
'!HE 
SHORT NOVELS 
OF 
'DOSTOEVSKY 

Translated from the Russian 
by Constance Garnett 

W<tJ ""ԥ tft..-6'l>u.cH6 
by THOMAS MANN 
A PERMANENT Ll BRARY BOOK 
DIAL PRESS· 1951 ·NEW YORK 

Copyright, 1945 by The Dial Prc:a 
These novels are published 
by special arrangement with 
The Macmillan Company 
Seventh Printing, April 1953 
Printed in the United States of America 
by The Haddon Craftsmen, Scranton, Pa. 

Contents 
THEc;jAMBLER 
PAGE I 
?{.OTEf FROM UNDERGROUND 
PAGE 127 
UNCLE'S "DREAM 
PAGE 223 
THE ETERNAL HUSBAND 
PAGE 343 
THE "DOUBLE 
PAGE 475 
THE FRIEND OF THE FAMILY 
PAGE 617 


P R E F A C E 
VOS'IOEVSKY- zn :iW.oderation 
BY 
THOMAS MANN 
THERE was something very attractive to me about the invitation 
on the part of the Dial Press to write a preface to an edition of Dostoev­
sky's shorter novels, the six narratives included in this volume. The 
publisher's moderation which determined the character of this edition 
tended to put the commentator's mind at ease and to encourage him 
in a task from which he might otherwise have shrunk, not to say re­
coiled-the task of making the entire, tremendous cosmos of Dostoev­
sky's works the object of his consideration and discussion. Moreover 
this commentator would scarcely have had another chance in this life 
to render his critical tribute to the great Russian if it had not been for 
this opportunity to do it lightly, so to speak, in a limited space, for a 
specific purpose, and with the degree of self-restriction which the pur­
pose charitably prescribes. 
Strangely enough, my life as an author led me to write detailed 
studies on Tolstoy as well as on Goethe-several on each of them. But 
I have never formally written on two other cultural experiences of 
sjmilar weight that moved me as deeply in my youth and that I never 
tired of renewing and intensifying in my mature years: I have never 
written on Nietzsche nor on Dostoevsky. I omitted writing the Niet­
zsche essay for which my friends often asked me, although it seemed to 
lie on my path. And the "profound, criminal, saintly face of Dostoev­
sky" (that was my characterization at one time) appears only fleetingly 
in my writings to vanish again quickly. Why this evasion, this shun· 
ning, this silence-in contrast with the inadequate, to be sure, bU! 
enthusiastic eloquence to which the greatness of the other two masten 
and stars inspired me? I know the answer. It was easy for me to render 
intimate and rapturous homage, tempered with tender irony, to the 
images of the divine and the fortunate, the children of nature in their 
exalted simplicity and their exuberant healthfulness: to the autobio-

V111 
PREFACE by r lwmas ̷aflfl 
graphic aristocratism of the molder of a majestic personal culture, 
Goethe, and to the primitive epic force, the unrivaled naturalness, of 
the "great author of all the Russias," Tolstoy, with his clumsy, ever 
failing attempts at moralistic spiritualization of his pagan corporeality. 
But I am filled with awe, with a profound, mysᐠic, silence-enjoining 
awe, in the presence of the religious greatness of the damned, in the 
presence of genius of disease and the disease of genius, of the type of 
the affiicted and the possessed, in whom saint and criminal are one . . . .  
It is my feeling that the Daemonic is the poet's theme and not the 
writer's. It should speak from the depths of a work, if possible, in the 
garb of humor; to devote critical essays to it seems to me, mildly, an 
indiscretion. Possibly, even probably, this is only an extenuation of my 
indolence and cowardice. It is incomparably easier and more whole­
some to write about divinely pagan healthfulness than about holy 
disease. We may amuse ourselves at the expense of the former, the 
fortunate children of nature and their artlessness; we cannot amuse 
ourselves at the expense of the children of the spirit, the great sinners 
and the damned, the sufferers of holy disease. I would find it utterly 
impossible to jest about Nietzsche and Dostoevsky as I have occasion­
ally done in a novel about the egotistic child of a lucky star, Goethe, 
'lind in an essay about the colossal loutishness of Tolstoy's moralism. It 
follows that my reverence for the intimates of Hell, the devout and the 
diseased, is fundamentally much deeper-and only therefore less vocal 
-than my reverence for the sons of light. It is a good thing that this 
reverence of mine has now received an outward incentive to eloquence, 
though of a practically limited and restrained nature. 
"The Pale Criminal"-whenever I read this chapter heading in 
Zarathustra, a morbidly inspired work of genius if ever there was one, 
the eerily grief-ridden features of Dostoevsky, as we know them from 
a number of good pictures, stand before me. Moreover, I suspect that 
they were in the mind of the drunken migrainist of Sils Maria when 
he wrote it. For Dostoevsky's work played a remarkable role in his 
life; he frequently mentions him in his letters as well as in his books 
(while I am not aware that he ever said a word about Tolstoy) ;  he 
calls him the most profound psychologist in world literature and refers 
to him in a kind of unassuming enthusiasm as his "great teacher"­
although in fact there is scarcely an indication of discipleship in his 
relation to his great Eastern brother-in-spirit. They were more nearly 
brothers in spirit, tragically grotesque companions in misfortune, in 
spite of fundamental differences in heredity and tradition-on the one 
band the German professor, whose Luciferian genius, stimulated by 

DosTOEVSKY-in c.Vloderation 
lX 
disease, developed from the soil of classical learning, philological erudi­
tion, idealistic philosophy, and musical Romanticism; on the other, the 
Byzantine Christian, who was free from the humanistic inhibitions that 
limited the other, and who could occasionally be regarded as the "great 
teacher" simply because he was not German (for it was Nietzsche's 
most passionate desire to free himself of his Germanism), because he 
appeared as the liberator from bourgeois morality, and because he 
affirmed the will to psychological affront, to the crime of frank ac­
knowledgment. 
It seems impossible to speak of Dostoevsky's genius without being 
forced to think of the word "criminal." The eminent Russian critic 
Merezhkovsky uses it in various studies on the author of The Kara­
mazovs, repeatedly and with a double meaning: referring, in the first 
place, to Dostoevsky himself and to "the criminal curiosity of his in­
sight," and, in the second place, referring to the object of this insight, 
the human heart, whose most recondite and most criminal impulses he 
laid bare. "The reader," says this critic, "is aghast at his omniscience, 
his penetration into the conscience of a stranger. \V e are confronted by 
our own secret thoughts, which we would not reveal to a friend, not 
even to ourselves." Yet we are only apparently dealing with objective 
and quasi-medical scrutiny and diagnosis-it is in reality psychological 
lyricism in the widest sense of the word, admission and horrible con­
fession, pitiless revelation of the criminal depths of the author's own 
conscience-and this accounts for the terrific moral force, the religious 
frightfulness of Dostoevsky"s knowledge of the soul. A comparison 
with Proust, and with the psychological novelties, surprises, and knick­
knacks that abound in his works, at once exposes the difference in 
accent, in moral tone. The psychological curios and pertnesses of the 
Frenchman are simply amusing compared with the ghastly revelations 
of Dostoevsky, a man who had been in Hell. Could Proust have writ­
ten Crime and Punishment, the greatest detective novel of all times? 
It was not the science that he lacked, but the conscience . . . .  As far as 
Goethe is concerned, a psychologist of the first water from Werther to 
the Elective Affinities, Goethe declares frankly that he has never heard 
of a crime of which he did not feel capable himself. This is the word 
of a disciple of pietistic self-scrutiny but the element of Greek inno­
cence predominates in it. It is a self-possessed word-a challenge to 
bourgeois morality, to be sure, but cool and haughty rather than filled 
with Christian contrition, bold rather than profound in a religious 
sense. Tolstoy was essentially his peer, in spite of all Christian velleity. 
"I have nothing to conceal from men," he used to say; "let them all 

X 
PREFACE by r hom as Jvfann 
know what I am doing!" Compare this with the confessions of the 
hero of Notes from Underground where he speaks of his secret dissi­
pations. "Even at that time," he says, "I had a love for secrecy. I was 
terribly afraid that someone might see me, meet me, recognize me." 
His life, which could not bear ultimate frankness, ultimate exposure 
before the eyes of the world, was ruled by the secret of Hell. 
Undoubtedly the subconsciousness and even the consciousness of this 
titanic creator was permanently burdened with a heavy sense of guilt, 
a sense of the criminal, and this feeling was by no means of purely 
hypochondriac nature. It was connected with his infirmity, the "sacred" 
disease, the pre-eminently mystic disease, epilepsy. He suffered from it 
from childhood, but the disease was fatally intensified by his trial when 
he was unjustly accused in the year 1849, at the age of twenty-eight, on 
a charge of political conspiracy and actually sentenced to death (he 
was already standing at the stake facing death when, at the last mo­
ment, his sentence was commuted to four years at hard labor in 
Siberia) .  It was his opinion that the disease would culminate in the 
exhaustion of his physical and intellectual powers, in death or insanity. 
The attacks occurred on the average of once a month, sometimes more 
frequently, at times even twice a week. He often described them : both 
in direct communication and by transferring the malady to psychologi­
cally favored characters in his novels: to the terrible Smerdyakov, to the 
hero of The Idiot, Prince Myshkin, to the nihilist and fanatic Kirilov 
in The Possessed. Two symptoms, according to his description, are 
characteristic of the falling sickness : the incomparable sense of rapture, 
of inner enlightenment, of harmony, of highest ecstasy, preceding by 
a few moments the spasm that begins with an inarticulate, no longer 
human scream-and the state of horrible depression and deep grief, of 
spiritual ruin and desolation, that follows it. This reaction seems to me 
even more symbolic of the nature of the disease than the exaltation 
that precedes the attack. Dostoevsky describes it as a rapture so strong 
and sweet "that one is ready to exchange ten years of life or even life 
itself for the bliss of these few seconds." The subsequent, terrific hang­
o\'er, however, according to the confession of the great invalid, was 
marked by a "feeling of being a criminal," by the weight of unknown 
guilt, by the burden of an awful crime. 
I don't know what neurologists think of the "sacred" disease, but in 
my opinion it is definitely rooted in the realm of the sexual, it is a 
wild and explosive manifestation of sex dynamics, a transferred and 
transfigured sexual act, a mystic dissipation. I repeat that I regard the 
subsequent state of contrition and misery, the mysterious feeling of 

DosTOEVSKY-in c.frf oderation 
xi 
guilt, as even more revealing than the preceding seconds of bliss for 
which "one is ready to exchange his life." No matter to what extent the 
malady menaced Dostoevsky"s mental powers, it is certain that his 
genius is most intimately connected with it and colored by it, that his 
psychological insight, his understanding of crime and of what the 
Apocalypse calls "satanic depths," and most of all his ability to suggest 
secret guilt and to weave it into the background of his frequently hor­
rible creatures-all these qualities are inseparably related to the dis­
ease. In the past of Svidrigailov (Crime and Punis/1 ment ), for example, 
there is "a criminal affair of bestial, not to say fantastic, brutality, for 
which he would most certainly have been sent to Siberia." It is left to 
the more or less willing imagination of the re:᐀der to guess what this 
alTair may be : in all probability it is a sex crime, possibly child rape 
-for this is also the secret or a part of the secret in the life of Stavrogin 
in The Possessed, that icy and contemptible masterful person before 
whom weaker creatures groveled in the dust, possibly one of the most 
weirdly Jttractive characters in world literature. There is an unpub­
lished portion of this novel, "Stavrogin's Confession," in which he 
relates, among other things, the rape of a little girl. According to 
Merezhkovsky it is 
a powerful fragment, full of terrible realism 
transcending the bounds of art. Apparently this infamous crime con­
stantly occupied the :᐀uthor's moral im:᐀gination. It is said that one 
day he confessed the commission of a sin of this sort to his famous 
colleague Turgenev, whom he h:᐀ted and despised on account of his 
\Vest European sympathies-undoubtedly a mendacious confession 
with which he merely wished to frighten and confuse the serene, hu­
mane, and quite unsatanic Turgenev. In St. Petersburg, when he was 
forty years old and had attained fame as the author of The Home of 
Death, which had moved even the Czar to tears, in a family circle 
that included a number of very young girls, he once narrated the plot 
of a story he had planned in his youth, a novel in which a landed 
proprietor, a sedate and substantial man, suddenly remembers that two 
decades ago, after an all-night drinking bout with dissolute compan­
ions, he had raped a ten-year-old girl. 
"Fyodor Mikhailovitch!" the mother of the household exclaimed, 
raising her hands in horror. "Have pity on us! The children are listen­
ing!" 
Yes, he must have been a very remarkable citizen, this Fyodor 
Mikhailovitch. 
Nietzsche's infirmity was not the falling sickness, although it is not 
difficult to picture the author of Zarathustra and The Antirhrist as an 

xu 
PREFACE by Thomas Jvfann 
epileptic. He shared the fate of many artists and particularly of a 
notable number of musicians (among whom he belongs after a fash­
ion) : he perished from progressive paralysis, a malady of unmistaka­
bly sexual origin, since medical science has long recognized it as the 
result of luetic infection. Viewed from the naturalistic-medical angle­
a limited perspective, to be sure-Nietzsche's intellectual develop­
ment is nothing but the case history of paralytic deterioration and 
degeneration-that is, he was propelled from a state of highly gifted 
normality upward into icy and grotesque spheres of fatal insight and 
moral isolation, a terrible and criminal degree of knowledge for 
which a delicate and kindhearted man, such as he was, in need of 
forbearance and indulgence, had never been born but for which, like 
Hamlet, he had only been called. 
"Criminal"-! repeat the word in order to stress the psychological 
relationship of the cases of Nietzsche and Dostoevsky. It is no mere 
chance that the former was so strongly attracted to the latter that he 
called him his "great teacher." Excess is common to them both, the 
drunken unleashing of insight, coupled with a religious, i. e., satanistic 
moralism which in Nietzsche's case was called antimoralism. Niet­
zsche probably did not know the epileptic's mystic sense of guilt 
of which I spoke. But the fact that his personal conception of life 
made him familiar with that of the criminal is attested by one of 
his aphorisms, which I can't find at the moment but which I distinctly 
remember. In it he says that all intellectual isobtion and alienation 
from the civil norm, all mental autonomy and ruthlessness, are related 
to the criminal's mode of life and afford an experiential insight into 
it. It seems to me that we can go even farther and say that all creative 
originality, all artistry in the widest sense of the word, does just that. 
The French painter and sculptor Degas once made the remark that 
the artist must approach his work in the same frame of mind in which 
the criminal commits his deed. 
"Exceptional conditions make the artist," Nietzsche himself said: 
"all conditions that are profoundly related and interlaced with morbid 
phenomena; it seems impossible to be an artist and not to be sick." 
The German thinker probably did not know the nature of his disease, 
but he was well aware of his debt to it, and his letters and published 
works are full of heroic eulogies of disease as a means to knowledge. 
A typical symptom of paralysis, presumably due to hyperemia of the 
affected cerebral parts, is the surge of an intoxicating sense of bliss and 
power and an actual-though medically, of course, pathological­
intensification of productive capacity. Before it clouds its victim's mind 

DosTOEVSKY-in c./'vf od eration 
Xlll 
and kills him, the disease grants him illusory (in the sense of sane 
normality) experiences of power and sovereign facility, of enlighten­
ment and blissful inspiration, so that he stands in awe of himself 
and is filled with the conviction that there has been no one like him 
in a thousand years; he regards himself as a divine mouthpiece, a 
vessel of grace, a god in his own right. We have descriptions of such 
euphoric affiiction and of overwhelming inspiration in the letters of 
Hugo Wolf, in whose case they were invariably followed by periods 
of intellectual void and artistic impotence. But the most grandiose 
account of paralytic enlightenment, a stylistic masterpiece, is found 
in Nietzsche's Ecce Homo, in the third section of the chapter on 
Zarathustra. "Does anyone," he asks, "at the end of the nineteenth 
century have an idea of what poets of pow"ful eras called inspiration? 
If not, I shall describe it." It is clear that he regards his experience as 
something atavistic, something daemonically retrovertive, something 
belonging to another, more "powerful," more Godlike state of man­
kind, something foreign to the psychic capabilities of our faintly ra­
tionalistic epoch. And to think that what he is in truth describing­
but what is truth : experience or medicine ?-is a morbid state of irrita­
tion that mockingly precedes the paralytic collapse. 
Possibly his concept of the "Eternal Return," to which he attaches 
great weight, is a product of euphoria, uncontrolled by reason, and 
a reminiscence rather than intellectual property. Merezhkovsky 
pointed out long ago that the idea of the "Superman" occurs in Dos­
toevsky, in the speeches of the aforementioned epileptic, Kirilov, in 
The Possessed. Dostoevsky's nihilistic seer says: "There will be a 
new man and everything will be new. History will be divided into 
two sections: from the gorilla to the annihilation of God, and from 
the annihilation of God to the physical transformation of the earth 
and of man"-in other words, to the appearance of the God-man, 
the superman. But no one seems to have noted that the idea of the 
Eternal Return is also to be found in The Karamazovs, in Ivan's dia­
logue with the Devil. "You're always thinking of our present earth!" 
says the Devil. "But our present earth has repeated itself, possibly 
billions of times,· it would become senile, turned to ice, broke in two, 
fell apart, resolved itself into its elements, once more there was water 
'over the firmament,' then the comet, next the sun, and finally, out 
of the sun, came the earth-this process has perhaps repeated itself 
times without number and each time in the identical mann" down to 
the /cut tiny detail .
•
•
 isn't that the most unspeakably indecent bore­
dom!" 

lriv 
PREFACE by Thomas e.lvfann 
Through the mouth of the Devil Dostoevsky designates as "in­
decent boredom" what Nietzsche hails with Dionysiac affirmation, 
adding "For I love you, Eternity!" But the idea is the same, and while 
I believe that the Superman Is a case of coincidence based on intellectual 
fraternity, I am inclined to regard the "Eternal Return" as a result 
of reading, a subconscious, euphorically tinged memory of Dos­
toevsky. 
I am aware that I may be making a mistake in chronology; it is 
a matter for the literary historians to examine. The important thing 
for me is a certain parallelism in the thinking of the two great in­
valids and then, moreover, the phenomenon of disease in the form of 
greatness or greatness in the form of disease-it is purely a matter of 
perspective in the evaluation of disease: as a diminution or an in­
tensification of life. Considering disease as greatness and greatness as 
disease, the mere medical point of view proves pedantic and inade­
quate, at the very least one-sidedly naturalistic : the thing has an 
intellectual and cultural side, connected with life itself and with its 
enhancement and growth, a side which the biologist and physician 
never fully understand. Let us put it into words: a type of humanity 
matures, or is reconstructed from the forgotten past, which takes the 
concepts of life and health out of the hands of biology, in which the 
exclusive right to these concepts has been vested, and presumes to 
administer them in a freer, more pious, and certainly more truthful 
manner. For man is not a mere creature of biology. 
Disease . . .  First of all it is a question of who is sick, who is 
insane, who is epileptic or paralytic : an average dolt, whose disease, 
of course, lacks all intellectual and cultural aspectsᐟr a Nietzsche, a 
Dostoevsky. In their cases the disease bears fruits that are more im­
portant and more beneficial to life and its development than any 
medically approved normality. The truth is that life has never been 
able to do without the morbid, and probably no adage is more inane 
than the one which says that "only disease can come from the diseased." 
Life is not prudish, and it is probably safe to say that life prefers crea­
tive, genius-bestowing disease a thousand times over to prosaic health; 
prefers disease, surmounting obstacles proudly on horseback, boldly 
leaping from peak to peak, to lounging, pedestrian healthfulness. Life 
is not finical and never thinks of making a moral distinction between 
health and infirmity. It seizes the bold product of disease, consumes 
and digests it, and as soon as it is assimilated, it is health. An entire 
horde, a generation of open-minded, healthy lads pounces upon the 

DosToEVSKY-in e.Jvfoderatiotz 
XV 
work of diseased genius, genialized by disease, admires and praises it, 
raises it to the skies, perpetuates it, transmutes it, and bequeathes it 
to civilization, which does not live on the home-baked bread of health 
alone. They all swear by the name of the great invalid, thanks to whose 
madneᐘs they no longer need to be mad. Their healthfulness feeds 
upon his madness and in them he will become healthy. 
In other words, certain attainments of the soul and the intellect are 
impossible without disease, without insanity, without spiritual crime, 
:md the great invalids are crucified victims, sacrificed to humanity and 
its advancement, to the broadening of its feeling and knowledge-in 
short, to its more sublime health. This is the reason for the aura of 
devoutness that clearly surrounds the lives of these men and deeply 
affects their self-consciousness. It is also the reason for the anticipatory 
feelings which these victims have of power and of accomplishment and 
of a vastly intensified life despite all suffering; feelings of triumph 
that can be regarded as illusory only in a prosaic, medical sense: a 
union of disease and power in their natures which scoffs at the ordinary 
association of disease and weakness and by its paradoxy contributes 
to the religious tinge of their existence. They force us to re-evaluate 
the concepts of "disease" and "health," the relation of sickness and 
life; they teach us to be cautious in our approach to the idea of "dis­
ease," for we are too prone always to give it a biological minus sign. 
Nietzsche mentions this very point in a posthumous note to his Will 
to Pown-. "Health and disease," he says "-be careful! The standard 
must always be the efflorescence of the body, the resilience, courage, 
and cheerfulness of the spirit-but naturally also how much morbidity 
it can absorb and conquer-in other words, make healthy." (The 
italics are Nietzsche's.) "That which would destroy more delicate men 
is a stimulant for great healthfulness." 
Nietzsche regarded himself as a sound person in the grand manner, 
one who is stimulated by disease. But if in his case the relation of 
disease and power is such that the greatest sense of power and its pro­
ductive confirmation appear to be a consequence of disease (which lies 
in the nature of paralysis), we are almost compelled in the case of 
Dostoevsky the epileptic to regard his disease as a product of super­
abundant power, an explosion, an excess of tremendous health, and 
we are confronted by the convincing fact that greatest vitality can at 
times wear the mask of pale infirmity. 
From the biological point of view the life of this man is most con­
fusing: a quivering bundle of nerves, subject to spasms at a moment's 

XVI 
PREFACE by '[ homas cfi1ann 
notice, "so sensitive as if he had been Aayed and the mere contact 
with the air were painful" (quoted from Notes from Underground), 
he nevertheless managed to live a full sixty years (1821-1881 ), and in 
his four productive decades he erected a stupendous lifework of an 
unheard-of novelty and audacity, a surging wealth of passions and 
visions-a work which not only broadens our knowledge of man by 
its furor of "criminal" insight and confession, but also contains a 
surprising amount of mischievous humor, fantastic comedy, and 
"cheerfulness of the spirit." For, among other things, as the reader 
of the present edition will soon discover, this crucified man was also 
a really great humorist. 
If Dostoevsky had written nothing else but the six short novels 
printed here, his name would no doubt still deserve a pre-eminent place 
in the history of the world's narrative literature. As a matter of fact 
they do not constitute one-tenth of his actual published writings, and his 
friends, who were familiar with the inside story of his work, assure us 
that of all the novels that Fyodor Mikhailovich carried with him 
in finished form, so to speak, and which he narrated enthusiastically 
and in detail, not one-tenth was ever put on paper. They say that he 
required practically no time at all for the elaboration of these countless 
outlines. And then we are expected to believe that disease represents 
an impoverishment of life! 
The epic monuments which he erected-Crime and Punishment, The 
Idiot, The Possessed, The Brothers Karamazov (incidentally, they are 
not epics at all but colossal dramas, composed almost scenically, in 
which the soul-stirring action, often compressed into the period of a 
few days, unwinds in super-realistic and feverish dialogue)-were cre­
ated not only under the scourge of disease but also under the blows 
of debt and degrading financial trouble that forced him to work at 
an unnatural rate of speed; he tells us that, in order to meet a dead­
line, he once wrote three and a half signatures-fifty-six pages-in two 
days and two nights. In foreign countries, in Baden-Baden and in 
\Viesbaden, where he had to Aee from his creditors, he tried to 
ameliorate his impoverishment by gambling, only in most instances to 
complete his ruin. Then he would write begging letters in which he 
speaks the language of misery of the most depraved characters of his 
novels, of Marmeladov, for ᐙxample. His passion for gambling was 
his second disease, possibly related to his first, a truly abnormal crav­
ing. To it we owe the wonderful novel The Gambler, who goes to a 
German resort, improbably and perversely named Roulettenburg; in 

DosTOEVSKY-in c.J'vfoderation 
xvu 
this novel the psychology of morbid passion and of the demon Chance 
is exposed with unrivaled veracity. 
This masterwork was written in 1867, between Crime and Punish­
ment (1866) and The Idiot (1868-1869), and with all its greatness 
it represents a mere recreation. It is the latest of the stories in this 
volume, for the others were produced between 1846 and 1864. The 
earliest one is The Double, a pathological grotesque, which had ap­
peared in the same year with Dostoevsky's first great novel, Poor Peo­
ple (1846), and it was a disappointment after the profound impression 
which the latter had made in Russia-probably with some justifica­
tion ; for in spite of brilliant details of the narrative, the young author 
was probably in error to believe that he had excelled Gogol, although 
The Double was strongly influenced by him. And he certainly did 
not surpass Edgar Allan Poe's William Wilson, where the same arch­
romantic motif is treated in a morally profounder manner, resolving 
the clinical in the poetic 
Be that as it may, our edition includes a number of wonderful 
"recreations" or perhaps preparations for masterworks to follow. The 
Eternal Hwband dates from 1848, before the time of Dostoevsky's trial 
and deportation to Omsk in Siberia; its central figure is the embarrass­
ingly ludicrous cuckold, from whose malicious anguish the eeriest 
effects are created. Then follows the period of confinement at hard 
labor, the horrible experience of the Katorga, which was to be mov­
ingly described later in St. Petersburg in Tl1e House of Deat/1, the tale 
that stirred all Russia to tears. But the actual resumption of Dos­
toevsky's literary activity took place in Siberia with the writing (1859) 
of Tl1e Friend of the Family, also called The Manor of Stepantchikovo, 
justly famous for the incomparable character of the despotic hypocrite 
Foma Opiskin, a comic creation of the first rank, irresistible, rivaling 
Shakespeare and Moliere. After this peak performance Uncle's Dream, 
which followed immediately, must frankly be regarded as a retrograde 
step. It is, if I may judge, too long-drawn-out for its content, a farce, 
whose tragic conclusion, the story of the tubercular young school­
master, is filled with unbearable sentimentalism derived from the early 
influence of Charles Dickens upon Dostoevsky's work. To make up for 
it, however, we find in Uncle's Dream the lovely Zinaida Afanasyevna, 
the type of the proud Russian girl, who enjoys the obvious and very 
suggestive love of an author whose Christian sympathy is ordinarily 
devoted to human misery, sin, vice, the depths of lust and crime, rather 
than to nobility of body and soul. 

:X:Vlll 
PREFACE by Thomas Jvfann 
The chief item in our anthology, Notes from Underground, written 
in 1864, is an awe- and terror-inspiring example of this sympathy and 
this frightful insight. In its content it comes closest to Dostoevsky's 
great and completely characteristic products. In general it is regarded 
as a turning point in the poet's activity, as an awakening to a con­
sciousness of himself. Today, when the painful and scornful conclu­
sions, the radical frankness of this novel, ruthlessly transcending all 
novelistic and literary bounds, have long become part of our moral 
culture, today we can scarcely conceive the lurid sensation which this 
novel must have created at the time of its appearance-protest on the 
side of "idealistic" aestheticism and passionate agreement on the side 
of fanatical love for truth. I spoke of ruthlessness-Dostoevsky or 
the first-person hero or un-hero or anti-hero avoids that charge by the 
fiction that he is not writing for the public, not for publication, not 
even for a reader, but exclusively and secretly for himself alone. 
His train of thought is as follows : "In every man's memory there are 
things which he does not reveal to everyone, but only to his friends. 
There are also things which he does not reveal to his friends, but 
at best to himself and only under a pledge of secrecy. And finally 
there are things which man hesitates to reveal even to himself, and 
every decent person accumulates a considerable quantity of such 
things. In fact, you might say, the more decent a person is, the greater 
the number of such things that he carries around with him. I myself, 
at any rate, have only recendy decided to recall a few of my earlier 
experiences; until now I ha\'e always avoided them, even with a cer­
tain uneasiness . . . .  
" 
And so this "novel" consists of the unspeakably compromising 
record of these "earlier experiences," mingling the repulsive with 
the attractive in a hitherto unheard-of manner. The author, or the 
person whom he makes the author, is trying an experiment. "Is it 
possible," he inquires, "to be completely frank at least to oneself, and 
to tell the whole truth without reserve?" He is thinking of Heine, 
who made the statement that strictly truthful autobiographies were next 
to impossible; that everyone always told untruths about himself, 
like Rousseau, who slandered himself from pure vanity. The author 
concurs; but, he says, the difference between Rousseau and himself 
is that the former made his confession to the public, while he was 
writing for himself alone. And, he declares emphatically, if it ap­
peared as if he were addressing a reader, this was a mere pretense, as 
he found it easier to write in that fashion. It is purely a matter of 
fnrm, he sa 'r'5. 

DosroEVSK Y-ill t.fiJ oderatwn 
XlX 
Of course, all that isn't true at all, for Dostoevsky was certainly 
writing for the public and for publication and for as many readers as 
possible, if only because he needed money badly. The artistic and 
almost facetious fiction of solitude and remoteness from literature is 
useful as an excuse for the radical cynicism of the frank confession. 
But the fiction within the fiction, the "appearance" of addressing 
himself to a reader, the constant haranguing of certain "gentlemen" 
with whom the speaker is arguing, that too is advantageous; for it 
brings an element of the discursive, the dialectic, the dramatic into 
the recital, an element in which Dostoevsky is very much at home and 
which makes even the most serious, the most wicked, the most de­
based things amusing in the highest sense. 
I confess that I like the first part of NotŰs from Undűground even 
better than the second, the stirring and shameful story of the prosti­
tute Liza. I grant that the first part does not consist of action but of 
talk, and talk reminiscent in many respects of the depraved prating 
of certain religious personages in Dostoevsky's great novels. Granted 
also that it is hazardous talk in the strongest sense of the word, danger­
ously likely to confuse na"ive minds, because it stresses skepticism 
against faith, and because it heretically attacks civilization and deᐚ 
mocracy and the humanitarians and the meliorists who believe that 
man stri..,·es for happiness and advancement while he is actually thirst· 
ing just as much for suffering, the only source of knowledge, that he 
really does not want the crystal palace and the anthill of social con­
summation, and that he will never renounce his predilection for de­
struction and chaos. All that sounds like reactionary wickedness and 
may worry well-meaning minds who believe that the mᐛst important 
thing today is the bridging of the chasm that yawns between intellec­
tual realization and scandalously retarded social and ccᐜnᐜmic reality. 
It is the most important thing-and yet those heresies :ue the truth: 
the dark side of truth, away from the sun, which no one dares to 
neglect who is interested in the truth, the whole truth, truth about 
man. The tortured paradoxes which Dostoevsky's "hero" hurls at his 
positivistic adversaries, antihuman as they sound, arc spoken in the 
name of and out of love for humanity : on behalf of a new, deeper, 
and unrhetorical humanity that has passed through all the hells of 
suffering and of understanding. 
As this edition of Dostoevsky compares with his complete work, and 
as his published work compares with that which he could and would 
have created if the limitations of human life had not prevented him­
so the things I have said here about the titanic Russian compare to 

XX 
PREFACE by Thomas e.ftfann 
what could be said about him. Dostoevsky in moderation, Dostoevsky 
in reason, that was the watchword. When I told a friend of my inten­
tion to provide a preface for these volumes he said, laughing: 
"Be careful! You will write a bok about him." 
I was careful. 
THOMAS MAN, Pacific Palisades, California, July, 1945 

Cihe (jambler 
FROM THE DIARY OF A YOUNG MAN 


CIHE <;]AMBLER 
( Pli.OM THE DIARY OF A YOUNG MAN ) 
Chapter 1 
AT LAST I have come back from my fortnight's absence. Our 
friends have already been two days in Roulettenburg. I imagined that 
they were expecting me with the greatest eagerness; I was mistaken, 
however. The General had an extremely independent air, he talked to 
me condescendingly and sent me away to his sister. I even fancied that 
the General was a little ashamed to look at me. Marya Filippovna was 
tremendously busy and scarcely spoke to me; she took the money, 
however, counted it, and listened to my whole report. They were 
expecting Mezentsov, the little Frenchman, and some Englishman; as 
usual, as soon as there was money there was a dinner-party; in the 
Moscow style. Polina Alexandrovna, seeing me, asked why I had been 
away so long, and without waiting for an answer went off somewhere. 
Of course, she did that on purpose. \Ve must have an explanation, 
though. Things have accumulated. 
They had assigned me a little room on the fourth storey of the hotel. 
They know here that I belong to the GIneral's suitI. It all looks as 
though they had managed to impress the people. The General is looked 
upon by every one here as a very rich Russian grandee. Even before 
dinner he commissioned me, among other things, to change two notes 
for a thousand francs each. I changed them at the office of the hotel. 
Now we shall be looked upon as millionaires for a whole week, at 
least. I wanted to take Misha and Nadya out for a walk, but on the 
stairs I was summoned back to the General; he had graciously be­
thought him to inquire where I was taking them. The man is absolutely 
unable to look me straight in the face; he would like to very much, but 
every time I meet his eyes with an intent, that is, disrespectful air, he 
seems overcome with embarrassment. In very bombastic language, 
piling one sentence on another, and at last losing his thread altogether, 
he gave me to understand that I was to take the children for a walk 
in the park, as far as possible from the Casino. At last he lost his 
temper completely, and added sharply: "Or else maybe you'll be taking 
3 

4 
'[ h% Short 'N.ove/s of Vosto%vslzy 
them into the gambling saloon. You must excuse me," he added, "but 
I know you are still rather thoughtless and capable, perhaps, of gamᐝ 
bling. In any case, though, I am not your mentor and have no desire 
to be, yet I have the right, at any rate, to desire that you will not 
compromise me, so to speak . . . . 
" 
"But I have no money," I said calmly; "one must have it before one 
can lose it." 
"You shall have it at once," answered the General, flushing a little; 
he rummaged in his bureau, looked up in an account book, and it 
turned out that he had a hundred and twenty roubles owing me. 
"How are we to settle up?" he said. "\Ve must change it into thalers. 
Come, take a hundred thalers-the rest, of course, won't be lost." 
I took the money without a word. 
"Please don't be offended by my words, you are so ready to take 
offence . . . .  If I did make an observation, it was only, so to speak, by 
way of warning, and, of course, I have some right to do so . . . .  
" 
On my way home before dinner, with the children, I met a perfect 
cavalcade. Our party had driven out to look at some ruin. Two mag­
nificent carriages, superb horses! In one carriage was Mlle. Blanche 
with Marya Filippovna and Polina; the Frenchman, the Englishman 
and our General were on horseback. The passers-by stopped and stared; 
a sensation was created; but the General will have a bad time, all the 
same. I calculated that with •he tour thousand francs I had brought, 
added to what they had eviriently managed to get hold of, they had 
now seven or eight thousand Erancs ; but that is not enough for Mlle. 
Blanche. 
Mlle. Blanche, too, is staying at the hotel with her mother; our 
Frenchm::m is somewhere in the house, too. The footman calls him 
"Monsieur le Comte." :Mlle. Blanche's mother is called "M:tdame la 
Comtesse"; well, who knows, they may be Comte and Comtesse. 
I felt sure that M. le Comte would not recognize me when we 
assembled at dinner. The General, of course, would not have thought 
of introducing us or even saying a word to him on my behalf; and 
M. le Comte has been in Russia himself, and knows what is called an 
outchite/ is very small fry. He knows me very well, however. But I 
must confess I made my appearance at dinner unbidden; I fancy the 
General forgot to give orders, or else he would certainly have sent me 
to dine at the table d'hote. I came of my own accord, so that the Gen­
eral looked at me with astonishment. Kindᐞhearted Marya FilippoYna 
immediately made a place for me; but my meeting with Mr. Astley 
saved the situation, and I could not help seeming to belong to the party. 

'I he (jam bier 
5 
I met this str:mge Englishman for the first time in the train in 
Prussia, where we sat opposite to one another, when I was travelling 
to join the family; then I came across him as I was going into France, 
and then again in Switzerland : in the course of that fortnight twice­
and now I suddenly met him in Roulettenburg. I never met a man so 
shy in my life. He is stupidly shy and, of course, is aware of it himself, 
for he is by no means stupid. He is very sweet and gentle, however. 
I drew him into talk at our first meeting in Prussia. He told me that 
he had been that summer at North Cape, and that he was very anxious 
to visit the fair at Nizhni Novgorod. I don't know how he made 
acquaintance with the General ;  I believe that he is hopelessly in love 
with Polina. When she came in he glowed like a sunset. He was very 
glad that I was sitting beside him at the table and seemed already to 
look upon me as his bosom friend. 
At dinner the Frenchman gave himself airs in an extraordinary way; 
he was nonchalant and majestic with every one. In Moscow, I remem­
ber, he used to blow soap bubbles. He talked a great deal about finance 
and Russian politics. The General sometimes ventured to contradict, 
but discreetly, and only so far as he could without too great loss of 
dignity. 
I was in a strange mood ; of course, before we were half through 
dinner I had asked myself my usual invariable question : "Why I went 
on dancing attendance on this General, and had not left them long 
ago?" From time to time I glanced at Polina Alexandrovna. She took 
no notice of me whatever. It ended by my flying into a rage and 
making up my mind to be rude. 
I began by suddenly, apropos of nothing, breaking in on the con­
versation in a loud voice. What I longed to do above all things was to 
be abusive to the Frenchman. I turned round to the General and very 
loudly and distinctly, I believe, interrupted him. I observed that this 
summer it was utterly impossible for a Russian to dine at table d'hote. 
The General turned upon me an astonished stare. 
"If you are a self-respecting man," I went on, "you will certainly be 
inviting abuse and must put up with affronts to your dignity. In Paris, 
on the Rhine, even in Switzerland, there are so many little Poles, and 
French people who sympathize with them, that there's no chance for 
a Russian to utter a word." 
I spoke in French. The General looked at me in amazement. I don't 
know whether he was angry or simply astonished at my so forgetting 
myself. 

6 
'I he Short Novels of Vostoevsky 
"It seems some one gave you a lesson," said the Frenchman, care­
lessly and contemptuously. 
"I had a row for the first time with a Pole in Paris," I answered; 
"then with a French officer who took the Pole's part. And then some of 
the French came over to my side, when I told them how I tried to spit 
in Monseigneur's coffee." 
"Spit?" asked the General, with dignified perplexity, and he even 
looked about him aghast. 
The Frenchman scanned me mistrustfully. 
"Just so," I answered. "After feeling convinced for two whole days 
that I might have to pay a brief visit to Rome about our business, I 
went to the office of the Papal Embassy to get my passport viseed. 
There I was met by a little abbe, a dried-up little man of about fifty, 
with a frost-bitten expression. After listening to me politely, but ex­
tremely drily, he asked me to wait a little. Though I was in a hurry, 
of course I sat down to wait, and took up L'Opinion Nationa/e and 
began reading a horribly abusive attack or. Russia. Meanwhile, I heard 
some one in the next room ask to see Monseigneur; I saw my abbe 
bow to him. I addressed the same request to him again; he asked me 
to wait-more drily than ever. A little later some one else entered, a 
stranger, but on business, some Austrian; he was listened to and at 
once conducted upstairs. Then I felt very much vexed; I got up, went 
to the abbe and said resolutely, that as Monseigneur was receiving, he 
might settle my business, too. At once the abbe drew back in great 
surprise. It was beyond his comprehension that an insignificant Rus­
sian should dare to put himself on a level with Monseigneur's guests. 
As though delighted to have an opportunity of insulting me, he looked 
me up and down, and shouted in the most insolent tone: 'Can you 
really suppose that Monseigneur is going to leave his coffee on your 
account ?' Then I shouted, too, but more loudly than he: 'Let me tell 
you I'm ready to spit in your Monseigneur's coffee! If you don't finish 
with my passport this minute, I'll go to him in person.' 
" 'What! When the Cardinal is sitting with him!' cried the abbe, 
recoiling from me with horror, and, flinging wide his arms, he stood 
like a cross, with an air of being ready to die rather than let me pass. 
"Then I answered him that 'I was a heretic and a barbarian, que je 
sttis heretique et barbare,' and that I cared nothing for all these Arch­
bishops, Cardinals, Monseigneurs and all of them. In short, I showed 
I was not going to give way. The abbe looked at me with uneasy 
ill-humour, then snatched my passport and carried it upstairs. A min-

'I he (;ambler 
7 
ute bter it had been viseed. Here, wouldn't you like to see it?" I took 
out the passport and showed the Roman vise. 
"Well, I must say . . .  " the General began. 
"What saved you was saying that you were a heretic and barbarian," 
the Frenchman observed, with a smile. "Cela n'etait pas si bhe." 
"Why, am I to model myself upon our Russians here? They sit, 
not daring to open their lips, and almost ready to deny they are Rus­
sians. In Paris, anyway in my hotel, they began to treat me much more 
attentively when I told every one about my passage-at-arms with the 
abbe. The fat Polish pan, the person most antagonistic to me at table 
d'hote, sank into the background. The Frenchmen did not even re­
sent it when I told them that I had, two years previously, seen a man 
at whom, in 1812, a French chassettr had shot simply in order to dis­
charge his gun. The man was at that time a child of ten, and his 
family had not succeeded in leaving Moscow." 
'"That's impossible," the Frenchman boiled up; "a French soldier 
would not fire at a child!" 
"Yet it happened," I answered. "I was told it by a most respectable 
captain on the retired list, and I saw the scar on his cheek from the 
bullet myself." 
The Frenchman began talking rapidly and at great length. The 
General began to support him, but I recommended him to read, for 
instance, passages in the "Notes" of General Perovsky, who was a 
prisoner in the hands of the French in 1812. At bst Marya Filippovna 
began talking of something else to change the conversation. The Gen­
eral was very much displeased with me, for the Frenchman and I had 
almost begun shouting at one another. But I fancy my dispute with the 
Frenchman pleased Mr. Astley very much. Getting up from the table, 
he asked me to have a glass of wine with him. 
In the evening I duly succeeded in getting a quarter of an hour's 
talk with Polina Alexandrovna. Our conversation took place when we 
were all out for a walk. We all went into the park by the Casino. 
Polina sat down on a seat facing the fountain, and let Nadenka play 
with some children not far from her. I, too, let Misha run off to the 
fountain, and we were at last left alone. 
\Ve began, of course, at first with business. Polina simply flew into 
a rage when I gave her only seven hundred guldens. She had reck­
oned positively on my pawning her diamonds in Paris for two thou­
sand guldens, if not more. 
"I must have money, come what may," she said. "I must get it or 
I am lost." 

8 
The Short N.ovds of 'Dostoevsky 
I began asking her what had happened during my absence. 
"Nothing, but the arrival of two pieces of news from Petersburg: 
first that Granny was very ill, and then, two days later, that she 
seemed to be dying. The news came from Timofey Petrovitch," added 
Pol ina, "and he's a trustworthy man. We are expecting every day to 
hear news of the end." 
"So you are all in suspense here?" I asked. 
"Of course, all of us, and all the time; we've been hoping for nothing 
else for the last six months." 
"And are you hoping for it?" I asked. 
"Why, I'm no relation. I am only the General's stepdaughter. But I 
am sure she will remember me in her will." 
"I fancy you'll get a great deal," I said emphatically. 
"Yes, she was fond of me; but what makes you think so?" 
"Tell me," I answered with a question, "our marquis is initiated 
into all our secrets, it seems?" 
"But why are you interested in that?" asked Polina, looking at me 
drily and austerely. 
"I should think so; if I'm not mistaken, the General has already 
succeeded in borrowing from him." 
"You guess very correctly." 
"Well, would he have lent the money if he had not known about 
your 'granny'? Did you notice at dinner, three times speaking of her, 
he called her 'granny.' What intimate and friendly relations!" 
"Yes, you are right. As soon as he knows that I have come into some­
thing by the will, he will pay his addresses to me at once. That is what 
you wanted to know, was it?" 
"He will only begin to pay you his addresses ? I thought he had been 
doing that a long time." 
"You know perfectly well that he hasn't!" Polina said, with anger. 
"Where did you meet that Englishman ?" she added, after a minute's 
silence. 
"I knew you would ask about him directly." 
I told her of my previous meetings with Mr. Astley on my journey. 
"He is shy and given to falling in love, and, of course, he's fallen in 
love with you already." 
"Yes, he's in love with me," answered Polina. 
"And, of course, he's ten times as rich as the Frenchman. \Vhy, is 
it certain that the Frenchman has anything? Isn't that open to doubt?" 
"No, it is not. He has a chateau of some sort. The General has 
spoken of that positively. Well, are you satisfied ?" 

Th% qambl%r 
"If I were in your place I should certainly marry the Englishman." 
"Why?" asked Polina. 
9 
"The Frenchman is better-looking, but he is nastier; and the Eng­
lishman, besides being honest, is ten times as rich," I snapped out. 
"Yes, but on the other hand, the Frenchman is a marquis and 
clever," she answered, in the most composed manner. 
"But is it true?" I went on, in the same way. 
"It certain! y is." 
Polina greatly disliked my questions, and I saw that she was trying 
to make me angry by her tone and the strangeness of her answers. 
I said as much to her at once. 
"\Vell, it really amuses me to see you in such a rage. You must pay 
for the very fact of my allowing you to ask such questions and make 
such suppositions." 
"I certainly consider myself entitled to ask you any sort of question," 
I answered calmly, "just because I am prepared to pay any price you 
like for it, and I set no value at all on my life now." 
Polina laughed. 
"You told me last time at the Schlangenberg, that you were pre­
pared, at a word from me, to throw yourself head foremost from the 
rock, and it is a thousand feet high, I believe. Some clay I shall utter 
that word, solely in order to see how you will pay the price, and trust 
me, I won't give way. You are hateful to me, just because I've allowed 
you to take such liberties, and even more hateful because you are so 
necessary to me. But so long as you are necessary to me, I must take 
care of you." 
She began getting up. She spoke with irritation. Of late she had 
always ended every conversation with me in anger and irritation, 
real anger. 
"Allow me to ask you, what ..1b0Ut Mlle. Blanche?" I asked, not lik­
ing to let her go without explanation. 
"You know all about Mlle. Blanche. Nothing more has happened 
since. Mlle. Blanche will, no doubt, be Madame Ia Generale, that is, 
if the rumour of Granny's death is confirmed, of course, for Mlle. 
Blanche and her mother and her cousin twice removed, the marquis­
all know very well that we are ruined." 
"And is the General hopelessly in love?" 
"That's not the point now. Listen and remember : take these seven 
hundred florins and go and play. Win me as much as you can at 
roulette; I must have money now, come what may." 
Saying this, she called Nadenka and went into the Casino, where: 

10 
T lze Slzort Novels of 7Jostoevsk.J 
she joined the rest of the party. I turned into the first path to the left, 
wondering and reflecting. I felt as though I had had a blow on the 
head after the command to go and play roulette. Strange to say, I had 
plenty to think about, but I was completely absorbed in analyzing the 
essential nature of my feeling towards Polina. It was true I had been 
more at ease during that fortnight's absence than I was now on the 
day of my return, though on the journey I had been as melancholy 
and restless as a madman, and at moments had even seen her in my 
dreams. Once, waking up in the train (in Switzerland), I began talk­
ing aloud, I believe, with Polina, which amused all the passengers in 
the carriage with me. And once more now I asked myself the ques­
tion: "Do I love her ?" And again I could not answer it, or, rather, I 
answered for the hundredth time that I hated her. Yes, she was hateful 
to me. There were moments (on every occasion at the end of our 
talks) when I would have given my life to strangle her! I swear if it 
had been possible on the spot to plunge a sharp knife in her bosom, 
I believe I should have snatched it up with relish. And yet I swear 
by all that's sacred that if at the Schlangenberg, at the fashionable 
peak, she really had said to me, "Throw yourself down," I should 
have thrown myself down at once, also with positive relish. I knew 
that. In one way or another it must be settled. All this she understood 
wonderfully well, and the idea that I knew, positively and distinctly, 
how utterly beyond my reach she was, how utterly impossible my mad 
dreams were of fulfilment, that thought, I am convinced, alTorded her 
extraordinary satisfaction; if not, how could she, cautious and intelli­
gent as she was, have been on such intimate and open terms with me? 
I believe she had hitherto looked on me as that empress of ancient 
times looked on the slave before whom she did not mind undressing 
because she did not regard him as a human being. Yes, often she did 
not regard me as a human being! 
I had her commission, however, to win at roulette, at all cosi.s. I had 
no time to consider why must I play, and why such haste, and ᐗvhat 
new scheme was hatching in that ever-calculating brain . .MoreovLr, 
it was evident that during that fortnight new facts had arisen of which 
I had no idea yet. I must discover all that and get to the bottom of it 
and as quickly as possible. But there was no time now; I must go to 
roulette. 

Th% (jambl%r 
11 
Chapter 2 
I CONFESS it was disagreeable to me. Though I had made up my 
mind that I would play, I had not proposed to play for other people. 
It rather threw me out of my reckoning, and I went into the gambling 
saloon with very disagreeable feelings. From the first glance I disliked 
everything in it. I cannot endure the flunkeyishness of the newspapers 
of the whole world, and especially our Russian papers, in which, almost 
every spring, the journalists write articles upon two things: first, on the 
extraordinary magnificence and luxury of the gambling saloons on 
the Rhine, and secondly, on the heaps of gold which are said to lie on 
the tables. They are not paid for it; it is simply done from disin­
terested obsequiousness. There was no sort of magnificence in these 
trashy rooms, and not only were there no piles of gold lying on the 
table, but there was hardly any gold at all. No doubt some time, in 
the course of the season, some eccentric person, either an Englishman 
or an Asiatic of some sort, a Turk, perhaps (as it was that summer), 
would suddenly turn up and lose or win immense sums; all the others 
play for paltry guldens, and on an average there is very little money 
lying on the tables. 
As soon as I went into the gambling saloon (for the first time in my 
life), I could not for some time make up my mind to play. There was 
a crush besides. If I had been alone, even then, I believe I should soon 
have gone away and not have begun playing. I confess my heart was 
beating and I was not cool. I knew for certain, and had made up my 
mind long before, that I should not leave Roulettenburg unchanged, 
that some radical and fundamental change would take place in my 
destiny; so it must be and so it would be. Ridiculous as it may be that 
I should expect so much for myself from roulette, yet I consider even 
more ridiculous the conventional opinion accepted by all that it is 
stupid and absurd to expect anything from gambling. And why should 
gambling be worse than any other means of making money-for in­
stance, commerce? It is true that only one out of a hundred wins, but 
what is that to me? 
In any case I determined to look about me first and not to begin 
anything in earnest that evening. If anything did happen that evening 
it would happen by chance and be something slight, and I staked my 
money accordingly. Besides, I had to study the game; for, in spite of 
the thousand descriptions of roulette which I had read so eagerly, I 

12 
'I he Short Novels of rnostoevskJ' 
understood absolutely nothing of its working until I saw it myself. 
In the first place it all struck me as so dirty, somehow, morally 
horrid and dirty. I am not speaking at all of the greedy, uneasy faces 
which by dozens, even by hundreds, crowd round the gambling 
tables. I see absolutely nothing dirty in the wish to win as quickly and 
as much as possible. I always thought very stupid the answer of that 
fat and prosperous moralist, who replied to some one's excuse "that 
he played for a very small stake," "So much the worse, it is such 
petty covetousness." As though covetousness were not exactly the same, 
whether on a big scale or a petty one. It is a matter of proportion. \Vhat 
is paltry to Rothschild is wealth to me, and as for profits and winnings, 
people, not only at roulette, but everywhere, do nothing but try to gain 
or squeeze something out of one another. \Vhether profits or gains 
are nasty is a different question. But I am not solving that question 
here. Since I was myself possessed by an intense desire of winning, I 
felt as I went into the hall all this covetousness, and all this covetous 
filth if you like, in a sense congenial and convenient. It is most charm­
ing when people do not stand on ceremony with one another, but 
act openly and aboveboard. And, indeed, why deceive oneself? Gam­
bling is a most foolish and imprudent pursuit! \Vhat was particularly 
ugly at first sight, in all the rabble round the roulette table, was the 
respect they paid to that pursuit, the solemnity and even reverence 
with which they all crowded round the tables. That is why a sharp 
distinction is drawn here between the kind of game that is mauvais 
genre and the kind that is permissible to well-bred people. There are 
two sorts of gambling: one the gentlemanly sort: the other the plebeian, 
mercenary sort, the game played by all sorts of riff-raff. The distinction 
is sternly observed here, and how contemptible this distinction realJ.r 
is! A gentleman may stake, for instance, five or ten louis d'or, rarely 
more; he may, however, stake as much as a thousand francs if he is 
very rich; but only for the sake of the play, simply for amusement, 
that is, simply to look on at the process of winning or of losing, but 
must on no account display an interest in winning. If he wins, he may 
laugh aloud, for instance; may make a remark to one of the bystanders; 
he may even put down another stake, and may even double it, but 
solely from curiosity, for the sake of watching and calculating the 
chances, and not from the plebeian desire to win. In fact, he must look 
on all gambling, roulette, trente et quarante, as nothing else than a 
pastime got up entirely for his amusement. He must not even suspect 
the greed for gain and the shifty dodges on which the bank depends. 
It would be extremely good form, too, if he should imagine that ali 

13 
the other gamblers, all the rabble, trembling over a gulden, were rich 
men and gentlemen like himself and were playing simply for their 
diversion and amusement. This complete ignorance of reality and in· 
nocent view of people would be, of course, extremely aristocratic. I 
have seen many mammas push forward their daughters, innocent and 
elegant misses of fifteen and sixteen, and, giving them some gold 
coins, teach them how to play. The young lady wins or loses, invariably 
smiles and walks away, very well satisfied. Our General went up to the 
table with solid dignity; a flunkey rushed to hand him a chair, but he 
ignored the flunkey; he, very slowly and deliberately, took out his 
purse, very slowly and deliberately took three hundred francs in gold 
from his purse, staked them on the black, and won. He did not pick 
up his winnings, but left them on the table. Black turned up again; he 
didn't pick up his winnings that time either; and when, the third 
time, red turned up, he lost at once twelve hundred francs. He 
walked away with a smile and kept up his dignity. I am positive he 
was raging inwardly, and if the stake had been two or three times as 
much he would not have kept up his dignity but would have betrayed 
his feelings. A Frenchman did, however, before my eyes, win and 
lose as much as thirty thousand francs with perfect gaiety and no 
sign of emotion. A real gentleman should not show excitement even if 
he loses his whole fortune. Money ought to be so much below his 
gentlemanly dignity as to be scarcely worth noticing. Of course, it 
would ha\'e been extremely aristocratic not to notice the sordidness of 
all the rabble and all the surroundings. Sometimes, however, the op­
posite pose is no less aristocratic-to notice-that is, to look about one, 
even, perhaps, to stare through a lorgnette at the rabble; though al­
ways taking the rabble and the sordidness as nothing else but a diver­
sion of a sort, as though it were a performance got up for the 
amusement of gentlemen. One may be jostled in that crowd, but one 
must look about one with complete conviction that one is oneself a 
spectator and that one is in no sense part of it. Though, again, to 
look very attentively is not quite the thing; that, again, would not be 
gentlemanly because, in any case, the spectacle does not deserve much, 
or close, attention. And, in fact, few spectacles do deserve a gentle­
man's close attention. And yet it seemed to me that all this was deserv­
ing of very close attention, especially for one who had come not only 
to observe it, but sincerely and genuinely reckoned himself as one of 
the rabble. As for my hidden moral convictions, there is no place for 
them, of course, in my present reasonings. Let that be enough for the 
present. I speak to relieve my conscierce. But I notice one thing: that 

14 
The Short 'N.ovt:ls of 'Dostoevsky 
of late it has become horribly repugnant to me to test my thoughts 
and actions by any moral standard whatever. I was guided by some­
thing different . . . .  
The rabble certainly did play very sordidly. I am readt to believe, 
indeed, that a great deal of the most ordinary thieving goes on at the 
gambling table. The croupiers who sit at each end of the table look at 
the stakes and reckon the winnings; they have a great deal to do. 
They are rabble, too! For the most part they are French. However, I 
was watching and observing, not with the object of describing roulette. 
I kept a sharp look-out for my own sake, so that I might know how 
to behave in the future. I noticed, for instance, that nothing was more 
common than for some one to stretch out his hand and snatch what 
one had won. A dispute would begin, often an uproar, and a nice job 
one would have to find witnesses and to prove that it was one's 
stake! 
At first it was all an inexplicable puzzle to me. All I could guess 
and distinguish was that the stakes were on the numbers, on odd 
and even, and on the colours. I made up my mind to risk a hundred 
guldens of Polina Alexandrovna's money. The thought that I was not 
playing for myself seemed to throw me out of my reckoning. It was 
an extremely unpleasant feeling, and I wanted to be rid of it as soon 
as possible. I kept feeling that by beginning for Polina I should break 
my own luck. Is it impossible to approach the gambling table without 
becoming infected with superstition ? I began by taking out five fried­
richs d'or (fifty gulden) and putting them on the even. The wheel 
went round and thirteen turned up-1 h::td lost. \ViLh a sickly feeling 
I staked another five friedrichs d'or on red, simply in order to settle 
the matter and go away. Red turned up. I staked all the ten friedrichs 
d'or-red turned up again. I staked all the money again on the same, 
and again red turned up. On receiving forty friedrichs d'or I staked 
twenty upon the twelve middle figures, not knowing what would 
come of it. I was paid three times my stake. In this way from ten 
friedrichs d'or I had all at once eighty. I was overcome by a strange, 
unusual feeling which was so unbearable that I made up my mind 
to go away. It seemed to me that I should not have been playing at 
all like that if I had been playing for myself. I staked the whole 
eighty friedrichs d'or, however, on even. This time four turned up; 
another eighty friedrichs d'or was poured out to me, and, gathering 
up the whole heap of a hundred and sixty friedrichs d'or, I set off to 
find Polina Alexandrovna. 
They were all walking somewhere in the park and I only succeeded 

'1 he (jam bier 
15 
in seeing her after supper. This time the Frenchman was not of the 
party, and the General unbosomed himself. Among other things he 
thought fit to observe to me that he would not wish to see me at the 
gambling tables. It seemed to him that it would compromise him if I 
were to lose too much : "But even if you were to win a very large sum 
I should be compromised, too," he added significantly. "Of course, I 
have no right to dictate your actions, but you must admit yourself . . .  " 
At this point he broke off, as his habit was. I answered, drily, that I 
had very little money, and so I could not lose very conspicuously, even 
if I did play. Going upstairs to my room I succeeded in handing 
Polina her winnings, and told her that I would not play for her an­
other time. 
"\Vhy not?" she asked, in a tremor. 
"Because I want to play on my own account," I answered, looking 
at her with surprise; "and it hinders me." 
"Then you still continue in your conviction that roulette is your 
only escape and salvation?" she asked ironically. 
I answered ''ery earnestly, that I did; that as for my confidence that 
I should win, it might be absurd; I was ready to admit it, but that 
I wanted to be let alone. 
Polina Alexandrovna began insisting I should go halves with her in 
to-day's winnings, and was giving me eighty friedrichs d'or, suggesting 
that I should go on playing on those terms. I refused the half, posi­
tively and finally, and told her that I could not play for other people, 
not because I didn't want to, but because I should certainly lose. 
"Yet I, too," she said, pondering, "stupid as it seems, am building 
all my hopes on roulette. And so you must go on playing, sharing 
with me, and-of course-you will." 
At this point she walked away, without listening to further objec­
tions. 
Chapter 3 
YET all yesterday she did not say a single word to me about play­
ing, and avoided speaking to me altogether. Her manner to me re­
mained unchanged : the same absolute carelessness on meeting me; 
there was even a shade of contempt and dislike. Altogether she did 
not care to conceal her aversion; I noticed that. In spite of that she 
did not conceal from me, either, that I was in some way necessary 
to her and that she was keeping me for some purpose. A strange rela-

16 
The Short N.ovels of rDostoevsky 
tion had grown up between us, incomprehensible to me in many 
ways when I considered her pride and haughtiness with every one. 
She knew, for instance, that I loved her madly, even allowed me to 
speak of my passion; and, of course, she could not have shown greater 
contempt for me than by allowing me to speak of my passion with­
out hindrance or restriction. It was as much as to say that she thought 
so little of my feelings that she did not care in the least what I talked 
about to her and what I felt for her. She had talked a great deal about 
her own affairs before, but had never been completely open. What is 
more, there was this peculiar refinement in her contempt for me: she 
would know, for instance, that I was aware of some circumstance 
in her life, or knew of some matter that greatly concerned her, or 
she would tell me herself something of her circumstances, if to for­
ward her objects she had to make use of me in some way, as a slave 
or an errand-boy; but she would always tell me only so much as a 
man employed on her errands need know, and if I did not know the 
whole chain of events, if she saw herself how worried and anxious 
I was over her worries and anxieties, she never deigned to comfort 
me by giving me her full confidence as a friend ; though she often 
made use of me for commissions that were not only troublesome, but 
dangerous, so that to my thinking she was bound to be open with me. 
Was it worth her while, indeed, to trouble herself about my feelings, 
about my being worried, and perhaps three times as much worried 
and tormented by her anxieties and failures as she was herself? 
I knew of her intention to play roulette three weeks before. She had 
even warned me that I should have to play for her, and it would be 
improper for her to play herself. From the tone of her words, I no­
ticed even then that she had serious anxieties, and was not actuated 
simply by a desire for money. \Vhat is money to her for its own sake? 
She must have some object, there must be some circumstance at which 
I can only guess, but of which so far I have no knowledge. Of course, 
the humiliation and the slavery in which she held me might have 
made it possible for me (it often does) to question her coarsely and 
bluntly. Seeing that in her eyes I was a slave and utterly insignificant, 
there was nothing for her to be offended at in my coarse curiosity. 
But the fact is, that though she allowed me to ask questions, she did 
not answer them, and sometimes did not notice them at all. That was 
the position between us. 
A great deal was said yesterday about a telegram which had been 
sent off four days before, and to which no answer had been received. 
The General was evidently upset and preoccupied. It had, of course, 

The (jambler 
17 
something to do with Granny. The Frenchman was troubled, too. 
Yesterday, for instance, after dinner, they had a long, serious talk. 
The Frenchman's tone to all of us was unusually high and mighty, 
quite in the spirit of the saying: "Seat a pig at table and it will put 
its feet on it." Even with Polina he was casual to the point of rude­
ness; at the same time he gladly took part in the walks in the public 
gardens and in the rides and drives into the country. I had long known 
some of the circumstances that bound the Frenchman to the General: 
they had made plans for establishing a factory together in Russia; 
I don't know whether their project had fallen through, or whether 
it was being discussed. Moreover, I had by chance come to know part 
of a family secret. The Frenchman had actually, in the previous year, 
come to the General's rescue, and had given him thirty thousand 
roubles to make up a deficit of Government monies missing when he 
resigned his duties. And, of course, the General is in his grip; but now 
the principal person in the whole business is Mlle. Blanche; about that 
I am sure I'm not mistaken. 
What is Mlle. Blanche ? Here among us it is said that she is a dis­
tinguished Frenchwoman, with a colossal fortune and a mother ac­
companying her. It is known, too, that she is some sort of relation of 
our marquis, but a very distant one: a cousin, or something of the 
sort. I am told that before I went to Paris, the Frenchman and Mlle. 
Blanche were on much more ceremonious, were, so to speak, on a 
more delicate and refined footing; now their acquaintance, their friend­
ship and relationship, was of a rather coarse and more intimate char­
acter. Perhaps our prospects seemed to them so poor that they did 
not think it very necessary to stand on ceremony and keep up appear­
ances with us. I noticed even the day before yesterday how Mr. Astley 
looked at Mlle. Ulanche and her mother. It seemed to me that he knew 
them. It even seemed to me that our Frenchman had met Mr. Astley 
before. Mr. Astley, however, is so shy, so reserved and silent, that one 
can be almost certain of him-he won't wash dirty linen in public. 
Anyway, the Frenchman barely bows to him and scarcely looks at 
him, so he is not afraid of him. One can understand that, perhaps, 
but why does Mlle. Blanche not look at him either? Especially when 
the marquis let slip yesterday in the course of conversation-} don't 
remember in what connection-that Mr. Astley had a colossal fortune 
and that he-the marquis-knew this for a fact; at that point Mlle. 
Blanche might well have looked at Mr. Astley. Altogether the General 
was uneasy. One can understand what a telegram announcing his 
aunt s death would mean! 

18 
'I he Slwrt N.ovels of 7Jostoevsky 
Though I felt sure Polina was, apparently for some object, avoid­
ing a conversation with me, I assumed a cold and indifferent air: I 
kept thinking that before long she would come to me of herself. But 
both to-day and yesterday I concentrated my attention principally on 
Mlle. Blanche. Poor General! He is completely done for! To fall in 
love at fifty-five with such a violent passion is a calamity, of course! 
When one takes into consideration the fact that he is a widower, his 
children, the ruin of his estate, his debts, and, finally, the woman it is 
his lot to fall in love with. Mlle. Blanche is handsome. But I don't 
know if I shall be understood if I say that she has a face of the type 
of which one might feel frightened. I, anyway, have always been afraid 
of women of that sort. She is probably five-and-twenty. She is well 
grown and broad, with sloping shoulders; she has a magnificent throat 
and bosom; her complexion is swarthy yellow. Her hair is as black as 
Indian ink, and she has a tremendous lot of it, enough to make two 
ordinary coiffures. Her eyes are black with yellowish whites; she has 
an insolent look in her eyes; her teeth are very white; her lips are 
always painted; she smells of musk. She dresses effectively, richly and 
with chic, but with much taste. Her hands and feet are exquisite. Her 
voice is a husky contralto. Sometimes she laughs, showing all her 
teeth, but her usual expression is a silent and impudent stare-before 
Polina and Marya Filippovna, anyway (there is a strange rumour that 
Marya Filippovna is going back to Russia) . I fancy that Mlle. Blanche 
has had no sort of education. Possibly she is not even intelligent; but, 
on the other hand, she is striking and she is artful. I fancy her life 
has not passed without adventures. If one is to tell the whole truth, 
it is quite possible that the marquis is no relation of hers at all, and 
that her mother is not her mother. But there is evidence that in Berlin, 
where we went with them, her mother and she had some decent ac­
quaintances. As for the marquis himself, though I still doubt his being 
a marquis, yet the fact that he is received in decent society-among 
Russians, for instance, in Moscow, and in some places in Germany-is 
not open to doubt. I don't know what he is in France. They say he has 
a chateau. 
I thought that a great deal would have happened during this fort­
night, and yet I don't know if anything decisive has been said be­
tween Mlle. Blanche and the General. Everything depends on our for­
tune, however; that is, whether the General can show them plenty of 
money. If, for instance, news were to come that Granny were not dead, 
I am convinced that Mlle. Blanche would vanish at once. It surprises 
and amuses me to see what a gossip I've become. Oh! how I loathe it 

Th% (iambl%r 
19 
all! How delighted I should be to drop it all, and them all! But can I 
leave Polina, can I give up spying round her ? Spying, of course, is 
low, but what do I care about that? 
I was interested in Mr. Astley, too, to-day and yesterday. Yes, I am 
convinced he's in love with Polina. It is curious and absurd how much 
may be expressed by the eyes of a modest and painfully chaste man, 
moved by love, at the very time when the man would gladly sink into 
the earth rather than express or betray anything by word or glance. 
Mr. Astley very often meets us on our walks. He takes off his hat and 
passes by, though, of course, he is dying to join us. If he is invited 
to do so, he immediately refuses. At places where we rest-at the 
Casino, by the bandstand, or before the fountain-he always stands 
somewhere not far from our seat; and wherever we may be-in the 
park, in the wood, or on the Schlangenberg--one has only to glance 
round, to look about one, and somewhere, either in the nearest path 
or behind the bushes, Mr. Astley's head appears. I fancy he is looking 
for an opportunity to have a conversation with me apart. This morning 
we met and exchanged a couple of words. He sometimes speaks very 
abruptly. Without saying "good-morning," he began by blurting out-
"Oh, Mlle. Blanche! . . .  I have seen a great many women like 
Mlle. Blanche! "  
He paused, looking at me significantly. What h e  meant to say by 
that I don't know. For on my asking what he meant, he shook his 
head with a sly smile, and added, "Oh, well, that's how it is. Is Mlle. 
Pauline very fond of flowers?" 
"I don't know; I don't know at all," I answered. 
"What? You don't even know that!" he cried, with the utmost 
amazement. 
"I don't know; I haver:'t noticed at all," I repeated, laughing. 
"H'm! That gives me a queer idea." 
Then he shook his head and walked away. He looked pleased, 
though. We talked the most awful French together. 
Chapter 4 
To-DAY has been an absurd, grotesque, ridiculous day. Now it 
is eleven o'clock at night. I am sitting in my little cupboard of a 
room, recalling it. It began with my having to go to roulette to play for 
Polina Alexandrovna. I took the hundred and sixty friedrichs d'or, but 

20 
The Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
on two conditions: first, that I would not go halves-that is, if I won 
I would take nothing for myself; and secondly, that in the evening 
Polina should explain to me why she needed to win, and how much 
money. I can't, in any case, suppose that it is simply for the sake of 
money. Evidently the money is needed, and as quickly as possible, for 
some particular object. She promised to explain, and I set off. In the 
gambling hall the crowd was awful. How insolent and how greedy 
they all were! I forced my way into the middle and stood near the 
croupier; then I began timidly experimenting, staking two or three 
coins at a time. Meanwhile, I kept quiet and looked on; it seemed to 
me that calculation meant very little, and had by no means the im­
portance attributed to it by some players. They sit with papers before 
them scrawled over in pencil, note the strokes, reckon, deduce the 
chances, calculate, finally stake and-lose exactly as we simple mortals 
who play without calculations. On the other hand, I drew one con­
clusion which I believe to be correct : that is, though there is no sys­
tem, there really is a sort of order in the sequence of casual chances­
and that, of course, is very strange. For instance, it happens that after 
the twelve middle numbers come the twelve later numbers; twice, 
for instance, it turns up on the twelve last numbers and passes to the 
twelve first numbers. After falling on the twelve first numbers, it 
passes again to numbers in the middle third, turns up three or four 
times in succession on numbers between thirteen and twenty-four, and 
again passes to numbers in the last third; then, after turning up two 
numbers between twenty-live and thirty-six, it passes to a number 
among the first twelve, turns up once again on a number among the 
first third, and again passes for three strokes in succession to the middle 
numbers; and in that way goes on for an hour and a half or two hours. 
One, three and two-one, three and two. It's very amusing. One day 
or one morniug, for instance, red will be followed by black and back 
again almost without any order, shifting every minute, so that it never 
turns up red or black for more than two or three strokes in succession. 
Another day, or another evening, there will be nothing but red over 
and over again, turning up, for instance, more than twenty-two times 
in succession, and so for a whole day. A great deal of this was ex­
plained to me by :Mr. Astley, who spent the whole morning at the 
tables, but did not once put down a stake. 
As for me, I lost every farthing very quickly. I staked straight off 
twenty friedrichs d'or on even and won, staked again and again won. 
and went on like that two or three times. I imagine I must haYe had 
about four hundred friedrichs d'or in my hands in about live minutes. 

Th% (jambl%r 
21 
At that point I ought to have gone away, but a strange sensation rose 
up in me, a sort of defiance of fate, a desire to challenge it, to put out 
my tongue at it. I laid down the largest stake allowed-four thousand 
gulden-and lost it. Then, getting hot, I pulled out all I had left, 
staked it on the same number, and lost again, after which I walked 
away from the table as though I were stunned. I could not even grasp 
what had happened to me, and did not tell Polin:: Alex::ndrovna of 
my losing till just before dinner. I spent the rest of the d::y sauntering 
in the park. 
At dinner I was ag::in in ::n excited state, just as I had been three 
days before. The Frenchman and Mlle. Bl::nche were dining with 
us again. It appeared that Mlle. Blanche had been in the gambling 
hall that morning and had witnessed my exploits. This time she ad­
dressed me, it seemed, somewhat attentively. The Frenchman set to 
work more directly, and asked me: Was it my own money I had lost? 
I fancy he suspects Polina. In fact, there is something behind it. I lied 
at once and said it was. 
The General was extremely surprised. Where had I got such a sum? 
I explained that I had begun with ten friedrichs d'or, that after six 
or seven times staking successfully on equal chances I had five or six 
hundred gulden, and that afterwards I had lost it all in two turns. 
All that, of course, sounded probable. As I explained this I looked 
at Polina, but I could distinguish nothing from her face. She let me 
lie, however, and did not set it right; from this I concluded that I had 
to lie and conceal that I was in collaboration with her. In any case, I 
thought to myself, she is bound to give me an explanation, and prom 
ised me this morning to reveal something. 
I expected the General would have made some remark to me, but 
he remained mute; I noticed, however, signs of disturbance and un­
easiness in his face. Possibly in his straitened circumstances it was 
simply painful to him to hear that such a pile of gold had come into, 
and within a quarter of an hour had passed out of, the hands of such 
a reckless fool as me. 
I suspect that he had a rather hot encounter with the Frenchman 
yesterday. They were shut up together talking for a long time. The 
Frenchman went away seeming irritated, and came to see the General 
again early this morning-probably to continue the conversation of the 
previous day. 
Hearing what I had lost, the Frenchman observed bitingly, even 
spitefully, that one ought to have more sense. He added-1 don't know 

22 
'1 he Short N.ovels of Vostoevsky 
why-that though a great many Russians gamble, Russians were not, 
in his opinion, well qualified even for gambling. 
"In my mind," said I, "roulette is simply made for Russians." 
And when at my challenge the Frenchman laughed contemptuously, 
I observed that I was, of course, right, for to speak of the Russians as 
gamblers was abusing them far more than praising them, and so I 
might be believed. 
"On what do you base your opinion?" asked the Frenchman. 
"On the fact that the faculty of amassing capital has, with the 
progress of history, taken a place-and almost the foremost place­
among the virtues and merits of the civilized man of the West. The 
Russian is not only incapable of amassing capital, but dissipates it in a 
reckless and unseemly way. Nevertheless we Russians need money, 
too," I added, "and consequently we are very glad and very eager to 
make use of such means as roulette, for instance, in which one can 
grow rich all at once, in two hours, without work. That's very fascinat­
ing to us; and since we play badly, recklessly, without taking trouble, 
we usually lose!" 
"That's partly true," observed the Frenchman complacently. 
"No, it is not true, and you ought to be ashamed to speak like that 
of your country," observed the General, sternly and impressively. 
"Allow me," I answered. "I really don't know which is more dis­
gusting: Russian unseemliness or the German faculty of accumulation 
by honest toil." 
"\Vhat an unseemly idea!" exclaimed the General. 
"What a Russian idea!" exclaimed the Frenchman. 
I laughed; I had an intense desire to provoke them. 
"Weiᐖ I should prefer to dwell all my life in a Kirgiz tent," I cried, 
"than bow down to the German idol." 
"What idol?" cried the General, beginning to be angry in earnest. 
"The German faculty for accumulating wealth. I've not been here 
long, but yet all I have been able to observe and verify revolts my 
Tatar blood. My God! I don't want any such virtue! I succeeded 
yesterday in making a round of eight miles, and it's all exactly as in 
the edifying German picture-books: there is here in every house a vater 
horribly virtuous and extraordinarily honest-so honest that you are 
afraid to go near him. I can't endure honest people whom one is 
afraid to go near. Every such German vater has a family, and in the 
evening they read improving books aloud. Elms and chestnut trees 
rusde over the house. The sun is setting; there is a stork on the roof, 
and everything is extraordinarily practical and touching . . . .  Don't be 

The (/ambler 
23 
angry, General; let me tell it in a touching style. I remember how 
my father used to read similar books to my mother and me under 
the lime-trees in the garden . . . .  So I am in a position to judge. 
And in what complete bondage and submission every such family 
is here. They all work like oxen and all save money like Jews. 
Suppose the vater has saved up so many gulden and is reckoning on 
giving his son a trade or a bit of land; to do so, he gives his daughter 
no dowry, and she becomes an old maid. To do so, the youngest son 
is sold into bondage or into the army, and the money is added to the 
family capital. This is actually done here; I've been making inquiries. 
All this is done from nothing but honesty, from such intense honesty 
that the younger son who is sold believes that he is sold from nothing 
but honesty : and that is the ideal when the victim himself rejoices at 
being led to the sacrifice. What more? Why, the elder son is no better 
off: he has an Amalia and their hearts are united, but they can't be 
married because the pile of gulden is not large enough. They, too, wait 
with perfect morality and good faith, and go to the sacrifice with a 
smile. Amalia's cheeks grow thin and hollow. At last, in twenty years, 
their prosperity is increased; the gulden have been honestly and virtu­
ously accumulating. The vater gives his blessing to the forty-year-old 
son and his Amalia of thirty-five, whose chest has grown hollow and 
whose nose has turned red . . . .  \Vith that he weeps, reads them a 
moral sermon, and dies. The eldest son becomes himself a virtuous 
vater and begins the same story over again. In that way, in fifty or 
seventy years, the grandson of the first vater really has a considerable 
capital, and he leaves it to his son, and he to his, and he to his, till in 
five or six generations one of them is a Baron Rothschild or goodness 
knows who. Come, isn't that a majestic spectacle? A hundred or two 
hundred years of continuous toil, patience, intelligence, honesty, char­
acter, determination, prudence, the stork on the roof! What more de 
you want? Why, there's nothing loftier than that; and from that 
standpoint they are beginning to judge the whole world and to punish 
the guilty; that is, any who are ever so little unlike them. Well, so 
that's the point: I would rather waste my substance in the Russian 
style or grow rich at roulette. I don't care to be Goppe and Co. in five 
generations. I want money for myself, and I don't look upon myself 
as something subordinate to capital and necessary to it. I know that I 
have been talking awful nonsense, but, never mind, such are my 
convictions." 
"I don't know whether there is much truth in what you have been 
saying," said the General thoughtfully, "but I do know you begin to 

24 
The Short Novels of 7JostoevskJ' 
give yourself insufferable airs as soon as you are permitted to forget 
yourself in the least . . .  
" 
As his habit was, he broke off without finishing. If our General 
began to speak of anything in the slightest degree more important than 
his ordinary everyday conversation, he never finished his sentences. 
The Frenchman listened carelessly with rather wide-open eyes ; he had 
scarcely understood anything of what I had said. Polina gazed with 
haughty indifference. She seemed not to hear my words, or anything 
else that was said that day at table. 
Chapter 5 
SHE was unusually thoughtful, but directly we got up from table 
she bade me escort her for a walk. We took the children and went 
into the park towards the fountain. 
As I felt particularly excited, I blurted out the crude and stupid 
question : why the Marquis de Grieux, our Frenchman, no longer 
escorted her when she went out anywhere, and did not even speak 
to her for days together. 
"Because he is a rascal," she answered me strangely. 
I had never heard her speak like that of De Grieux, and I received 
it in silence, afraid to interpret her irritability. 
"Have you noticed that he is not on good terms with the General 
to-day ?" 
"You want to know what is the matter?" she answered drily and 
irritably. "You know that the General is completely mortgaged to 
him ; all his property is his, and if Granny doesn't die, the Frenchman 
will come into possession of everything that is mortgaged to him." 
"And is it true that everything is mortgaged? I had heard it, but 
I did not know that everything was." 
"To be sure it is." 
"Then farewell to Mlle. Blanche," said I. "She won't be the General's 
wife, then! Do you know, it strikes me the General is so much in love 
that he may shoot himself if Mlle. Blanche throws him over. It is 
dangerous to be so much in love at his age." 
"I fancy that something will happen to him, too," Polina Alexan­
drovna observed musingly. 
"And how splendid that would be!" I cried. "They couldn't have 
shown more coarsely that she was only marrying him for his money! 

Th% (jamb/ł 
25 
There's no regard for decency, even; there's no ceremony about it 
whatever. That's wonderful! And about Granny-could there be 
anything more comic and sordid than to be continually sending tele­
gram after telegram: 'Is she dead, is she dead'? How do you like it, 
Polina Alexandrovna?" 
"That's all nonsense," she said, interrupting me with an air of 
disgust. ''I wonder at your being in such good spirits. What are you 
so pleased about ? Surely not at having lost my money?" 
"Why did you give it to me to lose? I told you I could not play for 
other people-especially for you! I obey you, whatever you order me 
to do, but I can't answer for the result. I warned you that nothing 
would come of it. Are you very much upset at losing so much money? 
What do you want so much for? "  
"Why these questions? "  
"Why, you promised to explain to me . . .  Listen : I am absolutely 
convinced that when I begin playing for myself (and I've got twelve 
friedrichs d'or) I shall win. Then you can borrow as much from me 
as you like." 
She made a contemptuous grimace. 
"Don't be angry with me for such a suggestion," I went on. "I am 
so deeply conscious that I am nothing beside you-that is, in your eyes 
-that you may even borrow money from me. Presents from me cannot 
insult you. Besides, I lost yours." 
She looked at me quickly, and seeing that I was speaking irritably 
and sarcastically, interrupted the conversation again. 
"There's nothing of interest to you in my circumstances. If you 
want to know, I'm simply in debt. I've borrowed money and I wanted 
to repay it. I had the strange and mad idea that I should be sure to 
win here at the gambling table. Why I had the idea I can't understand, 
but I believed in it. Who knows, perhaps I believed it because no other 
alternative was left me." 
"Or because it was quite necessary you should win. It's exactly like 
a drowning man clutching at a straw. You will admit that if he were 
not drowning he would not look at a straw as a branch of a tree." 
Polina was surprised. 
"Why," she said, "you were reckoning on the same thing yourself! 
A fortnight ago you said a great deal to me about your being absolutely 
convinced that you would win here at roulette, and tried to persuade 
me not to look upon you as mad; or were you joking then ? But I 
remember you spoke so seriously that it was impossible to take it as a 
joke." 

26 
The Short Novels of 7JostoevskJ 
"That's true," I answered thoughtfully. "I am convinced to this 
moment that I shall win. I confess you have led me now to wonder 
why my senseless and unseemly failure to-day has not left the slightest 
doubt in me. I am still fully convinced that as soon as I begin playing 
for myself I shall be certain to win." 
"Why are you so positive?" 
"If you will have it-I don't know. I only know that I must win, 
that it is the only resource left me. Well, that's why, perhaps, I fancy 
I am bound to win." 
"Then you, too, absolutely must have it, since you are so fanatically 
certain ?" 
"I wager you think I'm not capable of feeling that I must have 
anything?" 
"That's nothing to me," Polina answered quietly and indifferently. 
"Yes, if you like. I doubt whether anything troubles you in earnest. 
You may be troubled, but not in earnest. You are an unstable person, 
not to be relied on. What do you want money for? I could see nothing 
serious in the reasons you brought forward the other day." 
"By the way," I interrupted, "you said that you had to repay a 
debt. A fine debt it must be! To the Frenchman, I suppose?" 
"What questions! You're particularly impertinent to-day. Are you 
drunk, perhaps?" 
"You know that I consider myself at liberty to say anything to you, 
and sometimes ask you very candid questions. I repeat, I'm your slave, 
and one does not mind what one says to a slave, and cannot take 
offence at anything he says." 
"And I can't endure that 'slave' theory of yours." 
"Observe that I don't speak of my slavery because I want to be your 
slave. I simply speak of it as a fact which doesn't depend on me in the 
least." 
"Tell me plainly, what do you want money for?" 
"What do you want to know that for?" 
"As you please," she replied, with a proud movement of her head. 
"You can't endure the 'slave' theory, but insist on slavishness : 
'Answer and don't argue.' So be it. Why do I want money? you ask. 
How can you ask ? Money is everything!" 
"I understand that, but not falling into such madness from wanting 
it! You, too, are growing frenzied, fatalistic. There must be something 
behind it, some special object. Speak without beating about the bush; 
I wish it." 

'I he (jam bier 
27 
She seemed beginning to get angry, and I was awfully pleased at 
her questioning me with such heat. 
"Of course there is an object," I answered, "but I don't know how to 
explain what it is. Nothing else but that with money I should become 
to you a different man, not a slave." 
"What? How will you manage that?" 
"How shall I manage it? What, you don't even understand how I 
could manage to make you look at me as anything but a slave? Well, 
that's just what I don't care for, such surprise and incredulity!" 
"You said this slavery was a pleasure to you. I thought it was 
myself." 
"You thought so!" I cried, with a strange enjoyment. "Oh, how 
delightful such na"ivete is from you! Oh, yes, yes, slavery to you is a 
pleasure. There is-there is a pleasure in the utmost limit of humilia­
tion and insignificance!" I went on maundering. "Goodness knows, 
perhaps there is in the knout when the knout lies in the back and tears 
the flesh . . . .  But I should perhaps like to enjoy another kind of 
enjoyment. Yesterday, in your presence, the General thought fit to 
read me a lecture for the seven hundred roubles a year which perhaps 
I may not receive from him after all. ·The Marquis de Grieux raises his 
eyebrows and stares at me without noticing me. And I, perhaps, have 
a passionate desire to pull the Marquis de Grieux by the nose in your 
presence!" 
"That's the speech of a milksop. One can behave with dignity in 
any position. If there is a struggle, it is elevating, not humiliating." 
"That's straight out of a copybook. You simply take for granted that 
I don't know how to behave with dignity; that is, that perhaps I am 
a man of moral dignity, but that I don't know how to behave with 
dignity. You understand that that perhaps may be so. Yes, all Russians 
are like that; and do you know why ? Because Russians are too richly 
endowed and many-sided to be able readily to evolve a code of man­
ners. It is a question of good form. For the most part we Russians are 
so richly endowed that we need genius to evolve our code of manners. 
And genius is most often absent, for, indeed, it is a rarity at all times. 
It's only among the French, and perhaps some other Europeans, that 
the code of manners is so well defined that one may have an air of the 
utmost dignity and yet be a man of no moral dignity whatever. That's 
why good form means so much with them. A Frenchman will put up 
with an insult, a real, moral insult, without blinking, but he wouldn't 
endure a flip on the nose for anything, because that is a breach of the 

28 
T !te Short 'N.ovels of 'Dostoevsky 
received code, sanctified for ages. That's why our Russian young ladies 
have such a weakness for Frenchmen, that their manners are so good. 
Though, to my thinking, they have no manners at all; it's simply the 
cock in them, le coq gaulois. I can't understand it, though; I'm not a 
woman. Perhaps cocks are nice. And, in fact, I've been talking non­
sense, and you don't stop me. You must stop me more often. When I 
talk to you I long to tell you everything, everything, everything. I am 
oblivious of all good manners. I'll even admit that I have no manners, 
no moral qualities either. I tell you that. I don't even worry my head 
about moral qualities of any sort; everything has come to a standstill 
in me now; you know why. I have not one human idea in my head. 
For a long time past I've known nothing that has gone on in the world, 
either in Russia or here. Here I've been through Dresden, and I don't 
remember what Dresden was like. You know what has swallowed 'me 
up. As I have no hope whatever and am nothing in your eyes, I speak 
openly: I see nothing but you everywhere, and all the rest is naught to 
me. \Vhy and how I love you I don't know. Perhaps you are not at all 
nice really, you know. Fancy! I don't know whether you are good or 
not, even to look at. You certainly have not a good heart; your mind 
may very well be ignoble." 
"Perhaps that's how it is you reckon on buying me with money," 
she said, "because you don't believe in my sense of honour." 
"When did I reckon on buying you with money?" I cried. 
"You have been talking till you don't know what you are saying. 
If you don't think of buying me, you think of buying my respect with 
your money." 
"Oh no, that's not it at all. I told you it was difficult for me to 
explain. You are overwhelming me. Don't be angry with my chatter. 
You know why you can't be angry with me: I'm simply mad. Though 
I really don't care, even if you are angry. When I am upstairs in my 
little garret I have only to remember and imagine the rustle of your 
dress, and I am ready to bite off my hands. And what are you angry 
with me for? For calling myself your slave? Make use of my being 
your slave, make use of it, make use of it! Do you know that I shall 
kill you one day? I shall kill you not because I shall cease to love you or 
be jealous, I shall simply kill you because I have an impulse to devour 
you. You laugh . . . .  
" 
"I'm not laughing," she answered wrathfully. "I order you to be 
silent." 
She stood still, almost breathless with anger. Upon my word, I don't 
know whether she was handsome, but I always liked to look at her 

The (jambler 
29 
when she stood facing me like that, and so I often liked to provoke 
her anger. Perhaps she had noticed this and was angry on purpose. I 
said as much to her. 
"How disgusting!" she said, with an air of repulsion. 
"I don't care," I went on. "Do you know, too, that it is dangerous 
for us to walk together? I often have an irresistible longing to beat 
you, to disfigure you, to strangle you. And what do you think-won't 
it come to that? You are driving me into brain fever. Do you suppose 
I am afraid of a scandal? Your anger-why, what is your anger to 
me? I love you without hope, and I know that after this I shall love 
you a thousand times more than ever. If ever I do kill you I shall have 
to kill myself, too. Oh, well, I shall put off killing myself as long as 
possible, so as to go on feeling this insufferable pain of being without 
you. Do you know something incredible? I love you more every day, 
and yet that is almost impossible. And how can I help being a fatalist? 
Do you remember the day before yesterday, on the Schlangenberg, I 
whispered at your provocation, 'Say the word, and I will leap into that 
abyss?' If you had said that word I should have jumped in then. Don't 
you believe that I would have leapt down ?" 
"What stupid talk!" she cried. 
"I don't care whether it is stupid or clever!" I cried. "I know that in 
your presence I must talk, and talk, and talk-and I do talk. I lose 
all self-respect in your presence, and I don't care." 
"What use would it be for me to order you to jump off the 
Schlangen berg?" she said in a dry and peculiarly insulting manner. "It 
would be absolutely useless to me." 
"Splendid," I cried ; "you said that splendid 'useless' on purpose to 
overwhelm me. I see through you. Useless, you say? But pleasure is 
always of use, and savage, unbounded power-if only over a fly-is a 
pleasure in its way, too. Man is a despot by nature, and loves to be a 
torturer. You like it awfully." 
I remember she looked at me with peculiar fixed attention. My 
face must have expressed my incoherent and absurd sensations. I 
remember to this moment that our conversation actually was almost 
word for word exactly as I have described it here. My eyes were blood­
shot. There were flecks of foam on my lips. And as for the Schlangen­
berg, I swear on my word of honour even now, if she had told me to 
fling myself down I should have flung myself down! If only for a 
joke she had said it, with contempt, if with a jeer at me she had said 
it, I should even then have leapt down! 
''No, why? I believe you," she pronounced, as only she knows 

30 
The Short N.otcls of 1Jostoct1sky 
how to speak, with such contempt and venom, with such scorn that, 
by God, I could have killed her at the moment. 
She risked it. I was not lying about that, too, in what I said to her. 
"You are not a coward?" she asked me suddenly. 
"Perhaps I am a coward. I don't know . . . .  I have not thought 
about it for a long time." 
"If I were to say to you, 'Kill this man,' would you kill him?" 
"Whom ?" 
"Whom I choose." 
"The Frenchman?" 
"Don't ask questions, but answer. Whom I tell you. I want to 
know whether you spoke seriously just now?" 
She waited for my answer so gravely and impatiently that it struck 
me as strange. 
"Come, do tell me, what has been happening here?" I cried. "What 
are you afraid of-me, or what? I see all the muddle here for myself. 
You are the stepdaughter of a mad and ruined man possessed by a 
passion for that devil-Blanche. Then there is this Frenchman, with 
his mysterious influence over you, and-here you ask me now so 
gravely . . .  such a question. At any rate let me know, or I shall go 
mad on the spot and do something. Are you ashamed to deign to be 
open with me? Surely you can't care what I think of you?" 
"I am not speaking to you of that at all. I asked you a question and 
I'm waiting for the answer." 
"Of course I will kill any one you tell me to," I cried. "But can you 
possibly . . .  could you tell me to do it?" 
"Do you suppose I should spare you? I shall tell you to, and stand 
aside and look on. Can you endure that ? Why, no, as though you 
could! You would kill him, perhaps, if you were told, and then you 
would come and kill me for having dared to send you." 
I felt as though I were stunned at these words. Of course, even then 
I looked upon her question as half a joke, a challenge; yet she had 
spoken very earnestly. I was struck, nevertheless, at her speaking out so 
frankly, at her maintaining such rights over me, at her accepting such 
power over me and saying so bluntly: "Go to ruin, and I'll stand aside 
and look on." In those words there was something so open and 
cynical that to my mind it was going too far. That, then, was how she 
looked at me. This was something more than slavery or insignificance. 
If one looks at a man like that, one exalts him to one's own level, and 
absurd and incredible as all our conversation was, yet there was a 
throb at my heart. 

The (/ambler 
31 
Suddenly she laughed. We were sitting on a bench, before the 
playing children, facing the place where the carriages used to stop and 
people used to get out in the avenue before the Casino. 
"Do you see that stout baroness?" she cried. "That is Baroness 
Burmerhelm. She has only been here three days. Do you see her hus­
band-a tall, lean Pruss ian with a stick ? Do you remember how he 
looked at us the day before yesterday? Go up to the Baroness at once, 
take off your hat, and say something to her in French." 
"Why?" 
"You swore that you would jump down the Schlangenberg; you 
swear you are ready to kill any one if I tell you. Instead of these 
murders and tragedies I only want to laugh. Go without discussing 
it. I want to see the Baron thrash you with his stick." 
"You challenge me; you think I won't do it?" 
"Yes, I do challenge you. Go; I want you to!" 
"By all means, I am going, though it's a wild freak. Only, I say, 
I hope it won't be unpleasant for the General, and through him for 
you. Upon my honour, I am not thinking of myself, but of you and 
the General. And what a mad idea to insult a woman!" 
"Yes, you are only a chatterer, as I see," she said contemptuously. 
"Your eyes were fierce and bloodshot, but perhaps that was only 
because you had too much wine at dinner. Do you suppose that I don't 
understand that it is stupid and vulgar, and that the General would be 
angry? I simply want to laugh ; I want to, and that's all about it! 
And what should you insult a woman for? \Vhy, just to be thrashed." 
I turned and went in silence to carry out her commission. Of course 
it was stupid, and of course I did not know how to get out of it, but 
as I began to get closer to the Baroness I remember, as it were, some­
thing within myself urging me on; it was an impulse of schoolboyish 
mischief. Besides, I was horribly overwrought, and felt just as though 
I were drunk. 
Chapter 6 
Now two days have passed since that stupid day. And what 
a noise and fuss and talk and uproar there was! And how unseemly 
and disgraceful, how stupid and vulgar, it was! And I waᐔ the cause 
of it all. Yet at times it's laughable-to me, at any rate. I can't make 
up my mind what happened to me, whether I really was in a state 

32 
The Short Novels of Vostoevsky 
of frenzy, or whether it was a momentary aberration and I behaved 
disgracefully till I was pulled up. At times it seemed to me that my 
mind was giving way. And at times it seems to me that I have not 
outgrown childhood and schoolboyishness, and that it was simply a 
crude schoolboy's prank. 
It was Polina, it was all Polina! Perhaps I shouldn't have behaved 
like a schoolboy if it hadn't been for her. Who knows? perhaps I did 
it out of despair (stupid as it seems, though, to reason like that). And 
I don't understand, I don't understand what there is fine in her! She 
is fine, though ; she is; I believe she's fine. She drives other men off 
their heads, too. She's tall and graceful, only very slender. It seems 
to me you could tie her in a knot or bend her double. Her foot is long 
and narrow-tormenting. Tormenting is just what it is. Her hair has 
a reddish tint. Her eyes are regular eat's eyes, but how proudly and 
disdainfully she can look with them. Four months ago, when I had 
only just come, she was talking hotly for a long while one evening 
with De Grieux in the drawing-room, and looked at him in such a 
way . . .  that afterwards, when I went up to to my room to go to 
bed, I imagined that she must have just given him a slap in the face. 
She stood facing him and looked at him. It was from that evening 
that I loved her. 
To come to the point, however. 
I stepped off the path into the avenue, and stood waltmg for the 
Baron and the Baroness. When they were five paces from me I took 
off my hat and bowed. 
I remember the Baroness was wearing a light grey dress of immense 
circumference, with flounces, a crinoline, and a train. She was short 
and exceptionally stout, with such a fearful double chin that she 
seemed to have no neck. Her face was crimson. Her eyes were small, 
spiteful and insolent. She walked as though she were doing an honour 
to all beholders. The Baron was lean and tall. Like most Germans, 
he had a wry face covered with thousands of fine wrinkles, and wore 
spectacles; he was about forty-five. His legs seemed to start from his 
chest : that's a sign of race. He was as proud as a peacock. He was 
rather clumsy. There was something like a sheep in the expression 
of his face that would pass with them for profundity. 
All this flashed upon my sight in three seconds. 
My bow and the hat in my hand gradually arrested their attention. 
The Baron slightly knitted his brows. The Baroness simply sailed 
straight at me. 

The (;ambler 
33 
"Madame Ia baronne," I articulated distinctly, emphasizing each 
word, "j'ai l'honneur d'etre votre esc/ave." 
Then I bowed, replaced my hat, and walked past the Baron, turning 
my face towards him with a polite smile. 
She had told me to take off my hat, but I had bowed and behaved 
like an impudent schoolboy on my own account. Goodness knows what 
impelled me to! I felt as though I were plunging into space. 
"Heinl" cried, or rather croaked, the Baron, turning towards me 
with angry surprise. 
I turned and remained in respectful expectation, still gazing at him 
with a smile. He was evidently perplexed, and raised his eyebrows as 
high as they would go. His face grew darker and darker. The Baroness, 
too, turned towards me, and she, too, stared in wrathful surprise. The 
passers-by began to look on. Some even stopped. 
"Heinl" the Baron croaked again, with redoubled gutturalness and 
redoubled anger. 
"fa wohl!" I drawled, still looking him straight in the face. 
"Sind Sie rasend?" he cried, waving his stick and beginning, I think, 
to be a little nervous. He was perhaps perplexed by my appearance. 
I was very well, even foppishly, dressed, like a man belonging to the 
best society. 
"fa wo-o-o/z/1" I shouted suddenly at the top of my voice, drawling 
the o like the Berliners, who use the expression fa wohl in every sen­
tence, and drawl the letter o more or less according to the shade of 
their thought or feeling. 
The Baron and Baroness turned away quickly and almost ran away 
from me in terror. Of the spectators, some were talking, others were 
gazing at me in amazement. I don't remember very clearly, though. 
I turned and walked at my ordinary pace to Polina Alexandrovna. 
But when I was within a hundred paces of her seat, I saw her get 
up and walk with the children towards the hotel. 
I overtook her at the door. 
"I have performed . . .  the foolery," I said, when I reached her. 
"\Vell, what of it? Now you can get out of the scrape," she answered. 
She walked upstairs without even glancing at me. 
I spent the whole evening walking about the park. I crossed the park 
and then the wood beyond and walked into another state. In a cottage 
I had an omelette and some wine; for that idyllic repast they extorted 
a whole thaler and a half. 
It was eleven o'clock before I returned home. I was at once sum­
moned before the General. 

34 
T lze Short N.ovels of 'Dostoevsky 
Our party occupied two suites in the hotel; they have four rooms. 
The first is a big room-a drawing-room with a piano in it. The 
next, also a large room, is the General's study. Here he was awaiting 
me, standing in the middle of the room in a majestic pose. De Grieux 
sat lolling on the sofa. 
"Allow me to ask you, sir, what have you been about?" began the 
General, addressing me. 
"I should be glad if you would go straight to the point, General," 
said I. "You probably mean to refer to my encounter with a German 
this morning?" 
"A German? That German was Baron Burmerhelm, a very impor-
tant personage! You insulted him and the Baroness." 
"Not in the least." 
"You alarmed them, sir!" cried the General. 
"Not a bit of it. \Vhen I was in Berlin the sound was for ever in my 
ears of that fa woM, continually repeated at every word and disgust­
ingly drawled out by them. When I met them in the avenue that 
fa wohl suddenly came into my mind, I don't know why, and-well, it 
had an irritating effect on me . . . .  Besides, the Baroness, who has met 
me three times, has the habit of walking straight at me as though I 
were a worm who might be trampled underfoot. You must admit that 
I, too, may have my proper pride. I took ofT my hat and said politely 
(I assure you I said it politely) : 'Madame, j',,; /'honneur d'etre votre 
esc/ave.' When the Baron turned round and said, 'Heinl' I felt an 
impulse to shout, 'fa woM!' I shouted it twice: the first time in an 
ordinary tone, and the second-! drawled it as much as I could. That 
was all." 
: must own I was intensely delighted at this extremely schoolboyish 
explanation. I had a strange desire to make the story as absurd as 
possible in the telling. 
And as I went on, I got more and more to relish it. 
"Are you laughing at me? "  cried the General. He turned to the 
Frenchman and explained to him in French that I was positively 
going out of my way to provoke a scandal! De Grieux laughed con­
temptuously and shrugged his shoulders. 
"Oh, don't imagine that; it was not so at all!" I cried. "My conduct 
was wrong, of course; I confess that with the utmost candour. My 
behaviour may e\·en be called a stupid and improper schoolboy prank, 
but-nothing more. And do you know, General, I heartily regret it. 
But there is one circumstance which, to my mind at least, almost 
saves me from repentance. Lately, for the last fortnight, indeed, I've 

The (jamb/ł 
35 
not been feeling well : I have felt ill, nervous, irritable, moody, and on 
some occasions I lose all control of myself. Really, I've sometimes had 
an intense impulse to attack the Marquis de Grieux and . . .  How­
ever, there's no need to say, he might be offended. In short, it's the 
sign of illness. I don't know whether the Baroness Burmerhelm wili 
take this fact into consideration when I beg her pardon (for I intend 
to apologize). I imagine she will not consider it, especially as that line 
of excuse has been somewhat abused in legal circles of late. Lawyers 
have taken to arguing in criminal cases that their clients were not 
responsible at the moment of their crime, and that it was a form of 
disease. 'He killed him,' they say, 'and has no memory of it.' And only 
imagine, General, the medical authorities support them-and actually 
maintain that there are illnesses, temporary aberrations, in which a man 
scarcely remembers anything, or hJs only a half or a quarter of his 
memory. But the Baron and Baroness are people of the older genera­
tion; besides, they are Prussian junkers and landowners, and so are 
probably unaware. of this advance in the world of medical jurispru­
dence, and will not accept my explanation. What do you think, 
General ?" 
"Enough, sir," the General pronounced sharply, with surprised 
indignation; "enough! I will try once for all to rid myself of your 
mischievous pranks. You are not going to apologize to the Baron 
and Baroness. Any communication with you, even though it were to 
consist solely of your request for forgiveness, would be beneath their 
dignity. The Baron has learnt that you are a member of my household; 
he has ahady had an explanation with me at the Casino, and I assure 
you that he was within an ace of asking me to give him satisfaction. 
Do you understand what you have exposed me to-me, sir? 1-1 was 
forced to ask the Baron's pardon, and gave him my word that imme­
diately, :his very day, you would cease to be a member of my 
househoH." 
"Allow me, allow me, General; then did he insist on that himself, 
that I should cease to belong to your household, as you were pleased 
to express it?" 
"No, but I considered myself bound to give him that satisfaction, 
and, of :ourse, the Baron was satisfied. We must part, sir. There is 
what is )Wing to you, four friedrichs d'or and three florins, according 
to the reckoning here. Here is the money, and here is the note of the 
account: you can verify it. Good-bye. From this time forth we are 
stranger>. I've had nothing but trouble and unpleasantness from you. 
I will dl the kellner and inform him from this day forth that I am 

36 
The Short Novels of 'DostoevskY 
not responsible for your hotel expenses. I have the honour to remain 
your obedient servant." 
I t?ok the money and the paper upon which the account was written 
in pencil, bowed to the General, and said to him very seriously-
"General, the matter cannot end like this. I am very sorry that you 
were put into an unpleasant position with the Baron, but, excuse me, 
you were to blame for it yourself. Why did you take it upon yourself 
to be responsible for me to the Baron? What is the meaning of the 
expression that I am a member of your household ? I am simply a 
teacher in your house, that is all. I am neither your son nor your ward, 
and you cannot be responsible for my actions. I am a legally responsible 
person, I am twenty-five, I am a graduate of the university, I am a 
nobleman, I am not connected with you in any way. Nothing but my 
unbounded respect for your dignity prevents me now from demanding 
from you the fullest explanation and s:.tisfaction for taking upon 
yourself the right to answer for me." 
The General was so much amazed th:.t he flung up his hands, then 
turned suddenly to the Frenchman and hurriedly informed him that 
1 had just all but challenged him to a duel. 
The Frenchman laughed aloud. 
"But I am not going to let the Baron off," I said, with complete 
composure, not in the least embarrassed by M. de Grieux's laughter; 
"and as, General, you consented to listen to the Baron's com pi · nt to-day 
and have taken up his cause, and have made yourself, as 
were, a 
party in the whole affair, I have the honour to inform yo that no 
later than to-morrow morning I shall ask the Baron on 
y own 
account for a formal explanation of the reasons which led hi1 to apply 
to other persons-as though I were unable or unfit to a ·wer for 
myself." 
What I foresaw happened. The General, hearing of thi new ab­
surdity, became horribly nervous. 
"What, do you mean to keep up this damnable busi ss?" he 
shouted. "What a position you are putting me in-good eavens! 
Don't dare, don't dare, sir, or, I swear! . . .  There are police ere, too, 
and I . . .  I . . .  in fact, by my rank . . .  and the Baron's too . . .  
in fact, you shall be arrested and turned out of the state by t police, 
to teach you not to make a disturbance. Do you understand 
t, sir? "  
And although h e  was breathless with anger, he was also orribly 
frightened. 
"General," I answered, with a composure that was insu able to 
him, "you can't arrest any one for making a disturbance be re they 

Th% (jambl%r 
37 
have made a disturbance. I have not yet begun to make my explana­
tions to the Baron, and you don't know in the least in what form or on 
what grounds I intend to proceed. I only wish to have an explanation 
of a position insulting to me, i. e. that I am under the control of a 
person who has authority over my freedom of action. There is no 
need for you to be so anxious and uneasy." 
"For goodness' sake, for goodness' sake, Alexey Ivanovitch, drop 
this insane intention!" muttered the General, suddenly changing his 
wrathful tone for one of entreaty, and even clutching me by the hand. 
"Fancy what it will lead to! Fresh unpleasantness! You must see 
for yourself that I must be particular here . . .  particularly now! par-
ticularly now! . . .  Oh, you don't know, you don't know all my cir-
cumstances! . . .  \Vhen we leave this place I shall be willing to take 
you back again; I was only speaking of now, in fact-of course, you 
understand there are reasons!" he cried in despair. "Alexey Ivanovitch, 
Alexey Ivanovitᐕh . . .  
" 
Retreating to the door, I begged him more earnestly nol: to worry 
himself, promised him that everything should go off well and with 
propriety, and hastily withdrew. 
The Russian abroad is sometimes too easily cowed, and is horribly 
afraid of what people will say, how they will look at him, and whether 
this or that will be the proper thing. In short, they behave as though 
they were in corsets, especially those who have pretensions to conse­
quence. The thing that pleases them most is a certain established 
traditional etiquette, which they follow slavishly in hotels, on their 
walks, in assemblies, on a journey . . . .  But the General had let slip 
that, apart from this, there was a particular circumstance, that he must 
be "particular." That was why he so weakly showed the white feather 
and changed his tone with me. I took this as evidence and made a note 
of it; and, of course, he might have brought my folly to the notice of 
the authorities, so that I really had to be careful. 
I did not particularly want to anger the General, however; but I did 
want to anger Polina. Polina had treated me so badly, and had thrust 
me into such a stupid position, that I could not help wanting to force 
her to beg me to stop. My schoolboyish prank might compromise her, 
too. Moreover, another feeling and desire was taking shape in me: 
though I might be reduced to a nonentity in her presence, that did not 
prove that I could not hold my own before other people, or that the 
Baron could thrash me. I longed to have the laugh against them all, 
and to come off with flying colours. Let them see! She would be 

38 
T h% Short Novds of Vosto%vsky 
frightened by the scandal and call me back again, or, even if she didn't, 
at least she would see that I could hold my own. 
(A wonderful piece of news! I have just heard from the nurse, 
whom I met on the stairs, that Marya Filippovna set off to-day, entirely 
alone, by the evening train to Karlsbad to see her cousin. What's the 
meaning of that? Nurse says that she has long been meaning to go; 
but how was it no one knew of it? Though perhaps I was the only 
one who did not know it. The nurse let slip that Marya Filippovna had 
words with the General the day before yesterday. I understand. No 
doubt that is Mlle. Blanche. Yes, something decisive is coming.) 
Chapter 7 
IN THE morning I called for the kellner and told him to make 
out a separate bill for me. My room was not such an expensi,·e one 
as to make me feel alarmed and anxious to leave the hotel. I had 
sixteen friedrichs d'or, and there . . .  there perhaps was wealth! 
Strange to say, I have not won yet, but I behave, I feel and think, 
like a rich man, and cannot. imagine anything else. 
In spite of the early hour I intended to go at once to see Mr. Astley 
at the Hotel d'Angleterre, which was quite close by, when suddenly 
De Grieux came in to me. That had never happened before, and, what 
is more, that gentleman and I had for some time past been on very 
queer and strained terms. He openly displayed his contempt for me, 
even tried not to conceal it; and 1-I had my own reasons for disliking 
him. In short, I hated him. His visit greatly surprised me. I at once 
detected that something special was brewing. 
He came in very politely and complimented me on my room. Seeing 
that I had my hat in my hand, he inquired whether I could be going 
out for a walk so early. \Vhen he heard that I was going to see Mr. 
Astley on business, he pondered, he reflected, and his face assumed an 
exceedingly c:;.reworn expression. 
De Grieux was like all Frenchmen; that is, gay and polite when 
necessary and profitable to be so, and insufferably tedious when the 
necessity to be gay and polite was over. A Frenchman is not often 
naturally polite. He is always polite, as it were, to order, with a motive. 
If he sees the necessity for being fantastic, original, a little out of the 
ordinary, then his freakishness is most stupid and unnatural, and is 

The (jambler 
39 
made up of accepted and long-vulgarized traditions. The natural 
Frenchman is composed of the most plebeian, petty, ordinary practical 
sense-in fact, he is one of the most wearisome creatures in the world. 
In my opinion, only the innocent and inexperienced-especially Russian 
young ladies-are fascinated by Frenchmen. To every decent person 
the conventionalism of the established traditions of drawing-room 
politeness, ease and gaiety are at once evident and intolerable. 
"I have come to see you on business," he began, with marked direct­
ness, though with courtesy, "and I will not disguise that I have come 
as an ambassador, or rather as a mediator, from the General. As I 
know Russian very imperfectly I understood very little of what passed 
yesterday, but the General explained it to me in detail, and I con­
fess . . .  " 
"But, listen, M. de Grieux," I interrupted; "here you have under­
tlken to be a mediator in this affair. I am, of course, an outchitel, and 
have never laid claim to the honour of being a great friend of this 
family, nor of being on particularly intimate terms with it, and so I 
don't know all the circumstances; but explain :  are you now entirely 
a member of the family? You take such an interest in everything and 
are certain at once to be a mediator . . .  
" 
This question did not please him. It was too transparent for him, and 
he did not want to speak out. 
"I am connected with the General partly by business, partly by cer­
:ain special circumstances," he said drily. "The General has sent me 
to ask you to abandon the intentions you expressed yesterday. All you 
thought of doing was no doubt very clever; but he begged me to rep­
resent to you that you would be utterly unsuccessful; what's more, the 
Baron will not receive you, and in any case is in a position to rid 
himself of any further unpleasantness on your part. You must see that 
yourself. Tell me, what is the object of going on with it? The General 
promises to take you back into his home at the first convenient oppor­
tunity, and until that time will continue your salary, vos appointements. 
That will be fairly profitable, won't it?" 
I retorted very calmly that he was rather mistaken; that perhaps I 
shouldn't be kicked out at the Baron's, but, on the contrary, should 
be listened to; and I asked him to admit that he had probably come 
to find out what steps I was going to take in the matter. 
"Oh, heavens! Since the General is so interested, he will, of course, 
be glad to know how you are going to behave, and what you are going 
to do." 
I proceeded to explain, and he began listening, stretching himself at 

40 
The Short 'Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
his ease and inclining his head on one side towards me, with an obvi­
ous, undisguised expression of irony on his face. Altogether he behaved 
very loftily. I tried with all my might to pretend that I took a very 
serious view of the matter. I explained that since the Baron had ad­
dressed a complaint of me to the General as though I were the latter's 
servant, he had, in the first place, deprived me thereby of my position; 
and secondly, had treated me as a person who was incapable of answer­
ing for himself and who was not worth speaking to. Of course, I said, 
I felt with justice that I had been insulted ; however, considering the 
difference of age, position in society, and so on, and so on (I could 
scarcely restrain my laughter at this point), I did not want to rush 
into fresh indiscretion by directly insisting on satisfaction from the 
Baron, or even proposing a duel to him; ne\'ertheless, I considered 
myself fully entitled to offer the Baron, and still more the Baroness, 
my apologies, especially since of late I had really felt ill, overwrought, 
and, so to say, fanciful, and so on, and so on. However, the Baron had, 
by his applying to the General, which was a slight to me, and by his 
insisting that the General should deprive me of my post, put me in 
such a position that now I could not oller him and the Baroness my 
apologies, because he and the Baroness and all the world would cer­
tainly suppose that I came to apologize because I was frightened and 
in order to be reinstated in my post. From all this it followed that I 
found myself now compelled to beg the Baron first of all to apologize 
to me in the most formal terms; for instance, to say that he hJ.d no 
desire to insult me. And when the Baron said this I should feel that my 
hands were set free, and with perfect candour and sincerity I should 
offer him my apologies. In brief, I concluded, I could only beg the 
Baron to untie my hands. 
"Fie! how petty and how far-fetched! And why do you want to 
apologize? Come, admit, monsieur . . .  monsieur . . . that you are doing 
all this on purpose to \'eX the General . . .  and perhaps you have some 
special object . . .  mon cher monsieur . . .  pardon, j'ai oublie votre nom, 
M. Alexis? . . .  N'est-ce pas?" 
"But, excuse me, mon cher marquis, what has it to do with you?" 
"Mais le general .
. . " 
"But what about the General ? He said something last night, that he 
had to be particularly careful . . .  and was so upset . . .  but I did not 
understand it." 
"There is, there certainly is a particular circumstance," De Grieux 
caught me up in an insistent voice, in which a note of vexation was 
more and more marked. "You know Mlle. de Cominges . . .  ?" 

r he (jam bier 
41 
"That is, Mlle. Blanche?" 
" Why, yes, Mlle. Blanche de Cominges .
. . et madame sa mere. You 
see for yourself, the General . . .  in short, the General is in love; in 
fact . . .  in fact, the marriage may be celebrated here. And fancy, scan­
dal, gossip . . .  
" 
"I see no scandal or gossip connected with the marriage in this." 
"But le baron est si irascible, tm caractere Prussien, vous savez, enfin 
il fera une quere//e d'Allemand." 
"\Vith me, then, and not with you, for I no longer belong to the 
household . . . .  " (I tried to be as irrational as possible on purpose.) 
"But, excuse me, is it settled, then, that Mlle. Blanche is to marry the 
General? What are they waiting for? I mean, why conceal this from 
us, at any rate from the members of the household ?" 
"I cannot . . .  however, it is not quite . . .  besides . . .  you know, they 
are expecting news from Russia; the General has to make arrange­
ments . . .  " 
"Ah! ah! La baboulinka!" 
De Grieux looked at me with hatred. 
"In short," he interrupted, "I fully rely on your innate courtesy, on 
your intelligence, on your tact . . . .  You will certainly do this for the 
family in which you have been received like one of themselves, in which 
you ha\'e been liked and respected . . .  " 
"Excuse me, I've been dismissed! You maintain now that that is 
only in appearance; but you must admit, if you were told : 'I won't 
send you packing, but, for the look of the thing, kindly take yourself 
off' . . .  You see, it comes almost to the same thing." 
"\Veil, if that's how it is, if no request will have any influence on 
you," he began sternly and haughtily, "allow me to assure you that 
steps will be taken. There are authorities here; you'll be turned out 
to-day-que diable! U n blanc-bee com me vous wants to challenge a 
personage like the Baron! And do you think that you will not be inter­
fered with ? And, let me assure you, nobody is afraid of you here! I 
have approached you on my own account, because you have been wor­
rying the General. And do you imagine that the Baron will not order 
his flunkeys to turn you out of the house?" 
"But, you see, I'm not going myself," I answered, with the utmost 
composure. "You are mistaken, M. de Grieux; all this will be done 
much more decorously than you imagine. I am just setting off to Mr. 
Astley, and I am going to ask him to be my intermediary; in fact, to 
be my second. The man likes me, and certainly will not refuse. He will 
go to the Baron, and the Baron will receive him. Even if I am an 

42 
The Short N.ovels of 'Dostoevsky 
outcl1itel and seem to be something subordinate and, well, defence-less, 
Mr. Astley is a nephew of a lord, of a real lord; every one knows that­
Lord Pibroch-and that lord is here. Believe me, the Baron will be 
courteous to Mr. Astley and will listen to him. And if he won't listen, 
Mr. Astley will look upon it as a personal affront (you know how 
persistent Englishmen are), and will send a friend to call on the Baron; 
he has powerful friends. You may reckon, now, upon things not turn­
ing out quite as you expect." 
The Frenchman was certainly scared; all this was really very much 
like the truth, and so it seemed that I really might be able to get up a 
scandal. 
"Come, I beg you," he said in a voice of actual entreaty, "do drop 
the whole business! It seems to please you that it will cause a scandal! 
It is not satisfaction you want, but a scandal! As I have told you, it is 
very amusing and even witty-which is perhaps what you are aiming 
at. But, in short," he concluded, seeing that I had got up and was taking 
my hat, "I've come to give you these few lines from a certain person; 
read them; I was charged to wait for an answer." 
Saying this, he took out of his pocket a little note, folded and sealed 
with a wafer, and handed it to me. 
It was in Polina's handwriting. 
"I fancy that you intend to go on with this alTair, but there are spe­
cial circumstances which I will explain to you perhaps later; please 
leave off and give way. It is all such silliness! I need you, and you 
promised yourself to obey me. Remember the Schlangenberg; I beg you 
to be obedient, and, if necessary, I command you.-Your P. 
"P.S.-1£ you are angry with me for what happened yesterday, for­
give me." 
Everything seemed to be heaving before my eyes when I read these 
lines. My lips turned white and I began to tremble. The accursed 
Frenchman watched me with an exaggerated air of discretion, with 
his eyes turned away as though to avoid noticing my confusion. He 
had better have laughed at me outright. 
"Very good," I answered ; "tell Mademoiselle that she may set her 
mind at rest. Allow me to ask you," I added sharply, "why you have 
been so long giving me this letter. Instead of chattering about all sorts 
of nonsense, I think you ought to have begun with that . . .  if you 
came expressly with that object." 
"Oh, I wanted . . .  all this is so strange that you must excuse my 

'I he (jam bier 
43 
natural impatience. I was in haste to learn from you in person what 
you intended to do. Besides, I don't know what is in that note, and I 
thought there was no hurry for me to give it you." 
"I understand: the long and the short of it is you were told only to 
give me the letter in case of the utmost necessity, and if you could 
settle it by word of mouth you were not to give it to me. Is that 
right? Tell me plainly, M. de Grieux." 
"Peut-etre," he said, assuming an air of peculiar reserve, and looking 
at me with a peculiar glance. 
I took off my hat; he took off his hat and went out. It seemed to me 
that there was an ironical smile on his lips. And, indeed, what else 
could one expect? 
"\Ve'll be quits yet, Frenchy; we'll settle our accounts," I muttered 
as I went down the stairs. I could not think clearly; I felt as though I 
had had a blow on my head. The air revived me a little. 
Two minutes later, as soon as ever I was able to reflect clearly, two 
thoughts stood out vividly before me: the first was that such trivial 
incidents, that a few mischievous and far-fetched threats from a mere 
boy, had caused such universal consternation! The second thought was: 
what sort of influence had this Frenchman over Polina ? A mere word 
from him and she does anything he wants-writes a note and even 
begs me. Of course, their relations have always been a mystery to me 
from the very beginning, ever since I began to know them ; but of late 
[ have noticed in her a positive aversion and even contempt for him, 
while he did not even look at her, was absolutely rude to her. I had 
noticed it. Polina herself had spoken of him to me with aversion; she 
had dropped some extremely significant admissions .
•
.
 so he simply 
had her in his power. She was in some sort of bondage to him. 
Chapter 8 
Q N THE promenade, as it is called here, that is, in the chestnut 
avenue, I met my Englishman. 
"Oh, oh!" he began, as soon as he saw me. "I was coming to see you, 
and you are on your way to me. So you have parted from your people?" 
"Tell me, first, how it is that you know all this?" I asked in amaze­
ment. "Is it possible that everybody knows of it?" 
"Oh, no, every one doesn't; and, indeed, it's not worth their knowing. 
No one is talking about it." 

44 
The Short N.ovels of Vostocvsky 
"Then how do you know it?" 
"I know, that is, I chanced to learn it. Now, where are you going 
when you leave here? I like you and that is why I was coming to see 
you." 
. 
"You are a splendid man, Mr. Astley," said I (I was very much in­
terested, however, to know where he could have learnt it), "and since 
I have not yet had my coffee, and most likely you have not had a good 
cup, come to the cafe in the Casino. Let us sit down and have a smoke 
there, and I will tell you all about it, and . . .  you tell me, too . . .  
" 
The cafe was a hundred steps away. They brought us some coffee. 
We sat down and I lighted a cigarette. Mr. Astley did not light one 
and, gazing at me, prepared to listen. 
"I am not going anywhere. I am staying here," I began. 
"And I was sure you would," observed Mr. Astley approvingly. 
On my way to Mr. Astley I had not meant to tell him anything of 
my love for Polina, and, in fact, I expressly intended to say nothing to 
him about it. All that time I had hardly said one word to him about 
it. He was, besides, very reserved. From the first I noticed that Polina 
had made a great impression upon him, but he never uttered her name. 
But, strange to say, now no soo::ter had he sat down and turned upon 
me his fixed, pewtery eyes, I felt, I don't know why, a desire to tell him 
everything, that is, all about my love in all its aspects. I was talking to 
him for half an hour and it was very pleasant to me; it was the first 
time I had talked of it! Noticing that at certain ardent sentences he 
was embarrassed, I purposely exaggerated my ardour. Only one thing 
I regret : I said, perhaps, more than I should about the Frenchman . . . .  
Mr. Astley listened, sitting facing me without moving, looking 
straight into my eyes, not uttering a word, a sound ; but when I spoke 
of the Frenchman, he suddenly pulled me up and asked me, severely, 
whether I had the right to refer to this circumstance which did not 
concern me? Mr. Astley always asked questions very strangely. 
"You are right. I am afraid not," I answered. 
"You can say nothing definite, nothing that is not supposition about 
that marquis and Miss Polina?" 
I was surprised again at such a point-blank question from a man so 
reserved as Mr. Astley. 
"No, nothing definite," I answered ; "of course not." 
"If so, you have done wrong, not only in speaking of it to me, but 
even in thinking of it yourself." 
"Very good, very good ; I admit it, but that is not the point now," 
I interrupted, wondering at myself. At this point I told him the whole 

7' h% (jamhl%r 
45 
of yesterday's story in full detail: Polina's prank, my adventure with 
the Baron, my dismissal, the General's extraordinary dismay, and, 
finally, I described in detail De Grieux's visit that morning. Lastly I 
showed him the note. 
"What do you deduce from all this?" I asked. "I came on purpose 
to find out what you think. For my part, I could kill that Frenchman, 
and perhaps I shall." 
"So could I," said Mr. Astley. "As regards Miss Polina, you know 
. . .  we may enter into relations even with people who are detestable to 
us if we are compelled by necessity. There may be relations of which 
you know nothing, dependent upon outside circumstances. I think you 
may set your mind at rest-to some extent, of course. As for her action 
yesterday, it was strange, of course; not that she wanted to get rid of 
you and expose you to the Baron's walking-stick (I don't understand 
why he did not use it, since he had it in his hand), but because such 
a prank is improper . . . for such an . . .  exquisite young lady. Of 
course, she couldn't have expected that you would carry out her jesting 
wish so literally . . .  
" 
"Do you know what?" I cried suddenly, looking intently at Mr. 
Astley. "It strikes me that you have heard about this already-do you 
know from whom ? From Miss Polina herself!" 
Mr. Astley looked at me with surprise. 
"Your eyes are sparkling and I can read your suspicion in them," he 
said, regaining his former composure; "but you have no right whatever 
to express your suspicions. I cannot recognize the right, and I abso­
lutely refuse to answer your question." 
"Enough! There's no need," I cried, strangely perturbed, and not 
knowing why it had come into my head. And when, where and how 
could Mr. Astley have been chosen by Pol ina to confide in? Though, 
of late, indeed, I had, to some extent, lost sight of Mr. Astley, and 
Polina was always an enigma to me, such an enigma that now, for 
instance, after launching into an account of my passion to Mr. Astley, 
I was suddenly struck while I was speaking by the fact that there was 
scarcely anything positive and definite I could say about our relations. 
Everything was, on the contrary, strange, unstable, and, in fact, quite 
umque. 
"Oh, very well, very well. I am utterly perplexed and there is a great 
deal I can't understand at present," I answered, gasping as though I 
were breathless. "You are a good man, though. And now, another mat­
ter, and I ask not your advice, but your opinion." 
After a brief pause I began. 

46 
The Short N.ouels of Vostoeusky 
"What do you think? Why was the General so scared? Why did he 
make such a to-do over my stupid practical joke? Such a fuss that even 
De Grieux thought it necessary to interfere (and he interferes only in 
the most important matters) ;  visited me (think of that!), begged and 
besought me-he, De Grieux-begged and besought me! Note, finally, 
he came at nine o'clock, and by that time Miss Polina's letter was in his 
hands. One wonders when it was written. Perhaps they waked Miss 
Polina up on purpose! Apart from what I see clearly from this, that 
Miss Polina is his slave (for she even begs my forgiveness!)-apart 
from that, how is she concerned in all this, she personally; why is she 
so much interested ? Why are they frightened of some Baron? And 
what if the General is marrying Mlle. Blanche de Cominges? They say 
that, owing to that circumstance, they must be particular, but you must 
admit that this is somewhat too particular! What do you think? I am 
sure from your eyes you know more about it than I do!" 
Mr. Astley laughed and nodded. 
"Certainly. I believe I know much more about it than you," he said. 
"Mlle. Blanche is the only person concerned, and I am sure that is the 
absolute truth." 
"Well, what about Mlle. Blanche?" I cried impatiently. (I suddenly 
had a hope that something would be disclosed about Mlle. Polina.) 
"I fancy that Mlle. Blanche has at the moment special reasons for 
avoiding a meeting with the Baron and Baroness, even more an un­
pleasant meeting, worse still, a scandalous one." 
"Well, well . . .  
" 
"Two years ago Mlle. Blanche was here at Roulettenburg in the 
season. I was here, too. Mlle. Blanche was not called Mlle. de Cominges 
then, and her mother, Madame Ia maman Cominges, was non-existent 
then. Anyway, she was never mentioned. De Grieux-De Grieux was 
not here either. I cherish the conviction that, far from being relations, 
they have only very recently become acquainted. He-De Grieux-has 
only become a marquis very recently, too-l am sure of that from one 
circumstance. One may assume, in fact, that his name has not been 
De Grieux very long either. I know a man here who has met him 
passing under another name." 
"But he really has a very respectable circle of acquaintances." 
"That may be. Even Mlle. Blanche may have. But two years ago, at 
the request of that very Baroness, Mlle. Blanche was invited by the 
police to leave the town, and she did leave it." 
"How was that?" 
"She made her appearance here first with an Italian, a prince of 

47 
some sort, with an historical name-Barberini, or something like it­
a man covered with rings and diamonds, not false ones either. They 
used to drive about in a magnificent carriage. Mlle. Blanche used to 
play trente et quarante, at first winning, though her luck changed later 
on, as far as I remember. I remember one evening she lost a considera­
ble sum. But, worse still, un beau mat in her prince vanished ; the horses 
and the carriage vanished too, everything vanished. The bills owing at 
the hotels were immense. Mlle. Selma (she suddenly ceased to be 
Barberini, and became Mlle. Selma) was in the utmost despair. She 
was shrieking and wailing all over the hotel, and rent her clothes in 
her fury. There was a Polish count staying here at the hotel (all Polish 
travellers are counts), and Mlle. Selma, rending her garments and 
scratching her face like a cat with her beautiful perfumed fingers, made 
some impression on him. They talked things over, and by dinner-time 
she was consoled. In the evening he made his appearance at the Casino 
with the lady on his arm. As usual, Mlle. Selma laughed very loudly, 
and her manner was somewhat more free and easy than before. She 
definitely showed that she belonged to the class of ladies who, when 
they go up to the roulette table, shoulder the other players aside to clear 
a space for themselves. That's particularly chic amone such ladies. You 
must have noticed it?" 
"Oh, yes." 
"It's not worth noticing. To the annoyance of the decent public they 
are not moved on here-at least, not those of them who can change a 
thousand-rouble note every day, at the roulette table. As soon as they 
c:ease to produce a note to change they are asked to withdraw, however. 
Mlle. Selma still went on changing notes, but her play became more 
unlucky than ever. Note that such ladies are very often lucky in their 
play; they have a wonderful self-control. However, my story is finished. 
One day the count vanished just as the prince had done. However, 
Mlle. Selma made her appearance at the roulette table alone; this time 
no one came forward to oiler her his arm. In two days she had lost 
everything. After laying down her last louis d'or and losing it, she 
looked round, and saw, close by her, Baron Burmerhelm, who was 
scrutinizing her intently and with profound indignation. But Mlle. 
Selma, not noticing his indignation, accosted the Baron with that smile 
we all know so well, and asked him to put down ten louis d'or on the 
red for her. In consequence of a complaint from the Baroness she re­
ceived that evening an invitation not to show herself at the Casino 
again. If you are surprised at my knowing all these petty and extremely 
improper details, it is because I have heard them from Mr. Fider, one 

48 
The Short N.otels of VostoetlskJ 
of my relations, who carried off Mlle. Selma in his carriage from 
Roulettenburg to Spa that very evening. Now, remember, Mlle. Blanche 
wishes to become the General's wife; probably in order in future not 
to receive such invitations as that one from the police at the Casino, 
the year before last. Now she does not play; but that is because, as it 
seems, she has capital of her own which she lends out at a percentage to 
gamblers here. That's a much safer speculation. I even suspect that the 
luckless General is in debt to her. Perhaps De Grieux is, too. Perhaps 
De Grieux is associated with her. You will admit that, till the wedding, 
at any rate, she can hardly be anxious to attract the attention of the 
Baron and Baroness in any way. In short, in her position, nothing 
could be more disadvantageous than a scandal. You are connected 
with their party and your conduct might cause a scandal, especially 
as she appears in public every day either arm-in-arm with the General 
or in company with Miss Polina. Now do you understand ?" 
"::\"o, I don't!" I cried, thumping the table so violently that the garᐒon 
ran up in alarm. 
"Tell me, Mr. Astley," I said furiously. "If you knew all this story 
and, therefore, know positively what Mlle. Blanche de Cominges is, 
why didn't you warn me at least, the General, or, most of all, most of 
all, Miss Polina, who has shown herself here at the Casino in public, 
arm-in-arm with Mlle. Blanche? Can such a thing be allowed?" 
"I had no reason to warn you, for you could have done nothing," Mr. 
Astley answered calmly. "Besides, warn them of what? The General 
knows about Mlle. Blanche perhaps more than I do, yet he still goes 
about with her and Miss Polina. The General is an unlucky man. I 
saw ᐓlie. Blanche yesterday, galloping on a splendid horse with .M. de 
Grieux and that little Russian Prince, and the General was galloping 
after them on a chestnut. He told me in the morning that his legs 
ached, but he sat his horse well. And it struck me at that moment that 
he was an utterly ruined man. Besides, all this is no business of mine, 
and I have only lately had the honour of making Miss Polina's ac­
quaintance. However" (Mr. Astley caught himself up), "I've told you 
already that I do not recognize your right to ask certain questions, 
though I have a genuine liking for you . . .  " 
"Enough," I said, getting up. "It is clear as daylight to me now, that 
Miss Polina knows all about Mlle. Blanche, but that she cannot part 
from her Frenchman, and so she brings herself to going about with 
Mlle. Blanche. Believe me, no other influence would compel her to go 
about with Mlle. Blanche and to beg me in her letter not to interfere 
with the Baron! Damn it all, there's no understanding it!" 

7' he (jambler 
49 
"You forget, in the first place, that Mlle. de Cominges is the Gen­
eral's fiancee, and in the second place that Miss Polina is the General's 
stepdaughter, that she h:.1s :.1 little brother and sister, the General's own 
children, who are utterly neglected by that insane man and have, I 
believe, been robbed by him." 
"Yes, yes, that is so! To leave the children would mean abandoning 
them altogether; to remain means protecting their interests and, per­
haps, saving some fragments of their property. Yes, yes, all that is true. 
But still, still! . . .  Ah, now I understand why they are all so concerned 
about Granny!" 
"About whom?" asked Mr. Astley. 
"That old witch in Moscow who won't die, and about whom they 
are expecting a telegram that she is dying." 
"Yes, of course, all interest is concentrated on her. Everything de­
pends on what she leaves them! If he comes in for a fortune the Gen­
eral will marry, Miss Polina will be set free, and De Grieux . . .  " 
"Well, and De Grieux?" 
"And De Grieux will be paid; that is all he is waiting for here." 
"Is th:.1t all, do you think that is :.1ll he's waiting for?" 
"I know nothing more." Mr. Astley was obstinately silent. 
"But I do, I do!" I repeated fiercely. "He's waiting for the inheritance 
too, because Polina will get a dowry, and as soon as she gets the money 
will throw herself on his neck. All women are like that! Even the 
proudest of them turn into the meanest slaves! Polina is only capable 
of loving passionately: nothing else. That's my opinion of her! Look 
at her, particularly when she is sitting alone, thinking; it's something 
predestined, doomed, fated! She is capable of all the horrors of life, and 
passion . . .  she . . . she . . .  but who is that calling me?" I exclaimed 
suddenly. "Who is shouting? I heard some one shout in Russian: 
Alexey lvanovitch! A woman's voice. Listen, listen!" 
At this moment we were approaching the hotel. We had left the 
cafe long ago, almost without noticing it. 
"I did hear a woman calling, but I don't know who was being called; 
it is Russian. Now I see where the shouts come from," said Mr. Astley. 
"It is that woman sitting in a big armchair who has just been carried 
up the steps by so many flunkeys. They are carrying trunks after her, 
so the train must have just come in." 
"But why is she calling me? She is shouting again ;  look, she is 
waving to us." 
"I see she is waving," said Mr. Astley. 

50 
'llzc Short Novels of VostocvskJ 
"Aiexey lvanovitch! Alexey lvanovitch! Mercy on us, what a dolt he 
is!" came desperate shouts from the hotel steps. 
We almost ran to the entrance. I ran up the steps and . . .  my hands 
dropped at my sides with amazement and my feet seemed rooted to 
the ground. 
Chapter 9 
AT THE top of the broad steps at the hotel entrance, surrounded 
by footmen and maids and the many obsequious servants of the hotel, 
in the presence of the ober-ke/lner himself, eager to receive the exalted 
visitor, who had arrived with her own servants and with so many 
trunks and boxes, and had been carried up the steps in an invalid<hair, 
was seated-Granny! Yes, it was she herself, the terrible old Moscow 
lady and wealthy landowner, Antonida Vassilyevna Tarasyevitchev, 
the Granny about whom telegrams had been sent and received, who 
had been dying and was not dead, and who had suddenly dropped 
upon us in person, like snow on our heads. Though she was se\·enty­
five and had for the last five years lost the use of her legs and had to 
be carried about everywhere in a chair, yet she had arrived and was, as 
always, alert, captious, self-satisfied, sitting upright in her chair, shout­
ing in a loud, peremptory voice and scolding every one. In fact, she 
was exactly the same as she had been on the only two occasions that I 
had the honour of seeing her during the time I had been tutor in the 
General's family. Naturally I stood rooted to the spot with amazement. 
As she was being carried up the steps, she had detected me a hundred 
paces away, with her lynx-like eyes, had recognized me and called me 
by my name, which she had made a note of, once for all, as she always 
did. And this was the woman they had expected to be in her coffin, 
buried, and leaving them her property. That was the thought that 
flashed into my mind. "Why, she will outlive all of us and every one in 
the hotel! But, my goodness! what will our friends do now, what will 
the General do? She will turn the whole hotel upside down!" 
"Well, my good man, why are you standing with your eyes starting 
out of your head ?" Granny went on shouting to me. "Can't you wel­
come me? Can't you say 'How do you do'? Or have you grown proud 
and won't ? Or, perhaps, you don't recognize me? Potapitch, do you 
hear?" She turned to her butler, an old man with grey hair and a pink 
bald patch on his head, wearing a dresS<oat and white tie. "Do you 

The (jambler 
51 
hear? he doesn't recognize me. They had buried mel Tliey sent tele­
gram upon telegram to ask whether I was dead or not! You see, I 
know all about it! Here, you see, I am quite alive." 
"Upon my word, Antonida Vassilyevna, why should I wish you 
harm?" I answered gaily, recovering myself. "I was only surprised .
•
.
.
 
And how could I help being surprised at such an unexpected . . .  " 
"What is there to surprise you? I just got into the train and came. 
The train was comfortable and not jolting. Have you been for a walk?" 
"Yes, I've been a walk to the Casino." 
"It's pleasant here," said Granny, looking about her. "It's warm and 
the trees are magnificent. I like thad Are the family at home? The 
General? "  
"Oh, yes, at this time they are sure to be all at home." 
"So they have fixed hours here, and everything in style? They set 
the tone. I am told they keep their carriage, /u sdgnIurs russIs! They 
spend all their money and then they go abroad. And is Praskovya with 
them ?" 
"Yes, Polina Alexandrovna, too." 
"And the Frenchy? Oh, well, I shall see them all for myself. Alexey 
h-anovitch, show me the way straight to him. Arc you comfortable 
here?" 
"Fairly so, Amonida Vassilyevna." 
"Potapitch, tell that dolt, the kdln", to give me a nice convenient set 
of rooms, not too high up, and take my things there at once. Why are 
they all so eager to carry me? Why do they put themselves forward ? 
Ech, the slavish creatures! Who is this with you ?" she asked, address-
. 
. 
mg me agam. 
'This is Mr. Astley," I answered. 
"What Mr. Astley?" 
"A traveller, a good friend of mine; an acquaintance of the General's, 
too." 
"An Englishman. To be sure he stares at me and keeps his mouth 
shut. I like Englishmen, though. Well, carry me upstairs, straight to 
their rooms. Where are they?" 
They carried Granny up; I walked up the broad staircase in from. 
Our procession was very striking. E\'ery one we met stopped and 
stared. Our hotel is considered the best, the most expensive, and the 
most aristocratic in the place. Magnificent ladies and dignified English­
men were always to be met on the staircase and in the corridors. Many 
people were making inquiries below of the obIr-keiln", who was 
greatly impressed. He answered, of course, that this was a distin-

52 
The Short Novels of Vostoevsky 
guished foreign lady, une nuse, une comtesse, grande dame, and that 
she was taking the very apartments that had been occupied the week 
before by Ia grande duchesse de N. Granny's commanding and authori­
tative appearance as she was carried up in the chair was chiefly re­
sponsible for the sensation she caused. Whenever she met any one 
fresh she scrutinized him inquisitively and questioned me about him 
in a loud voice. Granny was powerfully built, and though she did not 
get up from her chair, it could be seen that she was very tall. Her back 
was as straight as a board and she did not lean back in her chair. Her 
big grey head with its large, bold features was held erect; she had a 
positively haughty and defiant expression; and it was evident that her 
air and gestures were perfectly natural. In spite of her seventy-five 
years there was still a certain vigour in her face: and even her teeth 
were almost perfect. She was wearing a black silk dress and a white 
cap. 
"She interests me very much," Mr. Astley, who was going up beside 
me, whispered to me. 
"She knows about the telegrams," I thought. "She knows about De 
Grieux, too, but I fancy she does not know much about Mlle. Blanche 
as yet." I communicated this thought to Mr. Astley. 
Sinful man that I was, after the first surprise was over, I was im­
mensely delighted at the thunderbolt that we were launching at the 
General. I was elated; and I walked in front feeling very gay. 
Our apartments were on the third floor. Without announcing her 
arrival or even knocking at the door, I simply flung it wide-open and 
Granny was carried in, in triumph. All of them were, as by design, 
assembled in the General's study. It was twelve o'clock and, I believe, 
some excursion was being planned for the whole party. Some were to 
drive, others were to ride on horseback, some acquaintances had been 
asked to join the party. Besides the General and Polina, with the chil­
dren and their nurse, there were sitting in the study De Grieux, Mlle. 
Blanche, again wearing her riding-habit, her mother, the little Prince, 
and a learned German traveller whom I had not seen before. 
Granny's chair was set down in the middle of the room, three paces 
from the General. My goodness! I shall never forget the sensation! 
As we went in the General was describing something, while De Grieux 
was correcting him. I must observe that Mlle. Blanche and De Grieux 
had for the last few days been particularly attentive to the little Prince, 
a Ia barbe du pauvre general, and the tone of the party was extremely 
gay and genially intimate, though, perhaps, it was artificial. Seeing 
Granny, the General was struck dumb. His mouth dropped open and 

The (jamb/er 
53 
he broke off in the middle of a word. He gazed at her open-eyed, as 
though spellbound by the eye of a basilisk. Granny looked at him in 
silence, too, immovably, but what a triumphant, challenging and ironi­
cal look it was! They gazed at each other for ten full seconds in the 
midst of profound silence on the part of all around them. For the first 
moment De Grieux was petrified, but immediately afterwards a look 
of extreme uneasiness flitted over his face. Mlle. Blanche raised her 
eyebrows, opened her mouth and gazed wildly at Granny. The Prince 
and the learned German stared at the whole scene in great astonish­
ment. Polina's eyes expressed the utmost wonder and perplexity, and 
she suddenly turned white as a handkerchief; a minute later the blood 
rushed rapidly into her face, flushing her cheeks. Yes, this was a 
catastrophe for all of them! I kept turning my eyes from Granny to 
all surrounding her and back again. Mr. Astley stood on one side, calm 
and polite as usual. 
"Well, here I am! Instead of a telegram!" Granny broke the silence 
by going ofT into a peal of laughter. "Well, you didn't expect me?" 
"Antonida Vassilyevna . . .  Auntie . . .  But how on earth . . .  " mut. 
tered the unhappy General. 
If Granny had remained silent for a few seconds longer, he would, 
perhaps, have had a stroke. 
"How on earth what ? I got into the train and came. What's the rail­
way for? You all thought that I had been laid out, and had left you a 
fortune ? You see, I know how you sent telegrams from here. What 
a lot of money you must have wasted on them! They cost a good bit 
from here. I simply threw my legs over my shoulders and came off 
here. Is this the Frenchman? M. de Grieux, I fancy?" 
"Oui, madame," De Grieux responded; "et croyez, je suis si enchante 
. . .  votre sante . . .  c'est un miracle . . .  votts voir ici . . .  une surprise 
charmante . . . .  
" 
"Charmante, I daresay; I know you, you mummer. I haven't this 
much faith in you," and she pointed her little finger at him. "Who is 
this?" she asked, indicating Mlle. Blanche. The striking-looking 
Frenchwoman, in a riding-habit with a whip in her hand, evidently 
impressed her. "Some one living here?" 
"This is Mlle. Blanche de Cominges, and this is her mamma, Madame 
de Cominges; they are staying in this hotel," I explained. 
"Is the daughter married?" Granny questioned me without cere­
mony. 
"Mlle. de Cominges is an unmarried lady," I answered, purposely 
speaking in a low voice and as respectfully as possible. 

54 
7' !Je S!Jort Novels of 7Jostoevs kJ 
"Lively?" 
"I do not understand the question." 
"You are not dull with her ? Does she understand Russian ? De 
Grieux picked it up in Moscow. He had a smattering of it." 
I explained that Mlle. de Cominges had never been in Russia. 
"Bonjour," said Granny, turning abruptly to Mlle. Blanche. 
"Bonjour, madame." Mlle. Blanche made an elegant and ceremonious 
curtsey, hastening, under the cover of modesty and politeness, to ex­
press by her whole face and figure her extreme astonishment at such 
a strange question and manner of address. 
"Oh, she casts down her eyes, she is giving herself airs and graces; 
you can see the sort she is at once; an actress of some kind. I'm stop­
ping here below in the hotel," she said, turning suddenly to the Gen­
eral. "I shall be your neighbour . .Are you glad or sorry ?" 
"Oh, Auntie! do believe in my sincere feelings . . .  of pleasure," the 
General responded. He h;d by now recm·cred himself to some extent, 
and as, upon occasion, he could speak appropriately and with dignity, 
and even with some pretension to ctlcctivencss, he began displaying 
his gifts now. "\Vc have been so alarmed and upset by the news of 
your illness . . . .  We received such despairing telegrams, and all at 
once . . .  
" 
"Come, you arc lying, you arc lying," Granny interrupted at once 
"But how could you"-thc General, too, made haste to interrupt, 
raising his voice and trying not to notice the word "lying"-"how 
could you bring yourself to undertake such a journey? You must admit 
that at your age and in your state of health . . .  at any rate it is all so 
unexpected that our surprise is very natural. But I am so pleased . . .  
and we all" (he began smiling with an ingratiating and delighted air) 
"will try our utmost that you shall spend your season here as agreeably 
as possible . . . .  " 
"Come, that's enough; that's idle chatter; you are talking nonsense, 
as usual. I can dispose of my time for myself. Though I've nothing 
against you, I don't bear a grudge. You ask how I could come? What 
is there surprising about it? It was the simplest thing. And why are you 
so surprised ? How are you, Praskovya ? What do you do here?" 
"How do you do, Granny?" said Polina, going up to her. "Have you 
been long on the journey?" 
''Well, she's asked a sensible question-the others could say nothing 
but oh and ah! \Vhy, you see, I lay in bed and lay in bed and was 
doctored and doctored, so I sent the doctors away and called in the sex­
ton from St. Nicolas. He had cured a peasant woman of the same disease 

T lz% (jamb/%r 
55 
by means of hayseed. And he did me good, too. On the third d::y I was 
in a perspir::tion all day and I got up. Then my Germans gathered 
round again, put on their spectacles and began to argue. 'If you were to 
go abroad now,' said they, 'and take a course of the waters, ::1ll your 
symptoms would disappear.' And why shouldn't I ?  I thought. The fools 
of Zazhigins began sighing ::1nd moaning: 'Where are you off to?' they 
said. Well, so here I am! It took me a day to get ready, and the follow­
ing week, on a Friday, I took a maid, and Potapitch, and the footman, 
Fyodor, but I sent Fyodor back from Berlin, because I saw he was not 
wanted, and I could ha\'e come quite alone. I took a special compart­
ment and there are porters at all the stations, and for twenty kopecks 
they will carry you wherever you like. I s::y, what rooms he h::s taken!" 
she said in conclusion, looking about her. "How do you get the money, 
my good man ?  Why, e\·erything you'\'e got is mortgaged. What a lot 
of money you must owe to this Frenchman alone! I know all about it; 
you sec, I know all about it !" 
"Oh, Auntie . . . " s::id the General, all confusion. "I am surprised, 
Auntie . . .  I imagine that I am free to act . . .  Besides, my expenses are 
not beyond my means, and we are here . . .  " 
"They are not? You s::y so! Then you must h::ve robbed your chil­
dren of their last farthing-you, their trustee!" 
"After that, after such words," began the General, indignant, "I 
really don't know . . . 
" 
"To be sure you don't! I'll be bound you are always at roulette here? 
Ha\'e you whistled it all away?" 
The General was so overwhelmed that he almost spluttered in the 
rush of his feelings. 
"Roulette! I? In my position . . .  I ?  Think what you are saying, 
Auntie; you must still be unwell .
•
.
 " 
"Come, you are lying, you are lying. I'll be bound they can't tear you 
away; it's all lies! I'll have a look to-day what this roulette is like. You. 
Prasko\'ya, tell me where to go and what to see, and Alexey lvanovitch 
here will show me, and you, Potapitch, make a note of all the places to 
go to. What is there to see here?" she said, addressing Polina again. 
"Close by are the ruins of the castle; then there is the Schlangen-
berg." 
"What is it, the Schlangenberg? A wood or what?" 
"No, not a wood, it's a mountain ; there is a peak there . . .  " 
"What do you mean by a peak ?" 
"The very highest point on the mountain. It is an enclosed place­
the view from it is unique." 

56 
The Short Novels of Dostoevsky 
"What about carrying my chair up the mountain? They wouldn'1 
be able to drag it up, would they?" 
"Oh, we can find porters," I answered. 
At this moment, Fedosya, the nurse, came up to greet Granny and 
brought the General's children to her. 
"Come, there's no need for kissing! I cannot bear kissing children, 
they always have dirty noses. \Veil, how do you get on here, Fedosya ?" 
"It's very, very nice here, Antonida Vassilyevna," answered Fedosya. 
"How have you been, ma'am? We've been so worried about you." 
"I know, you are a good soul. Do you always have visitors ? "-she 
turned to Polina again. "Who is that wretched little rascal in spec­
tacles?" 
"Prince Nilsky," Polina whispered. 
"Ah, a Russian. And I thought h.: wouldn't understand! Perhaps 
he didn't hear. I have seen Mr. Astley already. Here he is again," said 
Granny, catching sight of him. "How do you do?"-she turned to 
him suddenly. 
Mr. Astley bowed to her in silence. 
"Have you no good news to tell me? Say something! Translate that 
to him, Polina." 
Polina translated it. 
"Yes. That with great pleasure and delight I am looking at you, and 
very glad that you are in good health," Mr. Astley answered seriously, 
but with perfect readiness. It was translated to Granny and it was 
evident she was pleased. 
"How well Englishmen always answer," she observed. "That's why 
I always like Englishmen. There's no comparison between them and 
Frenchmen! Come and see me," she said, addressing Mr. Astley again. 
"I'll try not to worry you too much. Translate that to him, and tell 
him that I am here below-here below--do you hear? Below, below," 
she repeated to Mr. Astley, pointing downwards. 
Mr. Astley was extremely pleased at the invitation. 
Granny looked Polina up and down attentively and with a satisfied 
atr. 
"I was fond of you, Praskovya," she said suddenly. "You're a fine 
wench, the best of the lot, and as for will-my goodness! Well, I have 
will too; turn round. That's not a false chignon, is it?" 
"No, Granny, it's my own." 
"To be sure. I don't care for the silly fashion of the day. You look 
very nice. I should fall in love with you if I were a young gentleman. 
Why don't you get married ? But it is time for me to go. And I want to 

Th% (jambl%r 
57 
go out, for I've had nothing but the train and the train . . .  Well, are 
you still cross?" she added, turning to the General. 
"Upon my word, Auntie, what nonsense!" cried the General, de­
lighted. "I understand at your age . . .  
" 
"Cette vieille est tombee en enfance," De Grieux whispered to me. 
"I want to see everything here. Will you let me have Alexey Ivano­
vitch? "  Granny went on to the General. 
"Oh, as much as you like, but I will myself . . .  and Polina, M. de 
Grieux . . .  we shall all think it a pleasure to accompany you." 
''1./ais, madame, cela sem un plaisir" . .
. De Grieux addressed her 
with a bewitching smile. 
"A plaisir, to be sure; you are absurd, my good sir. I am not going 
to give you any money, though," she added suddenly. "But now to my 
rooms; I must have a look at them, and then we'll go the round of 
everything. Come. lift me up." Granny was lifted up again and we all 
flocked downstairs behind her chair. The General walked as though 
stunned by a blow on the head. De Grieux was considering something. 
Mlle. 13bnche seemed about to remain, but for some reason she made 
up her mind to come with the rest. The Prince followed her at once, 
and no one was left in the General's study but Madame de Cominges 
and the German. 
Chapter 10 
AT WATERING-PLACES and, I believe, in Europe generally, 
hotelkeepers and ober-kellners, in assigning rooms to their visitors, are 
guided not so much by the demands and desires of the latter as by 
their own personal opinion of them, and, one must add, they are rarely 
mistaken. 13ut for some reason I cannot explain, they had assigned 
Granny such a splendid suite that they had quite overshot the mark. 
It consisted of four splendidly furnished rooms with a bathroom, quar­
ters for the servants and a special room for the maid, and so on. Some 
grande duchesse really had been staying in those rooms the week be­
fore, a fact of which the new occupant was informed at once, in order 
to enhance the value of the apartments. Granny was carried, or rather 
wheeled, through all the rooms, and she looked at them attentively 
and severely. The ober-kellner, an elderly man with a bald head, fol­
lowed her respectfully at this first survey. 
I don't know what they all took Granny to be, but apparently for 

58 
T lze Slzort 'Novels of 7JostoevskJ 
a very important and, above all, wealthy lady. They put down in the 
book at once: "Madame Ia genera/e princesse de Tarasyevitchev," 
though Granny had never been a princess. Her servants, her special 
compartment in the train, the mass of useless bags, portmanteaus, and 
even chests that had come with Granny, probably laid the foundation 
of her prestige; while her invalid-chair, her abrupt tone and voice, 
her eccentric questions, which were made with the most unconstrained 
air that would tolerate no contradiction-in short, Granny's whole 
figure, erect, brisk, imperious-increased the awe in which she was 
held by all. As she looked at the rooms, Granny sometimes told them 
to stop her chair, pointed to some object in the furniture and addressed 
unexpected questions to the ober-kellner, who still smiled respectfully, 
though he was beginning to feel nervous. Granny put her questions 
in French, which she spoke, however, rather badly, so that I usually 
translated. The ober-kellner's answers for the most part did not please 
her and seemed unsatisfactory. And, indeed, she kept asking about all 
sorts of things quite irrelevant. Suddenly, for instance, stopping before 
a picture, a rather feeble copy of some well-known picture of a 
mythological subject, she would ask-
"\Vhose portrait is that ?" 
The ober-kellner replied that no doubt it was some countess. 
"How is it you don't know? You live here and don't know. Why is it 
here? Why is she squinting?" 
The ober-kellner could not answer these questions satisfactorily, and 
positively lost his head. 
"Oh, what a blockhead!" commented Granny, in Russian. 
She was wheeled on. The same performance was repeated with a 
Dresden statuette, which Granny looked at for a long time, and then 
ordered them to remove, no one knew why. Finally, she worried the 
ober-kellner about what the carpets in the bedroom cost, and where 
they had been woven! The ober-kellner promised to make inquiries. 
"\\'hat asses,'' Granny grumbled, and concentrated her whole at­
tention on the bed. "\Vhat a gorgeous canopy! Open the bed." 
They opened the bed. 
"More, more, turn it all over. Take oll the pillows, the pillows, lift 
up the feather-bed." 
Everything was turned over. Granny examined it attentively. 
"It's a good thing there are no bugs. Take away all the linen! Make 
it up with my linen and my pillows. But all this is too gorgeous. Such 
rooms are not for an old woman like me. I shall be dreary all alone. 

The (jambler 
59 
Alexey Ivanovitch, you must come and see me very often when your 
lessons with the children are over." 
"I left the General's service yesterday," I answered, "and am living 
in the hotel quite independently." 
"How is that ?" 
"A German of high rank, a Baron, with his Baroness, came here 
from Berlin the other day. I addressed him yesterday in German with­
out keeping to the Berlin accent." 
"Well, what then?" 
"He thought it an impertinence and complained to the General, and 
yesterday the General discharged me." 
"Why, did you swear at the Baron, or what? (though if you had it 
wouldn't have mattered!)" 
"Oh, no. On the contrary, the Baron raised his stick to thrash me." 
"And did you, sni\'eller, allow your tutor to be treated like that?" 
she said suddenly, addressing the General ; "and turned him out of his 
place too! Noodles! you're all a set of noodles, as I see." 
"Don't disturb yourself, Auntie," said the General, with a shade of 
condescending familiarity; "I can manage my own business. Besides, 
Alexey Ivanovitch has not given you quite a correct account of it." 
"And you just put up with it?"-she turned to me. 
"I meant to challenge the Baron to a duel," I answered, as calmly 
and as modestly as I could, "but the General opposed it." 
"Why did you oppose it?"-Granny turned to the General again. 
("And you can go, my good man; you can come when you are called," 
she said, addressing the ober-kellner; "no need to stand about gaping. 
I can't endure this Niirnberg rabble!") 
The man bowed and went out, not, of course, understanding Gran­
ny's compliments. 
"Upon my word, Auntie, surely a duel was out of the question." 
"Why out of the question ? Men are all cocks; so they should fight. 
You are all noodles, I see, you don't know how to stand up for your 
country. Come, take me up, Potapitch; see that there are always two 
porters : engage them. I don't want more than two. I shall only want 
them to carry me up and down stairs, and to wheel me on the levels in 
the street. Explain that to them; and pay them beforehand-they will 
be more respectful. You will always be with me yourself, and you, 
Alexey Ivanovitch, point out that Baron to me when we are out : that 
I may have a look at the von Baron. Well, where is the roulette?" 
I explained that the roulette tables were in rooms in the Casino. 
Then followed questions : Were there many of them? Did many peo-

60 
T h% Short N.ovds of Vosto%vskJ 
ple play? Did they play all day long? How was it arranged? I answered 
at last, that she had much better see all this with her own eyes, and 
that it was rather difficult to describe it. 
"Well, then, take me straight there! You go first, Alexey Ivanovitchl" 
"Why, Auntie, don't you really mean to rest after your journey?" 
the General asked anxiously. He seemed rather flurried and, indeed, 
they all seemed embarrassed and were exchanging glances. Probably 
they all felt it rather risky and, indeed, humiliating to accompany 
Granny to the Casino, where, of course, she might do something 
eccentric, and in public; at the same time they all proposed to accom­
pany her. 
"Why should I rest? I am not tired and, besides, I've been sitting 
still for three days. And then we will go and see the springs and 
medicinal waters; where are they? And then . . . we'll go and see, 
what was it you said, Praskovya?-peak, wasn't it?" 
"Yes, Granny." 
"Well, peak, then, if it is a peak. And what else is there here?" 
"There are a great many objects of interest, Granny," Polina exerted 
herself to say. 
"\Vhy don't you know them! Marfa, you shall come with me, too," 
she said, addressing her maid. 
"But why should she come?" the General said fussily ; "and in fact 
it's out of the guestion, and I doubt whether Potapitch will be ad­
mitted into the Casino." 
"What nonsense! Am I to abandon her because she is a sen·ant? 
She's a human being, too; here we have been on our travels for a week; 
she wants to have a look at things, too. With whom could she go except 
me? She wouldn't dare show her nose in the street by herself." 
"But. Granny . . .  
" 
"\Vhy, are you ashamed to be with me? Then stay at home; you are 
not asked. Why, what a General! I am a General's widow myself. And 
why should you all come trailing after me? I can look at it all with 
Alexey h·anovitch." 
But De Grieux insisted that we should all accompany her, and 
launched out into the most polite phrases about the pleasure of accom­
panying her, and so on. We all started. 
''EIIe est tomble ůn enfance," De Grieux repeated to the General; 
"seule, elle fera des bhises . . .  " I heard nothing more, but he evidently 
had some design, and, possibly, his hopes had revived. 
It was half a mile to the Casino. The way was through an avenue 
of chestnuts to a square, going round which, they came out straight 

'!he (jam bier 
61 
on the Casino. The General was to some extent reassured, for our 
procession, though somewhat eccentric, was, nevertheless, decorous and 
presentable. And there was nothing surprising in the fact of an invalid 
who could not walk putting in an appearance at the Casino; but, any­
way, the General was afraid of the Casino; why should an invalid 
unable to walk, and an old lady, too, go into the gambling saloon ? 
Polina and Mlle. Blanche walked on each side of the bath<hair. Mlle. 
Blanche laughed, was modestly animated and even sometimes jested 
very politely with Granny, so much so that the latter spoke of her 
approvingly at last. Polina, on the other side, was obliged to be con­
tinually answering Granny's innumerable questions, such as: "Who 
was that passed ? Who was that woman driving past? Is it a big town? 
Is it a big garden ?  What are those trees? What's that hill? Do eagles 
fly here? What is that absurd-looking roof?" Mr. Astley walked beside 
me and whispered that he expected a great deal from that morning. 
Potapitch and Marfa walked in the background close behind the bath­
chair, Potapitch in his swallow-tailed coat and white tie, but with a cap 
on his head, and Marfa (a red-faced maidservant, forty years old and 
beginning to turn grey) in a cap, cotton gown, and creaking goatskin 
slippers. Granny turned to them very often and addressed remarks to 
them. De Grieux was talking with an air of determination. Probably 
he was reassuring the Gencr::tl, evidently he was giving him some 
advice. But Granny h:d alrc:dy pronounced the fatal phrase: "I :1m 
not going to give you money." Perhaps to De Grieux this announce­
ment sounded incredible, but the General knew his aunt. I noticed th:Jt 
De Grieux and Mlle. Blanche were continually exchanging glances. 
I could distinguish the Prince and the German traveller at the further 
end of the avenue; they had stopped, and were walking away from us. 
Our visit to the Casino was a triumph. The porters and attendants 
displayed the same deference as in the hotel. They looked at us, how­
ever, with curiosity. Granny began by giving orders that she should 
be wheeled through all the rooms. Some she :dmired, others made no 
impression on her; she asked questions about them all. At last we came 
to the roulette room. The lackeys, who stood like sentinels at closed 
doors, flung the doors wide open as though they were impressed. 
Granny's appearance at the roulette table made a profound impres­
sion on the public. At the roulette tables and at the other end of the 
room, where there was a table with trente et quarante, there was a 
crowd of a hundred and fifty or two hundred players, several rows 
deep. Those who had succeeded in squeezing their way right up to the 
table, held fast, as they always do, and would not give up their places 

62 
7' h% Short N.ovds of Vosto%vskJ 
to any one until they had lost; for simple spectators were not allowed 
to stand at the tables and occupy the spOlce. Though there were chairs 
set round the table, few of the players sat down, especially when there 
was a great crowd, because standing one could get closer and conse­
quently pick out one's place and put down one's stake more com•en­
iently. The second and the third rows pressed up upon the first, wait­
ing and watching for their turn; but sometimes a hand would be im­
patiently thrust forward through the first row to put down a stake. 
Even from the third row people managed to seize chances of poking 
forward their stakes; consequently every ten or even five minutes there 
was some "scene" over disputed st:tkes :tt one end of the hall or another. 
The police of the Casino were, however, fairly good. It was, of course, 
impossible to prevent crowding; on the contrary, the owners were 
glad of the rush of people because it was profitable, but eight croupiers 
sitting round the table kept a vigilant watch on the stakes: they even 
kept count of them, and when disputes arose they could settle them. 
In extreme cases they called in the police, and the trouble was over in 
an instant. There were police officers in plain clothes stationed here 
and there among the players, so th:tt they could not he recognized. 
They were especially on the look-out for thieves and profession:ᅣ! pick­
pockets, who are very numerous at the roulette tables, as it aflords them 
excellent opportunity for exercising their skill. The fact is, elsewhere 
thieves must pick pockets or break locks, and such enterprises, when 
unsuccessful, have a very troublesome ending. But in this case the 
thief has only to go up to the roulette table, begin playing, and all at 
once, openly and publicly, take another person's winnings and put them 
in his pocket. If a dispute arises, the cheat insists loudly that the stake 
w:ts his. If the trick is played cleverly and the witnesses hesitate, the 
thief may often succeed in carrying off the money, if the sum is not 
a very large one, of course. In that case the croupiers or some one of 
the other players are almost certain to have been keeping an eye on 
it. But if the sum is not a brge one, the real owner sometimes actually 
declines to keep up the dispute, and goes away shrinking from the 
scandal. But if they succeed in detecting a thief, they turn him out at 
once with contumely. 
All this Granny watched from a distance with wild curiosity. She 
was much delighted at a thief's being turned out. Trmtԡ Ԣԣ quaranԤ 
did not interest her very much ; she was more pleased at roulette and 
the rolling of the little ball. She evinced a desire at last to get a closer 
view of the game. I don't know how it happened, bm the attendants 
and other officious oersons (principally Poles who had lost, and who 

'lh% (iambl%r 
63 
pressed their services on lucky players and foreigners of all sorts} at 
once, and in spite of the crowd, cleared a place for Granny in the 
very middle of the table beside the chief croupier, and wheeled her 
chair to it. A number of visitors who were not playing, but watching 
the play (chiefly Englishmen with their families), at once crowded 
round the table to watch Granny from behind the players. Numbers 
of lorgnettes were turned in her direction. The croupiers' expectations 
rose. Such an eccentric person certainly seemed to promise something 
out of the ordinary. An old woman of over seventy, who could not 
walk, yet wished to play, was, of course, not a sight to be seen every day. 
I squeezed my way up to the table too, and took my stand beside 
Granny. Potapitch and Marfa were left somewhere in the distance 
among the crowd. The General, Polina, De Grieux, and Mlle. Blanche 
stood aside, too, among the spectators. 
At first Granny began looking about at the players. She began in a 
half whisper asking me abrupt, jerky questions. Who was that man and 
who was this woman ? She was particularly delighted by a young man 
at the end of the table, who was playing for very high stakes, putting 
down 1housands and had, as people whispered around, already won 
as much as forty thousand francs, which lay before him in heaps of 
gold and banknotes. He was pale; his eyes glittered and his hands were 
shaking; he was staking now wi1hout counting, by handfuls, and yet 
he kept on winning and winning, kept raking in and raking in the 
money. The altendants hung about him solicitously, set a chair for him, 
cleared a place round him that he might have more room, that he 
migh1 not be crowded-all this in expectation of a liberal tip. Some 
players, after they have won, tip 1he attendants without counting a 
handful of coins in their joy. A Pole had already es1ablished himself 
at his side, and was deferentially but continually whispering to him, 
probably 1elling him what to stake on, advising and directing his play 
-of course, he, too, expecting a tip later on! But the player scarcely 
looked at him. He staked at random and kept winning. He evidently 
did not know what he was doing. 
Granny watched him for some minutes. 
"Tell him," Granny said suddenly, growing excited and giving me 
a poke, "1ell him to give it up, to take his money quickly and go away. 
He'll lose it all directly, he'll lose it all!" she urged, almost breathless 
with agitation. "Where's Potapitch ? Send Potapitch to him. Come, 
tell him, tell him," she went on, poking me. "Where is Potapitch ? 
Sortᅤ:z! Sortᅤ:zl"-she began herself shouting to the young man. 
I bent down to her and whispered resolutely that she must not shout 

64 
r he Short 'Novels of 'DostOCtiS 1\j' 
like this here, that even talking aloud was forbidden, because it hin­
dered counting and that we should be turned out directly. 
"How vexatious! The man's lost! I suppose it's his own doing . . . .  I 
can't look at him, it quite upsets me. What a dolt!" and Granny made 
haste to turn in another direction. 
On the left, on the other side of the table, there was conspicuous 
among the players a young lady, and beside her a sort of dwarf. \Vho 
this dwarf was, and whether he was a relation or brought by her for 
the sake of eiTect, I don't know. I had noticed the lady before; she 
made her appearance at the gambling table every day, at one o'clock 
in the afternoon, and went away exactly at two; she always played for 
an hour. She was already known, and a chair was set for her at once. 
She took out of her pocket some gold, some thousand-franc notes, and 
began staking quietly, coolly, prudently, making pencil notes on a bit 
of paper of the numbers about which the chances grouped themselves, 
and trying to work out a system. She staked considerable sums. She 
used to win every day-one, two, or at the most three thousand francs 
-not more, and instantly went away. Granny scrutinized her for a 
long time. 
"Well, that one won't lose! That one there won't lose! Of what class 
is she! Do you know ? Who is she?" 
"She must be a Frenchwoman, of a certain class, you know," I 
whispered. 
"Ah, one can tell the bird by its flight. One can see she has a sharp 
claw. Explain to me now what every turn means and how one has to 
bet!" 
I explained as far as I could to Granny all the \'arious points on 
which one could stake: rouge et nair, pair et impair, manque et passe, 
and finally the various subtleties in the system of the numbers. Granny 
listened attentively, remembered, asked questions, and began to master 
it. One could point to examples of eYery kind, so that she very quickly 
and readily picked up a great deal. 
"llut what is zero? You see that croupier, the curly-headed one, the 
chief one, showed zero just now ? And why did he scoop up e\'erything 
that was on the table? Such a heap, he took it all for himself. What 
is the meaning of it?" 
"Zero, Granny, means that the bank wins all. If the little ball falls on 
zero, everything on the table goes to the bank. It is true you can stake 
your money so as to keep it, but the bank pays nothing." 
"You don't say so! And shall I get nothing?" 

r lze (jam bier 
65 
"No, Granny, if before this you had staked on zero you would have 
got thirty-five times what you staked." 
"What! thirty-five times, and does it often turn up? Why don't they 
stake on it, the fools." 
"There are thirty-six chances against it, Granny." 
"What nonsense. Potapitch! Potapitch! Stay, I've money with me­
here." She took out of her pocket a tightly packed purse, and picked 
out of it a friedrich d'or. "Stake it on the zero at once." 
.. Granny, zero has only just turned up," I said; "so now it won't 
turn up for a long time. You will lose a great deal; wait a little, any­
way." 
"Oh, nonsense; put it down!" 
"As you please, but it may not turn up again till the evening. You 
may go on staking thousands; it has happened." 
"Oh, nonsense, nonsense. If you are afraid of the wolf you shouldn't 
go into the forest. What? HaYe I lost ? Stake again!" 
A second friedrich d·or was lost : she staked a third. Granny could 
scarcely sit still in her seat. She stared with feverish eyes at the little 
ball dancing on the spokes of the turning wheel. She lost a third, too. 
Granny was beside herself, she could not sit still, she even thumped 
on the table with her fist when the croupier announced, "tn:ntt:-six" 
instead of the zero she was expecting. 
"There, look at it," said Granny angrily; "isn't that cursed little 
zero coming soon ? As sure as I'm alive, I'll sit here till zero does come! 
It's that cursed curly-headed croupier's doing; he'll never let it come! 
Alexey Ivanovitch, stake two gold pieces at once! Staking as much 
as you do, even if zero does come you'll get nothing by it." 
"Granny!" 
"Stake, stake! it is not your money." 
I staked two friedrichs d'or. The ball flew about the wheel for a 
long time, at last it began dancing about the spokes. Granny was 
numb with excitement, and squeezed my fingers, and all at once­
"Zero/" boomed the croupier. 
"You see, you see!"-Granny turned to me quickly, beaming and 
delighted. "I told you so. The Lord Himself put it into my head to 
stake those two gold pieces! \Veil, how much do I get now? Why 
don't they give it me? Potapitch, Marfa, where are they? Where have 
all our people got to? Potapitch, Potapitch!" 
"Granny, afterwards," I whispered; "Potapitch is at the door, they 
won't let him in. Look, Granny, they are giving you the money, take 
it!" A heavy roll of printed blue notes, worth fifty friedrichs d'or, was 

66 
Tlz% Short 'N.ovds of 'Dosto%vskJ 
thrust towards Granny and twenty friedrichs d'or were counted out 
to her. I scooped it all up in a shovel and handed it to Granny. 
"Faites le jeu, messieurs! Faires le je11, messieurs! Rien ne va plus?" 
called the croupier, inviting the public to stake, and preparing to turn 
the wheel. 
"Heavens! we are too late. They're just going to turn it. Put it down, 
put it down!" Granny urged me in a flurry. "Don't dawdle, make 
haste!" She was beside herself and poked me with all her might. 
"What am I to stake it on, Granny ?" 
"On zero, on zero! On zero again! Stake as much as possible! How 
much have we got altogether? Seventy friedrichs d'or. There's no need 
to spare it. Stake twenty friedrichs d'or at once." 
"Think what you are doing, Granny! Sometimes it doe3 not turn up 
for two hundred times running! I assure you, you may go on staking 
your whole fortune." 
"Oh, nonsense, nonsense! Put it down! How your tongue docs wag! 
I know what I'm about." Granny was positively quivering with ex­
citement. 
"By the regulations it's not allowed to stake more than twel\'e 
roubles on zero at once, Granny; here I have staked that." 
"Why is it not allowed ? Aren't you lying? Monsieur! Monsicur!"­
shc nudged the croupier, who was sitting near her on the left, and 
was about to set the wheel turning. "Combietz zero? Douze? Douze?" 
I immediately interpreted the question in French. 
"Oui, madame," the croupier confirmed politely; "as the winnings 
from no single stake must exceed four thousand florins by the regula­
tions," he added in explanation. 
"\Veil, there's no help for it, stake twelve." 
"Le jeu est fait," cried the croupier. The wheel rotated, and thirty 
turned up. She had lost. 
"Again, again, again! Stake again!" cried Granny. I no longer re­
sisted, and, shrugging my shoulders, staked another t\\'elve friedrichs 
d'or. The wheel turned a long time. Granny was simply quivering as 
she watched the wheel. "Can she really imagine that zero will win 
again?" I thought, looking at her with wonder. Her face was beam­
ing with a firm conviction of winning, an unhesitating expectation 
that in another minute they would shout "Zero!" The ball jumped into 
the cage. 
"Zero!" cried the croupier. 
"What! ! !" Granny turned to me with intense triumph. 
I was a gambler myself, I felt that at the moment my arms and 

'llze (jambler 
67 
legs were trembling, there was a throbbing in my head. Of course, 
this was a rare chance that zero should have come up three times in 
some dozen turns; but there was nothing particularly wonderful about 
it. I had myself seen zero turn up three times running two days be­
fore, and a gambler who had been zealously noting down the lucky 
numbers, observed aloud that, only the day before, zero had turned up 
only once in twenty-four hours. 
Granny's winnings were counted out to her with particular at­
tention and deference as she had won such a large sum. She received 
four hundred and twenty friedrichs d'or, that is, four thousand florins 
and seventy friedrichs d'or. She was given twenty friedrichs d'or in 
gold, and four thousand florins in banknotes. 
This time Granny did not call Potapitch; she had other preoccupa­
tions. She did not even babble or quiver outwardly! She was, if one 
may so express it, quivering inwardly. She was entirely concentrated 
on something, absorbed in one aim. 
"Aiexey lvanovitch, he said th:It one could only st:Ike four thousand 
florins at once, didn't he? Come, t:Ike it, stake the whole four thou­
sand on the red," Gr:.1nny commanded. 
It was useless to protest ; the wheel began rotating. 
"RougT." the croupier procbimed. 
Again she h:.1d won four thousand florins, making eight in all. 
"Gi\'e me four, and st:Ike four again on red," Granny commanded. 
Ag:.1in I staked four thousand. 
"RougT." the croupier pronounced again. 
"Twelve thousand altogether! Give it me all here. Pour the gold 
here into the purse and put away the notes. That's enough! Home! 
Wheel my chair out." 
Chapter 11 
THE chair was wheeled to the door at the other end of the room. 
Granny was radiant. All our party immediately thronged round her 
with congratulations. However eccentric Granny's behaviour might 
be, her triumph covered a multitude of sins, and the General was no 
longer afraid of compromising himself in public by his relationship 
with such a strange woman. With a condescending and familiarly 
good-humoured smile, as though humouring a child, he congratulated 
Granny. He was. however, evidently impressed, like all the other 

68 
T M Short N.ovds of 7Jostońsl(y 
ᐑpectators. People talked all round and pointed at Granny. Many 
passed by to gc:t a closer view of her! Mr. Astley was talking of her 
aside:, with two English acquaintances. Some majestic ladies gazed 
at hc:r with majestic amazement, as though at a marvel. . . .  De Grieux 
positivc:ly showered congratulations and smiles upon hc:r. 
"Qudle ··ictoire!" he: said. 
"Mait, m<Idame, c'hait du feu," Mlle. Blanche commented, with 
an ingrati:1ting smile. 
"Yc:s, 1 just went and won twelve thousand florins! Twelve, indeed; 
what about the: gold ? With the: gold it makes almost thirteen. What 
is that in our money? Will it be six thousand ? " 
I explained that it made more: than seven, and in the: present state 
of exchange: might c:vc:n amount to eight. 
"Well, that's something worth having, eight thousand! And you 
stay here, you noodles, and do nothing! Potapitch, Marfa, did you sec?" 
"My goodness! how did you do it, ma'am ? Eight thousand!" ex· 
claimed Marfa, wriggling. 
"There! there's five gold pieces for you, here!" 
Potapitch and Marfa flew to kiss her hand. 
"And give the porters, too, a friedrich d'or each. Give it them in 
gold, Alcxcy Ivanovitch. Why is that flunkey bowing and the other 
one: too? Arc they congratulating me ? Give: them a friedrich d'or too." 
"A1adame Ia princesse .
. . 1111 pam•re expatrit . . .  mallu:ur con-
timtel . . .  let prinn:t russes sont si gb1treuJ.· . .
. " A person with 
moustaches and an obsequious smile, in a threadb:rc co:Jt .md gay­
coloured waistco::tt, came cringing about Granny's chair, w;IVing his 
hat in his hand. 
"Give: him a friedrich d'or too . . . . No, give him two; that's enough, 
or there: will be: no end to them. Lift me up and carry me out. Pras­
kovya"-shc: turned to Polina Alc:xandrovna-'Til buy you a dress to­
morrow, and I'll buy Mile: . . . .  what's hc:r name, Mlle. Blanche, isn't 
it? I'll buy her a dress too. Translate that to hc:r, Praskovya!" 
"Merci, madame." Mlle. Blanche made: a grateful curtsey while: she 
exchanged an ironical smile with De: Grieux and the General. The 
General was rather embarrassed and was greatly relieved when we 
reached the: avenue. 
"Fedosya-won 't Fc:dosya be surprised," said Granny. thinking of 
the: General 's nurse:. "I must make her a present of a dress. Hey. Alexey 
Ivanovitch. Alc:xc:y Ivanovitch. give this to the por m:Jn." 
A man in rags, with bent back, passed us on the road, and looked 
at us. 

T hW (jamhler 
"And perhaps he is not a por man, but a rogue, Granny." 
"Give him a gulden, give it him!" 
69 
I went up to the man and gave it him. He looked at me in wild 
amazement, but took the gulden, however. He smelt of spirits. 
"And you, Alexey lvanovitch. Have you not tried your luck yet?" 
"No, Granny." 
"But your eyes were burning, I saw them." 
"I shall try, Granny, I certainly shall later." 
"And st:ke on zΆro straight away. You will see! How much have 
you in hand ?" 
"Only twenty friedrichs d'or, Granny." 
"That's not much. I will give you fifty friedrichs d'or. I will lend 
it if you like. Here, take this roll-but don't you expect anything, all 
the same, my good man, I am not going to give you anything," she 
said, suddenly addressing the Gener:l. 
The btter winced, but he said nothing. De Grieux frowned. 
"QuJ diablJ. c'Jst ur1W urriblJ vitild" he muttered to the General 
through his teeth. 
"A beggar, a beggar, another beggar!" cried Granny. "Give him a 
gulden, too, Alexey Ivanovitch." 
This time it was a grey-headed old man with a wooden leg, in a 
long-skirted blue co:t and with a long stick in his hand. He looked 
like an old soldier. But when I held out a gulden to him he stepped 
back and looked at me angrily. 
" Was ist's dn- TJufe/," he shouted, following up with ::t dozen oaths. 
"Oh, he's a fool," cried Gr::tnny, dismissing him with a w:ve of her 
hand. "Go on! I'm hungry! Now we'll have dinner directly; then 
I'll rest a little, and back here again." 
"You want to play again, Granny!" I cried. 
"Wh:t do you expect? That you should all sit here and sulk while 
I watch you ?" 
"Mais, madamJ-" De Grieux drew near-"/ࢬs clzances pJuvent tour­
nn-, unJ uulJ mauvaisJ chanu et vous pn-drez tout . . .  surtout avec 
f!OfrJ jJll . . .  C'Jst tn-rib/d" 
" Vatu pJrdrJz absolumJnt," chirped Mlle. Blanche. 
"But what is it to do with all of you ? I shouldn't lose your money, 
but my own! And where is that Mr. Astley?" she asked me. 
"He stayed in the Casino, Granny." 
"I'm sorry, he's such a nice man." 
On reaching home Granny met the obJr-kellner on the stairs, called 
him and began bragging of her winnings; then she sent for Fedosya, 

70 
T h% Short N.ov%ls of 7Josto%vskJ 
made her a present of three friedrichs d'or and ordered dinner to be 
served. Fedosya and Marfa hovered over her at dinner. 
"I watched you, ma'am," Marfa cackled, "and said to Potapitch, 
'What does our lady want to do?' And the money on the table­
saints alive) the money! I haven't seen so much money in the whole 
of my life, and all round were gentlefolk-nothing but gentlefolk 
sitting. 'And wherever do all these gentlefolk come from, Potapitch ?' 
said I. May our Lady Herself help her, I thought. I was praying for 
you, ma'am, and my heart was simply sinking, simply sinking; I was 
all of a tremble. Lord help her, I thought, and here the Lord has sent 
you luck. I've been trembling ever since, ma'am. I'm all of a tremble 
now. 
" 
"Alexey Ivanovitch, after dinner, at four o'clock, get ready and we'll 
go. Now good-bye for a time; don't forget to send for a doctor for 
me. I must drink the waters, too. Go, or maybe you'll forget." 
As I left Granny I was in a sort of stupor. I tried to imagine what 
would happen now to all our people and what turn things would 
!ake. I saw clearly that they (especially the General) had not yet suc­
ceeded in recovering from the first shock. The fact of Granny's arrival 
instead of the telegram which they were expecting from hour to hour 
to announce her death (and consequently the inheritance of her 
fortune) had so completely shattered the whole fabric of their plans 
and intentions that Granny's further exploits at roulette threw them 
into positive bewilderment and a sort of stupefaction seemed to have 
come over all of them. 
Meanwhile this second bet was almost more important than the 
first ; for though Gr:ӱnny had repeated twice that she would not give 
the General any money, yet, who knows?-there was no need to give 
up all hope yet. De Grieux, who was involved in all the General's 
affairs, had not lost hope. I am convinced that Mlle. Blanche, also 
much involved in the General's affairs (I should think so: to marry a 
General and with a considerable fortune!), would not have given up 
hope, and would have tried all her fascinating arts upon Granny-in 
contrast with the proud and incomprehensible Polina, who did not 
know how to curry favour with any one. But now, now that Granny 
had had such success at roulette, now that Granny's personality had 
shown itself so clearly and so typically (a refractory and imperious 
old lady, et tombte en enfar.a), now, perhaps, all was lost. \Vhy, she 
was as pleased as a child, so pleased that she would go on till she was 
ruined and had lost everything. Heavens! I thought (and, God for­
give me, with a malignant laugh), why. every friedrich d'or Granny 

'lh% (jamblu 
71 
staked just now must have been a fresh sore in the General's heart, 
must have maddened. De Grieux and infuriated Mlle. de Cominges, 
who saw the cup slipping from her lips. Another fact: even in her 
triumph and joy of winning, when Granny was giving money away 
to every one, and taking every passer-by for a beggar, even then she 
had let fall to the General, ''I'm not going to give you anything, 
though!" That meant that she had fastened upon that idea, was stick­
ing to it, had made up her mind about it. There was danger! danger! 
All these refleCLions were revolving in my mind as I mounted the 
front stairs frorn Granny's apartments to my garret in the very top 
storey. All this interested me strongly. Though, of course, I could be­
fore have divined the strongest leading motives prompting the actors 
before me, yet I did not know for certain all the mysteries and in­
trigues of the drama. Polina had never been fully open with me. 
Though it did happen at times that she revealed her feelings to me, 
yet I noticed that almost always after such confidences she would make 
fun of all she h:ul said, or would try to obscure the matter and put it 
in a different light. Oh, she had hidden a great deal! In any case, I 
foresaw that the dtnouemmt of this mysterious and constrained posi­
tion was at hand. One more shock-and everything would be ended 
and revealed. About my fortunes, which were also involved in all this, 
I scarcely troubled. I was in a strange mood : I had only twenty fried­
richs d'or in my pocket; I was in a foreign land without a job or 
means of )i,•elihood, without hope, without prospects, and-1 did not 
trouble my head about it! If it had not been for the thought of Polina, 
I should have abandoned myself to the comic interest of the approach­
ing catastrophe, and should have been shouting with laughter. But I 
was troubled about Polina; her fate was being decided, I divined that; 
but I regret to say that it was not altogether her fate that troubled 
me. I wanted to fathom her secrets; I wanted her to come to me and 
say: "I lm•c you," and if not that, if that was senseless insanity, then 
. . .  well, what was there to care about ? Did I know what I wanted ? 
I was like one demented : all I wanted was to be near her, in the halo 
of her glory, in her radiance, always, for ever, all my life. I knew 
nothing more! And could I leave her? 
In their passage on the third storey I felt as though something 
nudged me. I turned round and, twenty paces or more from me, I 
saw coming out of a door Polina. She seemed waiting: and as soon as 
she saw me beckoned to me. 
"Polina Alexandrovna .
.
•
 
" 
"Hush!" she said. 

72 
T h% Short 'N.ovds of Vosto%vslzy 
"Imagine," 
whispered to her, "I felt as though some one had 
nudged mt: just now ; I looked round-you! It seems as though there 
were a sort of electricity from you !" 
"Take this letter," Polina articulated anxiously with a frown, proba­
bly not heo.ring what I had said, "and give it into Mr. Astley's own 
hands at once. Make haste, I beg you. There is no need of an answer. 
He will . . .  
" 
She did not finish. 
"Mr. Astley ? "  I repeated in surprise. 
But Polina had already disappeared behind the door. 
"Aha, so they arc in correspondence!" I ran at once, of course, to 
Mr. Astley; first to his hotel, where I did not find him, then to the 
Casino, where I hurried through all the rooms : and at last, as I was 
returning home in vexation, almost in despair, I met him by chance, 
with a party of Englishmen and English\\o"omen on horseback. I beck­
oned to him, stopped him and gave him the lener : we had not time 
even to exchange a glance. But I suspect that Mr . .Astley purposely 
gave rein to his horse. 
\Vas I tortured by jealousy? Anyway, I was in an utterly slut­
tered condition. I did not even want to find out what they were writ­
ing to one another about. And so he was trusted by her! "Her friend, 
her friend," I thought, "and that is clear (and when has he had time 
to become her friend), but is there love in the case ? Of course not," 
common-sense whispered to me. But common-sense alone counts for 
little in such cases ; anyway, this, too, had to be cleared up. Things 
were growing unpleasantly complicated. 
Before I had time to go into the hotel, first the porter and then the 
ober-kellner, coming out of his room, informed me that I was wanted, 
that I had been asked for, three times they had sent to ask : where was 
I ?-that I was asked to go as quickly as possible to the General's 
rooms. I was in the most disagreeable frame of mind. In the Gen­
eral's room I found, besides the General himself, De Grieux and Mlle. 
Blanche-alone, without her mother. The mother was evidently an 
official one, only used for show. Bur when it came to real bun"ness she 
acted for herself. And probably the woman knew little of her so­
called daughter's affairs. 
They were, however, consulting warmly about something, and the 
doors of the study were actually locked-which had never happened 
before. Coming to the door, I heard loud voices-De Grieux's insolent 
and malignant voice, Blanche's shrill fury, and the General's pitiful 
tones, evidently defending himself about something. Upon my ea-

7' h% (jambl%r 
73 
trance they all, as it were, pulled themselves up and restrained them-· 
selves. De Grieux smoothed his hair and forced a smile into his angry 
face-that horrid official French smile which I so detest. The crushed 
and desperate General tried to assume an air of dignity, but i t  was 
a mechanical effort. Only Mlle. Blanche's countenance, blazing with 
anger, scarcely changed. She only ceased speaking while she fixed her 
eyes upon me in impatient expectation. I may mention that hitherto 
she had treated me with extraordinary casualness, had even refused 
to respond to my bows, and had simply declined to see me. 
"Aiexey Ivanovitch," the General began in a soft mollifying tone, 
"allow me to tell you that it is strange, exceedingly strange . . .  in fact, 
your conduct in regard to me and my family . . .  in fact, it is exceed­
ingly strange . . .  " 
"Eh! a n 'Tst pas fa," De Grieux interposed, with vexation and con­
tempt. (There's no doubt he was the leading spirit.) "Mon chTr mon­
sinlr, notrT ch" gUnUra/ sT trompT. in taking up this tone" (I trans­
late the rest of his speech in Russian), "but he meant to say . . .  that 
is to warn you, or rather to beg you most earnestly not to ruin him­
yes, indeed, not to ruin him! I make use of that expression." 
"But how, how ?" I interrupted. 
"Why, you arc undertaking to be the guide (or how shall I express 
it ? )  of this old woman, attT pauvrT uriblT viŠiiiT"-De Grieux him­
self hcsitated-"but you know she'll lose everything ; she will gamble 
away her whole fortune! You know yourself, you have seen yourself, 
how she plays! If she begins to lose, she will never leave off from 
obstinacy, from anger, and will lose everything, she will gamble away 
everything, and in such cases one can never regain one's losses and 
then . . .  then . . .  
" 
"And then," the General put in, "then you will ruin the whole fam· 
ily! I and my family are her heirs, she has no nearer relations. I tell 
you openly : my affairs are in a bad way, a very bad way. You know 
my position to some extent . . . .  If she loses a considerable sum or even 
(Lord help us! )  her whole fortune, what will become of me, of my 
children! "' (The General looked round at De Grieux.) "Of me." (He 
looked round at ҭHie. Blanche, who turned away from him with con-
) "AI 
I 
. h 
' 
" 
tempt. 
exey vanovnc , save us, save us . . . .  
"But how, General, how, how can I ?  . .
. What influence have I in 
the matter ? "  
"Refuse, refuse, give her up! . . .  " 
"Then some one else will turn up," I said. 
"CT n'ut pas fa, a n'Tst pas fa," De Grieux interrupted Үain, "que 

74 
'IIze Short Novels of ?Jostoevsky 
diable! No, don't desert her, but at least advise her, dissuade her, draw 
her away . . .  don't let her play too much, distract her in some way." 
"But how can I do that ? If you would undertake the task yourself, 
M. de Grieux," I added, as na'ively as I could. 
Here I caught a rapid, fiery, questioning glance from Mlle. Blanche 
at M. de Grieux. And in De Grieux's own face there was something 
peculiar, something he could not himself disguise. 
"The point is, she won't accept me now!" De Grieux cried, with a 
wave of his hand. "If only . . .  later on . . .  
" 
De Grieux looked rapidly and meaningly at Mlle. Blanche. 
"0, mon cher M. Alexis, soyez si bon." Mlle. Blanche herself took a 
step towards me with a most fascinating smile, she seized me by both 
hands and pressed them warmly. Damn it all! That diabolical face 
knew how to change completely in one moment. At that instant her 
face was so imploring, so sweet, it was such a child-like and even mis­
chievous smile; at the end of the phrase she gave me such a sly wink, 
unseen by all the rest; she meant to do for me completely, and it 
was successfully done; only it was horribly coarse. 
Then the General leapt up, positively leapt up. "Alexey Ivanovitch, 
forgive me for beginning as I did just now. I did not mean that at all. 
. . .  I beg you, I beseech you, I bow down before you in Russian style­
you alone, you alone can save us. Mlle. de Cominges and I implore 
you-you understand, you understand, of course." He besought me, 
indicating Mlle. Blanche with his eyes. He was a very pitiful figure. 
At that instant there came three subdued and respectful knocks 
at the door; it was opened-the corridor attendant was knocking and 
a few steps behind him stood Potapitch. They came with messages 
from Granny; they were charged to find and bring me at once. "She 
is angry," Potapitch informed me. 
"But it is only half-past three." 
"She could not get to sleep ; she kept tossing about, and then at 
last she got up, sent for her chair and for you. She's at the front door 
now. 
" 
"Quelle megere," cried De Grieux. 
I did, in fact, find Granny on the steps, out of all patience at my 
not being there. She could not wait till four o'clock. 
"Come," she cried, and we set off again to roulette. 

'1 he (jamblcr 
75 
Chapter 12 
GRANNY was in an impatient and irritable mood ; it was evident 
that roulette had made a deep impression on her mind. She took no 
notice of anything else and was altogether absent-minded. For in­
stance, she asked me no questions on the road as she had done before. 
Seeing a luxurious carriage whirling by, she was on the point of raising 
her hand and asking: What is it? Whose is it?-but I believe she did 
not hear what I answered : her absorption was continually interrupted 
by abrupt and impatient gesticulations. When I pointed out to her 
Baron and Baroness Burmerhelm, who were approaching the Casino, 
she looked absent-mindedly at them and said, quite indifferently, 
"Ah!" and, turning round quickly to Potapitch and Marfa, who were 
walking behind her, snapped out to them-
"Why are you hanging upon us ? We can't take you every time! 
Go home! You and I are enough," she added, when they had hurriedly 
turned and gone home. 
They were already expecting Granny at the Casino. They im­
mediately made room for her in the same place, next to the croupier. 
I fancy that these croupiers, who are always so strictly decorous and 
appear to be ordinary officials who are absolutely indifferent as to 
whether the bank wins or loses, are by no means so unconcerned at 
the bank's losses and, of course, receive instructions for attracting 
players and for augmenting the profits-for which they doubtless re­
ceive prizes and bonuses. They looked upon Granny, anyway, as their 
prey. 
Then j ust what we had expected happened. 
This was how it was. 
Granny pounced at once on zero and immediately ordered me to 
stake twelve friedrichs d'or. She staked once, twice, three times-zero 
never turned up. 
"Put it down! Put it down!" Granny nudged me, impatiently. I 
obeyed. 
"How many times have we staked ?" she asked at last, grinding 
her teeth with impatience. 
"I have staked twelve times, Granny. I have put down a hundred 
and forty-four friedrichs d'or. I tell you, Granny, very likely till eve­
rung • • .  
" 

76 
'! h% Short 'N.ovds of Vosto%vs kJ' 
"Hold your tongue!" Granny interrupted. "Stake on zero, and stake 
at once a thousand gulden on red. Here, take the note." 
Red won, and zero failed once more; a thousand gulden was gained. 
"You see, you see!" whispered Granny, "we have gained almost all 
that we have lost. Stake again on zero; we'll stake ten times more 
and then give it up." 
But the fifth time Granny was thoroughly sick of it. 
"The devil take that filthy zero. Come, stake the whole four thou· 
sand gulden on the red," she commanded me. 
"Granny! it will be so much ; why, what if red does not turn up ? "  
I besought her; but Granny almost beat me. (Indeed, she nudged me 
so violently that she might almost be said to have attacked me.) There 
was no help for it, I staked on red the whole four thousand won that 
morning. The wheel turned. Granny sat calmly and proudly erect, 
never doubting that she would certainly win. 
"Zero!" boomed the croupier. 
At first Granny did not understand, but when she saw the croupier 
scoop up her four thousand gulden together with everything on the 
table, and learned that zero, which had not turned up for so long and 
on which we had staked in vain almost two hundred friedrichs d'or, 
had, as though to spite her, turned up just as Granny was abusing it, 
she groaned and flung up her hands in view of the whole hall. People 
around actually laughed. 
"Holy saints! The cursed thing has turned up! " Granny wailed, 
"the hateful, hateful thing! That's your doing! It's all your doing"­
she pounced upon me furiously, pushing me. "It was you persuaded 
me. 
, 
"Granny, I talked sense to you : how can I answer for chance? "  
"I'll chance you," she whispered angrily. "Go away." 
"Good-bye, Granny." I turned to go away. 
"Aiexey lvanovitch, Alexey lvanovitch ! stop. Where are you off 
to ? Come, what's the matter, what's the matter? Ach, he's in a rage! 
Stupid, come, stay, stay; come, don't be angry; I am a fool myself! 
Come, tell me what are we to do now! "  
" I  won't undertake t o  tell you, Granny, because you will blame 
me. Play for yourself, tell me and I'll put down the stakes." 
"\Veil, well! Come, stake another four thousand gulden on red! 
Here, take my pocket-book." She took it out of her pocket and gave 
it me. "Come, make haste and t:ke it, there's twenty thousand roubles 
sterling in it." 
"Gr:mnv." I murmured, "such stakes . . .  " 

7' he (/ambler 
"As sure ns I nm alive, I'll win it bnck . . . .  Stake." 
We staked and lost. 
"Stake, stake the whole eight ! "  
"You can't, Granny, four i s  the highest stake! 
"Well, stake four!" 
This time we won. Granny cheered up. 
, 
"You see, you see," she nudged me ; "stake four again!" 
She staked-she lost ; then we lost again and again. 
"Granny, the whole twelve thousand is gone," I told her. 
77 
"I see it's all gone," she answered with the calm of fury, if I may 
so express it. "I see, my good friend, I see," she muttered, with a 
fixed, as it were, absent-minded stare. "Ech, as sure I am alive, stake 
another four thousand gulden !" 
"But there's no money, Granny; there are some of our Russian five 
per cents. and some bills of exchange of some sort, but no money." 
"And in the purse ? "  
"There's some small change, Granny." 
"Are there any money-<: hangers here ? I was told one could change 
any of our notes," Granny inquired resolutely. 
"Oh, as much as you like, but what you'll lose on the exchange . . .  
would horrify a Jew!" 
"Nonsense! I'll win it all back. Take me! Call those blockheads!" 
I wheeled away the chair; the porters appeared and we went out 
of the Casino. 
".Make haste, make haste, make haste," Granny commanded. "Show 
us the way, Alexey Ivanovitch, and take us the nearest 
.
•
. Is it far? "  
"Two steps, Granny." 
But at the turning from the square into the avenue we were met 
by our whole party : the General, De Grieux, Mlle. Blanche and her 
mamma. Polina Alexandrovna was not with them, nor Mr. Astley 
either. 
"Well! Don't stop us!" cried Granny. "Well, what do you want ? 
have no time to spare for you now!" 
I walked behind ; De Grieux ran up to me. 
"She's lost all she gained this morning and twelve thousand gulden 
as well. \Ve are going to change some five per cents.," I whispered 
to him quickly. 
De Grieux stamped and ran to tell the General. We went on wheel­
i ng Granny. 
"Stop, stop!" the General whispered to me frantically. 
"You try stopping her," I whispered. 

78 
The Short Novels of 7Jostoevsky 
"Auntie!" said the General, approaching, "Auntie . . .  we are just 
. . .  we are just . . .  
" his voice quivered and failed him, "hiring a 
horse and driving into the country . . .  a most exquisite view . . .  the 
peak . . .  We were coming to invite you." 
"Oh, bother you and your peak." Granny waved him off irritably. 
"There are trees there .
•
.
 we will have tea . . .  " the General went 
on, utterly desperate. 
"Nous boirons du lait, sur l'herbe fratche," added De Grieux, with 
ferocious fury. 
Du /ait, de /' herbe fratche, that is the Paris bourgeois notion of the 
ideally idyllic; that is, as we all know, his conception of nature et Ia 
verite! 
"Oh, go on with you and your milk! Lap it up yourself; it gives 
me the bellyache. And why do you pester me ? "  cried Granny. "I tell 
you I've no time to waste." 
"It's here, Granny," I said; "it's here!" 
\Ve had reached the house where the bank was. I went in to change 
the notes ; Granny was left waiting at the entrance ; De Grieux, the 
General and Blanche stood apart waiting, not knowing what to do. 
Granny looked wrathfully at them, and they walked away in the 
direction of the Casino. 
They oilered me such ruinous terms that I did not accept them, and 
went back to Granny for instructions. 
"Ah, the brigands!" she cried, flinging up her hands. "\Veil, never 
mind! Change it," she cried resolutely; "stay, call the banker out to 
me!" 
"One of the clerks, Granny, do you mean?" 
"Yes, a clerk, it's all the same. Ach, the brigands!" 
The clerk consented to come when he learned that it was an invalid 
and aged countess, unable to come in, who was asking for him. 
Granny spent a long time loudly and angrily reproaching him for 
swindling her, and haggled with him in a mixture of Russian, French 
and German, while I came to the rescue in translating. The grave 
clerk listened to us in silence and shook his head. He looked at Granny 
with an intent stare that was hardly respectful; at last he began smiling. 
"\Veil, get along with you," cried Granny. "Choke yourself with the 
money! Change it with him, Alexey Ivanovitch ; there's no time to 
waste, or we would go elsewhere . . . .  
" 
"The clerk says that other banks give even less." 
I don't remember the sums exactly, but the banker's charges were 

The (jambler 
79 
terrible. I received close upon twelve thousand florins in gold and 
notes, took the account and carried it to Granny. 
"Well, well, well, it's no use counting it," she said, with a wave 
of her hand. "Make haste, make haste, make haste! 
"I'll never stake again on that damned zero nor on the red either," 
she pronounced, as she was wheeled up to the Casino. 
This time I did my very utmost to impress upon her the necessity 
of staking smaller sums, trying to persuade her that with the change 
of luck she would always be able to increase her stake. But she was 
so impatient that, though she agreed at first, it was impossible to 
restrain her when the play had begun; as soon as she had won a 
stake of ten, of twenty friedrichs d'or--
"There, you see, there, you see," she would begin nudging me; 
"there, you see, we've won ; if only we had staked four thousand in­
stead of ten, we should have won four thousand, but as it is what's 
the good ? It's all your doing, all your doing!" 
And, vexed as I felt, watching her play, I made up my mind at last 
to keep quiet and to give no more advice. 
Suddenly De Grieux skipped up. 
The other two were close by ; I noticed Mlle. Blanche standing on 
one side with her mother, exchanging amenities with the Prince. The 
General was obviously out of favour, almost banished. Blanche would 
not even look at him, though he was doing his utmost to cajole her! 
The poor General! He flushed and grew pale by turns, trembled and 
could not even follow Granny's play. Blanche and the Prince finally 
went away; the General ran after them. 
"Madame, madame," De Grieux whispered in a honeyed voice to 
Granny, squeezing his way close up to her ear. "Madame, such stakes 
do not answer . . . .  No, no, it's impossible 
.
•
.
 
" he said, in broken 
Russian. "No!" 
"How, then ? Come, show me!" said Granny, turning to him. 
De Grieux babbled something rapidly in French, began excitedly 
advising, said she must wait for a chance, began reckoning some num­
bers . . . .  Granny did not understand a word. He kept turning to me, 
for me to translate; tapped the table with his fingers, pointed; finally 
took a pencil and was about to reckon something on paper. At last 
Granny lost patience. 
"Come, get away, get away! You keep taiking nonsense! 'Madame, 
madame,' he doesn't understand it himself; go away." 
"Mais, madame," De Grieux murmured, and he began once more 
showing and explaining. 

80 
The Short Novels of 'DostoevskY 
"\Veil, stake once as he says," Granny said to me; "let us see: per­
haps it really will answer." 
All De Grieux wanted was to dissuade her from staking large sums; 
he suggested that she should stake on numbers, either individually or 
collectively. I staked as he directed, a friedrich d'or on each of the odd 
numbers in the first twelve and five friedrichs d'or respectively on the 
groups of numbers from twelve to eighteen and from eighteen to 
twenty-four, staking in all sixteen friedrichs d'or. 
The wheel turned. 
"Zero!" cried the croupier. 
We had lost everything. 
"You blockhead!" cried Granny, addressing De Grieux. "You 
scoundrelly Frenchman! So this is how he advises, the monster. Go 
away, go away! He knows nothing about it and comes fussing 
round!" 
Fearfully offended, De Grieux shrugged his shoulders, looked con­
temptuously at Granny, and walked away. He felt ashamed of hav­
ing interfered; he had been in too great a hurry. 
An hour later, in spite of all our efforts, we had lost everything. 
"Home," cried Granny. 
She did not utter a single word till we got into the avenue. In the 
avenue and approaching the hotel she began to break into exclama­
tions-
"What a fool! What a silly fool! You're an old fool, you are!" 
As soon as we got to her apartments-
"Tea!" cried Granny. "And pack up at once! \Ve are going!" 
"\Vhere does your honour mean to go?" Marfa was beginning. 
"What has it to do with you? Mind your own business! Potapitch, 
pack up everything: all the luggage. vVe are going back to Moscow. 
I have thrown away fifteen thousand roubles!" 
"Fifteen thousand, madame! My God!" Potapitch cried, flinging up 
his hands with deep feeling, probably meaning to humour her. 
"Come, come, you fool! He is beginning to whimper! Hold your 
tongue! Pack up! The bill, make haste, make haste!" 
"The next train goes at half-past nine, Granny," I said, to check 
her furore. 
"And what is it now?" 
"Half-past seven." 
"How annoying! Well, it doesn't matter! Alexey Ivanovitch, I haven't 
a farthing. Here are two more notes. Run there and change these 
for me too. Or I have nothing for the journey." 

r he (jam bier 
81 
I set off. Returning to the hotel half an hour later, I found our 
whole party at Granny's. Learning that Granny was going off to 
Moscow, they seemed to be even more upset than by her losses. Even 
though her going might save her property, what was to become of 
the General? Who would pay De Grieux? Mlle. Blanche would, of 
course, decline to wait for Granny to die and would certainly now make 
up to the Prince or to somebody else. They were all standing before 
Granny, trying to console her and persuade her. Again Polina was 
not there. Granny was shouting at them furiously. 
"Let me alone, you devils! What business is it of yours? Why does 
that goat's beard come forcing himself upon me?" she cried at De 
Grieux; "and you, my fine bird?" she cried, addressing Mlle. Blanche, 
"what are you after?" 
"Diantre!" whispered Mlle. Blanche, with an angry flash of her eyes, 
but suddenly she burst out laughing and went out of the room. 
"Elle vivra cent ansi" she called to the General, as she went out of 
the door. 
"Ah, so you are reckoning on my death ?" Granny yelled to the 
General. "Get away! Turn them- all out, Alexey Ivanovitch! What 
business is it of yours? I've fooled -away my own money, not yours!" 
The General shrugged his shoulders, bowed and went out. De 
Grieux followed him. 
"Call Praskovya," Granny told Marfa. 
Five minutes later Marfa returned with Polina. All this time Polina 
had been sitting in her own room with the children, and I fancy had 
purposely made up her mind not to go out all day. Her face was seri­
ous, sad and anxious. 
"Praskovya," began Granny, "is it true, as I learned by accident just 
now, that that fool, your stepfather, means to marry that silly feather­
head of a Frenchwoman-an actress is she, or, something worse? Tell 
me, is it true?" 
"I don't know anything about it for certain, Granny," answered 
Polina, "but from the words of Mlle. Blanche herself, who does not 
feel it necessary to conceal anything, I conclude . . .  " 
"Enough," Granny broke in vigorously, "I understand! I always 
reckoned that he was capable of it and I have always thought him a 
most foolish and feather-headed man. He thinks no end of himself, 
because he is a General (he was promoted from a Colonel on retiring), 
and he gives himself airs. I know, my good girl, how you kept send­
ing telegram after telegram to Moscow, to ask if your old Granny 
would soon be laid out. They were on the look-out for my money; 

82 
T lze Slwrt Novels of Vostoevsky 
without money that nasty hussy, what's her name-De Cominges­
wouldn't take him for her footman, especially with his false teeth. She 
has a lot of money herself, they say, lends at interest, has made a 
lot. I am not blaming you, Praskovya, it wasn't you who sent the 
telegrams; and I don't want to remember the past, either. I know 
you·ve got a bad temper-a wasp! You can sting to hurt; but I'm sorry 
for you because I was fond of your mother, Katerina. \Veil, you throw 
up everything here and come with me. You've nowhere to go, you 
know; and it's not fitting for you to be with them now. Stop!" cried 
Granny, as Polina was about to speak; "I've not finished. I ask noth­
ing of you. As you know, I have in Moscow a palace; you can have 
a whole storey to yourself and not come and see me for weeks at a 
time if my temper does not suit you! Well, will you or not?" 
"Let me ask you first : do you really mean to set off at once?" 
"Do you suppose I'm joking, my good girl! I've said I'm going and 
I'm going. I've wasted fifteen thousand roubles to-day over your 
damned roulette. Five years ago I promised to rebuild a wooden church 
with stone on my estate near Moscow, and instead of that I've thrown 
away my money here. Now, my girl, I'm going home to build the 
church." 
"And the waters, Granny ? You came to drink the waters ?" 
"Bother you and the waters, too. Don't irritate me, Praskovya; are 
you doing it on purpose? Tell me, will you come or not?" 
"I thank you very, very much," Polina began, with feeling, "for 
the home you offer me. You have guessed my position to some extent. 
I am so grateful to you that I shall perhaps come to you soon; but 
now there are reasons . . .  important reasons . . .  and I can't decide 
at once, on the spur of the moment. If you were staying only a fort­
night . . .  " 
"You mean you won't?" 
"I mean I can't. Besides, in any case I can't leave my brother and 
sister, as . . .  as . . .  as it may actually happen that they may be left 
abandoned, so . . .  if you would take me with the children, Granny, 
I certainly would come, and, believe me, I would repay you for it!" 
she added warmly; "but without the children I can't come, Granny." 
"Well, don't whimper." (Polina had no intention of whimpering­
indeed, I had never seen her cry.) "Some place will be found for the 
chickens, my henhouse is big enough. Besides, it is time they were at 
school. \Veil, so you are not coming now! Well, Praskovya, mind! I 
wished for your good, but I know \vhy you won't come! I know all 
about it, Praskovya. That Frenchman will bring you no good." 

r lze (;ambler 
83 
Polina Bushed crimson. I positively shuddered. (Every one knows 
all :.bout it. I am the only one to know nothing!) 
"Come, come, don't frown. I am not going to say anything more. 
Only take care no harm comes of it, understand. You are a clever 
wench; I shall be sorry for you. Well, that's enough. I should not like 
to look on you as on the others! Go along, good-bye!" 
"I'll come to see you off," said Polina. 
"There's no need, don't you interfere; I am sick of you all." 
Polina was kissing Granny's hand, but the latter pulled it away and 
kissed her on the cheek. 
As she passed me, Polina looked at me quickly and immediately 
turned away her eyes. 
"\Veil, good-bye to you, too, Alexey Ivanovitch, there's only an hour 
before the train starts, and I think you must be tired out with me. 
Here, take these fifty pieces of gold." 
"I thank you very much, Granny; I'm ashamed . . . " 
"Come, come!" cried Granny, but so vigorously and angrily that I 
dared say no more and took it. 
"When you are running about Moscow without a job come to me: 
I will give you some introductions. Now, get along with you!" 
I went to my room and lay down on my bed. I lay there for half 
an hour on my back, with my hands clasped behind my head. The 
catastrophe had come at last, I had something to think about. I made 
up my mind to talk earnestly to Polina. The nasty Frenchman! So 
it was true then! But what could there be at the bottom of it ? Polina 
and De Grieux! Heavens! what a pair! 
It was all simply incredible:. I suddenly jumped up, beside myself, 
to look for Mr. Astley, and at all costs to make him speak out. No 
doubt in this matter, too, he knew more than I did. Mr. Astley ? He 
was another riddle to mel 
But suddenly there was a tap at my door. I looked up. It was 
Potapitch. 
"Alexy lvanovitch, you are wanted to come to my lady!" 
"\Vhat's the matter? Is she setting off? The train does not start for 
twenty minutes." 
"She's uneasy, she can't sit still. 'Make haste, make haste!' she says, 
meaning to fetch you, sir. For Christ's sake, don't delay." 
I ran downstairs at once. Granny was being wheeled out into the 
passage, her pocket-book was in her hand. 
"Alexey Ivanov itch, go on ahead ; we're coming." 
"Where, Granny?" 

84 
The Short Novels of Vostoevsky 
"As sure as I'm alive, I'll win it back. Come, march, don't ask 
questions! Does the play go on there till midnight?" 
I was thunderstruck. I thought a moment, but at once made up my 
mind. 
"Do as you please, Antonida Vassilyevna, I'm not coming." 
"\Vhat's that for? What now? Have you all eaten too many pan­
cakes, or what ?" 
"Do as you please, I should blame myself for it afterwards; I won't. 
I won't take part in it or look on at it; spare me, Antonida Vas­
silyevna. Here are your fifty friedrichs d'or back ; good-bye!" And, 
laying the fifty friedrichs d'or on the little table near which Granny's 
chair was standing, I bowed and went out. 
"\Vhat nonsense!" Granny shouted after me. "Don't come if you 
don't want to, I can find the way by myself) Potapitch, come with mel 
Come, lift me up, carry me!" 
I did not find Mr. Astley and returned home. It was late, after mid­
night, when I learned from Potapitch how Granny's day ended. She 
lost all that I had changed for her that evening-that is, in Russian 
money, another ten thousand roubles. The little Pole, to whom she 
had given two friedrichs d'or the day before, had attached himself 
to her and had directed her play the whole time. At first, before the 
Pole came, she had made Potapitch put down the stakes, but soon she 
dismissed him ; it was at that moment the Pole turned up. As ill-luck 
would have it, he understood Russian and babbled away in a mixture 
of three languages, so that they understood each other after a fashion. 
Granny abused him mercilessly the whole time; and though he in­
cessantly "laid himself at his lady's feet," "yet he couldn't be com­
pared with you, Alexey Ivanovitch," said Potapitch. "She treated you 
like a gentleman, while the other-I saw it with my own eyes, God 
strike me dead-stole her money otT the table. She caught him at it 
herself twice. She did give it to him with all sorts of names, sir, even 
pulled his hair once, upon my word she did, so that folks were laugh­
ing round about. She's lost everything, sir, everything, all you changed 
for her; we brought her back here-she only asked for a drink of 
water, crossed herself and went to bed. She's worn out, to be sure; 
she fell asleep at once. God send her heavenly dreams. Och! these 
foreign parts!" Potapitch wound up. "I said it would lead to no good. 
If only we could soon be back in Moscow! We'd everything we 
wanted at home in Moscow : a garden, flowers such as you don't have 
here. fragrance, the apples are swelling, plenty of room everywhere. 
No. we had to come abroad. Oh, oh, oh . . .  
" 

'lh% (jambl%r 
85 
Chapter 13 
N 0\V almost a whole month has passed since I touched these 
notes of mine, which were begun under the influence of confused but 
intense impressions. The catastrophe which I felt to be approaching 
has actually come, but in a form a hundred times more violent and 
startling than I had expected. It has all been something strange, 
grotesque and even tragic-at least for me. Several things have hap­
pened to me that were almost miraculous; that is, at least, how I look 
upon them to this day-though from another point of view, particu­
larly in the whirl of events in which I was involved at that time, they 
were only somewhat out of the common. But what is most marvellous 
to me is my own attitude to all these events. To this day I cannot 
understand myself, and it has all floated by like a dream-even my 
passion-it was violent and sincere, but . . .  what has become of it 
now? It is true that sometimes the thought flashes through my brain: 
"\Vasn't I out of my mind then, and wasn't I all that time somewhere 
in a madhouse and perhaps I'm there now, so that was all my fancy 
and still is my fancy . . .  " I put my notes together and read them 
over. (\Vho knows-perhaps to convince myself that I did not write 
them in a madhouse.) Now I am entirely alone. Autumn is coming on 
and the leaves are turning yellow. I'm still in this dismal little town 
(oh ! how dismal the little German towns are!), and instead of con­
sidering what to do next, I go on living under the influence of the 
sensations I have just passed through, under the inAuence of memories 
still fresh, under the influence of the whirl of events which caught 
me up and flung me aside again. At times I fancy that I am still 
caught up in that whirlwind, that that storm is still raging, carrying 
me along with it, and again I lose sight of all order and measure and 
I whirl round and round again . . . .  
However, I may, perhaps, leave off whirling and settle down in 
a way if, so far as I can, I put clearly before my mind all the inci­
dents of the past month. I feel drawn to my pen again. Besides, I 
have sometimes nothing at all to do in the evenings. I am so hard 
up for something to do that, odd as it seems, I even take from the 
scurvy lending library here the novels of Paul de Kock (in a German 
translation) ,  though I can't endure them; yet I read them and wonder 
at myself. It is as though I were afraid of breaking the spell of the 

86 
The Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
recent past by a serious book or any serious occupation. It is as though 
that grotesque dream, with all the impressions left by it, was so 
precious to me that I am afraid to let anything new touch upon it for 
fear it should all vanish in smoke. Is it all so precious to me? Yes, 
of course it is precious. Perhaps I shall remember it for forty years 
.
.
•
.
 
And so I take up my writing again. I can give a brief account of it 
to some extent now : the impressions are not at all the same. 
In the first place, to finish with Granny. The following day she 
lost everything. It was what was bound to happen. When once any one 
is started upon that road, it is like a man in a sledge flying down a 
snow mountain more and more swiftly. She played all day till eight 
o'clock in the evening; I was not present and only know what hap­
pened from what I was told. 
Potapitch was in attendance on her at the Casino all day. Several 
Poles in succession guided Granny's operations in the course of the 
day. She began by dismissing the Pole whose hair she had pulled the 
day before and taking on another, but he turned out almost worse. 
After dismissing the second, and accepting again the first, who had 
never left her side, but had been squeezing himself in behind her chair 
and continually poking his head in during the whole period of his 
disgrace, she sank at last into complete despair. The second Pole also 
refused to move away; one stationed himself on her right and the 
other on her left. They were abusing one another the whole time and 
quarrelling over the stakes and the game, calling each other ''laidak'' 
and other Polish civilities, making it up again, putting down money 
recklessly and playing at random. When they quarrelled they put the 
money down regardless of each other-one, for instance, on the red 
and the other on the black. It ended in their completely bewildering 
and overwhelming Granny, so that at last, almost in tears, she ap­
pealed to the old croupier, begging him to protect her and to send 
them away. They were, in fact, immediately turned out in spite of 
their outcries and protests; they both shouted out at once and tried to 
prove that Granny owed them something, that she had deceived them 
about something and had treated them basely and dishonourably. The 
luckless Potapitch told me all this the same evening almost with tears, 
and complained that they stuffed their pockets with money, that he 
himself had seen them shamelessly steal and continually thrust the 
money in their pockets. One, for instance, would beg five friedrichs 
d'or for his trouble and begin putting them down on the spot side 
by side with Granny's stakes. Granny won, but the man shouted that 

'I he (jambler 
87 
his stake was the winning one and that Granny's had lost, \Vhen they 
were dismissed Potapitch came forward and said that their pockets 
were full of gold. Granny at once bade the croupier to look into it 
and, in spite of the outcries of the Poles (they cackled like two cocks 
caught in the hand), the police came forward and their pockets were 
immediately emptied for Granny's benefit. Granny enjoyed unmistaka­
ble prestige among the croupiers and the whole staff of the Casino all 
that day, until she had lost everything. By degrees her fame spread all 
over the town. All the visitors at the watering-place, of all nations, 
small and great, streamed to look on at "une vieille comtesse russe 
tombee en enfance," who had already lost "some millions." 
But Granny gained very, very little by being rescued from the two 
Poles. They were at once replaced by a third, who spoke perfectly pure 
Russian and was dressed like a gentleman, though he did look like a 
flunkey with a huge moustache and a sense of his own importance. 
He, too "laid himself at his lady's feet and kissed them," but behaved 
haughtily to those about him, was despotic over the play; in fact, 
immediately behaved like Granny's master rather than her servant. 
Every minute, at every turn in the game, he turned to her and swore 
with awful oaths that he was himself a "pan of good position," and 
that he wouldn't take a kopeck of Granny's money. He repeated this 
oath so many times that Granny was completely intimidated. But as 
this pan certainly seemed at first to impro\'e her luck, Granny was not 
willing to abandon him on her own account. An hour later the two 
Poles who had been turned out of the Casino turned up behind 
Granny's chair again, and again proffered their services if only to run 
errands for her. Potapitch swore that the "pan of good position" 
winked at them and even put something in their hands. As Granny 
had no dinner and could not leave her chair, one of the Poles cer­
tainly was of use: he ran off once to the dining-room of the Casino 
and brought her a cup of broth and afterwards some tea. They both 
ran about, however. But towards the end of the day, when it became 
evident to every one that she would stake her last banknote, there 
were behind her chair as many as six Poles who had never been seen 
or heard of before. When Granny was playing her last coin, they not 
only ceased to obey her, but took no notice of her whatever, squeezed 
their way up to the table in front of her, snatched the money them­
selves, put down the stakes and made their own play, shouted and 
quarrelled, talked to the "pan of good position" as to one of them­
selves, while the "pan of good position" himself seemed almost oblivi­
ous of Granny's existence. Even when Granny, after losing everything, 

88 
7 /1ƛ Short 'N.ovds of VostoƛvskJ 
was returning after eight o'clock to the hotel, three or four Poles ran 
at the side of her bath<hair, still unable to bring themselves to leave 
her ; they kept shouting at the top of their voices, declaring in a hur­
ried gabble that Granny had cheated them in some way and must 
give them something. They followed her in this way right up to the 
hotel, from which they were at last driven away with blows. 
By Potapitch's reckoning Granny had lost in all ninety thousand 
roubles that day, apart from what she had lost the day before. All her 
notes, her exchequer bonds, all the shares she had with her, she had 
changed, one after another. I marvelled how she could have stood 
those seven or eight hours sitting there in her chair and scarcely le:.w­
ing the table, but Potapitch told me that three or four times she had 
begun winning considerably ; and, carried on by fresh hope, she could 
not tear herself away. But gamblers know how a man can sit for al­
most twenty-four hours at cards, without looking to right or to left. 
Meanwhile, very critical events were taking place all that day at 
the hotel. In the morning, before eleven o'clock, when Granny was 
still at home, our people-that is, the General and De Grieux-made 
up their minds to take the final step. Le:uning that Granny had given 
up all idea of setting otT, but was going back to the Casino, they went 
in full conclave (all but Pol ina) to talk things over with her finally 
and even openly. The General, trembling and with a sinking heart in 
view of the awful possibilities for himself, overdid it. After spending 
half an hour in prayers and entreaties and making a clean breast of 
everything-that is, of all his debts and even his passion for Mlle. 
Blanche (he quite lost his head), the General suddenly adopted a 
menacing tone and even began shouting and stamping at Granny ; 
cried that she was disgracing their n:une, had become a scandal to 
the whole town, and finally 
.
•
.
 finally: ''You are shaming the Rus­
sian name," cried the General, and he told her that the police would 
be called in! Granny finally drove him from her with 
a stick (an 
actual stick). 1l1e General and De Grieux consulted once or twice 
that morning, and the question that agitated them was whether i t  
were not possible i n  some way t o  bring in the police, on the plea that 
an unfortunate but venerable old lady, sinking into her dotage, was 
gambling away her whole fortune, and so on ; whether, in fact, it 
would be possible to put her under any sort of supervision or restraint 
. 
• 
. . But De Grieux only shrugged his shoulders and laughed in the 
General's face, as the latter pranced up and down his study talking 
excitedly. Finally, De Grieux went off with a wave of his hand. In 
the evening we learned that he had left the hotel altogether, after 

T lze (/ambler 
89 
having been in very earnest and mysterious confabulation with Mlle. 
Blanche. As for Mlle. Blanche, she had taken her measures early in 
the morning: she threw the General over completely and would not 
even admit him to her presence. When the General ran to the Casino 
in search of her and met her arm-in-arm with the Prince, neither she 
nor Madame de Cominges deigned to notice him. The Prince did not 
bow to him either. Mlle. Blanche spent that whole day hard at work 
upon the Prince, trying to force from him a definite declaration. But 
alas! she was cruelly deceived in her reckoning! This little catastrophe 
took place in the evening. It suddenly came out that he was as poor 
as a church mouse, and, what is more, was himself reckoning on 
borrowing from her on an I 0 U to try his luck at roulette. Blanche 
turned him out indignantly and locked herself up in her room. 
On the morning of that day I went to Mr. Astley--<>r, to be more 
exact, I went in search of Mr. Astley, but could find him nowhere. 
He was not at home, or in the park, or in the Casino. He was not 
dining at his hotel that day. It was past four o'clock when I suddenly 
saw him walking from the railway station towards the Hotel d'Angle­
terrc. He was in a hurry and was very much preoccupied, though it 
was hard to trace any anxiety or any perturbation whatever in his 
face. He held out his hand to me cordially, with his habitual exclama­
tion "Ah!" but without stopping walked on with rather a rapid step. 
I attached myself to him, but he managed to answer me in such a way 
that I did not succeed in even asking him about anything. Moreover, 
I felt, for some reason, ashamed to begin speaking of Polina; he did 
not ask a word about her. I told him about Granny. He listened 
attentively and seriously and shrugged his shoulders. 
"She will gamble away everything," I observed. 
"Oh, yes," he answered ; "she went in to play just as 
was going 
away, and afterwards I learnt for a fact that she had lost everything. 
If there were time I would look in at the Casino, for it is curious." 
"Where have you been?" I cried, wondering that I had not asked 
before. 
"I've been in Frankfurt." 
"On business?" 
.. yes, on business." 
Well, what more was there for me to ask? I did, however, continue 
walking beside him, but he suddenly turned into the Hotel des 
Quatre Saisons, nodded to me and vanished. As I walked home I 
gradually realized that if I had talked to him for a couple of hours I 
should have learnt absolutely nothing, because . . .  I had nothing to 

90 
'1/ze Slzort Novels of 7Jostoevsky 
ask him! Yes, that was so, of course! I could not possibly formulate my 
question. 
All that day Polina spent walking with the children and their nurse 
in the park, or sitting at home. She had for a long time past avoided 
the General, and scarcely spoke to him about anything-about any­
thing serious, at any rate. I had noticed that for a long time past. But 
knowing what a position the General was in to-day, I imagined that 
he could hardly pass her over-that is, there could not but be an 
important conversation about family affairs between them. \Vhen, 
however, I returned to the hotel, after my conversation with Mr. 
Astley, I met Polina with the children. There was an expression of the 
most unruffied calm on her face, as though she alone had remained 
untouched by the family tempest. She nodded in response to my bow. 
I returned home feeling quite malignant. 
I had, of course, avoided seeing her and had seen nothing of her 
since the incident with the Burmerhelms. There was some affectation 
and pose in this; but as time went on, I felt more and more genuinely 
indignant. Even if she did not care for me in the least, she should not, 
I thought, have trampled on my feelings like that and have received 
my declarations so contemptuously. She knew that I really loved her; 
she admitted me, she allowed me to speak like that! It is true that it 
had begun rather strangely. Some time before, long ago, in fact, two 
months before, I began to notice that she wanted to make me her 
friend, her confidant, and indeed was in a way testing me. But some­
how this did not come otT then; instead of that there remained the 
strange relations that existed between us; that is how it was I began 
to speak to her like that. But if my love repelled her, why did she not 
directly forbid me to speak of it ? 
She did not forbid me; indeed she sometimes provoked me to talk 
of it and . . .  and, of course, she did this for fun. I know for certain. 
I noticed it unmistakably-it was agreeable to her to listen and to work 
me up to a state of misery, to wound me by some display of the 
utmost contempt and disregard. And, of course, she knew that I could 
not exist without her. It was three days since the affair with the Baron 
and I could not endure our separation any longer. When I met her 
just now near the Casino, my heart throbbed so that I turned pale. 
But she could not get on without me, either! She needed me and­
surely, surely not as a buffoon, a clown? 
She had a secret-that was clear! Her conversation with Granny 
had stabbed my heart. Why, I had urged her a thousand times to be 
open with me, and she knew that I was ready to give my life for her. 

The (jambler 
91 
But she always put me off, almost with contempt, or had asked of me, 
instead of the sacrifice of my life, such pranks as the one with the 
Baron! 
Was not that enough to make one indignant? Could that Frenchᐏ 
man be all the world to her? And Mr. Astley? But at that point the 
position became utterly incomprehensible-and meanwhile, my God! 
what agonies I went through! 
On getting home, in an access of fury I snatched up my pen and 
scribbled the following letter to her-
"Polina Alexandrovna, I see clearly that the denouement is at hand 
which will allect you also. I repeat for the last time: do you need my 
life or not ? If I can be of use in any way whatever, dispose of me as 
you think fit, and I will meanwhile remain in my room and not go 
out at all. If you need me, write to me or send for me." 
I sealed up this note and sent it off by the corridor attendant, 
instructing him to give it into her hands. I expected no answer, but 
three minutes later the attendant returned with the message that "she 
sent her greetings." 
It was past six when I was summoned to the General. 
He was in his study, dressed as though he were on the point of going 
out. His hat and coat were lying on the sofa. It seemed to me as I 
went in that he was standing in the middle of the room with his legs 
wide apart and his head hanging, talking aloud to himself. But as 
soon as he saw me, he rushed at me almost crying out, so that I invol­
untarily stepped back and was almost running away, but he seized me 
by both hands and drew me to the sofa; sat down on the sofa himself, 
made me sit down in an armchair just opposite himself, and, kee!Jing 
tight hold of my hand, with trembling lips and with tears suddenly 
glistening on his eyelashes, began speaking in an imploring voice. 
"Alexey lvanovitch, save, save me, spare me." 
It was a long while before I could understand. He kept talking and 
talking and talking, continually repeating, "Spare me, spare me!" 
At last I guessed that he expected something in the way of advice from 
me; or, rather, abandoned by all in his misery and anxiety, he had 
thought of me and had sent for me, simply to talk and talk and talk 
to me. 
He was mad, or at any rate utterly distraught. He clasped his hands 
and was on the point of dropping on his knees before me to implore me 

92 
'!he Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
(what do you suppose?) to go at once to Mlle. Blanche and to beseech, 
to urge her to return to him and marry him. 
"Upon my word, General," I cried; "why, Mlle. Blanche is perhaps 
scarcely aware of my existence. What can I do?" 
But it was vain to protest; he didn't understand what was said to 
him. He fell to talking about Granny, too, but with terrible inco­
herence; he was still harping on the idea of sending for the police. 
"Among us, among us," he began, suddenly boiling over with 
indignation; "among· us, in a well-ordered state, in fact, where there 
is a Government in control of things, such old women would have 
been put under guardianship at once! Yes, my dear sir, yes," he went 
on, suddenly dropping into a scolding tone, jumping up from his chair 
and pacing about the room; "you may not be aware of the fact, hon­
oured sir," he said, addressing some imaginary "honoured sir" in the 
corner, "so let me tell you . . .  yes . . .  among us such old women are 
kept in order, kept in order; yes, indeed . . . .  Oh, damn it all!" 
And he flung himself on the sofa again, and a minute later, almost 
sobbing, gasping for breath, hastened to tell me that Mlle. Blanche 
would not marry him because Granny had come instead of the tele­
gram, and that now it was clear he would not come into the inherit­
ance. He imagined that I knew nothing of this till then. I began to 
speak of De Grieux; he waved his hand : "He has gone away! Every­
hing of mine he has in pawn; I'm stripped of everything! That money 
you brought . . .  that money-I don't know how much there is, I 
think seven hundred francs are left and that's enough, that's all and 
what's to come-I don't know, I don't know! . . .  
" 
"How will you pay your hotel bill?" I cried in alarm; "and . . .  
afterwards what will you do?" 
He looked at me pensively, but I fancy he did not understand and 
perhaps did not hear what I said. I tried to speak of Polina Alexan­
drovna, of the children; he hurriedly answered : "Yes! yes!" but at once 
fell to talking of the Prince again, saying that Blanche would go away 
with him now and "then •
.
.
 then, what am I to do, Alexey Ivano­
vitch?" he asked, addressing me suddenly. "I vow, by God! I don't 
know what to do; tell me, isn't this ingratitude? Isn't this ingratitude?" 
Finally he dissolved into floods of tears. 
There was no doing anything with such a man; it would be danger­
ous to leave him alone, too-something might happen to him. I got 
rid of him somehow, but let nurse know she must look in upon him 
pretty frequently, and also spoke to the corridor attendant, a very 
sensible fellow; he, too, promised me to keep an eye on the General. 

The (/ambler 
93 
I had hardly left the General when Potapitch came to summon me 
to Granny. It was eight o'clock and she had only just come back from 
the Casino after losing everything. I went to her; the old lady was 
sitting in an armchair, utterly worn out and evidently ill. Marfa was 
giving her a cup of tea and almost forcing her to drink it. And 
Granny's tone and voice were utterly changed. 
"Good-day, Alexey Ivanovitch, my good sir," she said, bending her 
head slowly, and with dignity; "excuse me for troubling you once 
more, you must excuse an old woman. I have left everything behind 
there, my friend, nearly a hundred thousand roubles. You did well 
not to come with me yesterday. Now I have no money, not a farthing. 
I don't want to delay a moment, at half-past nine I'm setting off. I 
have sent to that Englishman of yours-what's his name, Astley-! 
want to ask him to lend me three thousand francs for a week. So you 
must persuade him not to take it amiss and refuse. I am still fairly 
well off, my friend. I have still three villages and two houses. And 
there is still some money. I didn't bring it all with me. I tell you this 
that he may not feel any doubts . . .  Ah, here he is! One can see he 
is a nice man." 
Mr. Astley had hastened to come at Granny's first summons. With 
no hesitation and without wasting words he promptly counted out 
three thousand francs for an I 0 U which Granny signed. When this 
business was settled he made haste to take his leave and go away. 
"And now you can go, too, Alexey Ivanovitch. I have only a little 
over an hour left. I want to lie down: my bones ache. Don't be hard on 
an old fool like me. Henceforward I won't blame young people for 
being flighty, and it would be a sin for me now to blame that luckless 
fellow, your General, either. I won't give him any money, though, as he 
wants me to, because-to my thinking he is utterly silly; only, old fool 
as I am, I've no more sense than he. Verily God seeks out and punishes 
pride, even in old age. Well, good-bye. Marfa, lift me up!" 
I wanted to see Granny off, however. What's more, I was in a state 
of suspense; I kept expecting that in another minute something would 
happen. I could not sit quietly in my room. I went out into the corri­
dor, even for a moment went for a saunter along the avenue. My letter 
to her had been clear and decisive and the present catastrophe was, of 
course, a final one. I heard in the hotel that De Grieux had left. If she 
rejected me as a friend, perhaps she would not reject me as a servant. 
I was necessary to her, I was of use to her, if only to run her errands, 
it was bound to be so! 
When the train was due to start I ran to the station and saw Granny 

94 
T lze Short 'Novels of Vostoevsky 
into the train. Her whole party were together, in a special reserved 
compartment. "Thank you, my good friend, for your disinterested 
sympathy," she said, at parting from me; "and tell Praskovya, in refer­
ence to what we were discussing yesterday, I shall expect her." 
I went home. Passing the General's rooms I met the old nurse and 
inquired after the General. "Oh, he's all right, sir," she answered me 
dolefully. I went in, however, but stood still in positive amazement. 
Mlle. Blanche and the General were both laughing heartily. Madame 
de Cominges was sitting on the sofa close by. The General was evi­
dently beside himself with delight. He was murmuring incoherently 
and going off into prolonged fits of nervous laughter, during which 
his face was puckered with innumerable wrinkles and his eyes dis­
appeared from sight. Afterwards I learnt from Blanche herself that, 
having dismissed the Prince and having heard how the General was 
weeping, she had taken it into her head to comfort him by going to see 
him for a minute. But the poor General did not know that at that 
time his fate was decided, and that Mlle. Blanche had already packed 
to set off for Paris by the first train next morning. 
Stopping in the doorway of the General's study, I changed my mind 
and went away unnoticed. Going up to my own room and opening 
the door, I suddenly noticed a figure in the half-darkness sitting on a 
chair in the corner by the window. She did not get up when I went in. 
I went up quickly, looked, and-my heart stood still: it was Polina. 
Chapter 14 
I POSITIVELY cried out aloud. 
"What is it? What is it?" she asked me strangely. She was pale and 
looked gloomy. 
"You ask what is it ? You ? Here in my room!" 
"If I come, then I come altogether. That's my way. You'll see that 
directly; light the candle." 
I lighted a candle. She got up, went up to the table, and put before 
me an open letter. 
"Read it," she ordered me. 
"It's-it's De Grieux's handwriting," I cried, taking the letter. My 
hands trembled and the lines danced before my eyes. I have forgotten 
the exact wording of the letter, but here is the main drift of it, if not 
the actual words : 

r lze (jam bier 
95 
"}.Jademoisellc," wrote De Grieux, "an unfortunate circumstance 
compels me to go away at once. You have, no doubt, observed that I 
have purposely avoided a final explanation with you until such time 
as the whole position might be cleared up. The arrival of your old 
relation (de Ia vieille dame) and her absurd behaviour have put an 
end to my doubts. The unsettled state of my own affairs forbids me to 
cherish further the sweet hopes which I permitted myself to indulge for 
some time. I regret the past, but I trust that you will not detect in my 
beh::tviour anything unworthy of a gentleman and an honest man 
(genti!lwmme et honnhe homme). H:.lVing lost almost all my money 
in loans to your stepfather, I find myself compelled to make the utmost 
use of what is left to me; I have already sent word to my friend in 
Petersburg to arrange at once for the sale of the estates he has mort­
gaged to me; knowing, however, that your frivolous stepfather has 
squandered your private fortune I have determined to forgive him 
fifty thousand francs, and I am returning him part of my claims on his 
property equivalent to Lhat sum, so that you are now put in a position 
to regain all that you have lost by demanding lhe property from him 
by legal process. I hope, Mademoiselle, that in the present position of 
affairs my action will be very advantageous to you. I hope, too, that by 
this action I am fully performing the duty of a man and a gentleman. 
Rest assured that your memory is imprinted upon my heart for ever." 
"Well, that's all clear," I said, turning to Polina ; "surely you could 
have expected nothing else," ! added, with indignation. 
"I expected nothing," she answered, with apparent composure, 
though there was a tremor in her voice. "I had made up my mind 
long ago; I read his mind and knew what he was thinking. He 
thought that I was trying-that I should insist •
.
.
 
" (She broke off 
without finishing her sentence, bit her lips and was silent.) "I pur­
posely doubled my scorn towards him," she began again. "I waited to 
see what was coming from him. If a telegram had come telling of the 
inheritance I'd ha\'e flung him the money borrowed from that idiot, 
my stepfather, and would have sent him about his business. He has 
been hateful to me for ages and ages. Oh! he was not the same man! 
a thousand times over, I tell you, he was dilTerent! but now, now . . .  
Oh, with what happiness I could fling that fifty thousand in his nasty 
face and spit and stamp . . .  " 
"But the security, the I 0 U for that fifty thousand, is in the 
General's hands. Take it and return it to De Grieux." 
"Oh, that's not the same thing, that's not the same thing .
•
.
 
" 

96 
The Short 'Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
"Yes, that's true, it's not the same thing. Besides, what is the General 
capable of now? And Granny! "  I cried suddenly. 
Polina looked at me, as it were absent-mindedly and impatiently. 
"Why Granny?" asked Polina, with vexation. "I can't go to her 
. . .  And I don't want to ask any one's pardon," she added irritably. 
"What's to be done!" I cried, "and how, oh, how could you love 
De Grieux! Oh, the scoundrel, the scoundrel! If you like I will kill 
him in a duel! Where is he now? "  
"He's at Frankfurt, and will be there three days." 
"One word from you and I'll set off to-morrow by the first train," 
I said, with stupid enthusiasm. 
She laughed. 
"Why, he'll say, maybe: 'Give me back the fifty thousand francs 
first.' Besides, what should you fight him for? . . .  What nonsense 
it is!" 
"But where, where is one to get that fifty thousand francs?" I 
repeated, grinding my teeth as though it had been possible to pick 
them up from the floor. "I say-Mr. Astley," I suggested, turning to 
her with a strange idea dawning upon me. 
Her eyes flashed. 
"What, do you mean to say you yourself want me to turn from you 
to that Englishman!" she said, looking in my face with a searching 
glance and smiling bitterly. For the first time in her life she addressed 
me in the second person singular. 
I believe she was giddy with emotion at the moment, and all at once 
she sat down on the sofa as though she were exhausted. 
It was as though I had been struck by a flash of lightning. I stood 
up and could not believe my eyes, could not believe my ears! \Vhy, 
then she loved me! She had come to me and not to Mr. Astley! 
She, she, a young girl, had come to my room in a hotel, so she had 
utterly compromised herself by her own act, and I, I was standing 
before her and still did not understand. 
One wild idea flashed through my mind. 
"Polina, give me only one hour. Stay here only one hour and . . .  
I'll come back. That's .
•
.
 that's essential! You shall see! Be here, be 
here!" 
And I ran out of the room, not responding to her amazed and 
questioning look; she called something after me but I did not turn 
back. 
Sometimes the wildest idea, the most apparently impossible thought, 
takes possession of one's mind so strongly that one accepts it at last as 

The (jambler 
9'1 
something substantial . . .  more than that, if the idea is associated 
with a strong passionate desire, then sometimes one will accept it at 
last as something fated, inevitable, predestined-as something bound 
to be, and bound to happen. Perhaps there is something else in it, some 
combination of presentiments, some extraordinary effort of will, self­
poisoning by one's own fancy-or something else-1 don't know what, 
but on that evening (which I shall never in my life forget) something 
marvellous happened to me. Though it is quite justified by the laws of 
arithmetic, nevertheless it is a marvel to me to this day. And why, 
why had that conviction so long before taken such firm and deep root 
in my mind ? I had certainly thought about it-I repeat-not as a 
chance among others which might or might not come to pass, but as 
something which was absolutely bound to happen! 
It was a quarter past ten. I went into the Casino with a confident 
expectation and at the same time with an excitement I had never 
experienced before. There were still a good many people in the 
gambling hall, though not half as many as in the morning. 
Between ten and eleven there are still to be found in the gambling 
halls the genuine desperate gamblers for whom nothing exists at a 
spa but roulette, who have come for that alone, who scarcely notice 
what is going on around them and take no interest in anything during 
the whole season, but play from morning till night and would be 
ready perhaps to play all night till dawn, too, if it were possible. And 
they always disperse with annoyance when at twelve o'clock the rou, 
lette hall is closed. And when the senior croupier announces, just 
before midnight. "Les trois derniers coups, messieurs," they are ready 
to stake on those last three strokes all they have in their pockets­
and do, in fact, lose most at that time. I went up to the very table 
where Granny had sat that day. It was not crowded, and so I soon 
took my place at the table standing. Exactly before me was the word 
Passe scrawled on the green cloth. 
Passe is the series of numbers from nineteen inclusive to thirty-six. 
The first series of numbers from one to eighteen inclusive is called 
manque; but what was that to me? I was not calculating, I had not 
even heard what had been the winning number last, and I did not ask 
about it when I began to play-as every player of any prudence would 
do. I pulled out all my twenty friedrichs d'or and staked them on 
passe, the word which lay before me. 
"Vingt-deux," cried the croupier. 
I had won and again staked all : including my winnings. 
"T rente-et-ten," cried the croupier, 

98 
T lze Short N.ovels of ̶Dostoevsky 
I had won again. I had in all eighty friedrichs d'or. I staked the 
whole of that sum on the twelve middle numbers (my winnings would 
be three to one, but the chances were two to one against me). The 
wheel rotated and stopped at twenty-four. I was passed three rolls 
each of fifty friedrichs d'or in paper and ten gold coins; I had now two 
hundred friedrichs d'or. 
I was as though in delirium and I moved the whole heap of gold to 
red-and suddenly thought better of it. And for the only time that 
whole evening, all the time I was playing, I felt chilled with terror and 
a shudder made my arms and legs tremble, I felt with horror and 
instantly realized what losing would mean for me now! My whole 
life was at stake. 
"Rouge," cried the croupier, and I drew a breath ; fiery pins and 
needles were tingling all m·er my body. I was paid in banknotes. It 
came to four thousand florins and eighty friedrichs d'or (I could still 
keep count at that stage). 
Then, I remember, I staked two thousand florins on the twelve middle 
numbers, and lost: I staked my gold, the eighty friedrichs d'or. and 
lost. I was seized with fury : I snatched up the two hundred tlorins I 
had left and staked them on the first twelve numbers-haphazard, at 
random, without thinking! There was, however, an instant of sus­
pense, like, perhaps, the feeling experienced by Madame Blanchard 
when she Aew from a balloon in Paris to the earth. 
"Quatrd" cried the croupier. 
Now with my stake I had six thousand florins. I looked triumphant 
already. I was afraid of nothing-nothing, and staked four thousand 
florins on black. Nine people followed my example and staged on 
black. The croupiers exchanged glances and said something to one 
another. People were talking all round in suspense. 
Black won. I don't remember my winnings after, nor what I staked 
on. I only remember as though in a dream that I won, I believe, six­
teen thousand florins; suddenly three unlucky turns took twelve thou­
sand from it; then I staked the last four thousand on pas.<e (but I 
scarcely felt anything as I did so; I simply waited in a mechanical, 
senseless way )-and again I won: then I won four times running. 
I only remember that I gathered up money in thousands; I remember, 
too, that the middle twelve won most often and I kept to it. It turned 
up with a sort of regularity, certainly three or four times in succession, 
then it did not turn up twice running and then it followed three or 
four times in succession. Such astonishing regularity is sometimes met 
with in streaks, and that is what throws inveterate gamblers who cal-

The (jam bier 
99 
culate with a pencil in their hands out of their reckoning. And what 
horrible ironies of fate happen sometimes in such cases! 
I believe not more than half an hour had passed since I came into the 
room, when suddenly the croupier informed me that I had won thirty 
thousand florins, and as the bank did not meet claims for a larger 
sum at one time the roulette would be closed till next morning. I 
snatched up all my gold, dropped it into my pockets, snatched up all 
my notes, and at once went into the other room where there was 
another roulette table; the whole crowd streamed after me; there at 
once a place was cleared for me and I fell to staking again haphazard 
without reckoning. I don't understand what saved me! 
At times, however, a glimmer of prudence began to dawn upon my 
mind. I clung to certain numbers and combinations, but soon aban­
doned them and staked almost unconsciously. I must have been very 
absent-minded; I remember the croupiers several times corrected me. 
I made several gross mistakes. My temples were soaked with sweat and 
my hands were shaking. The Poles ran up, too, with offers of their 
services, but I listened to no one. My luck was unbroken! Suddenly 
there \Vere sounds of loud talk and laughter, and every one cried "Bravo, 
bravo!" some even clapped their ha1ᐎds. Here, too, I collected three 
hundred thousand florins, and the bank closed till next day. 
"Go away, go away," a voice whispered on my right. 
It was a Frankfurt Jew; he was standing beside me all the time, 
and I believe sometimes helped me in my play. 
"For goodness' sake go," another voice whispered in my left ear. 
I took a hurried glance. It was a lady about thirty, very soberly 
and quietly dressed, with a tired, pale, sickly face which yet bore 
traces of having once been beautiful. At that moment I was stuffing 
my pockets with the notes, which I crumpled up anyhow, and gather­
ing up the gold that lay on the table. Snatching up the last roll of 
notes, I succeeded in putting it into the pale lady's hands quite without 
attracting notice; I had an intense desire to do so at the time, and I 
remember her pale slim fingers pressed my hand warmly in token of 
gratitude. All that took place in one instant. 
Having collected quickly all my winnings I went quickly to the 
trente et qttarante. 
Trente et quarante is frequented by the aristocratic public. Unlike 
roulette, it is a game of cards. Here the bank will pay up to a hundred 
thousand thalers at once. The largest stake is here also four thousand 
florins. I knew nothing of the game, and scarcely knew how to bet 
on it, except the red and the black upon which one can bet in this 

100 
'I he Short Novels of Vostoevsk.y 
game too. And I stuck to red and black. The whole Casino crowded 
round. I don't remember whether I once thought of Polina all this 
time. I was experiencing an overwhelming enjoyment in scooping up 
and taking away the notes which grew up in a heap before me. 
It seemed as though fate were urging me on. This time, as luck 
would have it, a circumstance occurred which, however, is fairly fre­
quent in the game. Chance favours red, for instance, ten or even fifteen 
times in succession. I had heard two days before that in the previous 
week red had turned up twenty-two times in succession; it was some­
thing which had never been remembered in roulette, and it was 
talked of with amazement. Every one, of course, abandoned red at 
once, and after the tenth time, for instance, scarcely any one dared to 
stake on it. But none of the experienced players staked on black either. 
The experienced gambler knows what is meant by this "freak of 
chance." It would mean that after red had won sixteen times, at the 
seventeenth time the luck would infalliby fall on black. Novices at 
play rush to this conclusion in crowds, double and treble their stakes, 
and lose terribly. 
But, noticing that red had turned up seven times running, by strange 
perversity I staked on it. I am convinced that vanity was half respon­
ᐐible for it; I wanted to impress the spectators by taking a mad risk, 
ond--oh, the strange sensation-! remember distinctly that, quite apart 
from the promptings of vanity, I w11s possessed by an intense craving 
for risk. Perhaps passing through so many sensations my soul was not 
satisfied but only irritated by them and craved still more sensation­
and stronger and stronger ones-till utterly exhausted. And, truly I 
am not lying, if the regulations had allowed me to stake fifty thousand 
florins at once, I should certainly have staked them. People around 
shouted that it was madness-that red had won fourteen times already! 
"Monsieur a gagn! d!ja cent mille florins," I heard a voice say 
near me. 
I suddenly came to myself. What ? I had won during that evening 
a hundred thousand florins! And what more did I want ? I fell on my 
banknotes, crumpled them up in my pockets without counting 
them, scooped up all my gold, all my rolls of notes, and ran out 
of the Casino. Every one was laughing as I went through the room, 
looking at my bulging pockets and at the way I staggered under the 
weight of gold. I think it weighed over twenty pounds. Several hands 
were held out to me; I gave it away in handfuls as I snatched it up. 
Two Jews stopped me at the outer door. 
"You are bold-you are very bold," they said to me, "but be sure 

The (/ambler 
101 
to go away to-morrow as soon as possible, or else you will lose it all­
you will lose it all . . . .  
" 
I didn't listen to them. The avenue was so dark that I could not see 
my hand before my face. It was half a mile to the hotel. I had never 
been afraid of thieves or robbers even as a small boy; I did not think 
of them now either. I don't remember what I thought of on the road; 
I had no thoughts. I was only aware of an immense enjoyment-suc­
cess, victory, power-I don't know how to express it. Polina's image 
hovered before my mind too; I remembered her and was conscious I 
was going to her; I should be with her in a moment, should be telling 
her and showing her . . .  But I hardly remembered what she had said 
to me earlier, and why I had gone, and all the sensations I had felt, 
not more than an hour and a half before, seemed to me something long 
past, transformed, grown old-something of which we should say no 
more because everything now would begin anew. Almost at the end 
of the avenue a sudden panic came upon me. What if I were robbed 
and murdered at this instant ? At every step my panic grew greater. I 
almost ran. Suddenly, at the end of the avenue there was the glare 
of our hotel with its many windows lighted up-thank God, home! 
I ran up to my storey and rapidly opened the door. Polina was 
there, sitting on the sofa with her arms crossed, with a lighted candle 
before her. She looked at me with amazement, and no doubt at that 
moment I must have looked rather strange. I stood before her and 
began flinging down all my piles of money on the table. 
Chapter 15 
I REMEMBER she fixed a very intent look on my face, but with­
out even moving from her seat or changing her position. 
"I've won two hundred thousand francs!" I cried, as I flung down 
the last roll of notes. 
The huge bundles of notes and piles of gold filled up the whole table; 
I could not take my eyes off it. At moments I completely forgot 
Polina. At one moment I began arranging the heap of banknotes, 
folding them up together, at the next I began undoing the rolls of gold 
and heaping them up in one pile; then I abandoned it all and strode 
rapidly up and down the room, lost in thought, then went up to the 
table, counting the money again. Suddenly, as though coming to 

102 
The Short Novels of 7Jostoevsky 
myself, I ran to the door and locked it with two turns of the key. Then 
I stood pondering before my little portmanteau. 
"Shall I put it in the portmanteau till to-morrow?" I said, suddenly 
remembering Polina and turning towards her. 
She was still sitting in the same place without stirring, but watching 
me attentively. Her expression was somehow strange; I did not like 
that expression. I am not mistaken if I say that there was hatred in it. 
I went up to her quickly. 
"Polina, here are twenty-five thousand florins-that's fifty thousand 
francs-more, in fact. Take it, throw it in his face to-morrow." 
She did not answer me. 
"If you like I will take you away early in the morning. Shall I?" 
She suddenly burst out laughing. She laughed for a long time. 
I looked at her with wonder and a mortified feeling. That laugh 
was very much like sarcastic laughter at my expense, which had always 
been so frequent at the times of my most passionate declarations. 
At last she ceased laughing and frowned; she looked at me sternly 
from under her brows. 
"I won't take your money," she declared contemptuously. 
"How ? What's this?" I cried. "Polina, why?" 
"I won't take money for nothing." 
"I offer it you as a friend; I olTer you my life." 
She looked at me with a long, penetrating look, as though she would 
pierce me through with it. 
"You give too much," she said, with a laugh; "De Grieux's mistress 
is not worth fifty thousand francs." 
"Polina, how can you talk to me like that!" I cried, reproachfully. 
"Am I a De Grieux?" 
"I hate you! Yes . . .  yes! . . .  I love you no more than De Grieux," 
she cried, her eyes suddenly flashing. 
Then she suddenly covered her face with her hands and went into 
hysterics. I rushed to her. 
I realized that something had happened to her while I was away. 
She seemed quite out of her mind. 
"Buy me! Do you want to? Do you want to? For fifty thousand 
francs, like De Grieux?" broke from her with convulsi\·e sobs. 
I held her in my arms, kissed her hands, her feet, fell on my knees 
before her. 
Her hysterics passed off. She put both hands on my shoulders, and 
looked at me intently; she seemed trying to read something in my face. 
She listened to me, but evidently did not hear what I was saying to 

'T lze (;ambler 
103 
her. Some doubt and anxiety betrayed itself in her face. I was anxious 
about her; it seemed to me that her brain was giving way. Then she 
began softly drawing me to her; a trustful smile began straying over her 
face; but she suddenly pushed me away, and again fell to scanning me 
with a darkened look. 
Suddenly she fell to embracing me. 
"You love me, you love me, don't you?" she said. "Why, you .
.
•
 
why, you . . .  wanted to fight the Baron for my sake!" 
And suddenly she burst out laughing-as though she had recalled 
something sweet and funny. She cried and laughed all at once. Well, 
what was I to do? I was in a fever myself. I remember she began 
saying something to me-but I could scarcely understand anything. 
It was a sort of delirium-a sort of babble-as though she wanted to tell 
me something as rapidly as possible-a delirium which was inter­
rupted from time to time with the merriest laughter, which at last 
frightened me. "No, no; you are sweet, sweet," she repeated. "You 
are my faithful one!" And again she put her hand on my shoulders, 
again she looked at me and repeated, "You love me . . .  love me .
.
•
 
will lo\'e me?" I could not take my eyes off her; I had never seen her 
before in such a mood of love and tenderness; it is true this, of course, 
was delirium, but . . .  noticing my passionate expression, she sud­
denly began smiling slyly; apropos of nothing she began suddenly 
talking of Mr. Astley. 
She talked incessantly of Mr. Astley, however (she talked of him 
particularly when she had been trying to tell me of something that 
evening), but wh:lt she mc:mt exactly I could not quite grasp; she 
seemed to be actually laughing at him. She repeated continually that 
he was waiting and that, did I know, he was certainly st:Inding under 
the window? 
"Yes, yes, under the window; come open it: look out : look out : he 
certainly is here! She pushed me to the window, but as soon as I made 
a movement to go she went off into peals of laughter and I remained 
with her, and she fell to embracing me. 
"Shall we go away ? shall we go away to-morrow?" The question 
suddenly came into her mind uneasily. "Well . . .  " (and she sank 
into thought.) "Well, shall we overtake Granny; what do you think? 
I think we might overtake her at Berlin. What do you think she will 
say when she sees us? And Mr. Astley? . . .  Well, he won't leap off 
the Schlangenberg-what do you think?" (She burst out laughing.) 
"Come, listen, do you know where he is going next summer? He 
wants to go to the North Pole for scientific investigations, and he has 

104 
The Short Novels of VostoevskY 
asked me to go with him, ha-ha-ha! He says that we Russians can do 
nothing without Europeans and are incapable of anything . . . .  But he 
is good-natured, too! Do you know he makes excuses for the General ? 
He says that Blanche . . .  that passion--oh, I don't know, I don't 
know," she repeated, as though she didn't know what she was talking 
about. "They are poor-how sorry I am for them, and Granny . . .  
Come, listen, listen, how could you kill De Grieux? And did you 
really imagine you could kill him? Oh, silly fellow! Can you really 
think I would let you fight with De Grieux? Why, you did not even 
kill the Baron," she added, suddenly laughing. "Oh, how funny you 
were then with the Baron. I looked at you both from the seat; and 
how unwilling you were to go then, when I sent you. How I laughed 
then, how I laughed," she added, laughing. 
And suddenly she kissed and embraced me again. Again she pressed 
her face to mine passionately and tenderly. I heard nothing and 
thought of nothing more. My head was in a whirl. . . .  
I think it was about seven o'clock in the morning when I woke 
up. The sun was shining into the room. Polina was sitting beside me 
and looking about her strangely, as though she were waking from 
some darkness and trying to collect her thoughts. She, too, had only 
just woken up and was gazing at the table and the money. My head 
ached and was heavy. I tried to take Polina by the hand: she pushed 
me away and j umped up from the sofa. The dawning day was over­
cast. Rain had fallen before sunrise. She went to the window, she 
opened it, put out her head and shoulders and with her face in her 
hands and her elbows on the window-sill, stayed for three minutes 
looking out without turning to me or hearing what I said to her. I 
wondered with dread what would happen now and how it would 
end. All at once she got up from the window, went up to the table 
and, looking at me with infinite hatred, with lips trembling with 
anger, she said to me-
"Well, give me my fifty thousand francs now?" 
"Polina, again, again?" I was beginning. 
"Or have you changed your mind ? Ha-ha-ha! Perhaps you regret 
it now." 
Twenty-five thousand florins, counted out the evening before, were 
lying on the table; I took the money and gave it to her. 
"It's mine now, isn't it? That's so, isn't it? Isn't it?" she asked me, 
spitefully holding the money in her hand. 
"Yes, it was always yours," I answered. 
"Well, there are your fifty thousand francs for you!" 

r he (/ambler 
105 
With a swing of her arm she flung the money at me. It hit me a 
stinging blow in the face and the coins flew all over the table. After 
doing this Polina ran out of the room. 
I know that at that moment she was certainly not in her right mind, 
though I don't understand such temporary insanity. It is true that she 
is still ill, even now, a month later. What was the cause of her condi­
tion, and, above all, of this whim? Was it wounded pride? Despair 
at having brought herself to come to me? Had I shown any sign of 
priding myself on my happiness, and did I, like De Grieux, want to 
get rid of her by giving her fifty thousand francs? But that was not 
so; I know that, on my conscience. I believe that her vanity was partly 
responsible; her vanity prompted her to distrust and insult me, 
although all that perhaps was not clear, even to herself. In that case, 
of course, I was punished for De Grieux and was made responsible, 
though I was not much to blame. It is true that all this was almost 
only delirium; it is true, too, that I knew she was in delirium and . . .  
did not take that fact into consideration; perhaps she cannot forgive 
me for that now. Yes, but that is now; but then, then ? Why, she was 
not in such a delirium and so ill then as to be utterly oblivious of what 
she was doing; when she came to me with De Grieux's letter she 
knew what she was doing. 
I made haste to thrust all my notes and my heap of gold into the 
bed, covered it over and went out ten minutes after Polina. I made sure 
she would run home, and I thought I would slip in to them on the 
sly, and in the hall ask the nurse how the young lady was. What 
was my astonishment when I learnt from Nurse, whom I met on the 
stairs, that Polina had not yet returned home and that Nurse was 
coming to me for her. 
"She only just left my room about ten minutes ago; where can she 
have gone?" 
Nurse looked at me reproachfully. 
And meanwhile it had caused a regular scandal, which by now was 
all over the hotel. In the porter's room and at the ober-kellner's it was 
whispered that Fraulein had run out of the hotel in the rain at six 
o'clock in the morning in the direction of the Hotel d'Angleterre. 
From what they said and hinted, I noticed that they all knew already 
that she had spent the night in my room. However, stories were being 
told of the whole family : it had become known all through the hotel 
that the General had gone out of his mind and was crying. The story 
was that Granny was his mother, who had come expressly from Russia 
to prevent her son's marriage with Mlle. de Cominges, and was Hoing 

106 
The Short N.ovels of 'Dostoevsky 
to cut him out of her will if he disobeyed her, and, as he certainly 
would disobey her, the Countess had purposely thrown away all her 
money at roulette before his eyes, so that he should get nothing. "Diese 
Russen!" repeated the ober-kellner, shaking his head indignantly. The 
others laughed. The ober-kellner was making out his bill. My winning 
was known about already. Karl, my corridor attendant, was the first 
to congratulate me. But I had no thought for any of them. I rushed to 
the Hotel d'Angleterre. 
It was early; Mr. Astley was seeing no one; learning that it was I, 
he came out into the corridor to me and stopped before me, turning 
his pewtery eyes upon me in silence, waiting to hear what I should say. 
I inquired about Polina. 
"She is ill," answered Mr. Astley, looking at me as fixedly as before. 
"Then she really is with you?" 
"Yes, she is." 
"Then, what do you . . .  do you mean to keep her?" 
"Yes." 
"Mr. Astley, it will make a scandal; it's impossible. Besides, she IS 
quite ill; perhaps you don't see it?" 
"Oh, yes, I notice it, and I've just told you she is ill. If she had not 
been ill she would not have spent the night with you." 
"Then you know that?" 
"Yes, I know it. She came here yesterday and I would haYe taken 
her to a relation of mine, but as she was ill, she made a mistake and 
went to you." 
"Fancy that! \Veil, I congratulate you, Mr. Astley. By the way, 
you've given me an idea : weren't you standing all night under our 
window? Miss Polina was making me open the window and look out 
all night to see whether you were standing under the window; she 
kept laughing about it." 
"Really? No, I didn't stand under the window; but I was waiting 
in the corridor and walking round." 
"But she must be looked after, Mr. Astley." 
"Oh, yes, I've sent for the doctor, and, if she dies, you will answer 
to me for her death." 
I was amazed. 
"Upon my word, Mr. Astley, what do you want?" 
"And is it true that you won two hundred thousand thalers yester­
day?" 
"Only a hundred thousand florins." 
"Well, do you see, you had better go off to Paris this morning!" 

The (iambler 
107 
"What for?" 
"All Russians who have money go to Paris," Mr. Astley explained, 
in a tone of voice as though he had read this in a book. 
"\Vhat could I do now in Paris, in the summer? I love her, Mr. 
Astley, you know it yourself." 
"Re::lly ? I am convinced you don't. If you remain here you will cer­
tainly lose all you have won and you will have nothing left to go to 
Paris with. But, good-bye, I am perfectly certain you will go to Paris 
to-day." 
"Very well, good-bye, only I sh::n't go to Paris. Think, Mr. Astley, 
what will be happening here? The Gener::l . . .  ::nd now this adven­
ture with Miss Polina-why, that will be all over the town." 
"Yes, all over the town; I believe the General is not thinking about 
that: he has no thoughts to spare for that. Besides, Miss Polina has a 
perfect right to live where she likes. In regard to thJ.t hmily, one may 
say quite correctly that the family no longer exists." 
I walked aw::y laughing at this Englishman's str::nge conviction that 
I WJ.S going to Paris. "He wants to shoot me in a duel, though," I 
thought, "if Mlle. Polina dies-what a complication!" I swear I was 
sorry for Polina, but, strange to say, from the very moment when I 
reached the gambling tables the previous evening and began winning 
a pile of money, my love had retreated, so to speak, into the back­
ground. I say this now; but J.t the time I did not re::lize all this clearly. 
Can I really be a gambler? Can I really . . .  have loved Polina so 
strangely? No, I love her to this day. God is my witness! And then, 
when I left Mr. Astley and went home, I was genuinely miserable and 
blaming myself. But . . .  at this point a very strange and silly thing 
happened to me. 
I \\'J.S hurrying to see the General, when suddenly not far from his 
rooms, a door wJ.s opened and some one called me. It was Madame Ia 
veuve Cominges, and she called me at the bidding of Mlle. Blanche. 
I went in to see Mlle. Blanche. 
They had a small suite of apartments, consisting of two rooms. I 
could hear Mlle. Blanche laugh and call out from the bedroom. 
She was getting up. 
"Ah, c'est lui! Viens done, betel Is it true, que tu as gagne zme mon-
tagne d'or et d'argent? f'aimerais mieux /'or." 
"Yes, I did win," I answered, laughing. 
"How much ?" 
"A hundred thousand florins." 

108 
The Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
"Bibi, comme tu es bete. Why, come in here. I can't hear anything. 
Nous ferons bombance, n'est-ce pas?" 
I went in to her. She was lying under a pink satin quilt, above 
which her robust, swarthy, wonderfully swarthy, shoulders were visi­
ble, shoulders such as one only sees in one's dreams, covered to some 
extent by a batiste nightgown bordered with white lace which was 
wonderfully becoming to her dark skin. 
"Mon fils, as-ttt dtt ca:ttr?" she cried, seeing me, and burst out laugh­
ing. She laughed very good-humouredly, and sometimes quite gen­
uinely. 
"Tout autre," I began, paraphrasing Corneille. 
"Here you see, vois-tu," she began babbling; "to begin with, find my 
stockings, help me to put them on; and then, si tu n'es pas trop bete, je 
te prends a Paris. You know I am just going." 
"Just going?" 
"In half an hour." 
All her things were indeed packed. All her portmanteaus and things 
were ready. Coffee had been served some time before. 
"Eiz bien, if you like, tu verras Paris. Dis done qzt'est-ce que c'est 
qu'ttn outclzitel? Tu etais bien bete, quand tu etais outchitel. \Vhere 
are my stockings? Put them on for me?" 
She thrust out some positively fascinating feet, little dark-skinned 
feet, not in the least misshapen, as feet that look so small in shoes always 
are. I laughed and began drawing her silk stockings on for her. Mean­
while Mlle. Blanche sat up in bed, prattling away. 
"Eh bien, que feras-tu, si je te prends avec? To begin with, I want 
fifty thousand francs. You'll give them to me at Frankfurt. Nous allons 
a Paris: there we'll play together : et je te ferai voir des eeoiles en plein 
jour. You will see women such as you have never seen before. 
Listen . . . " 
"Wait a minute, so if I give you fifty thousand francs, what will be 
left for me?" 
"Et cevt cinquante mille francs, you have forgotten: and what's 
more, I consent to live with you a month, two months : que sais-je! In 
those two months we shall certainly get through that hundred and 
fifty thousand francs, you see, je suis bonne enfant, and I tell you be­
forehand, mais tu verras des hoiles." 
"What! all in two months!" 
"Why! does that horrify you? Ah, vi/ esclave! But, do you know? 
one month of such a life is worth your whole existence. One month-

The (jambler 
109 
et apr΅s, /e deluge! Mais tu ne peux comprendre; val Go along, go 
along, you are not worth it! Aie, que fais-tu?" 
At that moment I was putting a stocking on the other leg, but could 
not resist kissing it. She pulled it away and began hitting me on the 
head with the tip of her foot. At last, she turned me out altogether. 
"Eh bien! mon outchitel, je t'attends, si tu veux; I am starting in a 
quarter of an hour!" she called after me. 
On returning home I felt as though my head were going round. 
Well, it was not my fault that Mlle. Polina had thrown the whole pile 
of money in my face, and had even yesterday preferred Mr. Astley to 
me. Some of the banknotes that had been scattered about were still 
lying on the floor; I picked them up. At that moment the door opened 
and the ober-kellner himself made his appearance (he had never 
deigned to look into my room before) with a suggestion that I might 
like to move downstairs to a magnificent suite of apartments which 
had just been vacated by Count V. 
I stood still and thought a little. 
"My bill-I am just leaving, in ten minutes," I cried. "If it's to be 
Paris, let it be Paris," I thought to myself; "it seems it was fated at my 
birth!" 
A quarter of an hour later we were actually sitting in a reserved 
compartment, Mlle. Blanche, Madame Ia veuve Cominges and I. Mlle. 
Blanche, looking at me, laughed till she was almost hysterical. Madame 
de Cominges followed suit; I cannot say that I felt cheerful. My 
life had broken in two, but since the previous day I had grown 
used to staking everything on a card. Perhaps it is really the truth that 
my sudden wealth was too much for me and had turned my head. 
Peut-hre, je ne demandais pas mieux. It seemed to me for a time-but 
only for a time, the scenes were shifted. "But in a month I shall be 
here, and then . . .  and then we will try our strength, Mr. Astley!" 
No, as I recall it now, I was awfully sad then, though I did laugh as 
loudly as that idiot, Blanche. 
"But what is the matter with you? How silly you are! Oh! how silly 
you are!" Blanche kept exclaiming, interrupting her laughter to scold 
me in earnest. "Oh well, oh well, we'll spend your two htmdred thaN­
sand francs: but in exchange mais tu seras hettreux com me un petit roi; 
I will tie your cravat myself and introduce you to Hortense. And when 
we have spent all our money, you will come back here and break the 
bank again. What did the Jews tell you? The great thing is-boldness, 
and you have it, and you will bring me money to Paris more than 

no 
The Short N.ovels of Dostoevsky 
once again. Quant a moi je veux cinquante mille francs de rentes et 
alors . . .  
" 
"And the General ?" I asked her. 
"\Vhy, the General, as you know, comes to see me every day with 
a bouquet. This time I purposely asked him to get me some very rare 
flowers. The poor fellow will come back and will find the bird has 
flown. He'll fly after us, you will see. Ha-ha-ha! I shall be awfully 
pleased to see him. He'll be of use to me in Paris; Mr. Astley will pay 
his bill here . . . .  " 
And so that was the way in which I went to Paris. 
Chapter 16 
WHAT shall I say about Paris? It was madness, of course, and 
foolery. I only spent a little over three weeks in Paris, and by the end 
of that time my hundred thousand francs was finished. I speak only 
of a hundred thousand. The other hundred thousand I gave to Mlle. 
Blanche in hard cash-fifty thousand at Frankfurt and three days later 
in Paris I gave her an I 0 U for another fifty thousand francs, though 
a week later she exchanged this for cash from me. "Et les cent mille 
francs, qui nous restent, tu les mangercu avec moi, mon outchitel." She 
always called me an outchitel, i.e., a tutor. It is difficult to imagine any­
thing in the world meaner, stingier and more niggardly than the class 
of creatures to which Mlle. Blanche belonged. But that was in the 
spending of her own money. As regards my hundred thousand francs, 
she openly informed me, later on, that she needed them to establish 
herself in Paris, "as now I am going to settle in decent style once for 
all, and now no one shall turn me aside for a long time; at least, that 
is my plan," she added. I hardly saw that hundred thousand, however; 
ohe kept the money the whole time, and in my purse, into which she 
looked every day, there was never more than a hundred francs, and 
always less and less. 
"What do you want money for?" she would say, sometimes, in the 
simplest way, and I did not dispute with her. But she furnished and 
decorated her flat very nicely with that money, and afterwards, when 
she took me to her new abode, as she showed me the rooms, she said: 
"You see what care and taste can do even with the scantiest means." 
These "scanty means" amounted to fifty thousand francs, however. 
With the second fifty thousand she provided herself with a carnage 

The (;ambler 
111 
and horses. Moreover, we gave two balls, that is, two evening parties 
at which were present Hortense, Lizette and Cleopatra, women re­
markable in very many respects and even quite good-looking. At those 
two evenings I had to play the very foolish part of host, to receive and 
entertain the stupidest rich tradesmen, incredibly ignorant and shame­
less, various army lieutenants and miserable little authors and jour­
nalistic insects, who appeared in the most fashionable swallow-tails 
and straw-coloured gloves, and displayed a vanity and affectation 
whose proportions were beyond anything conceivable in Petersburg­
and that is saying a great deal. Many of them thought fit to jeer at me; 
but I got drunk with champagne and lolled at full length in a back 
room. To me it was all loathsome to the last degree. 
"C'est un 
outchite/," Blanche kept saying about me, "il a gagne deux cent mille 
francs. \Vithout me he wouldn't have known how to spend it. And 
afterwards he will be an outclu'tel again; don't you know of a place for 
one? we ought to do something for him." 
I had recourse to champagne very often, because I was often sad and 
dreadfully bored. I lived in the most bourgeois, in the most mercenary 
surroundings in which every sou was reckoned and accounted for. 
Blanche disliked me for the first fortnight: I noticed that; it is true, she 
dressed me like a dandy, and tied my cravat for me every day, but in 
her soul she genuinely despised me. I did not pay the slightest attention 
to that. Bored and dispirited, I used to go usually to the Chateau de 
Fleurs, where regularly every evening I got drunk and practised the 
cancan (which they dance so disgustingly there), and acquired in the 
end a kind of celebrity. 
At last Blanche gauged my true character. She had for some reason 
conceived the idea that I should spend all the time we were together 
walking after her with a pencil and paper in my hand, and should 
always be reckoning how much she had spent, how much she had 
stolen, how much she would spend and how much more she would 
steal. And she was, of course, convinced that we should have a regular 
battle over every ten-franc piece. She had an answer in readiness for 
every attack that she anticipated from me; but when she found I did 
not attack her, she could not at first refrain from defending herself, 
unprovoked. Sometimes she would begin with great heat, but seeing 
that I remained silent as a rule, lying on a sofa gazing at the ceiling­
at last, she was surprised. At first she thought I was simply stupid, 
"un outchitel," and merely cut short her explanations, probably think­
ing to herself: "Why, he's a fool. There's no need to lay it on for him, 
since he doesn't understand." She would go away but come back again 

112 
7' he Short Novels of Vostoevsky 
ten minutes later (this happened at a time when she was spending 
most ferociously, spending on a scale quite out of proportion to our 
means : she had, for instance, got rid of the horses first bought and 
bought another pair for sixteen thousand francs). 
"Well, so you are not cross, bibi?" she said, coming up to me. 
"N-n-n-no! You weary me!" I said, removing her hands from 
me, but this seemed to her so curious, that she immediately sat down 
beside me. 
"You see, I only decided to pay so much because they could be sold 
later on if need be. They can be sold again for twenty thousand francs." 
"No doubt, no doubt; they are splendid horses, and you have a fine 
turnout now; it suits you; well, that's enough." 
"Then you are not cross?" 
"Why should I be? You are sensible to provide yourself with things 
that are necessary to you. All that will be of use to you afterwards. I 
see that it is quite necessary for you to establish yourself in such a style; 
otherwise you will never save up your million. Our h1.1ndred thousand 
francs is only a beginning; a drop in the ocean." 
Blanche had expected from me anything but such reflections (in­
stead of outcries and reproaches). She seemed to drop from the clouds. 
"So that's what you are like! Mais tu as /'esprit pour eompre1zdre. 
Sais-tu, mon garron, though you are an outclzitel you ought to have 
been born a prince. So you don't grudge the money's going so quickly?" 
"Bother the money! The quicker the better!" 
"Mais sais-ttt . . .  mais dis done, are you rich? Mais sais-tu, you really 
despise money too much. Qu'est ee que tu feras apres, dis done?" 
"Apres, I shall go to Homburg and win another hundred thousand 
francs." 
"Otti, oui, e'est ra, e'est magnifique! And I know you will certainly 
win it and bring it here. Dis done, why you will make me really love 
you. Eh bien, I will love you all the time for being like that, and won't 
once be unfaithful to you. You see, I have not loved you all this time, 
pareeque je croyais que tu n'hais qu 'rm outehitel (que/que chose 
eomme un laquais, n'est'e pas?), but I have been faithful to you all the 
same, pareeque je sttis boTZne fille." 
"Come, you are lying! How about Albert, that swarthy-faced little 
officer; do you suppose I didn't see last time?" 
"Oh, oh, mais ttt es . . .  
" 
"Come, you are lying, you are lying; why, do you suppose I should 
be angry? Why, it's no matter; il /aut que Ia jeunesse se passe. And 

T lze (jambler 
1 13 
there's no need for you to send him away if you had him before me 
and are fond of him. Only don't give him money, do you hear?" 
"So you are not angry about it? Mais tu es tm vrai philosophe, sais-tu? 
Un vrai philosophe!" she cried enthusiastically. 
"Eh bien! je t'aimerai, je t'aimerai-tu verras, ttt seras content!" 
And from that time she really did seem to be attached to me, to be 
really affectionate; and so our last ten days passed. The "stars" promised 
me I did not see. But in some respects she really did keep her word. 
What is more, she introduced me to Hortense, who really was a re­
markable woman in her own way, and in our circle was called 
Therese philosophe . . . .  
However, there is no need to enlarge upon that; all that might make 
a separate story, in a different tone, which I do not want to introduce 
into this story. The fact is, I longed above everything for all this 
episode to be over. But our hundred thousand francs lasted, as I have 
mentioned already, almost a month-at which I was genuinely sur­
prised ; eighty thousand of that, at least, Blanche spent on things for 
herself, and we lived on no more than twenty thousand francs, and­
yet it was enough. Blanche, who was in the end almost open with me 
(or, at any rate, did not lie to me about some things), declared that, 
anyway, the debts she had been obliged to make would not fall upon 
me: "I have never given you bills or I 0 U's to sign," she said, "because 
I was sorry for you; but any other girl would have certainly done it 
and got you into prison. You see, you see how I loved you and how 
good I am! Think of what that devil of a wedding alone is going to 
cost me!" 
We really were going to have a wedding. It took place at the very 
end of my month, and it may be assumed that the last remains of my 
hundred thousand francs went upon it; that was how the thing ended; 
that is, my month ended with that, and after it I received my formal 
dismissal. 
This was how it happened: a week after our arrival in Paris the 
General suddenly turned up. He came straight to Blanche, and from 
his first call almost lived with us. He had a lodging of his own, it is 
true. Blanche received him joyfully, with shrieks of laughter, and even 
flew to embrace him; as things had turned out, she was unwilling to 
let him go: and he had to follow her about everywhere, on the boule­
vards, and to the theatres, and to call on her acquaintances, and to take 
her for drives. The General was still of use for such purposes; he was 
of rather imposing and decorous appearance-he was above the aver­
age in height, with dyed whiskers and moustaches (he had once served 

114 
'[he Short Novels of 'DostoevskY 
in the Cuirassiers) ; he was still presentable-looking, though his face 
was puffy. His manners were superb; he looked well in evening dress. 
In Paris he began wearing his decorations. The promenade on the 
boulevard with a man like this was not only possible, but advantageous. 
The good-natured and senseless General was immensely delighted with 
all this; he had not reckoned upon it at all when he came to see us on 
arriving in Paris. He had come, then, almost trembling with terror; he 
was afraid that Blanche would make an uproar and order him to be 
turned out; and so he was highly delighted at the changed aspect of 
the position, and spent the whole month in a sort of senseless rapture: 
and he was in the same state when I left him. I learnt that on the 
morning of our sudden departure from Roulettenburg he had had 
some sort of a fit. He had fallen insensible, and had been all that week 
almost like a madman, talking incessantly. He was being nursed and 
doctored, but he suddenly threw up everything, got into the train and 
flew off to Paris. Of course, Blanche's reception was the best cure for 
him; but the traces of his illness remained long after, in spite of his joy 
and his enthusiastic condition. He was utterly incapable of reflection 
or even of carrying on a· conversation on any serious subject; when any 
such topic was brought forward, he confined himself to nodding his 
head and ejaculating, "H'm!" at every word. He often laughed, but it 
was a nervous, sickly laugh, as though he were giggling; another time 
he would sit for hours looking as black as night, knitting his bushy 
brows. Of many things he had no recollection whatever; he had be­
come absent-minded to an unseemly degree, and had acquired the 
habit of talking to himself. Blanche was the only person who could 
rouse him; and, indeed, his attacks of gloom and depression, when he 
hid himself in a corner, meant nothing but that he hadn't seen Blanche 
for a long time, or that Blanche had gone ofi somewhere without 
taking him, or had not been nice to him before going. At the same 
time he could not say what he wanted, and did not know why he was 
depressed and miserable. After sitting for two or three hours (I noticed 
this on two or three occasions when Blanche had gone out for the 
whole day, probably to see Albert), he would suddenly begin to look 
about him in a nervous fluster, to stare round, to recollect himself, and 
seem to be looking for something; but seeing no one and not remem­
bering the question he meant to ask, he sank into forgetfulness again 
till Blanche reappeared, gay, frisky, gorgeously dressed, with her ring­
ing laugh; she would run up to him, begin teasing him, and even 
kissing him-a favour which she did not often, however, bestow upon 

The (;ambler 
115 
him. Once the General was so delighted to see her that he even burst 
into tears-1 really marvelled at him. 
From the very first, Blanche began to plead his cause before me. 
Indeed, she waxed eloquent in his behalf; reminded me that she had 
betrayed the General for my sake, that she was almost engaged to him, 
had given him her word ; that he had abandoned his family on her 
account, and, lastly, that I had been in his service and ought to re­
member that, and that I ought to be ashamed . . . .  I said nothing while 
she rattled away at a terrific pace. At last I laughed : and with that the 
matter ended, that is, at first, she thought I was a fool : and at last came 
to the conclusion that I was a very nice and accommodating man. In 
fact, I had the good fortune to win in the end the complete approval of 
that excellent young woman. (Blanche really was, though, a very 
good-natured girl-in her own way, of course; I had not such a high 
opinion of her at first.) "You're a kind and clever man," she used to 
say to me towards the end, "and . . . and . . .  it's only a pity you are 
such a fool! You never, never, save anything!" 
"Un vrai russe, un calmoul(!" Several times she sent me to take the 
General for a walk about the streets, exactly as she might send her 
lapdog out with her footman. I took him, however, to the theatre, and 
to the Bal-Mabille, and to the restaurants. Blanche gave me the money 
for this, though the General had some of his own, and he was very 
fond of taking out his pocket-book before people. But I had almost to 
use force to prevent him from buying a brooch for seven hundred 
francs, by which he was fascinated in the Palais Royal and of which 
he wanted, at all costs, to make Blanche a present. But what was a 
brooch of seven hundred francs to her? The General hadn't more than 
a thousand francs altogether. I could never find out where he had got 
that money from. I imagine it was from Mr. Astley, especially as the 
latter had paid their bill at the hotel. As for the General's attitude to 
me all this time, I believe that he did not even guess at my relations 
with Blanche. Though he had heard vaguely that I had won a fortune, 
yet he probably supposed that I was with Blanche in the capacity of a 
private secretary or even a servant. Anyway, he always, as before, spoke 
to me condescendingly, authoritatively, and even sometimes fell to 
scolding me. One morning he amused Blanche and me immensely at 
breakfast. He was not at all ready to take offence, but suddenly he was 
huffy with me-why?-1 don't know to this day. No doubt he did not 
know himself. In fact, he made a speech without a beginning or an 
end, a batons rompus, shouted that I was an impudent boy, that he 
would give me a lesson . . .  that he would let me know it . . . and so 

1 16 
The Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
on. But no one could make out anything from it. Blanche went off into 
peals of laughter. At last he was somehow appeased and taken out for 
a walk. I noticed sometimes, however, that he grew sad, that he was 
regretting some one and something, he was missing something, in 
spite of Blanche's presence. On two such occasions he began talking 
to me of himself, but could not express himself clearly, alluded to his 
times in the army, to his deceased wife, to his family affairs, to his 
property. He would stumble upon some phrase-and was delighted 
with it and would repeat it a hundred times a day, though perhaps it 
expressed neither his feelings nor his thoughts. I tried to talk to him 
about his children : but he turned off the subject with incoherent 
babble, and passed hurriedly to another topic: "Yes, yes, my children, 
you are right, my children!" Only once he grew sentimental-we were 
with him at the theatre: "Those unhappy children!" he began sud­
denly. "Yes, sir, those un-happy children!" And several times after­
wards that evening he repeated the same words: "unhappy children!" 
Once, when I began to speak of Polina, he flew into a frenzy. "She's 
an ungrateful girl," he cried. "She's wicked and ungrateful! She has 
disgraced her family. If there were laws here I would make her mind 
her p's and q's. Yes, indeed, yes, indeed!" As for De Grieux, he could 
not bear even to hear his name: "He has been the ruin of me," he 
would say, "he has robbed me, he has destroyed me! He has been my 
nightmare for the last two years! He has haunted my dreams for 
whole months! It's, it's, it's . . .  Oh, never speak to me of him!" 
I saw there was an understanding between them, but, as usual, I 
said nothing. Blanche announced the news to me, first-it was just a 
week before we parted: "ll a du cl!ance," she babbled. "Granny really 
is ill this time, and certainly will die. Mr. Astley has sent a telegram. 
You must admit that the General is her heir, anyway, and even if he 
were not, he would not interfere with me in anything. In the first 
place, he has his pension, and in the second place, he will live in a 
back room and will be perfectly happy. I shall be 'Madame Ia Ge­
nerale.' I shall get into a good set" (Blanche was continually dreaming 
of this), "in the end I shall be a Russian landowner, j'aurai ttn chateau, 
des moujiks, et puis j'aurai toujours mon million." 
"Well, what if he begins to be jealous, begins to insist .
•
.
 on good­
ness knows what-do you understand?" 
"Oh, no, non, non, non! How dare he! I have taken precautions, 
you needn't be afraid. I have even made him sign some I 0 U's for 
Albert. The least thing-and he will be arrested; and he won't dare!" 
"Well, marry him . . • .  
" 

The (;ambler 
1 17 
The marriage was celebrated without any great pomp; it was a quiet 
family affair. Albert was invited and a few other intimate friends. 
Hortense, Cleopatra and company were studiously excluded. The 
bridegroom was extremely interested in his position. Blanche herself 
tied his cravat with her own hands, and pomaded his head : and in his 
swallow-tailed coat with his white tie he looked tres comme il faut. 
"Il est pourtant tres comme il faut," Blanche herself observed to me, 
coming out of the General's room, as though the idea that the General 
was tres comme il faut was a surprise even to her. Though I assisted 
at the whole affair as an idle spectator, yet I took so little interest in 
the details that I have to a great extent forgotten the course of events. 
I only remember that Blanche turned out not to be called "De 
Cominges," and her mamma not to be Ia veuve "Cominges," but "Du 
Placet." Why they had been both "De Cominges" till then, I don't 
know. But the General remained very much pleased with that, and 
"Du Placet" pleased him, in fact, better than "De Cominges." On the 
morning of the wedding, fully dressed for the part, he kept walking 
to and fro in the drawing-room, repeating to himself with a grave and 
important air, "Mlle. 13lanche du Placet! Blanche du Placet, du Placet!" 
. . .  and his countenance beamed with a certain complacency. At 
church, before the maire, and at the wedding breakfast at home, he 
was not only joyful but proud. There was a change in both of them. 
Blanche, too, had an air of peculiar dignity. 
"I shall have to behave myself quite differently now," she said to 
me, perfectly seriously : "mais vois-tu, I never thought of one very 
horrid thing: I even fancy, to this day, I can't learn my surname. 
Zagoryansky, Zagozyansky, Madame Ia Generale de Sago-Sago, ces 
diables de noms russes, enfin madame Ia generale a quatorze con­
sonnes! Comme c'est agreable, n'est-ce pas?" 
At last we parted, and Blanche, that silly Blanche, positively shed 
tears when she said good-bye to me. "Ttt etais bon enfant," she said, 
whimpering. "Je te croyais bete et tu en avais /'air, but it suits you." 
And, pressing my hand at parting, she suddenly cried, "Attends!" 
rushed to her boudoir and, two minutes later, brought me a banknote 
for two thousand francs. That I should never have believed possible! 
"It may be of use to you. You may be a very learned outchitel, but you 
are an awfully stupid man. I am not going to give you more than two 
thousand, for you'll lose it gambling, anyway. Well, good-bye! Nous 
serons toujours bon amis, and if you win, be sure to come to me again, 
et ttt seras lleureux!" 
I had five hundred francs left of my own. I had besides a splendid 

118 
·[Jlr: Short 'N.ovels of 'Dostoevsky 
watch that cost a thousand francs, some diamond studs, and so on, so 
that I could go on a good time longer without anxiety. I am staying 
in this little town on purpose to collect myself, and, above all, I am 
waiting for Mr. Astley. I have learnt for a fact that he will pass through 
the town and stay here for twenty-four hours on business. I shall find 
out about everything; and then-then I shall go straight to Homburg. 
I am not going to Roulettenburg; not till next year anԶway. They say 
it is a bad omen to try your luck twice running at the same tables; 
and Homburg is the real place for play. 
Chapter 17 
IT IS a year and eight months since I looked at these notes, and 
only now in sadness and dejection it has occurred to me to read them 
through. So I stopped then at my going to Homburg. My God! With 
what a light heart, comparatively speaking, I wrote those last lines! 
Though not with a light heart exactly, but with a sort of self-confi­
dence, with undaunted hopes! Had I any doubt of myself? And now 
more than a year and a half has passed, and I am, to my own mind, 
far worse than a beggar! Yes, what is being a beggar? A beggar is 
nothing! I have simply ruined myself! However, there is nothing I 
can compare myself with, and there is no need to give myself a moral 
lecture! Nothing could be stupider than moral reflections at this date! 
Oh, self-satisfied people, with what proud satisfaction these prattlers 
prepare to deliver their lectures! If only they knew how thoroughly 
I understand the loathsomeness of my present position, they would not 
be able to bring their tongues to reprimand me. \Vhy, what, what can 
they tell me that I do not know? And is that the point? The point is 
that-one turn of the wheel, and all will be changed, and those very 
moralists will be the first (I am convinced of that) to come up to 
congratulate me with friendly jests. And they will not all turn away 
from me as they do now. But, h::mg them all! \Vh:1t am I now? Zero. 
What may I be to-morrow? To-morrow I may rise from the dead and 
begin to live again! There are still the makings of a m::m in me. 
I did, in hct, go to Homburg then, but . . .  afterwards I went to 
Roulettenburg again, and to Spa. I have eYen been in Baden, where 
I went as valet to the councillor Gintse, a scoundrel, who was my 
master here. Yes, I was a lackey for five whole months! I got a place 
immediately after coming out of prison. (I was sent to prison in Rou-

T lze (Jam bier 
119 
leuenburg for a debt I made here.) Some one, I don't know who, paid 
my debt-who was it? Was it Mr. Astley? Polina? I don't know, but 
the debt was paid; two hundred thalers in all, and I was set free. \Vhat 
could I do? I entered the service of this Gintse. He is a young man 
and frivolous, he liked to be idle, and I could read and write in three 
languages. At first I went into his service as a sort of secretary at thirty 
guldens a month; but I ended by becoming a regular valet: he had not 
the means to keep a secretary; and he lowered my wages; I had no­
where to go, I remained-and in that way became a lackey by my own 
doing. I had not enough to eat or to drink in his service, but on the 
other hand, in five months I saved up seventy gulden. One evening in 
Baden, however, I announced to him that I intended parting from 
him; the same evening I went to roulette. Oh, how my heart beat! No, 
it was not money that I wanted. All that I wanted then was that next 
day all these Gintses, all these ober-kellners, all these magnificent 
Baden ladies-that they might be all talking about me, repeating my 
story, wondering at me, admiring me, praising me, and doing homage 
to my new success. All these are childish dreams and desires, but •
•
.
 
who knows, perhaps I should meet Polina again, too, I should tell her, 
and she would see that I was above all these stupid ups and downs of 
fate . . . .  Oh, it was not money that was dear to me! I knew I should 
Aing it away to some Blanche again and should drive in Paris again 
for three weeks with a pair of my own horses, costing sixteen thousand 
francs. I know for certain that I am not mean; I believe that I am not 
even a spendthrift-and yet with what a tremor, with what a thrill 
at my heart, I hear the croupier's cry: trente-et-un, rouge, impair et 
passe, or: quatre, noir, pair et manque! With what avidity I look at the 
gambling table on which louis d'or, friedrichs d'or and thalers lie 
scattered: on the piles of gold when they are scattered from the 
croupier's shovel like glowing embers, or at the piles of silver a yard 
high that lie round the wheel. Even on my way to the gambling hall, 
as soon as I hear, two rooms away, the clink of the scattered money 
I almost go into convulsions. 
Oh! that evening, when I took my seventy gulden to the gambling 
table, was remarkable too. I began with ten gulden, staking them 
again on passe. I have a prejudice in favour of passe. I lost. I had sixty 
gulden left in silver money; I thought a little and chose zero. I began 
staking five gulden at a time on zero; at the third turn the wheel 
stopped at zero; I almost died of joy when I received one hundred and 
seventy-five gulden; I had not been so delighted when I won a hundred 
thousand gulden. I immediately staked a hundred gulden on rouge-

120 
The Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
it won; the two hundred on rouge-it won; the whole of the four 
hundred on nair-it won; the whole eight hundred on manqtte-it 
won; altogether with what I had before it made one thousand seven 
hundred gulden and that-in less than five minutes! Yes, at moments 
like that one forgets all one's former failures! Why, I had gained this 
by risking more than life itself, I dared to risk it, and-there I was 
again, a man among men. 
I took a room at the hotel, locked myself in and sat till three o'clock 
counting over my money. In the morning I woke up, no longer a 
lackey. I determined the same day to go to Homburg: I had not been 
a lackey or been in prison there. Half an hour before my train left, I 
set off to stake on two hazards, no more, and lost fifteen hundred 
florins. Yet I went to Homburg all the same, and I have been here 
for a month . . . .  
I am living, of course, in continual anxiety. I play for the tiniest 
stakes, and I keep waiting for something, calculating, standing for 
whole days at the gambling table and watching the play; I even dream 
of playing-but I feel that in all this, I have, as it were, grown stiff 
and wooden, as though I had sunk into a muddy swamp. I gather this 
from my feeling when I met Mr. Astley. \Ve had not seen each other 
since that time, and we met by accident. This was how it happened: 
I was walking in the gardens and reckoning that now I was almost 
without money, but that I had fifty gulden-and that I had, moreover, 
three days before paid all I owed at the hotel. And so it was possible 
for me to go once more to roulette-if I were to win anything, I might 
be able to go on playing; if I lost I should have to get a lackey's place 
again, if I did not come across Russians in want of a tutor. Absorbed 
in these thoughts, I went my daily walk, across the park and the forest 
in the adjoining principality. 
Sometimes I used to walk like this for four hours at a time, and go 
back to Homburg hungry and tired. I had scarcely gone out of the 
gardens into the park, when suddenly I 'saw on one of the seats Mr. 
Astley. He saw me before I saw him, and called to me. I sat down 
beside him. Detecting in him a certain dignity of manner, I instantly 
moderated my delight; though I was awfully delighted to see him. 
"And so you are here! I thought I should meet you," he said to me. 
"Don't trouble yourself to tell me your story; I know, I know all about 
it; I know every detail of your life during this last year and eight 
months." 
"Bah! What a watch you keep on your old friends!" I answered. 
"It is very creditable in you not to forget. . . .  Stay, though, you have 

T lze (jambler 
121 
given me an idea. \Vasn't it you bought me out of prison at Rouletten­
burg where I was imprisoned for debt for two hundred gulden ? Some 
unknown person paid it for me." 
"No, oh, no; it was not I who bought you out when you were in 
prison at Roulettenburg for a debt of two hundred gulden. But I knew 
that you were imprisoned for a debt of two hundred gulden." 
"Then you know who did pay my debt?" 
"Oh, no, I can't say that I know who bought you out." 
"Strange; I don't know any of our Russians; besides, the Russians 
here, I imagine, would not do it; at home in Russia the Orthodox may 
buy out other Orthodox Christians. I thought it must have been some 
eccentric Englishman who did it as a freak." 
Mr. Astley listened to me with some surprise. I believe he had 
expected to find me dejected and crushed. 
"I am very glad, however, to find that you have quite maintained 
your independence of spirit and even your cheerfulness," he pro­
nounced, with a rather disagreeable air. 
"That is, you are chafing inwardly with vexation at my not being 
crushed and humiliated," I said, laughing. 
He did not at once understand, but when he understood, he smiled. 
"I like your observations: I recognize in those words my clever, 
enthusiastic and, at the same time, cynical old friend; only Russians 
can combine in themselves so many opposites at the same time. It is 
true, a man likes to see even his best friend humiliated ; a great part 
of friendship rests on humiliation. But in the present case I assure you 
that I am genuinely glad that you are not dejected. Tell me, do you 
intend to give up gambling?" 
"Oh, damn! I shall give it up at once as soon as I . . .  " 
"As soon as you have won back what you have lost! Just what I 
thought; you needn't say any more-l know-you have spoken un­
awares, and so you have spoken the truth. Tell me, have you any 
occupation except gambling?" 
"No, none . . . .  " 
He began cross-examining me. I knew nothing. I scarcely looked 
into the newspapers, and had literally not opened a single book all that 
time. 
"You've grown rusty," he observed. "You have not only given up 
life, all your interests, private and public, the duties of a man and a 
citizen, your friends (and you really had friends )-you have not only 
given up your objects, such as they were, all but gambling-you have 
even given up your memories. I remember you at an intense and 

122 
'The Short Novels of 7Jostoevsky 
ardent moment of your life; but I am sure you have forgotten all the 
best feelings you had then; your dreams, your most genuine desires 
now do not rise above pair, impair, rouge, noir, the twelve middle 
numbers, and so on, I am sure!" 
"Enough, Mr. Astley, please, please don't remind me," I cried with 
vexation, almost with anger, "let me tell you, I've forgotten absolutely 
nothing; but I've only for a time put everything out of my mind, even 
my memories, until I can make a radical improvement in my circum­
stances; then . . . then you will see, I shall rise again from the dead!" 
"You will be here still in ten years' time," he said. "I bet you I shall 
remind you of this on this very seat, if I'm alive." 
"\Vell, that's enough," I interrupted impatiently; "and to prove to 
you that I am not so forgetful of the past, let me ask: where is Miss 
Polina now ? If it was not you who got me out of prison, it must have 
been her doing. I have had no news of her of any sort since that time." 
"Ko, oh no, I don't believe she did buy you out. She's in Switzerland 
now, and you'll do me a great favour if you leave off asking about 
Miss Polina," he said resolutely, and even with some anger. 
"That means that she has wounded you very much!" I laughed 
with displeasure. 
"i\fiss Polina is of all people deserving of respect the very best, but 
I repeat-you will do me a great favour if you cease questioning me 
concerning Miss Polina. You never knew her : and her name on your 
lips I regard as an insult to my moral feelings." 
"You don't say so! you are wrong, however; besides, what have I to 
talk to you about except that, tell me that? Why, all our memories 
really amount to that! Don't be uneasy, though; I don't want to know 
your private secret affairs . . . .  I am only interested, so to say, in Miss 
Polina's external affairs. That you could tell me in a couple of words." 
"Certainly, on condition that with those two words all is over. Miss 
Polina was ill for a long time; she's ill even now. For some time she 
stayed with my mother and sister in the north of England. Six months 
ago, her grandmother-you remember that madwoman ?-died and 
left her, personally, a fortune of seven thousand pounds. At the present 
time Miss Polina is travelling with the family of my married sister. 
Her little brother and sister, too, were provided for by their grand­
mother's will, and are at school in London. The General, her step­
father, died a month ago in Paris of a stroke. Mlle. Blanche treated 
him well, but succeeded in getting possession of all he received from 
the grandmother . . . .  I believe that's all." 
"And De Grieux? Is not he travelling in Switzerland, too?" 

The Qambler 
123 
"No, De Grieux is not travelling in Switzerland: and I don't know 
where De Grieux is; besides, once for all, I warn you to avoid such 
insinuations and ungentlemanly coupling of names, or you will cer­
tainly have to answer for it to me." 
"What! in spite of our friendly relations in the past?" 
"Yes, in spite of our friendly relations in the past." 
"I beg a thousand pardons, Mr. Astley. But allow me, though: there 
is nothing insulting or ungentlemanly about it; I am not blaming Miss 
Polina for anything. Besides-a Frenchman and a Russian young lady, 
speaking generally-it's a combination, Mr. Astley, which is beyond 
your or my explaining or fully comprehending." 
"If you will not mention the name of De Grieux in company with 
another name, I should like you to explain what you mean by the 
expression of 'the Frenchman and the Russian young lady.' \Vhat do 
you mean by that 'combination'? Why the Frenchman exactly and 
why the Russian young lady?" 
"You see you are interested. But that's a long story, Mr. Astley. You 
need to understand many things first. But it is an important question, 
however absurd it may seem at first sight. The Frenchman, Mr. Astley, 
is the product of a finished beautiful tradition. You, as a Briton, may 
not agree with this; I, as a Russian, do not either, from envy maybe; 
but our young ladies may be of a different opinion. You may think 
Racine artificial, affected and perfumed; probably you won't even read 
him. I, too, think him artificial, affected and perfumed-from one point 
of view e\'en absurd; but he is charming, Mr. Astley, and, what is 
more, he is a great poet, whether we like it or not. The national type 
of Frenchman, or, rather, of Parisian, had been moulded into elegant 
forms while we were still bears. The revolution inherited the tradi­
tions of the aristocracy. Now even the vulgarest Frenchman has man­
ners, modes of address, expressions and even thoughts, of perfectly 
elegant form, though his own initiative, his own soul and heart, have 
had no part in the creation of that form ; it has all come to him through 
inheritance. Well, Mr. Astley, I must inform you now that there is not 
a creature on the earth more confiding, and more candid, than a good, 
clean and not too sophisticated Russian girl. De Grieux, appearing in a 
peculiar role, masquerading, can conquer her heart with extraordinary 
ease; he has elegance of form, Mr. Astley, and the young lady takes 
this form for his individual soul, as the natural form of his soul and his 
heart, and not as an external garment, which has come to him by 
inheritance. Though it will greatly displease you, I must tell you that 
Englishmen are for the most part awkward and inelegant, and Rus-

124 
The Short N.ot1cls of Vostoct1sky 
sians are rather quick to detect beauty, and are eager for it. But to 
detect beauty of soul and originality of character needs incomparably 
more independence and freedom than is to be found in our women, 
above all in our young ladies-and of course ever so much .more ex­
perience. Miss Polina-forgive me, the word is spoken and one can't 
take it back-needs a long, long time to bring herself to prefer you 
to the scoundrel De Grieux. She thinks highly of you, becomes your 
friend, opens all her heart to you; but yet the hateful scoundrel, the 
base and petty money-grubber, De Grieux, will still dominate her heart. 
Mere obstinacy and vanity, so to say, will maintain his supremacy, 
because at one time this De Grieux appeared to her with the halo of 
an elegant marquis, a disillusioned liberal, who is supposed to have 
ruined himself to help her family and her frivolous stepfather. All these 
shams have been discovered later on. But the fact that they have been 
discovered makes no difference: anyway, what she wants is the orig­
inal De Grieux-that's what she wants! And the more she hates the 
present De Grieux the more she pines for the original one, though he 
existed only in her imagination. You are a sugar-boiler, Mr. Astley." 
"Yes, I am a partner in the well-known firm, Love! & Co." 
"Well, you see, Mr. Astley, on one side-a sugar-boiler, and on the 
other-Apollo Belvedere; it is somewhat incongruous. And I am not 
even a sugar-boiler; I am simply a paltry gambler at roulette, and have 
even been a lackey, which I think Miss Polina knows very well, as I 
fancy she has good detectives." 
"You are exasperated, and that is why you talk all this nonsense," 
Mr. Astley said coolly, after a moment's thought. "Besides, there is 
nothing original in what you say." 
"I admit that! But the awful thing is, my noble friend, that however 
stale, however hackneyed, however farcical my statements may be­
they are nevertheless true! Anyway, you and I have made no way 
at all!" 
"That's disgusting nonsense . . .  because, because . . .  let me tell you!" 
Mr. Astley, with flashing eyes, pronounced in a quivering voice, "let 
me tell you, you ungrateful, unworthy, shallow and unhappy man, that 
I am come to Homburg expressly at her wish, to see you, to have a 
long and open conversation with you and to tell her everything-what 
you are feeling, thinking, hoping, and . . .  what you rememberi" 
"Is it possible? Is it possible?" I cried, and tears rushed in streams 
from my eyes. 
I could not restrain them. I believe it was the first time it happened 
in my life. 

'l he (jambler 
125 
"Yes, unhappy man, she loved you, and I can tell you that, because 
you are-a lost man! What is more, if I were to tell you that she loves 
you to this day-you would stay here just the same! Yes, you have 
destroyed yourself. You had some abilities, a lively disposition, and 
were not a bad fellow; you might have even been of service to your 
country, which is in such need of men, but-you will remain here, 
and your life is over. I don't blame you. To my mind all Russians are 
like that, or disposed to be like that. If it is not roulette it is something 
similar. The exceptions are very rare. You are not the first who does 
not understand the meaning of work (I am not talking of your peas­
antry). Roulette is a game pre-eminently for the Russians. So far 
you've been honest and preferred serving as a lackey to stealing . . . .  
But I dread to think what may come in the future. Enough, good-bye! 
No doubt you are in want of money? Here are ten louis d'or from me. 
I won't give you more, for you'll gamble it away in any case. Take it 
and good-bye! Take it!" 
"No, Mr. Astley, after all you have said." 
"Ta-ake it!" he cried. "I believe that you are still an honourable 
man, and I give it as a true friend gives to another friend. If I were sure 
that you would throw up gambling, leave Homburg and would return 
to your own country, I would be ready to give you at once a thousand 
pounds to begin a new career. But I don't give you a thousand pounds: 
I give you only ten louis d'or just because a thousand pounds and ten 
louis d'or are just the same to you now; it's all the same-you'll gam­
ble it away. Take it and good-bye." 
"I will take it if you will let me embrace you at parting." 
"Oh, with pleasure!" 
We embraced with sincere feeling, and Mr. Astley went away. 
No, he is wrong! If I was crude and silly about Polina and De 
Grieux, he was crude and hasty about Russians. I say nothing of 
myself. However . . .  however, all that is not the point for the time: 
that is all words, words, and words, deeds are what are wanted! Swit­
zerland is the great thing now! To-morrow . . .  Oh, if only it were 
possible to set off to-morrow! To begin anew, to rise again. I must 
show them . . . .  Let Polina know that I still can be a man. I have only 
to . . .  But now it's too late-but to-morrow . . .  oh, I have a presenti­
ment and it cannot fail to be! I have now fifteen louis d'or, and I have 
begun with fifteen gulden! If one begins carefully .
•
.
 and can I, can 
I be such a baby! Can I fail to understand that I am a lost man, but­
can I not rise again! Yes! I have only for once in my life to be prudent 
and patient and-that is all! I have only for once to show will power 

126 
The Short Notels of 'Dostoet1sky 
and in one hour I can transform my destiny! The great thing is will 
power. Only remember what happened to me seven months ago at 
Roulettenburg just before my final failure. Oh! it was a remark­
able instance of determination: I had lost everything then, everything . 
• . . I was going out of the Casino, I looked, there was still one gulden 
in my waistcoat pocket: "Then I shall have something for dinner," 
I thought. But after I had gone a hundred paces I changed my mind 
and went back. I staked that gulden on manque (that time it was on 
manque), and there really is something peculiar in the feeling when, 
alone in a strange land, far from home and from friends, not knowing 
whether you will have anything to eat that day-you stake your last 
gulden, your very last! I won, and twenty minutes later I went out of 
the Casino, having a hundred and seventy gulden in my pocket. That's 
a fact! That's what the last gulden can sometimes do! And what if I 
had lost heart then? What if I had not dared to risk it? .
.
•
 
To-morrow, to-morrow it will all be over! 

$otes from 
Underground 


Part l 
2OTES FROM 
UNDERc;JROUNDl 
UNDERGROUND 
I AM a sick man .
.
.
.
 I am a spiteful man. I am an unattractive 
man. I believe my liver is diseased. However, I know nothing at all 
about my disease, and do not know for certain what ails me. I don't 
consult a doctor for it, and never have, though I have a respect for 
medicine and doctors. Besides, I am extremely superstitious, sufficiently 
so to respect medicine, anyway (I am well-educated enough not to.be 
superstitious, but I am superstitious). No, I refuse to consult a doctor 
from spite. That you probably will not understand. Well, I understand 
it, though. Of course, I can't explain who it is precisely that I am 
mortifying in this case by my spite : I am perfectly well aware that I 
cannot "pay out" the doctors by not consulting them; I know better 
than any one that by all this I am only injuring myself and no one else. 
But still, if I don't consult a doctor it is from spite. My liver is bad, well 
-let it get worse! 
I have been going on like that for a long time-twenty years. Now 
I am forty. I used to be in the government service, but am no longer. 
I was a spiteful official. I was rude and took pleasure in being so. I did 
1 The author of the diary and the diary itself are, of course, imaginary. Neverthe­
less it is clear that such persons as the writer of these notes not only may, but 
positively must, exist in our society, when we consider the circumstances in the 
midst of which our society is formed. I have tried to expose to the view of the 
public more distinctly than is commonly done one of the characters of the recent 
past. He is one of the representatives of a generation still living. In this fragment, 
entitled '"Underground," this person introduces himself and his views, and, as it 
were, tries to explain the causes owing to which he has made his appearance and 
was bound to make his appearance in our midst. In the second fragment there are 
added the actual notes of this person concerning certain events in his life.­
AUTHOR's .1:\'0TE 
129 

uo 
'!he Short Novels of VostoevskY 
not take bribes, you see, so I was bound to find a recompense in that, 
at least. (A poor jest, but I will not scratch it out. I wrote it thinking 
it would sound very witty; but now that I have seen myself that I only 
wanted to show off in a despicable way, I will not scratch it out on 
purpose!) 
When petitioners used to come for information to the table at which 
I sat, I used to grind my teeth at them, and felt intense enjoyment 
when I succeeded in making anybody unhappy. I almost always did 
succeed. For the most part they were all timid people-of course, they 
were petitioners. But of the uppish ones there was one officer in par­
ticular I could not endure. He simply would not be humble, and 
clanked his sword in a disgusting way. I carried on a feud with him 
for eighteen months over that sword. At last I got the better of him. 
He left off clanking it. That happened in my youth, though. 
But do you know, gentlemen, what was the chief point about my 
spite? Why, the whole point, the re:ll sting of it lay in the fact that 
continually, even in the moment of the acutest spleen, I w:s inwardly 
conscious with shame that I was not only not a spiteful but not e\·en 
an embittered man, that I was simply scaring sparrows at random and 
amusing myself by it. I might foam at the mouth, but bring me a doll 
to play with, give me a cup of tea with sugar in it, and m:ᐍybe I should 
be appeased. I might even be genuinely touched, though prob:bly I 
should grind my teeth at myself :fterwards and lie :wake at night with 
shame for months after. That was my way. 
I was lying when I s:id just now that I was :1 spiteful offici:!. I was 
lying from spite. I was simply amusing myself with the petitioners 
and with the officer, and in reality I never could become spiteful. I was 
conscious every moment in myself of many, very m:ny elements abso­
lutely opposite to that. I felt them positively swarming in me, these 
opposite elements. I knew that they h:d been swarming in me all my 
life and craving some outlet from me, but I would not let them, 
would not let them, purposely would not let them come out. They 
tormented me till I was ashamed : they drove me to convulsions 
and-sickened me, at last, how they sickened me! Now, are not 
you fancying, gentlemen, that I :1m expressing remorse for some­
thing now, that I am asking your forgiveness for something? I am 
sure you are fancying that . . . .  However, I assure you I do nut care if 
you are . . . .  
It was not only that I could not become spiteful, I did not know how 
to become anything: neither spiteful nor kind, neither :1 r:sc:l nor an 
honest man, neither a hero nor an insect. Now, I am living out my life 

N.otes from Underground 
131 
in my corner, taunting myself with the spiteful and useless consolation 
that an intelligent man cannot become anything seriously, and it is 
only the fool who becomes anything. Yes, a man in the nineteenth 
century must and morally ought to be pre-eminently a characterless 
creature; a man of character, an active man, is pre-eminently a limited 
creature. That is my conviction of forty years. I am forty years old now, 
and you know forty years is a whole lifetime; you know it is extreme 
old age. To live longer than forty years is bad manners, is vulgar, 
immoral. Who does live beyond forty? Answer that, sincerely and 
honestly. I will tell you who do: fools and worthless fellows. I tell all 
old men that to their face, all these venerable old men, all these s:lver­
haired and reverend seniors! I tell the whole world that to its face. I 
have a right to say so, for I shall go on living to sixty myself. To 
seventy! To eighty! . . .  Stay, let me take breath .
.
.
•
 
You imagine no doubt, gentlemen, that I want to amuse you. You 
are mistaken in that, too. I am by no means such a mirthful person as 
you im:tgine, or as you may imagine; however, irritated by all this 
babble (and I feel that you arc irritated) you think fit to ask me who 
am I-then my answer is, I :tm :t collegiate assessor. I was in the service 
that I might ha\'C something to cat (and solely for that reason), and 
when last year a distant rebtion left me six thousand roubles in his 
will I immediately retired from the sen·ice and settled down in my 
corner. I used to li\'e in this corner before, but now I have settled 
down in it. My room is a wretched, horrid one in the outskirts of the 
town. My servant is an old country-woman, ill-natured from stupidity, 
and, moreover, there is always a nasty smell about her. I am told that 
the Petersburg climate is b:td for me, and that with my small means it 
is \'ery expensi\'e to live in Petersburg. I know all that better than all 
these sage and experienced counsellors and monitors. . . . But I am 
remaining in Petersburg; I am not going away from Petersburg! I 
am not going away because . . .  ech! \Vhy, it is absolutely no matter 
whether I am going away or not going away. 
But what can a decent man speak of with most pleasure? 
Answer : Of himself. 
Well, so I will talk about myself. 
[ II ] 
I want now to tell you, gentlemen, whether you care to hear it or 
not, why I could not e\'en become an insect. I tell you solemnly, that 
I have rnanv times tried to become an insect. But I was not equal even 

132 
The Short N.ovels of 'DostoevskY 
to that. I swear, gentlemen, that to be too conscious is an illness-a 
real thoroughgoing illness. For man's everyday needs, it would have 
been quite enough to have the ordinary human consciousness, that is, 
half or a quarter of the amount which falls to the lot of a cultivated 
man of our unhappy nineteenth century, especially one who has the 
fatal ill-luck to inhabit Petersburg, the most theoretical and inten­
tional town on the whole terrestrial globe. (There are intentional and 
unintentional towns.) It would have been quite enough, for instance, 
to have the consciousness by which all so-called direct persons and 
men of action live. I bet you think I am writing all this from affecta­
tion, to be witty at the expense of men of action; and what is more, that 
from ill-bred affectation, I am clanking a sword like my officer. But, 
gentlemen, whoever can pride himself on his diseases and even swagger 
over them? 
Though, after all, every one does do that; people do pride them­
selves on their diseases, and I do, may be, more than any one. \Ve will 
not dispute it; my contention was absurd. But yet I am firmly per­
suaded that a great deal of consciousness, every sort of consciousness, 
in fact, is a disease. I stick to that. Let us leave that, too, for a minute. 
Tell me this: why does it happen that at the very, yes, at the very 
moments when I am most capable of feeling every refinement of all 
that is "good and beautiful," as they used to say at one time, it would, 
as though of design, happen to me not only to feel but to do such ugly 
things, such that . . .  \Veil, in short, actions that all, perhaps, commit; 
but which, as though purposely, occurred to me at the very time when 
I was most conscious that they ought not to be committed. The more 
conscious I was of goodness and of all that was "good and beautiful," 
the more deeply I sank into my mire and the more ready I was to sink 
in it altogether. But the chief point was that all this was, as it were, 
not accidental in me, but as though it were bound to be so. It was as 
though it were my most normal condition, and not in the least disease 
or depravity, so that at last all desire in me to struggle against this 
depravity passed. It ended by my almost believing (perhaps actually 
believing) that this was perhaps my normal condition. But at first, in 
the beginning, what agonies I endured in that struggle! I did not 
believe it was the same with other people, and all my life I hid this 
fact about myself as a secret. I was ashamed (even now, perhaps, I am 
ashamed) : I got to the point of feeling a sort of secret abnormal, 
despicable enjoyment in returning home to my corner on some disgust­
ing Petersburg night, acutely conscious that that day I had committed 
a loathsome action again, that what was done could never be undone, 

Notes from Underground 
133 
and secretly, inwardly gnawing, gnawing at myself for it, tearing and 
consuming myself till at last the bitterness turned into a sort of shame­
ful accursed sweetness, and at last-into positive real enjoyment! Yes, 
into enjoyment, into enjoyment! I insist upon that. I have spoken of 
this because I keep wanting to know for a fact whether other people 
feel such enjoyment. I will explain: the enjoyment was just from the 
too intense consciousness of one's own degradation; it was from feeling 
oneself that one had reached the last barrier, that it was horrible, but 
that it could not be otherwise; that there was no escape for you; that 
you never could become a different man; that even if time and faith 
were still left you to change into something different you would most 
likely not wish to change; or if you did wish to, even then you would 
do nothing; because perhaps in reality there was nothing for you to 
change into. 
And the worst of it was, and the root of it all, that it was all in accord 
with the normal fundamental laws of over-acute consciousness, and 
with the inertia that was the direct result of those laws, and that 
consequently one was not only unable to change but could do abso­
lutely nothing. Thus it would follow, as the result of acute conscious­
ness, that one is not to blame in being a scoundrel; as though that were 
any consolation to the scoundrel once he has come to realize that he 
actually is a scoundrel. But enough . . . .  Ech, I have talked a lot of 
nonsense, but what have I explained ? How is enjoyment in this to be 
explained? But I will explain it. I will get to the bottom of it! That 
is why I have taken up my pen . . . .  
I, for instance, have a great deal of amour propre. I am as suspicious 
and prone to take offence as a humpback or a dwarf. But upon my 
word I sometimes have had moments when if I had happened to be 
slapped in the face I should, perhaps, have been positively glad of it. 
I say, in earnest, that I should probably have been able to discover even 
in that a peculiar sort of enjoyment-the enjoyment, of course, of 
despair; but in despair there are the most intense enjoyments, espe­
cially when one is very acutely conscious of the hopelessness of one's 
position. And when one is slapped in the face-why then the con­
sciousness of being rubbed into a pulp would positively overwhelm 
one. The worst of it is, look at it which way one will, it still turns out 
that I was always the most to blame in everything. And what is most 
humiliating of all, to blame for no fault of my own but, so to say, 
through the laws of nature. In the first place, to blame because I am 
cleverer than any of the people surrounding me. (I have always con­
sidered myself cleverer than any of the people surrounding me, and 

134 
'1 he Short N.oveh of 7Jostoevsky 
sometimes, would you believe it, have been positively ashamed of it. 
At any rate, I have all my life, as it were, turned my eyes away and 
never could look people straight in the face.) To blame, finally, because 
even if I had had magnanimity, I should only have had more suffering 
from the sense of its uselessness. I should certainly have never been 
able to do anything from being magnanimous-neither to forgive, for 
my assailant would perhaps have slapped me from the laws of nature, 
and one cannot forgive the laws of nature; nor to forget, for e\·en if 
it were owing to the laws of nature, it is insulting all the same. Finally, 
even if I had wanted to be anything but magnanimous, had desired 
on the contrary to revenge myself on my assailant, I could not have 
revenged myself on any one for anything because I should certainly 
never have made up my mind to do anything, even if I had been able to. 
Why should I not have made up my mind ? About that in particular 
I want to say a few words. 
[ Ill ] 
With people who know how to revenge themselves and to stand up 
for themselves in general, how is it done? \Vhy, when they are pos­
sessed, let us suppose, by the feeling of revenge, then for the time there 
is nothing else but that feeling left in their whole being. Such a gentle­
man simply dashes straight for his object like an infuriated bull with 
its horns down, and nothing but a wall will stop him. (By the way: 
facing the wall, such gentlemen-that is, the "direct" persons and 
men of action-are genuinely nonplussed. For them a wall is not an 
evasion, as for us people who think and consequently do nothing; it 
is not an excuse for turning aside, an excuse for which we are always 
very glad, though we scarcely believe in it ourselves, as a rule. No, 
they are nonplussed in all sincerity. The wall has for them something 
tranquillizing, morally soothing, final-maybe even something mys­
terious . . .  but of the wall later.) 
Well, such a direct person I regard as the real normal man, as his 
tender mother Nature wished to see him when she graciously brought 
him into being on the earth. I envy such a man till I am green in the 
face. He is stupid. I am not disputing that, hut perhaps the normal 
man should be stupid, how do you know? Perhaps it is very beautiful, 
in fact. And I am the more persuaded of that suspicion, if one can call 
it so, by the fact that if you take, for instance, the antithesis of the 
normal man, that is, the man of acute consciousness, who has come, of 
course, not out of the lap of Nature but out of a retort (this is almost 

'Notes from U11derground 
135 
mysticism, gentlemen, but I suspect this, too), this retort-made man is 
sometimes so nonplussed in the presence of his antithesis that with all 
his exaggerated consciousness he genuinely thinks of himself as a 
mouse and not a man. It may be an acutely conscious mouse, yet it is 
a mouse, while the other is a man, and therefore, et caetera, et caetera. 
And the worst of it is, he himself, his very own self, looks on himself 
as a mouse; no one asks him to do so; and that is an important point. 
Now let us look at this mouse in action. Let us suppose, for instance, 
that it feels insulted, too (and it almost always does feel insulted), and 
wants to revenge itself, too. There may even be a greater accumulation 
of spite in it than in /'hom me de Ia natttre et de Ia verite. The base and 
nasty desire to vent that spite on its assailant rankles perhaps even 
more nastily in it than in l'homme de Ia nature et de Ia ven"te. For 
through his innate stupidity the latter looks upon his revenge as justice 
pure and simple; while in consequence of his acute consciousness the 
mouse does not believe in the justice of it. To come at last to the deed 
itself, to the very act of revenge. Apart from the one fundamental 
nastiness the luckless mouse succeeds in creating around it so many 
other nastinesses in the form of doubts and questions, adds to the one 
question so many unsettled questions, that there inevitably works up 
around it a sort of fatal brew, a stinking mess, made up of its doubts, 
emotions, and of the contempt spat upon it by the direct men of action 
who stand solemnly about it as judges and arbitrators, laughing at it 
till their healthy sides ache. Of course the only thing left for it is to 
dismiss all that with a wave of its paw, and, with a smile of assumed 
contempt in which it does not even itself believe, creep ignominiously 
into its mouse-hole. There in its nasty, stinking, underground home 
our insulted, crushed and ridiculed mouse promptly becomes absorbed 
in cold, malignant and, above all, everlasting spite. For forty years 
together it will remember its injury down to the smallest, most igno­
minious details, and every time will add, of itself, details still more 
ignominious, spitefully teasing and tormenting itself with its own 
imagination. It will itself be ashamed of its imaginings, but yet it will 
recall it all, it will go over and over every detail, it will invent unheard­
of things against itself, pretending that those things might happen, and 
will forgive nothing. Maybe it will begin to revenge itself, too, but, as 
it were, piecemeal, in trivial ways, from behind the stove, incognito, 
without believing either in its own right to vengeance, or in the success 
of its revenge, knowing that from all its efforts at revenge it will suffer 
a hundred times more than he on whom it revenges itself, while he, 
I daresay, will not even scratch himself. On its death-bed it will recall 

136 
'1 he Short N.otels of 7Jostoetlsk,y 
it all over again, with interest accumulated over all the years and . . .  
But it is just in that cold, abominable half despair, half belief, in that 
conscious burying oneself alive for grief in the underworld for forty 
years, in that acutely recognized and yet partly doubtful hopelessness 
of one's position, in that hell of unsatisfied desires turned inward, in 
that fever of oscillations, of resolutions determined for ever and re­
pented of again a minute later-that the savour of that strange enjoy­
ment of which I have spoken lies. It is so subtle, so difficult of analysis, 
that persons who are a little limited, or even simply persons of strong 
nerves, will not understand a single atom of it. "Possibly," you will 
add on your own account with a grin, "people will not understand it 
either who have never received a slap in the face," and in that way you 
will politely hint to me that I too, perhaps, have had the experience 
of a slap in the face in my life, and so I speak as one who knows. I bet 
that you are thinking that. But set your minds at rest, gentlemen, I 
have not received a slap in the face, though it is absolutely a matter of 
indifference to me what you may think about it. Possibly, I even regret 
myself that I have given so few slaps in the face during my life. But 
enough . . .  not another word on that subject of such extreme interest 
to you. 
I will continue calmly concerning persons with strong nerves who 
do not understand a certain refinement of enjoyment. Though in cer­
tain circumstances these gentlemen bellow their loudest like bulls, 
though this, let us suppose, does them the greatest credit, yet, as I have 
said already, confronted with the impossible they subside at once. The 
impossible means the stone wall! \Vhat stone wall? Why, of course, 
the laws of nature, the deductions of natural science, mathematics. As 
soon as they prove to you, for instance, that you are descended from 
a monkey, then it is no use scowling, accept it for a fact. \Vhen they 
prove to you that in reality one drop of your own fat must be dearer 
to you than a hundred thousand of your fellow creatures, and that this 
conclusion is the final solution of all so-called virtues and duties and all 
such prejudices and fancies, then you have just to accept it, there is no 
help for it, for twice two is a law of mathematics. Just try refuting it. 
"Upon my word," they will shout at you, "it is no use protesting: it is 
a case of twice two makes four! Nature does not ask your permission, 
she has nothing to do with your wishes, and whether you like her laws 
or dislike them, you are bound to accept her as she is, and consequently 
all her conclusions. A wall, you see, is a wall . . .  and so on, and so on." 
Merciful heavens! but what do I care for the laws of nature and 
arithmetic, when, for some reason, I dislike those laws and the fact that 

Notes from Underground 
137 
twice two makes four? Of course I cannot break through the wall by 
battering my head against it if I really have not the strength to knock 
it down, but I am not going to be reconciled to it simply because it is 
a stone wall and I have not the strength. 
As though such a stone wall really were a consolation, and really did 
contain some word of conciliation, simply because it is as true as twice 
two makes four. Oh, absurdity of absurdities! How much better it is to 
understand it all, to recognize it all, all the impossibilities and the stone 
wall; not to be reconciled to one of those impossibilities and stone walls 
if it disgusts you to be reconciled to it; by the way of the most inevita­
ble, logical combinations to reach the most revolting conclusions on 
the e\'erlasting theme, that even for the stone wall you are yourself 
somehow to blame, though again it is as clear as day you are not to 
blame in the least, and therefore grinding your teeth in silent im­
potence to sink into luxurious inertia, brooding on the fact that there 
is no one even for you to feel vindictive against, that you have not, 
and perhaps never will have, an object for your spite, that it is a sleight­
of-hand, a bit of juggling, a card-sharper's trick, that it is simply a 
mess, no knowing what and no knowing who, but in spite of all these 
uncertainties and jugglings, still there is an ache in you, and the more 
you do not know, the worse the ache. 
( IV ] 
"Ha, ha, ha! You will be finding enjoyment m toothache next," 
you cry, with a laugh. 
"\Veil? Even in toothache there is enjoyment," I answer. I had tooth­
ache for a whole month and I know there is. In that case, of course, 
people are not spiteful in silence, but moan; but they are not candid 
moans, they are malignant moans, and the malignancy is the whole 
point. The enjoyment of the sufferer finds expression in those moans; 
if he did not feel enjoyment in them he would not moan. It is a good 
example, gentlemen, and I will develop it. Those moans express in the 
first place all the aimlessness of your pain, which is so humiliating to 
your consciousness; the whole legal system of Nature on which you 
spit disdainfully, of course, but from which you suffer all the same 
while she does not. They express the consciousness that you have no 
enemy to punish, but that you have pain; the consciousness that in spite 
of all possible Vagenheims you are in complete slavery to your teeth; 
that if some one wishes it, your teeth will leave off aching, and if he 
does not, they will go on aching another three months; and that finally 

138 
The Short Novels of 'DostoevskY 
if you are still contumacious and still protest, all that is left you for 
your own gratification is to thrash yourself or beat your wall with your 
fist as hard as you can, and absolutely nothing more. Well, these mortal 
insults, these jeers on the part of some one unknown, end at last in an 
enjoyment which sometimes reaches the highest degree of voluptuous­
ness. I ask you, gentlemen, listen sometimes to the moans of an edu­
cated man of the nineteenth century suffering from toothache, on the 
second or third day of the attack, when he is beginning to moan, not 
as he moaned on the first day, that is, not simply because he has tooth­
ache, not just as any coarse peasant, but as a man affected by progress 
and European civilization, a man who is "divorced from the soil and 
the national elements," as they express it nowadays. His moans be­
come nasty, disgustingly malignant, and go on for whole days and 
nights. And of course he knows himself that he is doing himself 
no sort of good with his moans; he knows better than any one 
that he is only lacerating and harassing himself and others for nothing; 
he knows that even the audience before whom he is making his efforts, 
and his whole family, listen to him with loathing, do not put a ha'porth 
of faith in him, and inwardly understand that he might moan differ­
ently, more simply, without trills and flourishes, and that he is only 
amusing himself like that from ill-humour, from malignancy. Well, in 
all these recognitions and disgraces it is that there lies a voluptuous 
pleasure. As though he would say: "I am worrying you, I am lacerating 
your hearts, I am keeping every one in the house awake. \Veil, stay 
awake then, you, too, feel every minute that I have toothache. I am 
not a hero to you now, as I tried to seem before, but simply a nasty 
person, an impostor. Well, so be it, then! I am very glad that you see 
through me. It is nasty for you to hear my despicable moans : well, let 
it be nasty; here I will let you have a nastier flourish in a minute . . . .  " 
You do not understand even now, gentlemen ? No, it seems our devel­
opment and our consciousness must go further to understand all the 
intricacies of this pleasure. You laugh ? Delighted. My jests, gentlemen, 
are of course in bad taste, jerky, involved, lacking self-confidence. But 
of course that is because I do not respect myself. Can a man of percep­
tion respect himself at all? 
[ v ] 
Come, can a man who attempts to find enjoyment in the very feeling 
of his own degradation possibly have a spark of respect for himself? 
I am not saying this now from any mawkish kind of remorse. And, 

Notes from Underground 
139 
indeed, I could never endure saying, "Forgive me, Papa, I won't do it 
again," not because I am incapable of saying that-on the contrary, 
perhaps ju.:;t because I have been too capabie of it, and in what a way, 
too! As though of design I used to get into trouble in cases when I was 
not to blame in any way. That was the nastiest part of it. At the same 
time I was genuinely touched and penitent, I used to shed tears and, 
of course, deceived myself, though I was not acting in the least and 
there was a sick feeling in my heart at the time . . . .  For that one could 
not blame even the laws of nature, though the laws of nature have 
continually all my life offended me more than anything. It is loath­
some to remember it all, but it was loathsome even then. Of course, a 
minute or so later I would realize wrathfully that it was all a lie, a 
revolting lie, an affected lie, that is, all this penitence, this emotion, 
these vows of reform. You will ask why did I worry myself with such 
antics : answer, because it was very dull to sit with one's hands folded, 
and so one began cutting capers. That is really it. Observe yourselves 
more carefully, gentlemen, then you will understand that it is so. I 
invented adventures for myself and made up a life, so as at least t0 live 
in some way. How many times it has happened to me-well, for in­
stance, to take offence simply on purpose, for nothing; and cne knows 
oneself, of course, that one is ofTended at nothing, that one is putting 
it on, but yet one brings oneself, at Iaᅞt, to the point of being really 
oflended. All my life I have had an impulse to play such pranks, so 
that in the end I could not control it in myself. Another time, twice, 
in fact, I tried hard to be in love. I sufTered, too, gentlemen, I assure 
you. In the depth of my heart there was no faith in my sufTering, only 
a faint stir of mockery, but yet I did suffer, and in the real, orthodox 
way; I was jealous, beside myself . . .  and it was all from ennui, gentle­
men, all from ennui; inertia overcame me. You know the direct, legiti­
mate fruit of consciousness is inertia, that is, conscious sitting-with-the­
hands-folded. I have referred to this already. I repeat, I repeat with 
emphasis: all "direct" persons and men of action are active just because 
they are stupid and limited. How explain that? I will tell you : in 
consequence of their limitation they take i.nmediate and secondary 
causes for primary ones, and in that way persuade themselves more 
quickly and easily than other people do that they have found an 
infallible foundation for their activity, and their minds are at ease and 
you know that is the chief thing. To begin to act, you know, you must 
first have your mind completely at ease and no trace of doubt left in it. 
\Vhy, how am I, for example, to set my mind at rest ? \Vhere are 
the primary causes on which I am to build? Where are my foun-

140 
The Short Novels of 7Jostoevsky 
dations? Where am I to get them from ? I exercise myself in 
reflection, and consequently with me every primary cause at once 
draws after itself another still more primary, and so on to infinity. 
That is just the essence of every sort of consciousness and reflection. 
It must be a case of the laws of nature again. What is the result of it in 
the end? Why, just the same. Remember I spoke just now of venge­
ance. (I am sure you did not take it in.) I said that a man revenges 
himself because he sees justice in it. Therefore he has found a primary 
cause, that is, justice. And so he is ::: rest on all sides, and consequently 
he carries out his revenge calmly and successfully, being persuaded 
that he is doing a j ust and honest thing. But I see no justice in it, I find 
no sort of virtue in it either, and consequently if I attempt to revenge 
myself, it is only out of spite. Spite, of course, might overcome every­
t!1ing, all my doubts, and so might serve quite successfully in place of 
a primary cause, precisely because it is not a cause. But what is to be 
done if I have not even spite (I began with that just now, you know) ? 
In consequence again of those accursed laws of consciousness, anger in 
me is subject to chemical disintegration. You look into it, the object 
flies off into air, your reasons evaporate, the criminal is not to be found, 
the wrong becomes not a wrong but a phantom, something like the 
toothache, for which no one is to blame, and consequently there is only 
the same outlet left again-that is, to beat the wall as hard as you can. 
So you give it up with a wave of the hand because you have not found 
a fundamental cause. And try letting yourself be carried away by your 
feelings, blindly, without reflection, without a primary cause, repelling 
consciousness at least for a time; hate or love, if only not to sit with 
your hands folded. The day after to-morrow, at the latest, you will 
begin despising yourself for having knowingly deceived yourself. Re­
sult: a soap-bubble and inertia. Oh, gentlemen, do you know, perhaps 
I consider myself an intelligent man only because all my l'ife I have 
been able neither to begin nor to finish anything. Granted I am a 
babbler, a harmless vexatious babbler, like all of us. But what is to 
be done if the direct and sole vocation of every intelligent man 1s 
babble, that is, the intentional pouring of water through a sieve? 
( VI ) 
Oh, if I had done nothing simply from laziness! Heavens, how I 
should have respected myself then. I should have respected myself 
because I should at least have been capable of being lazy; there would 
at least have been one quality, as it were, positive in me, in which I 

Notes from Underground 
141 
could have believed myself. Question: What is he? Answer: A slug­
gard; how very pleasant it would have been to hear that of oneself! 
It would mean that I was positively defined, it would mean that there 
was something to say about me. "Sluggard"-why, it is a calling and 
vocation, it is a career. Do not jest, it is so. I should then be a member 
of the best dub by right, and should find my occupation in continually 
respecting myself. I knew a gentlemen who prided himself all his 
life o:1 being a connoisseur of Lafitte. He considered this as his positive 
virtue, and never doubted himself. He died, not simply with a tranquil, 
but with a triumphant, conscience, and he was quite right, too. Then 
I should have chosen a career for myself, I should have been a sluggard 
and a glutton, not a simple one, but, for instance, one with sympathies 
for everything good and beautiful. How do you like that ? I have long 
had visions of it. That "good and beautiful" weighs heavily on my 
mind at forty. But that is at forty; then--oh, then it would have been 
different! I should have found for myself a form of activity in keeping 
with it, to be precise, drinking to the health of everything "good and 
beautiful." I should have snatched at every opportunity to drop a tear 
into my glass and then to drain it to all that is "good and beautiful." I 
should then have turned everything into the good and the beautiful; 
in the nastiest, unquestionable trash, I should have sought out the good 
and the beautiful. I should have exuded tears like a wet sponge. An 
artist, for instance, paints a picture worthy of Gay. At once I drink to 
the health of the artist who painted the picture worthy of Gay, be­
cause I love all that is "good and beautiful." An author has written 
As you tt;i//: at once I drink to the health of "any one you will" because 
I love all that is "good and beautiful." 
I should claim respect for doing so. I should persecute any one who 
would not show me respect. I should live at ease, I should die with 
dignity, why, it is charming, perfectly charming! And what a good 
round belly I should have grown, what a treble chin I should have 
established, what a ruby nose I should have coloured for myself, so that 
every one would have said, looking at me: "Here is an asset! Here is 
something real and solid!" And, say what you like, it is very agreeable 
to hear such remarks about oneself in this negative age. 
[ VII ) 
But these are all golden dreams. Oh, tell me, who was it first an­
nounced, who was it first proclaimed, that man only does nasty things 
because he does not know his own interests; and that if he were 

142 
'!he Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
enlightened, if his eyes were opened to his real normal interests, man 
would at once cease to do nasty things, would at once become good 
and noble because, being enlightened and understanding his real 
advantage, he would see his own advantage in the good and nothing 
else and we all know that not one man can, consciously, act against 
' 
his own interests, consequently, so to say, through necessity, he would 
begin doing good? Oh, the babe! Oh, the pure, innocent child! Why, 
in the first place, when in all these thousands of years has there been 
a time when man has acted only from his own interest? \Vhat is to be 
done with the millions of facts that bear witness that men, consciously, 
that is, fully understanding their real interests, have left them in the 
background and have rushed headlong on another path, to meet peril 
and danger, compelled to this course by nobody and by nothing, but, 
as it were, simply disliking the beaten track, and have obstinately, 
wilfully, struck out another difficult, absurd way, seeking it almost in 
the darkness. So, I suppose, this obstinacy and perversity were pleas­
anter to them than any advantage . . . .  Advantage! \Vhat is advantage? 
And will you take it upon yourself to define with perfect accuracy in 
what the advantage of man consists ?  And what if it so happens that 
a man's advantage, sometimes, not only may, but even must, consist 
in his desiring in certain cases what is harmful to himself and not 
advantageous. And if so, there can be such a case, the whole principle 
falls into dust. What do you think-are there such cases? You laugh; 
laugh away, gentlemen, but only answer me: have man's advantages 
been reckoned up with perfect certainly? Are there not some which not 
only have not been included but cannot possibly be included under 
any classification? You see, you gentlemen have, to the best of my 
knowledge, taken your whole register of human advantages from the 
averages of statistical figures and politico-economical formulas. Your 
advantages are prosperity, wealth, freedom, peace-and so on, and so 
on. So that the man who should, for instance, go openly and knowingly 
in opposition to all that list would, to your thinking, and indeed mine 
too, of course, be an obscurantist or an absolute madman : would not 
he? But, you know, this is what is surprising: why does it so happen 
that all these statisticians, sages and lovers of humanity, when they 
reckon up human advantages invariably leave out one? They don't 
even take it into their reckoning in the form in which it should be 
taken, and the whole reckoning depends upon that. It would be no 
great matter, they would simply have to take it, this advantage, and 
add it to the list. But the trouble is, that this strange advantage does 
not fall under any classification and is not in place in any list. I have a 

N.otes from Underground 
143 
friend for instance . . .  Ech! gentlemen, but of course he is your friend, 
too; and indeed there is no one, no one, to whom he is not a friend! 
When he prepares for any undertaking this gentleman immediately 
explains to you, elegantly and clearly, exactly how he must act in 
accordance with the laws of reason and truth. What is more, he will 
talk to you with excitement and passion of the true normal interests 
of man; with irony he will upbraid the short-sighted fools who do not 
understand their own interests, nor the true significance of virtue; and, 
within a quarter of an hour, without any sudden outside provocation, 
but simply through something inside him which is stronger than all 
his interests, he will go off on quite a different tack-that is, act in 
direct opposition to what he has just been saying about himself, in 
opposition to the laws of reason, in opposition to his own advantage­
in fact, in opposition to everything . . . .  I warn you that my friend is a 
compound personality, and therefore it is difficult to blame him as an 
individual. The fact is, gentlemen, it seems there must really exist 
something that is dearer to almost every man than his greatest advan­
tages, or (not to be illogical) there is a most advantageous advantage 
(the very one omitted of which we spoke just now) which is more 
important and more advantageous than all other advantages, for the 
sake of which a man if necessary is ready to act in opposition to all 
laws; that is, in opposition to reason, honour, peace, prosperity-in 
fact, in opposition to all those excellent and useful things if only he 
can attain that fundamental, most advantageous advantage which is 
dearer to him than all. "Yes, but it's advantage all the same" you will 
retort. But excuse me, I'll make the point clear, and it is not a case 
of playing upon words. What matters is, that this advantage is remark­
able from the very fact that it breaks down all our classifications, and 
continually shatters every system constructed by lovers of mankind for 
the benefit of mankind. In fact, it upsets everything. But before I 
mention this advantage to you, I want to compromise myself person­
ally, and therefore I boldly declare that all these fine systems-all these 
theories for explaining to mankind their real normal interests, in order 
that inevitably striving to pursue these interests they may at once 
become good and noble-are, in my opinion, so far, mere logical exer­
cises! Yes, logical exercises. \Vhy, to maintain this theory of the 
regeneration of mankind by means of the pursuit of his own advan­
tage is to my mind almost the same thing as . . .  as to affirm, for in­
stance, following Buckle, that through civilization mankind becomes 
softer, ar:d consequently less bloodthirsty, and less fitted for warfare. 
Logically it does seem to follow from his arguments. But man haᅟ 

144 
The Short Novels of VostoevskJ 
such a predilection for systems and abstract deductions that he is ready 
to distort the truth intentionally, he is ready to deny the evidence of 
his senses only to justify his logic. I take this example because it is the 
most glaring instance of it. Only look about you: blood is being spilt 
in streams, and in the merriest way, as though it were champagne. Take 
the whole of the nineteenth century in which Buckle lived. Take 
Napoleon-the Great and also the present one. Take North America­
the eternal union. Take the farce of Schleswig-Holstein . . . .  And what 
is it that civilization softens in us? The only gain of civilization for 
mankind is the greater capacity for variety of sensations-and abso­
lutely nothing more. And through the development of this mᅠmy­
sidedness man may come to finding enjoyment in bloodshed. In fact, 
this has already happened to him. Have you noticed that it is the most 
civilized gentlemen who have been the subtlest slaughterers, to whom 
the Attilas and Stenka Razins could not hold a candle, and if they are 
not so conspicuous as the Attilas and Stenka R::zins it is simply bec::1use 
they are so often met with, are so ordinary and have become so familiar 
to us. In any case civilization has made mankind if not more blood­
thirsty, at least more vilely, more loathsomely blood-thirsty. In old 
days he saw justice in bloodshed and with his conscience at pe::ce 
exterminated those he thought proper. Now we do think blood­
shed abominable and yet we engage in this abomination, and with 
more energy than ever. \Vhich is worse? Decide th::t for yourselves. 
They say that Cleopatr:I (excuse an instance from Roman history) 
was fond of sticking gold pins into her slave-girls' breasts and de­
rived gratification from their scre::ms ::nd writhings. You will s::y 
that that was in the comparatively barbarous times; that these are 
barbarous times too, because also, comparatively speaking, pins are 
stuck in even now; that though m::1n h::s now learned to see more 
clearly than in barbarous ages, he is still far from having learnt to ::1ct 
as reason and science would dictate. But yet you are fully convinced 
that he will be sure to learn when he gets rid of certain old b::d habits, 
and when common sense and science have completely re-educated 
human nature and turned it in a normal direction. You are confident 
that then man will cease from intentional error and will, so to say, be 
compelled not to want to set his will against his normal interests. That 
is not all; then, you say, science itself will teach man (though to my 
mind it's a superfluous luxury) that he never has really had any caprice 
or will of his own, and that he himself is something of the nature of 
a piano-key or the stop of an organ, and that there are, besides, things 
called the laws of nature; so that everything he does is not done by 

Notes from Underground 
145 
his willing it, but is done of itself, by the laws of nature. Consequently 
we have only to discover these laws of nature, and man will no longer 
have to answer for his actions and life will become exceedingly easy 
for him. All human actions will then, of course, be tabulated according 
to these laws, mathematically, like tables of logarithms up to 108,000, 
and entered in an index; or, better still, there would be published 
certain edifying works of the nature of encyclopaedic lexicons, in which 
everything will be so clearly calculated and explained that there will 
be no more incidents or adventures in the world. 
Then-this is all what you say-new economic relations will be estab­
lished, all ready-made and worked out with mathematical exactitude, 
so that every possible question will vanish in the twinkling of an eye, 
simply because every possible answer to it will be provided. Then the 
"Palace of Crystal" will be built. Then . . .  In fact, those will be 
halcyon days. Of course there is no guaranteeing (this is my comment) 
that it will not be, for instance, frightfully dull then (for what will one 
have to do when everything will be calculated and tabulated ?), but on 
the other hand everything will be extraordinarily rational. Of course 
boredom may lead you to anything. It is boredom sets one sticking 
golden pins into people, but all that would not matter. \Vhat is bad 
(this is my comment again) is that I dare say people will be thankful 
for the gold pins then. Man is stupid, you know, phenomenally stupid ; 
or rather he is not at all stupid, but he is so ungrateful that you could 
not find another like him in all creation. I, for instance, would not be 
in the least surprised if all of a sudden, apropos of nothing, in the 
midst of general prosperity a gentleman with an ignoble, or rather with 
a reactionary and ironical, countenance were to arise and, putting his 
arms akimbo, say to us all: "I say, gentlemen, hadn't we better kick 
over the whole show and scatter rationalism to the winds, simply to 
send these logarithms to the devil, and to enable us to live once more 
at our own sweet foolish will!" That again would not matter; but 
what is annoying is that he would be sure to find followers-such is 
the nature of man. And all that for the most foolish reason, which, one 
would think, was hardly worth mentioning: that is, that man everyᅡ 
where and at all times, whoever he may be, has preferred to act as he 
chose and not in the least as his reason and advantage dictated. And 
one may choose what is contrary to one's own interests, and some­
times one positively ought (that is my idea). One's own free unfettered 
choice, one's own caprice-however wild it may be, one's own fancy 
worked up at times to frenzy-is that very "most advantageous ad­
vantage" which we have overlooked, which comes under no classifica-

146 
'The Short Novels of 'DostoevskY 
tion and against which all systems and theories are continually being 
shattered to atoms. And how do these wiseacres know that man wants 
a normal, a virtuous choice? What has made ᅢhem conceive that man 
must want a rationally advantageous choice? What man wants is 
simply independent choice, whatever that independence may cost and 
wherever it may lead. And choice, of course, the devil only knows what 
choice . . . .  
[ \'Ill ] 
"Ha! ha! ha! But you know there is no such thing as choice in 
reality, say what you like," you will interpose with a chuckle. "Science 
has succeeded in so far analyzing m:tn that we know already that choice 
and what is called freedom of will is nothing else than--" 
Stay, gentlemen, I meant to begin with that myself. I confess, I was 
rather frightened. I was just going to say that the dcYil only knows 
what choice depends on, and that perhaps that was a \'cry good thing, 
but I remembered the teaching of science . . .  and pulled myself up. 
And here you have begun upon it. Indeed, if there really is some day 
discovered a formula for all our desires and caprices-that is, an 
txplanation of what they depend upon, by what laws they arise, how 
they develop, what they are aiming at in one case and in another and 
so on, that is, a real mathematical formula-then, most likely, man will 
at once cease to feel desire, indeed, he will be certain to. For who 
would want to choose by rule ? Besides, he will at once be transformed 
from a human being into an organ-stop or something of the sort; for 
what is a man without desires, without free will and without choice, if 
not a stop in an organ ? \Vhat do you think ? Let us reckon the chances 
--<:an such a thing happen or not? 
"H'm!" you decide. "Our choice is usually mistaken from a false 
view of our advantage. \Ve sometimes choose absolute nonsense be­
cause in our foolishness we see in that nonsense the easiest means for 
attaining a supposed advantage. But when all that is explained and 
worked out on paper (which is perfectly possible, for it is contemptible 
and senseless to suppose that some laws of nature man will never 
understand) ,  then certainly so-called desires will no longer exist. For 
if a desire should come into conflict with reason we shall then reason 
and not desire, because it will be impossible retaining our reason to 
be senseless in our desires, and in that way knowingly act against reason 
and desire to injure ourselves. And as all cho!ce and reasoning can be 
really calculated-because there will some day be discovered the laws 

N.otes from Underground 
147 
of our so<alled free will-so, joking apart, there may one day be 
something like a table constructed of them, so that we really shall 
choose in accordance with it. If, for instance, some day they calculate 
and prove to me that I made a long nose at some one because I could 
not help making a long nose at him and that I had to do it in that 
particular way, what freedom is left me, especially if I am a learned 
man and have taken my degree somewhere? Then I should be able 
to calculate my whole life for thirty years beforehand. In short, if this 
could be arranged there would be nothing left for us to do; anyway, 
we should have to understand that. And, in fact, we ought unweary­
ingly to repeat to ourselves that at such and such a time and in such 
and such circumstances Nature does not ask our leave; that we have 
got to take her as she is and not fashion her to suit our fancy, and if 
we really aspire to formulas and tables of rules, and well, even . . . to 
the chemical retort, there's no help for it, we must accept the retort 
too, or else it will be accepted without our consent . . . .  
" 
Yes, but here I come to a stop! Gentlemen, you must excuse me for 
being over-philosophical ; it's the result of forty years underground! 
Allow me to indulge my fancy. You see, gentlemen, reason is an 
excellent thing, there's no disputing that, but reason is nothing but 
reason and satisfies only the rational side of man's nature, while will 
is a manifestation of the whole life, that is, of the whole human life 
including reason and all the impulses. And although our life, in this 
mJnifestation of it, is often worthless, yet it is life and not simply 
extracting square roots. Here I, for instance, quite naturally want to 
live, in order to satisfy all my capacities for life, and not simply my 
capacity for reasoning, that is, not simply one-twentieth of my capacity 
for life. \Vhat does reason know ? Reason only knows what it has suc­
ceeded in learning (some things, perhaps, it will never learn; this is 
a poor comfort, but why not say so frankly?) and human nature acts 
as a whole, with everything that is in it, consciously or unconsciously, 
and, even if it goes wrong, it lives. I suspect, gentlemen, that you are 
looking at me with compassion; you tell me again that an enlightened 
and developed man, such, in short, as the future man will be, cannot 
consciously desire anything disadvantageous to himself, that that can 
be proved mathematically. I thoroughly agree, it can-by mathematics. 
But I repeat for the hundredth time, there is one case, one only, when 
man may consciously, purposely, desire what is injurious to himself, 
what is stupid, very stupid-simply in order to have the right to desire 
for himself even what is very stupid and not to be bound by an obliga­
tion to desire only what is sensible. Of course, this very stupid thing, 

148 
The Short N.ovels of 'Dostoevsky 
this caprice of ours, may be in reality, gentlemen, more advantageous 
for us than anything else on earth, especially in certain cases. And in 
particular it may be more advantageous than any advantage even when 
it does us obvious harm, and contradicts the soundest conclusions of 
our reason concerning our advantage-for in any circumstances it 
preserves for us what is most precious and most important-that is, 
our personality, our individuality. Some, you see, maintain that this 
really is the most precious thing for mankind; choice can, of course, 
if it chooses, be in agreement with reason; and especially if this be not 
abused but kept within bounds. It is profitable and sometimes even 
praiseworthy. But very often, and even most often, choice is utterly 
and stubbornly opposed to reason . . .  and .
.
•
 and . . .  do you know 
that that, too, is profitable, sometimes even praiseworthy? Gentlemen, 
let us suppose that man is not stupid. (Indeed one cannot refuse to 
suppose that, if only from the one consideration, that, if man is stupid, 
then who is wise? )  But if he is not stupid, he is monstrously un­
grateful! Phenomenally ungrateful. In fact, I believe that the best 
definition of man is the ungrateful biped. But that is not all, that is not 
his worst defect; his worst defect is his perpetual moral obliquity, 
perpetual-from the days of the Flood to the Schleswig-Holstein period. 
Moral obliquity and consequently lack of good sense; for it has long 
been accepted that lack of good sense is due to no other cause than 
moral obliquity. Put it to the test and cast your eyes upon the history 
of mankind. \Vhat will you see? Is it a grand spectacle? Grand, if 
you like. Take the Colossus of Rhodes, for instance, that's worth some­
thing. With good reason Mr. Anaevsky testifies of it that some say 
that it is the work of man's hands, while others maintain that it has 
been created by Nature herself. Is it many-coloured? It may be it is 
many-coloured, too: if one takes the dress uniforms, military and 
civilian, of all peoples in all ages-that alone is worth something, and 
if you take the undress uniforms you will never get to the end of it; 
no historian would be equal to the job. Is it monotonous ? It may be it's 
monotonous too: it's fighting and fighting; they are fighting now, they 
fought first and they fought last-you will admit that it is almost too 
monotonous. In short, one may say anything about the history of the 
world-anything that might enter the most disordered imagination. 
The only thing one can't say is that it's rational. The very word sticks 
in one's throat. And, indeed, this is the odd thing that is continually 
happening: there are continually turning up in life moral and rational 
persons, sages and lovers of humanity, who make it their object to live 
all their lives as morally and rationally as possible, to be, so to speak, 

Notes from UtJderground 
149 
a light to their neighbours simply in order to show them that it is 
possible to live morally and rationally in this world. And yet we all 
know that those very people sooner or later have been false to them­
selves, playing some queer trick, often a most unseemly one. Now I 
ask you: what can be expected of man since he is a being endowed 
with such strange qualities? Shower upon him every earthly blessing, 
drown him in a sea of happiness, so that nothing but bubbles of bliss 
can be seen on the surface; give him economic prosperity, such that 
he should have nothing else to do but sleep, eat cakes and busy him­
self with the continuation of his species, and even then out of sheer 
ingratitude, sheer spite, man would play you some nasty trick. He 
would even risk his cakes and would deliberately desire the most fatal 
rubbish, the most uneconomical absurdity, simply to introduce into 
all this positive good sense his fatal fantastic element. It is just his 
fantastic dreams, his vulgar folly, that he will desire to retain, simply 
in order to prove to himself-as though that were so necessary-that 
men still are men and not the keys of a piano, which the laws of 
nature threaten to control so completely that soon one will be able to 
desire nothing but by the calendar. And that is not all: even if man 
really were nothing but a piano-key, even if this were proved to him 
by natural science and mathematics, even then he would not become 
reasonable, but would purposely do something perverse out of simple 
ingratitude, simply to gain his point. And if he does not fir:d means 
he will contrive destruction and chaos, will contrive sufferings of all 
sorts, only to gain his point! He will launch a curse upon the world, 
and as only man can curse (it is his privilege, the primary distinction 
between him and other animals) it may be by his curse alone he will 
attain his object-that is, convince himself that he is a man and not a 
piano-key! If you say that all this, too, can be calculated and tabulated 
-chaos and darkness and curses, so that the mere possibility of calcu­
lating it all beforehand would stop it all, and reason would reassert 
itself-then man would purposely go mad in order to be rid of reason 
and gain his point! I believe in it, I answer for it, for the whole work 
of man really seems to consist in nothing but proving to himself every 
minute that he is a man and not a piano-key! It may be at the cost of 
his skin, it may be by cannibalism! And this being so, can one help 
being tempted to rejoice that it has not yet come off, and that desire 
still depends on something we don't know? 
You will scream at me (that is, if you condescend to do so) that no 
one is touching my free will, that all they are concerned with is that 

150 
The Short Novels of 7Jostoevsky 
my will should of itself, of its own free will, coincide with my own 
normal interests, with the laws of nature and arithmetic. 
Good heavens, gentlemen, what sort of free will is left when we 
come to tabulation and arithmetic, when it will all be a case of twice 
two makes four? Twice two makes four without my will. As if free 
will meant that! 
( IX ) 
Gentlemen, I am joking, and I know myself that my jokes are not 
brilliant, but you know one can't take everything as a joke. I am, 
perhaps, jesting against the grain. Gentlemen, I am tormented by ques­
tions; answer them for me. You, for instance, want to cure men of 
their old habits and reform their will in accordance with science and 
good sense. But how do you know, not only that it is possible, but also 
that it is desirable, to reform man in that way? And what leads you 
to the conclusion that man's inclinations need reforming? In short, 
how do you know that such a reformation will be a benefit to man ? 
And to go to the root of the matter, why are you so positively con­
vinced that not to act against his real normal interests guaranteed by 
the conclusions of reason and arithmetic is certainly always advanta­
geous for man and must always be a law for mankind? So far, you 
know, this is only your supposition. It may be the law of logic, but 
not the law of humanity. You think, gentlemen, perhaps that I am 
mad? Allow me to defend myself. I agree that man is pre-eminently 
a creative animal, predestined to strive consciously for an object and to 
engage in engineering-that is, incessantly and eternally to make new 
roads, wherever they may lead. But the reason why he wants some­
times to go off at a tangent may just be that he is predestir1ed to make 
the road, and perhaps, too, that however stupid the "direct" practical 
man may be, the thought sometimes will occur to him that the road 
almost always does lead somewhere, and that the destination it leads to 
1s less important than the process of making it, and that the chief 
.thing is to save the well-conducted child from despising engineering, 
:and so giving way to the fatal idleness, which, as we all know, is the 
mother of all the vices. Man likes to make roads and to create, that is a 
fact beyond dispute. But why has he such a passionate love for destruc­
tion and chaos also? Tell me that! But on that point I want to say a 
couple of words myself. May it not be that he loves chaos and destruc­
tion (there can be no disputing that he does sometimes love it) because 
he is instinctively afraid of attaining his object and completing the 

Notes from Underground 
151 
edifice he is constructing? Who knows, perhaps he only loves that 
edifice from a distance, and is by no means in love with it at close 
quarters; perhaps he only loves building it and does not want to live 
in it, but will leave it, when completed, for the use of /ej animaux 
domutiquej-such as the ants, the sheep, and so on. Now the ants 
have quite a different taste. They have a marvellous edifice of that 
pattern which endures for ever-the ant-heap. 
\Vith the ant-heap the respectable race of ants began and with the 
ant-heap they will probably end, which does the greatest credit to their 
perseverance and good sense. But man is a frivolous and incongruous 
creature, and perhaps, like a chess-player, loves the process of the game, 
not the end of it. And who knows (there is no saying with certainty), 
perhaps the only goal on earth to which mankind is striving lies in this 
incessant process of attaining in other words, in life itself, and not 
in the thing to be attained, which must always be expressed as a 
formula, as positive as twice two makes four, and such positiveness 
is not life, gentlemen, but is the beginning of death. Anyway, man 
has always been afraid of this mathematical certainty, and I am afraid 
of it now. Granted that man does nothing but seek that mathematical 
certainty, he tr::lVerses oceans, sacrifices his life in the quest, but to sue· 
ceed, really to find it, he dreads, I assure you. He feels that when he 
has found it there will be nothing for him to look for. \Vhen workmen 
have finished their work they do at least receive their pay, they go 
to the tavern, then they are taken to the police-station-and there 
is occupation for a week. But where can man go? Anyway, one can 
observe a certain awkwardness about him when he has attained such 
objects. He loves the process of attaining, but does not quite like to 
have attained, and that, of course, is very absurd. In fact, man is a 
comical creature; there seems to be a kind of jest in it all. But yet 
mathemJ.tical certainty is, after all, something insufferable. Twice two 
makes four seems to me simply a piece of insolence. Twice two makes 
four is a pert coxcomb who stands with arms akimbo barring your 
path and spitting. I admit that twice two makes four is an excellent 
thing, but if we are to give everything its due, twice two makes five 
is sometimes a very charming thing too. 
And why are you so firmly, so triumphantly, convinced that only 
the normal and the positive-in other words, only what is conducive 
to welfare-is for the advantage of man ?  Is not reason in error as 
regards advantage? Does not man, perhaps, love something besides 
well-being? Perhaps he is just as fond of suffering? Perhaps suffering 
is just as great a benefit to him as well-being? Man is sometimes 

152 
The Short Novels of 'DostoevskY 
extraordinarily, passionately, in love with suffering, and that is a fact:' 
There is no need to appeal to universal history to prove that; only 
ask yourself, if you are a man and have lived at all. As far as my 
personal opinion is concerned, to care only for well-being seems to me 
positively ill-bred. Whether it's good or bad, it is sometimes very 
pleasant, too, to smash things. I hold no brief for suffering nor for 
well-being either. I am standing for . . .  my caprice, and for its being 
guaranteed to me when necessary. Suffering would be out of place in 
vaudevilles, for instance; I know that. In the "Palace of Crystal" it is 
unthinkable; suffering means doubt, negation, and what would be the 
good of a "palace of crystal" if there could be any doubt about it? And 
yet I think man will never renounce real suffering, that is, destruction 
and chaos. \Vhy, suffering is the sole origin of consciousness. Though 
I did lay it down at the beginning that consciousness is the greatest 
misfortune for man, yet I know man prizes it and would not give 
it up for any satisfaction. Consciousness, for instance, is infinitely 
superior to twice two makes four. Once you have mathematical cer­
tainty there is nothing left to do or to understand. There will be noth­
ing left but to bottle up your five senses and plunge into contemplation. 
While if you stick to consciousness, even though the same result is 
attained, you can at least flog yourself at times, and that will, at any 
rate, liven you up. Reactionary as it is, corporal punishment is better 
than nothing. 
[ X ) 
You believe in a palace of crystal that can never be destroyed-a 
palace at which one will not be able to put out one's tongue or make 
a long nose on the sly. And perhaps that is just why I am afraid of this 
edifice that it is of crystal and can never be destroyed and that one 
cannot put one's tongue out at it even on the sly. 
You see, if it were not a palace, but a hen-house, I might creep into 
it to avoid getting wet, and yet I would not call the hen-house a 
palace out of gratitude to it for keeping me dry. You laugh and say 
that in such circumstances a hen-house is as good as a mansion. Yes, I 
answer, if one had to live simply to keep out of the rain. 
But what is to be done if I have taken it into my head that that 
is not the only object in life, and that if one must live one had better 
live in a mansion. That is my choice, my desire. You will only eradi­
cate it when you have changed my preference. Well, do change it, 
allure me with something else, give me another ideal. But meanwhile 

N.otes from U11dergrou11d 
153 
I will not take a hen-house for a mansion. The palace of crystal may 
be an idle dream, it may be that it is inconsistent with the laws of 
nature and that I have invented it only through my own stupidity, 
tnrough the old-fashioned irrational habits of my generation. But 
what does it matter to me that it is inconsistent? That makes no 
difference since it exists in my desires, or rather exists as long as my 
desires exist. Perhaps you are laughing again? Laugh away; I will put 
up with any mockery rather than pretend that I am satisfied when I 
am hungry. I know, anyway, that I will not be put off with a com­
promise, with a recurring zero, simply because it is consistent with the 
laws of nature and actually exists. I will not accept as the crown of my 
desires a block of buildings with tenements for the poor on a lease 
of a thousand years, and perhaps with a sign-board of a dentist hanging 
out. Destroy my desires, eradicate my ideals, show me something 
better, and I will follow you. You will say, perhaps, that is not worth 
your trouble; but in that case I can give you the same answer. We are 
discussing things seriously; but if you won't deign to give me your 
attention, I will drop your acquaintance. I can retreat into my under­
ground hole. 
But while I am alive and have desires I would rather my hand 
were withered off than bring one brick to such a building! Don't 
remind me that I have just rejected the palace of crystal for the sole 
reason that one cannot put out one's tongue at it. I did not say because 
I am so fond of putting my tongue out. Perhaps the thing I resented 
was, that of all your edifices there has not been one at which one 
could not put out one's tongue. On the contrary, I would let my 
tongue be cut off out of gratitude if things could be so arranged that 
I should lose all desire to put it out. It is not my fault that things 
cannot be so arranged, and that one must be satisfied with model flats. 
Then why am I made with such desires? Can I have been constructed 
simply in order to come to the conclusion that all my construction is a 
cheat? Can this be my whole purpose? I do not believe it. 
But do you know what: I am convinced that we underground folk 
ought to be kept on a curb. Though we may sit forty years under­
ground without speaking, when we do come out into the light of day 
and break out we talk and talk and talk. 
[ XI ) 
The long and the short of it is, gentlemen, that it is better to do 
nothing! Better conscious inertia! And so hurrah for underground! 

154 
The Short Novels of 'DostoevskY_ 
Though I h:tve said that I envy the normal man to the last drop of my 
bile, yet I should not care to be in his place such as he is now (though 
I shall not cease envying him). No, no; anyway the underground life 
is more advantageous. There, at any rate, one can . . .  Oh, but even 
now I am lying! I am lying because I know myself that it is not 
underground that is better, but something different, quite different, 
for which I am thirsting, but which I cannot find! Damn under­
ground! 
I will tell you another thing that would be better, and that is, if I 
myself believed in anything of what I have just written. I swear to 
you, gentlemen, there is not one thing, not one word of what I have 
written, that I really believe. That is, I believe it, perhaps, but at the 
same time I feel and suspect that I am lying like a cobbler. 
"Then why have you written all this?" you will say to me. 
"I ought to put you underground for forty years without anything 
to do and then come to you in your cellar, to find out what stage you 
have reached! How can a man be left with nothing to do for forty 
years? 
"Isn't that shameful, isn't that humiliating?" you will say, perhaps, 
wagging your heads contemptuously. "You thirst for life and try to 
settle the problems of life by a logical tangle. And how persistent, 
how insolent are your sallies, and at the same time what a scare you are 
in! You talk nonsense and are pleased with it; you say impudent 
things and are in continual alarm and apologizing for them. You 
declare that you are afraid of nothing and at the same time try to 
ingratiate yourself in our good opinion. You declare that you are 
gnashing your teeth and at the same time you try to be witty so as to 
amuse us. You know that your witticisms are not witty, but you are 
evidently well satisfied with their literary value. You may, perhaps, 
have really suffered, but you have no respect for your own suffering. 
You may have sincerity, but you have no modesty; out of the pettiest 
vanity you expose your sincerity to publicity and ignominy. You 
doubtlessly mean to say something, but hide your last word through 
fear, because you have not the resolution to utter it, and only have a 
cowardly impudence. You boast of consciousness, but you are not 
sure of your ground, for though your mind works, yet your heart is 
darkened and corrupt, and you cannot have a full, genuine conscious­
ness without a pure heart. And how intrusive you are, how you insist 
and grimace! Lies, lies, lies!" 
Of course I have myself made up all the things you say. That, too, 
is from underground. I have been for forty years listening to you 

Notes from U12dcrground 
155 
through a crack under the Aoor. I have invented them myself, there 
was nothing else I could invent. It is no wonder that I have learned 
it by heart and it has taken a literary form . . . .  
But can you really be so credulous as to think that I will print all 
this and give it to you to read too ? And another problem : why do I 
call you "gentlemen," why do I address you as though you really were 
my readers ? Such confessions as I intend to make are never printed 
nor given to other people to read. Anyway, I am not strong-minded 
enough for that, and I don't see why I should be. But you see a fancy 
has occurred to me and I want to realize it at all costs. Let me explain. 
Every man has reminiscences which he would not tell to every one, 
but only to his friends. He has other matters in his mind which he 
would not reveal even to his friends, but only to himself, and that 
in secret. But there are other things which a man is afraid to tell even 
to himself, and every decent man has a number of such things stored 
away in his mind. The more decent he is, the greater the number of 
such things in his mind. Anyway, I have only lately determined to 
remember some of my early adventures. Till now I have always 
avoided them, even with a certain uneasiness. Now, when I am not 
only recalling them, but have actually decided to write an account 
of them, I want to try the experiment whether one can, even with 
oneself, be perfectly open and not take fright at the whole truth. I will 
observe, in parenthesis, that Heine says that a true autobiography is 
almost an impossibility, and that man is bound to lie about himself. 
He considers that Rousseau certainly told lies about himself in his con­
fessions, and even intentionally lied, out of vanity. I am convinced 
that Heine is right; I quite understand how sometimes one may, out 
of sheer vanity, attribute regular crimes to oneself, and indeed I can 
very well conceive that kind of vanity. But Heine judged of people 
who made their confessions to the public. I write only for myself, and 
I wish to declare once and for all that if I write as though I were 
addressing readers, that is simply because it is easier for me to write 
in that form. It is a form, an empty form-I shall never have readers. 
I have made this plain already . . . .  
I don't wish to be hampered by any restrictions in the compilation 
of my notes. I shall not attempt any system or method. I will jot things 
down as I remember them. 
But here, perhaps, some one will catch at the word and ask me: if 
you really don't reckon on readers, why do you make such compacts 
with yourself-and on paper too-that is, that you won't attempt any 
system or method, that you jot things down as you remember them, 

156 
'!he Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
and so on, and so on? Why are you explaining? Why do you 
apologize? 
Well, there it is, I answer. 
There is a whole psychology in all this, though. Perhaps it is simply 
that I am a coward. And perhaps that I purposely imagine an audience 
before me in order that I may be more dignified while I write. There 
are perhaps thousands of reasons. Again, what is my object precisely 
in writing? If it is not for the benefit of the public why should I not 
simply recall these incidents in my own mind without putting them 
on paper? 
Quite so; but yet it is more imposing on paper. There is something 
more impressive in it; I shall be better able to criticize myself and 
improve my style. Besides, I shall perhaps obtain actual relief from 
writing. To-day, for instance, I am particularly oppressed by one 
memory of a distant past. It came back vividly to my mind a few days 
ago, and has remained haunting me like an annoying tune that one 
cannot get rid of. And yet I must get rid of it somehow. I have hun­
dreds of such reminiscences; but at times some one stands out from the 
hundred and oppresses me. For some reason I believe that if I write 
it down I should get rid of it. Why not try? 
Besides, I am bored, and I never have anything to do. Writing will 
be a sort of work. They say work makes man kind-hearted and honest. 
Well, here is a chance for me, anyway. 
Snow is falling to-day, yellow and dingy. It fell yesterday, too, and 
a few days ago. I fancy it is the wet snow that has reminded me of 
that incident which I cannot shake off now. And so let it be a story 
apropos of the falling snow. 

Part 2 
Notes from Underground 
APROPOS OF THE WET SNOW 
When from dark error's subjugation 
My words of passionate exhortation 
Had wrenched thy fainting spirit free; 
And writhing prone in thine affiiction 
Thou didst recall with malediction 
The vice that had encompassed thee: 
And when thy slumbering conscience, fretting 
By recollection's torturing ll.ame, 
Thou didst reveal the hideous setting 
Of thy life's current ere I came: 
When suddenly I saw thee sicken, 
And weeping, hide thine anguished face, 
Revolted, maddened, horror-stricken, 
At memories of foul disgrace. 
157 
NEKRASSOV (tramlated by Juliet So1kice) 
[ I ] 
AT THAT time I was only twenty-four. My life was even then 
gloomy, ill-regulated, and as solitary as that of a savage. I made friends 
with no one and positively avoided talking, and buried myself more 
and more in my hole. At work in the office I never looked at any one, 
and I was perfectly well aware that my companions looked upon me, 
not only as a queer fellow, but even looked upon me-l always fancied 
this-with a sort of loathing. I sometimes wondered why it was that 
nobody except me fancied that he was looked upon with aversion. 
One of the clerks had a most repulsive, pock-marked face, which 
looked positively villainous. I believe I should not have dared to look 
at any one with such an unsightly countenance. Another had such a 
very dirty old uniform that there was an unpleasant odour in his 
proximity. Yet not one of these gentlemen showed the slightest self­
consciousness-either about their clothes or their countenance or their 
character in any way. Neither of them ever imagined that they were 
looked at with repulsion; if they had imagined it they would not have 
minded-so long as their superiors did not look at them in that way. 
It is clear to me now that, owing to my unbounded vanity and to the 

158 
The Short N.ovels of 'Dostoevsky 
high standard I set for myself, I often looked at myself with furious 
discontent, which verged on loathing, and so I inwardly attributed the 
same feeling to every one. I hated my face, for instance: I thought it 
disgusting, and even suspected that there was something base in my 
expression, and so every day when I turned up at the office I tried to 
behave as independently as possible, and to assume a lofty expression, 
so that I might not be suspected of being abject. "My face may be 
ugly," I thought, "but let it be lofty, expressive, and, above all, ex­
tremely intelligent." But I was positively and painfully certain that it 
was impossible for my countenance ever to express those qualities. 
And what was worst of all, I thought it actually stupid-looking, and 
I would have been quite satisfied if I could have looked intelligent. 
In fact, I would even have put up with looking base if, at the same 
time, my face could have been thought strikingly intelligent. 
Of course, I hated my fellow-clerks one and all, and I despised them 
all, yet at the same time I was, as it were, afraid of them. In fact, it 
happened at times that I thought more highly of them than of myself. 
It somehow happened quite suddenly that I alternated between despis­
ing them and thinking them superior to myself. A cultivated and 
decent man cannot be vain without setting a fearfully high standard 
for himself, and without despising and almost hating himself at cer­
tain moments. But whether I despised them or thought them superior 
I dropped my eyes almost every time I met any one. I even made 
experiments whether I could face So-and-So's looking at me, and I was 
always the first to drop my eyes. This worried me to distraction. I had 
a sickly dread, too, of being ridiculous, and so had a slavish passion 
for the conventional in everything external. I loved to fall into the 
common rut, and had a whole-hearted terror of any kind of eccen­
tricity in myself. But how could I live up to it? I was morbidly sensi­
tive, as a man of our age should be. They were all stupid, and as like 
one another as so many sheep. Perhaps I was the only one in the office 
who fancied that I was a coward and a slave, and I fancied it just 
because I was more highly developed. But it was not only that I 
fancied it, it really was so. I was a coward and a slave. I say this without 
the slightest embarrassment. Every decent man of our age must be a 
coward and a slave. That is his normal condition. Of that I am firmly 
persuaded. He is made and constructed to that very end. And not only 
at the present time owing to some casual circumstances, but always, 
at all times, a decent man is bound to be a coward and a slave. It is 
the law of nature for all decent people all over the earth. If any one 
of them happens to be valiant about something, he need not be com-

Notes from U11dergrottnd 
159 
forted nor carried away by that; he would show the white feather just 
the same before somt:thing else. That is how it invariably and inevi­
tably ends. Only donkeys and mules are valiant, and they only till they 
are pushed up to the wall. It is not worth while to pay attention to 
them, for they really are of no consequence. 
Another circumstance, too, worried me in those days: that there 
was no one like me and I was unlike any one else. "I am alone and they 
are every one," I thought-and pondered. 
From that it is evident that I was still a youngster. 
The very opposite sometimes happened. It was loathsome sometimes 
to go to the office; things reached such a point that I often came home 
ill. But all at once, apropos of nothing, there would come a phase of 
skepticism and indifference (everything happened in phases to me), 
and I would laugh myself at my intolerance and fastidiousness, I would 
reproach myself with being romantic. At one time I was unwilling to 
speak to any one, while at other times I would not only talk, but go to 
the length of contemplating making friends with them. All my fas­
tidiousness would suddenly, for no rhyme or reason, vanish. Who 
knows, perhaps I never had really had it, and it had simply been 
affected, and got out of books. I have not decided that question even 
now. Once I quite made friends with them, visited their homes, played 
preference, drank vodka, talked of promotions 
.
.
•
.
 But here let me 
make a digression. 
\Ve Russians, speaking generally, have never had those foolish tran­
scendental "romantics"-German, and still more French--on whom 
nothing produces any effect; if there were an earthquake, if all France 
perished at the barricades, they would still be the same, they would 
not even have the decency to affect a change, but would still go on 
singing their transcendental songs to the hour of their death, because 
they are fools. \Ve, in Russia, have no fools; that is well known. That 
is what distinguishes us from foreign lands. Consequently these tran­
scendental natures are not found amongst us in their pure form. The 
idea that they are is due to our "realistic" journalists and critics of that 
day, always on the lookout for Kostanzhoglos and Uncle Pyotr 
lvanitches and foolishly accepting them as our ideal; they have slan­
dered our romantics, taking them for the same transcendental sort as 
in Germany or France. On the contrary, the characteristics of our 
"romantics" are absolutely and directly opposed to the transcendental 
European type, and no European standard can be applied to them. 
(Allow me to make use of this word "romantic"-an old-fashioned 
and much respected word which has done good service and is familiar 

160 
'!he Short 'Novels of Vostoevsky 
to all.) The characteristics of our romantics are to understand every­
thing, to see everything and to see it often incomparably more clearly 
than our most realistic minds see it; to refuse to accept anyone or any­
thing, but at the same time not to despise anything; to give way, to 
yield, from policy; never to lose sight of a useful practical object (such 
as rent-free quarters at the government expense, pensions, decora­
tions), to keep their eye on that object through all the enthusiasms and 
volumes of lyrical poems, and at the same time to preserve "the good 
and the beautiful" inviolate within them to the hour of their death, 
and to preserve themselves also, incidentally, like some precious jewel 
wrapped in cotton wool if only for the benefit of "the good and the 
beautiful." Our "romantic" is a man of great breadth and the greatest 
rogue of all our rogues, I assure you . . . .  I can assure you from 
experience, indeed. Of course, that is, if he is intelligent. But what am 
I saying! The romantic is always intelligent, and I only meant to 
observe that although we have had foolish romantics they don't count, 
and they were only so because in the flower of their youth they degen­
erated into Germans, and to preserve their precious jewel more com­
fortably, settled somewhere out there-by preference in Weimar or the 
Black Forest. 
I, for instance, genuinely despised my official work and did not 
openly abuse it simply because I was in it myself and got a salary for it. 
Anyway, take note, I did not openly abuse it. Our romantic would 
rather go out of his mind-a thing, however, which very rarely 
happens-than take to open abuse, unless he had some other career in 
view; and he is never kicked out. At most, they would take him to the 
lunatic asylum as "the King of Spain" if he should go very mad. But 
it is only the thin, fair people who go out of their minds in Russia. 
Innumerable "romantics" attain later in life to considerable rank in the 
service. Their many-sidedness is remarkable! And what a faculty they 
have for the most contradictory sensations! I was comforted by this 
thought even in those days, and I am of the same opinion now. That 
is why there are so many "broad natures" among us who never lose 
their ideal even in the depths of degradation; and though they never 
stir a finger for their ideal, though they are arrant thieves and knaves, 
yet they tearfully cherish their first ideal and are extraordinarily honest 
at heart. Yes, it is only among us that the most incorrigible rogue can 
be absolutely and loftily honest at heart without in the least ceasing 
to be a rogue. I repeat, our romantics, frequently, become such accom­
plished rascals (I use the term "rascals" affectionately), suddenly·dis­
f?lay such a sense of reality and practical knowledge, that their be· 

Notes from Underground 
161 
wildered superiors and the public generally can only ejaculate in 
amazement. 
Their many-sidedness is really amazing, and goodness knows what 
it may develop into later on, and what the future has in store for us. 
It is not a poor material! I do not say this from any foolish or boastful 
patriotism. But I feel sure that you are again imagining that I am 
joking. Or perhaps it's just the contrary, and you are convinced that I 
really think so. Anyway, gentlemen, I shall welcome both views as an 
honour and a special favour. And do forgive my digression. 
I did not, of course, maintain friendly relations with my comrades 
and soon was at loggerheads with them, and in my youth and inexpe­
rience I even gave up bowing to them, as though I had cut off all 
relations. That, however, only happened to me once. As a rule, I was 
always alone. 
In the first place I spent most of my time at home, reading. I tried 
to stifle all that was continually seething within me by means of ex­
ternal impressions. And the only external means I had was reading. 
Reading, of course, was a great help-exciting me, giving me pleasure 
and pain. But at times it bored me fearfully. One longed for move­
ment in spite of everything, and I plunged all at once into dark, under­
ground, loathsome vice of the pettiest kind. My wretched passions 
were acute, smarting, from my continual, sickly irritability. I had 
hysterical impulses, with tears and convulsions. I had no resource 
except reading-that is, there was nothing in my surroundings which I 
could respect and which attracted me. I was overwhelmed with depres­
sion, too; I had an hysterical craving for incongruity and for contrast, 
and so I took to vice. I have not said all this to justify myself .
.
•
.
 
But, no! I am lying. I did want to justify myself. I make that little 
observation for my own benefit, gentlemen. I don't want to lie. I 
vowed to myself I would not. 
And so, furtively, timidly, in solitude, at night, I indulged in filthy 
vice, with a feeling of shame which never deserted me, even at the 
most loathsome moments, and which at such moments nearly made 
me curse. Already even then I had my underground world in my soul. 
I was fearfully afraid of being seen, of being met, of being recognized. 
I visited various obscure haunts. 
One night as I was passing a tavern I saw through a lighted window 
some gentlemen fighting with billiard cues, and saw one of them 
thrown out of the window. At other times I should have felt very much 
disgusted, but I was in such a mood at the time, that I actually envied 
the gentleman thrown out of the window-and I envied him so much 

162 
The Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
that I even went into the tavern and into the billiard-room. "Perhaps," 
I thought, "I'll have a fight, too, and they'll throw me out of the 
window." 
I was not drunk-but what is one to do-depression will drive a 
man to such a pitch of hysteria? But nothing happened. It seemed 
that I was not even equal to being thrown out of the window and I 
went away without having my fight. 
An officer put me in my place from the first moment. 
I was standing by the billiard-table and in my ignorance blocking up 
the way, and he wanted to pass; he took me by the shoulders and 
without a word-without a warning or an explanation-moved me 
from where I was standing to another spot and passed by as though he 
had not noticed me. I could have forgiven blows, but I could not 
forgive his having moved me without noticing me. 
Devil knows what I would have given for a real regular quarrel 
-a more decent, a more literary one, so to speak. I had been treated 
like a fly. This officer was over six foot, while I was a spindly little 
fellow. But the quarrel was in my hands. I had only to protest and I 
certainly would have been thrown out of the window. But I changed 
my mind and preferred to beat a resentful retreat. 
I wem out of the tavern straight home, confused and troubled, and 
the next night I went out again with the same lewd intentions, still 
more furtively, abjectly and miserably than before, as it were, with 
tears in my eyes-but still I did go out again. Don't imagine, though, 
it was cowardice made me slink away from the officer: I never have 
been a coward at heart, though I have always been a coward in action. 
Don't be in a hurry to laugh-! assure you I can explain it all. 
Oh, if only that officer had been one of the sort who would consent 
to fight a duel! But no, he was one of those gentlemen (alas, long 
extinct!) who preferred fighting with cues, or, like Gogol's Lieutenant 
Pirogov, appealing to the police. They did not fight duels and would 
have thought a duel with a civilian like me an utterly unseemly pro­
cedure in any case-and they looked upon the duel altogether as 
something impossible, something free-thinking and French. But they 
were quite ready to bully, especially when they were over six foot. 
I did not slink away through cowardice, but through an unbounded 
vanity. I was afraid not of his six foot, not of getting a sound thrashing 
and being thrown out of the window; I should have had physical 
courage enough, I assure you; but I had not the moral courage. What 
I was afraid of was that every one present, from the insolent marker 
down to the lowest little stinking, pimply clerk in a greasy collar, 

Notes from Underground 
163 
would jeer at me and fail to understand when I began to protest and 
to address them in literary language. For of the point of honour-not 
of honour, but of the point of honour (point d' lwnneur )-one cannot 
speak among us except in literary language. You can't allude to the 
"point of honour" in ordinary language. I was fully convinced (the 
sense of reality, in spite of all my romanticism!) that they would all 
simply split their sides with laughter, and that the officer would not 
simply beat me, that is, without insulting me, but would certainly 
prod me in the back with his knee, kick me round the billiard-table, 
and only then perhaps have pity and drop me out of the window. 
Of course, this trivial incident could not with me end in that. I 
often met that officer afterwards in the street and noticed him very 
carefully. I am not quite sure whether he recognized me, I imagine 
not; I judge from certain signs. But 1-1 stared at him with spite and 
hatred and so it went on . . .  for several years! My resentment grew 
even deeper with years. At first I began making stealthy inquiries 
about this officer. It was difficult for me to do so, for I knew no one. 
But one day I heard some one shout his surname in the street as I 
was following him at a distance, as though I were tied to him-and 
so I learnt his surname. Another time I followed him to his flat, and 
for ten kopecks learnt from the porter where he lived, on which 
storey, whether he lived alone or with others, and so on-in fact, 
everything one could learn from a porter. One morning, though I had 
never tried my hand with the pen, it suddenly occurred to me to 
write a satire on this officer in the form of a novel which would 
unmask his villainy. I wrote the novel with relish. I did unmask his 
villainy, I even exaggerated it; at first I so altered his surname that it 
could easily be recognized, but on second thoughts I changed it, and 
sent the story to the Otetchestvenniya Zapiski. But at that time such 
attacks were not the fashion and my story was not printed. That was a 
great vexation to me. 
Sometimes I was positively choked with resentment. At last I deter­
mined to challenge my enemy to a duel. I composed a splendid, charm­
ing letter to him, imploring him to apologize to me, and hinting rather 
plainly at a duel in case of refusal. The letter was so composed that if 
the officer had had the least understanding of the good and the beauti­
ful he would certainly have flung himself on my neck and have offered 
me his friendship. And how fine that would have been! How we 
should have got on together! "He could have shielded me with his 
higher rank, while I could have improved his mind with my culture, 
and, well . . .  mv ideas, and all sorts of things might have happened." 

164 
'I he Short N.ovels of 'Dostoevsfo· 
Only fancy, this was two years after his insult to me, and my challenge 
would have been a ridiculous anachronism, in spite of all the ingenuity 
of my letter in disguising and explaining away the anachronism. But, 
thank God (to this day I thank the Almighty with tears in my eyes) 
I did not send the letter to him. Cold shivers run down my back when 
I think of what might have happened if I had sent it. 
And all at once I revenged myself in the simplest way, by a stroke 
of genius! A brilliant thought suddenly dawned upon me. Sometimes 
on holidays I used to stroll along the sunny side of the Nevsky about 
four o'clock in the afternoon. Though it was hardly a stroll so much 
as a series of innumerable miseries, humiliations and resentments; but 
no doubt that was just what I wanted. I used to wriggle along in a 
most unseemly fashion, like an eel, continually moving aside to make 
way for generals, for officers of the Guards and the Hussars, or for 
ladies. At such minutes there used to be a convulsive twinge at my 
heart, and I used to feel hot all down my back at the mere thought 
of the wretchedness of my attire, of the wretchedness and abjectness 
of my little scurrying figure. This was a regular martyrdom, a con­
tinual, intolerable humiliation at the thought, which passed into an 
incessant and direct sensation, that I was a mere fly in the eyes of all 
this world, a nasty, disgusting fly-more intelligent, more highly de­
veloped, more refined in feeling than any of them, of course, but a 
fly that was continually making way for every one, insulted and in­
jured by every one. Why I inflicted this torture upon myself, why I 
went to the Nevsky, I don't know. I felt simply drawn there at every 
possible opportunity. 
Already then I began to experience a rush of the enjoyment of which 
I spoke in the first chapter. After my affair with the officer I felt even 
more drawn there than before: it was on the Nevsky that I met him 
most frequently, there I could admire him. He, too, went there chiefly 
on holidays. He, too, turned out of his path for generals and persons 
of high rank, and he, too, wriggled between them like an eel; but 
people like me, or even better dressed like me, he simply walked 
over; he made straight for them as though there was nothing but 
empty space before him, and ne\·er, under any circumstances, turned 
aside. I gloated over my resentment watching him and , . .  always 
resentfully made way for him. It exasperated me that even in the 
street I could not be on an even footing with him. 
"Why must you invariably be the first to move aside?" I kept asking 
myself in hysterical rage, waking up sometimes at three o'clock in the 
mormng. "Why is it you and not he? There's no regulation about it; 

Notes from Underground 
165 
there's no written law. Let the making way be equal as it usually is 
when refined people meet: he moves half-way and you move half-way; 
you pass with mutual respect." 
But that never happened, and I always moved aside, while he did 
not even notice my making way for him. And lo and behold a bright 
idea dawned upon me! "What," I thought, "if I meet him and don't 
move on one side? What if I don't move aside on purpose, even if I 
knock up against him ? How would that be?" This audacious idea 
took such a hold on me that it gave me no peace. I was dreaming of 
it continually, horribly, and I purposely went more frequently to the 
Nevsky in order to picture more vividly how I should do it when I did 
do it. I was delighted. This intention seemed to me more and more 
practical and possible. 
"Of course I shall not really push him," I thought, already more 
good-natured in my joy. "I will simply not turn aside, will run up 
against him, not very violently, but just shouldering each other-just 
as much as decency permits. I will push against him just as much as 
he pushes against me." At last I made up my mind completely. But my 
preparations took a great deal of time. To begin with, when I carried 
out my plan I should need to be looking rather more decent, and so I 
had to think of my get-up. "In case of emergency, if, for instance, 
there were any sort of public scandal (and the public there is of the 
most recliercM: the Countess walks there; Prince D. walks there; all 
the literary world is there), I must be well dressed ; that inspires respect 
and of itself puts us on an equal footing in the eyes of society." 
With this object I asked for some of my salary in advance, and 
bought at Tchurkin's a pair of black gloves and a decent hat. Black 
gloves seemed to me both more dignified and bon ton than the lemon­
coloured ones which I had contemplated at first. "The colour is too 
gaudy, it looks as though one were trying to be conspicuous," and I 
did not take the lemon-coloured ones. I had got ready long beforehand 
a good shirt, with white bone studs; my overcoat was the only thing 
that held me back. The coat in itself was a very good one, it kept me 
warm ; but it was wadded and it had a raccoon collar which was the 
height of vulgarity. I had to change the collar at any sacrifice, and to 
have a beaver one like an officer's. For this purpose I began visiting 
the Gostiny Dvor and after several attempts I pitched upon a piece of 
cheap German beaver. Though these German beavers soon grow 
shabby and look wretched, yet at first they look exceedingly well, and 
I only needed it for one occasion. I asked the price; even so, it was too 
expensive. After thinking it over thoroughly I decided to sell my 

166 
The Short Novels of 7Jostoevsky 
raccoon collar. The rest of the money-a considerable sum for me, I 
decided to borrow from Anton Antonitch Syetotchkin, my immediate 
superior, an unassuming person, though grave and judicious. He never 
lent money to any one, but I had, on entering the service, been spe­
cially recommended to him by an important personage who had got 
me my berth. I was horribly worried. To borrow from Anton Anton­
itch seemed to me monstrous and shameful. I did not sleep for two or 
three nights. Indeed, I did not sleep well at that time, I was in a fever; 
I had a vague sinking at my heart or else a sudden throbbing, throb­
bing, throbbing! Anton Antonitch was surprised at first, then he 
frowned, then he reflected, and did after all lend me the money, receiv­
ing from me a written authorization to take from my salary a fortnight 
later the sum that he had lent me. 
In this way everything was at last ready. The handsome beaver 
replaced the mean-looking raccoon, and I began by degrees to get to 
work. It would never have done to act off-hand, at random; the plan 
had to be carried out skilfully, by degrees. But I must confess that after 
many efforts I began to despair: we simply could not run into each 
other. I made every preparation, I was quite determined-it seemed as 
though we should run into one another directly-and before I knew 
what I was doing I had stepped aside for him again and he had passed 
without noticing me. I even prayed as I approached him that God 
would grant me determination. One time I had made up my mind 
thoroughly, but it ended in my stumbling and falling at his feet be­
cause at the very last instant when I was six inches from him my 
courage failed me. He very calmly stepped over me, while I flew on 
one side like a ball. That night I was ill again, feverish and delirious. 
And suddenly it ended most happily. The night before I had made 
up my mind not to carry out my fatal plan and to abandon it all, and 
with that object I went to the Nevsky for the last time, just to see how 
I would abandon it all. Suddenly, three paces from my enemy, I 
unexpectedly made up my mind-! closed my eyes, and we ran full 
tilt, shoulder to shoulder, against one another! I did not budge an inch 
and passed him on a perfectly equal footing! He did not even look 
round and pretended not to notice it; but he was only pretending, I am 
convinced of that. I am convinced of that to this day! Of course, I got 
the worst of it-he was stronger, but that was not the point. The point 
was that I had attained my object, I had kept up my dignity, I had not 
yielded a step, and had put myself publicly on an equal social footing 
with him. I returned home feeling that I was fully avenged for every­
thing. I was delighted. I was triumphant and sang Italian arias. Of 

Notes from Underground 
167 
course, I will not describe to you what happened to me three days 
later; if you have read my first chapter you can guess that for yourself. 
The officer was afterwards transferred; I have not seen him now for 
fourteen years. \Vhat is the dear fellow doing now ? Whom is he 
walking over? 
( II ] 
But the period of my dissipation would end and I always felt very 
sick afterwards. It was followed by remorse-! tried to drive it away: 
I felt too sick. By degrees, however, I grew used to that too. I grew 
used to everything, or rather I voluntarily resigned myself to enduring 
it. But I had a means of escape that reconciled everything-that was to 
find refuge in "the good and the beautiful," in dreams, of course. 
I was a terrible dreamer, I would dream for three months on end, 
tucked away in my corner, and you may believe me that at those 
moments I had no resemblance to the gentleman who, in the per­
turbation of his chicken heart, put a collar of German beaver on his 
greatcoat. I suddenly became a hero. I would not have admitted my 
six-foot lieutenant even if he had called on me. I could not even picture 
him before me then. What were my dreams and how I could satisfy 
myself with them, it is hard to say now, but at the time I was satisfied 
with them. Though, indeed, even now I am to some extent satisfied 
with them. Dreams were particularly sweet and vivid after a spell 
of dissipation; they came with remorse and with tears, with curses and 
transports. There were moments of such positive intoxication, of such 
happiness, that there was not the faintest trace of irony within me, on 
my honour. I had faith, hope, love. I believed blindly at such times that 
by some miracle, by some external circumstance, all this would sud­
denly open out, expand; that suddenly a vista of suitable activity­
beneficent, good, and, above all, ready-made (what sort of activity I 
had no idea, but the great thing was that it should be all ready for 
me )-would rise up before me, and I should come out into the light 
of day, almost riding a white horse and crowned with laurel. Anything 
but the foremost place I could not conceive for myself, and for that 
very reason I quite contentedly occupied the lowest in reality. Either 
to be a hero or to grovel in the mud-there was nothing between. That 
was my ruin, for when I was in the mud I comforted myself with the 
thought that at other times I was a hero, and the hero was a cloak for 
the mud : for an ordinary man it was shameful to defile himself, but a 
hero was too lofty to be utterly defiled, and so he might defile himself. 

168 
The Short N.otels of 'DostoetskJ 
It is worth noting that these attacks of "the good and the beautiful" 
visited me even during the period of dissipation and just at the times 
when I was touching the bottom. They came in separate spurts, as 
though reminding me of themselves, but did not banish the dissipation 
by their appearance. On the contrary, they seemed to add a zest to it 
by contrast, and were only sufficiently present to serve as an appetizing 
sauce. That sauce was made up of contradictions and sufferings, of 
agonizing inward analysis, and all these pangs and pin-pricks gave a 
certain piquancy, even a significance to my dissipation-in fact, com­
pletely answered the purpose of an appetizing sauce. There was a 
certain depth of meaning in it. And I could hardly have resigned 
myself to the simple, vulgar, direct debauchery of a clerk and have 
endured all the filthiness of it. What could have allured me about it 
then and have drawn me at night into the street? No, I had a lofty 
way of getting out of it all. 
And what loving-kindness, oh Lord, what loving-kindness I felt at 
times in those dreams of mine! in those "flights into the good and the 
beautiful"; though it was fantastic love, though it was never applied 
to anything human in reality, yet there was so much of this love that 
one did not feel afterwards even the impulse to apply it in reality; that 
would have been superfluous. Everything, however, passed satisfactorily 
by a lazy and fascinating transition into the sphere of art, that is, into 
the beautiful forms of life, lying ready, largely stolen from the poets 
and novelists and adapted to all sorts of needs and uses. I, for instance, 
was triumphant over every one; every one, of course, was in dust and 
ashes, and was forced spontaneously to recognize my superiority, and 
I forgave them all. I was a poet and a grand gentleman, I fell in love; 
I came in for countless millions and immediately devoted them to 
humanity, and at the same time I confessed before all the people my 
shameful deeds, which, of course, were not merely shameful, but had 
in them much that was "good and beautiful," something in the Man­
fred style. Every one would kiss me and weep (what idiots they would 
be if they did not), while I should go barefoot and hungry preaching 
new ideas and fighting a victorious Austerlitz against the obscurantists. 
Then the band would play a march, an amnesty would be declared, 
the Pope would agree to retire from Rome to Brazil; then there would 
be a ball for the whole of Italy at the Villa Borghese on the shores 
of Lake Como, Lake Como being for that purpose transferred 
to the neighbourhood of Rome; then would come a scene in the 
bushes, and so on, and so on-as though you did not know all about it! 
You will say that it is vulgar and contemptible to drag all this into 

Notes from Underground 
169 
public after all the tears and transports which I have myself confessed. 
But why is it contemptible? Can you imagine that I am ashamed of it 
all, and that it was stupider than anything in your life, gentlemen? 
And I can assure you that some of these fancies were by no means 
badly composed . . . .  It did not all happen on the shores of Lake 
Como. And yet you are right-it really is vulgar and contemptible. 
And most contemptible of all it is that now I am attempting to justify 
myself to you. And even more contemptible than that is my making 
this remark now. But that's enough, or there will be no end to it: 
each step will be more contemptible than the last . . . .  
I could never stand more than three months of dreaming at a time 
without feeling an irresistible desire to plunge into society. To plunge 
into society meant to visit my superior at the office, Anton Antonitch 
Syetotchkin. He was the only permanent acquaintance I have had in 
my life, and I wonder at the fact myself now. But I only went to see him 
when that phase came over me, and when my dreams had reached 
such a point of bliss that it became essential at once to embrace my 
fellows and all mankind; and for that purpose I needed at least one 
human being, actually existing. I had to call on Anton Antonitch, 
however, on Tuesday-his at-home day; so I had always to time my 
passionate desire to embrace humanity so that it might fall on a 
Tuesday. 
This Anton Antonitch lived on the fourth storey in a house in Five 
Corners, in four low-pitched rooms, one smaller than the other, of a 
particularly frugal and sallow appearance. He had two daughters and 
their aunt, who used to pour out the tea. Of the daughters one was 
thirteen and another fourteen, they both had snub noses, and I was 
awfully shy of them because they were always whispering and giggling 
together. The master of the house usually sat in his study on a leather 
couch in front of the table with some grey-headed gentleman, usually a 
colleague from our office or some other department. I never saw more 
than two or three visitors there, always the same. They talked about 
the excise duty, about business in the senate, about salaries, about 
promotions, about His Excellency, and the best means of pleasing him, 
and so on. I had the patience to sit like a fool beside these people for 
four hours at a stretch, listening to them without knowing what to 
say to them or venturing to say a word. I became stupefied, several 
times I felt myself perspiring, I was overcome by a sort of paralysis; 
but this was pleasant and good for me. On returning home I deferred 
for a time my desire to embrace all mankind. 
I had, however, one other acquaintance of a sort, Sirnonov, who was 

170 
The Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
an old schoolfellow. I had a number of schoolfellows indeed in Peters­
burg, but I did not associate with them and had even given up nodding 
to them in the street. I believe I had transferred into the depa1 tment I 
was in simply to avoid their company and to cut off all connection with 
my hateful childhood. Curses on that school and all those terrible 
years of penal servitude! In short, I parted from my schoolfellows as 
soon as I got out into the world. There were two or three left to whom 
I nodded in the street. One of them was Simonov, who had been in 
no way distinguished at school, was of a quiet and equable disposition; 
but I discovered in him a certain independence of character and even 
honesty. I don't even suppose that he was particularly stupid. I had at 
one time spent some rather soulful moments with him, but these had 
not lasted long and had somehow been suddenly clouded over. He 
was evidently uncomfortable at these reminiscences, and was, I fancy, 
always afraid that I might take up the same tone again. I suspected 
that he had an aversion for me, but still I went on going to see him, 
not being quite certain of it. 
And so on one occasion, unable to endure my solitude and knowing 
that as it was Thursday Anton Antonitch's door would be closed, I 
thought of Simonov. Climbing up to his fourth storey I was thinking 
that the man disliked me and that it was a mistake to go and see him. 
But as it always happened that such reflections impelled me, as though 
purposely, to put myself into a false position, I went in. It was almost 
a year since I had last seen Simonov. 
[ nr ] 
I found two of my old schoolfellows with him. They seemed to be 
discussing an important matter. All of them took scarcely any notice 
of my entrance, which was strange, for I had not met them for years. 
Evidently they looked upon me as something on the level of a common 
fly. I had not been treated like that even at school, though they all 
hated me. I knew, of course, that they must despise me now for my 
lack of success in the service, and for my having let myself sink so 
low, going about badly dressed and so on-which seemed to them a 
sign of my incapacity and insignificance. But I had not expected such 
contempt. Simonov was positively surprised at my turning up. Even 
in the old days he had always seemed surprised at my coming. All this 
disconcerted me: I sat down, feeling rather miserable, and began listen­
ing to what they were saying. 
They were engaged in warm and earnest conversation about a fan:-

N.otes from Uttderground 
171 
well dinner which they wanted to arrange for the next day to a com­
rade of theirs called Zverkov, an officer in the army, who was going 
away to a distant provin'ce. This Zverkov had been all the time at 
school with me too. I had begun to hate him particularly in the upper 
forms. In the lower forms he had simply been a pretty, playful boy 
whom everybody liked. I had hated him, however, even in the lower 
forms, just because he was a pretty and playful boy. He was always 
bad at his lessons and got worse and worse as he went on ; however, 
he left with a good certificate, as he had powerful interest. During his 
last year at school he came in for an estate of two hundred serfs, and 
as almost all of us were poor he took up a swaggering tone among us. 
He was vulgar in the extreme, but at the same time he was a good­
natured fellow, even in his swaggering. In spite of superficial, fan­
tastic and sham notions of honour and dignity, all but very few of us 
positively grovelled before Zverkov, and the more so the more he 
swaggered. And it was not from any interested motive that they 
grovelled, but simply because he had been favoured by the gifts of 
nature. Moreover, it was, as it were, an accepted idea among us that 
Zverkov was a specialist in regard to tact and the social graces. This 
last fact particularly infuriated me. I hated the abrupt self-confident 
tone of his voice, his admiration of his own witticisms, which were 
often frightfully stupid, though he was bold in his language; I hated 
his handsome but stupid face (for which I would, however, have 
gladly exchanged my intelligent one), and the free-and-easy military 
manners in fashion in the "forties." I hated the way in which he used 
to talk of his future conquests of women (he did not venture to begin 
his attack upon women until he had the epaulettes of an officer, and 
was looking forward to them with impatience), and boasted of the 
duels he would constantly be fighting. I remember how I, invariably 
so taciturn, suddenly fastened upon Zverkov, when one day talking 
at a leisure moment with his schoolfellows of his future relations with 
the fair sex, and growing as sportive as a puppy in the sun, he all at 
once declared that he would not leave a single village girl on his estate 
unnoticed, that that was his droit de seigneur, and that if the peasants 
dared to protest he would have them all flogged and double the tax 
on them, the bearded rascals. Our servile rabble applauded, but I 
attacked him, not from compassion for the girls and their fathers, but 
simply because they were applauding such an insect. I got the better of 
him on that occasion, but though Zverkov was stupid he was lively and 
impudent, and so laughed it off, and in such a way that my victory 
was not really complete: the laugh was on his side. He got the better 

172 
The Short Novels of Vostoevsky 
of me on several occasions afterwards, but without malice, jestingly, 
casually. I remained angrily and contemptuously silent and would not 
answer him. When we left school he made advances to me; I did not 
rebuff them, for I was flattered, but we soon parted and quite naturally. 
Afterwards I heard of his barrack-room success as a lieutenant, and of 
the fast life he was leading. Then there came other rumours-of his 
successes in the service. By then he had taken to cutting me in the 
street, and I suspected that he was afraid of compromising himself 
by greeting a personage as insignificant as I. I saw him once in the 
theatre, in the third tier of boxes. By then he was wearing shoulder· 
straps. He was twisting and twirling about, ingratiating himself with 
the daughters of an ancient general. In three years he had gone off 
considerably, though he was still rather handsome and adroit. One 
could see that by the time he was thirty he would be corpulent. So it 
was to this Zverkov that my schoolfellows were going to give a dinner 
on his departure. They had kept up with him for those three years, 
though privately they did not consider themselves on an equal footing 
with him, I am convinced of that. 
Of Simonov's two visitors, one was Ferfitchkin, a Russianized Ger­
man-a little fellow with the face of a monkey, a blockhead who was 
always deriding every one, a \'cry bitter enemy of mine from our days 
in the lower forms-a vulgar, impudent, swaggering fellow, who 
affected a most sensitive feeling of personal honour, though, of course, 
he was a wretched little coward at heart. He was one of those wor­
shippers of Zverkov who made up to the latter from interested motives, 
and often borrowed money from him. Simonov's other visitor, Tru­
dolyubov, was a person in no way remarkable-a tall young fellow, 
in the army, with a cold face, fairly honest, though he worshipped 
success of every sort, and was only capable of thinking of promotion. 
He was some sort of distant relation of Zverko,•'s, and this, foolish as it 
seems, gave him a certain importance among us. He always thought 
me of no consequence whate\·er; his behaviour to me, though not 
quite courteous, was tolerable. 
"\Veil, with seven roubles each," said Trudolyubov, "twenty-one 
roubles between the three of us, we ought to be able to get a good 
dinner. Zverkov, of course, won't pay." 
"Of course not, since we are inviting him," Simonov decided. 
"Can you imagine," Ferfitchkin interrupted hotly and conceitedly, 
like some insolent flunkey boasting of his master the general's deco­
rations, "can you imagine that Zverkov will let us pay alone? He will 

Notes from Underground 
173 
accept from delicacy, but he will order half a dozen bottles of cham­
pagne." 
"Do we want half a dozen for the four of us?" observed Tru­
dolyubov, taking notice only of the half-dozen. 
"So the three of us, with Zverkov for the fourth, twenty-one roubles, 
at the Hotel de Paris at five o'clock to-morrow," Simonov, who had 
been asked to make the arrangements, concluded finally. 
"How twenty-one roubles?" I asked in some agitation, with a show 
of being offended ; "if you count me it will not be twenty-one, but 
twenty-eight roubles." 
It l'eemed to me that to invite myself so suddenly and unexpectedly 
would be positively graceful, and that they would all be conquered 
at once and would look at me with respect. 
"Do you want to join, too ? "  Simonov observed, with no appearance 
of pleasure, seeming to avoid looking at me. He knew me through and 
through. 
It infuriated me that he knew me so thoroughly. 
"Why not? I am an old schoolfellow of his too, I believe, and I must 
own I feel hurt that you have left me out," I said, boiling over again. 
"And where were we to find you ?" Ferfitchkin put in roughly. 
"You never were on good terms with Zverkov," Trudolyubov added, 
frowning. 
But I had already clutched at the idea and would not give it up. 
"It seems to me that no one has a right to form an opinion upon that," 
retorted in a shaking voice, as though something tremendous had 
happened. "Perhaps that is just my reason for wishing it now, that I 
have not always been on good terms with him." 
"Oh, there's no making you out . . .  with these refinements," Tru­
dolyubov jeered. 
"\Ve'll put your name down," Simonov decided, addressing me. 
"To-morrow at five o'clock at the Hotel de Paris." 
"What about the money?" Ferfitchkin began in an undertone, indi­
cating me to Simonov, but he broke off, for even Simonov was 
embarrassed. 
"That will do," said Trudolyubov, getting up. "If he wants to come 
so much, let him." 
"But it's a private thing, between us friends," Ferfitchkin said 
crossly, as he too picked up his hat. "It's not an official gathering." 
"We do not want at all, perhaps . . .  
" 
They went away. Ferfitchkin did not greet me in any way as he 
went out, Trudolyubov barely nodded. Simonov, with whom I was 

174 
The Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
left tet.-:-a-tete, was in a state of vexation and perplexity, and looked 
at me queerly. He did not sit down and did not ask me to. 
"H'm . . .  yes . . .  to-morrow, then. Will you pay your subscrip­
tion now? I just ask so as to know," he muttered in embarrassment. 
I flushed crimson, and as I did so I remembered that I had owed 
Simonov fifteen roubles for ages-which I had, indeed, never forgotten, 
though I had not paid it. 
"You will understand, Simonov, that I could have no idea when I 
came here . . .  I am very much vexed that I have forgotten 
.
.
•
.
 " 
"All right, all right, that doesn't matter. You can pay to-morrow 
after the dinner. I simply wanted to know 
.
.
.
•
 Please don't .
•
.
 " 
He broke off and began pacing the room still more vexed. As he 
walked he began to stamp with his heels. 
"Am I keeping you ?" I asked, after two minutes of silence. 
"Oh!" he said, starting, "that is-to be truthful-yes. I have to go 
and see some one . . .  not far from here," he added in an apologetic 
voice, somewhat abashed. 
"My goodness, why didn't you say so?" I cried, seizing my cap 
with an astonishingly free-and-easy air, which was the last thing I 
should have expected of myself. 
"It's close by . . .  not two paces away," Simonov repeated, accompany­
ing me to the front door with a fussy air which did not suit him at 
all. "So five o'clock, punctually, to-morrow," he called down the stairs 
after me. He was very glad to get rid of me. I was in a fury. 
"What possessed me, what possessed me to force myself upon them?" 
I wondered, grinding my teeth as I strode along the street. "For a 
scoundrel, a pig like that Zverkov! Of course, I had better not go; of 
course, I must just snap my fingers at them. I am not bound in any 
way. I'll send Simonov a note by to-morrow's post . . . . " 
But what made me furious was that I knew for certain that I should 
go, that I should make a point of going; and the more tactless, the 
more unseemly my going would be, the more certainly I would go. 
And there was a positive obstacle to my going: I had no money. 
All I had was nine roubles, I had to give seven of that to my servant, 
Apollon, for his monthly wages. That was all I paid him-he had to 
keep himself. 
Not to pay him was impossible, considering his character. But I will 
talk about that fellow, about that plague of mine, another time. 
However, I knew I should go and should not pay him his wages. 
That night I had the most hideous dreams. No wonder; all the 
evening I had been oppressed by memories of my miserable days at 

Notes from Underground 
175 
school, and I could not shake them off. I was sent to the school by 
distant relations, upon whom I was dependent and of whom I have 
heard nothing since-they sent me there a forlorn, silent boy, already 
crushed by their reproaches, already troubled by doubt, and looking 
with savage distrust at every one. My schoolfellows met me with spite­
ful and merciless jibes because I was not like any of them. But I could 
not endure their taunts; I could not give in to them with the ignoble 
readiness with which they gave in to one another. I hated them from 
the first, and shut myself away from every one in timid, wounded and 
disproportionate pride. Their coarseness revolted me. They laughed 
cynically at my face, at my clumsy figure; and yet what stupid faces 
they had themselves. In our school the boys' faces seemed in a special 
way to degenerate and grow stupider. How many fine-looking boys 
came to us! In a few years they became repulsive. Even at sixteen I 
wondered at them morosely; even when I was struck by the pettiness 
of their thoughts, the stupidity of their pursuits, their games, their 
conversations. They had no understanding of such essential things, 
they took no interest in such striking, impressive subjects, that I could 
not help considering them inferior to myself. It was not wounded 
vanity that drove me to it, and for God's sake do not thrust upon me 
your hackneyed remarks, repeated to nausea, that "I was only a 
dreamer," while they even then had an understanding of life. They 
understood nothing, they had no idea of real life, and I swear that 
that was what made me most indignant with them. On the contrary, 
the most obvious, striking reality they accepted with fantastic stupidity 
and even at that time were accustomed to respect success. Everything 
that was just, but oppressed and looked down upon, they laughed at 
heartlessly and shamefully. They took rank for intelligence; even at 
sixteen they were already talking about a snug berth. Of course a 
great deal of it was due to their stupidity, to the bad examples with 
which they had always been surrounded in their childhood and boy­
hood. They were monstrously depraved. Of course a great deal of that, 
too, was superficial and an assumption of cynicism; of course there 
were glimpses of youth and freshness even in their depravity; but even 
that freshness was not attractive, and showed itself in a certain rakish­
ness. I hated them horribly, though perhaps I was worse than any of 
them. They repaid me in the same way, and did not conceal their 
aversion for me. But by then I did not desire their affection : on the 
contrary I continually longed for their humiliation. To escape from 
their derision I purposely began to make all the progress I could with 
my studies and forced my way to the very top. This impressed them. 

176 
'1 he Short N.ovels of 'Dostoevsky 
Moreover, they all began by degrees to grasp that I had already read 
books none of them could read, and understood things (not forming 
part of our school curriculum) of which they had not even heard. 
They took a savage and sarcastic view of it, but were morally im­
pressed, especially as the teachers began to notice me on those grounds. 
The mockery ceased, but the hostility remained, and cold and strained 
relations became permanent between us. In the end I could not put up 
with it: with years a craving for society, for friends, developed in me. 
I attempted to get on friendly terms with some of my schoolfellows; 
but somehow or other my intimacy with them was always strained 
and soon ended of itself. Once, indeed, I did have a friend. But I was 
already a tyrant at heart; I wanted to exercise unbounded sway over 
him; I tried to instil into him a contempt for his surroundings; I 
required of him a disdainful and complete break with those surround­
ings. I frightened him with my passionate affection; I reduced him to 
tears, to hysterics. He was a simple and devoted soul; but when he 
devoted himself to me entirely I began to hate him immediately and 
repulsed him-as though all I needed him for was to win a victory 
over him, to subjugate him and nothing else. But I could not subjugate 
all of them; my friend was not at all like them either, he was, in fact, 
a rare exception. The first thing I did on leaving school was to give 
up the special job for which I had been destined so as to break all 
ties, to curse my past and shake the dust from off my feet . . . .  And good­
ness knows why, after all that, I should go trudging off to Simonov's! 
Early next morning I roused myself and jumped out of bed with 
excitement, as though it were all about to happen at once. But I be­
lieved that some radical change in my life was coming, and would 
inevitably come that day. Owing to its rarity, perhaps, any external 
event, however trivial, always made me feel as though some radical 
change in my life were at hand. I went to the office, however, as usual, 
but sneaked away home two hours earlier to get ready. The great thing, 
I thought, is not to be the first to arrive, or they will think I am over­
joyed at coming. But there were thousands of such great points to 
consider, and they all agitated and overwhelmed me. I polished my 
boots a second time with my own hands; nothing in the world would 
have induced Apollon to clean them twice a day, as he considered that 
it was more than his duties required of him. I stole the brushes to 
clean them from the passage, being careful he should not detect it, for 
fear of his contempt. Then I minutely examined my clothes and 
thought that everything looked old, worn and threadbare. I had let 
myself get too slovenly. My uniform, perhaps, was tidy, but I could 

Notes from Underground 
177 
not go out to dinner in my uniform. The worst of it was that on the 
knee of my trousers was a big yellow stain. I had a foreboding that 
that stain would deprive me of nine-tenths of my personal dignity. 
I knew, too, that it was very poor to think so. "But this is no time for 
thinking: now I am in for the real thing," I thought, and my heart 
sank. I knew, too, perfectly well even then, that I was monstrously 
exaggerating the facts. But how could I help it? I could not control 
myself and was already shaking with fever. With despair I pictured to 
myself how coldly and disdainfully that "scoundrel" Zverkov would 
meet me; with what dull-witted, invincible contempt the blockhead 
Trudolyubov would look at me; with what impudent rudeness the 
insect Ferfitchkin would snigger at me in order to curry favour with 
Zverkov; how completely Simonov would take it all in, and how he 
would despise me for the abjectness of my vanity and lack of spirit­
and, worst of all, how paltry, unliterary, commonplace it would all be. 
Of course, the best thing would be not to go at all. But that was most 
impossible of all: if I feel impelled to do anything, I seem to be pitch­
forked into it. I should have jeered at myself ever afterwards: "So you 
funked it, you funked it, you funked the real thing!" On the contrary, 
I passionately longed to show all that "rabble" that I was by no means 
such a spiritless creature as I seemed to myself. What is more, even 
in the acutest paroxysm of this cowardly fever, I dreamed of getting 
the upper hand, of dominating them, carrying them away, making 
them like me-if only for my "elevation of thought and unmistakable 
wit." They would abandon Zverkov, he would sit on one side, silent 
and ashamed, while I should crush him. Then, perhaps, we would be 
reconciled and drink to our everlasting friendship; but what was most 
bitter and most humiliating for me was that I knew even then, knew 
fully and for certain, that I needed nothing of all this really, that I did 
not really want to crush, to subdue, to attract them, and that I did 
not care a straw really for the result, even if I did achieve it. Oh, how 
I prayed for the day to pass quickly! In unutterable anguish I went 
to the window, opened the movable pane and looked out into the 
troubled darkness of the thickly falling wet snow. At last my wretched 
little clock hissed out five. I seized my hat and trying not to look at 
Apollon, who had been all day expecting his month's wages, but in 
his foolishness was unwilling to be the first to speak about it, I slipt 
between him and the door and jumping into a high-class sledge, on 
which I spent my last half-rouble, I drove up in grand style to the 
Hotel de Paris. 

178 
'l he Short N.ovcls of Vostoct1sky 
[ IV ] 
I had been certain the day before that I should be the first to arrive. 
But it was not a question of being the first to arrive. Not only were 
they not there, but I had difficulty in finding our room. The table was 
not laid even. What did it mean ? After a good many questions I 
elicited from the waiters that the dinner had been ordered not for 
five, but for six o'clock. This was confirmed at the buffet too. I felt 
really ashamed to go on questioning them. It was only twenty-five 
minutes past five. If they changed the dinner hour they ought at least 
to have let me know-that is what the post is for, and not to have put 
me in an absurd position in my own eyes and . . .  and even before the 
waiters. I sat down; the servant began laying the table; I felt even 
more humiliated when he was present. Towards six o'clock they 
brought in candles, though there were lamps burning in the room. It 
had not occurred to the waiter, however, to bring them in at once 
when I arrived. In the next room two gloomy, angry-looking persons 
were eating their dinners in silence at two different tables. There waᐋ 
a great deal of noise, even shouting, in a room further away; one 
could hear the laughter of a crowd of people, and nasty little shrieks 
in French : there were ladies at the dinner. It was sickening, in fact. 
I rarely passed more unpleasant moments, so much so that when they 
did arrive all together punctually at six I was overjoyed to see them, 
as though they were my deliverers, and even forgot that it was in­
cumbent upon me to show resentment. 
Zverkov walked in at the head of them; evidently he was the leading 
spirit. He and all of them were laughing; but, seeing me, Zverkov 
drew himself up a little, walked up to me deliberately with a slight, 
rather jaunty bend from the waist. He shook hands with me in a 
friendly, but not over-friendly, fashion, with a sort of circumspect 
courtesy like that of a general, as though in giving me his hand he 
were warding off something. I had imagined, on the contrary. that on 
coming in he would at once break into his habitual thin, shrill laugh 
and fall to making his insipid jokes and witticisms. I had been pre­
paring for them ever since the previous day, but I had not expected 
such condescension, such high-official courtesy. So, then, he felt himself 
ineffably superior to me in every respect! If he only meant to insult 
me by that high-official tone, it would not matter, I thought-! could 
pay him back for it one way or another. But what if, in reality, with­
out the least desire to be offensive. that sheep's-head had a notion in 

Notes from Underground 
179 
earnest that he was superior to me and could only look at me m a 
patronizing way? The very supposition made me gasp. 
"I was surprised to hear of your desire to join us," he began, lisping 
and drawling, which was something new. "You and I seem to have 
seen nothing of one another. You fight shy of us. You shouldn't. We 
are not such terrible people as you think. Well, anyway, I am glad 
to renew our acquaintance." 
And he turned carelessly to put down his hat on the window sill. 
"Have you been waiting long?" Trudolyubov inquired. 
"I arrived at five o'clock as you told me yesterday," I answered 
aloud, with an irritability that threatened an explosion. 
"Didn't you let him know that we had changed the hour?" said 
Trudolyubov to Simonov. 
"No, I didn't. I forgot," the latter replied, with no sign of regret, 
and without even apologizing to me he went off to order the lzors 
d'a:uvres. 
"So you've been here a whole hour? Oh, poor fellow!" Zverkov 
cried ironically, for to his notions this was bound to be extremely 
funny. That rascal Ferfitchkin followed with his nasty little snigger 
like a puppy yapping. My position struck him, too, as exquisitely 
ludicrous and embarrassing. 
"It isn't funny at all!" I cried to Ferfitchkin, more and more irri­
tated. "It wasn't my fault, but other people's. They neglected to let me 
know. It was . . .  it was . . .  it was simply absurd." 
"It's not only absurd, but something else as well," muttered Tru­
dolyubov, naively taking my part. "You are not hard enough upon it. 
It was simply rudeness-unintentional, of course. And how could 
Simonov . . .  h 'm!" 
"If a trick like that had been played on me," observed Ferfitchkin, 
"I should . . .  " 
"But you should have ordered something for yourself," Zverkov 
interrupted, "or simply asked for dinner without waiting for us." 
"You will allow that I might have done that without your permis­
sion," I rapped out. "If I waited, it was . . .  
" 
"Let us sit down, gentlemen," cried Simonov, coming in. "Every­
thing is ready; I can answer for the champagne; it is capitally frozen . 
. . . You see, I did not know your address, where was I to look for 
you?" he suddenly turned to me, but again he seemed to avoid looking 
at me. Evidently he had something against me. It must have been 
what happened yesterday. 
All sat down; I did the same. It was a round table. Trudolyubov 

180 
The Short N.ovels of 'Dostoevsky 
was on my left, Simonov on my right. Zverkov was sitting opposite, 
Ferfitchkin next to him, between him and Trudolyubov. 
"Tell me, are you . . .  in a government office?" Zverkov went on 
attending to me. Seeing that I was embarrassed, he seriously thought 
that he ought to be friendly to me, and, so to speak, cheer me up. 
"Does he want me to throw a bottle at his head?" I thought, in a 
fury. In my novel surroundings I was unnaturally ready to be irri­
tated. 
"In the N- office," I answered jerkily, with my eyes on my plate. 
"And ha-ave you a go-od berth? I say, what rna-a-de you leave your 
original job?" 
"What rna-a-de me was that I wanted to leave my original job," I 
drawled more than he, hardly able to control myself. Ferfitchkin went 
off into a guffaw. Simonov looked at me ironically. Trudolyubov left 
off eating and began looking at me with curiosity. 
Zverkov winced, but he tried not to notice it. 
"And the remuneration ?" 
"What remuneration?" 
"I mean, your sa-a-lary?" 
"Why are you cross-examining me?" However, I told him at once 
what my salary was. I turned horribly red. 
"It is not very handsome," Zverkov observed majestically. 
"Yes, you can't afford to dine at cafes on that," Ferfitchkin added 
insolently. 
"To my thinking it's very poor," Trudolyubov observed gravely. 
"And how thin you have grown! How you have changed!" added 
Zverkov, with a shade of venom in his voice, scanning me and my 
attire with a sort of insolent compassion. 
"Oh, spare his blushes," cried Ferfitchkin, sniggering. 
"My dear sir, allow me to tell you I am not blushing," I broke out 
at last; "do you hear ? I am dining here, at this cafe, at my own 
expense, not at other people's-note that, Mr. Ferfitchkin." 
"\Vha-at? Isn't every one here dining at his own expense? You 
would seem to be . . .  " Ferfitchkin fl.ew out at me, turning as red as a 
lobster, and looking me in the face with fury. 
"Tha-at," I answered, feeling I had gone too far, "and I imagine it 
would be better to talk of something more intelligent." 
"You intend to show off your intelligence, I suppose?" 
"Don't disturb yourself, that would be quite out of place here." 
"Why are you clacking away like that, my good sir, eh? Have yon 
gone out of your wits in your office?" 

Notes from Underground 
"Enough, gentlemen, enot•gh!" Zverkov cried, authoritatively. 
"How stupid it is!" muttered Simonov. 
181 
"It really is stupid. We have met here, a company of friends, for 
a farewell dinner to a comrade and you carry on an altercation," said 
Trudolyubov, rudely addressing himself to me alone. "You invited 
yourself to join us, so don't disturb the general harmony." 
"Enough, enough! "  cried Zverkov. "Give over, gentlemen, it's out 
of place. Better let me tell you how I nearly got married the day 
before yesterday . . . .  
" 
And then followed a burlesque narrative of how this gentleman 
had almost been married two days before. There was not a word 
about the marriage, however, but the story was adorned with generals, 
colonels and kammer-junkers, while Zverkov almost took the lead 
among them. It was greeted with approving laughter; Fer fitch kin 
positively squealed. 
No one paid any attention to me, and I sat crushed and humiliated. 
"Good heavens, these are not the people for me!" I thought. "And 
what a fool I have made of myself before them! I let Ferfitchkin go 
too far, though. The brutes imagine they are doing me an honour in 
letting me sit down with them. They don't understand that it's an 
honour to them and not to me! I've grown thinner! My clothes! Oh, 
damn my trousers! Zverkov noticed the yellow stain on the knee as 
soon as he came in . . . .  But what's the usc! I must get up at once, this 
very minute, take my hat and simply go without a word . . .  with 
contempt! And to-morrow I can send a challenge. The scoundrels! As 
though I cared about the seven roubles. They may think . . .  Damn 
it! I don't care about the seven roubles. I'll go this minute!" 
Of course I remained. I drank sherry and Lafitte by the glassful in 
my discomfiture. Being unaccustomed to it, I was quickly affected. 
My annoyance increased as the wine went to my head. I longed all a1 
once to insult them all in a most flagrant manner and then go away. 
To seize the moment and show what I could do, so that they would 
say, "He's clever, though he is absurd," and . . .  and . . .  in fact, damn 
them all! 
I scanned them all insolently with my drowsy eyes. But they seemed 
to have forgotten me altogether. They were noisy, vociferous, cheerful. 
Zverkov was talking all the time. I began listening. Zverkov was 
talking of some exuberant lady whom he had at last led on to declaring 
her love (of course, he was lying like a horse), and how he had been 
helped in this affair by an intimate friend of his, a Prince Kolya, an 
officer in the Hussars, who had three thousand serfs. 

182 
'I he Short Novels of 'DostoevskY 
"And yet this Kolya, who has three thousand serfs, has not put in 
an appearance here to-night to see you off," I cut in suddenly. 
For a minute every one was silent. "You are drunk already." Trudo­
lyubov deigned to notice me at last, glancing contemptuously in my 
direction. Zverkov, without a word, examined me as though I were 
an insect. I dropped my eyes. Simonov made haste to fill up the glasses 
with champagne. 
Trudolyubov raised his glass, as did every one else but me. 
"Your health and good luck on the journey!" he cried to Zverkov. 
"To old times, to our future, hurrah!" 
They all tossed off their glasses, and crowded round Zverkov to 
kiss him. I did not move; my full glass stood untouched before me. 
"Why, aren't you going to drink it?" roared Trudolyubov, losing 
patience and turning menacingly to me. 
"I want to make a speech separately, on my own account .
•
. and 
then I'll drink it, Mr. Trudolyubov." 
"Spiteful brute!" muttered Simonov. I drew myself up in my chair 
and feverishly seized my glass, prepared for something extraordinary, 
though I did not know myself precisely what I was going to say. 
"Silence!" cried Ferfitchkin. "Now for a display of wit!" 
Zverkov waited very gravely, knowing what was coming. 
"Mr. Lieutenant Zverkov," I began, "let me tell you that I hate 
phrases, phrasemongers and men in corsets . . .  that's the first point, 
and there is a second one to follow it." 
There was a general stir. 
"The second point is: I hate ribaldry and ribald talkers. Especially 
ribald talkers! The third point: I love justice, truth and honesty." I 
went on almost mechanically, for I was beginning to shiver with horror 
myself and had no idea how I came to be talking like this. "I love 
thought, Monsieur Zverkov; I love true comradeship, on an equal 
footing and not . . . H'm . . .  I love . . .  But, however, why not? I will 
drink your health, too, Mr. Zverkov. Seduce the Circassian girls, shoot 
the enemies of the fatherland and . . .  and . . .  to your health, Monsieur 
Zverkov!" 
Zverkov got up from his seat, bowed to me and said : 
"I am very much obliged to you." He was frightfully offended and 
turned pale. 
"Damn the fellow!" roared Trudolyubov, bringing his fist down on 
the table. 
"Well, he wants a punch in the face for that," squealed Ferfitchkin. 
"We ought to turn him out," muttered Simonov. 

Notes from Underground 
183 
"Not a word, gentlemen, not a movement!" cried Zverkov solemnly. 
checking the general indignation. "I thank you all, but I can show him 
for myself how much value I attach to his words." 
"Mr. Ferfitchkin, you will give me satisfaction to-morrow for your 
words just now!" I said aloud, turning with dignity to Ferfitchkin. 
"A duel, you mean? Certainly," he answered. But probably I was 
so ridiculous as I challenged him and it was so out of keeping with my 
appearance that everyone, including Ferfitchkin, was prostrate with 
laughter. 
"Yes, let him alone, of course! He is quite drunk," Trudolyubov 
said with disgust. 
"I shall never forgive myself for letting him join us," Simonov 
muttered again. 
"Now is the time to throw a bottle at their heads," I thought to 
myself. I picked up the bottle . . .  and filled my glass . . . .  "::\'o, I'd 
better sit on to the end," I went on thinking; "you would be pleased, 
my friends, if I went away. Nothing will induce me to go. I'll go on 
sitting here and drinking to the end, on purpose, as a sign that I 
don't think you of the slightest consequence. I will go on sitting and 
drinking, because this is a public-house and I paid my entrance money. 
I'll sit here and drink, for I look upon you as so many pawns, as 
inanimate pawns. I'll sit here and drink . . .  and sing if I want to, yes, 
sing, for I have the right to . . .  to sing . . .  H'm!" 
But I did not sing. I simply tried not to look at any of them. I 
assumed most unconcerned attitudes and waited with impatience for 
them to speak first. But alas, they did not address me! And oh, how 
I wished, how I wished at that moment to be reconciled to them! It 
struck eight, at last nine. They moved from the table to the sofa. 
Zverkov stretched himself on a lounge and put one foot on a round 
table. Wine was brought there. He did, as a fact, order three bottles 
on his own account. I, of course, was not invited to join them. They all 
sat round him on the sofa. They listened to him, almost with rever­
ence. It was evident that they were fond of him. "What for? What 
for?" I wondered. From time to time they were moved to drunken 
enthusiasm and kissed each other. They talked of the Caucasus, of 
the nature of true passion, of snug berths in the service, of the income 
of an hussar called Podharzhevsky, whom none of them knew per­
sonally, and rejoiced in the largeness of it, of the extraordinary grace 
and beauty of a Princess D., whom none of them had ever seen; then 
it came to Shakespeare's being immortal. 
I smiled contemptuously and walked up and down the other side of 

184 
The Short N.ovels of Vostoevsky 
the room, opposite the sofa, from the table to the stove and back again. 
I tried my very utmost to show them that I could do without them, and 
yet I purposely made a noise with my boots, thumping with my heels. 
But it was all in vain. They paid no attention. I had the patience to 
walk up and down in front of them from eight o'clock till eleven, in 
the same place, from the table to the stove and back again. "I walk up 
and down to please myself and no one can prevent me." The waiter 
who came into the room stopped, from time to time, to look at me. I 
was somewhat giddy from turning round so often; at moments it 
seemed to me that I was in delirium. During those three hours I was 
three times soaked with sweat and dry again. At times, with an 
intense, acute pang I was stabbed to the heart by the thought that ten 
years, twenty years, forty years would pass, and that even in forty 
years I would remember with loathing and humiliation those filthiest, 
most ludicrous, and most awful moments of my life. No one could 
have gone out of his way to degrade himself more shamelessly, and 
I fully realized it, fully, and yet I went on pacing up and down from 
the table to the stove. "Oh, if you only knew what thoughts and 
feelings I am capable of, how cultured I am!" I thought at moments, 
mentally addressing the sofa on which my enemies were sitting. But 
my enemies behaved as though I were not in the room. Once-only 
once-they turned towards me, just when Zverkov was talking about 
Shakespeare, and I suddenly gave a contemptuous laugh. I laughed in 
such an affected and disgusting way that they all at once broke off 
their conversation, and silently and gravely for two minutes watched 
me walking up and down from the table to the stove, taking no notice 
of them. But nothing came of it : they said nothing, and two minutes 
later they ceased to notice me again. It struck eleven. 
"Friends," cried Zverkov getting up from the sofa, "let us all be off 
now, there!" 
"Of course, of course," the others assented. I turned sharply to 
Zverkov. I was so harassed, so exhausted, that I would have cut my 
throat to put an end to it. I was in a fever; my hair, soaked with 
perspiration, stuck to my forehead and temples. 
"Zverkov, I beg your pardon," I said abruptly and resolutely. 
"Ferfitchkin, yours too, and every one's, every one's: I have insulted 
you all!" 
"Aha! A duel is not in your line, old man," Ferfitchkin hissed 
venomously. 
It sent a sharp pang to my heart. 
"No, it's not the duel I am afraid of, Ferfitchkin! I am ready to 

N.otes from Underground 
185 
fight you to-morrow, after we are reconciled. I insist upon it, in fact, 
and you cannot refuse. I want to show you that I am not afraid of a 
duel. You shall fire first and I shall fire into the air." 
"He is comforting himself," said Simonov. 
"He's simply raving," said Trudolyubov. 
"But let us pass. \Vhy are you barring our way? What do you want?" 
Zverkov answered disdainfully. 
They were all flushed; their eyes were bright: they had been drink­
ing heavily. 
"I ask for your friendship, Zverkov; I insulted you, but . . .  " 
"Insulted ? You insulted me? Understand, sir, that you never, under 
any circumstances, could possibly insult me." 
"And that's enough for you. Out of the way!" concluded Trudol­
yubov. 
"Olympia is mine, friends, that's agreed!" cried Zverkov. 
"We won't dispute your right, we won't dispute your right," the 
others answered, laughing. 
I stood as though spat upon. The party went noisily out of the room. 
Trudolyubov struck up some stupid song. Simonov remained behind 
for a moment to tip the waiters. I suddenly went up to him. 
"Simonov! give me six roubles!" I said, with desperate resolution. 
He looked at me in extreme amazement, with vacant eyes. He, too, 
was drunk. 
"You don't mean you are coming with us?" 
"Yes." 
"I've no money," he snapped out, and with a scornful laugh he went 
out of the room. 
I clutched at his overcoat. It was a nightmare. 
"Simonov, I saw you had money. Why do you refuse me? Am I a 
scoundrel? Beware of refusing me: if you knew, if you knew why I 
am asking! My whole future, my whole plans depend upon it!" 
Simonov pulled out the money and almost flung it at me. 
"Take it, if you have no sense of shame!" he pronounced pitilessly, 
and ran to overtake them. 
I was left for a moment alone. Disorder, the remains of dinner, a 
broken wine-glass on the floor, spilt wine, cigarette ends, fumes of 
drink and delirium in my brain, an agonizing misery in my heart 
and finally the waiter, who had seen and heard all and was looking 
inquisitively into my face. 
"I am going there!" I cried. "Either they shall all go down on their 

186 
'I he Short N.ovels of Vostoevsky 
knees to beg for my friendship, or I will give Zverkov a slap in the 
face!" 
[ v ] 
"So this is it, this is it at last-contact with real life," I muttered as 
I ran headlong downstairs. "This is very different from the Pope's 
leaving Rome and going to Brazil, very different from the ball on 
the shores of Lake Como!" 
"You are a scoundrel," a thought flashed through my mind, "if you 
laugh at this now." 
"No matter!" I cried, answering myself. "Now everything is lost!" 
There was no trace to be seen of them, but that made no difference­
! knew where they had gone. 
At the steps was standing a solitary night sledge-driver in a rough 
peasant coat, powdered over with the still falling, wet, and as it were 
warm, snow. It was hot and steamy. The little shaggy piebald horse 
was also covered with snow and coughing, I remember that very well. 
I made a rush for the roughly made sledge; but as soon as I raised my 
foot to get into it, the recollection of how Simonov had just given me 
six roubles seemed to double me up and I tumbled into the sledge 
like a sack. 
"No, I must do a great de::l to make up for all that," I cried. "But I 
will make up for it or perish on the spot this very night. Start!,. 
We set off. There was a perfect whirl in my head. 
"They won't go down on their knees to beg for my friendship. That 
is a mirage, cheap mirage, revolting, romantic and fantastical-that's 
another ball at Lake Como. And so I am bound to slap Zverkov's 
face! It is my duty to. And so it is settled; I am flying to give him 
a slap in the face. Hurry up! "  
The driver tugged at the reins. 
"As soon as I go in I'll give it him. Ought I before giving him the 
slap to say a few words by way of preface? No. I'll simply go in and 
give it him. They will all be sitting in the drawing-room, and he with 
Olympia on the sofa. That damned Olympia! She laughed at my 
looks on one occasion and refused me. I'll pull Olympia's hair, pull 
Zverkov's ears! No, better one ear, and pull him by it round the room. 
Maybe they will all begin beating me and will kick me out. That's 
most likely, indeed. No matter! Anyway, I shall first slap him; the 
initiative will be mine; and by the laws of honour that is everything: 
he will be branded and cannot wipe ofT the slap by any blows, by 

Notes from Underground 
187 
nothing but a duel. He will be forced to fight. And let them beat me 
now. Let them, the ungrateful wretches! Trudolyubov will beat me 
hardest, he is so strong; Ferfitchkin will be sure to catch hold sideways 
and tug at my hair. But no matter, no matter! That's what I am going 
for. The blockheads will be forced at last to see the tragedy of it all! 
When they drag me to the door I shall call out to them that in reality 
they are not worth my little finger. Get on, driver, get on!" I cried to the 
driver. He started and flicked his whip, I shouted so savagely. 
"We shall fight at daybreak, that's a settled thing. I've done with 
the office. Ferfitchkin made a joke about it just now. But where can 
I get pistols? Nonsense! I'll get my salary in advance and buy them. 
And powder, and bullets? That's the second's business. And how can 
it all be done by daybreak ? And where am I to get a second? I have 
no friends. Nonsense!" I cried, lashing myself up more and more. 
"It's of no consequence! the first person I meet in the street is bound 
to be my second, just as he would be bound to pull a drowning man 
out of water. The most eccentric things may happen. Even if I were to 
ask the Director himself to be my second to-morrow, he would be 
bound to consent, if only from a feeling of chivalry, and to keep the 
secret! Anton Antonitch . . . .  
" 
The fact is, that at that very minute the disgusting absurdity of my 
plan and the other side of the question was clearer and more vivid 
to my imagination than it could be to any one on earth. But . . . 
"Get on, driver, get on, you rascal, get on!" 
"Ugh, sir!" said the son of toil. 
Cold shivers suddenly ran down me. \Vouldn't it be better . . .  to go 
straight home? My God, my God! Why did I invite myself to this 
dinner yesterday? But no, it's impossible. And my walking up and 
down for three hours from the table to the stove? No, they, they and 
no one else must pay for my walking up and down! They must wipe 
out this dishonour! Drive on! 
And what if they give me into custody ? They won't dare! They'll 
be afraid of the scandal. And what if Zverkov is so contemptuous that 
he refuses to fight a duel? He is sure to; but in that case I'll show 
them . . .  I will turn up at the posting station when he is setting off 
to-morrow, I'll catch him by the leg, I'll pull off his coat when he gets 
into the carriage. I'll get my teeth into his hand, I'll bite him. "See 
what lengths you can drive a desperate man to!" He may hit me on 
the head and they may belabour me from behind. I will shout to the 
assembled multitude : "Look at this young puppy who is driving off 
to captivate the Circassian girls after letting me spit in his face!" 

188 
'I he Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
Of course, after that everything will be over! The office will have 
vanished off the face of the earth. I shall be arrested, I shall be tried, 
I shall be dismissed from the service, thrown in prison, sent to Siberia. 
Never mind! In fifteen years when they let me out of prison I will 
trudge off to him, a beggar, in rags. I shall find him in some provin­
cial town. He will be married and happy. He will have a grown-up 
daughter . . . .  I shall say to him : "Look, monster, at my hollow cheeks 
and my rags! I've lost everything-my career, my happiness, art, sci­
ence, the woman I loved, and all through you. Here are pistols. I have 
come to discharge my pistol and . . .  and I . . .  forgive you. Then I 
shall fire into the air and he will hear nothing more of me . . . .  
I was actually on the point of tears, though I knew perfectly well 
at that moment that all this was out of Pushkin's Silvio and Ler­
montov's Masquerade. And all at once I felt horribly ashamed, so 
ashamed that I stopped the horse, got out of the sledge, and stood .still 
in the snow in the middle of the street. The driver gazed at me, 
sighing and astonished. 
What was I to do? I could not go on there-it was evidently stupid, 
and I could not leave things as they were, because that would seem 
as though . . .  Heavens, how could I leave things! And after such 
insults! "No!" I cried, throwing myself into the sledge again. "It 
is ordained! It is fate! Drive on, dri,·e on!" 
And in my impatience I punched the sledge-driver on the back of 
the neck. 
"What are you up to? What are you hitting me for? "  the peasant 
shouted, but he whipped up his nag so that it began kicking. 
The wet snow was falling in big flakes ; I unbuttoned myself, regard­
less of it. I forgot everything else, for I had finally decided on the 
slap, and felt with horror that it was going to happen norv, at once, 
and that no force could stop it. The deserted street lamps gleamed 
sullenly in the snowy darkness like torches at a funeral. The snow 
drifted under my greatcoat, under my coat, under my cravat, and 
melted there. I did not wrap myself up-all was lost, anyway. 
At last we arrived. I jumped out, almost unconscious, ran up the 
steps and began knocking and kicking at the door. I felt fearfully 
weak, particularly in my legs and my knees. The door was opened 
quickly as though they knew I was coming. As a fact, Simonov had 
warned them that perhaps another gentleman would arrive, and this 
was a place in which one had to give notice and to observe certain 
precautions. It was one of those "millinery establishments" which were 
abolished by the police a good time ago. By day it really '"''as a shop; 

N.otes from Underground 
189 
but at night, if one had an introduction, one might visit it for other 
purposes. 
I walked rapidly through the dark shop into the familiar drawing· 
room, where there was only one candle burning, and stood still in 
amazement: there was no one there. "Where are they?" I asked some· 
body. But by now, of course, they had separated. Before me was stand· 
ing a person with a stupid smile, the "madam" herself, who had seen 
me before. A minute later a door opened and another person came in. 
Taking no notice of anything, I strode about the room, and, I believe, 
I ᐌalked to myself. I felt as though I had been saved from death and 
was conscious of this, joyfully, all over : I should have given that slap, 
I should certainly, certainly have given it! But now they were not here 
md . . . everything had vanished and changed! I looked round. I 
could not realize my condition yet. I looked mechanically at the girl 
who had come in : and had a glimpse of a fresh, young, rather pale 
face, with straight, dark eyebrows, and with grave, as it were wonder· 
ing, eyes that attracted me at once; I should have hated her if she had 
been smiling. I began looking at her more intently and, as it were, 
with effort. I had not fully collected my thoughts. There was something 
simple :md good-natured in her face, but something strangely grave. 
1 am sure that this stood in her way here, and no one of those fools 
had noticed her. She could not, however, h::ve been c::lled a be::uty, 
though she was tall, strong-looking, and well built. She was very simply 
dressed. Something loathsome stirred within me. I went str::ight up 
to her. 
I chanced to look into the gl::ss. My h::rassed face struck me as 
revolting in the extreme, p::le, ::ngry, abject, with dishevelled hair. 
"No m::Jter, I am gl::d of it," I thought; "I ::1m glad that I shall seem 
repulsive to her; I like that." 
( VI ) 
. . .  Somewhere behind a screen a clock began wheezing, as though 
oppressed by something, Js though some one were strangling it. After 
an unn::Jturally prolonged wheezing there followed ::1 shrill, n::Jsty, ::nd 
as it were unexpectedly r::1pid, chime-as though some one were sud­
denly jumping forward. It struck two. I woke up, though I had indeed 
not been asleep but lying half<onscious. 
It was almost completely dark in the narrow, cramped, low-pitched 
room, cumbered up with an enormous wardrobe and piles of card­
bo::rd boxes ::nd all sorts of frippery and litter. The candle end that 

190 
The Short N..ovels of Vostoevsky 
had been burning on the table was going out and gave a faint Ricker 
from time to time. In a few minutes there would be complete darkness. 
I was not long in coming to myself; everything came back to my 
mind at once, without an effort, as though it had been in ambush to 
pounce upon me again. And, indeed, even while I was unconscious 
a point seemed continually to remain in my memory unforgotten, and 
round it my dreams moved drearily. But strange to say, everything 
that had happened to me in that day seemed to me now, on waking, 
to be in the far, far away past, as though I had long, long ago lived 
all that down. 
My head was full of fumes. Something seemed to be hovering over 
me, rousing me, exciting me, and making me restless. Misery and 
spite seemed surging up in me again and seeking an outlet. Suddenly 
I saw beside me two wide-open eyes scrutinizing me curiously and 
persistently. The look in those eyes was coldly detached, sullen, as it 
were utterly remote; it weighed upon me. 
A grim idea came into my brain and passed all over my body, as a 
horrible sensation, such as one feels when one goes into a damp and 
mouldy cellar. There was something unnatural in those two eyes, 
beginning to look at me only now. I recalled, too, that during those 
two hours I had not said a single word to this creature, and had, in 
fact, considered it utterly superfluous; in fact, the silence had for some 
reason gratified me. Now I suddenly realized vividly the hideous idea 
-revolting as a spider-of vice, which, without love, grossly and 
shamelessly begins with that in which true love finds its consumma­
tion. For a long time we gazed at each other like that, but she did not 
drop her eyes before mine and her expression did not change, so that 
at last I felt uncomfortable. 
"What is your name?" I asked abruptly, to put an end to it. 
"Liza," she answered almost in a whisper, but somehow far from 
graciously, and she turned her eyes away. 
I was silent. 
"What weather! The snow . . .  it's disgusting!'' I said, almost to 
myself, putting my arm under my head despondently, and gazing at 
the ceiling. 
She made no answer. This was horrible. 
"Have you always lived in Petersburg?" I asked a minute later, 
almost angrily, turning my head slightly towards her. 
"No., 
"Where do you come from?" 
"From Riga," she answered reluctantly. 

Notes from Underground 
"Are you a German?" 
"No, Russian." 
"Have you been here long?" 
"Where?" 
"In this house?" 
"A fortnight." 
i91 
She spoke more and more jerkily. The candle went out; I could no 
longer distinguish her face. 
"Have you a father and mother?" 
"Yes . . .  no . . .  I have." 
"Where are they?" 
"There . . .  in Riga." 
"What are they?" 
"Oh, nothing." 
"Nothing? \Vhy, what class are they?" 
"Tradespeople." 
"Have you always lived with them? "  
"Yes." 
"How old are you ?" 
"Twenty." 
"Why did you leave them?" 
"Oh, for no reason." 
That answer meant "Let me alone; I feel sick, sad.'' 
\Ve were silent. 
God knows why I did not go away. I felt myself more and more 
sick and dreary. The images of the previous day began of themselves, 
apart from my will, flitting through my memory in confusion. I sud­
denly recalled something I had seen that morning when, full of 
anxious thoughts, I was hurrying to the office. 
"I saw them carrying a coffin out yesterday and they nearly dropped 
it," I suddenly said aloud, not that I desired to open the conversation, 
but as it were by accident. 
"A coffin?" 
"Yes, in the Haymarket; they were bringing it up out of a cellar." 
"From a cellar?" 
"Not from a cellar, but from a basement. Oh, you know . . .  down 
below . . .  from a house of ill-fame. It was filthy all round . . .  Egg-
shells, litter . . .  a stench. It was loathsome.'' 
Silence. 
"A nasty day to be buried," I began, simply to avoid being silent. 
"Nasty, in what way?" 

192 
The Short 'Novels of 7Jostoevsk.y 
"The snow, the wet." (I yawned.) 
"It makes no difference," she said suddenly, after a brief silence. 
"No, it's horrid." (I yawned again.) "The grave-diggers must have 
sworn at getting drenched by the snow. And there must have been 
water in the grave." 
"Why water in the grave?" she asked, with a sort of curiosity, but 
speaking even more harshly and abruptly than before. 
I suddenly began to feel provoked. 
"Why, there must have been water at the bottom a foot deep. You 
can't dig a dry grave in Volkovo Cemetery." 
"Why ?" 
"Why? Why, the place is waterlogged. It's a regular marsh. So they 
bury them in water. I've seen it myself . . .  many times." 
(I had never seen it once, indeed I had never been in Volkovo, and 
had only heard stories of it.) 
"Do you mean to say you don't mind how you die?" 
"But why should I die?" she answered, as though defending herself. 
"Why, some day you will die, and you will die just the same as that 
dead woman. She was •
•
.
 a girl like you. She died of consumption." 
"A wench would have died in a hospital. . . .  " (She knows all about 
it already: she said "wench," not "girl.") 
"She was in debt to her mad:᐀m," I retorted, more and more pro­
voked by the discussion ; "and went on earning money for her up to 
the end, though she was in consumption. Some sledge-drivers st:᐀nding 
by were talking about her to some soldiers and telling them so. No 
doubt they knew her. They were laughing. They were going to meet 
in a pot-house to drink to her memory." 
A great deal of this was my invention. Silence followed, profound 
silence. She did not stir. 
"And is it better to die in a hospital?" 
"Isn't it just the same? Besides, why should I die? "  she added 
irritably. 
"If not now, a little later." 
"Why a little later ?" 
"Why, indeed? Now you are young, pretty, fresh, you fetch a high 
price. But after another year of this life you will be very different­
you will go off." 
"In a year?" 
"Anyway, in a year you will be worth less," I continued malignantly. 
"You will go from here to something lower, another house; a year later 
-to a third, lower and lower, and in seven years you will come to a 

Notes from Underground 
193 
basement in the Haymarket. That will be if you were lucky. But it 
would be much worse if you got some disease, consumption, say . . .  
and caught a chill, or something or other. It's not easy to get over an 
illness in your way of life. If you catch anything you may not get rid 
of it. And so you would die." 
"Oh, well, then I shall die," she answered, quite vindictively, and 
she made a quick movement. 
"But one is sorry." 
"Sorry for whom ?" 
"Sorry for life." 
Silence. 
"Have you been engaged to be married? Eh?" 
"\Vhat "s that to you?" 
"Oh, I am not cross-examining you. It's nothing to me. Why are 
you so cross ? Of course you may have had your own troubles. What is 
it to me? It's simply that I felt sorry." 
"Sorry for whom?" 
"Sorry for you." 
"No need," she whispered hardly audibly, and again made a faint 
movement. 
That incensed me at once. What! I was so gentle with her, and 
she . . .  
"Why, do you think that you are on the right path?" 
"I don"t think anything." 
"That"s what's wrong, that you don't think. Realize it while there 
is still time. There still is time. You are still young, good-looking; you 
might love, be married, be happy . . . .  " 
"Not all married women are happy," she snapped out in the rude 
abrupt tone she had used at first. 
"Not all, of course, but anyway it is much better than the life here. 
Infinitely better. Besides, with love one can live even without happi­
ness. Even in sorrow life is sweet; life is sweet, however one lives. But 
here what is there but . . .  foulness. Phew!" 
I turned away with disgust; I was no longer reasoning coldly. I 
began to feel myself what I was saying and warmed to the subject. 
I was already longing to expound the cherished ideas I had brooded 
over in my corner. Something suddenly flared up in me. An object 
had appeared before me. 
"Never mind my being here, I am not an example for you. I am, 
perhaps, worse than you are. I was drunk when I came here, though," 
I hastened, however, to say in self-defence. "Besides, a man is no 

194 
The Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
example for a woman. It's a different thing. I may degrade and defile 
myself, but I am not any one's slave. I come and go, and that's an end 
of it. I shake it off, and I am a different man. But you are a slave from 
the start. Yes, a slave! You give up everything, your whole freedom. 
If you want to break your chains afterwards, you won't be able to: 
you will be more and more fast in the snares. It is an accursed bondage. 
I know it. I won't speak of anything else, maybe you won't under­
stand, but tell me: no doubt you are in debt to your madam ? There, 
you see," I added, though she made no answer, but only listened in 
silence, entirely absorbed, "that's a bondage for you! You will never 
buy your freedom. They will see to that. It's like selling your soul to 
the Devil. . . .  And besides . . .  perhaps I, too, am just as unlucky­
how do you know-and wallow in the mud on purpose, out of misery? 
You know, men take to drink from grief; well, maybe I am here from 
grief. Come, tell me, what is there good here ? Here you and I . . .  
came together . . .  just now and did not say one word to one another 
all the time, and it was only afterwards you began staring at me like 
a wild creature, and I at you. Is that loving? Is that how one human 
being should meet another ? It's hideous, that's what it is!" 
"Yes!" she assented sharply and hurriedly. 
I was positively astounded by the promptitude of this "Yes.'' So the 
same thought may have been straying through her mind when she 
was staring at me just before. So she, too, was capable of certain 
thoughts? "Damn it all, this was interesting, this was a point of like­
ness!" I thought, almost rubbing my hands. And indeed it's easy to 
turn a young soul like that! 
It was the exercise of my power that attracted me most. 
She turned her head nearer to me, and it seemed to me in the dark­
ness that she propped herself on her arm. Perhaps she was scrutinizing 
me. How I regretted that I could not see her eyes. I heard her deep 
breathing. 
"Why have you come here?" I asked her, with a note of authority 
already in my voice. 
"Oh, I don't know." 
"But how nice it would be to be living in your father's house! It's 
warm and free; you have a home of your own." 
"But what if it's worse than this?" 
"I must take the right tone," Rashed through my mind. "I may not 
get far with sentimentality." But it was only a momentary thought. 
I swear she really did interest me. Besides, I was exhausted and moody. 
And cunning so easily goes hand in hand with feelin{!. 

N.otes from Underground 
195 
"\Vho denies it!" I hastened to answer. "Anything may happen. I 
am convinced that some one has wronged you, and that you are more 
sinned against than sinning. Of course, I know nothing of your story, 
but it's not likely a girl like you has come here of her own inclina­
tion . . . .  " 
"A girl like me?" she whispered, hardly audibly; but I heard it. 
Damn it all, I was flattering her. That was horrid. But perhaps it 
was a good thing . . . .  She was silent. 
"See, Liza, I will tell you about myself. If I had had a home from 
childhood, I shouldn't be what I am now. I often think that. However 
bad it may be at home, anyway they are your father and mother, and 
not enemies, strangers. Once a year at least, they'll show their love of 
you. Anyway, you know you are at home. I grew up without a home; 
and perhaps that's why I've turned so . . .  unfeeling." 
I waited again. "Perhaps she doesn't understand," I thought, "and, 
indeed, it is absurd-it's moralizing." 
"If I were a father and had a daughter, I believe I should love my 
daughter more than my sons, really," I began indirectly, as though 
talking of something else, to distract her attention. I must confess I 
blushed. 
"Why so ?" she asked. 
Ah! so she was listening! 
"I don't know, Liza. I knew a father who was a stern, austere man, 
but used to go down on his knees to his daughter, used to kiss her 
hands, her feet, he couldn't make enough of her, really. When she 
danced at parties he used to stand for five hours at a stretch, gazing at 
her. He was mad over her: I understand that! She would fall asleep 
tired at night, and he would wake to kiss her in her sleep and make 
the sign of the cross over her. He would go about in a dirty old coat, 
he was stingy to every one else, but would spend his last penny for her, 
giving her expensive presents, and it was his greatest delight when 
she was pleased with what he gave her. Fathers always love their 
daughters more than the mothers do. Some girls live happily at home! 
And I believe I should never let my daughters marry." 
"What next?" she said, with a faint smile. 
"I should be jealous, I really should. To think that she should kiss 
any one else! That she should love a stranger more than her father! 
It's painful to imagine it. Of course, that's all nonsense, of course every 
father would be reasonable at last. But I believe before I should let 
her marry, I should worry myself to death; I should find fault with 
all her suitors. But I should end by letting her marry whom she her-

196 
'1 he Short Novels of Vostoevsky 
self loved. The one whom the daughter loves always seems the worst 
to the father, you know. That is always so. So many family troubles 
come from that." 
"Some are glad to sell their daughters, rather than marrying them 
honourably." 
Ah, so that was it! 
"Such a thing, Liza, happens in those accursed families in which 
there is neither love nor God," I retorted warmly, "and where there is 
no love, there is no sense either. There are such families, it's true, but 
I am not speaking of them. You must have seen wickedness in your 
own family, if you talk like that. Truly, you must have been unlucky. 
H'm! . . .  that sort of thing mostly comes about through poverty." 
"And is it any better with the gentry? Even among the poor, honest 
people live happily." 
"H'm . . .  yes. Perhaps. Another thing, Liza, man is fond of reckon­
ing up his troubles, but does not count his joys. If he counted them 
up as he ought, he would see that every lot has enough happiness 
provided for it. And what if all goes well with the family, if the bless­
ing of God is upon it, if the husband is a good one, lo\'es you, cherishes 
you, never leaves you! There is happiness in such a family! Even 
sometimes there is happiness in the midst of sorrow; and indeed sor­
row is everywhere. If you marry you will find out for yourself. But 
think of the first years of married life with one you 10\•e: what happi­
ness, what happiness there sometimes is in it! And indeed it's the 
ordinary thing. In those early days e\·en quarrels with one's husband 
end happily. Some women get up quarrels with their husbands just 
because they love them. Indeed, I knew a woman like that : she seemed 
to say that because she loved him, she would torment him and make 
him feel it. You know that you may torment a man on purpose 
through love. \Vomen are particularly given to that, thinking to 
themselves 'I will love him so, I will make so much of him afterwards, 
that it's no sin to torment him a little now.' And all in the house 
rejoice in the sight of you, and you are happy and gay and peaceful 
and honourable . . . .  Then there are some women who are jealous. If 
he went off anywhere-! knew one such woman, she couldn't restrain 
herself, but would jump up at night and run off on the sly to find out 
where he was, whether he was with some other woman. That's a pity. 
"And the woman knows herself it's wrong, and her heart fails her 
and she suffers, but she loves-it's all through love. And how sweet it is 
to make it up after quarrels, to own herself in the wrong or to forgive 
him! And they are both so happy all at once-as though they had met 

Notes from Underground 
197 
anew, been married over again; as though their love had begun afresh. 
And no one, no one should know what passes between husband and 
wife if they love one another. And whatever quarrels there may be 
between them they ought not to call in their own mothers to judge 
between them and tell tales of one another. They are their own judges. 
"Love is a holy mystery and ought to be hidden from all other eyes, 
whatever happens. That makes it holier and better. They respect one 
another more, and much is built on respect. And if once there has been 
love, if they have been married for love, why should love pass away? 
Surely one can keep it! It is rare that one cannot keep it. And if the 
husband is kind and straightforward, why should not love last? The 
first phase of married love will pass, it is true, but then there will come 
a love that is better still. Then there will be the union of souls, they 
will have everything in common, there will be no secrets between them. 
"And once they have children, the most difficult times will seem to 
them happy, so long as there is love and courage. Even toil will be a 
joy, you may deny yourself bread for your children and even that will 
be a joy. They will love you for it afterwards; so you are laying by for 
your future. As the children grow up you feel that you are an example, 
a support for them ; thar even after you die your children will always 
keep your thoughts and feelings, because they have received them 
from you, they will take on your semblance and likeness. So you see 
this is a great duty. How can it fail to draw the father and mother 
nearer ? People say it's a trial to have children. Who says that ? It is 
heavenly happiness! Are you fond of little children, Liza? I am awfully 
fond of them. You know-a little rosy baby boy at your bosom, and 
what husband's heart is not touched, seeing his wife nursing his child! 
A plump little rosy baby, sprawling and snuggling, chubby little 
hands and feet, clean tiny little nails, so tiny that ir makes one laugh 
to look ar them ; eyes that look as if they understand everything. And 
while it sucks it clutches at your bosom with its little hand, plays. When 
its father comes up, the child tears itself away from the bosom, flings 
itself back, looks at its father, laughs, as though it were fearfully funny, 
and falls to sucking again. Or it will bite its mother's breast when its 
little teeth are coming, while it looks sideways at her with its little 
eyes as though to say, 'Look, I am biting!' Is not all that happiness 
when they are the three together, husband, wife and child? One can 
forgive a great deal for the sake of such moments. Yes, Liza, one must 
first learn to live oneself before one blames others!" 
"It's by pictures, pictures like that one must get at you," I thought 
to myself, though I did speak with real feeling, and all at once I 

198 
'1 he Short N.ovels of Vostoevs ky 
flushed crimson. "What if she were suddenly to burst out laughing, 
what should I do then?" That idea drove me to fury. Towards the 
end of my speech I really was excited, and now my vanity was some­
how wounded. The silence continued. I almost nudged her. 
"Why are you . . .  " she began and stopped. But I understood: there 
was a quiver of something different in her voice, not abrupt, harsh 
and unyielding as before, but something soft and shamefaced, so 
shamefaced that I suddenly felt ashamed and guilty. 
"What?" I asked, with tender curiosity. 
"Why, you . . •  
" 
"What?" 
"Why, you . . .  speak somehow like a book," she said, and again there 
was a note of irony in her voice. 
That remark sent a pang to my heart. It was not what I was ex­
pecting. 
I did not understand that she was hiding her feelings under irony, 
that this is usually the last refuge of modest and chaste-souled people 
when the privacy of their soul is coarsely and intrusively invaded, and 
that their pride makes them refuse to surrender till the last moment 
and shrink from giving expression to their feelings before you. I ought 
to have guessed the truth from the timidity with which she had 
repeatedly approached her sarcasm, only bringing herself to utter it 
at last with an effort. But I did not guess, and an evil feeling took 
possession of me. 
"Wait a bit!" I thought. 
[ Vll ] 
"Oh, hush, Liza! How can you talk about being like a book when 
it makes even me, an outsider, feel sick ? Though I don't look at it 
as an outsider, for, indeed, it touches me to the heart . . . .  Is it possible, 
is it possible that you do not feel sick at being here yourself? Evidently 
habit does wonders! God knows what habit can do with any one. Can 
you seriously think that you will never grow old, that you will always 
be good-looking, and that they will keep you here for ever and ever ? 
I say nothing of the loathsomeness of the life here . . . .  Though let 
me tell you this about it-about your present life, I mean; here though 
you are young now, attractive, nice, with soul and feeling, yet you 
know as soon as I came to myself just now I felt at once sick at being 
here with you! One can only come here when one is drunk. But if you 
were anywhere else, living as good people live, I should perhaps be 

Notes from Underground 
199 
more than attracted by you, should fall in love with you, should be 
glad of a look from you, let alone a word; I should hang about your 
door, should go down on my knees to you, should look upon you as 
my betrothed and think it an honour to be allowed to. I should not 
dare to have an impure thought about you. But here, you see, I know 
that I have only to whistle and you have to come with me whether you 
like it or not. I don't consult your wishes, but you mine. The lowest 
labourer hires himself as a workman but he doesn't make a slave of 
himself altogether; besides, he knows that he will be free again pres­
ently. But when are you free? Only think what you are giving up 
here! What is it you are making a slave of? It is your soul, together 
with your body; you are selling your soul which you have no right 
to dispose of! You give your love to be outraged by every drunkard! 
Love! But that's everything, you know, it's a priceless diamond, it's 
a maiden's treasure, love-why, a man would be ready to give his soul, 
to face death to gain that love. But how much is your love worth now? 
You are sold, all of you, body and soul, and there is no need to strive 
for love when you can have everything without love. And you know 
there is no greater insult to a girl than that, do you understand? To 
be sure, I have heard that they comfort you, poor fools, they let you 
have lovers of your own here. But you know that's simply a farce, that's 
simply a sham, it's just laughing at you, and you are taken in by it! 
"\Vhy, do you suppose he really loves you, that lover of yours ? I don't 
believe it. How can he love you when he knows you may be called 
away from him any minute? He would be a low fellow if he did! 
Will he have a grain of respect for you ? What have you in common 
with him? He laughs at you and robs you-that is all his love amounts 
to! You are lucky if he does not beat you. Very likely he does beat 
you, too. Ask him, if you have got one, whether he will marry you. 
He will laugh in your face, if he doesn't spit in it or give you a blow­
though maybe he is not worth a bad halfpenny himself. And for what 
have you ruined your life, if you come to think of it? For the coffee they 
give you to drink and the plentiful meals? But with what object are 
they feeding you up ? An honest girl couldn't swallow the food, for 
she would know what she was being fed for. You are in debt here, 
and, of course, you will always be in debt, and you will go on in debt 
to the end, till the visitors here begin to scorn you. And that will soon 
happen, don't rely upon your youth-all that flies by express train here, 
you know. You will be kicked out. And not simply kicked out; long 
before that she'll begin nagging at you, scolding you, abusing you, as 
though you had not sacrificed your health for her, had not thrown 

200 
The Short N.ovels of VostoevskJ 
away your youth and your soul for her benefit, but as though you had 
ruined her, beggared her, robbed her. And don't expect any one to 
take your part: the others, your companions, will attack you, too, to 
win her favour, for all are in slavery here, and have lost all conscience 
and pity here long ago. They have become utterly vile, and nothing on 
earth is viler, more loathsome, and more insulting than their abuse. 
"And you are laying down everything here, unconditionally, youth 
and health and beauty and hope, and at twenty-two you will look like a 
woman of five-and-thirty, and you will be lucky if you are not diseased, 
pray to God for that! No doubt you are thinking now that you have 
a gay time and no work to do! Yet there is no work harder or more 
dreadful in the world or ever has been. One would think that the heart 
alone would be worn out with tears. And you won't dare to say a 
word, not half a word when they drive you away from here; you will 
go away as though you were to blame. You will change to another 
house, then to a third, then somewhere else, till you come down at last 
to the Haymarket. There you will be beaten at every turn; that is good 
manners there, the visitors don't know how to be friendly without 
beating you. You don't believe that it is so hateful there? Go and look 
for yourself some time, you can see with your own eyes. Once, one 
New Year's Day, I saw a woman at a door. They had turned her out 
as a joke, to give her a taste of the frost because she had been crying 
so much, and they shut the door behind her. At nine o'clock in the 
morning she was already quite drunk, dishevelled, half-naked, covered 
with bruises, her face was powdered, but she had a black eye, blood 
was trickling from her nose and her teeth; some cabman had just given 
her a drubbing. She was sitting on the stone steps, a salt fish of some 
sort was in her hand; she was crying, wailing something about her 
luck and beating with the fish on the steps, and cabmen and drunken 
soldiers were crowding in the doorway taunting her. You don't believe 
that you will ever be like that? I should be sorry to believe it, too, but 
how do you know; maybe ten years, eight years ago that very woman 
with the salt fish came here fresh as a cherub, innocent, pure, knowing 
no evil, blushing at every word. Perhaps she was like you, proud, 
ready to take offence, not like the others; perhaps she looked like a 
queen, and knew what happiness was in store for the man who should 
love her and whom she should love. Do you see how it ended ? And 
what if at that very minute when she was beating on the filthy steps 
with that fish, drunken and dishevelled-what if at that very minute 
she recalled the pure early days in her father's house, when she used to 
go to school and the neighbour's son watched for her on the way, 

Notes from Underground 
201 
declaring that he would love her as long as he lived, that he would 
devote his life to her, and when they vowed to love one another for 
ever and be married as soon as they were grown up! 
"No, Liza, it would be happy for you if you were to die soon of con­
sumption in some corner, in some cellar like that woman just now. In 
the hospital, do you say? You will be lucky if they take you, but what 
if you are still of use to the madam here? Consumption is a queer 
disease, it is not like fever. The patient goes on hoping till the last 
minute and says he is all right. He deludes himself. And that just suits 
your madam. Don't doubt it, that's how it is; you have sold your soul, 
and what is more you owe money, so you daren't say a word. But 
when you are dying, all will abandon you, all will turn away from 
you, for then there will be nothing to get from you. What's more, they 
will reproach you for cumbering the place, for being so long over dying. 
However you beg you won't get a drink of water without abuse: 
'Whenever are you going off, you nasty hussy, you won't let us sleep 
with your moaning, you make the gentlemen sick.' That's true, I have 
heard such things said myself. They will thrust you dying into the 
filthiest corner in the cellar-in the damp and darkness; what will your 
thoughts be, lying there alone? When you die, strange hands will lay 
you out, with grumbling and impatience; no one will bless you, no one 
will sigh for you, they only want to get rid of you as soon as may be; 
they will buy a coffin, take you to the grave as they did that poor woman 
to-day, and celebrate your memory at the tavern. In the grave sleet, filth, 
wet snow-no need to put themselves out for you-'Let her down, 
Vanuha; it's just like her luck-even here, she is head-foremost, the 
hussy. Shorten the cord, you rascal.' 'It's all right as it is.' 'All right, is 
it? \Vhy, she's on her side! She was a fellow-creature, after all! But, 
never mind, throw the earth on her.' And they won't care to waste 
much time quarrelling over you. They will scatter the wet blue clay 
as quick as they can and go off to the tavern . . .  and there your mem­
ory on earth will end; other women have children to go to their graves, 
fathers, husbands. While for you neither tear, nor sigh, nor remem­
brance; no one in the whole world will ever come to you, your name 
will vanish from the face of the earth-as though you had never ex­
isted, never been born at all! Nothing but filth and mud, however you 
knock at your coffin lid at night, when the dead arise, however you 
cry: 'Let me out, kind people, to live in the light of day! My life was 
no life at all; my life has been thrown away like a dishclout; it was 
drunk away in the tavern at the Haymarket; let me out, kind people, 
to live in the world again.' " 

202 
'I he Short N.ovels of Vostoevsky 
And I worked myself up to such a pitch that I began to have a lump 
in my throat myself, and . . .  and all at once I stopped, sat up in dis­
may, and bending over apprehensively, began to listen with a beating 
heart. I had reason to be troubled. 
I had felt for some time that I was turning her soul upside down and 
rending her heart, and-and the more I was convinced of it, the more 
eagerly I desired to gain my object as quickly and as effectually as 
possible. It was the exercise of my skill that carried me away; yet it 
was not merely sport . . . .  
I knew I was speaking stiffly, artificially, even bookishly, in fact, I 
could not speak except "like a book." But that did not trouble me: I 
knew, I felt that I should be understood and that this very bookishness 
might be an assistance. But now, having attained my effect, I was 
suddenly panic-stricken. Never before had I witnessed such despair! 
She was lying on her face, thrusting her face into the pillow and 
clutching it in both hands. Her heart was being torn. Her youthful 
body was shuddering all over as though in convulsions. Suppressed 
sobs rent her bosom and suddenly burst out in weeping and wailing, 
then she pressed closer into the pillow : she did not want any one here, 
not a living soul, to know of her anguish and her tears. She bit the 
pillow, bit her hand till it bled (I saw that afterwards), or, thrusting 
her fingers into her dishevelled hair, seemed rigid with the effort of 
restraint, holding her breath and clenching her teeth. I began saying 
something, begging her to calm herself, but felt that I did not dare; 
and all at once, in a sort of cold shiver, almost in terror, began fum­
bling in the dark, trying hurriedly to get dressed to go. It was dark : 
though I tried my best I could not finish dressing quickly. Suddenly I 
felt a box of matches and a candlestick with a whole candle in it. As 
soon as the room was lighted up, Liza sprang up, sat up in bed, and 
with a contorted face, with a half-insane smile, looked at me almost 
senselessly. I sat down beside her and took her hands; she came to 
herself, made an impulsive movement towards me, would have caught 
hold of me, but did not dare, and slowly bowed her head before me. 
"Liza, my dear, I was wrong . . .  forgive me, my dear," I began, but 
she squeezed my hand in her fingers so tightly that I felt I was saying 
the wrong thing and stopped. 
"This is my address, Liza, come to me." 
"I will come," she answered resolutely, her head still bowed. 
"But now I am going, good-bye . . .  till we meet again." 
I got up; she, too, stood up and suddenly Rushed all over, gave a 
shudder, s໩atched up a shawl that was lying on a chair and muffled 

Notes from Underground 
203 
herself in it to her chin. As she did this she gave another sickly smile, 
blushed and looked at me strangely. I felt wretched; I was in haste 
to get away-to disappear. 
"Wait a minute," she said suddenly, in the passage just at the door­
way, stopping me with her hand on my overcoat. She put down the 
candle in hot haste and ran off; evidently she had thought of some­
thing or wanted to show me something. As she ran away she Rushed, 
her eyes shone, and there was a smile on her lips-what was the mean­
ing of it? Against my will I waited : she came back a minute later with 
an expression that seemed to ask forgiveness for something. In fact, 
it was not the same face, not the same look as the evening before: 
sullen, mistrustful and obstinate. Her eyes now were imploring, soft, 
and at the same time trustful, caressing, timid. The expression with 
which children look at people they are very fond of, of whom they are 
asking a favour. Her eyes were a light hazel, they were lovely eyes, 
full of life, and capable of expressing love as well as sullen hatred. 
Making no explanation, as though I, as a sort of higher being, must 
understand everything without explanations, she held out a piece of 
paper to me. Her whole face was positively beaming at that instant 
with naive, almost childish, triumph. I unfolded it. It was a letter to 
her from a medical student or some one of that sort-a very high­
flown and flowery, but extremely respectful, love-letter. I don't recall 
the words now, but I remember well that through the high-Aown 
phrases there was apparent a genuine feeling, which cannot be feigned. 
When I had finished reading it I met her glowing, questioning, and 
childishly impatient eyes fixed upon me. She fastened her eyes upon 
my face and waited impatiently for what I should say. In a few words, 
hurriedly, but with a sort of joy and pride, she explained to me that 
she had been to a dance somewhere in a private house, a family of 
"very nice people, who knew notlu'ng, absolutely nothing, for she had 
only come here so lately and it had all happened . . . and she hadn't 
made up her mind to stay and was certainly going away as soon as she 
had paid her debt . . .  " and at that party there had been the student 
who had danced with her all the evening. He had talked to her, and 
it turned out that he had known her in old days at Riga when he was 
a child, they had played together, but a very long time ago-and he 
knew her parents, but about this he knew nothing, nothing whatever, 
and had no suspicion! And the day after the dance (three days ago) 
he had sent her that letter through the friend with whom she had 
gone to the party . . .  and . . . "well, that was all." 

204 
'!he Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
She dropped her shining eyes with a sort of bashfulness as she 
finished. 
The poor girl was keeping that student's letter as a precious treasure, 
and had run to fetch it, her only treasure, because she did not want 
me to go away without knowing that she, too, was honestly and 
genuinely loved; that she, too, was addressed respectfully. No doubt 
that letter was destined to lie in her box and lead to nothing. But none 
the less, I am certain that she would keep it all her life as a precious 
treasure, as her pride and justification, and now at such a minute she 
had thought of that letter and brought it with na"ive pride to raise 
herself in my eyes that I might see, that I, too, might think well of her. 
I said nothing, pressed her hand and went out. I so longed to get away . 
. . . I walked all the way home, in spite of the fact that the melting 
snow was still falling in heavy flakes. I was exhausted, shattered, in 
bewilderment. But behind the bewilderment the truth was already 
gleaming. The loathsome truth. 
[ vm 
It was some time, however, before I consented to recognize that 
truth. \Vaking up in the morning after some hours of heavy, leaden 
sleep, and immediately realizing all that had happened on the previous 
day, I was positively amazed at my last night's sentimentality with 
Liza, at all those "outcries of horror and pity." "To think of having 
such an attack of womanish hysteria, pah!" I concluded. And what 
did I thrust my address upon her for? What if she comes? Let her 
come, though; it doesn't matter . . . .  But obviously that was not now 
the chief and the most important matter: I had to make haste and at 
all costs save my reputation in the eyes of Zverkov and Simonov as 
quickly as possible; that was the chief business. And I was so taken 
up that morning that I actually forgot all about Liza. 
First of all I had at once to repay what I had borrowed the day 
before from Simonov. I resolved on a desperate measure: to borrow 
fifteen roubles straight off from Anton Antonitch. As luck would have 
it he was in the best of humours that morning, and gave it to me at 
once, on the first asking. I was so delighted at this that, as I signed 
the I 0 U with a swaggering air, I told him casually that the night 
before "I had been keeping it up with some friends at the Hotel de 
Paris; we were giving a farewell party to a comrade, in fact, I might 
say a friend of my childhood, and you know-a desperate rake, fear­
fully spoilt-of course, he belongs to a good family, and has con-

Notes from Underground 
205 
siderable means, a brilliant career; he is witty, charming, a regular 
Lovelace, you understand; we drank an extra 'half-dozen' and . . .  " 
And it went off all right; all this was uttered very easily, uncon­
strainedly and complacently. 
On reaching home I promptly wrote to Simonov. 
To this hour I am lost in admiration when I recall the truly gentle­
manly, good-humoured, candid tone of my letter. With tact and good 
breeding, and, above all, entirely without superfluous words, I blamed 
myself for all that had happened. I defended myself, "if I really may 
be allowed to defend myself," by alleging that being utterly unaccus­
tomed to wine, I had been intoxicated with the first glass, which I 
said I had drunk before they arrived, while I was waiting for them 
at the Hotel de Paris between five and six o'clock. I begged Simonov's 
pardon especially; I asked him to convey my explanations to all the 
others, especially to Zverkov, whom "I seemed to remember as though 
in a dream" I had insulted. I added that I would have called upon all 
of them myself, but my head ached, and besides I had not the face to. 
I was particularly pleased with a certain lightness, almost carelessness 
(strictly within the bounds of politeness, however), which was apparent 
in my style, and better than any possible arguments, gave them at once 
to understand that I took rather an independent view of "all that un­
pleasantness last night"; that I was by no means so utterly crushed 
as you, my friends, probably imagine; but on the contrary, looked 
upon it as a gentleman serenely respecting himself should look upon 
it. "On a young hero's past no censure is cast!" 
"There is actually an aristocratic playfulness about it!" I thought 
admiringly, as I read over the letter. "And it's all because I am an 
intellectual and cultivated man! Another man in my place would not 
have known how to extricate himself, but here I have got out of it and 
am as jolly as ever again, and all because I am a cultivated and edu­
cated man of our day." And, indeed, perhaps, everything was due to 
the wine yesterday. H'm! . . . no, it was not the wine. I did not drink 
anything at all between five and six when I was waiting for them. 
I had lied to Simonov; I had lied shamelessly; and indeed I wasn't 
ashamed now . . . .  Hang it all, though, the great thing was that I was 
rid of it. 
I put six roubles in the letter, sealed it up, and asked Apollon to take 
it to Simonov. When he learned that there was money in the letter, 
Apollon became more respectful and agreed to take it. Towards eve­
ning I went out for a walk. My head was still aching and giddy after 
yesterday. But as evening came on and the twilight grew denser, my 

206 
The Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
impressions and, following them, my thoughts grew more and more 
different and confused. Something was not dead within me, in the 
depths of my heart and conscience it would not die, and it showed 
itself in acute depression. For the most part I jostled my way through 
the most crowded business streets, along Myeshtchansky Street, along 
Sadovy Street and in Yusupov Garden. I always liked particularly 
sauntering along these streets in the dusk, just when there were 
crowds of working people of all sorts going home from their daily 
work, with faces looking cross with anxiety. \Vhat I liked was just 
that cheap bustle, that bare prose. On this occasion the jostling of the 
streets irritated me more than ever. I could not make out what was 
wrong with me, I could not find the clue, something seemed rising up 
continually in my soul, painfully, and refusing to be appeased. I 
returned home completely upset; it was just as though some crime 
were lying on my conscience. 
The thought that Liza was coming worried me continually. It 
seemed queer to me that of all my recollections of yesterday this tor­
mented me, as it were, especially, as it were, quite separately. Every­
thing else I had quite succeeded in forgetting by the evening; I dis­
missed it all and was still perfectly satisfied with my letter to Simonov. 
But on this point I was not satisfied at all. It was as though I were 
worried only by Liza. "What if she comes," I thought incessantly, 
"well, it doesn't matter, let her come! H'm! it's horrid that she should 
see, for instance, how I live. Yesterday I seemed such a hero to her, 
while now, h'm! It's horrid, though, that I have let myself go so, the 
room looks like a beggar's. And I brought myself to go out to dinner 
in such a suit! And my American leather sofa with the stuffing stick­
ing out. And my dressing-gown, which will not cover me, such tatters, 
and she will see all this and she will see Apollon. That beast is certain 
to insult her. He will fasten upon her in order to be rude to me. And 
I, of course, shall be panic-stricken as usual, I shall begin bowing and 
scraping before her and pulling my dressing-gown round me, I shall 
begin smiling, telling lies. Oh, the beastlines: ! And it isn't the beastli­
ness of it that matters most! There is something more important, more 
loathsome, viler! Yes, viler! And to put on that dishonest lying mask 
. 
I "  
agam. . . . 
When I reached that thought I fired up all at once. 
"Why dishonest? How dishonest? I was speaking sincerely last 
night. I remember there was real feeling in me, too. \Vhat I wanted 
was to excite an honourable feeling in her 
.
.
.
•
 Her crying was a good 
thing, it will have a good effect." 

N.otes from Underground 
207 
Yet I could not feel at ease. All that evening, even when I had come 
back home, even after nine o'clock, when I calculated that Liza could 
not possibly come, she still haunted me, and what was worse, she came 
back to my mind always in the same position. One moment out of all 
that had happened last night stood vividly before my imagination; the 
moment when I struck a match and saw her pale, distorted face, with 
its look of torture. And what a pitiful, what an unnatural, what a 
distorted smile she had at that moment! But I did not know then that 
fifteen years later I should still in my imagination see Liza, always 
with the pitiful, distorted, inappropriate smile which was on her face 
at that minute. 
Next day I was ready again to look upon it all as nonsense, due to 
over-excited nerves, and, above all, as exaggerated. I was always con­
scious of that weak point of mine, and sometimes very much afraid 
of it. "I exaggerate everything, that is where I go wrong," I repeated 
to myself every hour. But, however, "Liza will very likely come all 
the same" was the refrain with which all my reflections ended. I was 
so uneasy that I sometimes flew into a fury : "She'll come, she is certain 
to come!" I cried, running about the room, "if not to-day, she will 
come to-morrow; she'll find me out! The damnable romanticism of 
these pure hearts! Oh, the vileness-oh, the silliness-oh, the stupidity 
of these 'wretched sentimental souls'! \Vhy, how fail to understand? 
How could one fail to understand ?" . . .  
But at this point I stopped short, and in great confusion, indeed. 
And how few, how few words, I thought, in passing, were needed; 
how little of the idyllic (and affectedly, bookishly, artificially idyllic 
too) had sufficed to turn a whole human life at once according to my 
will. That's virginity, to be sure! Freshness of soil! 
At times a thought occurred to me, to go to her, "to tell her all," 
and beg her not to come to me. But this thought stirred such wrath 
in me that I believed I should have crushed that "damned" Liza if she 
had chanced to be near me at the time. I should have insulted her, 
have spat at her, have turned her out, have struck her! 
One day passed, however, another and another; she did not come 
and I began to grow calmer. I felt particularly bold and cheerful after 
nine o'clock, I even sometimes began dreaming, and rather sweetly: 
I, for instance, became the salvation of Liza, simply through her com­
ing to me and my talking to her 
. . . .  I develop her, educate her. Finally, 
I notice that she loves me, loves me passionately. I pretend not to 
understand (I don't know, however, why I pretend, just for effect, 

208 
'!he Short Novels of VostoevskJ 
perhaps). At last all confusion, transfigured, trembling and sobbing, 
she flings herself at my feet and says that I am her saviour, and that 
she loves me better than anything in the world. I am amazed, but . . .  
"Liza," I say, "can you imagine that I have not noticed your love? I 
saw it all, I divined it, but I did not dare to approach you first, because 
I had an influence over you and was afraid that you would force 
yourself, from gratitude, to respond to my love, would try to rouse in 
your heart a feeling which was perhaps absent, and I did not wish that 
•
.
.
 because it would be tyranny . . .  it would be indelicate (in short, 
I launch off at that point into European, inexplicably lofty subtleties 
a Ia George Sand), but now, now you are mine, you are my creation, 
you are pure, you are good, you are my noble wife. 
" 'Into my house come bold and free, 
Its rightful mistress there to be.' " 
Then we begin living together, go abroad and so on, and so on. In 
fact, in the end it seemed vulgar to me myself, and I began putting 
out my tongue at myself. 
Besides, they won't let her out, "the hussy!" I thought. They don't 
let them go out very readily, especially in the evening (for some reason 
I fancied she would come in the evening, and at seven o'clock pre­
cisely) . Though she did say she was not altogether a slave there yet, 
and had certain rights; so, h'm! Damn it all, she will come, she is sure 
to come! 
It was a good thing, in fact, that Apollon distracted my attention 
at that time by his rudeness. He drove me beyond all patience! He 
was the bane of my life, the curse laid upon me by Providence. \Ve 
had been squabbling continually for years, and I hated him. My God, 
how I hated him! I believe I had never hated anyone in my life as I 
hated him, especially at some moments. He was an elderly, dignified 
man, who worked part of his time as a tailor. But for some unknown 
reason he despised me beyond all measure, and looked down upon 
me insufferably. Though, indeed, he looked down upon every one. 
Simply to glance at that flaxen, smoothly brushed head, at the tuft of 
hair he combed up on his forehead and oiled with sunflower oil, at that 
dignified mouth, compressed into the shape of the letter V, made one 
feel one was confronting a man who never doubted of himself. He 
was a pedant, to the most extreme point, the greatest pedant I had met 
on earth, and with that had a vanity only befitting Alexander of 
Macedon. He was in love with every button on his coat, every nail on 
his fingers-absolutely in love with them, and he looked it! In his 

Notes from UndergroUtld 
209 
behaviour to me he was a perfect tyrant, he spoke very little to me, 
and if he chanced to glance at me he gave me a firm, majestically self­
confident and invariably ironical look that drove me sometimes to 
fury. He did his work with the air of doing me the greatest favour. 
Though he did scarcely anything for me, and did not, indeed, consider 
himself bound to do anything. There could be no doubt that he looked 
upon me as the greatest fool on earth, and that he did not "get rid of 
me" was simply that he could get wages from me every month. He 
consented to do nothing for me for seven roubles a month. Many sins 
should be forgiven me for what I suffered from him. My hatred 
reached such a point that sometimes his very step almost threw me 
into convulsions. What I loathed particularly was his lisp. His tongue 
must have been a little too long or something of that sort, for he 
continually lisped, and seemed to be very proud of it, imagining that 
it greatly added to his dignity. He spoke in a slow, measured tone, with 
his hands behind his back and his eyes fixed on the ground. He mad­
dened me particularly when he read aloud the Psalms to himself behind 
his partition. Many a battle I waged over that reading! But he was 
awfully fond of reading aloud in the evenings, in a slow, even, sing­
song voice, as though over the dead. It is interesting that that is how 
he has ended: he hires himself out to read the Psalms over the dead, 
and at the same time he kills rats and makes blacking. But at that 
time I could not get rid of him, it was as though he were chemically 
combined with my existence. Besides, nothing would have induced 
him :o consent to leave me. I could not live in furnished lodgings: my 
lodging was my private solitude, my shell, my cave, in which I con­
cealed myself from all mankind, and Apollon seemed to me, for some 
reason, an integral part of that flat, and for seven years I could not 
turn him away. 
To be two or three days behind with his wages, for instance, was 
impossible. He would have made such a fuss, I should not have known 
where to hide my head. But I was so exasperated with every one dur­
ing those days, that I made up my mind for some reason and with 
some object to punis/z Apollon and not to pay him for a fortnight the 
wages that were owing him. I had for a long time-for the last two 
years-been intending to do this, simply in order to teach him not to 
give himself airs with me, and to show him that if I liked I could 
withhold his wages. I purposed to say nothing to him about it, and 
was purposely silent indeed, in order to score off his pride and force 
him to be the first to speak of his wages. Then I would take the seven 
roubles out of a drawer, show him I have the money put aside on 

210 
'[he Short Novels of VostoevskJ' 
purpose, but that I won't, I won't, I simply won't pay him his wages, 
I won't just because that is "what I wish," because "I am master, and 
it is for me to decide," because he has been disrespectful, because he 
has been rude; but if he were to ask respectfully I might be softened 
and give it to him, otherwise he might wait another fortnight, another 
three weeks, a whole month . . . .  
But angry as I was, yet he got the better of me. I could not hold 
out for four days. He began as he always did begin in such cases, 
for there had been such cases already, there had been attempts (and it 
may be observed I knew all this beforehand, I knew his nasty tactics 
by heart). He would begin by fixing upon me an exceedingly severe 
stare, keeping it up for several minutes at a time, particularly on meet­
ing me or seeing me out of the house. If I held out and pretended not 
to notice these stares, he would, still in silence, proceed to further 
tortures. All at once, apropos of nothing, he would walk softly and 
smoothly into my room, when I was pacing up and down or reading, 
stand at the door, one hand behind his back and one foot behind the 
other, and fix upon me a stare more than severe, utterly contemptuous. 
If I suddenly asked him what he w;.nted, he would make me no 
answer, but continue staring at me persistently for some seconds, then, 
with a peculiar compression of his lips and a most significant air, de­
liberately turn round and deliberately go back to his room. Two hours 
later he would come out again and again present himself before me 
in the same way. It had happened that in my fury I did not even ask 
him what he wanted, but simply raised my head sharply and im­
periously and began staring back at him. So we stared at one another 
for two minutes; at last he turned with deliberation and dignity and 
went back again for two hours. 
If I were still not brought to reason by all this, but persisted in my 
revolt, he would suddenly begin sighing while he looked at me, long, 
deep sighs as though measuring by them the depths of my moral 
degradation, and, of course, it ended at last by his triumphing com­
pletely: I raged and shouted, but still was forced to do what he wanted. 
This time the usual staring manoeuvres had scarcely begun when I 
lost my temper and flew at him in a fury. I was irritated beyond 
endurance apart from him. 
"Stay," I cried, in a frenzy, as he was slowly and silently turning, 
with one hand behind his back, to go to his room, "stay! Come back, 
come back, I tell you!" and I must have bawled so unnaturally, that 
he turned round and even looked at me with some wonder. However, 
he persisted in saying nothing, and that infuriated me. 

Notes from U11derground 
211 
"How dare you come and look at me like that without being sent 
for? Answer!" 
After looking at me calmly for half a minute, he began turning 
round again. 
"Stay!" I roared, running up to him, "don't stir! There. Answer, 
now : what did you come in to look at?" 
"If you have any order to gi"e me it's my duty to carry it out," he 
answered, after another silent pause, with a slow, measured lisp, rais­
ing his eyebrows and calmly twisting his head from one side to an­
other, all this with exasperating composure. 
"That's not what I am asking you about, you torturer!" I shouted, 
turning crimson with anger. "I'll tell you why you came here myself: 
you see, I don't give you your wages, you are so proud you don't 
want to bow down and ask for it, and so you come to punish me with 
your stupid stares, to worry me and you have no sus-pic-ion how 
stupid it is-stupid, stupid, stupid, stupid!" . . .  
He would have turned round again without a word, but I seized 
him. 
"Listen," I shouted to him. "Here's the money, do you see, here it is" 
(I took it out of the table drawer) ;  "here's the seven roubles complete, 
but you are not going to have it, you . . .  are . . .  not . . .  going . . .  
to . . .  have it until you come respectfully with bowed head to beg my 
pardon. Do you hear?" 
"That cannot be," he answered, with the most unnatural self-con­
fidence. 
"It shall be so," I said, "I gi\'e you my word of honour, it shall be!" 
"And there's nothing for me to beg your pardon for," he went on, 
as though he had not noticed my exclamations at all. "Why, besides, 
you called me a 'torturer,' for which I can summon you at the police­
station at any time for insulting behaviour." 
"Go, summon me," I roared, "go at once, this very minute, this very 
second! You are a torturer all the same! a torturer!" 
But he merely looked at me, then turned, and regardless of my loud 
calls to him, he walked to his room with an even step and without 
looking round. 
"If it had not been for Liza nothing of this would have happened," 
I decidedly inwardly. Then, after waiting a minute, I went myself 
behind his screen with a dignified and solemn air, though my heart 
was beating slowly and violently. 
"Apollon," I said quietly and emphatically, though I was breathless, 
"go at once without a minute's delay and fetch the police-officer." 

212 
The Short Novels of 1JostoevskJ 
He had meanwhile settled himself at his table, put on his spectacles 
and taken up some sewing. But, hearing my order, he burst into a 
guffaw. 
"At once, go this minute! Go on, or else you can't imagine what will 
happen." 
"You are certainly out of your mind," he observed, without even 
raising his head, lisping as deliberately as ever and threading his 
needle. "Whoever heard of a man sending for the police against him­
self? And as for being frightened-you are upsetting yourself about 
nothing, for nothing will come of it." 
"Go!" I shrieked, clutching him by the shoulder. I felt I should 
strike him in a minute. 
But I did not notice the door from the passage softly and slowly 
open at that instant and a figure come in, stop short, and begin staring 
at us in perplexity. I glanced, nearly swooned with shame, and rushed 
back to my room. There, clutching at my hair with both hands, I 
leaned my head against the wall and stood motionless in that position. 
Two minutes later I heard Apollon's deliberate footsteps. "There is 
some woman asking for you," he said, looking at me with peculiar 
severity. Then he stood aside and let in Liza. He would not go away, 
but stared at us sarcastically. 
"Go away, go away," I commanded in desperation. At that moment 
my clock began whirring and wheezing and struck seven. 
[ IX ] 
"Into my house come bold and free, 
Its rightful mistress there to be." 
I stood before her crushed, crestfallen, revoltingly confused, and I 
believe I smiled as I did my utmost to wrap myself in the skirts of my 
ragged wadded dressing-gown-exactly as I had imagined the scene 
not long before in a fit of depression. After standing over us for a 
couple of minutes Apollon went away, but that did not make me more 
at ease. \Vhat made it worse was that she, too, was overwhelmed with 
confusion, more so, in fact, than I should have expected. At the sight 
of me, of course. 
"Sit down," I said mechanically, moving a chair up to the table, and 
I sat down on the sofa. She obediently sat down at once and gazed at 
me open-eyed, evidently expecting something from me at once. This 
na'ivete of expectation drove me to fury, but I restrained myself. 

Notes from Underground 
213 
She ought to have tried not to notice, as though everything had 
been as usual, while instead of that, she .
.
•
 and I dimly felt that I 
should make her pay dearly for all this. 
"You have found me in a strange position, Liza," I began, stammer­
ing and knowing that this was the wrong way to begin. "No, no, 
don't imagine anything," I cried, seeing that she had suddenly flushed. 
"I am not ashamed of my poverty . . . .  On the contrary I look with 
pride on my poverty. I am poor but honourable . . . . One can be poor 
and honourable," I muttered. "However . . .  would you like tea?" .
.
•
 
"No," she was beginning. 
"Wait a minute." 
I leapt up and ran to Apollon. I had to get out of the room somehow. 
"Apollon," I whispered in feverish haste, flinging down before him 
the seven roubles which had remained all the time in my clenched 
fist, "here are your wages, you see I give them to you; but for that 
you must come to my rescue: bring me tea and a dozen rusks from the 
restaurant. If you won't go, you'll make me a miserable man! You 
don't know what this woman is . . . .  This is-everything! You may 
be imagining something . . . .  But you don't know what that woman 
. , .. 
I S .  
• 
•
•
 
Apollon, who had already sat down to his work and put on his 
spectacles again, at first glanced askance at the money without speak­
ing or putting down his needle; then, without paying the slightest 
attention to me or making any answer he went on busying himself 
with his needle, which he had not yet threaded. I waited before him 
for three minutes with my arms crossed a Ia Napoleon. My temples 
were moist with sweat. I was pale, I felt it. But, thank God, he must 
have been moved to pity, looking at me. Having threaded his needle, 
he deliberately got up from his seat, deliberately moved back his chair, 
deliberately took off his spectacles, deliberately counted the money, 
and finally asking me over his shoulder : "Shall I get a whole portion ?" 
deliberately walked out of the room. As I was going back to Liza, 
the thought occurred to me on the way: shouldn't I run away just 
as I was in my dressing-gown, no matter where, and then let happen 
what would? 
I sat down again. She looked at me uneasily. For some minutes we 
were silent. 
"I will kill him," I shouted suddenly, striking the table with my fist 
so that the ink spurted out of the inkstand. 
"\Vhat are you saying!" she cried, starting . 
.. 1 will kill him! kill him!" I shrieked, suddenly striking the table 

214 
'l he Short N.ovels of 'Dostoevsky 
in absolute frenzy, and at the same time fully understanding how 
stupid it was to be in such a frenzy. "You don't know, Liza, what that 
torturer is to me. He is my torturer . . . .  He has gone now to fetch 
some rusks; he . . .  " 
And suddenly I burst into tears. It was an hysterical attack. How 
ashamed I felt in the midst of my sobs; but still I could not restrain 
them. 
She was frightened. 
"What is the matter ? What is wrong?" she cried, fussing about me. 
"Water, give me water, over there!" I muttered in a faint voice, 
though I was inwardly conscious that I could have got on very well 
without water and without muttering in a faint voice. But I was what 
is called putting it on, to save appearances, though the attack was a 
genume one. 
She gave me water, looking at me in bewilderment. At that moment 
Apollon brought in the tea. It suddenly seemed to me that this com­
monplace, prosaic tea was horribly undignified and paltry after all 
that had happened, and I blushed crimson. Liza looked at Apollon 
with positive alarm. He went out without a glance at either of us. 
"Liza, do you despise me?" I asked, looking at her fixedly, trembling 
with impatience to know what she was thinking. 
She was confused, and did not know what to answer. 
"Drink your tea," I said to her angrily. I was angry with myself, 
but, of course, it was she who would have to pay for it. A horrible 
spite against her suddenly surged up in my heart; I believe I could 
have killed her. To revenge myself on her I swore inwardly not to 
say a word to her all the time. "She is the cause of it all," I thought. 
Our silence lasted for five minutes. The tea stood on the table; we 
did not touch it. I had got to the point of purposely refraining from 
beginning in order to embarrass her further; it was awkward for her 
to begin alone. Several times she glanced at me with mournful per­
plexity. I was obstinately silent. I was, of course, myself the chief 
sufferer, because I was fully conscious of the disgusting meanness of 
my spiteful stupidity, and yet at the same time I could not restrain 
myself. 
"I want to . . .  get away . . .  from there altogether," she began, 
to break the silence in some way, but, poor girl, that was just what 
she ought not to have spoken about at such a stupid moment to a man 
so stupid as I was. My heart positively ached with pity for her tactless 
and unnecessary straightforwardness. But something hideous at once 

'Notes from Underground 
215 
stifled all compassion in me; it even provoked me to greater venom. 
I did not care what happened. Another five minutes passed. 
"Perhaps I am in your way," she began timidly, hardly audibly, and 
was getting up. 
But as soon as I saw this first impulse of wounded dignity I posi­
tively trembled with spite, and at once burst out. 
"Why have you come to me, tell me that, please?" I began, gasping 
for breath and regardless of logical connection in my words. I longed 
to have it all out at once, at one burst; I did not even trouble how to 
begin. "Why have you come? Answer, answer," I cried, hardly know­
ing what I was doing. "I'll tell you, my good girl, why you have come. 
You've come because I talked sentimental stuff to you then. So now 
you are soft as butter and longing for fine sentiments again. So you 
may as well know that I was laughing at you then. And I am laugh­
ing at you now. Why are you shuddering? Yes, I was laughing at 
you! I had been insulted just before, at dinner, by the fellows who 
came that evening before me. I came to you, meaning to thrash one 
of them, an officer; but I didn't succeed, I didn't find him; I had to 
avenge the insult on some one to get back my own again ; you turned 
up, I vented my spleen on you and laughed at you. I had been hu­
miliated, so I wanted to humiliate; I had been treated like a rag, 
so I wanted to show my power . . . .  That's what it was, and you 
imagined I had come there on purpose to save you. Yes? You imagined 
that? You imagined that?" 
I knew that she would perhaps be muddled and not take it all in 
exactly, but I knew, too, that she would grasp the gist of it, very well 
indeed. And so, indeed, she did. She turned white as a handkerchief, 
tried to say something, and her lips worked painfully; but she sank 
on a chair as though she had been felled by an axe. And all the time 
afterwards she listened to me with her lips parted and her eyes wide­
open, shuddering with awful terror. The cynicism, the cynicism of my 
words overwhelmed her. 
"Save you!" I went on, jumping up from my chair and running up 
and down the room before her. "Save you from what? But perhaps 
I am worse than you myself. Why didn't you throw it in my teeth 
when I was giving you that sermon: 'But what did you come here 
yourself for? Was it to read us a sermon?' Power, power was what I 
wanted then, sport was what I wanted, I wanted to wring out your 
tears, your humiliation, your hysteria-that was what I wanted then! 
Of course, I couldn't keep it up then, because I am a wretched creature, 
I was frightened, and, the devil knows why, gave you my address 

216 
7' he Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
in my folly. Afterwards, before I got home, I was cursing and swear­
ing at you because of that address, I hated you already because of the 
lies I had told you. Because I only like playing with words, only dream­
ing, but, do you know, what I really want is that you should all go to 
hell. That is what I want. I want peace; yes, I'd sell the whole world for 
a farthing, straight off, so long as I was left in peace. Is the world to go 
to pot, or am I to go without my tea? I say that the world may go to 
pot for me so long as I always get my tea. Did you know that, or 
not? Well, anyway, I know that I am a blackguard, a scoundrel, an 
egoist, a sluggard. Here I have been shuddering for the last three days 
at the thought of your coming. And do you know what has worried 
me particularly for these three days? That I posed as such a hero 
to you, and now you would see me in a wretched torn dressing­
gown, beggarly, loathsome. I told you just now that I was not ashamed 
of my poverty; so you may as well know that I am ashamed of it; I am 
more ashamed of it than of anything, more afraid of it than of being 
found out if I were a thief, because I am as vain as though I had been 
skinned and the very air blowing on me hurt. Surely by now you must 
realize that I shall never forgive you for having found me in this 
wretched dressing-gown, just as I was Aying at Apollon like a spiteful 
cur. The saviour, the former hero, was Aying like a mangy, unkempt 
sheep-dog at his lackey, and the lackey was jeering at him! And I 
shall never forgive you for the tears I could not help shedding before 
you j ust now, like some silly woman put to shame! And for what I 
am confessing to you now, I shall never forgive you either! Yes-you 
must answer for it all because you turned up like this, because I am a 
blackguard, because I am the nastiest, stupidest, absurdest and most 
envious of all the worms on earth, lvho are not a bit better than I am, 
but, the devil knows why, are never put to confusion; while I shall 
aiways be insulted by every louse, that is my doom! And what is it to 
me that you don't understand a word of this! And what do I care, 
\\'hat do I care about you, and whether you go to ruin there or not? 
Do you understand ? How I shall hate you now after saying this, for 
having been here and listening. Why, it's not once in a lifetime a man 
speaks out like this, and then it is in hysterics! . . .  What more do 
you want ? 'Why do you still stand confronting me, after all this ? Why 
are you worrying me? Why don't you go?" 
But at this point a strange thing happened : I was so accustomed to 
chink and imagine everything from books, and to picture everything in 
the world to myself just as I had made it up in my dreams before­
hand, that I could not all at once take in this strange circumstance. 

Notes from Underground 
217 
What happened was this: Liza, insulted and crushed by me, under໪ 
stood a great deal more than I imagined. She understood from all this 
what a woman understands first of all, if she feels genuine love, that is, 
that I was myself unhappy. 
The frightened and wounded expression on her face was followed 
first by a look of sorrowful perplexity. When I began calling myself a 
scoundrel and a blackguard and my tears Rowed (the tirade was 
accompanied throughout by tears) her whole face worked convulsively. 
She was on the point of getting up and stopping me; when I finished 
she took no notice of my shouting: "Why are you here, why don't you 
go away?" but realized only that it must have been very bitter to me to 
say all this. Besides, she was so crushed, poor girl; she considered her໫ 
self infinitely beneath me; how could she feel anger or resentment? 
She suddenly leapt up from her chair with an irresistible impulse and 
held out her hands, yearning towards me, though still timid and not 
daring to stir . . . .  At this point there was a revulsion in my heart, too. 
Then she suddenly rushed to me, threw her arms round me and burst 
into tears. I, too, could not restrain myself, and sobbed as I never had 
before. 
"They won't let me . . .  I can't be good!" I managed to articulate; 
then I went to the sofa, fell on it face downwards, and sobbed on it 
for a quarter of an hour in genuine hysterics. She came close to me, 
put her arms round me and stayed motionless in that position. But 
the trouble was that the hysterics could not go on for ever, and (I 
am writing the loathsome truth) lying face downwards on the sofa 
with my face thrust into my nasty leather pillow, I began by degrees 
to be aware of a far໬away, involuntary but irresistible feeling that it 
would be awkward now for me to raise my head and look Liza straight 
in the face. Why was I ashamed ? I don't know, but I was ashamed. 
The thought, too, came into my overwrought brain that our parts now 
were completely changed, that she was now the heroine, while I was 
just such a crushed and humiliated creature as she had been before 
me that night-four days before . . . .  And all this came into my 
mind during the minutes I was lying on my face on the sofa. 
My God! surely I was not envious of her then. 
I don't know, to this day I cannot decide, and at the time, of course, 
I was still less able to understand what I was feeling than now. I 
cannot get on without domineering and tyrannizing over some one, 
but . . .  there is no explaining anything by reasoning and so it is 
useless to reason. 
I conquered myself, however, and raised my head; I had to do so 

218 
The Short Novels of Vostoevsky 
sooner or later 
•
.
.
 and I am convinced to this day that it was just 
because I was ashamed to look at her that another feeling was sud­
denly kindled and flamed up in my heart . . .  a feeling of mastery 
and possession. My eyes gleamed with passion, and I gripped her hands 
tightly. How I hated her and how I was drawn to her at that minute! 
The one feeling intensified the other. It was almost like an act of 
vengeance. At first there was a look of amazement, even of terror, on 
her face, but only for one instant. She warmly and rapturously em­
braced me. 
( X ) 
A quarter of an hour later I was rushing up and down the room in 
frenzied impatience, from minute to minute I went up to the screen 
and peeped through the crack at Liza. She was sitting on the ground 
with her head leaning against the bed, and must have been crying. 
But she did not go away, and that irritated me. This time she under­
stood it all. I had insulted her finally, but . . .  there's no need to de­
scribe it. She realized that my outburst of passion had been simply 
revenge, a fresh humiliation, and that to my earlier, almost causeless 
hatred was added now a personal hatred, born of envy . . . .  Though I 
do not maintain positively that she understood all this distinctly; but 
she certainly did fully understand that I was a despicable man, and 
what was worse, incapable of loving her. 
I know I shall be told that this is incredible-but it is incredible to be 
:s spiteful and stupid as I was; it may be added that it was strange I 
should not love her, or at any rate, appreciate her love. Why is it 
strange? In the first place, by then I was incapable of love, for, I 
repeat, with me loving meant tyrannizing and showing my moral 
superiority. I have never in my life been able to imagine any other 
sort of love, and have nowaday!'; come to the point of sometimes think­
ing that love really consists in the right-freely given by the beloved 
object-to tyrannize over her. 
Even in my underground dreams I did not imagine love except as a 
struggle. I began it always with hatred and ended it with moral sub­
jugation, and afterwards I never knew what to do with the subjugated 
object. And what is there to wonder at in that, since I had succeeded 
in so corrupting myself, since I was so out of touch with "real life," 
as to have :.ctually thought of reproaching her, and putting her to 
shame for having come to me to hear "fine sentiments"; and did not 
even guess that she had come not to hear fine sentiments, but to love 

Notes from Underground 
219 
me, because to a woman all reformation-all salvation from any sort 
of ruin, and all moral renewal-is included in love and can only show 
itself in that form. 
I did not hate her so much, however, when I was running about the 
room and peeping through the crack in the screen. I was only insuffer­
ably oppressed by her being here. I wanted her to disappear. I wanted 
"peace," to be left alone in my underground world. Real life oppressed 
me with its novelty so much that I could hardly breathe. 
But several minutes passed and she still remained without stirring, 
as though she were unconscious. I had the shamelessness to tap softly 
at the screen as though to remind her •
.
.
.
 She started, sprang up, and 
flew to seek her kerchief, her hat, her coat, as though making her 
escape from me . . . .  Two minutes later she came from behind the 
screen and looked with heavy eyes at me. I gave a spiteful grin, which 
was forced, however, to keep up appearances, and I turned away from 
her eyes. 
"Good-bye," she said, going towards the door. 
I ran up to her, seized her hand, opened it, thrust something in it 
and closed it again. Then I turned at once and dashed away in haste 
to the other corner of the room to avoid seeing, anyway . . . .  
I did mean a moment since to tell a lie-to write that I did this acci­
dentally, not knowing what I was doing through foolishness, through 
losing my head. But I don't want to lie, and so I will say straight 
out that I opened her hand and put the money in it . . .  from spite. 
It came into my head to do this while I was running up and down 
the room and she was sitting behind the screen. But this I can say for 
certain : though I did that cruel thing purposely, it was not an impulse 
from the heart, but came from my evil brain. This cruelty was so 
afiected, so purposely made up, so completely a product of the brain, of 
books, that I could not even keep it up a minute-first I dashed away 
to a\'oid seeing her, and then in shame and despair rushed after Liza. 
I opened the door in the passage and began listening. 
"Liza! Liza!" I cried on the stairs, but in a low voice, not boldly. 
There was no answer, but I fancied I heard her footsteps, lower 
down on the stairs. 
"Liza!" I cried, more loudly. 
No answer. But at that minute I heard the stiff outer glass door 
open heavily with a creak and slam violently, the sound echoed up the 
stairs. 
She had gone. I went back to my room in hesitation. I felt horribly 
oppressed. 

220 
The Short 'Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
I stood still at the table beside the chair on which she had sat and 
looked aimlessly before me. A minute passed, suddenly I started; 
uraight before me on the table I saw . . . .  In short, I saw a crumpled 
blue five-rouble note, the one I had thrust into her hand a minute 
before. It was the same note; it could be no other, there was no other in 
the flat. So she had managed to fling it from her hand on the table 
at the moment when I had dashed into the further corner. 
Well! I might have expected that she would do that. Might I have 
expected it? No, I was such an egoist, I was so lacking in respect for 
my fellow-creatures that I could not even imagine she would do so. 
I could not endure it. A minute later I flew like a madman to dress, 
flinging on what I could at random and ran headlong after her. She 
could not have got two hundred paces away when I ran out into the 
street. 
It was a still night and the snow was coming down in masses and 
falling almost perpendicularly, covering the pavement and the empty 
street as though with a pillow. There was no one in the street, no sound 
was to be heard. The street lamps gave a disconsolate and useless 
glimmer. I ran two hundred paces to the cross-roads and stopped short. 
Where had she gone? And why was I running after her? 
\Vhy? To fall down before her, to sob with remorse, to kiss her 
feet, to entreat her forgiveness! I longed for that, my whole breast 
was being rent to pieces, and never, never shall I recall that minute 
with indifference. But-what for? I thought. Should I not begin to 
hate her, perhaps, even to-morrow, just because I had kissed her feet 
to-day? Should I give her happiness ? Had I not recognized that day, 
for the hundredth time, what I was worth ? Should I not torture her? 
I stood in the snow, gazing into the troubled darkness and pondered 
this. 
"And will it not be better?" I mused fantastically, afterwards at 
home, stifling the living pang of my heart with fantastic dreams. "Will 
it not be better that she should keep the resentment of the insult for 
ever? Resentment-why, it is purification; it is a most stinging and 
painful consciousness! To-morrow I should have defiled her soul 
and have exhausted her heart, while now the feeling of insult will 
never die in her heart, and however loathsome the filth awaiting her­
the feeling of insult will elevate and purify her . . .  by hatred . . .  
h'm! . . .  perhaps too, by forgiveness . . . .  \Vill all that make things 
easier for her, though ? . . .  
" 
And, indeed, I will ask on my own account here an idle question: 

Notes from Underground 
221 
which is better-cheap happiness or exalted sufferings? Well, which 
is better? 
So I dreamed as I sat at home that evening, almost dead with the 
pain in my soul. Never had I endured such suffering and remorse, 
yet could there have been the faintest doubt when I ran out from my 
lodging that I should turn back half-way? I never met Liza again 
and I have heard nothing of her. I will add, too, that I remained for a 
long time afterwards pleased with the phrase about the benefit from 
resentment and hatred, in spite of the fact that I almost fell ill from 
misery. 
Even now, so many years later, all this is somehow a very evil 
memory. I have many evil memories now, but . . .  hadn't I better end 
my "Notes" here? I believe I made a mistake in beginning to write 
them, anyway I have felt ashamed all the time I've been writing this 
story; so it's hardly literature so much as a corrective punishment. 
Why, to tell long stories, showing how I have spoiled my life through 
morally rotting in my corner, through lack of fitting environment, 
through divorce from real life, and rankling spite in my underground 
world, would certainly not be interesting; a novel needs a hero, and all 
the traits for an anti-hero are exfressly gathered together here, and 
what matters most, it all produces an unpleasant impression, for we are 
all divorced from life, we are all cripples, every one of us, more or 
less. We are so divorced from it that we feel at once a sort of loathing 
for real life, and so cannot bear to be reminded of it. Why, we have 
come almost to looking upon real life as an effort, almost as hard 
work, and we are all privately agreed that it is better in books. And 
why do we fuss and fume sometimes ? \Vhy are we perverse and ask 
for something else? We don't know what ourselves. It would be the 
worse for us if our petulant prayers were answered. Come, try, give 
any one of us, for instance, a little more independence, untie our hands, 
widen the spheres of our activity, relax the control and we . . .  yes, 
I assure you . . .  we should be begging to be under control again at 
once. I know that you will very likely be angry with me for that, and 
will begin shouting and stamping. Speak for yourself, you will say, 
and for your miseries in your underground holes, and don't dare to say 
all of us-excuse me, gentlemen, I am not justifying myself with that 
"all of us." As for what concerns me in particular I have only in my 
life carried to an extreme what you have not dared to carry half­
way, and what's more, you have taken your cowardice for good sense, 

222 
The Short Novels of VostoevskJ 
and have found comfort in deceiving yourselves. So that perhaps, after 
all, there is more life in me than in you. Look into it more carefully! 
Why, we don't even know what living means now, what it is, and what 
it is called! Leave us alone without books and we shall be lost and in 
confusion at once. We shall not know what to join on to, what to cling 
to, what to love and what to hate, what to respect and what to despise. 
We are oppressed at being men-men with a real individual body 
and blood, we are ashamed of it, we think it a disgrace and try to 
contrive to be some sort of impossible generalized man. \Ve are still­
born, and for generations past have been begotten, not by living 
fathers, and that suits us better and better. \Ve are developing a taste 
for it. Soon we shall contrive to he born somehow from an idea. But 
enough; I don't want to write more from "Underground." 
[The notes of tl1is paradoxalist do not end here, however. He could 
not refrain from going on with tl1em, but it seems to w that zue may 
stop here.] 

Uncle" s Vream 
F R O M  TH E A N N A L S  O F  M O R D A S O V  


UNCLE"S VREAM 
( FROM THE ANNALS OF :>.IORDASOV ) 
Chapter 1 
MARYA ALEXANDROVNA MOSKALEV is the leading 
lady in Mordasov, and of that there can be no possible question. She 
behaves as though she were independent of every one and every one 
else were dependent on her. It is true that scarcely any one likes her 
and, indeed, very many people sincerely hate her; but on the other 
hand every one is afraid of her, and that is just what she wants. Such 
a desire betokens a high degree of diplomacy. How is it, for instance, 
that Marya Alexandrovna, who is desperately fond of gossip, and 
cannot sleep all night if she has not heard something new the day 
before, how is it that with all that she knows how to deport herself 
so that it would never occur to any one looking at her that this 
majestic lady was the greatest gossip in the world, or at any rate in 
Mordasov ? One would suppose, on the contrary, that gossip would die 
away in her presence, that backbiters would blush and tremble like 
schoolboys confronting their teacher, and that the conversation would 
not deal with any but the loftiest subjects. She knows about some of 
the Mordasov people facts so scandalous and so important that if she 
were to tell them on a suitable occasion and to make them public, as 
she so well knows how to do, there would be a regular earthquake of 
Lisbon in Mordasov. And at the same time she is very reserved over 
these secrets and will only tell them in extreme cases, and then only 
to her most intimate female friends. She confines herself to frighten­
ing people with hints at what she knows, and likes better to keep a 
man or a lady in continual apprehension than to deal them a final 
blow. That is intelligence, that is diplomacy! Marya Alexandrovna 
was always distinguished among us by her irreproachable comme il 
faut, upon which we all model ourselves. As regards comme il faut 
she is without a rival in Mordasov. She can, for instance, kill, tear to 
pieces, annihilate a rival with a single word, a performance we have 
wimessed; and at the same time she will have the air of not observing 
225 

226 
The Short N.otJels of VostoetJsk,y 
that she has uttered that word. And we all know that this ability is 
characteristic of the very highest society. In fact, at all such tricks she 
is a match for Pinetti. Her connections are immense. Many persons 
who have visited Mordasov have been delighted with her hospitality, 
and have even kept up a correspondence with her after their departure. 
Some one even wrote her a poem, and Marya Alexandrovna showed 
it to us all with pride. One literary visitor dedicated to her his novel, 
which he read aloud to her in the evenings, and this made an extremely 
agreeable impression. A learned German, who came from Carlsruhe 
expressly to study some kind of worm with horns, which is found 
in our province, and who wrote four quarto volumes on the creature in 
question, was so enchanted by Marya Alexandrovna's hospitality and 
politeness that to this day he keeps up with her a correspondence of 
the most respectful and highly moral tone, from Carlsruhe. Marya 
Alexandrovna has even been compared in one respect with Napoleon. 
This comparison was of course made in jest by her enemies, more by 
way of sarcasm than truth. But while fully admitting the oddity of 
the comparison I make bold to ask one innocent question: why was 
Napoleon's head turned at last when he was too greatly exalted ? The 
champions of the old dynasty used to ascribe this to the fact that 
Napoleon was not only not of royal blood, but was not even a gentil­
homme of good family, and so was naturally alarmed at last by his 
own exalted state and was conscious of his real position. In spite of the 
obvious cleverness of this surmise, which recalls the most brilliant 
period of the old French court, I venture to add in my turn : how was 
it that Marya Alexandrovna's head was never under any circumstances 
turned, how was it that she always remained the leading lady in 
Mordasov ? There were occasions when everybody asked: "How will 
Marya Alexandrovna act now in such difficult circumstances?" But 
the circumstances arrived and passed and-all went well! Everything 
remained satisfactory, as before; even better than before. Every one 
remembers, for instance, how her husband, Afanasy Matveyitch, was 
deprived of his post owing to his incompetence and feeble-mindedness, 
which excited the wrath of an inspector from the capital. Every one 
thought that Marya Alexandrovna would be depressed, would be 
humbled, would entreat and petition, would, in short, be crestfallen. 
Nothing of the sort : Marya Alexandrovna grasped that nothing could 
be gained by petitioning, and played her cards so well that she lost 
nothing of her influence in society, and her house is still looked upon 
as the house of most consequence in Mordasov. Anna Nikolaevna 
Antipov, the Public Prosecutor's wife, a sworn foe of Marya Alexan-

Uncle's 'Dream 
227 
drovna's, though externally her friend, was already trumpeting her 
victory; but when we saw that Marya Alexandrovna could not be 
easily put to confusion, we realized that she had sent her roots far 
more deeply down than we had supposed. 
By the way, since we have mentioned him we will say a few words 
about Afanasy Matveyitch, Marya Alexandrovna's husband. In the 
first place he was a man of very presentable exterior, and indeed of 
very correct principles, only on critical occasions he somehow lost his 
head, and looked like a sheep facing a new gate. He was extraordi­
narily dignified, especially in his white tie at name-day dinners, but 
his dignified air and presentability only lasted till the minute when he 
began to speak. Then there was nothing for it, if I may say so, but 
cotton wool in one's ears. He certainly was not worthy to belong to 
Marya Alexandrovna; that was the universal opinion, he had only kept 
his position through the genius of his wife; in my private judgment 
he ought long ago to have been in the kitchen garden scaring sparrows. 
There and only there he might have been of real unquestionable 
service to his fellow-countrymen. And so Marya Alexandrovna acted 
admirably in sending Afanasy Matveyitch to their country place, two 
and a half miles from Mordasov, where she had a hundred and twenty 
serfs-in parenthesis I may say, the whole property, the whole fortune 
upon which she so worthily maintained the dignity of her household. 
Everybody knew that she had kept Afanasy Matveyitch about her 
solely because he was in the government service and in receipt of a 
salary and . . .  of other sums. As soon as he ceased to receive a salary 
and other sums, she immediately removed him to a distance on account 
of his incompetence and absolute uselessness. And every one com­
mended Marya Alexandrovna's' clear-sightedness and decision of char­
acter. In the country Afanasy Matveyitch is in clover. I went to see him 
and spent a whole hour with him fairly pleasantly. He tries on his 
white cravats, cleans his boots with his own hands, not from necessity 
but simply for love of the art, because he likes his boots to shine; he 
drinks tea three times a day, is exceedingly fond of going to the bath­
house, and-is contented. Do you remember the horrid scandal that 
was concocted among us a year and a half ago concerning Zinaida 
Afanasyevna, the only daughter of Marya Alexandrovna and Afanasy 
Matveyitch ? Zinaida Afanasyevna is unquestionably beautiful, and is 
extremely well educated, yet she is three-and-twenty and is still un­
married. Among the reasons people give for Zina's being unmarried, 
one of the chief is considered to be the sinister rumour of some strange 
intimacy a year and a half ago with a wretched district schoolmaster-

228 
'I he Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
a rumour which has persisted to this day. Even now there is talk of 
some love-letter written by Zina and said to have been passed from 
hand to hand in Mordasov ; but I should like to know if any one has 
seen that letter. If it has passed from hand to hand, what has become 
of it? Every one has heard about it, but nobody has seen it. I, at any 
rate, have never come across any one who has seen this letter with his 
own eyes. If you drop a hint about it to Marya Alexandrovna she 
simply fails to understand you. Now let us assume that there really was 
something, and Zina did write the love-letter (I fancy, indeed, that 
it must have been so), how skilful it all was on Marya Alexandrovna's 
part! How adroitly was this awkward, scandalous alTair suppressed 
and stifled! Not a trace, not a hint! Marya Alexandrovna takes no 
notice now of this ignoble slander, and at the same time, God knows 
how she may have worked to save the honour of her only daughter 
from the slightest slur. And as for Zina's not being married, that's 
very natural : there are no eligible young men here. The only fitting 
match for Zina would be a reigning prince. Have you ever seen a 
beauty like her? It is true that she is proud-too proud. They say that 
Mozglyakov is paying her his addresses, but it is hardly likely to 
come to a marriage. \Vhat is Mozglyakov ? It is true that he is young, 
not bad-looking, a dandy, has a hundred and fifty serfs not mort­
gaged, and comes from Petersburg. But in the first place, you know 
he is not quite sound in the upper storey. He is feather-headed, a 
chatterbox, and has some very new-fangled ideas. And after all what 
is an estate of a hundred and fifty serfs, especially with new-fangled 
ideas! That marriage won't come off. 
All that the kind reader has read so far was written by me five 
months ago entirely from excess of feeling. I may as well confess 
betimes I have rather a partiality for Marya Alexandroma. I wanted 
to write something like a eulogy on that magnificent lady, and to put 
it in the shape of a playful letter to a friend, on the model of the letters 
which used, at one time, in the old golden days that, thank God, will 
never return, to be published in the Northern Bee and other periodi­
cals. But as I have no friend, and have, moreover, a certain innate 
literary timidity, my work has remained in my table drawer as my 
first literary effort and a memento of peaceful recreation in hours of 
leisure and comfort. 
Five months have passed, and all at once a wonderful event has 
occurred in Mordasov : early one morning Prince K. arrived in the 
town and stopped at Marya Alexandrovna"s house. The consequences 

Uncle's 1Jream 
229 
of this arrival have been innumerable. The Prince spent only three 
days in Mordasov, but those three days have left behind them mo­
mentous memories that will never be effaced. I will say more: Prince K. 
produced, in a certain sense, a revolution in our town. The story of 
that revolution is, of course, one of the most significant pages in the 
annals of Mordasov. That page I have made up my mind at last, 
after some hesitation, to put into literary shape and lay before the 
criticism of the honoured public. My story will contain the full and 
remarkable history of the exaltation, glory and solemn downfall of 
Marya Alexandrovna and all her family : a worthy and alluring theme 
for an author. First of all, of course, I must explain what there was 
wonderful in Prince K.'s arriving in our town and staying at Marya 
Alexandrovna's-and to do that I must, of course, say a few words 
about Prince K. himself. And that I will do. Besides, the biography 
of that personage is absolutely essential for all the further develop­
ment of our story. And so I will begin. 
Chapter 2 
I WILL begin by saying that Prince K. was not so extraordinarily 
aged, but yet he was so decrepit, so worn-out, that as one looked at 
him the thought instinctively occurred to one that in another minute 
he might drop to pieces. Extremely queer stories of the most fantastic 
kind were repeated in Mordasov about this prince. People even said 
that the old man was oil his head. Every one thought it very strange 
that the owner of an estate of four thousand serfs, a man of distin­
guished family, who might, if he had chosen, have had a great influ­
ence in the province, should live in solitude on his magnificent estate, 
a complete hermit. Many had known Prince K. when he was staying 
in .Mordasov six or seven years before, and they declared that in those 
days he could not endure solitude and had not the faintest resem­
blance to a hermit. 
All that I could ascertain about him, on good authority, however, 
was this : 
In his young days, which were, however, long ago, the Prince had 
made a brilliant debut, he had led a gay life, flirted, had made several 
tours abroad, sang songs, made puns, :md had at no period been 
distinguished by the brilliance of his intellectual gifts. Of course he 
had squandered all his fortune, and found himself in his old age 

230 
'1 h( Short N.ovels of 'Dostoevsky 
without a farthing. Some one advised him to visit his estate, which 
was beginning to be sold by auction. He set off and arrived at Morda­
sov, where he stayed six months. He liked provincial life extremely. 
During those six months he dissipated all he had left, to the last 
halfpenny, spending his whole time in gambling and getting up 
various intrigues with the ladies of the province. He was, moreover, 
extremely good-natured, though of course not without certain princely 
airs, which were, however, regarded in Mordasov as characteristic of 
the highest society, and so, instead of annoying people, they positively 
impressed them favourably. The ladies especially were in perpetual 
ecstasy over their charming visitor. A number of curious reminiscences 
of him were preserved. People said among other things that the Prince 
spent more than half the day over his toilet, and was, it appeared, 
entirely made up of different little bits. No one knew when and where 
he had managed to become so dilapidated. He wore a wig, mous­
taches, whiskers, and even a little "imperial"-all, every hair of it, 
false, and of a magnificent black colour; he rouged and powdered 
every day. It was said that he had little springs to smooth away the 
wrinkles on his face, and these springs were in some peculiar way 
concealed in his hair. It was asserted, too, that he wore corsets, because 
he had lost a rib jumping somewhat clumsily out of a window 
on one of his amorous adventures in Italy. He limped with the left 
leg; it was maintained that the leg in question was an artificial one, 
and that the real one had been broken in the course of another similar 
adventure in Paris, and that he had been provided with a new cork 
leg of a special pattern. But what will not people say? It certainly was 
true that his right eye was a glass one, though it was a most skilful 
imitation. His teeth, too, were false. He spent whole days washing in 
various patent waters, scenting and pomading himself. It was recalled, 
however, that even then the Prince was perceptibly beginning to grow 
feeble, and that he had become insufferably garrulous. It seemed as 
though his career were drawing to its close. Every one knew that he 
had not a farthing. And all of a sudden, quite unexpectedly, one of 
his nearest relations, a very aged lady who had lived for many years in 
Paris and from whom he could have had no expectations, died, just 
a month after the funeral of her legal heir. The Prince found himself 
quite ·unexpectedly the heir to her fortune. A magnificent estate of 
four thousand serfs, about forty miles from Mordasov, all came to him. 
He at once prepared to go to Petersburg to settle his affairs. Our ladies 
got up a magnificent subscription dinner in his honour. It is recalled 
that the Prince was enchantingly gay at this farewell banquet, he made 

U11cle's 'Dream 
231 
puns, made every one laugh, told the most extraordinary anecdotes, 
vowed that he would return as quickly as possible to Duhanovo (his 
new property), and promised that on his return there would be a con­
linual round of fetes, picnics, balls, and fireworks. For a whole year 
after his departure the ladies talked of this promise, and awaited 
their charming old friend with immense impatience. While awaiting 
his return they even made up parties to Duhanovo, where there was 
an old-world manor house and garden, with acacias lopped into the 
shape of lions, with artificial mounds, with lakes, upon which boats 
sailed up and down, with wooden images of Turks playing a pipe for 
figureheads, with arbours, with pavilions, with pleasure grounds, and 
other attractions. 
At last the Prince returned, but to the general surprise and disap­
pointment he did not even call at Mordasov on his way, but settled 
at Duhanovo and lived like a hermit. Strange rumours began to cir­
culate, and altogether from that period the Prince's history became 
obscure and fantastic. To begin with, it was asserted that he had not 
been altogether successful in Petersburg, that some of his relations and 
future heirs tried to take advantage of the Prince's mental feebleness 
in order to get him put under some sort of supervision, fearing that he 
would squander everything again. What was more, some people de­
clared that they had tried to put him in a lunatic asylum, but that one 
of his relations, a gentleman of consequence, had taken his part, 
explaining frankly to the others that the poor Prince, half-dead and 
half a dummy already, would probably soon die together, and then 
the property would come to them without the help of a lunatic asylum. 
I repeat again : what will not people say? especially in our town, 
Mordasov. All this, so it was said, scared the Prince terribly, so much 
so that he became a transformed character and turned into a hermit. 
Some of the Mordasov gentry went from curiosity to call upon him, 
but were either not received or met with a very strange reception. The 
Prince did not even recognize his old acquaintances. It was asserted 
that he did not want to recognize them. The Governor, too, paid him 
a visit. 
He returned with the news that in his opinion the Prince really 
was a little off his head, and ever afterwards he made a wry face at 
any allusion to his visit to Duhanovo. The ladies were loud in their 
indignation. At last a fact of prime importance was discovered, namely, 
that the Prince was entirely in the power of one Stepanida Matveyevna, 
a woman no one knew anything about, who had come with him from 
Petersburg, was stout and elderly, and went about in cotton dresses 

232 
'!he Short Novels of Vostoevsky 
with the keys in her hands; that the Prince obeyed her in everything 
like a child and did not dare to take a step without her permission, 
that she even washed him with her own hands, that she spoilt him, 
dandled him and comforted him like a child, and that finally she 
kept away from him all visitors, and especially the relations, who had 
been gradually beginning to visit Duhanovo to see how things were 
going. People in Mordasov discussed this incomprehensible relation­
ship a great deal, especially the ladies. It was added that Stepanida 
Matveyevna had unchecked and independent control of the Prince's 
whole estate; that she dismissed the stewards, the bailiffs and the 
servants, and collected the revenues; but that she ruled it well, so that 
the peasants blessed their fate. As regards the Prince himself, it was 
learned that his days were spent almost entirely on his toilet, in trying 
on wigs and dress-coats; that he spent the rest of his time with 
Stepanida Matveyevna, that he played his game of cards with her, 
tried his fortune with the cards, only now and then going for a ride 
on a quiet English mare, on which occasions Stepanida Matveyevna 
invariably accompanied him in a closed chaise in case of mishap, for 
the Prince rode on horseback chieAy for effect, and could hardly keep 
in the saddle. He was sometimes seen also on foot, wearing an over­
coat and wide-brimmed straw hat; with a lady's pink neckerchief 
round his neck, with an eyeglass in his eye and a wicker basket for 
mushrooms, cornAowers and other wild Aowers; Stepanicb Mat­
veyevna always accompanieJ him, while behind them walked two tall 
footmen, and the carriage followed to be ready in case of need. \Vhen 
he was met by a peasant, who stepped aside, rook off his hat, bowed 
low and said : "Good-day, Prince, your Excellency, our sunshine,"' the 
Prince promptly turned his lorgnette upon him, nodded graciously and 
said to him affably: "Boniour, mon ami, boniou,.f" Many such 
rumours were current in Mordasm·; they could not forget the Prince: 
he was such a near neighbour! What was the general amazement 
when one fine day there was a report that the Prince, the eccentric 
hermit, had arrived in .Mordasov in person and was staying at Marya 
Alexandrovna's! All was bustle and excitement. E\·ery one was eager 
for an explanation, all asked one another what it meant? Some pre­
pared to call on Marya Alexandrovna. The Prince's arri,·al struck 
every one as a wonder. The ladies sent one another notes, prepared to 
call on one another, sent their maids and their husbands to make 
inquiries. It seemed particularly strange and hard to understand why 
the Prince should stay at Marya Alexandrovna's rather than at any 
one else's. Anna Nikolaevna Antipov was particularly annoyed, be-

U nc/e' s 'Dream 
233 
cause the Prince was a very distant relation of hers. But to solve all 
these questions it is absolutely necessary to call on Marya Alexan­
drovna herself, and we cordially invite the kind reader to do so. It 
is true that it is only ten o'clock in the morning, but I don't think 
she will refuse to receive an intimate friend. Us, at any rate, she will 
certainly admit. 
Chapter 3 
T E:N' o'clock in the morning. \Ve are in Marya Alexandrovna's 
house in the main street, in the very room which the lady of the 
house on solemn occasions calls her salon. Marya Alexandrovna has 
also a boudoir. In this salon there are well-painted floors, and rather 
nice wall-p:pers that were ordered expressly for the walls. In the 
rather clumsy furniture red is the predominating colour. There is an 
open lirepbce, over the mantelpiece a mirror, before the looking-glass 
a bronze clock with a Cupid on it in very bad taste. In the space be­
tween the windows there are two looking-glasses from which they 
h:ve already removed the covers. On little tables in front of the 
looking-glass there are two more clocks. Against the wall at the further 
end is a magnificent piano, which was procured for Zina. Zina is 
musical. Round the glowing lire arm-chairs are set, as far as possible 
in picturesque confusion; among them a little table. At the other end 
of the room another table covered with a cloth of dazzling whiteness; 
on it a silver samovar is boiling and a pretty tea-service is set out. The 
samovar and the tea are presided over by Nastasya Petrovna Zyablov, 
a lady who lives with Marya Alexandrovna in the capacity of a distant 
relation. Two words about this lady. She is a widow, she is over 
thirty, a brunette with a fresh complexion, and with lively dark-brown 
eyes. Altogether she is good-looking. She is of a gay disposition and 
much given to laughter, rather sly, of course a scandalmonger, and 
very capable of managing any little affair of her own. She has two 
children, they are somewhere at school. She would very much like to 
get married again. She is rather independent in her behaviour. Her 
husband was an officer in the army. Marya Alexandrovna herself is 
sitting by the lire, in the very best of spirits, and in a becoming light 
green dress. She is highly delighted at the arrival of the Prince, who is 
at this moment upstairs, engaged in his toilet. She is so delighted that 
she does not even think it necessary to conceal her joy. Before her 

234 
7' he Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
stands a young man, telling her something with animation. It is evi­
dent from his eyes that he is anxious to please his listeners. He is five­
and-twenty. His manners would not be bad, but he frequently flies 
into raptures, and he has, besides, pretensions to wit and humour. He 
is very well dressed, fair, and rather nice-looking. But we have spoken 
of him already; he is Mr. Mozglyakov, of whom great things are ex­
pected. Marya Alexandrovna privately thinks that he is rather empty­
headed, but gives him a warm welcome. He is a suitor for the hand 
of her daughter Zina, with whom, in his own words, he is madly in 
love. He turns every moment to Zina, trying to extract a smile from 
her lips by his wit and gaiety. But she is perceptibly cold and care­
less in her manner to him. At this instant she is standing apart, at the 
piano, and turning over a calendar with her fingers. She is one of 
those women who excite general enthusiasm and wonder whenever 
they appear in society. She is incredibly beautiful; tall, a brunette 
with exquisite, almost black eyes, a graceful figure and a superb bust. 
Her shoulders and arms are antique, her foot is fascinating, she has the 
step of a queen. She is a little pale to-day; but her full, crimson, ex­
quisitely chiselled lips, between which gleam even, little teeth like 
threaded pearls, will haunt your dreams for the next three days if once 
you glance at them. Her expression is grave and severe. Monsieur 
Mozglyakov seems to fear her intent gaze, at least he winces when he 
ventures to glance at her. Her movements are disdainfully careless. 
She is dressed in simple white muslin, which suits her exquisitely, 
but then everything suits her. On her finger is a ring woven of hair, 
and from the colour, not her mamma's. Mozglyakov has never dared 
to ask her whose hair it is. That morning Zina is particularly silent 
and over-melancholy, as though preoccupied. Marya Alexandrovna, 
on the other hand, is ready to talk without stopping, though she, too, 
glances at her daughter from time to time with a peculiar, suspicious 
look; she does so, however, stealthily, as though she, too, were afraid 
of her. 
"I am so delighted, so delighted, Pavel Alexandrovitch!" she 
prattles, "that I am ready to cry aloud my joy out of the window to 
every passer-by. To say nothing of the charming surprise you have 
given Zina and me by returning a fortnight earlier than you prom­
ised; that goes without saying! I am awfully glad that you have 
brought the dear Prince with you. You know how fond I am of the 
fascinating old darling! But no, no! You won't understand me. You 
young people can't understand my enthusiasm, however much I might 
assure you of it! You don't know what he was to me in the past, 

Uncle's Vream 
235 
six years ago. Do you remember, Zina ? I forget, though, you were 
staying with your aunt at that time . . . .  You would not believe it, 
Pavel Alexandrovitch, I was his mentor, sister, mother! He did what 
I told him like a child! There was something naive, tender and en­
nobling in our relations; something even, as it were, Arcadian 
.
.
.
•
 
I really don't know what to call it! That is why he thinks of my 
house alone with gratitude, ce pauvre prince! Do you know, Pavel 
Alexandrovitch, you may perhaps have saved him by bringing him 
to me! I have thought of him with a pang at my heart these last six 
years. You wouldn't believe it, he positively haunted my dreams. They 
say that monstrous woman has bewitched him, ruined him. But at 
last you have torn him out of her clutches! Yes, we must take advan­
tage of the opportunity and save him altogether! But tell me once 
more, how did you succeed in doing it? Describe your whole meeting 
as fully as possible. Just now I was in such excitement that I only 
attended to the central fact, though all the little details, so to speak, 
make up the real flavour of it! I am awfully fond of trifling details, 
even on most important occasions what I notice first is the small 
points . . .  and . . .  while he is still engaged in his toilet . . .  
" 
"But it is all just what I have told you already, Marya Alexan­
drovna," Mozglyakov responds with readiness, perfectly willing to tell 
his story for the tenth time, it is a pleasure to him. "I was travelling 
all night, of course I did not sleep all night, you can imagine what 
haste I was in," he adds, turning to Zina; "in short, I swore, I shouted, 
I demanded horses. I even made a row at the posting stations over 
getting horses; if it were printed it would make quite a poem in the 
latest fashion! But that is off the point! At six o'clock in the morning 
I reached the last station, Igishevo. I was all of a shiver, but I did not 
want to warm myself; I called for horses! I frightened the overseer's 
wife, who had a baby at the breast, I think I must have upset her milk . 
. . . The sunrise was enchanting. The hoar frost, you know, all crim­
son and silver! I took no notice of anything; in short, I was in desperate 
haste! I took the horses by storm; I snatched them from a collegiate 
councillor, and almost challenged him to a duel. I was told that a 
quarter of an hour before some prince had set off from the station 
travelling with his own horses; he had spent the night there. I scarcely 
listened. I got into my sledge, flew off, as though I were let off the 
chain. There is something like it in Fet, in some elegy of his. Just six 
miles from the town, at the cross-road leading to the Svyetozersky 
Monastery, I saw that something surprising had happened. A huge 
travelling coach was lying on its side, a coachman and two footmen 

236 
The Short Novels of Vostoevsk.y 
were standing beside it in perplexity, and heart-rending shrieks and 
wails were coming from the carriage, that lay on its side. I was think­
ing of driving by : 'Let it lie on its side; it is no business of mine.' 
But I was overcome by a feeling of humanity, which, as Heine ex­
presses it, pokes its nose into everything. I stopped. I, my Semyon and 
the driver-another true Russian heart-hastened to their assistance, 
and so the six of us together hoisted up the coach at last and set it on 
its legs, though indeed it had none, for it was on runners. Some 
peasants on their way to the town with wood helped too. I gave them 
a trifle. I thought, no doubt this is the same prince! I looked. My 
goodness! It was he, Prince Gavrila! '\Vhat a meeting!' I cried out to 
him. 'Prince! Uncle!' Of course he scarcely recognized me at first 
sight; however, he almost knew me . . .  at a second look. I must 
confess, however, that he hardly understands who I am now, and I 
believe he takes me for some one else and not a relation. I saw him 
seven years ago in Petersburg; but of course I was a boy then. I 
remembered him; he impressed me-but how should he remember 
me! I introduced myself; he was ench:.mted, embraced me, and at the 
same time he was trembling all over with fright and crying-he really 
was crying, I saw that with my own eyes! One thing and another­
! persuaded him at last to get into my sledge and to come for at least 
one day to Mordasov, to rest and recover. He agreed without any ado . 
. . . He told me he was going to the Svyetozersky Monastery to visit 
the monk Misail, whom he honours and reveres; that Stepan ida Mat­
veyevna-and which of us relations has not heard of Stepanida 
Matveyevna? she drove me off with a broom from Duhanovo last 
year-that this Stepanida Matveyevna had received a letter telling her 
that some one of her folks in Moscow was at the last gasp; her father, 
or her daughter, I don't remember which exactly, and I am not inter­
ested to know, possibly father and daughter both together, with, 
maybe, the addition of a nephew, a potman in some public-house . . . .  
In short, she was so upset that she made up her mind to part from 
her prince for ten days, and flew off to adorn the capital with her 
presence. The Prince stayed quiet for one day, for another, tried on his 
wigs, pomaded, and painted himself; he tried to tell his fortune with 
the cards (maybe with beans too), but could not put up with it with­
out Stepanida Matveyevna. He ordered his horses and set off to the 
Svyetozersky Monastery. Some one of his household, fearing the 
absent Stepanida Matveyevna, \'entured to protest, but the Prince per­
sisted. He set off yesterday, after dinner, stayed the night at lgishevo. 
He left the station at daybreak, and just at the turning that leads to 

Uncle's Vream 
237 
Father Misail's, went flying with his carriage almost into a ravine. 
I rescued him, persuaded him to visit our common and deeply reࢦ 
spected friend, Marya Alexandrovna; he said that you were the most 
fascinating lady he had ever known-and here we are, and at this 
moment the Prince is upstairs adjusting his toilet with the assistance of 
his valet, whom he has not forgotten to bring with him, and whom 
he never will, under any circumstances, forget to take with him, for 
he would sooner die than consent to appear before ladies without 
certain preliminary preparations, or rather, adjustments . . . .  That's 
the whole story! Eine allerliebste Geschichte!" 
"But what a humorist he is, Zina!" cries Marya Alexandrovna, 
after hearing his story. "How charmingly he tells it. But listen, Paul, 
one question : explain to me exactly what relation you are to the 
Prince! You call him uncle?" 
"Upon my word, Marya Alexandrovna, I do not know how or in 
what way I am related to him ; it's seven times removed, I believe, 
maybe e\·en seventy times seven. It's not a bit my fault; it's all Aunt 
Aglaya Ivlihalovna. Aunt Aglaya Mihalovna does nothing but count 
over the relations on her fingers, though; it was she forced me to go 
to see him last summer at Duhanovo. She should have gone herself! I 
simply call him uncle, he answers to that name. That's all our relationࢧ 
ship for toࢨay, anyway . . . .  
" 
"All the same, I repeat that it must have been a prompting from on 
High that led you to bring him straight to me! I tremble to think 
what would have happened to him, poor darling, if he had got into 
any one else's hands instead of mine. They would have pounced upon 
him, torn him to pieces, devoured him! They would have fallen upon 
him as though he were a gold mine-I dare say they would have 
robbed him! You cannot imagine what low, greedy, artful people 
there are here, Pavel Alexandrovitch! . . .  " 
"Upon my soul, to whom should he have been taken if not to you? 
\Vhat are you saying, Marya Alexandrovna ?" puts in the widow, 
Nastasya Petrovna, as she pours out the tea. "You don't suppose he 
might have been taken to Anna Nikolaevna's?" 
"But why is he so long coming? It's really strange," says Marya 
Alexandrovna, getting up from her seat impatiently. 
"Uncle, do you mean? Why, I expect he will be another five hours 
up there dressing! Besides, as he had quite lost his memory, he has 
perhaps forgotten that he is on a visit to you. You know he is a most 
extraordinary person, Marya Alexandrovna!" 
"Oh, come, come! What nonsense." 

238 
The Short Novels of 7Jostocvsky 
"Not nonsense at all, Marya Alexandrovna! He is half a made-up 
dummy, not a man! You saw him six years ago, but it is only an hour 
since I have seen him. He is half a corpse. He is only a reminiscence 
of a man; they have forgotten to bury him, you know! His eyes are 
artificial, his legs are made of cork, he is all worked by springs, he 
even talks by machinery." 
"My goodness, what a giddy fellow you are, to listen to you!" 
exclaims Marya Alexandrovna, assuming a stern air. "Aren't you 
ashamed, a young man, and a relation, to talk like that about that 
venerable old man ? To say nothing of his boundless kindliness"-and 
her voice takes a touching note-"remember that he is a relic, a scion, 
so to speak, of our aristocracy. My friend, mon ami! I understand that 
you are led into this frivolity by those modern ideas of which you 
are always talking. But, my goodness! I share those new ideas myself. 
I realize that what is at the root of your views is generou:. and credit­
able, I realize that there is, indeed, something lofty in those new 
ideas; but all that does not prevent my seeing the direct, so to speak, 
practical side of things. I have seen something of the world, I have 
seen more than you have, and, last of all, I am a mother, and you are 
still young. He is an old man, and so in our eyes he is absurd! What 
is more, last time you said that you would cert:inly emancipate your 
serfs, and that you must do something for the public weal, and all that 
comes from poring so much over your Shakespeare or somebody! 
Believe me, Pavel Alexandrovitch, your Shakespeare has had his day, 
and if he were to rise again he would not with all his cleverness under­
stand anything about our life. If there is anything chivalrous and 
sublime in our contemporary society it is to be found only in the 
highest rank. A prince in a sack is still a prince; a prince in a hovel 
is as good as a prince in a palace! Here Natalya Dmitryevna's hus­
band has built himself something like a palace-and yet he is Natalya 
Dmitryevna's husband and no morel And if Natalya Dmitryevna were 
to stick on fifty crinolines she would still remain the same Natalya 
Dmitryevna, and would add nothing to herself by it. You, too, repre­
sent the highest rank to some extent because you are descended from 
it. I consider myself not far removed from it, and it's an ill bird that 
fouls its own nest! But you will find out all this of yourself, mon 
chtT Paul, better than I can tell you, and will forget your Shakespeare. 
I predict it. I am persuaded that you are not in earnest even now, 
but are talking like that because it is die. But I have been chattering 
too long. You stay here, mon cher Paul, I will go upstairs and find 

Uncle's Vream 
239 
out about the Prince. Perhaps he wants something, and with my stupid 
servants . . .  
" 
And Marya Alexandrovna goes hurriedly out of the room at the 
thought of her stupid servants. 
"Marya Alexandrovna seems very much pleased that that dressed-up 
creature, Anna Nikolaevna, has not got hold of the Prince. And you 
know she keeps declaring that she is related to him. She must be burst­
ing with spite now!" remarked Nastasya Petrovna; but observing 
that she received no answer and glancing at Zina and Pavel Alexan­
drovitch, she grasped the situation at once and went out of the room 
as though on some errand. But to reward herself for her discretion she 
stopped just outside and listened at the door. 
Pavel Alexandrovitch turned at once to Zina. He was in great 
agitation, his voice was quivering. 
"Zinaida Afanasyevna, you are not angry with me?" he asked, with 
a timid and imploring air. 
"With you! What for?" said Zina, raising her wonderful eyes and 
looking at him with a faint Rush. 
"For coming back so soon, Zinaida Afanasyevna! I could not resist 
it, I could not wait another fortnight . . . .  I positively dreamed of 
you. I flew back to hear my fate . . . .  llut you frown, you are angry! 
Surely you will not refuse to let me hear something decisive?" 
Zinaida certainly did frown. 
"I expected you would talk of that," she answered, dropping her eyes 
again, in a firm and severe voice in which there was a note of vexa­
tion. "And as that expectation was very painful to me, the sooner it is 
over the better. Again you insist, that is, beg for an answer. Very well, 
I will repeat it to you again, for my answer is still the same as before: 
wait! I tell you again-I have not made up my mind yet, and cannot 
promise to be your wife. That is not exacted by force, Pavel Alexandrov­
itch. llut to comfort you, I will add I do not definitely refuse you. 
Note, too, in giving you hope now of a favourable decision, I do this 
entirely out of consideration for your impatience and anxiety. I repeat 
that I wish to remain perfectly free in my decision, and if I tell you 
in the end that I do not consent, you must not blame me for having 
given you hope. And so realize that!" 
"And so what does that amount to?" cried Mozglyakov in a plain­
tive voice. "Is that hope? Can I extract any hope at all from your 
words, Zinaida Afanasyevna?" 
"Remember all I have told you and extract what you choose. It is 
for you to decide, but I will add nothing more. I do not refuse you 

240 
?'he Short Novels of Vostocvsk,y 
yet, but only tell you, wait. I tell you again I reserve a perfect right to 
refuse you if I think fit. There is another thing I must tell you, Pavel 
Alexandrovitch : if you have returned before the time fixed for my 
answer in order to work upon me in indirect ways, relying on outside 
support, on the influence of Mamma, for instance, you have made a 
great mistake in your calculations. Then I shall refuse you straight out. 
Do you hear ? And now-that's enough, and please, until the right 
time, do not utter one word more on this subject." 
All this speech was pronounced drily, firmly, and without hesita­
tion, as though it had been studied beforehand. Monsieur Paul felt 
that he had been made a fool of. At that moment Marya Alexan­
drovna returned. And almost immediately after her Madame Zyablov. 
"He will be down directly, I fancy, Zina! Nastasya Petrovna, be 
quick, make some fresh tea!" Marya Alexandrovna was positively a 
little excited. 
"Anna Nikolaevna has already sent to inquire. Her Anyutka has 
come flying to the kitchen to ask questions. I bet she's cross now!" 
Nastasya Petrovna announced, rushing up to the samovar. 
"What is that to me!'' Marya Alexandrovna said over her shoulder 
to Madame Zyablov. "As though I were interested to know what your 
Anna Nikolaevna is thinking. You may be sure I shan't send any 
one to her kitchen. And I wonder, I really wonder why you persist 
in regarding me as an enemy to poor Anna Nikolaevna, and not you 
only, but everybody in the town. I appeal to you, Pavel Alexandrov­
itch! You know us both. Come, what reason have I to be her enemy? 
Over precedence? But I don't care in the least about precedence. Let 
her be first, let her. I am ready to be the first to go and congratulate 
her on being first. And, after all, it's quite unfair. I will take her part 
-I am bound to take her part! She is maligned. Why do you all 
attack her? She is young and fond of fine clothes-is that a reason, 
pray? To my thinking fine clothes are better than something else­
like Natalya Dmitryevna, who is fond-of what one really can't talk 
about. Is it because Anna Nikolaevna is always gadding about and 
can't stay at home? But my goodness! She has had no education, and 
of course she finds it tedious to open a book or occupy herself with 
anything for two minutes together. She flirts and makes eyes out of the 
window at any one who passes in the street. But why do people assure 
her she is so pretty when she has nothing but a white face? She is 
ridiculous at dances, I admit. But why assure her she dances the polka 
so splendidly? She wears impossible hats and head-dresses; but is it 
her fault that God has given her no taste, but has made her so easily 

Uncle's 'Dream 
241 
taken in? Assure her that it looks nice to pin a bit of coloured paper 
in her hair, and she would stick it in her hair. She is a scandalmonger 
-but that's the way here: there is no one in the town who does not 
talk scandal. Sushilov, with his whiskers, is always there, morning, 
noon, and almost night. But, dear me! No wonder, when her husband 
plays cards till five in the morning. Besides, there are so many bad 
examples here! Moreover, it may be only scandal. In short, I shall 
always stand up for her, always. But, good gracious, here is the Prince! 
It is he, it is he! I should know him among a thousand! At last I see 
you, mon prince!" cried Marya Alexandrovna, and she Hew to meet 
the Prince as he entered. 
Chapter 4 
AT THE first casual glance you would not have taken the Prince 
for an old man at all, it was only on a closer and more attentive 
inspection that you discerned that he was a sort of corpse worked by 
mechanism. All the resources of art were utilized to disguise this 
mummy as a young man. A marvellous wig, whiskers, moustaches, 
and a little imperial, all of a superb black, covered half his face. His 
face was whitened and rouged with extraordinary skill, and there was 
not a trace of wrinkles upon it. \Vhat had become of them ? There is 
no knowing. He was dressed in the height of fashion, as though he 
had stepped out of a fashion-plate. He had on a visiting jacket or 
something of the sort, upon my word I don't know what exactly, but 
it was something extremely fashionable and up-to-date, created espe­
cially for morning calls. His gloves, his cravat, his waistcoat, his linen, 
and so on, were all of dazzling freshness and artistic taste. The Prince 
limped a little, but limped so elegantly that it seemed as though it 
were prescribed by fashion. He had an eyeglass in his eye, the very 
eyes that was itself of glass. The prince was saturated with scent. In 
talking he drawled certain words in a peculiar way, perhaps from the 
weakness of old age, perhaps because all his teeth were false, perhaps 
for the sake of greater dignity. Certain syllables he pronounced with 
extraordinary sweetness, with a special stress on certain vowels. Yes 
with him was turned into ye-es. In all his manners there was a certain 
carelessness, acquired in the course of his life as a dandy. But if any­
thing of his old fashionable life was still preserved, it was preserved 
as it were unconsciously in the form of some vague reminiscence, in 

242 
'1 he Short Novels of 7Jostoevsky 
the form of some outlived buried past, which, alas! no cosmetics, 
corsets, perfumers or barbers could bring to life again. And so we 
shall do well to begin by confessing that if the man had not lost his 
wits he had long ago lost his memory, and was now constantly mud­
dled, repeating himself, and even babbling at random. One needed a 
special knack to talk to him. But Marya Alexandrovna could rely 
upon herself, and at the sight of the Prince she flew into unutterable 
ecstasy. 
"But you have not changed, not changed in the least!" she exclaimed, 
seizing her visitor by both hands and making him sit down in a 
comfortable arm-chair. "Sit down, Prince, sit down! It's six years, six 
whole years since we have met, and not a single letter, not one line 
all that time! Oh, how badly you have treated me, Prince! How angry 
I have been with you, mon cller prince! But-tea, tea! Oh, my good­
ness, Nastasya Petrovna, tea!" 
"Thank you, tha-ank you, I am sor-ry," the Prince lisped (we forgot 
to say that he lisped a little, but that, too, he did as though it were the 
fashion). "I am so-or-ry! And only fancy, last year I qui-ite meant to 
come here," he added, looking round the room through his lorgnette. 
"But they scared me: you had chol-er-a here, I was told . . . .  
" 
"No, Prince, we haven't had cholera here," said Marya Alexan­
drovna. 
"There was the cattle plague here, Uncle!" Mozglyakov put m, 
anxious to distinguish himself. Marya Alexandrovna looked him up 
and down with a stern expression. 
"To be sure, cattle pia-ague or something of the sort . . . .  So ! 
stayed at home. But how is your husband, my dear Anna Nikolaevna ? 
Still at his pros-e-cuting duties?" 
"N-no, Prince," said Marya Alexandrovna, a little disconcerted ; 
"my husband is not prosecutor . . .  " 
"I'll bet Uncle has got mixed up and takes you for Anna Nikolaevna 
Antipov!" cried the sharp-witted Mozglyakov, but he pulled himself 
up at once, observing that Marya Alexandrovna seemed to be wincing 
apart from these explanations. 
"Oh, ye-es, ye-es Anna Nikolaevna, and . . .  and . . .  (I keep for­
getting!). Oh, ye-es, Antipov, An-ti-pov it is," the Prince acquiesced. 
"N-no, Prince, you are very much mistaken," said Marya Alexan­
drovna, with a bitter smile. "I am not Anna Nikolaevna, and I must 
say I didn't at all expect that you wouldn't know me. You have 
surprised me, Prince. I am your old friend, Marya Alexandrovna Mos­
kalev. Do you remember, Prince, Marya Alexandrovna? . . .  
" 

Uncle's 'Dream 
243 
"Marya A-lex-and-rovna, only fancy! And I actually supposed that 
you were (what's her name)--oh, ye-es, Anna Vassilyevna . . . .  C'est 
deticieux! So I have come to the wrong place. And I thought, my 
dear fellow, that you were taking me to Anna Matveyevna. C'est 
clzarmant! It often happens like that with me, though . . . .  I often 
go to the wrong place! I am satisfied, always satisfied, whatever hap­
pens. So you are not N astasya Vassilyevna ? That's interesting . . . .  
" 
"Marya Alexandrovna, Prince, Marya Alexandrovna! Oh, how 
badly you have treated me! To forget your best, best friend!" 
"Oh, ye-es, my be-est friend . .
. pardon, pardon!" the Prince lisped, 
gazing at Zina. 
"That is my daughter, Zina. You don't know her, Prince, she was 
away when you were here last, in the year 18-, do you remember?" 
"Is that your daughter? Clzarmante, clzarmante!" muttered the 
Prince, eyeing Zina with avidity through his lorgnette. "Mais quelle 
beaute!" he murmured, evidently struck by her. 
"Tea, Prince," said Marya Alexandrovna, calling the Prince's atten­
tion to the page standing before him with a tray in his hands. The 
Prince took the cup and looked attentively at the boy, who had pink 
and chubby cheeks. 
"A-ah, is this your boy?" he said. "What a pret-ty boy! A-and I am 
sure he behaves ni-icely . . . .  " 
"But, Prince," Marya Alexandrovna interposed hurriedly, "I have 
heard of your terrible adventure! I must confess I was frightened out 
of my wits . . . .  Weren't you hurt? Make sure! It is not a thing to 
neglect." 
"He upset me! He upset me! The coachman upset me!" the Prince 
exclaimed, with extraordinary animation. "I thought the end of the 
world was coming or something of the sort, and so I must own I 
was so frightened that-holy saints forgive me!-I didn't know 
whether I was on my head or my feet! I hadn't expected it, I hadn't 
expected it! I did not ex-pect it at all. And it's all the fault of my coach­
man, Fe-o-fil. I rely upon you now entirely, my dear fellow: do what 
is necessary and investigate the matter thoroughly. I am per-suaded 
that it was an at-tempt on my life." 
"All right, Uncle; all right," answered Pavel Alexandrovitch. "I 
will investigate it thoroughly. Only listen, Uncle! Forgive him this 
once, won't you? What do you say?" 
"I won't forgive him on any account. I am persuaded that he was 
trying to ta-ake my life. He, together with Lavrenty, whom I left at 
home. Only fancy, he has got hold of some new ideas, you know! 

244 
'[he Short Novels of 'DostoevskY 
There is a sort of scepticism in him . . .  in short, he is a communist 
in the fullest sense of the word! I am positively afraid to meet him." 
"Ah, what you say is so true, Prince!" exclaimed Marya Alexan­
drovna. "You wouldn't believe what I suffer from these good-for­
nothing servants myself! Imagine, I have two new servants, and I 
must say they are so stupid that I am simply struggling with them 
from morning till night. You wouldn't believe how stupid they are, 
Prince!" 
"Oh, ye-es; oh, ye-es. But I must say, I really prefer to have a footman 
rather stupid," observed the Prince, who like all old men was de­
lighted when people listened to his chatter with obsequious attention; 
"it somehow suits a footman, and really is a vir-tue in him if he 
is simple-hearted and stupid. Only in certain cases, of course. It makes 
him more im-pos-ing, it gives a solem-nity to his countenance; it gives 
him a greater air of good breeding, and what I insist on most is a 
servant's good bre-ed-ing. Here I have my Te-ren-ty. You remember 
my Te-ren-ty, my dear fellow, don't you ? As soon as I looked at him 
I predicted that he was destined to be a hall-porter! Stupid-phe-nom­
enally. He stares like a sheep looking at water. But what imposing 
dignity! What solemnity! Such a pale pink double chin! You know, 
with a white cravat in full get-up, it docs produce an ellect. I took the 
greatest fancy to him. Sometimes I look at him and feel quite fas­
cinated; he might be writing a dissertation-such a solemn air! In 
fact, he is a regular German philosopher Kant, or perhaps more truly, 
a fat, overfed turkey<ock. Perfectly comme i/ faut for a manservant." 
Marya Alexandrovna bughed with enthusiasm, and even clapped 
her hands. Pavel Alexandrovitch seconded her with all his heart; he 
was extremely entertained by his "uncle." Nastasya Pctrovna laughed 
too--even Zina gave a smile. 
"But what humour, what gaiety, what wit you have, Prince!" 
exclaimed Marya Alexandrovna. "What a precious gift for noting the 
most subtle, the most amusing point! . . .  And to vanish from society, 
to shut yourself up for five whole years! \Vith such a talent! But you 
might write, Prince! You might be another Von Vizin, another Griboy­
edov, another Gogol! . . .  " 
"Oh, ye-es; oh, ye-es!" said the Prince, highly delighted ; "I might, 
and do you know I used to be remarkably witty in the old days. I actu­
ally wrote a vau-de-ville for the stage. There were several ex-qui-site 
lines in it! It was never acted, though . . . .  " 
"Ah, how charming it would be to read it, and, do you know, Zina, 
it would be apropos now! They are getting up theatricals here-for 

U11cle's 1Jream 
245 
a patriotic object, Prince-for the benefit of the wounded 
.
•
•
.
 Your 
vaudeville would be the thing!" 
"Of course! I am ready to write it again, indeed •
•
.
 though I have 
completely forgotten it. But I remember there were two or three puns, 
such that . . .  " (and the Prince kissed his finger-tips) "and altogether 
when I was abro-ad I made a reg-u-lar fu-rore. I remember Lord 
Byron. We were on friendly terms. He danced the Cracoviana 
enchantingly at the Vienna Congress." 
"Lord Byron, Uncle! Upon my word, Uncle, what do you mean?" 
"Oh, ye-es, Lord Byron. Though perhaps it wasn't Lord Byron, but 
some one else. Quite so; not Lord Byron, but a Pole, I remember 
perfectly now. And that Pole was ve-ry ori-gi-nal, he gave himself 
out for a count, and it afterwards turned out that he was some sort 
of head cook, but he did dance the Cracoviana most en-chant-ing-ly, 
and at last he broke his leg. I wrote some verses on that occasion to: 
" 'Our dear little Pole 
To dance was his role.' 
And what came then, I can't remember. 
" 'When he broke his limb 
No more capers for him.' " 
"Oh, that must be how it went, Uncle," exclaimed Mozglyakov, 
entering more and more into the spirit of the thing. 
"I think that is what it was, my dear fellow," answered the old 
man, "or something like it. But perhaps it wasn't it, but anyway, the 
\'erses turned out very successfully . . . .  The fact is I've forgotten some 
things that have happened. It comes from being so busy." 
"But tell us, Prince, what have you been doing all this time in your 
solitude?" Marya Alexandrovna inquired with interest. "I have so 
often thought of you, mon cher pn"nce, that I must confess I am 
burning now with impatience to have a full account of it all." 
"What have I been doing? Well, altogether, you know, I have a 
great de-al to do. Sometimes-one rests; and sometimes, you know, 
I go for walks and imagine all sorts of things . . . .  " 
"You must have a very powerful imagination, Uncle!" 
"Extremely powerful, my dear boy. I sometimes imagine such 
things that I won-der at myself afterwards. When I was in Kaduev 
. . .  Apropos! I believe you used to be Deputy Governor at Kaduev?" 
"I, Uncle? Upon my soul, what do you mean?" exclaimed Pavel 
Alexandrovitch. 

246 
The Short Novels of Vostocvsk.y 
"Fancy, my dear fellow, and I have been taking you all the while 
for the Deputy Governor, and I was wondering to myself how is it that 
all of a sudden you had got quite a different face 
.
•
.
.
 He had such 
a dig-ni-fied face-intelligent, you know. He was an exceptionally 
intelligent man, and he was always com-pos-ing verses, on all sorts of 
occasions. He was a bit like the king of diamonds in profile . . . .  
" 
"No, Prince," Marya Alexandrovna interposed, "I vow you will ruin 
yourself by living like that! To shut yourself up in solitude for five 
years, to see no one, to hear nothing! But you are a doomed man, 
Prince. Ask any one among those who are devoted to you, and every 
one will tell you that you are a doomed man!" 
"Really!" exclaimed the Prince. 
"I assure you it is so; I am speaking to you as a friend, as a sister. 
I am speaking to you because you are dear to me, because the memory 
of the past is sacred to me! What have I to gain by pretending? No, 
you must reform your life fundamentally, or you will fall sick, you 
will waste away, you will die . . . .  
" 
"Oh, dear me! Am I really going to die so soon ?" exclaimed the 
Prince, panic-stricken. "And do you know, you have guessed right! 
I am frightࢩully troubled by haemorrhoids, especi::ࢫlly at cert::in times 
. 
• 
. . And when I have attacks of it I generally have the most re-mark­
able symptoms (I will tell you all about them) . . . .  To be!,>in 
with . . .  
" 
"Uncle, you will tell about that another time," Pavel Alexandrovitch 
interposed, "but now . . .  isn't it time for us to start ?" 
"Oh, ye-es! Another time if you like. Possibly it is not so very interest­
ing to listen to now I come to think of it . . . .  At the same time it is 
a very curious complaint. It has several stages . . . .  Remind me, my 
dear boy, I will describe this evening in de-tail one thing that hap­
pened . . . . " 
"But listen, Prince, you ought to try a cure abroad," Marya Alex­
androvna intervened again. 
"Abroad? Oh, ye-es; oh, ye-es! I certainly shall go abroad. I remember 
when I was abroad in the twenties, it was won-der-fully gay. I almost 
got married to a French vicomteue. I was tremendously in love with 
her at the time, and wanted to devote my life to her. I did not marry 
her, though; somebody else did. And such a strange thing happened, 
I was absent only two hours and the other man won the day, a German 
baron, he was; he was put into a madhouse for a time afterwards." 
"But cl1er prince, what I meant was, that you must think seriouࢪly 
about your health. There are such doctors abroad . . .  and besides. a 

Uncle's Vream 
247 
change of life does so much! You really must abandon your Duhanovo, 
if only for a time." 
"Ce-er-tain-ly! I have made up my mind to do so long ago, and, do 
you know, I mean to try hy-drop-athy." 
"Hydropathy ?" 
"Hydropathy. I have tried hy-drop-athy once already. I was at the 
waters then. There was a Moscow lady there, I have forgotten her sur­
name, only she was a very poetical lady, about seventy; she had a 
daughter too, about fifty, a widow with cataract in her eye. She, too, 
almost talked in verse. Afterwards she had a very unfortunate mishap: 
she killed one of her serf girls in a rage and was tried for it. And, do 
you know, they took it into their heads to make me try the water cure. 
I must say I had nothing the matter with me; but they kept in-sisting: 
'Try the cure, try the cure!' Simply from ddicacy I began to drink 
the waters; I thought I really should be better for it; I drank and drank 
and drank and drank. I drank up a perfect waterfall, and, do you know, 
hydropathy is really a very good thing and did me a very great deal of 
good, so that if I had not fallen ill, I assure you I should have been 
perfectly well. .
. • " 
"That is a very just conclusion, Uncle. Tell me, Uncle, have you 
studied logic?" 
"Upon my word, what questions you ask," Marya Alexandrovna 
observed sternly, much scandalized. 
"l did study it, my dear boy, but very long ago. I studied philosophy, 
too, in Germany! I went through a whole course, but even at the time 
I couldn't remember it. But . . .  I must own . . .  you have so frightened 
me about this illness that I feel quite upset. I'll come back directly, 
though . . . .  " 
"But where are you going, Prince? "  cried Marya Alexandrovna in 
amazement. 
"I will be back directly, direct!} 
•
.
•
 I simply want to note down a 
new idea .
. . .  Au revoir . . . .  " 
"What a specimen!" cried Pavel Alexandrovitch, and he went off 
into a fit of laughter. 
Marya Alexandrovna lost patience. 
"I don't understand, I don't understand in the least what you are 
laughing at," she began with heat. "To laugh at a venerable old man, 
at a relation, to take advantage of his angelic kindness and to turn 
every word he utters into ridicule! I blushed for you, Pavel Alexan­
drovitch! Tell me, please, what do you find absurd in him ? I saw 
nothing to laugh at in him." 

248 
7' he Short Novels of Vostoevsky 
"When he does not know people, when he sometimes talks non­
sense?" 
"But that is the effect of the awful life he is leading, of his horrible 
imprisonment for the last five years under the eye of that fiendish 
woman. One ought to pity him and not to laugh at him. He did not 
even know me, you were a witness of that yourself. That was, so to 
speak, a flagrant example! He absolutely must be saved! I suggested 
to him to go abroad simply in the hope that he might get rid of that 
. . .  market-woman!" 
"Do you know what ? We ought to find him a wife, Marya Alex­
androvna," cried Pavel Alexandrovitch. 
"Again! You are incorrigible, Monsieur Mozglyakov!" 
"No, Marya Alexandrovna, no! This time I am speaking seriously! 
Why shouldn't we marry him ? It's an idea. C'est une idee comme une 
autre. What harm could it do him, kindly tell me that? On the con­
trary, he is in such a position that only such a step could save him! 
He is still legally able to marry. To begin with, he would be rescued 
from that trollop (excuse the expression). Secondly and chiefly­
imagine that he picks out a girl or, better still, a widow-sweet, kind, 
sensible, tender and, above all, poor, who will look after him like a 
daughter and realize that he has been a benefactor to her in giving her 
the title of his wife. And what could be better for him than a noble 
and upright creature who would belong to him and would be con­
tinually at his side, instead of that . . .  female. Of course she ought to 
be pretty, for even to this day Uncle loves a pretty bee. Did you notice 
how he kept looking at Zinaida Afanasyevna ?" 
"But where will you find such a bride?" asked Nastasya Petroma, 
listening attentively. 
"Ah, there it is: why, you, for instance, if you were willing! Allow 
me to ask : aren't you perfectly suitable as a match for the Prince? In 
the first place you are pretty, secondly you are a widow, thirdly you 
are a lady, fourthly poor (for you really are not very well off), fifthly 
you are a very sensible woman and consequently will love him, keep 
him in cotton wool, send that person about her business, take him 
abroad, will feed him on semolina pudding and sweetmeats, all that 
up to the time when he leaves this transitory world, which will happen 
within a year and possibly within two or three months. Then you will 
be a princess, a wealthy widow, and as a reward for your pluck you 
can marry a marquis or a general! C'e.•·t jo/i, isn't it?" 
"Why. my gracious! I believe I should fall in love with him, poor 
dear gentleman. out of mere gratitude if only he made me an offer!" 

Uncle's 1Jream 
249 
exclaimed Madame Zyablov, and her dark expressive eyes gleamed. 
"But that's-all nonsense." 
"Nonsense ? If you like, it needn't be nonsense! Ask me nicely and 
then you may cut off my finger if you are not engaged to him to-day! 
Why, there is nothing easier than to persuade or tempt Uncle into 
anything! He always says, 'Oh, yes; oh, yes!' You have heard him 
yourself. We will marry him so that he will hardly notice it. We will 
deceive him and marry him, perhaps: why, it is for his benefit, mercy 
upon us! . . .  You might dress up in your best to be ready for anything, 
Nastasya Petrovna." 
Monsieur Mozglyakov's enthusiasm knew no bounds. Sensible 
though she might be, Madame Zyablov's mouth watered. 
"I know I look a perfect slut to-day without your telling me," she 
replied. "I have grown shockingly careless, I have no ambition. That's 
how it is I go about such a grub. Why, do I really look like a cook ?" 
All this time Marya Alexandrovna was sitting with a strange look on 
her face. I am not mistaken if I say that she heard Pavel Alexan­
drovitch's strange proposition with a sort of dismay, as though dis­
concerted by it . . . .  
At last she recovered herself. 
"All that is very nice, no doubt, but it is all nonsense and absurdity, 
and what is more-quite out of place," she interrupted Mozglyakov 
sharply. 
"But why, my dear Marya Alexandrovna, why is it nonsense and 
out of place?" 
"For many reasons, and first of all because you are in my house and 
the Prince is my guest, and I allow no one to show a lack of respect for 
my house. I look upon your words as nothing but a jest, Pavel Alex­
androvitch. But, thank goodness, here is the Prince!" 
"Here I am," cried the Prince, walking into the room. "It's wonder­
ful, cl1er ami, how many different ideas I've had to-day. And at other 
times, perhaps you wouldn't believe it, I seem to have none at all. 
Nothing all day." 
"That's probably from your tumble to-day, Uncle. It has upset your 
nerves, and that is how it is . . .  
" 
"I put it down to that myself, my dear fellow, and I think that the 
accident has been really ben-e-fi-cial. So that I have made up my mind 
to forgive my Fe-o-fil. Do you know what, I believe he was not trying 
to take my life after all, what do you think? Besides, he has been pun­
ished only lately by having his beard shaved off." 

250 
'I he Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
"His beard shaved off, Uncle! Why, he has a beard as big as the 
German Empire." 
"Oh, ye-es, as big as the German Empire. You are generally very cor­
rect in your con-clu-sions, my dear boy. But it is a false one. And only 
fancy how it happened; I was sent a price list. The superbest beards 
for coachmen and gentlemen newly imported from abroad, also whis­
kers, imperials, moustaches, and so on, and all of the best qual-i-ty and 
at the most moderate prices. I thought I would send for a beard just 
to see what it was like. So I wrote for a coachman's beard, it really was 
a beard worth seeing! But it turned out that Fe-o-fil had a beard of his 
own almost twice as big. Of course we were puzzled what to do: to 
shave his off, or to send back the one they had sent us and let him 
wear his natural one? I thought and thought about it, and came to the 
conclusion that it was better for him to have the artificial one." 
"Probably because art is better than nature, Uncle!" 
"That was just it. And what distress it caused him when his beard 
was shaved off! As though he had parted with his whole career to­
gether with his beard. But isn't it time for us to start, my dear boy?" 
"I am ready, Uncle." 
"But I hope, Prince, that you :ue only going to the Governor's," 
Marya Alexandrovna exclaimed in excitement. "You are mine now, 
Prince, and belong to my family for the whole day. I am not going to 
tell you anything about the society here, of course. Perhaps you want 
to go to Anna Nikolaevna's, and I have not the right to disillusion 
you; besides, I am fully persuaded that time will tell its own story. But 
remember that I an1 your hostess, sister, nurse for the whole of to-day, 
and I must own that I tremble for you, Prince! You don't know these 
people, you don't yet know them." 
"Rely on me, Marya Alexandrovna. Everything shall be as I prom­
ised you," said Mozglyakov. 
"Oh, you feather-head! Rely on you! I expect you to dinner, Prince. 
We dine early. And how I regret that on this occasion my husband is 
in the country. How delighted he would have been to see you. He has 
such a respect for you, he has such a genuine affection for you." 
"Your husband? So you have a husband too?" the Prince queried. 
"Oh, my goodness, how forgetful you are, Prince! Why, you have 
utterly, utterly forgotten all the past! My husband, Afanasy Matveyitch, 
surely you have not forgotten him? He is in the country now, but you 
have seen him a thousand times in old days. Do you remember, Prince, 
Afanasy Matveyitch?" 
"Afanasy Matveyitch! In the country, only fancy! }ofais c'est deli-

Uncle's Vream 
251 
deux! So you have a husband too? What a strange thing, though ? 
That's exactly like some vaudeville: 'The husband's on the stair, but 
the wife has gone to . .  .' Excuse me, I have forgotten! Only the wife 
had gone off somewhere also, to Tula or to Yaroslav, anyway it's very 
funny.'' 
" 'The husband is on the stair, but the wife has gone to Tver,' Uncle," 
Mozglyakov prompted him. 
"Oh, ye-es! Oh, ye-es! Thank you, my dear boy, Tver it was. Char­
man!, charmant! So that it rhymes also. You always drop into rhyme, 
my dear boy. I didn't remember whether it was to Yaroslav or to Kos­
troma, but only that his wife had gone off somewhere too. Cl1armant, 
charmant! I have a little forgotten what I was beginning to speak 
about, though . . . .  Ah, ye-es, so we are starting, my dear fellow. Au 
revoir, madame. Adieu, ma dwrmante demoiselle," added the Prince, 
turning to Zina and kissing his finger-tips. 
"To dinner, to dinner, Prince! Don't forget to make haste back," 
Marya Alexandrovna called after him. 
Chapter 5 
You might just glance into the kitchen, Nastasya Petrovna," she 
said, after seeing the Prince out. "I have a presentiment that that mon­
ster Nikita will be sure to spoil the dinner! I am convinced that he is 
drunk by now . . .  . '' 
Nastasya Petrovna obeyed. As she went out she looked suspiciously 
at Marya Alexandrovna and observed in her signs of exceptional agita­
tion. Instead of going to look after the monster Nikita, N astasya 
Petrovna went into the bigger drawing-room, from there through the 
corridor to her own room, from there into a little dark apartment, 
something like a lumber-room, where there were trunks standing, gar­
ments of some sort hanging, and the dirty linen of the whole family 
stored in bags. She went on tiptoe to the closed door, held her breath, 
stooped down, looked through the keyhole and listened. This door 
was one of the three doors of the very room in which Marya Alexan­
drovna and Zina had remained, and was always kept shut and locked. 
Marya Alexandrovna considered Nastasya Petrovna a sly but exceed­
ingly frivolous woman. No doubt the idea did at times occur to her 
that Nastasya Petrovna had no scruples and was given to eavesdrop­
ping. But at the present moment Marya Alexandrovna was so much 

252 
The Short Novels of 'DostoevskY 
engrossed and excited that she quite forgot to take certain precautions. 
She sat down in an easy chair and looked significantly at Zina. Zina 
was conscious of that gaze fixed upon her, and a feeling of uneasy 
depression began to weigh upon her heart. 
"Zina!" 
Zina slowly turned her pale face towards her, and lifted her dreamy 
black eyes. 
"Zina, I intend to speak to you about an extremely important matter." 
Zina turned completely round to her mother, folded her hands, and 
stood waiting. There was a look in her face of vexation and sarcasm, 
which she tried, however, to conceal. 
"I want to ask you, Zina, what you thought to-day of that Moz­
glyakov?" 
"You have known what I think of him for ever so long," answered 
Zina reluctantly. 
"Yes, mon enfant; but it seems to me that he is becoming too per­
sistent with his . . .  attentions." 
"He says he is in love with me, and his persistency is excusable." 
"Strange; you used not to be so . . .  ready to excuse him. On the 
contrary, you invariably attacked him whenever I spoke of him." 
"It is strange, too, that you always defended him and were so set on 
my marrying him, and now you attack him." 
"That is almost so. I don "t deny it, Zina; I did desire to sec you 
married to Mozglyakov. It was painful for me to see your continual 
depression, your unhappiness, which I am quite capable of understand­
ing (whatever you may think of me) and which poisons my sleep at 
night. I felt sure at last that nothing but a complete change of life 
could save you! And that change must be-marriage. \Ve are not well 
off and cannot, for instance, go abroad. The asses here are surprised 
that you are three-and-twenty and not yet married, and concoct a 
regular legend to explain it. But is it likely I should make a match for 
you with a local councillor, or with Ivan Ivanitch, our attorney here? 
Is there a husband here for you ? Mozglyakov is empty-headed, of 
course, but he is the best of the lot. He is of a decent family, he has 
connections, he has a hundred and fifty serfs; that is better anyway 
than living by tricks and bribes, and God knows what shifts; that's 
why I turned my eyes upon him. But I swear I never had a real liking 
for him. I am persuaded that it was the hand of the Almighty that 
forewarned me. And if God were to send you even now something 
better--oh! what a good thing it will be that you have not pledged your 

Uncle's Vream 
253 
word! You have not said anything positive to him to-day, have you, 
Zina?" 
"Why all this pretence, Mamma, when the whole thing could be sair 
in two words?" Zina brought out irritably. 
"Pretence, Zina, pretence! And you can use a word like that to your 
mother ? But what am I saying? For a long while past you have put 
no faith in your mother! For a long while past you have looked on me 
as your enemy and not your mother." 
"Oh, do leave off, Mammal Surely you and I need not dispute about 
words! Don't we understand each other? I should have thought it was 
high time we did." 
"You wound me, my child! You do not believe that I am ready to 
do absolutely anything, anything, anything to secure your future." 
Zina looked at her mother sarcastically and with annoyance. 
"You don't want to marry me to that Prince to secure my future, do 
you? "  she asked, with a queer smile. 
"I have not said a word of that, but since you have mentioned it, I 
will say that if it were your lot to marry the Prince, it would be a great 
happiness for you and not at all senseless." 
"And I consider that's simply nonsense!" cried Zina passionately. 
"Nonsense, nonsense! I also think, Mamma, that you have too much 
romantic inspiration, you are a poetess, in the fullest sense of the word; 
that's what they call you here. You are continually having projects. 
Their impossibility and absurdity do not deter you. I had a foreboding 
while the Prince was sitting here that you had this in your mind. When 
Mozglyakov began playing the fool, and declaring that we ought to 
find a wife for the old man, I read all you were thinking in your face. 
I am ready to bet that you are thinking of that, and that is what you 
are leading up to with me. But as your incessant scheming on my 
behalf is beginning to bore me to death, is beginning to torture me, I 
beg you not to say one word about it to me; do you hear, Mamma? 
not one word, and I should be glad if you would remember that!" She 
was breathless with anger. 
"You are a child, Zina, a sick, irritable child," answered Marya 
Alexandrovna in a tearful voice full of emotion. "You speak disre­
spectfully to me and hurt my feelings. No mother would put up with 
what I endure from you every day! But you are nervous, you are 
ill, you are suffering, and I am a mother and, above all, a Christian. 
I must bear it and forgive. But one word, Zina: if I really were dream­
ing of that union-why do you look upon it as nonsense ? To my 
mind Mozglyakov never spoke more sensibly than just now when he 

254 
The S!zort Novels of 'DostoevskY 
pointed out that it was essential for the Prince to marry-of course 
not that slut Nastasya. He was talking wildly about that." 
"Listen, Mamma! Tell me straight out: are you questioning me like 
this out of curiosity, or with a motive?" 
"I ask you only, why does it seem to you such nonsense?" 
"Oh, how annoying! What a life!" exclaimed Zina, stamping with 
impatience. "I'll tell you why, if you still don't know : to say nothing 
of all the other absurdities-to take advantage of a wretched old 
man's having fallen into dotage, to deceive him, to marry him, a 
wreck, in order to get hold of his money and then every day, every 
hour, to long for his death, to my mind is not simply nonsense, but 
so base, so base, that I can't congratulate you on such ideas, Mamma!" 
The silence lasted for a minute. 
"Zina, do you remember what happened two years ago?" Marya 
Alexandrovna asked suddenly. 
Zina started. 
"Mamma," she said in a severe voice, "you promised me solemnly 
never to speak of that again." 
"And now I solemnly beg you, my child, to allow me only once to 
break that promise which I ha\'e never broken till now, Zina! The 
time has come for a full explanation between us. These two years of 
silence have been awful! It can't go on like this! . . .  I am ready to 
beg you on my knees to let me speak. Listen, Zina, your own mother 
begs you on her knees! At the same time I gi\'e you my solemn 
promise-the promise of an unhappy mother who adores her daughter 
-that I will never under any circumstances whatever, even if it were a 
question of my life, I will never speak of it again. This shall be the 
last time, but now-it is essential!" 
Marya Alexandrovna was calculating on her words having their full 
effect. 
"Speak," said Zina, turning perceptibly pale. 
"Thank you, Zina. Two years ago poor dear Mitya, your little 
brother, had a tutor . . .  
" 
"But why do you begin in this solemn way, Mamma! Why all this 
fine speaking, all these details, which are utterly unnecessary, which 
are painful, which are only too well known to both of us?" Zina cut 
her short with a kind of angry repulsion. 
"Because, my child, I, your mother, am compelled to justify myself 
before you! Because I want to put it all before you from an absolutely 
different point of view, and not from the mistaken point of view 
from which you are in the habit of looking at it. In fact, that you 

Uncle's 'Dream 
255 
might understand better the conclusion I am meaning to draw from 
all this. Do not imagine, my child, that I want to play with your 
feelings. No, Zina, you will find in me a true mother, and perhaps 
shedding tears at my feet, the feet of the base woman you have just 
called me, you will yourself implore the reconciliation you have so 
long, so haughtily rejected; that is why I wish to speak out the whole 
truth, Zina, the whole from the very beginning; otherwise I will be 
silent!" 
"Speak," Zina repeated, cursing her mother's love of fine speeches 
from the bottom of her heart. 
"I will continue, Zina : how this district school-teacher, hardly more 
than a boy, made an impression upon you, I could never understand. 
I put too much confidence in your good sense, in your honourable 
pride, and above all, in his utter insignificance (for one must tell the 
whole truth), to suspect there could be anything between you. And 
all of a sudden you come to me and announce that you intend to 
marry him! Zina! It was a dagger in my heart! I uttered a shriek 
and fell into a swoon. But . . .  you remember all that? I need not 
say, I thought it needful to use all my authority, which you call 
tyranny. Only think, a boy, the son of a sacristan hired for twelve 
roubles a month, a scribbler of wretched doggerel, published out of 
kindness in the 'Library of Good Reading,' a fellow who could talk 
of nothing but that cursed Shakespeare-that boy, your husband, the 
husband of Zinaida Moskalev! Why, it is worthy of Florian and his 
shepherdesses! Forgive me, Zina, but the mere remembrance moves 
me to frenzy! I refused him, but no authority could keep you in 
check. Your father could do nothing but blink his eyes, and did not 
even understand when I tried to explain to him. You maintained your 
relations with that boy, even had interviews with him, and most 
awful of all, you even ventured to correspond with him. Rumours 
were spreading all over the town. Our neighbours began stabbing me 
with hints: they were already in high glee, they were already blowing 
their trumpets, and suddenly all my predictions were fulfilled in the 
most flagrant way. You quarrelled over something; he showed him­
self utterly unworthy of you . . .  the wretched boy (I cannot call 
him a man), and threatened to show your letters about the town. 
At that threat, full of indignation, you were wild with anger and 
gave him a slap in the face. Yes, Zina, that circumstance, too, is known 
to me! I know all about it, all. That very day the miserable boy 
showed one of your letters to that scoundrel Zaushin, and within an 
hour that letter was already in the hands of Natalya Dmitryevna, my 

256 
The Short Novels of Vostoevsl(y 
deadly enemy. The same evening that madman, overcome with re­
morse, made an absurd attempt to poison himself. In a word, there 
was a most appalling scandal! That slut Nastasya ran to me in alarm 
with the terrible intelligence: the letter had been for a full hour in 
Natalya Dmitryevna's hands; within two hours the whole town would 
know of your disgrace! I controlled myself, I did not swoon-but 
with what blows you struck at my heart, Zina! That shameless hussy, 
that monster, Nastasya, demanded two hundred roubles, and for that 
sum swore to get that letter back. I myself ran through the snow in 
my thin slippers to the Jew Burnstein and pawned my jewel-case-a 
keepsake from my sainted mother! \Vi thin two hours the letter was 
in my hands : Nastasya had stolen it. She broke open a box and your 
reputation was saved-there was nothing to prove the story! But in 
what anxiety you made me pass that awful day! The next day I 
noticed, for the first time in my life, some grey hairs in my head, 
Zina! You have formed your own judgment now of that boy's con­
duct. You will agree now yourself, and perhaps with a bitter smile, 
that it would have been the acme of folly to entrust your future to 
his keeping. But from that time you have been fretting, you have 
been tormenting yourself, my child; you cannot forget him, or rather 
not him, he was always unworthy of you, but the phantom of your 
past happiness. That unhappy youth is lying on his death-bed now, 
I am told he is in consumption, and you-angel of goodness!-you 
will not marry during his lifetime that you may not lacerate his feel­
ings; for to this day he is tortured by jealousy, though I am per­
suaded that he never loved you with true exalted )o\'e! I know that 
when he heard of Mozglyakov's attentions, he spied on you, sent to 
find out, made inquiries. You are sparing him, my child; I have 
guessed your secret, and God knows with what bitter tears I have 
wetted my pillow!" 
"Oh, do drop all that, Mamma!" Zina interrupted in unspeakable 
misery. "I think you might have left your pillow out," she added 
bitingly. "You can't speak without all this declamation and flourish!" 
"You do not believe me, Zina! Do not look upon me with antag­
onism, my child! My eyes have not been dry for these two years, but 
I hid my tears from you, and I swear that I, too, have greatly changed 
during that time! I have long understood your feelings and, I regret to 
say, that it is only now that I have realized all the depth of your 
grief. Can you blame me, my dear, for looking on this attachment as 
a romantic folly inspired by that cursed Shakespeare who will poke 
his nose where he is not wanted ? What mother will blame me for my 

Uncle's 'Dream 
257 
terror, for the steps I took, for the sternness of my decision ? But now, 
now after seeing your suffering for these two years, I understand and 
appreciate your feelings. Believe me that I understand you, perhaps 
far better than you understand yourself. I am persuaded you love not 
him, that unnatural boy, but your golden dreams, your lost happiness, 
your exalted ideals. I, too, have loved, and perhaps more ardently 
than you. I have suffered myself; I, too, have had my exalted ideals. 
And so who can blame me now; and above all, can you blame me for 
regarding a match with the Prince as the thing best fitted to save 
you, most essential for you in your present position?" 
Zina had been listening with wonder to this long tirade, knowing 
perfectly well that her mother would not take up this tone without 
some object. But the unexpected conclusion in her mother's last words 
utterly amazed her. 
"Can you really propose to marry me to that Prince?" she cried, 
looking at her mother in astonishment and almost alarm. "Then it is 
not a mere dream, not a project, but your firm intention. So I guessed 
right? And . . .  and . . .  and in what way will such a marriage save 
me and be essential in my position ? And . . .  and . . .  and in what 
way is all this worked in with what you have been saying just now­
with all this story? . . .  I really don't understand you, Mamma!" 
"And I wonder how any one can fail to understand, mon angel" 
exclaimed Marya Alexandrovna, growing excited in her turn. "In the 
first place the mere fact that you will move into a different society, a 
different world! You will leave for ever this detestable little town, 
full of terrible memories for you ; where you have no friend, no wel­
come; where you have been slandered; where all these magpies hate 
you for your beauty. You may even go abroad this spring, to Italy, 
to Switzerland, to Spain; to Spain, Zina, to Spain, where there is the 
Alhambra and the Guadalquivir, not this wretched, miserable river 
here with its unseemly name . . .  
," 
"But excuse me, Mamma, you are talking as if I were already 
married, or at least as though the Prince had made me an offer." 
"Don't trouble about that, my angel; I know what I am talking 
about. But-allow me to proceed. I have already mentioned the first 
point, now for the second: I understand, my child, with what repug­
nance you would give your hand to that Mozglyakov." 
"I know without your telling me that I never shall be his wife!" 
Zina answered with heat, and her eyes flashed. 
"And if you knew how well I understand your repugnance, my 
dear! It is an awful thing to swear before the altar of God to love one 

258 
The Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
for whom you can feel no love! It is awful to belong to one whom 
you cannot even respect! And he will have your love; it is for that 
he will marry you. I can tell that by the look in his eyes when you 
turn away from him. How awful to keep up the pretence! I have 
endured that trial for twenty-five years. Your father has wrecked 
my life. He has, so to speak, sapped my youth, and how often you 
have seen my tears!" 
"Papa is in the country, please let him alone," answered Zina. 
"I know you always take his part. Ah, Zina! My heart ached, when 
from motives of prudence I desired your marriage with Mozglyakov. 
But there would be no need to dissemble with the Prince. Of course 
I need not say that you cannot care for him . . .  with love, and indeed 
he is not capable of requiring such love . . . .  
" 
"My goodness, what nonsense! But I assure you that you are mis­
taken from the very beginning upon the most essential point. Let 
me tell you that I don't want to sacrifice myself for no reason that 
I know of. Let me tell you that I don't want to be married to anybody, 
and that I shall remain single. For the last two years you have been 
nagging at me for not getting married. Well, you will have to make 
up your mind to accept it. I don't want to, and that is all! And so it 
shall be." 
"But Zinotchka darling, for goodness' sake don't fly into a passion 
before you have heard what I have to say! What a hot-headed child 
you are, to be sure. Allow me to look at it from my point of view, 
and you will agree with me at once. The Prince will live for a year or 
two at the utmost, and to my mind it is better to be a young widow 
than an old maid, to say nothing of your being at his death a princess, 
free, wealthy, and independent! My dear, you may look with con­
tempt on these calculations-calculations on his death! But I am a 
mother, and what mother would condemn me for my far-sightedness? 
Finally, if like an angel of goodness you still feel compassion for that 
boy, such compassion that you are unwilling to be married so long as 
he lives (as I conjecture is the case), reflect that you will give him 
fresh courage and relieve his mind by marrying the Prince! If he has 
a spark of common sense, he will understand, of course, that jealousy 
of the Prince would be misplaced, absurd; he will understand that you 
have married from motives of prudence, from necessity. He will 
understand, indeed, that is-I merely mean to say, you can marry any 
one you like when the Prince is dead." 
"To put it plainly, it comes to this: marry the Prince, plunder him, 
reckoning on his death to marry a lover afterwards. You balance your 

Uncle's 1Jream 
259 
accounts cleverly. You try to tempt me, offering me . . .  I understand 
you, Mamma, I quite understand you! You never can resist a display 
of noble sentiments, even in the nastiest action. You had better have 
said simply and straightforwardly: 'Zina, it is base, but it is profitable, 
and so consent to do it!' that would be more candid, anyway." 
"But why, my child, persist in looking at it from that point of view 
-from the point of view of deception, artfulness, self-interest? You 
regard my calculation as base, deceitful. But by all that is holy, what 
deceit is there about it, where is the baseness? Look at yourself in 
the glass; you are so lovely that one might give up a kingdom for your 
sake! And you, you a beauty, sacrifice your best years to an old man! 
Like a lovely star you will shed light on his declining hours; you, 
like the green ivy, will twine about his age; you, and not that nettle, 
that abominable woman, who has cast a spell on him, and from greed 
is sapping his existence. Do you think that his money, his princely 
rank, is more precious than you? \Vhere is the deceit, where is the 
baseness in that ? You don't know what you are saying, Zina!" 
"They evidently are more precious, since I have to marry a decrepit 
wreck. Deceit is always deceit, Mamma, whatever the object may be." 
"On the contrary, my dear, on the contrary! You may look at it 
from a lofty, indeed from a Christian point of view, my child! You 
said yourself on one occasion, in a moment of frenzy, that you would 
like to be a Sister of Mercy. Your heart had suffered, had grown 
hard. You said (I know this) that it could not love now. If you do 
not believe in love, turn your feelings to another loftier subject, turn 
it genuinely, like a child with all faith and reverence-and God will 
bless you. This old man has suffered too, he is unhappy, he is perse­
cuted; I have known him for some years and have always cherished 
for him an incomprehensible sympathy, akin to love, as though I had 
a presentiment. Be his friend, be his daughter, be perhaps even his 
plaything-if one is to speak plainly. But warm his heart, and you 
will be doing an act godly and virtuous! He is ridiculous-don't 
think of that. He is half a man-have compassion on him ;  you are 
a Christian! Master yourself; such deeds are done by self-mastery. 
To our minds it is hard to bandage wounds in a hospital; it is revolt­
ing to breathe the infected air of the sick-room. But there are angels 
of mercy who do that and thank God for their vocation. Here is 
balm for your wounded heart, occupation, self-sacrifice-and you will 
heal your own wounds. Where is the egoism in it, where is the base­
ness? But you don't believe me. You imagine, perhaps, that I am 
dissimulating when I talk of duty, of self-sacrifice. You can't conceive 

260 
The Short 'N.ovels of 1Jostoevs k,y 
that I, a frivolous, worldly woman, can have a heart, feelings, prin­
ciples. Well, refuse to believe, insult your mother, but admit that 
what she says is reasonable and helpful. Imagine that it is not I who 
am speaking but some one else; shut your eyes, turn round to the 
corner, imagine that some unseen voice is speaking to you . . . .  \Vhat 
troubles you most is that it is all for the sake of money, as though it 
were some sale or purchase. Well, renounce the money if money is so 
hateful to you. Keep only what is barely necessary for yourself, and 
give away the rest to the poor. Help him, for instance, that luckless 
boy lying now on his death-bed." 
"He will take no help," Zina said softly, as though to herself. 
"He will not take it, but his mother will take it," Marya Alexan­
drovna answered triumphantly. "She will take it without his knowing. 
You sold your earrings, your aunt's present, and helped her six 
months ago; I know that. I know the old woman takes in washing to 
keep her unhappy son." 
"He will soon have no neeJ of help." 
"I know what you are hinting at, too," Marya AlexandrO\·na caught 
her up; and an inspiration, a genuine inspiration, dawned upon her. 
"I know what you are alluding to. They s;ӱy he is in consumption and 
will not live long. But who says that? The other day I purposely ques­
tioned Kalist Stanislavitch; I was anxious about him, because I have 
a heart, Zina. Kalist Stanislavitch answered me, that the illness was, 
of course, serious, but that he was convinced that, so far, the poor boy 
was not in consumption, but that it was only a rather severe affection 
of the chest. Question him yourself. He told me, as a fact, that under 
different circumstances, especially with a change of climate and sur­
roundings, the patient might recover. He told me that in Spain­
and I had heard it before and even read it-that in Spain there is 
some extraordin:uy island, I believe it is called :Malaga-like some 
wine, in fact-where not only persons with weak lungs, but even 
consumptives recover simply from the climate, and th:n people go 
there on purpose to be treated, people of rank and consequence, of 
course; or commercial people too, if only they are rich. But the magicJl 
Alhambra, the myrtles, the lemons, the Spaniards on their mules! 
That alone would make an extraordinary impression on a poetical 
nature. You think he will not take your help, your money for the 
journey? Well, deceive him, then, if you are sorry for him! Deception 
is pardonable when it is to save a man's life. Give him hope, even 
promise him your love; tell him you will marry him when you are 
left a widow. Anything in the world can be said in :m honourable 

Uncle's 1Jream 
261 
way. Your mother will not teach you anything dishonourable, Zina; 
you will do this to save his life, so anything is permissible! You will 
restore him to life through hope; he will begin to take trouble over 
his health, to try and cure himself, to obey the doctors. He will try 
to regain his health for the sake of happiness. If he recovers, even 
though you do not marry him, anyway he will be well again, and 
anyway you will have saved him, you will have brought him back 
to life. And indeed one may even look at him with sympathy; perhaps 
fate has taught him a lesson and changed him for the better, and if 
only he is worthy of you-marry him, if you like, when you are left 
a widow. You will be wealthy and independent. If you restore him to 
health, you can give him a position in the world-a career. Your mar­
riage will be more excusable then than now, when it is out of the 
question. \Vhat would be in store for you both if you were to venture 
on such madness now? Universal contempt, beggary, the task of 
pulling the nasty urchins' ears, for that is part of his duties, the 
reading of Shakespeare together, staying on for ever in Mordasov; 
and lastly, his speedy and inevitable death. While if you restore him 
to health you will be restoring him for a useful, virtuous life; if you 
forgive him, you will make him adore you. He is fretting over his 
abominable action, and opening a new life to him, forgiving him, you 
will give him hope and reconcile him to himself. He may enter the 
service, may rise to a good grade; and indeed, even if he does not 
recover, he will die happy, at peace with himself, in your arms-for 
you will be able to be with him at that moment-trusting in your 
love, forgiven by you, in the shade of the myrtles and lemons, under 
the azure exotic sky! Oh, Zina! all that is in your power! There is 
every advantage for you in it-and all that through marriage with the 
Prince." 
Marya Alexandrovna had finished. Rather a prolonged silence fol­
lowed. Zina's agitation was inexpressible. 
\Ve will not undertake to describe Zina's feelings; we cannot even 
conjecture them. But it seemed that Marya Alexandrovna had found 
the way to her heart. Not knowing what was the present state of her 
daughter's feelings, she had gone over every mood in which she 
might possibly be, and guessed that she had at last hit on the true 
path. She coarsely touched upon the sorest spot in Zina's heart. And, 
from old habit, she could not refrain from the exhibition of noble 
sentiments, which of course did not hoodwink Zina. "What does it 
matter if she does not believe me," thought Marya Alexandrovna. "If 
only J have made her think things over! If only I have clearly hinted 

262 
T lze Short N.ovels of 'DostoevskY 
at what 
could not say outright!" So she argued, and she attained 
her object. The effect was produced. Zina listened greedily. Her cheeks 
glowed, her bosom heaved. 
"Listen, Mamma," she said resolutely at last, though the sudden 
pallor of her face betrayed what that resolution cost her. "Listen, 
Mamma." 
But at that moment a sudden noise in the entrance hall, and a harsh, 
shrill voice asking for Marya Alexandrovna, made Zina pause. Marya 
Alexandrovna jumped from her seat. 
"Oh, my goodness!" she cried, "the devil has sent that magpie, the 
Colonel's wife; why, I all but turned her out of the house a fortnight 
ago!" she added, almost in despair. "But . . .  but it is impossible not 
to receive her now! Impossible! She most likely has news, or she 
would not have dared to come. It is important, Zina! I must know . 
. . . \Ve must neglect nothing now!-Oh, how grateful I am for your 
visit!" she cried, hastening to meet her guest. "How did you come to 
think of me, my precious Sofya Petrovna? \Vhat an en-chant-ing 
surprise." 
Zina ran out of the room. 
Chapter 6 
THE Colonel's wife, Sofya Petrovna Karpuhin, had only a moral 
resemblance to a magpie. Physically she was more like a sparrow. She 
was a little lady, about fifty, with sharp little eyes, with freckles and 
yellow patches all over her face. On her little dried-up body, perched 
on strong, thin, sparrow-like little legs, was a dark silk dress which 
was always rustling, for the Colonel's lady could not keep still for two 
seconds. She was a spiteful and malign:mt gossip. She was mad on the 
fact of being a colonel's wife. She very often fought with her husb::tnd, 
the retired Colonel, and used to scratch his face. Moreover, she used 
to drink four glasses of vodka in the morning, and as many in the 
evening, and had an insane hatred for Ann::t Nikolaevna Antipov, 
who had turned her out of her house the week before, as well as for 
Natalya Dmitryevna P::tskudin, who had assisted in the operation. 
"I have only looked in for a minute, mon ange," she twittered. "I 
..-eally ought not to have sat down. I have only come to tell you what 
marvellous things are going on among us. The whole town has gone 
off its head about that Prince! Our wily ones-vous comprenez-are 

Uncle's 'Dream 
263 
chasing him, hunting him down, snatching him from one another, 
regaling him with champagne-you wouldn't believe it! You wouldn't 
believe it! How could you bring yourself to let him go? Do you know 
that he is at Natalya Dmitryevna's now?" 
"At Natalya Dmitryevna's!" cried Marya Alexandrovna, jumping 
up from her seat. "\Vhy, he was only going to see the Governor, and 
afterwards, perhaps, to Anna Nikolaevna's, and was not going to 
stay long even there!" 
"Not for long, I dare say; catch him now if you can! He did not 
find the Go\'ernor at home, then he went to Anna Nikolaevna's, 
promised to dine with her, and Natalya Dmitryevna, who is always 
with her nowadays, has carried him off to her house for lunch. There's 
your Prince!" 
"And what . . .  about Mozglyakov ? Why, he promised . . .  " 
"Yes, your Mozglyakov, indeed! You think a lot of him, don't you ? 
. . .  Why, he has gone with him. You see if they don't get up a game 
of cards there, and he loses all his money as he did last year! Yes, and 
they'll make the Prince take a hand too, and strip him like bark. And 
the things she is spreading about, that Natalya! She is crying aloud 
that you are trying to ensnare the Prince, you know, with certain 
objectS-t'otts comprenez? She is talking to him about it. Of course he 
doesn't understand ; he sits like a wet cat and says, 'Oh, ye-es! oh, ye-esl' 
at every word. And she, she brought out her Sonka-only fancy! 
fifteen, and she still keeps her in short skirts, only down to the knee, 
so you can imagine 
.
•
.
.
 They sent for that little orphan Mashka; she 
is in short skirts too, only above the knee-l looked through my 
lorgnette . . .  they put some sort of red caps with feathers on their 
heads-! really don't know what it was meant for! And they made 
the two little magpies dance the Cossack dance to the piano before 
the Prince! Well, you know his weakness; he was melting with ecstasy. 
'Contours! contours!' He looked at them through his lorgnette, and 
they did distinguish themselves, the magpies! They got red in the 
face, they twirled their legs, and it was such an exhibition that I was 
shocked, and that was all about it. Tfoo! Call that a dance! I've danced 
myself, the shawl dance, at the breaking-up party at Madame Jarnis's 
select boarding school-and it really was a distinguished performance. 
I was applauded by senators! The daughters of princes and counts 
were educated there! But this was simply a cancan! I grew hot with 
shame, I grew hot, hot! I simply could not sit it out! . . .  
" 
"But . . .  surely you have not been at Natalya Dmitryevna's your­
self? Why, you . . .  " 

264 
'I he Short 'Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
"Why, yes, she did insult me last week. I say that straight out to 
every one. Mais, ma chere, I wanted to have a peep at that Prince, 
if it was only through a crack in the door. I did go. For where else 
could I have seen him? I shouldn't have been to see her, if it hadn't 
been for that horrid old Prince! Only fancy, chocolate was handed 
round to every one, but not offered to me, and they did not say a word 
to me all the time. She did that on purpose, you know. The tub of a 
woman, I'll pay her out! But good-bye, mon ange. I am in a hurry 
now, a great hurry . . .  I must find Akulina Panfilovna, and tell her 
. . .  only you may as well say good-bye to the Prince now, he won't 
come back to you. You know he has no memory, so Anna Nikolaevna 
will certainly carry him off! They are all afraid that you . . .  do you 
understand? on Zina's account." 
"Quelle horreur!" 
"I assure you the whole town is talking of it! Anna Nikolaevna is 
set on keeping him to dinner, and then to stay altogether. She is doing 
that to spite you, mon ange. I peeped into the servants' quarters; such 
a bustle going on there; they are preparing the dinner, such a clatter 
of knives . . . .  They have sent for champagne. Make haste, make 
haste, and catch him on the road when he is on his way to her. \Vhy, 
he promised to dine with you first! He is your visitor, and not hers! 
To think of her having the laugh of you, the sly jade, the marplot, 
the filthy slut! Why, she is not worth the sole of my shoe, though she 
is the prosecutor's wife! I am a colonel's wife myself! I was brought 
up at Madame Jarnis's select establishment . . .  Tfoo! Mais adieu, 
mon angel I have my own sledge waiting, or I would have gone with 
you . . . .  
" 
The walking newspaper vanished. Marya Alexandrovna was all of 
a tremble with excitement, but her visitor's advice was extremely clear 
and practical. There was no reason to delay, and indeed no time to be 
lost. But the chief difficulty still remained. Marya Alexandrovna flew 
to Zina's room. 
Zina, pale and troubled, was walking up and down the room, with 
her arms crossed and her head bowed. There were tears in her eyes, 
but there was a gleam of determination in the look she cast upon her 
mother. She made haste to hide her tears, and a sarcastic smile came 
on to her lips. 
"Mamma," she said, before her mother could speak, "you wasted 
a great deal of your eloquence on me just now, far too much. But 
you did not blind me-l am not a child. To persuade myself that I 
am sacrificing myself like a Sister of Mercy, though I have no vocation 

Uncle's 'Dream 
265 
for such a life, to justify the base deeds one commits from simple 
egoism, with the pretence of honourable motives-all that is casuistry 
which cannot deceive me. Do you hear? That could not deceive me, 
and I want you to know that!" 
"But, mon ange," cried Marya Alexandrovna, crestfallen. 
"Do not speak, Mamma. Have the patience to hear me to the end. 
Though I fully recognize that it is jesuitical casuistry, though I fully 
• '!alize the utter baseness of such a proceeding, I fully accept your 
proposition-<lo you hear ?-fully; and I tell you I am ready to marry 
the Prince, and even ready to second all your efforts to induce him 
to marry me. With what object I do so there is no need for you to 
know. It is enough that I have made up my mind. I have made up 
my mind to everything: I will put on his boots for him; I will be 
his servant; I will dance to please him, to make up for my baseness 
to him; I will do anything in the world that he may not regret having 
married me! But in return for my decision, I insist that you tell me 
openly by what means you are going to arrange it all. Since you have 
begun speaking so insistently about it, you could not-1 know you­
have done so without having some definite plan in your head. Be open 
for once in your life at least. Openness is the indispensable condition! 
I cannot decide without knowing exactly how you intend to do it all." 
:Marya Alexandrovna was so much taken aback by Zina's unexpected 
conclusion that for some time she stood facing her, dumb and motion­
less with amazement, and stared at her open-eyed. She had prepared 
;erself to combat the obstinate romanticism of her daughter, of whose 
severe rectitude she stood in constant dread, and now she suddenly 
heard that her daughter agreed with her, and was ready to do any­
thing, even in opposition to her principles! The whole affair was, in 
consequence, immensely simplified; and there was a gleam of joy in 
her eyes. 
"Zinotchka!" she cried enthusiastically. "Zinotchka, you are my own 
flesh and blood!" 
She could say no more, but flew to embrace her daughter. 
"Oh, my goodness! I did not ask for your endearments, Mamma," 
cried Zina, with impatient repulsion. "I don't want your raptures! 
I ask you for an answer to my question, and nothing more." 
"But, Zina, I love you! I adore you, and you repulse me . . . .  You 
know I am doing my best for your happiness . . . .  
" 
And unfeigned tears glistened in her eyes. Marya Alexandrovna 
really did love Zina in her own way, and on this occasion, in her suc­
cess :md her excitement, she was brimming over with sentimental 

266 
'l he Short N.ovels of Vostoevsky 
emotion; in spite of a certain narrowness in her outlook, Zina under­
stood that her mother loved her and-that love was burdensome to 
her. She would have been more at ease, indeed, if her mother had 
hated her 
.
.
.
•
 
"Well, don't be angry, Mamma; I am so agitated," she said, to 
soothe her. 
"I am not angry, I am not angry, my angel," Marya Alexandrovna 
twittered, reviving instantly. "Of course I know that you are agitated. 
Well, my dear, you insist on openness . . .  certainly I will be open, 
entirely open, I assure you! If only you would trust me! And to begin 
with, I must tell you that I have not yet a definite plan-that is, in full 
detail, Zinotchka; and indeed I could not have; a clever girl like you 
will see why. I foresee some obstacles, in fact . . . .  That magpie just 
now babbled all sorts of nonsense . . .  (oh, my goodness, I must make 
haste) .  You see, I am entirely open! But I swear I will attain my 
object," she added, with enthusiasm. "My confidence is not romanc­
ing, as you called it just now, my angel; it rests on a basis of reality. 
It is founded on the absolute feeble-mindedness of the Prince, that is 
the canvas on which I can embroider what I like. The great thing is 
that they should not prevent me! As though those fools could outwit 
me!" she cried, bringing her hand down on the table, with a gleam 
in her eye. "That is my affair! And what is most necessary is to begin 
as quickly as we can, so as to settle what is most important to-day, if 
only it is possible." 
"Very good, Mamma ; only listen to one more . . .  piece of open­
ness : do you know why I am so interested to know your plan and 
have no faith in it? Because I cannot rely upon myself. I ha\'e said 
already that I have made up my mind to this base action ; but if the 
details of your plan are really too revolting, too dirty, I warn you that 
I shan't be able to endure it, and I shall fling it all up. I know that 
that is only an added baseness; to resol\'e upon vileness, and to be 
afraid of the filth in which it is swimming; but there is no help for it. 
It will inevitably be so! . . .  " 
"But, Zinotchka, what is there particularly vile in it, man ange?" 
Marya Alexandrovna was protesting timidly. "It is nothing but mak­
ing an advantageous marriage, and everybody does that, you know! 
You have only to look at it from that point of view, and it all seems 
perfectly honourable . . . .  
" 
"Ah, Mamma, for God's sake, don't try to deceive me! You see, I 
agree to anything, anything! What more do you want? Please don't 

Uncle's 'Dream 
267 
be alarmed if I call things by their names. That is perhaps my only 
comfort now." 
And a bitter smile came upon her lips. 
"Well, well! that's all right, my angel; we can differ in our opinions 
and yet mutually respect each other. Only if you are anxious about 
the details and are afraid they will be nasty, leave all that business 
to me; I assure you that not a speck of dirt shall fall on you. Should 
I be willing to compromise you in people's eyes? Only rely on me 
and everything shall be settled capitally with the utmost decorum, above 
all, with the utmost decorum! There shall not be the slightest scandal, 
and if there should be the tiniest, unavoidable, little bit of scandal­
well, what of it ? Why, we shall be far away then! We shan't stay here, 
you know! They can talk as much as they like, we can despise them! 
They will be envious. And they are not worth worrying about! I 
wonder at you, Zinotchka-but don't be angry with me-how can 
you, with your pride, be afraid of them?" 
"Oh, Mamma, I am not in the least afraid of them! You don't 
understand me a bit," Zina answered irritably. 
"\Veil, well, my love, don't be angry. All I mean is that they are 
contriving some nasty plots every day of their lives, and here, just 
for once in your life . . .  But how silly I am! What am I saying? 
It is not nasty at all! \Vhat is there nasty about it? On the contrary, 
it is perfectly honourable! I will prove that to you conclusively, Zina. 
I repeat, it all depends on how you look at it. . . .  
" 
"Oh, do leave of, Mamma, with your arguments," Zina cried 
wrathfully, and she stamped impatiently. 
"Well, my love, I'll say no more, I'll say no more! I have said 
something foolish again . . . .  
" 
A brief silence followed. Marya Alexandrovna meekly waited for 
Zina to speak, and looked uneasily into her eyes, as a little dog who 
has done wrong watches its mistress. 
"I don't understand how you are going to set to work," Zina con­
tinued, with repugnance. "I feel sure that you will only meet with 
ignominy. I despise their opinion, but for you it will mean disgrace." 
"Oh, if that's all that is worrying you, my angel, please don't worry 
yourself! I beg you, I entreat you. If only we are agreed, you need not 
be anxious about me. Oh, if only you knew the storms I have 
weathered unharmed! The scrapes I have had to get out of! Well, 
only let me have a try. In any case we must lose no time in getting 
the Prince the..J-tete. That is the very first thing. And all the rest will 
depend on it! But I can foresee the rest. They will all be up in arms, 

268 
r he Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
but . . .  that does not matter. I'll settle their business! I am frightened 
of Mozglyakov, too . . . .  " 
"Mozglyakov!" Zina pronounced with contempt. 
"Why, yes, Mozglyakov; only don't you be frightened, Zinotchka! 
I declare I'll bring him to such a pass that he will help us of himself! 
You don't know me, Zinotchka! You don't know what I am equal to 
in an emergency! Ah, Zinotchka, darling! When I heard about the 
Prince a little while ago, the thought flashed upon my brain even then. 
My whole mind seemed full of light at once. And who, who could 
expect that he would come to us? Why, such an opportunity might 
not occur once in a thousand years! Zinotchka, my angel, there is no 
dishonour in your marrying an old man and a broken-down cripple, 
but there would be in your marrying a man you could not endure, 
though you would really be his wife. And you won't be a real wife 
to the Prince, you know. Why, it is not marriage. It is only a domestic 
contract! Why, of course it will be a benefit to him, the fool! Why, 
it is bestowing priceless happiness on an old fool like that! Ah, how 
beautiful you are to-day, Zinotchka! Not beautiful, but a queen of 
beauty! Why, if I were a man I would win you half a kingdom, if 
you wanted it! They are all asses! How resist kissing this hand!" And 
Marya Alexandrovna kissed her daughter's hand warmly. "Why, this 
is my flesh and blood! We will marry him by force, if need be, the 
old fool! And how we will arrange life, you and I, Zinotchka! You 
won't drive away your old mother, when you are in luck, will you ? 
Though we do quarrel, my angel, you have never had another friend 
like me, anyway . . .  
" 
"Mamma! If you have decided, perhaps it is time . . .  you were 
doing something. You are simply wasting time here!" said Zina 
impatiently. 
"It is time, Zina, it is. Oh, I have been letting myself chatter too 
long!" cried Marya Alexandrovna, catching herself up. "They are 
trying to entice the Prince away altogether. I'll get into the sledge 
and set off at once. I'll drive round, call Mozglyakov out, and then 
. . .  Yes, I'll bring him away by force, if need be! Good-bye, Zinotchka, 
good-bye, darling; don't grieve, have no doubts, don't be sad-above 
all, don't be sad. Everything will turn out splendidly; everything shall 
be done with dignity and decorum! It makes all the difference how 
you look at it . . . .  Well, good-bye, good-bye." 
Marya Alexandrovna made the sign of the cross over Zina, whisked 
out of the room, twisted and turned before the looking-glass in her 
own room for a brief instant, and two minutes later was being whirled 

Uncle's Vream 
269 
along the streets of Mordasov in her sledge, which was always at the 
door at that hour in readiness for paying calls. Marya Alexandrovna 
lived en grand. 
"No, you won't outwit me," she thought, as she sat in her sledge. 
"Zina consents, and that means half my task is done. And break down 
now! Nonsense! Ah, that Zina! She has agreed, anyway, at last! So 
some considerations do affect even her darling brain! I drew a tempt­
ing prospect for her! I touched her! But it is terrific how beautiful she 
is to-day! With her beauty I would have had Europe upside down to 
suit me. Oh, well, we'll wait and see . . . .  Shakespeare will fade away 
when she becomes a princess and gets to know a thing or two. What 
does she know? Mordasov and her schoolmaster . . .  H'm! . . .  But 
what a princess she will be! I love in her that pride, that boldness. 
She is so unapproachable! She glances at you-it is the look of a 
queen. \Vhy, how could she, how could she fail to see her advantage? 
She saw it at last! She'll see the rest . . . .  I shall be with her, of course! 
In the end she will agree with me on every point! And she won't be 
able to get on without me. I shall be a princess myself. I shall be 
known in Petersburg. Farewell, horrid little town! The Prince will die 
and that boy will die, and then I will marry her to a reigning prince. 
Only one thing I am afraid of: didn't I confide too much in her? 
Wasn't I too open? Didn't I let myself be carried away by my feel­
ings? She frightens me; oh, she frightens me! "  
And Marya Alexandrovna became engrossed i n  her meditations; 
needless to say that they were of an active nature. But as the proverb 
has it: "A good will does more than compulsion." 
Left alone, Zina spent a long time walking up and down the room, 
with her arms crossed. She pondered over many things. Often, and 
almost unconsciously, she repeated, "Ir's time, it's time, it's high time!" 
\Vhat did that fragmentary exclamation mean ? More than once tears 
glistened on her long, silky eyelashes. She did not think of checking 
them or wiping them away. But there was no need for her mother to 
be anxious, and to try to penetrate into her daughter's thoughts. Zina 
had fully made up her mind, and was prepared for all the consequences. 
"Wait a bit," thought Nastasya Petrovna, threading her way out of 
the lumber-room on the departure of the Colonel's wife. "And I was 
meaning to put on a pink ribbon for the benefit of that wretched 
Prince, and was fool enough to believe that he would marry me! 
Ah, Marya Alexandrovna, I am a slut, I am a beggar, I take bribes 
of two hundred roubles, do I ?  I dare say I ought to have let you off 
and taken nothing from a swell like you. I took the money honour-

270 
The Short N.ovels of 7Jostoevsky 
ably; I took it for the expenses connected with the job . . .
. I might 
have had to give a bribe myself. What do you care that I demeaned 
myself to break the lock with my own hands? I did the dirty work 
for your benefit, while you sit with your hands in your lap! You have 
only to embroider on the canvas; wait a bit, I'll show you the canvas! 
I'll show you both whether I am a slut! You will appreciate Nastasya 
Petrovna and her kindness." 
Chapter 7 
BuT Marya Alexandrovna was led by her good genius. The 
project she was planning was a grand and daring one. To marry her 
daughter to a wealthy man, to a prince and to a wreck, to marry her 
without any one's knowing it, taking advantage of the feeble-minded­
ness and defencelessness of her guest, to do this by stealth like a thief, 
as Marya Alexandrovna's enemies would say, was not only bold but 
audacious. It was of course a profitable scheme, but in case of failure 
the schemers would be covered with disgrace. Marya Alexandrovna 
knew this, but she did not despair. "You don't know what storms I 
have weathered unharmed," she had said to Zina, and she had spoken 
truly. Otherwise she would not have been much of a heroine. 
There is no disputing that all this was something like highway 
robbery; but Marya Alexandrovna did not tJke much notice of that. 
On that score she had one wonderful and unfailing reflection : "Once 
married, you can't be unmarried." A simple thought, but alluring 
the imaginJtion with such extraordinary advantages that the mere con­
ception of them sent thrills and shudders all over her. Altogether she 
was in great excitement, and sat in her sledge as though she were on 
thorns. Like a woman of inspiration with an unmistakable creative 
gift, she had already formed a plan of action. But this plan was still 
a rough sketch, altogether en grand, and still loomed somewhat dimly 
before her. A mass of details and unforeseen possibilities of all sorts 
awaited her. But Marya Alexandrovna had confidence in herself; she 
was agitated, not by fear of failure-no! she longed only to begin 
the fray as soon as possible. Impatience, a laudable impatience, fired 
her at the thought of delays and obstacles. But as we are speaking of 
obstacles we will ask leave to explain our meaning more fully. The 
chief trouble Marya Alexandrovna foresaw and expected was from her 
excellent fellow-citizens, and especially from the highly respectable 

Uncle's 'Dream 
271 
ladies of Mordasov. She knew by experience their implacable hatred 
for herself. She was perfectly certain, for instance, that at that moment 
every one in the town probably knew of her designs, although no 
one had been told anything about them. She knew from bitter expe­
rience on more than one occasion, that no incident, even of the most 
private nature, happened in her house in the morning without being 
known by the evening to the humblest market-woman, the humblest 
individual sitting behind a counter. Of course Marya Alexandrovna, 
so far, had only a presentiment of trouble. But such presentiments 
had never deceived her. She was not deceived now. This was what 
had actually happened, though she knew nothing positive about it. 
About midday, that is just three hours after the Prince's arrival in 
Mordasov, strange rumours were circulating about the town. No one 
knew where they had begun, but they spread instantly. All began 
assuring one another that Marya Alexandrovna had already made 
a match between the Prince and her Zina, her portionless, twenty­
three-year-old Zina; that Mozglyakov had been dismissed, and that 
it was all signed and settled. What was the cause of these rumours? 
Could it be that every one knew Marya Alexandrovna so well that 
they instantly hit on the very centre of her secret thoughts and ideals? 
Neither the incongruity of such a rumour with the usual order of 
things, for such affairs can very rarely be settled in an hour, nor the 
obvious lack of any foundation for the story, for no one could dis­
cover whence it had arisen, could shake the conviction of the people 
of Mordasov. The rumours grew and took root with extraordinary 
obstinacy. What is most remarkable is that they began to circulate 
at the very time when Marya Alexandrovna was beginning her con­
versation with Zina on that very subject. So sharp are the noses of the 
provincials! The instinct of provincial newsmongers sometimes ap­
proaches the miraculous, and of course there is some reason for it. 
It is founded on the closest and most interested study of one another, 
pursued through many years. Every provincial lives, as it were, under 
a glass case. There is no possibility of concealing anything from your 
excellent fellow-citizens. They know you by heart, they know even 
what you don't know about yourself. The provincial ought, one would 
think, by his very nature to be a psychologist and a specialist on human 
nature. That is why I have been sometimes genuinely amazed at meet­
ing in the provinces not psychologists and specialists on human nature, 
but a very great number of asses. But that is aside; that is a super­
fluous reflection. 
The news was like a thunderclap. A marriage with the Prince 

272 
The Short Novels of Vostoevsky 
appeared to every one so advantageous, so dazzling, that even the 
strangeness of the affair did not occur to any one. We will observe 
one other circumstance: Zina was almost more hated than Marya 
Alexandrovna-why ?-1 cannot tell. Possibly Zina's beauty may have 
been partly the reason. Perhaps the fact, too, that Marya Alexandrovna 
was anyway recognized as one of themselves by all the ladies of Morda­
sov, she was a berry off the same bush. If she had vanished from the 
town-who knows?-they might have regretted her. She enlivened 
their society by her goings-on. It would have been dull without her. 
Zina, on the contrary, behaved as if she were living in the clouds and 
not in Mordasov. She was somehow not on a level with these people, 
not their equal, and, possibly without being aware of it, behaved with 
insufferable haughtiness in their company! And now all of a sudden, 
that Zina, concerning whom there was a scandalous story, that proud, 
that haughty Zina was becoming a millionaire and a princess, was 
rising to rank and distinction. In a couple of years, when she would 
be a widow, she would marry a duke or maybe a general, who knows, 
perhaps a governor (and the Governor of Mordasov was, as luck 
would have it, a widower with a great weakness for the fair sex). 
Then she would be the lady of the greatest consequence in the prov­
ince, and of course the mere thought of that was insufferable, and 
no news could ever have aroused more indignation in Mordasov than 
the news of Zina's marrying the Prince. Instantly a furious outcry rose 
on all sides. People declared that it was wicked, positively vile; that 
the Prince was out of his mind; th:It the old man was being deceived, 
that they were taking advantage of his feeble-mindedness to deceive 
him, to dupe him, to cheat him; that the old man must be saved from 
their bloodthirsty claws; that it was robbery and immorality, and 
finally that other girls were just as good as Zina; and other girls might 
just as well marry the Prince. All these objections and opinions, Marya 
Alexandrovna, so far, only surmised, but that was enough for her. 
She knew for certain that every one, absolutely every one, was ready 
to do everything possible, and even impossible, to frustrate her de­
signs. Here they were trying to kidnap the Prince so that she would 
have to get him back by force. Besides, if she did succeed in catching 
the Prince and luring him back, she could not keep him for ever on 
the lead. Besides, who could guarantee that that day, within a couple 
of hours, the whole solemn conclave of Mordasov ladies would not be 
sitting in her drawing-room, would not call on her on some pretext 
which would make it impossible to refuse to see them. If they were 
refused admittance at the door, they would climb in at the window-

Uncle's 'Dream 
273 
a feat almost impossible, though it did happen in Mordasov. In short, 
there was not an hour, not a second, to be lost, and meanwhile nothing 
had yet been begun. All at once an idea that was a stroke of genius 
flashed upon Marya Alexandrovna's brain, and was instantly matured 
there. Of that new idea we shall not neglect to speak in its proper 
place. Here we will only say that at that moment, our heroine was 
dashing along the streets of Mordasov full of menace and inspiration, 
resolving even upon actual violence should it prove necessary in order 
to get the Prince back. She did not yet know how it would be done and 
where she would meet him, but she did know positively that Mordasov 
would sink into the earth sooner than one jot of her present plans 
should fail of accomplishment. 
Her first step could not have been more successful. She succeeded 
in waylaying the Prince in the street and taking him back to dinner. 
If I am asked how, in spite of all her enemies' devices, she managed 
to insist on getting her own way, so making Anna Nikolaevna look 
rather a fool-1 am bound to say that I regard such a question as insult­
ing to Marya Alexandrovna. Could she fail to triumph over any 
Anna Nikolaevna Antipov ? She simply stopped the Prince on his way 
to her rival's house, and in spite of everything (including the protests 
of Mozglyakov, who was afraid of a scandal) transferred the old 
gentleman to her sledge. It was this that distinguished Marya Alex­
androvna from her rivals, that on critical occasions she did not hesitate 
for fear of a scandal, taking as her motto that success justifies every­
thing. The Prince, of course, made no great resistance, and, as usual, 
quickly forgot all about it, and was highly delighted. At dinner he 
babbled away without ceasing, was exceedingly lively, made jokes and 
puns, began telling anecdotes which he did not finish, or jumped from 
one story to another without being aware of it. At Natalya Dmitry­
evna's he had drunk three glasses of champagne; at dinner he drank 
more, and was completely fuddled. Marya Alexandrovna herself kept 
filling up his glass. The dinner was a very good one. The monster 
Nikita had not spoilt it. The lady of the house enlivened the party 
with the most fascinating graciousness. But the others, as though of 
design, seemed extraordinarily depressed. Zina maintained a sort of 
solemn silence. Mozglyakov was evidently put out and ate little. He 
was absorbed in thought, and as that was very exceptional with him, 
Marya Alexandrovna felt very uneasy. Nastasya Petrovna sat glum, 
and actually made signs to Mozglyakov which the latter entirely 
failed to observe. Had it not been for the enchanting suavity and 
vivacity of the hostess, the dinner would have been like a funeral. 

274 
The Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
Yet Marya Alexandrovna was inexpressibly excited. Zina alarmed 
her dreadfully with her mournful air and tear-stained eyes. And 
another difficulty was that there was need of haste, of prompt 
action; and that "accursed Mozglyakov" sitting on like a blockhead, 
troubling about nothing, and simply in the way! It was, of course, 
impossible to begin on such a subject before him. Marya Alexandrovna 
rose from the table in terrible uneasiness. What was her amazement, 
her delighted horror, if one may use such an expression, when, as soon 
as they arose from the table, Mozglyakov came up to her and suddenly, 
quite unexpectedly, announced that-to his great regret, of course-he 
was absolutely forced to take leave of them at once. 
"\Vhere are you going?" Marya Alexandrovna asked, with a note 
of extreme regret. 
"Well, you see, Marya Alexandrovna," Mozglyakov began, with 
some uneasiness and even hesitation, "a very queer thing has happened 
to me. I really don't know how to tell you . . . .  For goodness' sake 
give me advice." 
"Why, what is it?" 
"My godfather Boroduev, the merchant, you know, met me to-day. 
The old fellow was quite huffy, he scolded me and said I had grown 
proud. This is the third time I have been in Mordasov without his 
having a glimpse of me. 'Come to tea to-day,' he said. It is four o'clock 
now, and he drinks tea in the old-fashioned way-when he wakes up. 
What am I to do? It is a bore of course, Marya Alexandrovna, but 
think. He saved my poor father from hanging, you know, when he 
gambled away the government money. It was owing to that that he 
stood godfather to me. If I am so happy as to marry Zinaida Afanas­
yevna I have only a hundred and fifty serfs, while he has a million, 
people say, even more. He is childless. Seventy, think of it! If one 
pleases him he may leave one a hundred thousand in his will." 
"Oh, my goodness! What are you about! Why are you delaying?" 
cried Marya Alexandrovna, scarcely concealing her relief. "Go to him, 
go to him! You must not let it slip. To be sure, I was noticing at 
dinner-you seemed so dull! Go, man ami, go. Why, you ought to 
have paid a call in the morning to show that you appreciate, that 
you value, his kindness. Ah, you young people, you young people!" 
"Why, Marya Alexandrovna," cried Mozglyakov in amazement, 
"you yourself attacked me for that acquaintance. Why, you said that 
he was a peasant with a great beard, connected with innkeepers, low­
class people and attorneys." 
"Oh! man ami! We say a great many thoughtless things. I may 

Uncle's 'Dream 
275 
make mistakes like any one else-I am not a saint. I don't remember, 
but I may have easily been in that mood . . . .  Besides, you were not 
at that time paying your addresses to Zina . . . .  Of course it is egoism 
on my part, but now I am forced to look at it from a different point 
of view, and what mother could blame me in the circumstances? Go, 
do not delay for a minute! Spend the evening with him too . . .  and, 
listen! Say something to him about me. Tell him that I have a great 
regard, a great liking, a respect for him; and do it tactfully, nicely! 
Oh, my goodness, why, it quite went out of my head! I ought to have 
thought to suggest it to you!" 
"You have quite reassured me, Marya Alexandrovna," Mozglyakov 
cried, enchanted. "I swear I will obey you in everything now! Why, I 
was simply afraid to tell you! . . .  Well, good-bye, I am off. Make 
my apologies to Zinaida Afanasyevna. Though I shall certainly . . .  " 
"I give you my blessing, mon ami. Be sure you speak of me to him! 
He certainly is a very dear old man. I changed my opinion of him long 
ago. Though, indeed, I have always liked in him all those old-fash­
ioned truly Russian ways of his . . . .  Au revoir, mon ami, au revoir!" 
"Oh, what a blessing that the devil has taken him off! No, it was 
the hand of God helping us!" she thought, breathless with joy. 
Pavel Alexandrovitch went out into the hall, and was putting on his 
fur coat when Nastasya Petrovna seemed suddenly to spring from 
nowhere. She was lying in wait for him. 
"Where are you going?" she said, holding him by the arm. 
"To see Boroduev, my godfather, Nastasya Petrovna, who graciously 
stood sponsor at my christening . . . .  He's a wealthy old man, he will 
leave me something, I must make up to him." 
Pavel Alexandrovitch was in the best of spirits. 
"To see Boroduev! Very well then, say good-bye to your bride," 
Nastasya Petrovna said, abruptly. 
"How do you mean good-bye?" 
"Why, what I say! You imagine she is yours already! While they 
are trying to marry her to the Prince. I have heard it myself." 
"To the Prince? Mercy on us, Nastasya Petrovna!" 
"Mercy on us, to be sure! Now wouldn't you like to look on and 
overhear? Put down your coat and come this way." 
Pavel Alexandrovitch, petrified, put down his fur coat and followed 
Nastasya Petrovna on tiptoe; she led him to the same little lumber­
room in which she had listened that morning. 
"But upon my word, Nastasya Petrovna, I really don't understand." 

276 
The Short 'l'{ove/s of Vostoevsky 
"Oh, wetl, you'll understand when you bend down and listen. The 
farce will begin at once, no doubt." 
"What farce?" 
"Shl don't speak so loud! The farce is that they are simply hoaxing 
you. This morning, when you had gone away with the Prince, Marya 
Alexandrovna was a whole hour persuading Zina to consent to marry 
this Prince; she said that nothing would be easier than to get round 
him and force him to get married, and she pitched such a fine tale 
that I felt quite sick. I overheard it all from here. Zina consented. 
How flattering they both were to you! They look upon you simply 
as a fool, and Zina said straight out that nothing would induce her to 
marry you. I am a fool, too! I meant to pin on a pink ribbon! Listen, 
now, listen!" 
"But I say, it's the most unholy treachery, if so!" whispered Pavel 
Alexandrovitch, looking into Nastasya Petrovna's face in the most 
foolish way. 
"Well, you only listen, and that's not all you'll hear." 
"But listen where?" 
"Why, stoop down here-to this keyhole 
.
.
•
.
 " 
"But Nastasya Petrovna . . .  I . . .  I am really not capable of listen­
ing at keyholes." 
"Pooh, it's a bit late to think of that. It's a case of putting your 
honour in your pocket; since you've come you had better listen!" 
"But really . . .  
" 
"If you are incapable of it, then be made a fool of! One takes pity 
on you and you give yourself airs. What is it to me? I am not doing 
it for my own sake. I shall be gone from here before evening!" 
Pavel Alexandrovitch, overcoming his scruples, stooped down to the 
keyhole. His heart was beating, there was a throbbing in his temples. 
He scarcely understood what was happening to him. 
Chapter 8 
So YOU had a very gay time at Natalya Dmitryevna's, Prince?" 
queried Marya Alexandrovna, surveying the field of the approaching 
conflict with a predatory eye, and desiring to begin the conversation 
as innocently as possible. Her heart was beating with excitement and 
anticipation. 
After dinner they had taken the Prince at once to the salon, in 

Uncle's Vream 
277 
which he had been received that morning. All solemn functions and 
receptions at Marya Alexandrovna's took place in this salon. She 
was proud of the room. The old man seemed rather limp after his 
six glasses of wine, and could hardly keep on his legs. But he chat­
tered away without ceasing. His garrulousness was only intensified. 
Marya Alexandrovna realized that this spurt of excitement was only 
momentary, and that her guest, heavy from his potations, would soon 
be drowsy. She must seize the moment. Scanning the field of battle, 
she noticed with satisfaction that the lascivious old man was fixing 
upon Zina glances of peculiar avidity, and her maternal heart fluttered 
with joy. 
"Ex-ceed-ing-ly gay," answered the Prince, "and you know Natalya 
Dmitryevna is an absolutely in-com-parable woman-in-com-parable!" 
Though Marya Alexandrovna was so absorbed in her great plans, 
yet such ringing praise of her rival stabbed her to the heart. 
"Upon my word, Prince," she cried, with flashing eyes. "I really 
don't know what to think if your Natalya Dmitryevna is an incom­
parable woman! You say that because you don't know our society, 
you don't know it at all! Why, it is a mere exhibition of fictitious 
qualities, of noble sentiments, a farce, an outer husk of gold. Remove 
that husk and you will find a perfect hell under the flowers; a perfect 
wasp's nest, where you will be devoured to the last bone!" 
"Is it possible!" exclaimed the Prince; "you surprise me!" 
"But I vow that it is so! Ah, mon prince. Do you know, Zina, I 
really ought to tell the Prince that absurd and undignified incident 
with N atalya Dmitryevna last week-do you remember? Yes, Prince 
-it is about your vaunted Natalya Dmitryevna, with whom you are 
so fascinJted. Oh, my dearest Prince! I vow I am not a scandalmonger! 
But I certainly must tell you this, simply to amuse you, to show you 
in a living instance, in a magnifying glass, so to speak, what people 
here are like. A fortnight ago Natalya Dmitryevna came to see me. 
Coffee was served, and I went out of the room for something. I re­
member perfectly well how much sugar there was in my silver sugar­
basin : it was quite full. I came back and looked: there were only 
three lumps lying at the bottom of the basin. No one had been left in 
the room but Natalya Dmitryevna. What do you say to that! She has 
a brick house of her own and heaps of money! It's an absurd, comical 
incident, but you can judge from that of the lofty tone of our society." 
"Is it pos-si-ble!" exclaimed the Prince, genuinely surprised. "What 
unnJtural greediness! Did she eat it all up alone?" 
"So you see what an incomparable woman she is, Prince! How do 

278 
'The Short Novels of Vostoevsky 
you like that disgraceful incident? I believe I should have died on the 
spot if I had brought myself to commit such a revolting action." 
"To be sure; to be sure . . . .  But, you know, she really is such a 
belle femme." 
"Natalya Dmitryevnal Upon my word, Prince, she is a perfect tub! 
Oh, Prince, Prince! What are you saying? I did expect better taste 
from you . . . .  " 
"To be sure, a tub . . .  only, you know, she is such a fine figure .
•
.
 
and that girl who da-anced, she is . . .  such a good figure too . . . .  " 
"Sonitchka ? But she is quite a child! She is only fourteen! "  
"To be sure . . .  only, you know, she is so agile and she has . . .  such 
contours . . .  too . . .  they are developing, such a cha-arm-ing girll And 
the other who da-anced with her, she is developing too . . . .  
" 
"Ah, that is a luckless orphan, Prince! She often stays with them." 
"An orph-an! She is a dirty girl, though, she might wash her hands, 
anyway . . . .  Though she was at-tra-active, too . . . .  
" 
As he said this the Prince scrutinized Zina through his lorgnette 
with a sort of growing avidity. 
"Mais quelle cllarmante personnel" he muttered in an undertone 
melting with gratification. 
"Zina, play us something, or, better still, sing! How she sings, Prince! 
She is equal to a professional, a professionall And if you only knew, 
Prince," Marya Alexandrovna went on in a low voice, when Zina had 
moved away to the piano with her soft swimming gait, which sent a 
thrill through the poor old m:m. "If only you knew what a daughter 
she is! \Vhat a loving nature she h:1s, how tender she is with me! 
What feeling, what heart!" 
"To be sure . . .  feeling . . .  and do you know, I have only known 
one wom:Jn in my life who could be compared with her for beau-uty," 
the Prince interrupted, with his mouth watering. "That was Countess 
Nainsky, she died thirty years ago. A most fas-ci-nating woman she 
was, an indescribable beauty, afterwards she married her cook . . . .  
" 
"Her cook, prince!" 
"To be sure, her cook . . .  a Frenchman, abroad. She got a count's 
title for him abroad. He was a good-looking man, extremely well 
educated, with little mous-taches like this." 
"And . . .  and . . .  how did they get on together, Prince?" 
"To be sure, they got on very well together. Though they separated 
soon afterwards. He robbed her and went off. They quarrelled about 
some sauce . . . . 
" 
"Mamma, what shall I play?" asked Zina. 

Uncle's 1Jream 
279 
"You had better sing us something, Zina. How she smgs, Prince! 
Are you fond of music?" 
"Oh, ye-es! Cllarmant, cllarmant! I am very fond of music. I used to 
know Beethoven when I was abroad." 
"Beethoven! Only fancy, Zina, the Prince used to know Beethoven," 
Marya Alexandrovna cried rapturously. "Oh, Prince, did you really 
know Beethoven?" 
"To be sure .
•
.
 we were quite fri-ends, and he always had his nose 
in the snuff-box. Such a funny fellow." 
"Beethoven!" 
"To be sure, Beethoven, but perhaps it was not Beet-hoven, though, 
but some other Ger-man. There are such a lot of Germans out there 
. . .  I believe I have mix-ed them up." 
"What am I to sing, Mamma?" asked Zina. 
"Oh, Zina! Sing that song in which there is so much chivalry, the 
one in which there is the lady of the castle and her troubadour 
.
.
.
•
 
Oh, Prince! How I love all that age of chivalry! Those castles, those 
castles! That mediaeval life. Those troubadours, heralds, tournaments 
• 
. . . I will accompany you, Zina. Come here closer, Prince! Ah, those 
castles, those castles!" 
"To be sure . . .  those castles. I love castles too," muttered the Prince 
rapturously, transfixing Zina with his solitary eye. "But . . .  my good­
ness!" he exclaimed, "that so-ong, why, I know that so-ong! I heard 
that song long ago . . . .  It brings back such memories . . . .  Ah, my 
goodness!" 
I will not undertake to describe what happened to the Prince while 
Zina was singing. She sang an old French song, which had once been 
in fashion. Zina sang it beautifully. Her pure resonant contralto went 
straight to the heart. Her lovely face, her wonderful eyes, the won­
derful delicately moulded fingers with which she turned the music, 
her thick brilliant black hair, her heaving bosom, her whole figure, 
proud, lovely, noble, all this bewitched the poor old man completely. 
He did not take his eyes off her while she was singing, he gasped 
with emotion. His aged heart, warmed by the champagne, the 
music, and rising memories (what man has not favourite memories?), 
was throbbing faster and faster, as it had not beat for ages . . . .  He 
was ready to fall on his knees before Zina, and was almost weeping 
when she finished. 
"0, ma cllarmant® enfant!" he cried, kissing her fingers, "vous me 
ravissez! Only just now, just now I remembered . . .  But . . .  but •
•
•
 
0, ma cllarmante ®nfant . . . .  " 

280 
The Short Novels of Vostoevsky 
And the Prince could not go on. 
Marya Alexandrovna felt that her moment had come. 
"Why are you wasting your life, Prince?" she exclaimed solemnly. 
"\Vhat feeling, what vital energy, what spiritual riches, and to bury 
yourself for your whole life in solitude! To run away from people, 
from your friends! But it is unpardonable! Think better of it, Prince! 
Look at life, so to speak, with a fresh eye! Evoke from your heart your 
memories of the past-the memories of your golden youth, of those 
golden days free from care; bring them back to life, restore yourself 
to life! Begin to live again in society among your fellows! Go abroad, 
go to Italy, to Spain-to Spain, Prin.:e! . . .  You want some one to 
guide you, a heart that would love you, that would honour you and 
feel with you. But you have friends! Summon them, call them to you 
and they will flock in crowds to your side! I would be the first to 
throw up everything and fly at your summons. I remember our friend­
ship, Prince; I would abandon my husband and follow you . . . and, 
indeed, if I were younger, if I were as good and as lovely as my daugh­
ter, I would be your travelling companion, your friend, your wife, if 
that was your wish." 
"And I am sure you were une charmante personne in your da-ay," 
said the Prince, blowing his nose. His eyes were moist with tears. 
"\Ve live again in our children, Prince," Marya Alexandrovna an­
swered, with lofty feeling. "1, too, have my guardian angel! And that 
is my daughter, the friend of my heart, the partner of my thoughts, 
Prince. She has already refused seven offers, unwilling to part from 
me. 
" 
"So she would come with you when you ac-mm-pan-y me abroad? 
In that case I will certainly go abroad," cried the Prince, growing more 
animated. "I will cer-er-tain-ly go! And if I might flatter myself with 
the ho-ope . . . .  But she is a fascinating, faS<i-na-ting child! 0, ma 
cha,-mante enfant! .
. . " and the Prince began kissing her hand again. 
The poor man would have liked to drop on his knees before her. 
"But . . .  but, Prince, you say: can you flatter yourself with hope?" 
Marya Alexandrovna caught him up, conscious of a fresh rush of elo­
quence. "But you are strange, Prince. Can you consider yourself un­
worthy of a woman's devotion? It is not youth that makes a man 
handsome. Remember, that you, so to speak, are a scion of the old 
aristocracy. You are the embodiment of the most refined, the most 
chivalrous sentiments and . . .  manners! Did not Maria love Mazeppa 
in his old age? I remember, I have read that Lauzun, that enchanting 
marquis at the court of Louis the . . .  I have forgotten which, in his 

Uncle's 7Jream 
281 
declining years, when he was an old man, won the heart of one of the 
leading court beauties! . . .  And who has told you that you are old? 
Who has instilled that idea into you? Men like you do not grow old! 
You, with such wealth of feeling, of gaiety, of wit, of vital energy, of 
brilliant manners! Only show yourself at some spa abroad with a 
young wife, as beautiful as my Zina, for instance-! am not speaking 
of her, I only mention her for example-and you will see what a 
colossal sensation it will make! You a scion of the aristocracy, she­
a queen of beauty! You will walk with her on your arm in triumph; 
she will sing in brilliant society, you, for your part, will scintillate with 
wit-and all the visitors at the spa will flock to look at you! All Europe 
will be ringing with your name, for all the newspapers, all the feuille­
tons at the watering-places, will tell the same story . . . .  " 
"The feuilletons . .
. . Oh, ye-es; oh, ye-es. That's in the newspapers . 
. . . " muttered the Prince, not understanding half Marya Alexandrovna's 
babble, and growing more and more limp every moment. "But . . .  my 
chi-ild, if you are not ti-ired, sing that song you sang just now, once 
more." 
"Oh, Prince! But she has other songs better still. . . .  Do you remem 
ber L'Hirondel/e, Prince? No doubt you have heard it?" 
"Yes, I remember, or, rather, I have forgotten it. No, no; the samԳ 
so-ong as be-fore, the same that she sang just now! I don't want 
L'Hirondelle! I want the same song . . . .  " said the Prince, entreating 
like a child. 
Zina sang it over again. The Prince could not restrain himself, and 
sank on his knees before her. 
"0, ma belle chatelaine!" he cried, in a voice quavering with age and 
excitement. "0, ma clzarmante clzatelaine! Oh, my sweet child! You 
have re-min-ded me of so much . . .  of what was in the distant past . 
. . . I thought then that everything would be better than it was after­
wards. In those days I used to sing duets . . .  with the vicomtesse .
•
.
 
that very song . . .  and now .
.
•
 I don't know what now . . . .  
" 
All this speech the Prince uttered breathless and gasping. His tongue 
was perceptibly faltering. Some words were almost impossible to 
understand. It could only be seen that he was in an extremely maudlin 
state; Marya Alexandrovna promptly threw oil on the flames. 
"Prince! But perhaps you are falling in love with my Zina!" she cried, 
feeling that it was a solemn moment. 
The Prince's answer surpassed her highest expectations. 
"I am madly in love with her," cried the old man, suddenly reviving, 
still on his knees and trembling all over with excitement. "I am ready 

282 
'I he Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
to devote my life to her, and if I could only ho-ope . . . .  But lift me up, 
I feel ra-ather we-eak . . . .  I . . .  if I could only hope to offer her my 
heart, then . . .  I . . .  she would sing me so-ongs eve-ry day, and I could 
always look at her . . . always look at her . . . .  Oh, my goodness!" 
"Prince, Prince! You offer her your hand! You want to rob me of 
my Zina, my darling, my angel, Zina! But I will not let you go, Zina! 
You will have to tear her from my arms, from the arms of her mother!" 
Marya Alexandrovna rushed at her daughter and folded her tightly 
in her arms, though she was conscious of being somewhat violently 
repulsed . . . .  The mamma was rather overdoing it. Zina felt that in 
every fibre of her being, and looked on at the farce with indescribable 
disgust. She was silent, however, and that was all Marya Alexandrovna 
wanted. 
"She has refused nine offers, simply to avoid being parted from her 
mother!" she cried. "But now, my heart forebodes separation! This 
morning I noticed how she looked at you. . . . You impressed her 
with your aristocratic ways, Prince, with that refinement! . . .  Oh! 
you are parting us; I have a presentiment of it." 
"I ado-ore her!" muttered the Prince, still quivering like an aspen leaf. 
"And so you will forsake your mother?" exclaimed Marya Alexan­
drovna, dashing at her daughter once again. 
Zina was in haste to put an end to the painful scene. She held out 
her lovely hand to the Prince, and even forced herself to smile. The 
Prince took the hand with reverence and covered it with kisses. 
"Only now, I be-gin to live," he muttered, gasping with ecstasy. 
"Zina," Marya Alexandrovna pronounced solemnly. "Look at this 
man! He is the noblest, the most honourable of all the men I know! 
He is a mediaeval knight! But she knows that, Prince; she knows it to 
my sorrow . . . .  Oh, why did you come! I am giving you my treasure, 
my angel. Take care of her, Prince! That is the earnest prayer of a 
mother, and what mother will censure me for my sorrow!" 
"Mamma, that is enough!" whispered Zina. 
"You will protect her from insult, Prince. Your sword will flash in 
the face of any slanderer or backbiter who dare malign my Zina!" 
"That is enough, Mamma, or I'll . . .  " 
"Ye-es, ye-es, it will flash . . . . " muttered the Prince. "Only now I 
begin to live . . . .  I want the wedding to be at once, this minute . . .  I 
. .
. I want to send to Du-ha-no-vo at once. I have di-a-monds there. I 
want to lay them at her feet." 
"What fire, what fervour! What nobility of feeling!" exclaimed 
Marya Alexandrovna. "And you could waste yourself, waste yourself, 

Uncle's 'Dream 
283 
withdrawing from the world! I shall say that a thousand times over! 
I am beside myself when I think of that diabolical . . .  " 
"How co-ould I help it, I was so fri-ightened!" muttert'd the Prince, 
whimpering and growing maudlin. "They wa-an-ted to put me in a 
ma-adhouse . . . .  I was frightened." 
"In a madhouse! Oh, the monsters! Oh, the inhuman creatures! Oh, 
the base treachery! Prince, I had heard that. But that was insanity on 
the part of those people! What for, whatever for?" 
"I don't know myself, what for!" answered the old man, feeling 
weak, and sitting down in an easy chair. "I was at a ba-all, you know, 
and I to-old some anecdote; and they did not li-ike it. And so there 
was a fuss." 
"Really only for that, Prince?" 
"No. I played cards afterwards with Prince Pyotr Dementi-itch. I 
couldn't make any tricks. I had two ki-ings and three queens . . .  or, 
rather, three queens and two ki-ings 
.
.
•
.
 No; one ki-ing! And after­
wards I had the queens . . .  
" 
"And for that! For that! Oh, the fiendish inhumanity! You are 
weeping, Prince! But now that will not happen again! Now I shall be 
at your side, my Prince; I shall not part from Zina, and we shall see 
if they dare to say a word! . . .  And indeed you know, Prince, your 
marriage will impress them. It will put them to shame! They will see 
that you are still quite competent . . .  that is, they will realize that such 
a beauty would not have married a madman! Now you can hold up 
your head proudly. You can look them straight in the face . . . .  
" 
"Oh, ye-es; I will look them stra-aight in the face," muttered the 
Prince, closing his eyes. 
"He's nearly asleep, though," thought Marya Alexandrovna; "it is 
merely wasting words." 
"Prince, you are agitated, I see that; you absolutely must be quiet; 
rest after your emotion," she said, bending over him maternally. 
"Oh, ye-es; I should like to li-ie down a little," he said. 
"Yes, yes! Calm yourself, Prince! This agitation. . . . Stay, I will 
accompany you myself . . . .  I will put you to bed myself, if need be. 
Why are you looking at that portrait, Prince? It is the portrait of my 
mother, an angel, not a woman! Oh, why is she not with us now! 
She was a saintly woman, Prince, a saintly woman! I can call her 
nothing else." 
"A sa-aintly woman? C'e.rt joli .
.
. . I had a mother too •
•
.
 princesse 
.
•
.
 and only fancy, she was an ex-tra-or-din-arily fat woman 
.
.
•
.
 But 
that wasn't what I meant to say . . . .  I am a lit-tle tired. Adieu, rna 

284 
The Short N.ovds of 'DostoevskY 
charmante enfant! . . .  I . . .  de-ligh-ted •
.
.
 to-day . . .  to-morrow .
•
.
 
But no ma-atterl au revoir, au revoir!" At this point he tried to wave 
a kiss, but slipped and almost fell down in the doorway. 
"Take care, Prince! Lean on my arm," cried Marya Alexandrovna. 
"Charmant, charmant!" he muttered as he went out. "Only now I 
am be-gin-ning to live!" 
Zina was left alone; unutterable bitterness weighed upon her heart. 
She felt sick with repulsion. She was ready to despise herself. Her 
cheeks were burning. Clenching her fists and setting her teeth, she 
stood motionless with bowed head. Tears of shame gushed from her 
eyes . . . .  At that moment the door opened and Mozglyakov ran into 
the room. 
Chapter 9 
HE HAD heard all, all! 
He did not walk into the room, but actually ran in, pale with emo­
tion and with fury. Zina gazed at him in amazement. 
"So that's how it is," he shouted, panting. "At last I have found out 
what you are!" 
"\Vhat I am!" repeated Zina, staring at him as though he were mad; 
and all at once her eyes flashed with anger. "How dare you speak like 
that to me?" she cried, going up to him. 
"I have heard it all!" Mozglyakov repeated solemnly, though he 
involuntarily dn.:w back a step. 
"You heard? You've been listening," said Zina, looking at him 
disdainfully. 
"Yes! I've been listening. Yes, I brought myself to do a low thing, 
but I learned what you are, the most . . .  I don't know what words 
to use to tell you . . .  what you have shown yourself to be!" he an­
swered, quailing more and more before Zina's eyes. 
"If you have heard, what can you blame me for? What right have 
you to blame me? \Vhat right have you to speak so rudely to me?" 
"I? What right have I? And you can ask that? You are going to 
marry the Prince, and I have no right! . . . Why, you gave me your 
word!" 
"When?" 
"How can you ask when?" 

Uncle's 'Dream 
285 
"\Vhy, only this morning, when you were pestering me, I told you 
straight out that I could say nothing positive." 
"But you did not drive me away, you did not refuse me altogether. 
So you were keeping me in reserve! So you were drawing me on!" 
A look of suffering as though from an acute, piercing, internal pain 
came into Zina's irritated face; but she mastered her feeling. 
"That I did not drive you away," she said, clearly and emphatically, 
though there was a scarcely perceptible quiver in her voice, "was solely 
through pity. You implored me yourself to take time, not to say 'no,' 
but to get to know you better, and 'then,' you said, 'then, when you are 
convinced that I am an honourable man, perhaps you will not refuse 
me.' Those were your own words when first you pressed your suit. 
You cannot draw back from them. You had the insolence to say just 
now that I drew you on. But you saw yourself my aversion when I met 
you to-day, a fortnight earlier than you promised. That aversion I did 
not conceal from you; on the contrary, I displayed it. You noticed it 
yourself, for you asked me whether I was angry with you for coming 
back sooner. You know one is not drawing a man on if one cannot 
and does not care to conceal one's aversion. You have had the insolencԴ 
to say that I was keeping you in reserve. To that I will answer, that 
what I thought about you was, 'though he is not endowed with very 
much intelligence, he may yet be a good man, and so one might marry 
him.' But now I am convinced, to my relief, that you are a fool, and 
what's more, an ill-natured fool. I have only now to wish you every 
happiness and bon voyage. Good-bye!" 
Saying this, Zina turned from him and walked slowly towards the 
door. 
Mozglyakov, guessing that all was lost, boiled with rage. 
"Ah, so I am a fool," he cried, "so now I am a fool! Very well! 
Good-bye. But before I go away I'll tell the whole town how you and 
your mamma have tricked the old Prince, after making him drunk! 
I'll tell every one! I'll show you what Mozglyakov can do!" 
Zina shuddered, and was stopping to answer; but after a moment's 
thought, she merely shrugged her shoulders contemptuously, and 
slammed the door after her. 
At that moment Marya Alexandrovna appeared in the doorway. She 
had heard Mozglyakov's exclamation, in an instant guessed what it 
meant and shuddered with alarm. Mozglyakov had not gone yet, 
Mozglyakov near the Prince, Mozglyakov would spread it all over the 
town, and secrecy for a short time at least was essential! Marya Alex­
androvna had her own calculations. She instantly grasped the situation. 

286 
The Short Novels of 7Jostoevsky 
and the plan for subduing Mozglyakov was already formed. 
"What is the matter, mon ami?" she said, going up to him and 
holding out her hand affectionately. 
"What? mon ami!" he cried furiously. "After what you have been 
plotting, you call me mon ami! You don't catch me, honoured madame! 
And do you suppose you can deceive me again?" 
"I am grieved, very much grieved to see you in such a strange state 
of mind, Pavel Alexandrovitch. What an expression to use! You do 
not even curb your language before a lady." 
"Before a lady! You . . .  you may be anything you like, but not a 
lady!" cried Mozglyakov. 
I don't know what he meant to express by this exclamation, but 
probably something very tremendous. 
Marya Alexandrovna looked blandly into his face. 
"Sit down," she said mournfully, motioning him to the chair on 
which a quarter of an hour before the Prince had been reposing. 
"But, do listen, Marya Alexandrovna!" cried Mozglyakov in per­
plexity. "You look at me as though you were not to blame in any way, 
but as though I had treated you badly! You can't go on like that, you 
know! . . .  Such a tone! . . . Why, it is beyond all human endurance . 
• . . Do you know that?" 
"My friend!" answered Marya Alexandrovna, "you must still allow 
me to call you that, for you have no better friend than I; my friend! 
You are unhappy, you are distressed, you are wounded to the heart­
and so it is not to be wondered at that you speak to me in such a tone. 
But I am resolved to reveal to you everything, to open my whole heart, 
the more readily as I feel myself somewhat to blame in regard to you. 
Sit down, let us talk." 
There was a sickly softness in Marya Alexandrovna's voice. There 
was a look of suffering in her face. Mozglyakov, astounded, sat down 
in an easy chair beside her. 
"You have been listening?" she said, looking reproachfully into his 
face. 
"Yes, I have been listening! If I hadn't listened I should have been 
a duffer. Anyway, I have found out all that you were plotting against 
me," Mozglyakov answered rudely, growing bolder and working 
himself into a passion. 
"And you, you, with your breeding, with your principles, could 
bring yourself to such an action? Oh, good heavens!" 
Mozglyakov positively jumped up from his chair. 
"But, Marya Alexandrovna!" he cried, "it is insufferable to listen 

Uncle's 'Dream 
287 
to this! Think what you have brought yourself to do with your princi­
ples, and then you judge other people!" 
"Another question," she said, without answering him. "Who put 
you up to listening, who told you, who is the spy here? That's what 
I want to know." 
"Excuse me, but I won't tell you that." 
"Very well, I shall find out for myself. I said, Paul, that I had treated 
you badly. But if you go into it all, into all the circumstances, you will 
see that, even if I am to blame, it is solely through a desire for your 
good." 
"Mine? My good? That is beyond everything! I warn you, you won't 
delude me again! I am not such a child as that." 
And he writhed in the arm-chair with such violence that it creaked. 
"Please, my dear boy, keep cool, if you can. Listen to me attentively, 
and you will agree with everything yourself. To begin with, I intended 
to tell you about it at once, everything, everything, and you would 
have heard the whole business from me in the fullest details, without 
demeaning yourself to listen. That I did not explain it to you before 
was simply because it was only a project. It might not have come off. 
You see, I am being perfectly open with you. Secondly, do not blame 
my daughter. She loves you madly, and it cost me incredible effort to 
draw her away from you, and to induce her to consent to accept the 
Prince." 
"I have just had the happiness to receive the fullest proof of that mad 
love," Mozglyakov pronounced ironically. 
"Very good. But how were you speaking to her? Was that the way 
that a lover should speak? Was that the way, indeed, for a well-bred 
man to speak? You wounded and irritated her!" 
"It is not a question of breeding now, Marya Alexandrovna. And 
this morning, after you had both treated me to such honeyed looks, I 
went off with the Prince and you blackguarded me behind my back! 
You called me names-let me tell you that. I know all about it, I 
know!" 
"And no doubt from the same foul source?" said Marya Alexan­
drovna, with a contemptuous smile. "Yes, Pavel Alexandrovitch, I did 
disparage you, I did talk against you, and I must confess I had a hard 
struggle. But the very fact that I had to abuse you to her, even to 
slander you, that very fact proves how hard it was for me to extort 
her consent to abandon you! You short-sighted man! If she did not 
care for you, would there have been any need for me to blacken your 
character, to put you in an undignified and ridiculous light, to resort 

288 
'I he Short Novels of 'DostoevskY 
to such extreme measures? But you do not know everything yet! I had 
to use my maternal authority to eradicate you from her heart, and 
after incredible efforts I wrung from her only the appearance of agree­
ment. If you were listening just now you must have noticed that she 
did not support me with the Prince, by one word, one gesture. Through­
out the whole scene she scarcely uttered a single word: she sang like 
an automaton. Her whole soul was aching with despondency, and it 
was from pity for her that, at last, I got the Prince away. I am sure that 
she wept as soon as she was alone. When you came in here you must 
have noticed her tears." 
Mozglyakov did, in fact, remember that when he ran into the room 
he had noticed that Zina was in tears. 
"But you, you, why were you against me, Marya Alexandrovna?" 
he cried. "Why did you blacken my character? Why did you slander 
me, as you yourself confess you did!" 
"Ah, that is a different matter. If you had asked that question sensi­
bly in the beginning, you would have had an answer to it long ago. 
Yes, you are right! It has all been my doing, and only mine. Don't 
mix Zina up in it. What was my object? I answer, in the first place, 
it was for Zina's sake. The Prince is a man of rank and fortune, he 
has connections, and marrying him, Zina would make a splendid 
match. Besides, if he dies, perhaps before long, indeed, for we are all 
more or less mortal, then Zina will be a young widow, a princess, in 
the highest society, and perhaps very wealthy. Then she can marry any 
one she likes; she would be able to make a still wealthier match. But 
of course she will marry the man she loves, the man she loved before, 
whose heart she wounded by marrying the Prince. Remorse alone 
would force her to atone for her treatment of the man she loved 
before." 
"Hm!" mumbled Mozglyakov, looking thoughtfully at his boots. 
"And the second thing is, and I will only mention it briefly," Marya 
Alexandrovna went on, "for perhaps you will not understand it. You 
read your Shakespeare, and draw all your lofty sentiments from him, 
but in real life, though you are very good, you are too young and I am 
a mother, Pavel Alexandrovitch. Listen: I am giving Zina to the Prince 
partly for his sake, to save him by this marriage. I loved that noble, 
most kindly, chivalrously honourable old man in the past. We were 
friends. He is unhappy in the claws of that hellish woman. She will 
bring him to his grave. God is my witness that I only persuaded Zina 
to consent to marry the Prince by putting before her all the greatness 
of her heroic self-sacrifice. She was carried away by the nobility of her 

Uncle's 1Jream 
289 
feelings, by the fascination of an act of sacrifice. There is something 
chivalrous in her, too. I put before her what a lofty Christian act it 
was to be the prop, the comfort, the friend, the child, the lovely idol 
of one who has perhaps but one year yet to live. No hateful woman, 
no terror, no despondency should be about him in the last days of his 
life, but brightness, affection, love. These last declining days would 
seem like Paradise to him! Where is the egoism in that? Tell me, 
pray. It is more like the noble deed of a Sister of Mercy than egoism!" 
"So you are doing this simply for the sake of the old Prince, simply 
as the sacrifice of a Sister of Mercy?" muttered Mozglyakov in an 
ironical voice. 
"I understand that question, Pavel Alexandrovitch, it is clear enough. 
You imagine, perhaps, that the interests of the Prince are jesuitically 
intertwined with our own advantage? Well? Possibly those considera­
tions were present in my brain, only they were not jesuitical, but 
unconscious. I know that you will be amazed at so open a confession, 
but one thing I do beg of you, Pavel Alexandrovitch: don't mix Zina 
up in that! She is pure as a dove; she is not calculating; she is capable 
of nothing but love, my sweet child! If any one has been calculating, it 
is I, and I alone! But in the first place, search your own conscience 
sternly, and tell me: who would not calculate in my position, in a case 
like this? We consider our interests even in the most magnanimous, 
even in the most disinterested of our actions, inevitably, involuntarily 
we consider them. No doubt we all deceive ourselves when we assure 
ourselves that we are acting solely from noble motives. I don't want 
to deceive myself; I admit that for all the purity of my motives I was 
calculating. But ask yourself, am I interested on my own behalf? I 
want nothmg, Pavel Alexandrovitch, I have lived my life. I am 
calculating for her sake, for the sake of my angel, for my child, and­
what mother can blame me for it?" 
Tears glistened in Marya Alexandrovna's eyes. Pavel Alexandrov­
itch listened in astonishment to this candid confession, and blinked 
incredulously. 
"Well, yes, what mother would?" he said at last. "You pitch a fine 
tale, Marya Alexandrovna, but . . .  but, you know, you gave me your 
word! You gave me hopes . . . .  How about me? Only think! You've 
made me look a pretty fool, haven't you?" 
"But surely you don't imagine that I haven't thought of you, mon 
cher Paul; the advantage for you in all this was so immense, that it 
was that, indeed, that chiefly impelled me to undertake it all." 

290 
The Short N.otJels of 'DostoetJsk,y 
"Advantage for me!" cried Mozglyakov, completely dumbfounded 
this time. "How so?" 
"My goodness! Can any one be so simple and short-sighted!" cried 
Marya Alexandrovna, turning up her eyes to the ceiling. "Oh, youth! 
youth! That is what comes of burying oneself in that Shakespeare, 
of dreaming, and of imagining that one is thinking for oneself when 
one is following the thoughts and the mind of others! You ask, my 
good Pavel Alexandrovitch, where your advantage is to be found in 
it. Allow me, for the sake of clearness, to make a digression. Zina loves 
you-that is beyond doubt! But I have noticed that, in spite of her 
obvious feeling for you, she has a secret lack of confidence in you, 
in your good feelings, in your propensities. I have noticed that at 
times she behaves to you, as it were intentionally, with coldness, the 
result of uncertainty and lack of confidence. Have you noticed that 
yourself, Pavel Alexandrovitch?" 
"I have noticed it, and to-day indeed 
.
.
•
.
 But what do you mean 
to say, Marya Alexandrovna?" 
"There, you see you have noticed it yourself. So I was not mistaken, 
then. She has a strange lack of confidence in the stability of your 
character. I am a mother-and is it not for me to divine the secrets of 
my child's heart? Imagine now that instead of rushing into the room 
with reproaches, and even with abuse, irritating her, wounding and 
insulting her in her purity, her goodness and her pride, and so un­
wittingly confirming her suspicions of your evil propensities-imagine 
that you had accepted it all mildly, with tears of regret, perhaps, even, 
of despair, but with lofty nobility of feeling . . .  " 
"Hml . . .  " 
"No, do not interrupt me, Pavel Alexandrovitch. I want to paint 
the whole picture which will strike your imagination. Imagine that 
you had gone to her and said: 'Zinaida! I love you more than life 
itself, but family reasons divide us. I understand those reasons. They 
are for your happiness, and I do not venture to rebel against them, 
Zinaida! I forgive you. Be happy if you can!' And at that point you 
would fix your gaze upon her, the gaze of a lamb at the sacrifice, if 
I may so express myself-imagine all that and only think what effect 
such words would have had on her heart!" 
"Yes, Marya Alexandrovna, let us suppose all that; I understand 
all that . . . .  But after all, if I had said all that I should have gained 
nothing by it." 
"No, no, no, my dear! Don't interrupt me. I want to picture the 
scene in every detail that it may make the right impression on you. 

Uncle's 'Dream 
291 
Imagine that you meet her again a little later in the highest society; 
meet her at some ball, in a brilliantly lighted room, to the intoxicating 
strains of music, in the midst of magnificent women, and in the midst 
of this gay festival you alone mournful, melancholy, pale, leaning 
somewhere against a column (but so that you can be seen), watch her 
in the whirl of the ball. She dances. Around you flow the intoxicating 
strains of Strauss and the scintillating wit of the highest society­
while you stand alone, pale and crushed by your passion. What will 
Zinaida feel then, do you suppose? With what eyes will she look at 
you. 'And 1,' she will think, 'I doubted of that man who has sacrificed 
for me all-all, and has rent his heart for my sake.' Her old love would, 
of course, rise up again with irresistible force." 
Marya Alexandrovna stopped to take breath. Mozglyakov wriggled 
in his easy-chair with such violence that it creaked again. Marya 
Alexandrovna went on: 
"For the prince's health Zina will go abroad, to Italy, to Spain-to 
Spain where there are myrtles, lemons, where the sky is blue, where 
there is the Guadalquivir; the land of love, where one cannot live 
without loving: the land of roses, where kisses, so to speak, float in the 
air. You will follow her there; you will sacrifice your past in the service, 
your connections, everything. There your love will begin with irre­
sistible force; love, youth! Spain-my God! Your love of course is 
untainted, holy; though you will languish gazing at one another. 
You understand me, mon ami! Of course there will be base, treacher­
ous people, monsters who will declare that you have not been tempted 
abroad by family feeling for a suffering old relation. I have purposely 
called your love untainted, because such people will perhaps give it a 
very different significance. But I am a mother, Pavel Alexandrovitch, 
and am I likely to lead you astray! . . .  Of course the Prince will not 
be in a condition to look after you both, but-what of that? Could 
such an abominable calumny be based on that? At last he will die, 
blessing his fate. Tell me: whom would Zina marry if not you? You 
are such a distant relation of the Prince's that that can be no hindrance 
to your marriage. You will wed her, young, wealthy, distinguished, 
and, only think!-when the grandest of our noblemen would be proud 
to marry her. Through her you will gain a footing in the highest circles 
of society, through her you will gain the highest rank and position. 
Now you have a hundred and fifty serfs, but then you will be rich; 
the Prince will arrange everything in his will. I will see to that. And, 
lastly and most important, she will have gained complete confidence 
in you, in your heart, in your feelings, and you will become in her eyes 

292 
The Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
a hero of goodness and self-sacrifice! . . .  And after that you ask where 
your advantage comes in? Why, you must be blind not to reflect, not 
to consider that advantage, when it stands not two steps from you, 
staring you in the face, smiling at you and crying out to you: 'Here 
I am, your advantage!' Pavel Alexandrovitch, upon my word!" 
"Marya Alexandrovna!" cried Mozglyakov in extraordinary excite­
ment, "now I understand it all. I have behaved coarsely, basely and 
caddishly!" 
He leapt up from his seat and clutched his hair. 
"And unreflectingly," added Marya Alexandrovna. "Above all, 
unreflectingly!" 
"I am an ass, Marya Alexandrovna!" he cried, almost in despair. 
"Now all is lost, because I loved her so madly." 
"Perhaps all is not lost," said Madame Moskalev softly, as though 
pondering something. 
"Oh, if that were possible! Help me! Teach me! Save me!" 
And Mozglyakov burst into tears. 
"My dear!" said Marya Alexandrovna with commiseration, giving 
him her hand, "you have acted from excess of ardour, from the fervour 
of your passion, that is, from love for her! You were in despair, you 
did not know what you were doing! She ought to understand ali 
that . . . .  " 
"I love her to madness, and am ready to sacrifice anything to her!" 
cried Mozglyakov. 
"I tell you what, I will set you right with her . . . .  " 
"Marya Alexandrovna?" 
"Yes, I will undertake to do that! I will bring you together. You 
must tell her everything-everything as I have told it you, just now." 
"Oh, God! How kind you are, Marya Alexandrovna! But . . .  would 
it be impossible to do it at once?" 
"God forbid! Oh, how inexperienced you are, my dear! She is so 
proud. She will take this as a fresh insult, as insolence! To-morrow 
I will arrange it all; but now go away, to see that merchant, for in­
stance . . .  come in the evening, perhaps, but I would not advise you to." 
"I will go away, I will! My God! You bring me back to life! But 
one more question. What if the Prince doesn't die so soon?" 
"Oh, my God! how na'ive you are, mon cher Paul. On the contrary, 
you must pray for his health. We must, with all our hearts, hope for 
lԵngth of days for that dear, kind, chivalrously honourable old man. 
I shall be the first to pray, night and day, with tears in my eyes, for 
my daughter's happiness. But, alas! I fear the Prince's health is hope-

Uncle's 'Dream 
293 
less. Moreover, he will have now to visit Petersburg, to take Zina into 
society. I fear, oh, I fear that this may be too much for him! But we 
will pray for the best, cher Paul, and the rest is-in God's Hands! •
.
•
 
You are going now? I bless you, mon ami! Hope, be patient, be manly 
above all things, be manly! I never doubted the nobility of your 
sentiments . . . .  " 
She pressed his hand warmly, and Mozglyakov walked out of the 
room on tiptoe. 
"Well, I have got rid of one fool!" she said triumphantly. "There 
are others left . . . .  
" 
The door opened and Zina came in. She was paler than usual. Her 
eyes were flashing. 
"Mamma," she said, "finish it quickly or I can't endure it! It's all so 
vile and nasty that I am ready to run out of the house. Don't torture 
me, don "t irritate me! I feel sick-do you hear ?-sick of all this filth!" 
"Zina! What is the matter with you, my angel? You . . .  you have 
been listening!" cried Marya Alexandrovna, looking intently and 
uneasily at Zina. 
"Yes, I have been listening. Do you want to put me to shame as you 
did that fool? Listen, I swear that if you go on torturing me like this, 
and assign to me all sorts of low parts in this low farce, I will throw 
it all up and make an end of it at one blow. It is enough that I have 
brought myself to do the vile thing that is most important. But . .  
I did not know myself! I shall be stifled in this filth." 
And she went out, slamming the door. 
Marya Alexandrovna gazed after her and pondered. 
"Haste! haste!" she cried, starting. "She is the chief trouble, the 
chief danger, and if all these scoundrels won't let us alone, if they 
spread it all over the town-as they probably have done by now­
all is lost! She will never endure the hubbub and will refuse. At all 
costs we must take the Prince into the country, and promptly too! I 
will fly off first myself, will haul along my blockhead and bring him 
here, he must make himself useful at last; meanwhile the old man 
will have had his sleep out, and we will set off." 
She rang the bell. 
"The horses?" she asked the servant who came in. 
"They have been ready a long while," answered the footman. 
The horses had been ordered at the moment when Marya Alexan­
drovna was taking the Prince upstairs. 
She dressed, but first ran into Zina to tell her in rough outline her 
decision and to give her some instructions. But Zina could not listen 

294 
The Short Novels of 'DostoevskY 
to her. She was lying on her bed, with her face in her pillow, and her 
white arms bare to the elbows; she was shedding tears and tearing 
her long, exquisite hair. At moments she shuddered all over as though 
a cold shiver were running over her limbs. Marya Alexandrovna began 
talking, but Zina did not even lift her head. 
After standing for some time beside her, Marya Alexandrovna went 
out in confusion, and to vent her feelings, got into the carriage and 
told her coachman to drive as fast as he could. 
"It's a nuisance that Zina overheard it," she thought as she got into 
the carriage. "I brought Mozglyakov round with the same words that 
I used with her. She is proud, and perhaps was wounded . . . .  Hm! 
But the great thing, the great thing is to make haste and settle it all 
before they have got wind of it! It's a pity! Well, and what if by ill 
luck the fool is not at home!" 
And at the mere thought of that she was overcome with a fury that 
boded nothing pleasant to Afanasy Matveyitch; she could hardly sit 
still for impatience. The horses whirled her along full speed. 
Chapter 10 
THE carriage flew along. \V e mentioned before that an idea that 
was a stroke of genius had flashed into Marya Alexandrovna's brain 
that morning when she was hunting over the town for the Prince. \Ve 
promised to refer to that idea in its proper place. But the reader knows 
it already. The idea was to kidnap the Prince in her turn, and to carry 
him off as quickly as possible to their estate in the neighbourhood, 
where the blissful Afanasy Matveyitch flourished in tranquility. There 
is no disguising the fact that Marya Alexandrovna was more and more 
overcome by an inexplicable uneasiness. This does happen at times to 
real heroes at the very moment when they are attaining their object. 
Some instinct suggested to her that it was dangerous to rer:1ain at 
Mordasov. "But once we are in the country," she thought, "the whole 
town may be upside down for all I care!" Of course, no time was to be 
lost even .in the country. Anything might happen-anything, absolutely 
anything; though, of course, we put no faith in the rumours, circulated 
later about my heroine by her enemies, that at this juncture she was 
actually afraid of the police. In short, she saw that she must get the 
marriage of Zina and the Prince solemnized as quickly as possible. She 

Uncle's 'Dream 
295 
had the means for doing so at hand. The village priest could celebrate 
the nuptials in their own home. The ceremony might actually be per· 
formed the day after to-morrow; in the last resort, even to-morrow. 
There were cases of weddings within two hours of the betrothal! They 
could present the haste, the absence of festivities, of betrothal, of brides­
maids, to the Prince as essentially comme il faut; they could impress 
upon him that it would be more in keeping with decorum and aristo­
cratic style. In fact, it might all be made to appear as a romantic ad­
venture, and so the most susceptible chord in the Prince's heart would 
be struck. If all else failed, they could always make him drunk, or, 
still better, keep him in a state of perpetual drunkenness. And after­
wards, come what may, Zina would anyway be a princess! Even if 
they did not get off afterwards without a scandal-in Petersburg or 
Moscow, for instance, where the Prince had relations-even that had 
its consolations. In the first place, all that was in the future; and in 
the second, Marya Alexandrovna believed that in the best society 
scarcely anything ever happened without a scandal, especially in the 
matrimonial line; that this was, in fact, chic, though the scandals of 
the best society were, she imagined, necessarily all of a special stamp­
on a grand scale, something after the style of Monte Cristo or Les 
Mcmoires du Diable. That, in fact, Zina need only show herself in the 
best society, and her mamma need only be there to support her, and 
every one-absolutely every one-would instantly be conquered, and 
that not one of all those countesses and princesses would be capable 
of withstanding the sousing which Marya Alexandrovna alone was 
capable of giving them, collectively or individually, in true Mordasov 
style. In consequence of these reflections, Marya Alexandrovna was 
now flying to her country seat to fetch Afanasy Matveyitch, whose 
presence, she calculated, was now indispensable. Indeed, to take the 
Prince to the country would mean taking him to see Afanasy Matvey­
itch, whose acquaintance the Prince might not be anxious to make. 
If Afanasy Matveyitch were to give the invitation it would put quite 
a different complexion upon it. Moreover, the arrival of an elderly 
and dignified paterfamilias in a white cravat and a dress-coat, with a 
hat in his hand, who had come from distant parts at once on hearing 
about the Prince, might produce a very agreeable effect, might even 
flatter the amour-propre of the latter. It would be difficult to refuse an 
invitation so pressing and so ceremonious, thought Marya Alexan­
drovna. At last the carriage had driven the two and a half miles, and 
Sofron, the coachman, pulled up his horses at the front door of a 

296 
The Short N.ovels of 1Jostoevsky 
rambling wooden building of one storey, somewhat dilapidated and 
blackened by age, with a long row of windows, and old lime-trees 
standing round it on all sides. This was the country house and summer 
residence of Marya Alexandrovna. Lights were already burning in the 
house. 
"Where is the blockhead?" cried Marya Alexandrovna, bursting into 
the rooms like a hurricane. "What is that towel here for? Ah! he has 
been drying himself! Have you been to the baths again? And he is 
for ever swilling his tea! Well, why are you staring at me like that, 
you perfect fool? Why hasn't his hair been cut? Grishka! Grishka! 
Grishka! Why haven't you cut your master's hair, as I told you to last 
week?" 
As she went into the room Marya Alexandrovna intended to greet 
her spouse far more gently, but seeing that he had just come from the 
bath-house and was sipping his tea with great enjoyment, she could 
not refrain from the bitterest indignation. And, indeed, her cares and 
anxieties were only equalled by the blissful quietism of the useless and 
incompetent Afanasy Matveyitch; the contrast instantly stung her to 
the heart. Meanwhile the blockhead, or to speak more respectfully, he 
who was called the blockhead, sat behind the samovar, and in senseless 
panic gazed at his better half with open mouth and round eyes, almost 
petrified by her appearance. The drowsy and clumsy figure of Grishka 
blinking at this scene was thrust in from the entry. 
"He wouldn't let me, that is why I didn't cut it," he said in a 
grumbling and husky voice. "A dozen times I went up to him with 
the scissors, and said, 'The mistress will be coming directly, and then 
we shall both catch it; and what shall we do then?' 'No,' he said; 'wait 
a little. I am going to curl it on Sunday, so I must have my hair long.' " 
"What? So he curls his hair. So you have begun curling your hair 
while I am away? What new fashion is this? Why, does it suit you­
does it suit your wooden head? My goodness, how untidy it is here! 
What is this smell? I am asking you, you monster, what is this horrid 
smell here?" shouted his wife, scolding her innocent and completely 
flabbergasted husband more and more angrily. 
"Mo . . .  mother!" muttered her panic-stricken spouse, gazing with 
imploring eyes at his domineering tyrant, and not getting up from his 
seat. "Mo . . .  Mother! . .  .'' 
"How often have I knocked into your ass's head that I am not to be 
called 'Mother'? Mother, indeed, to you, a pigmy! How dare you use 
such a mode of address to a refined lady, whose proper place is in the 
best society, instead of beside an ass like vou!" 

Uncle's 'Dream 
297 
"But . . .  but you know, Marya Alexandrovna, you are my lawful 
wedded wife, and so I speak to you . . .  as to my wife," Afanasy 
Matveyitch protested, and at the same moment put up both hands to 
his head to protect his hair. 
"Oh, you ugly creature! Oh, you aspen post! Was anything ever 
more stupid than your answer? Lawful wedded wife? Lawful wedded 
wife, indeed, nowadays! Does anybody in good society make use of 
that stupid, clerical, that revoltingly vulgar expression, 'lawful wedded'? 
And how dare you remind me that I am your wife, when I am doing 
my best, my very utmost, to forget it! Why are you putting your hands 
over your head? Look what his hair is like! Sopping, absolutely sop­
ping! It won't be dry for another three hours! How can I take him 
now-how can I let people see him! \Vhat's to be done now?" 
And Marya Alexandrovna wrung her hands in fury, running back­
wards and forwards in the room. The trouble, of course, was a small 
one, and could easily be set right; but the fact was that Marya 
Alexandrovna could not control her all-conquering and masterful 
spirit. She felt an irresistible craving to be constantly venting her wrath 
upon Afanasy Matveyitch, for tyranny is a habit which becomes an 
irresistible craving. And we all know what a contrast some refined 
ladies of a certain position are capable of at home behind the scenes; 
and it is just that contrast I wish to reproduce. Afanasy Matveyitch 
watched his wife's evolution with a tremor, and positively broke into 
a perspiration as he looked at her. 
"Grishka," she cried at last, "dress your master at once: his dress­
coat, his trousers, his white tie, his waistcoat. Look sharp! But where 
is his hair-brush? Where is the brush?" 
"Mother! Why, I have just come from the bath; I shall catch cold 
if I drive to the town . . . .  " 
"You won't catch cold!" 
"But my hair is wet . . . .  " 
"Well, we will dry it directly. Grishka, take the hair-brush; brush 
him till he is dry. Harder, harder, harder! That's it! that's it!" 
At this command the zealous and devoted Grishka began brushing 
his master's hair with all his might, clutching him by the shoulder to 
get a more convenient grip, and pressing him down to the sofa. Afanal'y 
Matveyitch frowned and almost wept. 
"Now come here! Lift him up, Grishka! Where is the pomatum? 
Bend down, bend down, you good-for-nothing; bend down, you 
sluggard!" 

298 
The Short N.oveis of 'Dostoevsky 
And Marya Alexandrovna set to work to pomade her husband's 
head with her own hands, ruthlessly tugging at his thick, grizzled 
locks, which, to his sorrow, he had not had cut. Afanasy Matveyitch 
cleared his throat, gasped, but did not scream, and endured the whole 
operation submissively. 
"You have sucked the life-blood out of me, you sloven!" said Marya 
Alexandrovna. "Bend down more, bend down!" 
"How have I sucked your life-blood, Mother?" mumbled her hus­
band, bending his head as far as he could. 
"Blockhead! He doesn't understand allegory! Now comb your hair; 
and you, dress him, and look sharp!" 
Our heroine sat down in an easy-chair and kept an inquisitorial 
watch on the whole ceremony of arraying Afanasy Matveyitch. Mean­
while he succeeded in getting his breath and recovering himself a little, 
and when the tying of his cravat was reached he even ventured to 
express an opinion of his own on the style and beauty of the knot. 
Finally, putting on his dress-coat, the worthy man was restored to 
cheerfulness, and looked at himself in the glass with some respect. 
"Where are you taking me, Marya Alexandrovna?" he said, prink­
ing before the looking-glass. 
Marya Alexandrovna could not believe her ears. "Hear him! Oh, 
you dummy! How dare you ask me where I am taking you!" 
"Mother, but, you know, one must know . . . . 
" 
"Hold your tongue! Only I tell you if you call me 'Mother' once 
more, especially where we are going now, you shall be cut off tea for 
a month!" 
The panic-stricken husband held his tongue. 
"Ugh! Not a single decoration has he gained, the sloven!" she went 
on, looking at Afanasy Matveyitch's black coat contemptuously. 
At last her husband was offended. 
"It's the Government gives decorations, Mother; and I am a councillor 
and not a sloven," he said, with honourable indignation. 
"\Vhat, what, what? So you have learnt to argue out here! Ah, you 
peasant! Ah, you snivelled It's a pity I haven't time to see to you, or 
I'd . . .  But I shan't forget it later on. Give him his hat, Grishka! Give 
him his overcoat! \Vhile I'm away get these three rooms ready; get 
the green corner room ready, too. Fetch your brooms instantly! Take 
the co\'ers off the looking-glasses, off the clocks, too, and within an 
hour let everything be ready; and put on your swallow-tail yourself 
and give the servants gloves! Do you hear, Grishka, do you hear?" 
They got into the carriage. Afanasy Matveyitch was puzzled and 

Uncle's 'Dream 
299 
wondering. Meanwhile Marya Alexandrovna was deliberating how 
she could most intelligibly knock into her husband's brain certain 
admonitions indispensable in his present position. But her husband 
anticipated her. 
"Do you know, Marya Alexandrovna, I had a most original dream 
this morning," he informed her quite unexpectedly, in the midst of 
silence on both sides. 
"Phoo! you confounded dummy! Goodness knows what I thought 
you were going to say! Some stupid dream! How dare you interrupt 
me with your loutish dreams! Original! Do you understand what 
original means? Listen: I tell you for the last time, if you dare to say 
one word to-day about your dream or anything else, I'll •
.
•
 I don't 
know what I'll do to you! Listen attentively. Prince K. has come to 
stay with me. Do you remember Prince K.?" 
"I remember him, mother, I remember him. What has he come for?" 
"Be quiet; that is not your business. You must, as master of the 
house, invite him, with special politeness, to stay with us in the coun­
try. That is what I am taking you for. We shall set off and drive back 
to-day. But if you dare to utter one single word the whole evening, or 
to-morrow, or the day after to-morrow, or at any time, I'll set you to 
herd the geese for a whole year! Don't say anything, not a single 
word. That's the whole of your duty. Do you understand?" 
"But if I am asked a question?" 
"Never mind, hold your tongue." 
"But you know it's impossible to hold one's tongue all the while, 
Marya Alexandrovna." 
"In that case, answer in monosyllables; something, for instance, such 
as 'H'm!' or something of that kind, to show you are a sensible man 
and think before you speak." 
"H'm!" 
"Understand me: I am taking you because you have heard about 
the Prince and, delighted at his visit, have hastened to pay your respects 
to him and to ask him to visit you in the country. Do you under­
stand?" 
"H'm!" 
"None of your h'mming now, you idiot! You answer me." 
"Very good, Mother, it shall all be as you say. Only why am I to 
invite the Prince?" 
"What, what? Arguing again! What business is it of yours what 
for? And how dare you ask questions about it?" 

300 
7' h% Short N.ovels of TJosto%vsky 
"But I keep wondering, Mother, how I am to invite him if I hold 
my tongue, as you tell me." 
"I will speak for you, and you've simply got to bow-do you hear? 
to bow-and hold your hat in your hand. Do you understand?" 
"I understand, Moth . . .  Marya Alexandrovna." 
"The Prince is extremely witty. If he says anything, even though it 
is not to you, you must respond to everything with a bright and good­
humoured smile. Do you understand?" 
"H'm!" 
"H'mming again! Don't say 'H'm!' to me. Answer simply and 
directly. Do you hear?" 
"I hear, Marya Alexandrovna; of course I hear. And I am saying 
'H'm!' to practise saying it, as you told me. Only I keep wondering 
about the same thing, Mother: how it is to be. If the Prince says any­
thing, you tell me to look at him and smile. Well, but if he asks me 
something?" 
"You slow-witted dolt! I have told you already: hold your tongue. 
I will answer for you; you simply look at him and smile." 
"Why, but he'll think I am dumb," grumbled Afanasy Matveyitch. 
"As though that mattered! Let him think it; you'll conceal the fact 
that you are a fool, anyway." 
"H'm! . . .  But what if other people ask me some question?" 
"Nobody will ask you; no one will be there. But in case-which God 
forbid!-somebody does come in, and if anybody does ask you a 
question, or say anything to you, you must answer at once by a sar­
castic smile. Do you know what is meant by a sarcastic smile?" 
"It means witty, doesn't it, Mother?" 
"I'll teach you to be witty, you blockhead! And who would ask a 
fool like you to be witty? A mocking smile-don't you understand?­
mocking and contemptuous." 
"H'm!" 
"Oh, I do feel uneasy about this blockhead!" Marya Alexandrovna 
murmured to herself. "He certainly has taken a vow to be the death 
of me! It really would have been better not to have brought him at all." 
Absorbed in such reflections, in regret and anxiety, Marya Alexan­
drovna was continually popping her head out of the window and 
urging on the coachman. The horses raced along, but still it seemed 
too slow for her. Afanasy Matveyitch sat silently in his corner, in­
wardly repeating his lesson. At last the carriage drove into the town 
and stopped at Marya Alexandrovna's house. But our heroine had 

Uncle's 'Dream 
301 
hardly had time to alight at the front door, when all at once she saw 
driving up to the house a two-seated sledge with a hood-the very 
sledge in which Anna Nikolaevna Antipov usually drove about. In 
the sledge were sitting two ladies. One of them was, of course, Anna 
Nikolaevna herself, the other Natalya Dmitryevna, who had of late 
been her devoted friend and follower. Marya Alexandrovna's heart 
sank. But before she had time to cry out, another carriage drove up­
a sledge, in which there was evidently another visitor. There was a 
sound of joyful exclamations: 
"Marya Alexandrovna! And with Afanasy Matveyitch, too! You 
have just arrived? Where from? How lucky! And we have come to 
spend the whole evening! What a surprise!" 
The visitors sprang out at the front door, and chattered like swallows. 
Marya Alexandrovna could not believe her eyes or her ears. 
"I'll see you further," she thought to herself. "It looks like a plot! 
I must inquire into it. But . . .  you won't outwit me, you magpies . . . .  
You wait a bit 
.
•
•
 ," 
Chapter 11 
AS MOZGLY AKOV left Marya Alexandrovna, he was appar­
ently quite comforted. She had completely inflamed his imagination. 
He did not go to see Boroduev, feeling that he wanted to be alone. 
A perfect flood of heroic and romantic dreams would not let him 
rest. He dreamed of a solemn explanation with Zina, then of generous 
tears of forgiveness on his part, pallor and despair at the gorgeous ball 
in Petersburg, Spain, the Guadalquivir, love and the dying Prince join­
ing their hands on his death-bed. Then his lovely wife devoted to him 
and for ever lost in admiration of his heroism and lofty feelings; inci­
dentally, on the quiet, the attentions of some countess belonging to the 
best society into which he would certainly be brought by his marriage 
with Zina, the widow of Prince K.; a post as vice-governor, money­
in fact, everything so eloquently described by Marya Alexandrovna 
passed once more through his gratified soul, caressing and attracting it, 
and, above all, flattering his vanity. But-and I really don't know how 
to explain it-as he began to be wearied by these raptures, the ex­
tremely vexatious reflection occurred to him: that all this was, in any 
case, in the future, while now anyway he had been made a fool of. 

302 
Th% Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
When this thought came into his mind, he noticed that he had wan­
dered a long way into some solitary and unfamiliar suburb of Morda­
sov. It had grown dark. In the streets, with their rows of little houses 
sunk into the earth, there was a savage barking of the dogs which 
abound in provincial towns in alarming numbers, precisely in those 
quarters where there is nothing to guard and nothing to steal. Snow 
was beginning to fall and melting as it fell. From time to time he 
met a belated workman or a peasant woman in a sheepskin and high 
boots. All this, for some unknown reason, began to irritate Pavel 
Alexandrovitch-a very bad sign, for when things are going well 
everything strikes us in a charming and attractive light. Pavel Alexan­
drovitch could not help remembering that hitherto he had always 
been a leading figure in Mordasov. He had been highly gratified when 
in every house he had heard it hinted that he was an eligible parti and 
had been congratulated on that distinction. He was actually proud of 
being an eligible young man. And now he would appear before every 
one as on the shelf! There would be laughter at his expense. Of course 
he could not enlighten them, he could not talk to them about Peters­
burg ball-rooms with columns, and about the Guadalquivir! Thinking 
of all this, full of dejection and regret, he stumbled at last upon a 
thought which had for a long while been rankling unnoticed in his 
heart: "Was it all true? Would it all come to pass as Marya Alexan­
clrovna had described it?" At that point he remembered very oppor­
tunely that Marya Alexandrovna was a very designing woman, that 
however worthy of general respect she might be, she was gossiping 
and lying from morning till night; that in getting rid of him now, 
she probably had her own reasons, and that drawing fancy pictures of 
the future was a thing that anybody could do. He thought of Zina, too, 
recalled her parting look at him, which expressed anything rather than 
concealed passion; and therewith 1J?propriately remembered that an 
hour before she had called him a fool. At that recollection Pavel 
Alexandrovitch stopped short as though rooted to the spot, and Rushed 
with shame till the tears came into his eyes. As ill-luck would have 
it, the next minute he had an unpleasant adventure: he stepped back 
and went flying from the wooden· pavement into a heap of snow. 
While he was floundering in the snow a pack of dogs, which had 
been pursuing him with their barking for some time, flew at him on 
all sides. One of them, the smallest and most aggressive, hung on to 
him, fastening its teeth into his fur coat. Fighting off the clogs, swear­
ing aloud, and even cursing his fate, Pavel Alexandrovitch, with a 

Uncle's 'Dream 
303 
torn coat and insufferable despondency in his heart, reached the corner 
of the street and only then realized that he had lost his way. We all 
know that a man who has lost his way in an unknown part of the 
town, especially at night, can never walk straight along the streets. 
Some unknown force seems at every moment to impel him to turn 
down every side street he comes to on his way. Following this system, 
Pavel Alexandrovitch was soon hopelessly lost. "Deuce take all these 
exalted notions!" he said to himself, spitting with anger. "And the 
devil himself take you with your lofty feelings and your Guadal­
quivirs!" I cannot say that Mozglyakov was attractive at that moment. 
After wandering about for a couple of hours, he arrived exhausted 
and harassed at Marya Alexandrovna's front door. He was surprised at 
seeing a number of carriages. "Can there be visitors, can it be an 
evening party?" he thought. "What's the object of it?" Questioning 
a servant he met, and learning that Marya Alexandrovna had been 
to their country house and had brought back with her Afanasy Mat­
veyitch in a white cravat, and that the Prince was awake but had not 
yet come downstairs to join the visitors, Pavel Alexandrovitch went 
upstairs to his "uncle" without saying a word to any one. He was 
at the moment in that state of mind when a man of weak character 
is capable of committing some horrible, malignant and nasty action 
from revenge, without considering that he may have to regret it all his 
life afterwards. 
Going upstairs, he saw the Prince sitting in an easy-chair before 
his travelling dressing-case, with an absolutely bald head, though he 
had his "imperial" and whiskers on. The wig was in the hands of his 
grey-haired old valet and favourite, Ivan Pahomitch. Pahomitch was 
combing it with an air of deep reflection and respect. As for the Prince, 
he presented a very sorry spectacle, having hardly recovered from his 
recent potations. He was sitting as it were, all of a heap, blinking, 
crumpled and out of sorts, and he looked at Mozglyakov as though 
he did not recognize him. 
"How are you feeling, Uncle?" asked Mozglyakov. 
"What! . . .  That's you," said his "uncle" at last. "I've had a little 
nap, my boy. Oh, my goodness!" he cried, suddenly reviving, "why, I 
•
.
.
 haven't got my wi-ig on." 
"Don't disturb yourself, Uncle. I . . .  I will help you, if you like." 
"But now you've learnt my secret! I said we ought to Io.-ock the 
door. Come, my dear, you must give me your wo-ord of honour at 
once that you won't give away my secret and won't tell any one that 
my hair is fa-alse." 

304 
The Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
"Upon my word, Uncle! Can you think me capable of anything so 
base!" cried Mozglyakov, anxious to please the old gentleman, with 
• . . ulterior aims. 
"Oh, ye-es; oh, ye-es! And as I see you are an honourable man, so be 
it, I will surprise you . . .  and will tell you all my secrets. How do you 
like my mous-taches, my dear?" 
"They are superb, Uncle! Marvellous! How can you have preserved 
them so long?" 
"Don't deceive yourself, my dear, they are ar-ti-fi-cial," said the 
Prince, looking with triumph at Pavel Alexandrovitch. 
"Is it possible? I can hardly believe it. And the whiskers? Confess, 
Uncle, you must darken them?" 
"Darken them? They are not dyed, they are ar-ti-fi-cial." 
"Artificial? No, Uncle, you may say what you like, but I don't 
believe it. You are laughing at me!" 
"Parole d'honneur, mon ami!" the Prince cried triumphantly; 
"and only fan-cy, every one is de-ceived, like you. Even Stepanida 
Matveyevna cannot believe it, though she sometimes fix-es them on 
herself. llut, I am sure, my boy, you will keep my secret. Give me 
your word of honour . . . .  " 
"On my word of honour, Uncle, I will keep it. I ask you again, 
can you think me capable of anything so base?" 
"Oh, my dear, what a fall I have had while you were away to-day. 
Fe-o-fil upset me out of the carriage again." 
"Upset you again! When?" 
"We were on our way to the mon-as-tery . . . .  " 
"I know, uncle, this morning." 
"No, no, two hours ago, not more. I set off to the monastery and 
he upset me. How frigh-tened I was, even now my heart isn't 
right." 
"But you've been asleep, Uncle," said Mozglyakov, wondering. 
"Oh, ye-es, I've been asleep . . .  and afterwards I drove out, though 
indeed . . .  though perhaps I •
.
.
 oh, how strange it is!" 
"I assure you, Uncle, that you have been dreaming it! You have 
been guietly dozing ever since dinner." 
"Really?" and the Prince pondered. "Oh, ye-es, perhaps I really 
did dream it, though I remember everything I dreamed. At first I 
dreamt of a very dreadful bull with horns; and then I dreamt of some 
pub-lic pro-se-cu-tor who seemed to have ho-orns, too . . . .  
" 

Uncle's 'Dream 
305 
"I suppose that was Nikolay Vassilitch Antipov, uncle?" 
"Oh, yes, perhaps it was he; and then I dreamt of Napoleon 
Bonaparte. Do you know, my dear, they all tell me that I am like 
Napoleon Bonaparte . . .  and in profile I am strikingly like some 
pope of old days! What do you think, my dear, am I like a pope?" 
"I think you are more like Napoleon, Uncle." 
"Oh, ye-es, full face. I think so myself, too, my dear. And I dreamt 
about him, when he was on the island, and you know he was so 
talkative, so sprightly, such a jo-olly fel-low that he quite amused me." 
"Are you speaking of Napoleon, Uncle?" said Pavel Alexandrov­
itch, looking at the old man reflectively. A strange idea was begin­
ning to dawn upon his mind, an idea which he could not yet define 
clearly to himself. 
"Oh, ye-es, of Na-po-leon. We were discussing philosophy to-gether. 
And do you know, my dear, that I am really sorry the En-glish 
treated him so harshly. Of course, if he had not been kept on the 
chain he would have been attacking people again. He was a desperate 
man, but still I am sorry for him. I wouldn't have treated him so. I 
would have put him upon an un-in-habited island . . . .  " 
"Why on an uninhabited one?" asked Mozglyakov absent­
mindedly. 
"Well, perhaps, on an in-habited one; but inhabited only by 
sensible people. And I would have got up entertainments of all sorts 
for him: a theatre, concerts, ballets, and all at the government ex­
pense. I would have let him go for walks under supervision, of 
course, or else he would have slipped away at once. He was very 
fond of little pies. Well, I would have made him little pies every 
day. I would have looked after him like a father, so to speak. He 
would have re-pen-ted in my care . . . .  
" 
Mozglyakov listened abent-mindedly to the babble of the old man 
not yet fully awake, and bit his nails with impatience. He wanted 
to turn the conversation upon marriage, though he scarcely yet 
knew why; an unbounded anger was surging in his heart. All at 
once the old man cried out in surprise: 
"Oh, mon ami! Why, I forgot to tell you. Only fancy, I made a 
pro-po-sal to-day." 
"A proposal, Uncle!" cried Mozglyakov, waking up. 
"Why, ye-es, a pro-po-sal. Pahomitch, are you going? Very good. 
C'est une charmante personne .
. . .  But .
. . I confess, my dear boy, 
I acted thought-less-ly. I only se-ee that now. Oh, dear me!" 

306 
The Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
"But excuse me, Uncle, when did you make this proposal?" 
"I own, my dear boy, that I really don't quite know when it was. 
Didn't I dream it, perhaps? Ah, how queer it is, though!" 
Mozglakov shuddered with delight. A new idea flashed upon his 
mind. 
"But who was it you made an offer to, and when did you make it, 
Uncle?" he repeated impatiently. 
"The daughter of the house, mon ami . . .  cet.te belle personne . 
. . . I have for-got-ten her name, though. Only you see, my dear, 
I really can't get ma-arried. What am I to do now?" 
"Yes, it will certainly be your ruin if you get married. But allow 
me to ask you one other question, Uncle. You seem to be convinced 
that you really have made an offer?" 
"Oh, yes . .
. . I am sure of it." 
"But what if you have dreamed it all, just as you dreamed you had 
been upset out of your carriage a second time?" 
"Oh, my goodness! Perhaps this really was a dream, tool So that 
I really don't know how to behave with them. How is one to find 
out for certain, my dear boy, whether I did make a proposal or not? 
But now fancy what a position I am in!" 
"Do you know Uncle, I fancy there is no need to find out." 
"How so?" 
"I feel sure that you dreamed it." 
"I think so, too, my dear, especially as I often have dreams of that 
sort." 
"There you see, Uncle. Remember that you had a little wine at 
lunch, and then again at dinner, and in the end . . .  
" 
"Oh, ye-es, my dear; it very like-ly was due to that." 
"Besides, Uncle, however exhilarated you may have been, you 
couldn't possibly under any circumstances have made such a non­
sensical proposal in reality. As far as I know you, Uncle, you are a 
man of the greatest good sense, and . . .  
" 
"Oh, ye-es; oh, ye-es." 
"Only consider one point: if your relations, who have nothing but 
ill-will for you in any case, were to hear of it, what would happen 
then?" 
"Oh, my goodness!" cried the Prince in alarm, "what would happen 
then?" 
"Upon my word! Why, they would all cry out in chorus that you 
were out of your mind when you did it, that you had gone mad, 

Uncle's Vream 
307 
that you must be put under restraint, that you had been taken 
advantage of, and perhaps they would put you somewhere under 
SUperVISIOn." 
Mozglyakov knew what would frighten the Prince most. 
"Oh, my God!" cried the Prince, trembling like a leaf. "Could they 
possibly shut me up?" 
"And then only think, Uncle, could you possibly have made such 
an imprudent offer when you were awake? You undestand your own 
interests. I assure you solemnly that it was all a dream." 
"It cer-tain-ly must have been a dream, it cer-tain-ly must!" the 
Prince repeated in a panic. "Oh, how sensibly you've thought it out, 
my de-ear boy! I am sincerely grateful to you for setting me right." 
"I am awfully glad, Uncle, that I have met you to-day. Only fancy, 
if I had not been here you might really have been muddled, have 
thought that you were engaged, and have gone down to them as 
though you were. Think how dangerous!" 
"Oh, ye-es . . .  ye-es, dangerous." 
"Remember that young lady is three-and-twenty; nobody wants to 
marry her, and all at once you, a man of wealth and rank, appear 
as a suitor! Why, they would snatch at the idea at once, would 
assure you you were engaged, and would force you perhaps into 
marriage. And they would calculate on the possibility of your dying 
before long." 
"Really?" 
"And remember, Uncle, a man of your qualities . . .  " 
"Oh, ye-es, with my qualities . . .  
" 
"With your intelligence, with your politeness . . .  " 
"Oh, ye-es, with my intelligence, ye-es! . . .  
" 
"And last, but not least, you are a prince. What a splendid match 
you might make if, for some reason, you really did want to marry! 
Only think what your relations would say!" 
"Oh, my dear, why they would be the death of mel I have endured 
such treachery, such ill-treatment at their hands. . . . Would you 
believe it, I suspect they wanted to put me into a lu-na-tic asylum. 
Upon my word, my dear, wasn't that absurd? Why, what could I 
have done there . . .  in a lu-na-tic asylum?" 
"Quite so, Uncle, and so I won't leave your side when you go 
downstairs. There are visitors there now." 
"Visitors? Oh, my goodness!" 
"Don't be uneasy, Uncle, I will keep with you." 

The Short 'N.ovels of 'Dostoevsky 
"But how grate-ful I am to you, my dear, you are simply my 
saviour! But do you know, I think I had better go away." 
"To-morrow morning, Uncle, at seven o'clock to-morrow morning. 
But to-day you can take leave of every one and tell them you are 
going away." 
"I will certainly go away . . .  to Father Misail. .
.
•
 But my dear 
boy-what if they do make a match of it?" 
"Don't be afraid, Uncle, I shall be with you, and whatever they 
say to you, whatever they hint at, you say straight out that it was all 
a dream, as it certainly was. . . ." 
"Oh, ye-es, it cer-tain-ly must have been a dream. Only do you 
know, my dear, it was a most en-chan-ting dream! She is wonder­
fully good-looking, and do you know, such a figure . . . .  " 
"Well, farewell, Uncle. I am going downstairs, and you . . .  " 
"What! Are you going to leave me alone?" cried the Prince m 
alarm. 
"No, Uncle, we'll both go down but separately; I'll go first, and 
then you. That will be better." 
"Oh, ve-ry well, And by the way, I must jot down an idea." 
"Quite so, Uncle, jot down your idea and then come down, don't 
delay. To-morrow morning . . .  
" 
"And to-morrow morning to Father Misail, cer-tain-ly to Father 
Misail! Cljarmant, charmant! But do you know, my dear, she is 
won-der-ful-ly good-looking . . .  such contours . . .  and if I really 
had to be married . . .  
" 
"God preserve you, Uncle." 
"Oh, ye-es, God preserve mel . . .  Well, good-bye, my dear, I'll 
come directly . . .  only I will just jot down. A propos, I have been 
meaning to ask you for a long time. Have you read the memoirs of 
Casanova?" 
"Yes, I have, Uncle. Why?" 
"Oh, well . . .  I have forgotten now what I meant to say 
.
.
.
•
 
" 
"You will think of it later, Uncle. Good-bye for the present!" 
"Good-bye, my dear, good-bye. Though it really was a fascinating 
dream, a fa-as-ci-na-ting dream! . . .  
" 

Uncle's Vream 
309 
Chapter 12 
WE'VE all come to see you, all of us! and Praskovya Ilyin­
itchna is coming too, and Luiza Karlovna meant to come too," 
twittered Anna Nikolaevna, walking into the salon and looking 
about her greedily. 
She was a rather pretty little lady, dressed expensively but in gaudy 
colours, and very well aware that she was pretty. She fancied that 
the Prince was hidden somewhere in a corner with Zina. 
"And Katerina Petrovna is coming, and Felisata Mihalovna meant 
to be here too," added Natalya Dmitryevna, the lady of colossal pro­
portions, remarkably like a grenadier, whose appearance had so 
delighted the Prince. 
She had on an extraordinarily small pink hat perched on the back 
of her head. For the last three weeks she had been the devoted 
friend of Anna Nikolaevna, whose good graces she had long been 
trying to win, and whom, to judge by appearances, she could have 
swallowed up at one gulp, bones and all. 
"I won't speak of the delight, I may call it, of seeing you both here 
and in the evening too," Marya Alexandrovna chanted, recovering 
from her first stupefaction. "But tell me, please, what miracle has 
brought you to me to-night, when I quite despaired of such an 
honour." 
"Oh, my goodness, Marya Alexandrovna, what a forgetful lady 
you are!" said Natalya Dmitryevna in honeyed accents, mincing and 
speaking in a bashful and squeaky voice which was a very curious 
contrast to her appearance. 
"Mais rna charmante," twittered Anna Nikolaevna, "we must, you 
know, we really must complete our arrangements for these theatricals. 
Only to-day Pyotr Mihalovitch said to Kalist Stanislavitch that he 
was very much disappointed that it was not coming off well, and that 
we did nothing but fall out over it. So we met together this eve­
ning and thought: let us go to Marya Alexandrovna's and settle it all 
right away. Natalya Dmitryevna let the others know. They are all 
coming. So we will talk it all over together and all will go well. 
We won't let them say that we do nothing but quarrel, will we, 
mon ange?" she added playfully, kissing Marya Alexandrovna. "Oh, 
my goodness! Zinaida Afanasyevna! Why, you grow prettier every 
day!" 

310 
Th% Short N.ovds of 'Dosto%vsky 
Anna Nikolaevna flew to shower kisses on Zina. 
"Indeed, she has nothing else to do but grow prettier," Natalya 
Dmitryevna added in sugary accents, rubbing her huge hands. 
"The devil take them! I did not think about those theatricals! 
They have been sharp, the magpies!" Marya Alexandrovna mur­
mured, beside herself with fury. 
"Especially, my angel, since that darling Prince is staying with you. 
You know there used to be a theatre at Duhanovo in the time of 
the late owners. We have made inquiries already and know that all 
the old scenery, the curtain, and even the costumes are put away 
somewhere. The Prince called on me to-day, and I was so surprised 
at seeing him that I quite forgot to speak of it. Now we will intro­
duce the subject of the theatre, you must help us, and the Prince 
will order all the old trappings to be sent us. For who is there here 
you can trust to make anything like scenery? And what is more, 
we want to interest the Prince in our theatricals. He must subscribe, 
you see it is for charity. Perhaps he will even take a part-he is so 
sweet and obliging. Then it will be a wonderful success." 
"Of course he will take a part. Why, he can be made to play any 
part," :Katalya Dmitryevna added with vast significance. 
Anna Nikolaevna had not misinformed Marya Alexandrovna: 
ladies kept arriving every minute. Marya Alexandrovna hardly had 
time to receive them and utter the exclamations demanded on such 
occasions by propriety and the rules of comme il faut. 
I will not undertake to describe all the visitors. I will only mention 
that each one wore a look of extraordinary wiliness. Anticipation 
and a sort of wild impatience was expressed on every face. Some 
of the ladies had come with the express object of witnessing an 
extraordinary and scandalous scene, and would have been exceed­
ingly wroth if they had had to drive home again without having 
seen it. On the surface they behaved with the utmost amiability, but 
Marya Alexandrovna resolutely prepared herself for the attack. There 
was a shover of questions about the Prince; they sounded most 
natural; yet each seemed to contain an allusion or innuendo. Tea 
was brought in; every one sat down. One group took possession of 
the piano. On being asked to play and sing, Zina answered that she 
did not feel quite well. The paleness of her face confirmed her words. 
Sympathetic inquiries were showered upon her, and the ladies even 
seized the opportunity to ask questions and drop hints. They inquired 
about Mozglyakov, too, and addressed these inquiries to Zina. Marya 
Alexandrovna displayed ten times her usual energy at that moment; 

Uncle's 'Dream 
311 
she saw everything that was going on in every corner of the room, 
heard what was said by each one of her visitors, though there were 
nearly a dozen of them, and answered every question immediately, 
without hesitating for a word. She was trembling for Zina and was 
surprised that she did not go away, as she had always done before on 
such occasions. She kept her eye, too, on Afanasy Matveyitch. Every­
body always made fun of him in order to pique Marya Alexan­
drovna through her husband. On this occasion it might be possible 
to learn something from the simple-minded and open-hearted 
Afanasy Matveyitch. Marya Alexandrovna looked with anxiety at 
the way in which her husband was being besieged. Moreover, to 
every question he answered "H'm," with an expression so unhappy 
and unnatural that it might well have driven her to fury. 
"Marya Alexandrovna, Afanasy Matveyitch won't talk to us at 
all!" cried one bold, sharp-eyed little lady, who was afraid of nobody 
and never embarrassed by anything. "Do tell him to be more polite 
with ladies." 
"I really don't know what has come over him to-day," answered 
Marya Alexandrovna, interrupting her conversation with Anna 
Nikolaevna and Natalya Dmitryevna, with a gay smile. "He cer­
tainly is uncommunicative! He has scarcely said a word to me. Why 
don't you answer Felisata Mihalovna, Athanase? What did you ask 
him ?" 
"But . . .  but . . .  you know, Mother, you told me yourself . 
" 
Afanasy Matveyitch began muttering in his surprise and confusion. 
At that moment he was standing by the lighted fire, with his hands 
thrust into his waistcoat in a picturesque attitude which he had 
chosen for himself. He was sipping tea. The ladies' questions so 
embarrassed him that he blushed like a girl. When he began justify­
ing himself, he caught such a terrible glance from his infuriated 
wife that he almost lost consciousness from terror. Not knowing 
what to do, anxious to put himself right and regain respect, he took 
a gulp at his tea ; but the tea was too hot. Having taken it so hastily, 
he burnt himself terribly, dropped the cup, spluttered and choked 
so violently that he had to go out of the room, to the surprise of all 
present. In fact, everything was clear. Marya Alexandrovna realized 
that her visitors knew all about it and had met together with the 
worst intentions. The position was dangerous. They might talk to 
the feeble-minded old man and turn him from his purpose even in 
her presence. They might even take the Prince away from her, set 
him against her that very evening, and entice him away with them. 

312 
The Short N.otJels of VostoetJsk,y 
She might expect anything. But fate had another ordeal in store for 
her; the door opened and she beheld Mozglyakov, whom she had 
believed to be at Boroduev's and did not in the least expect that 
evening. She started as though something had stabbed her. 
Mozglyakov stopped in the doorway and looked round at every 
one a little confused. He was not able to control his emotion, which 
was clearly apparent in his face. 
"Oh, my goodness, Pavel Alexandrovitch!" cried several voices. 
"Oh, my goodness! Why, it is Pavel Alexandrovitch. How was it 
you told us he had gone to Boroduev's, Marya Alexandrovna? We 
were told you were hiding at Boroduev's, Pavel Alexandrovitch!" 
Natalya Dmitryevna piped. 
"Hiding?" repeated Mozglyakov, with a rather wry smile. "It is 
a strange expression! Excuse me, Natalya Dmitryevna! I don't 
conceal myself from any one, and I don't want to conceal anybody 
else, either," he added, looking significantly at Marya Alexandrovna. 
Marya Alexandrovna was in a tremor. 
"Can the blockhead be mutinous?" she wondered, looking search­
ingly at Mozglyakov. "No, that will be worse than anything . . . .  " 
"Is it true, Pavel Alexandrovitch, that they have given you the 
sack . . .  at your office, I mean, of course?" the impudent Felisata 
Mihalovna asked pertly, sarcastically looking him straight in the face. 
"The sack ? What sack ? I am simply transferring from one branch 
to another. I have a post in Petersburg," Mozglyakov answered 
coldly. 
"Oh, I congratulate you, then," Felisata Mihalovna went on. "We 
were positively scared when we heard you were trying to get a post 
in Mordasov. The posts here can't be relied upon, Pavel Alexan­
drovitch, there is no keeping them." 
"It is only as a teacher in the district school that you might find a 
vacancy," observed Natalya Dmitryevna. 
The hint was so obvious and so crude that Anna Nikolaevna, con­
fused, gently nudged her malicious friend with her foot. 
"Do you imagine that Pavel Alexandrovitch would be willing to 
take the place of a wretched teacher?" put in F elisata Mihalovna. 
But Pavel Alexandrovitch could not find an answer. He turned 
round and jostled against Afanasy Matveyitch, who held out his 
hand to him. Mozglyakov very stupidly did not take his hand, but 
gave him a low and ironical bow. Exceedingly irritated, he went 
up to Zina, and looking angrily into her face, muttered: 

Uncle's Vream 
313 
"This is all thanks to you. Wait a bit, I'll show you this very 
evening whether I am a fool." 
"Why put it off? One can see that now," Zina answered aloud, 
looking her former suitor up and down with an air of aversion. 
Mozglyakov turned away hurriedly, frightened by her loud voice. 
"Have you been to see Boroduev?" Marya Alexandrovna ventured 
to inquire at last. 
"No, I have been seeing Uncle." 
"Uncle? So you have just been with the Prince, then?" 
"Oh, my goodness! Then the Prince is awake? And we were told 
that he was still resting," added Natalya Dmitryevna, with a malignant 
look at Marya Alexandrovna. 
"Don't trouble about the Prince, Natalya Dmitryevna," answered 
Mozglyakov; "he is awake, and now, thank God, he has all his 
senses about him. This morning he was given too much wine; first 
when he was with you, and afterwards here, till his head, never 
over-strong, was completely muddled. But now, thank God, we have 
had a little talk, and he has recovered his common-sense. He will 
be here directly to take leave of you, Marya Alexandrovna, and thank 
you for all your hospitality. To-morrow at daybreak we are setting 
ofT together to the monastery, and then I shall certainly escort him 
back to Duhanovo myself, to avoid a second accident like that of 
to-day; and then I shall hand him over to Stepanida Matveyevna, 
who by that time will certainly be back from Moscow and will not 
let him go on his travels a second time-! can answer for that." 
As he said this, Mozglyakov looked spitefully at Marya Alexan­
drovna. She was sitting as though petrified with amazement. I admit 
with grief that my heroine was, perhaps for the first time in her life, 
cowed. 
"So he is going away at daybreak to-morrow! How's that?" said 
Natalya Dmitryevna, addressing Marya Alexandrovna. 
"How is that? "  the visitors were heard saying naively. "Why, we 
heard that . . .  why, that's very odd." 
But their hostess did not know what answer to make. Suddenly 
the general attention was diverted in the most strange and eccentric 
way. In the adjoining room a strange noise was heard, and abrupt 
exclamations, and all at once, utterly unexpectedly, Sofya Petrovna 
Karpuhin dashed into Marya Alexandrovna's salon. Sofya Petrovna 
was unquestionably the most eccentric lady in Mordasov, so eccentric 
that it had even been decided of late not to receive her in society. 
It must be observed, too, that regularly every evening at seven o'clock 

314 
The Short Novels of VostoevskY 
it was her habit to take a nip of something-for the sake of her 
stomach, as she explained-and after it, she was as a rule in an 
emancipated state of mind, to put it mildly. She was in that state 
of mind now at the moment when she so unexpectedly burst in upon 
Marya Alexandrovna. 
"So this is the way, Marya Alexandrovna," she shouted to be heard 
all over the room. "So this is the way you treat me! Don't disturb 
yourself, I have only come for a minute, I won't sit down. I've come 
on purpose to find out whether it is true what I am told! So you 
have balls, banquets, a betrothal party, but Sofya Petrovna must sit 
at home and knit a stocking! You've asked the whole town, but not 
me! Though this morning I was your friend and mon ange when 
I came to tell you what they were doing with the Prince at Natalya 
Dmitryevna's. And now here's Natalya Dmitryevna, whom you were 
abusing like a pickpocket, and who was abusing you, paying you a 
visit. Don't disturb yourself, Natalya Dmitryevna. I don't want your 
chocolate a Ia sante, at twopence a stick. I have better to drink at 
home! Tfoo!" 
"One can see you have," observed Natalya Dmitryevna. 
"But upon my word, Sofya Petrovna," cried Marya Alexandrovna, 
flushing with vexation, "what is the matter with you? Do control 
yourself at least." 
"Don't trouble about me, Marya Alexandrovna, I know all about 
it, all about it!" cried Sofya Petrovna in her harsh, shrill voice. She 
was surrounded by the other visitors, who seemed to be enjoying 
this unexpected scene. "I have found out all about it. Your Nastasya 
ran round and told me the whole story. You pounced on this 
wretched Prince, made him drunk, and made him propose to your 
daughter whom nobody wants to marry now, and you imagine 
that you've become a fine bird now yourself-a duchess in lace! 
Tfoo! Don't disturb yourself. I am a Colonel's wife myself. I don't 
care if you don't invite me to your betrothal party. I have mixed 
with better people than you. I have dined with Countess Zalihvatsky. 
The head commissary, Kurotchkin, paid me his addresses. As though 
I wanted your invitation! Tfoo!" 
"Come, Sofya Petrovna," answered Marya Alexandrovna, losing 
patience, "I must tell you, this is not the way to burst into a lady's 
house, especially in mch a condition, and if you do not relieve me 
of your presence and your eloquent remarks, I shall promptly take 
l'teps to get rid of you." 
"I know you will tell your nasty servants to turn me out! Don't 

Uncle's 'Dream 
315 
excite yourself, I can find the way for myself. Good-bye; make any 
marriage you like. And you, Natalya Dmitryevna, don't laugh at me, 
if you please; I don't care a damn about your chocolate! Though I 
am not invited here. I don't go dancing jigs to amuse princes. 
What are you laughing at, Anna Nikolaevna ? Sushilov has broken 
his leg; they've just carried him home! And you, Felisata Mihalovna, 
if you don't tell your b:ue-legged Matryoshka to drive your cow home 
in good time so she's not mooing under my window every day, I will 
break her legs. Good-bye, Marya Alexandrovna, good luck to you! 
Tfoo!" 
Sofya Petrovna. vanished. The visitors laughed. Marya Alexan­
drovna was thrown into extreme embarrassment. 
"I think the lady has had a little too much," Natalya Dmitryevna 
brought out in her sugary voice. 
"But what insolence!" 
"Quelle abominable femme!" 
"How funny she was, though!" 
"Ah, what shocking things she said!" 
"But what was it she said about a betrothal party? What betrothal 
party?" Felisata Mihalovna asked sarcastically. 
"But this is awful!" Marya Alexandrovna burst out at last. "It is 
these monsters who scatter these absurd rumours by handfuls! It is 
not so strange, Felisata Mihalovna, that such ladies are to be found 
in our midst, no; what is more surprising is that these ladies are 
sought after, are listened to, are encouraged, are believed, are . .  
," 
"The Prince! the Prince!" all voices cried suddenly at once. 
"Oh, my goodness! Le clzer prince!" 
"Oh, thank goodness! Now we shall find out all the details," 
Felisata Mihalovna whispered to her neighbour. 
Chapter 13 
THE Prince came in with a honeyed smile on his lips. The alarm 
which Mozglyakov had inspired in his chicken heart entirely dis­
appeared at the sight of the ladies. He melted at once like a sweet­
meat. The ladies greeted him with shrill cries of delight. Ladies 
always made a great deal of our old friend, and were very familiar 
with him. He was able to afford them incredible entertainment. 
Felisata Mihalovna had declared that morning (not in earnest, of 

316 
The Short N.ovels of Vostoevsky 
course) that she was ready to sit on his knee, if that would give him 
any pleasure, "because he was a darling, darling old man, sweet 
beyond all bounds!" Marya Alexandrovna transfixed him with her 
eyes, trying to read something from his face and to divine from it 
the way out of her critical position. It was evident that Mozglyakov 
had said horrible things about her, and that her plans were in 
jeopardy. But nothing could be read from the Prince's face. He 
was the same as he had been that morning and as he always was. 
"Ah, my goodness, here is the Prince! We have been waiting and 
waiting for you," cried several of the ladies. 
"With impatience, Prince, with impatience!" piped others. 
"That's extremely flat-ter-ing," lisped the Prince, sitting down at 
the table on which the samovar was boiling. The ladies immediately 
surrounded him. Anna Nikolaevna and Natalya Dmitryevna were 
the only ones left by the side of Marya Alexandrovna. Afanasy 
Matveyitch smiled respectfully. Mozglyakov smiled too, and with a 
defiant air looked at Zina, who, without taking the slightest notice 
of him, went and sat down by her father near the fire. 
"Oh, Prince, is it true what they say, that you are leaving us?" piped 
Felisata Mihalovna. 
"Oh, ye-es, mesdames, I am going away, I want to go abro-oad 
im-med-iately." 
"Abroad, Prince, abroad!" they all cried in chorus. "\Vhat an idea!" 
"Abro-oad," repeated the Prince, prinking. "And do you know, 
I want to go abroad particularly for the sake of the new ideas." 
"How do you mean for the sake of the new ideas? New ideas 
about what?" said the ladies, exchanging glances with one another. 
"Oh, ye-es, for the sake of the new ideas," repeated the Prince, with 
an air of the deepest conviction. "Every one now goes abroad for the 
sake of the new i-deas, and so I, too, want to gain ne-ew i-ideas.'• 
"Don't you want, perhaps, to enter a masonic lodge, Uncle?" 
put in Mozglyakov, who evidently wished to impress the ladies by 
his wit and his ease. 
"Oh, ye-es, my dear, you are quite right," the old man answered 
unexpectedly. "In old days I real-ly did belong to a masonic lodge 
abroad, and I, too, had a number of noble ideas. I intended, indeed, 
at that time to do a great deal for the en-light-en-ment of the peo-ple, 
and I quite decided at Frankfurt to set free my man Sidor whom 
I had brought with me from Russia. But to my surprise he ran away 
from me himself. He was an ex-treme-ly odd man. Afterwards I met 
him in Pa-ris, such a swell, with whiskers, he was walking along the 

Uncle's 'Dream 
317 
boulevard with a mamselle. He looked at me, gave me a nod, and the 
mamselle with him was such a brisk, sharp-eyed, alluring crea­
ture .
.
•
 
" 
"Come, Uncle! Why, you'll be setting all your peasants free next, 
if you go abroad this time," cried Mozglyakov, laughing loudly. 
"You have gu-essed perfectly right, my dear boy, what I desire to 
do," the Prince answered without hesitation. "I do want to set them 
all fre-ee." 
"But upon my word, Prince, they will all run away from you 
directly, and then where will you get your money?" cried Felisata 
Mihalovna. 
"Of course they would all run away," Anna Nikolaevna echoed, 
with a note of alarm. 
"Oh, dear me, do you really think they would run away?" cried 
the Prince in astonishment. 
"They would run away, they would all run away at once and 
would leave you alone," Natalya Dmitryevna confirmed. 
"Oh, dear me! Well, then I shall not se-et them free. But of course 
I did not mean it." 
"So much the better, Uncle," Mozglyakov said approvingly. 
Till then, Marya Alexandrovna had been listening and watching 
in silence. It seemed to her that the Prince had entirely forgotten 
her, and that that was not natural. 
"Allow me, Prince," she began in a loud and dignified voice, "to 
introduce my husband, Afanasy Matveyitch. He came expressly from 
our country house as soon as he heard you were staying with us." 
Afanasy Matveyitch smiled and looked dignified. It seemed to him 
as though he were being praised. 
"Ah, I am delighted," said the Prince, "A-fa-nasy Matveyitch! To 
be sure, I believe I remember something. A-fa-nasy Mat-ve-yitch. 
To be sure, that is the gentleman in the country. Charmant, char­
mant, delighted. My dear!" cried the Prince, turning to Mozglyakov. 
"Why, that's the very man, do you remember, who was in that 
rhyme this morning. How did it go? 'The husband's on the stair, 
and the wife has gone . .  .' Oh, ye-es, the wife has gone away to 
some town." 
"Oh, Prince, why that's true; 'The husband's on the stair, while 
the wife has gone to Tver,' the very vaudeville the actors played here 
last year,' Felisata Mihalovna put in. 
"Oh, ye-es, precisely: to Tver; I always forget. Charmant, charmant! 
So you are that very man? Extremely glad to make your ac-quaint• 

318 
'1/ze Short Novels of VostoevskJ 
ance," said the Prince, holding out his hand to the smiling Afanasy 
Matveyitch without getting up from his chair. "Well, I hope you are 
well ?" 
"H'm . . . .  " 
"He is quite well, Prince, quite well," Marya Alexandrovna 
answered hurriedly. 
"Oh, ye-es, one can see he is quite well. And are you always in the 
country? Well, I am delighted. Why, what red che-eeks he has and 
how he keeps laughing!" 
Afanasy Matveyitch continued smiling, bowing, and even scraping 
with his foot. But at the Prince's last observation he could not restrain 
himself, and all of a sudden, apropos of nothing, in the most foolish 
way burst into a loud laugh. Everybody laughed. The ladies squealed 
with delight. Zina flushed and with flashing eyes looked at Marya 
Alexandrovna, who in her turn was bursting with anger. It was high 
time to change the conversation. 
"How did you sleep, Prince?" she asked in a honeyed voice, at the 
same time turning a menacing look upon Afanasy Matveyitch to 
indicate that he should take himself off as quickly as possible. 
"Oh, I had a very good sleep," answered the Prince; "and do you 
know, I had a most en-chan-ting dream, an en-chan-ting dream!" 
"A dream! I love to hear people tell their dreams," cried Felisata 
Mihalovna. 
"And I, too, I love itl" added Natalya Dmitryevna. 
"An en-chan-ting dream!" repeated the Prince, with a mawkish 
'mile; "but the dream is a dead secret!" 
"How so, Prince, do you really mean you can't tell it us? It must 
have been a wonderful dream!" observed Anna Nikolaevna. 
"A dead secret," repeated the Prince, gleefully tantalizing the ladies' 
curiosity. 
"Oh, then it must be very interesting!" cried the ladies. 
"I bet that the Prince dreamed that he fell on his knees before 
some beautiful young lady and made her an offer of marriage!" cried 
Felisata Mihalovna. "Come, Prince, own up that that's right! Darling 
Prince, confess!" 
"Confess, Prince, confess," the others chimed in on all sides. 
The Prince listened triumphantly and ecstatically to all their out­
cries. The ladies' supposition flattered his vanity extremely, and he 
almost licked his lips. 
"Though I said that my dream was a dead secret," he answered 

Uncle's 'Dream 
319 
at last, "yet I must admit, madame, that to my great surprise, you 
have guessed al-most per-fect-ly right." 
"Guessed right!" cried Felisata Mihalovna rapturously. "Well, 
Prince! Well, now you absolutely must tell us who the beautiful 
young lady was!" 
"You must tell us!" 
"Does she live in these parts?" 
"Darling Prince, do tell us! You must tell us, whatever happensl" 
they cried on all sides. 
"Mesdames, mesdames! .
.
.
 If you are so very in-sis-tent to know, 
I can only tell you one thing, that it was the most fas-ci-na-ting and, 
I may say, the most vir-tu-ous young lady I know," mumbled the 
Prince, melting like wax. 
"Most fascinating and 
.
.
•
 some one living here! Who could it 
be?" the ladies kept asking, exchanging significant glances and 
winking at one another. 
"Of course, the one who is considered the chief belle here," said 
Natalya Dmitryevna, rubbing her huge red hands and looking with 
her cat-like eyes at Zina. All the others looked at Zina with her. 
"\Veil, Prince, if you have such dreams, why don't you get married 
in reality?" asked Felisata Mihalovna, with a significant look at the 
others. 
"What a splendid match we would make for you! "  another lady 
put in. 
"Prince, darling! do get married!" piped a third. 
"Get married, get married!" they cried on all sides. "Why shouldn't 
you get married ?" 
"Oh, ye-es, why not get married? "  the Prince assented, completely 
confused by these outcries. 
"Uncle! "  cried Mozgl yakov. 
"Oh, ye-es, my dear, I un-der-stand. I meant to tell you, mesdames, 
that I am not able to get married, and that when I have spent a 
delightful evening with our fascinating hostess, I shall set off to-mor­
row to Father Misail at the monastery, and then I am going straight 
abroad so as to keep up with the progress of European en-light-en­
ment." 
Zina turned pale and looked at her mother with inexpressible 
misery. But Marya Alexandrovna had already made up her mind. 
Hitherto she had only been waiting, testing things, though she did 
realize that her project was ruined and that her enemies had circum­
vented her successfully. At last she grasped the whole position, she 

320 
'I he Short N.ovels of 1Jostoevsk.y 
made up her mind at one blow to crush the many-headed hydra. 
She got up from her easy-chair majestically and with resolute steps 
approached the table, scanning with haughty eyes her pigmy foes. 
There was the light of inspiration in that look. She determined to 
impress, to disconcert, all these venomous scandalmongers, to squash 
Mozglyakov as though he were a beetle, and by one bold resolute 
stroke to recapture all her lost influence over the imbecile Prince. 
Exceptional audacity was of course needed; but Marya Alexandrovna 
had no lack of audacity! 
"Mesdames," she began solemnly and with dignity (Marya Alex­
androvna was particularly fond of a solemn manner), "mesdames, I 
have been listening for some time to your conversation, to your gay 
and witty jests, and I think it is time for me to put in my word. 
You know we have met together this evening-<}uite by chance (and 
I am so glad, so glad of it) 
. .
. I should never have brought myself 
of my own accord to announce to you an important family secret 
and to publish it abroad sooner than the most ordinary feeling of 
decorum would dictate. Especially I must beg the forgiveness of my 
dear guest; but I fancied that he himself, by indirect hints at the very 
circumstance, gives me to understand that a formal and ceremonious 
announcement of our family secret will not be disagreeable, that, in 
fact, he desires this announcement. . . . Is it not so, Prince, I am 
not mistaken?" 
"Oh, ye-es, you are not mistaken . . .  and I am delighted!" said the 
Prince, without the faintest idea of what she was talking about. 
For the sake of greater effect, Marya Alexandrovna stopped to take 
breath, and looked round at the whole company. All the visitors 
were listening to her words with spiteful and uneasy curiosity. Moz­
glyakov started. Zina flushed crimson and got up from her chair. 
Afanasy Matveyitch, in anticipation of something extraordinary, blew 
his nose to be ready for anything. 
"Yes, mesdames, I am ready joyfully to confide to you my family 
secret. After dinner to-day the Prince, captivated by the beauty and 
. . .  virtues of my daughter, did her the honour of offering her his 
hand. Prince!" she concluded in a voice quivering with tears and 
emotion, "dear Prince, you must not, you cannot be angry with me 
for my indiscretion! Nothing but my great joy as a mother could 
have torn from my heart this precious secret before the fitting time, 
and . . .  what mother could blame me in this case?" 
I cannot find words to describe the effect produced by Marya 
Alexandrovna's unexpected outburst. Every one seemed as though 

Uncle's 7Jream 
321 
petrified with amazement. The treacherous visitors, who had thought 
they would frighten Marya Alexandrovna by their knowledge of her 
secret, had expected to crush her by the premature disclosure of that 
secret, who had expected to torment her, at first simply by allusions, 
were dumbfounded by such audacious candour. Such fearless au­
dacity was a sure sign of power. "Then was the Prince really going 
to marry Zina of his own free will? Then had they not allured him, 
made him drunk, deceived him ? Then he was not being forced into 
marriage in an underhand, dishonest way? Then Marya Alexan­
drovna was not afraid of anybody? Then it would be impossible to 
prevent the marriage, since the Prince was not being forced into it?" 
For a moment there was a sound of whispering which turned at 
once into shrill cries of delight. Natalya Dmitryevna was the first 
to embrace Marya Alexandrovna; Anna Nikolaevna followed her 
example, and after her Felisata Mihalovna. They all jumped up from 
their seats, they were all thrown into confusion, some of the ladies 
\Ven· pale from spite. They began to congratulate the embarrassed 
Zina; they even fastened on Afanasy Matveyitch. Marya Alexan­
drovna held out her arms in a picturesque attitude, and almost by 
force enfolded her daughter in her embrace. The Prince alone looked 
on at the scene with strange surprise, though he went on smiling as 
before. The scene pleased him in a way, however. At the sight of the 
mother embracing the daughter, he took out his handkerchief and 
wiped his eyes in which there gleamed a tear. Of course people 
rushed to congratulate him too. 
"\Ve congratulate you, Prince! We congratulate you!" the ladies 
cried on all sides. 
"So you are going to get married?" 
"So you are really going to get married!" 
"Darling Prince, so you are going to get married?" 
"Oh, ye-es; oh, ye-es," answered the Prince, extremely delighted with 
their raptures and their congratulations. "And I must say, that noth­
ing gives me more pleasure than your kind sympathy, which I shall 
ne-ever forget, ne-ever forget. Charmant! charmant! You've brought 
tears into my eyes." 
"Kiss me, Prince," Felisata Mihalovna cried, louder than all the rest. 
"And I must say," the Prince went on, interrupted on all sides, "I 
am most of all surprised that Marya I-van-ov-na, our honoured 
hostess, has guessed my dream with such ex-tra-or-di-nary insight. 
It is as though she had dreamed it instead of me. Ex-tra-or-di-nary 
insight! Ex-tra-or-di-nary insight!" 

322 
'[he Short Novels of Vostoevsky 
"Oh, Prince, the dream again?" 
"Come, confess, Prince, confess!" they all cried, surrounding him. 
"Yes, Prince, there is no need for concealment, the time has come 
to reveal our secret!" Marya Alexandrovna said sternly and resolutely. 
"I understand your subtle allegory, the enchanting delicacy with 
which you tried to hint to me your desire to make public your en­
gagement. Yes, mesdames, it is true: this afternoon the Prince went 
down on his knees to my daughter, and not in a dream but reality, 
and made her a formal offer." 
"Exactly as though it were real and actually with the very same 
circumstances," repeated the Prince, "Mademoiselle," he said, turning 
with marked courtesy to Zina, who had not yet recovered from her 
amazement, "mademoiselle, I swear that I would never have made 
so bold as to pronounce your name if others had not ut-tered it before 
me. It was fascinating dream, a fas-ci-na-ting dream, and I am doubly 
happy that I am now permitted to tell it to you. Cl1armant, char­
manti .
.
•
 
" 
"But upon my word how is this? He is still talking about a dream," 
whispered Anna Nikolaevna to Marya Alexandrovna, who was some­
what flustered and had turned a little pale. 
Alas! There was an ache and a tremor in Marya Alexandrovna's 
heart already, apart from those warning words. 
"How is this?" whispered the ladies, looking at one another. 
"Why, Prince," began Marya Alexandrovna, with a wry and sickly 
smile. "I protest, you surprise me! What is this strange idea about 
a dream ? I confess I thought till now that you were jesting, but .
•
•
 
if it is a joke, it is rather an inappropriate one . . . .  I should desire, 
I should wish to put it down to your absent-mindedness, but .
.
•
 
" 
"Perhaps it really is the result of his absent-mindedness," hissed 
Natalya Dmitryevna. 
"Oh, yes, perhaps it is absent-mindedness," the Prince assented, 
still not fully grasping what they were trying to get out of him. "And 
only fancy, I must tell you an a-nec-dote. In Petersburg I was invited 
to a fu-ne-ral to some people, maison bourgeoise, mais honnete, and 
I muddled it up and thought it was a name-day party. The name-day 
party had been the week before. I got ready a bouquet of camellias 
for the lady whose name day it was. I go in and what do I see, a re­
spectable, dignified man lying on the table, so that I was quite sur­
prised. I simply did not know what to do with myself and the 
bou-quet." 
"Come, Prince, this is not a time for anecdotes!" Marya Alexan-

Uncle's 'Dream 
323 
drovna interrupted with vexation. "Of course my daughter has no 
need to run after suitors, but this afternoon, beside that piano, you 
made her a proposal. I did not invite you to do so . . . .  I was, I may 
say, astounded . . . .  I was, of course, struck by one idea at the time, 
and I put it all off till you should wake. But I am a mother . . .  she 
is my daughter .
•
.
.
 You spoke yourself just now of a dream, and I 
thought that you wished, under the guise of allegory, to tell us of 
your engagement. I know very well that you will be dissuaded . . .  
and I suspect who it is 
.
•
.
 but . . .  explain yourself, Prince, make 
haste and explain satisfactorily. You cannot jest like this with a 
respectable family." 
"Oh, no, one cannot jest like this with a respectable family," the 
Prince assented mechanically, though he was beginning to be a little 
uneasy. 
"But that is no answer, Prince, to my question. I beg you to give a 
definite answer; repeat at once, repeat before every one that you 
did make my daughter an offer this afternoon." 
"Oh, ye-es, I am ready to repeat it, though I have already told the 
whole story, and Felisata Yakovlevna guessed my dream exactly." 
"It was not a dream, it was not a dream!" cried Marya Alexan­
drovna in exasperation. "It was not a dream, it was reality, Prince; 
reality-do you hear ?-reality!" 
"Reality!" cried the Prince, getting up from his chair in his sur­
prise. "Well, my dear, it is just as you foretold upstairs!" he added, 
turning to Mozglyakov. "But I assure you, honoured Marya Stepa­
novna, that you are in error! I am quite persuaded that I only 
dreamed it." 
"Lord have mercy upon us!" cried Marya Alexandrovna. 
"Don't upset yourself, Marya Alexandrovna," Natalya Dmitryevna 
put in. "Perhaps the Prince has forgotten . . . .  He will remember." 
"I wonder at you, Natalya Dmitryevna," retorted Marya Alexan­
drovna indignantly. "Can such things be forgotten? Can one forget 
it? Upon my word, Prince, are you laughing at us? Or you are, 
perhaps, playing the part of a profligate beau of the days of the 
Regency depicted by Dumas? Some Faire-la-cour or Lauzun? But 
apart from that not being in keeping with your years, I assure you 
that you will not succeed in it. My daughter is not a vicomtesse. Here, 
this afternoon, on this spot she sang to you, and carried away by her 
singing you dropped on your knees and made her an offer! Can I be 
dreaming? Can I be sleeping? Speak, Prince: am I awake or sleeping? "  
"Oh, ye-es . . . .  or rather, perhaps, n o  •
•
• " answered the bewil-

324 
'l he Short N.ovels of Vostoevsky 
dered Prince. "I mean, that I believe I am not dreaming now. You 
see, I was asleep this afternoon, and so I had a dream that in my 
sleep . . .  
" 
"Tfoo, my goodness, what does it mean? Not asleep-asleep, 
dreaming-not dreaming! Why, goodness knows what it means. Are 
you raving, Prince ?" 
"Oh, ye-es, goodness knows . . . though I believe I'm utterly at sea 
now," said the Prince, turning uneasy glances around him. 
"But how could you have dreamed it ?" Marya Alexandrovna in­
sisted in distress, "when I tell you your own dream in such detail, 
though you had not yet told any one of us about it!" 
"But perhaps the Prince did tell somebody," said Natalya Dmitry­
evna. 
"Oh, ye-es, perhaps I did tell somebody," the Prince repeated, utterly 
bewildered. 
"Here's a farce," whispered Felisata Mihalovna to her neighbour. 
"Good heavens, this is past all endurance!" cried Marya Alexan­
drovna, wringing her hands in a frenzy. "She sang to you, she sang 
a ballad! Did you dream that too?" 
"Oh, ye-es; ye-es, indeed, I fancy she did sing a ballad," the Prince 
muttered meditatively. 
And his face lightened up at some sudden recollection. 
"My dear," he cried, addressing Mozglyakov, "I forget to tell you 
just now that there really was a ballad, and there were continually 
castles in that ballad, so that it seemed as if there were a great many 
castles; and then there was a troubadour! Oh, ye-es, I remember it all. 
. . .  So that I even shed tears . . . .  And now I am puzzled, it seems 
as if that really did happen and was not a dream." 
"I must say, Uncle," answered Mozglyakov, speaking as calmly as 
he could, though his voice quivered from some emotion, "I must 
say it seems to me that it is very easy to account for that and make 
it fit in. I believe you really did listen to singing. Zinaida Afanasyevna 
sings beautifully. After dinner you were brought in here and Zinaida 
Afanasyevna sang the ballad to you. I was not there at the time, but 
you were probably touched by its recalling old days; perhaps remem­
bering that very vicomtesse with whom you used once to sing ballads, 
and about whom you told us this morning. And then afterwards 
when you went to bed, in consequence of your pleasant impressions, 
you dreamed that you were in love and had made an offer." 
Marya Alexandrovna was positively petrified by this audacity. 
"Ah, my dear, that is just as it really was!" cried the Prince, delighted. 

Uncle's 1Jream 
325 
"It was just in consequence of those pleasant impressions. I certainly 
remember the ballad being sung to me, and it was because of that, that 
in my dream I wanted to get married. And it is true about the vicom­
tesse too . . . .  Oh, how clever of you, my dear, to see it all! Well, now 
I am quite convinced that I dreamed all that! Marya Vassilyevna! I 
assure you that you are mistaken! It was a dream. Otherwise I should 
not be playing with your estim:ble feelings . . . .  " 
"Ah, now I see clearly who has been at work in this!" cried Marya 
Alexandrovna, beside herself with fury, addressing Mozglyakov. "It 
is you, you, sir; you dishonourable man, it is all your doing. You have 
muddled this unhappy imbecile, because you were refused! But you 
shall pay for this insult, you blackguard! You shall pay for it. You 
shall pay for it!" 
"Marya Alexandrovna!" cried Mozglyakov, turning as red as a crab. 
"Your words are so . . .  I really don't know what to say of your 
words . . . .  No well-bred lady would allow herself . . . I am defend­
ing my kinsman, anyway. You must admit that to ensnare him like 
this . . .  
" 
"Oh, ye-es, to ensnare like this . . .  " the Prince chimed in, trying 
to hide behind Mozglyakov. 
"Afanasy Matveyitch! "  shrieked Marya Alexandrovna, in an unnatu­
ral voice. "Don't you hear how we are being outraged and dishon­
oured ? Or have you lost all sense of your duties ? Are you not the head 
of your family, but a repulsive wooden post? Why do you keep blink­
ing? Any other husb:nd would long ago have washed out such an 
insult to his family in blood! . . .  
" 
"\Vife," Afamsy Matveyitch began with dignity, proud that he was 
needed at last. "Wife! Didn't you perhaps dream it all, and afterwards 
when you woke up, you muddled it all to suit yourself! . . .  
" 
But Afanasy Matveyitch was not destined to give full expression to 
his witty surmise. To that point the visitors had restrained themselves 
and had treacherously assumed an air of demure dignity. But at this 
point a loud burst of laughter that could not be restrained resounded 
through the room. Marya Alexandrovna, forgetting all propriety, 
rushed at her husband, probably with the intention of immediately 
scratching his eyes out. But she was restrained by force. Natalya 
Dmitryevna took advantage of the occasion to add just one drop more 
of venom. 
"Oh, Marya Alexandrovna, perhaps that is just how it was, and 
you are upsetting yourself," she said, in a most honeyed voice. 

326 
'!he Short Novels of Vostoevsky 
"What was? How was it?" cried Marya Alexandrovna, not yet fully 
understanding it. 
"Oh, Marya Alexandrovna, you know it sometimes does happen." 
"What happens? Do you want to drive me crazy?" 
"Perhaps you really did dream it?" 
"Dream it, I? Dream it! And you dare to tell me that to my face?" 
"Well, perhaps that is really how it was," responded Felisata Mihal-
ovna. 
"Oh, ye-es, perhaps that is how it really was," the Prince, too, 
muttered. 
"He too, he too! Lord have mercy on us!" cried Marya Alexan­
drovna, clasping her hands. 
"How you do upset yourself, Marya Alexandrovna! Remember that 
dreams are sent us from on high. If it is God's will, there is none can 
oppose Him, and we are all in His Hands. It's no use being angry 
about it." 
"Oh, ye-es, it's no good being angry about it," the Prince chimed in. 
"Do you take me for a lunatic!" Marya Alexandrovna articulated 
faintly, gasping from wrath. This was beyond human endurance. She 
hastily sought a chair and sank into a swoon. A hubbub followed. 
"It was to do the correct thing that she fainted," Natalya Dmitry­
evna whispered to Anna Nikolaevna. 
But at that instant, at the moment when the general bewilderment 
was greatest and the position was at its tensest, a person who had 
hitherto remained silent suddenly stepped forward-and immediately 
the whole character of the scene was changed .
.
.
•
 
Chapter 14 
ZINAIDA AFANASYEVNA was, speaking generally, of an ex· 
tremely romantic disposition. I don't know whether this was, as Marya 
Alexandrovna maintained, due to too much reading of "that fool 
Shakespeare" with "her wretched little schoolmaster." But never in thৌ 
course of her life at Mordasov had Zina permitted herself such ar:t 
extraordinarily romantic or rather heroic action as the one which Wt 
are just about to describe. 
Pale, with a look of determination in her eyes, but almost shakin& 
with excitement, wonderfully lovely in her indignation, she stepped 
forward. Scanning the whole company with a slow, challenging look 

Uncle's Vream 
327 
in the midst of the sudden silence, she turned to her mother, who at her 
first movement had promptly recovered from her swoon and opened 
her eyes. 
"Mamma," said Zina, "why keep up deception? Why defile ourselves 
further by lying? It has all been made so foul that it is not worth 
taking degrading pains to cover up that foulness!" 
"Zina, Zina! What is the matter with you? Think what you are 
doing!" cried Marya Alexandrovna, leaping up from her chair. 
''I told you, I told you beforehand, Mamma, that I could not bear all 
this disgrace," Zina went on. "Is it necessary to degrade oneself even 
more, to defile oneself still further? But do you know, Mamma, that I 
take it all upon myself, for I am more to blame than any one. I, I by 
consenting, set this vile . . .  intrigue . . .  going! You are a mother; you 
love me, you meant to secure my happiness in your own way, according 
to your own ideas. You may be forgiven; but I, I, never." 
"Zina, surely you don't mean to speak ? . . .  Oh, my God! I foresaw 
that that dagger would stab me to the heart!" 
"Yes, Mamma, I shall speak out. I am disgraced, you •
.
•
 we are all 
disgraced! . . .  
" 
"You are exaggerating, Zina! You are not yourself, and don't under­
stand what you are saying! And what is the use of telling it? There is 
no sense in it 
.
.
•
.
 The disgrace is not ours. I will show at once that 
the disgrace is not ours." 
"No, Mamma," cried Zina, with an angry quiver in her voice, "I will 
not remain silent longer before these people, whose opinion I despise 
and who have come to jeer at us. I will not endure insult from them; 
not one of them has the right to throw dirt at me. They are all ready 
any minute to do thirty times worse than you or I! Dare they, can they 
be our judges? . . .  
" 
"That's a nice thing! Do you hear what she says? What does it 
mean? It's insulting us!" was heard on all sides. 
"The young lady simply does not know what she is saying," said 
Natalya Dmitryevna. 
We may observe in parenthesis that Natalya Dmitryevna's remark 
was a true one. If Zina did not consider those ladies worthy to judge 
her, what was the object of rushing into such publicity, into such con­
fessions before them ? Zinaida Afanasyevna was, in fact, extremely 
hasty, such was the opinion of the best heads in Mordasov later on. 
Everything could have been set right, everything could have been 
smoothed over. It is true that Marya Alexandrovna, too, had damaged 
their position that evening by her hastiness and presumption. They 

328 
The Short Novels of 7Jostoevsky 
need only have derided the imbecile old gentleman and have sent him 
about his business. But as though of design Zina, contrary to all good 
sense and Mordasov prudence, addressed herself to the Prince. 
"Prince," she said to the old man, who was so impressed by her at 
that moment that he got up from his chair as a sign of respect. "Prince, 
forgive me, forgive us. We deceived you! We drew you on . . .  
" 
"Oh, will you be silent, unhappy girl!" Marya Alexandrovna cried 
in a frenzy. 
"Madame, madame! Ma charmante enfant .
.
. " muttered the Prince, 
much impressed. 
But Zina's proud, impulsive and extremely idealistic character carried 
her at that instant far away from every propriety demanded by the 
reality of the position. She even forgot her mother, who was writhing 
in agony at her confession. 
"Yes, we both deceived you, Prince; Mamma, by determining to 
make you marry me, and I, by consenting to it. You were given too 
much wine, I consented to sing and play a part before you. \Ve, as 
Pavel Alexandrovitch has expressed it, have tricked you when you were 
weak and helpless, tricked you for the sake of your fortune, for the sake 
of your rank. All this was horribly base and I repent of it. But I swear 
to you, Prince, that it was from no base impulse that I brought myself to 
that base act. I meant . . .  but what am I saying, it is twice as base to 
justify oneself for a thing like that! But I assure you, Prince, that if I 
had taken anything from you, I would have paid for it by being your 
plaything, your handmaid, your dancing girl, your slave .
.
.
.
 I had 
vowed it, and would have kept my vow!" 
A lump in her throat prevented her from going on. All the visitors 
seemed petrified and listened with their eyes starting out of their heads. 
Zina's strange and, to them, utterly unintelligible outbreak completely 
perplexed them; only the Prince was touched to tears, though he did 
not understand half of what Zina was saying. 
"But I will marry you, ma belle enfant, if you wi-ish it so much," he 
muttered, "and it will be a gre-at honour to me! Only, I assure you 
that it real-ly was like a dream . . . .  Why, I dream all sorts of things. 
Why are you so tro-oubled ? I really don't understand it at all, mon 
ami," he went on, addressing Mozglyakov. "You explain to me, 
please . . . .  
" 
"And you, Pavel Alexandrovitch," said Zina, turning too to Moz­
glyakov, "you, on whom I once brought myself to look as my future 
husband, you who have now so cruelly revenged yourself on me, can 

Uncle's Vream 
329 
you really have joined with these people to torture me and cover me 
with ignominy? And you told me you loved me! But it is not for me 
to preach to you, I am more to blame than you . . . .  I have injured you, 
for I really did lure you on with promises, and my statements were lies 
and a tissue of falsehoods! I never loved you, and if I had brought 
myself to marry you it would simply have been to get away from here, 
from this accursed town, and to escape from all this corruption . . . .  
But, I swear to you, that if I had married you I would have made you 
a good and faithful wife . . . .  You have cruelly revenged yourself on me, 
and if that flatters your pride . . .  " 
"Zinaida Afanasyevna!" cried Mozglyakov. 
"If you still harbour a feeling of hatred for me . . .  " 
"Zinaida Afanasyevna! I" 
"If you ever," said Zina, stifling her tears, "if you ever did love 
me! ! !" 
"Zinaida Afanasyevnal l l" 
"Zina, Zina, my daughter," wailed Marya Alexandrovna. 
"I am a scoundrel, Zinaida Afanasyevna, I am a scoundrel and noth­
ing else," declared Mozglyakov, and general excitement followed. 
Cries of surprise and indignation were raised, but Mozglyakov stood 
as though rooted to the spot, incapable of thought or speech. 
For weak and shallow characters accustomed to habitual subordina­
tion who have dared at last to be moved to wrath and to protest, in 
short, to be resolute and consistent, there is always a line-a limit­
to their resolution and consistency, which is soon reached. Their protest 
is apt at first to be most vigorous. Their energy even approaches frenzy. 
They fling themselves against obstacles as though with closed eyes, and 
always take upon themselves burdens beyond their strength. But reach­
ing a certain point, the frenzied man, as though frightened at himself, 
stops short, dumbfounded with the awful question, "What is this that 
I have done?" Then at once he grows limp, whimpers, asks for ex­
planations, drops on his knees, begs forgiveness, implores that all shall 
be as before, only quickly, as quickly as possible . . . .  This is almost 
exactly what happened now with Mozglyakov. After having been 
beside himself with fury, having invited trouble which now he 
ascribed entirely to himself alone, having satisfied his vanity and 
indignation and beginning to hate himself for it, he stopped short, 
conscience-stricken, before Zina's unexpected outbreak. Her last words 
crushed him completely. To rush from one extreme to another was the 
work of a minute. 

330 
The Short Novels of TJostoevslzy 
"I am an ass, Zinaida Afanasyevnal" he cried, in a rush of frantic 
penitence. "No! What's an ass? An ass would be nothing. I am in­
comparably worse than an ass! But I will show you, Zinaida Afanasy­
evna, I will show you that even an ass may be an honourable man! . . .  
Uncle! I deceived you. It was I, I deceived you! You were not asleep; 
you really did make an offer, and I, I, like a scoundrel, out of revenge 
for having been refused, persuaded you that it had all been a dream." 
"Wonderfully interesting things are coming out," whispered Natalya 
Dmitryevna in Anna Nikolaevna's ear. 
"My dear," answered the Prince, "pie-ease calm yourself; you really 
frighten me with your shouting. I assure you that you are mis-ta-ken . 
. . . I am ready to be married by all means if it is necessary; but, you 
know, you assured me yourself that it was only a dream . . . .  " 
"Oh, how can I convince you! Tell me how to convince him! Uncle, 
Uncle! You know it's an important matter, most important, affecting 
family honour. Reflect! Consider!" 
"My dear, certainly I will re-flect. Stay, let me recull it all in order. 
At first I dreamed of my coachman, Fe-o-fil . . .  " 
"Ohl it is not a question of Feofil now, Uncle." 
"Oh, well, I suppose it is not a question of him now. Then there 
was Na-po-le-on, and then we seemed to be drinking tea and a lady 
came and ate up all the sugar." 
"But, Uncle"-Mozglyakov bawled in the confusion of his mind­
"why, it was Marya Alexandrovna herself told us that this morning 
about Natalya Dmitryevna! Why, I was here and heard it myself! I 
was hiding and looking at you through the keyhole . . . .  " 
"What, Marya Alexandrovna," Natalya Dmitryevna broke in; "so 
you told the Prince too that I stole the sugar out of your sugar-basin! 
So I come to steal your sugar, do II" 
"Get away with you!" cried Marya Alexandrovna, reduced to despair. 
"No, I won't go away, Marya Alexandrovna. Don't dare to speak to 
me like that! . . .  So I stole your sugar, did I ?  I have been hearing 
for a long time that you tell such nasty stories about me. Sofya Petrovna 
gave me an exact account of it . . . .  So I steal your sugar, do I ?" 
"But, mesdames," cried the Prince, "it was only a dream, you know. 
Why, I dream all sorts of things . . . .  " 
"Cursed tub," Marya Alexandrovna muttered in an undertone. 
"So I am a tub, am I!" shrieked Natalya Dmitryevna. "And who are 
you ? I have known for ever so long that you called me a tub. I have 
got a husband, anyway, while you've got a fool. . . .  " 
"Oh, ye-es, I remembt'r there was a tub too," muttered the Prince, 

U tzclc' s 'Dream 
331 
unconsciously recalling his conversation with Marya Alexandrovna 
that morning. 
"So you're insulting a lady too? How dare you, Prince, insult a lady ? 
If I am a tub, you have no legs . . .  " 
"Who? I have no legs ?" 
"Yes, indeed, no legs and no teeth either, so that's what you are." 
"Yes, and only one eye, too," shouted Marya Alexandrovna. 
"You have stays instead of ribs," said Natalya Dmitryevna. 
"Your face is worked by springs." 
"You've no hair! . . .  " 
"And the idiot has a false moustache," cried Marya Alexandrovna. 
"Do at least leave me my nose, Marya Stepanovna," cried the Prince, 
overwhelmed by such sudden candour. "My dear! Was it you gave me 
away? Did you tell them that my hair was false?" 
"Uncle!" 
"No, my dear, I really can't stay here any longer. Take me away . . .  
que/le societe! \Vhat have you brought me to, my goodness?" 
"Imbecile, scoundrel!" cried Marya Alexandrovna. 
"Oh, dear!" said the poor Prince. "I've forgotten for the minute why 
I came here, but I shall re-mem-ber di-rect-ly. Take me away, dear boy, 
or they will te-ar me to pieces! Meanwhile . . .  I must at once no-ote 
down a new idea . . . .  " 
"Let us go, Uncle, it is not too late; I will take you at once to an 
hotel and I will go with you . . . .  
" 
"Oh, ye-es, to an ho-tel. Adieu, ma charmante enfant . . . .  You alone 
. . .  you alone . . .  are good and vir-tu-ous. You are an hon-ou-rable 
girl. Come along, my dear boy. Oh, dear; oh, dear!" 
But I will not describe the conclusion of the unpleasant scene which 
took place on the Prince's departure. The visitors dispersed with shrill 
scoldings and abuse. Marya Alexandrovna was left at last alone in the 
midst of the ruins of her former glory. Alas! Power, glory, conse­
quence-all had vanished in that one evening. Marya Alexandrovna 
realized that she could never rise to her former height. Her despotic 
rule over local society which had lasted long years was annihilated for 
ever. What was left her now? To be philosophical? But she was not 
philosophical. She was in a paroxysm of rage all night. Zina was dis­
honoured, there would be endless gossip and scandal! Horrors! 
As a faithful historian I ought to mention that from this frenzy the 
chief sufferer was Afanasy Matveyitch, who took refuge at last in the 
lumber-room, and stayed there freezing till morning; at last the morn­
ing came, but it brought nothing good. Misfortunes never come singly. 

332 
'l he Short Novels of Vostocvslzy 
Chapter 15 
I F DESTINY once begins to pursue some one with misfortune 
there is no end to its blows. That has been noticed long ago. Was the 
shame and disgrace of the previous day not enough for Marya Alexan­
drovna? No! Fate was preparing something more, something better. 
Before ten o'clock in the morning a strange and almost incredible 
rumour was suddenly all over the town, welcomed by all with the most 
spiteful and venomous glee-as we generally do welcome any extraor­
dinary scandal connected with any of our neighbours. "To be so lost 
to all shame and conscience!" people cried on all sides; "to demean 
herself to such a degree, to disregard all decorum, so utterly to cast 
off all restraint!" and so on, and so on. 
This was what had happened, however. Early in the morning, a 
little before six o'clock, a poor and pitiful-looking old woman in tears 
and despair ran up to Marya Alexandrovna's house and besought the 
maidservant to wake the young lady immediately, only the young lady, 
and in secret, so that Marya Alexandrovna should in no way hear of 
it: Zina, pale and shattered, ran out to the old woman at once. The 
latter fell at her feet, kissed them, bathed them with her tears, and 
besought her to come with her to her sick Vasya, who had been so 
bad, so bad all night that he might perhaps not last through the day. 
The old woman, sobbing, told Zina that Vasya himself begged her to 
go for a last farewell before he died, implored her by all the holy 
angels, by all that had been in the past, and said that if she did not 
come he would die in despair. Zina at once resolved to go, though 
yielding to this entreaty would obviously confirm all the old malicious 
gossip about the intercepted letter, about her scandalous behaviour, 
and so on. Saying nothing to her mother, she threw on a cloak and at 
once hastened with the old woman right across the town to one of the 
poorest quarters of Mordasov, to the most out-of-the-way street, in 
which there was a little dilapidated house, with little slits for windows, 
fallen aslant, as it were sunken into the ground and almost buried 
under huge drifts of snow. 
In this little house, in a little, low-pitched, musty room in which the 
huge stove filled up half the floor space, a young man was lying cov­
ered with an old greatcoat, on an unpainted wooden bed with a mat­
tress as thin as a pancake. His face was pale and exhausted, his eyes 

Uncle's Vream 
333 
glittered with a feverish glow, his hands were thin and dry as sticks, 
his breathing was laboured and husky. It could be seen that he had 
once been handsome; but disease had disfigured the delicate features 
of his handsome face, which was terrible and pitiful to look at, as the 
face of a consumptive, or rather of a dying man, always is. His old 
mother, who had been for a whole year, almost to the last hour, hoping 
for her Vasya's recovery, saw at last that he was not long for this world. 
She stood over him now crushed with grief, but tearless, clasping her 
hands and gazing at him as though she could never look at him 
enough; and though she knew it, she could not grasp that in a few 
days her Vasya, the apple of her eye, would be covered by the frozen 
earth out yonder under the snowdrifts in the wretched graveyard. But 
Vasya was not looking at her at that moment. His whole face, wasted 
and marked by suffering, was full of bliss. He saw before him, at last, 
her of whom he had been dreaming, asleep and awake, for the last 
year and a half in the long, dreary nights of his sickness. He saw that 
she had forgiven him, coming to him like the angel of the Lord as he 
lay at death's door. She was pressing his hands, was weeping over him, 
smiling at him, looking at him again with her wonderful eyes and­
and all the past never to return, rose up in the dying man's soul. Life 
glowed again in his heart, and seemed at parting from him as though 
it would make the sufferer feel how hard it was to part. 
"Zina," he said, "Zinotchka! Don't weep over me, don't mourn, don't 
grieve, don't remind me that I shall soon die. I shall look at you-yes, 
as I am looking at you now-I shall feel that our souls are together 
again, that you have forgiven me; I shall kiss your hands again as in 
old days, and die, perhaps, without noticing death! You have grown 
thin, Zinotchka! My angel, with what kindness you are looking at 
me now. And do you remember how you used to laugh in old 
days? Do you remember? . . .  Ah, Zina, I will not ask your forgiveness, 
I do not want to remember what happened, because, Zina, because 
though you have forgiven me I shall never forgive myself. There have 
been long nights, Zina, long, sleepless nights, awful nights, and in those 
nights on this bed I thought for long hours over many things, and 
made up my mind long ago that it is better for me to die; yes, by God, 
it is better! . . .  I am not fit for life, Zinotchka!" 
Zina was weeping and mutely pressing his hands as though she 
would check his words. 
"Why are you crying, my angel ?" the sick man went on; "because 
I am dying-only for that? But you know all the past has been dead 
and buried long ago! You are cleverer than I, you are more pure-

334 
T h% Short 'Novds of 7Jostoevslzy 
hearted, and so you have known a long time that I am a bad man. 
Can Ǎ·ou still love me ? And what it has cost me to endure the thought 
that you know I am a bad and shallow man. And how much pride 
there was in that, perhaps honourable pride . . .  I don't know. Oh, my 
dear, all my life bas been a dream. I was always dreaming, for ever 
dreaming, but did DO( live. I was proud, I despised the herd ; and in 
what was I superior to other people ? I don't know. Purity of heart, 
generosity of feeling? But al that was dreaming, Zina, when we read 
Shakespeare together ; but when it came to action I showed my purity 
and generosity of feeling." 
'"Hush !" said Zina, "hush ! . . .  All that is not so, it is useles . . .  you 
are killing }'Ourself." 
"Why do you stop me, Zina ? I know you ha,·e forgiven me, and 
perhaps you forgave me long ago ; but you j udged me-and unckrstood 
the son of man I am ; that is what torments me. I am unworthy of 
your love, Zina! You were honest and great-souled in action too ; you 
went to your mother and said that you would marry me and no one 
else, and you would have kept your word because with you words were 
not apan from action. While I, I! when it came to action . . .  Do you 
know, Zina, I did not understand then what you would be sacrificing 
in marrying me! I did not even understand that marrying me you 
m!ght die of stan·ation. I never even thought of it; I only thought 
that you would marry me, a great poet (a future one, that is) .  I would 
not understand the reasons you brought forn-·ard begging me to put off 
our marriage ; I tormented you, bullied you, reproached you, despised 
you, and it came at last to my threatening you with that letter. I was 
not e\'en a scoundrel at that moment. I was simply a worm ! Oh, how 
you must have despised me! Yes, it is well that I am dying! It is well 
that ǎ·ou did not marry me! I should have understood nothing of your 
sacrifice, I should have tormented you, I should ha·te worried you over 
our poverty ; the years would have passed, and who knows !-Perhaps 
I should have grown to bate you, as a hindrance in mǏ· life. Now it is 
better. Now at least my bitter tears have purified my bean. Ah, 
Zinotchka! love me a little as ,·ou used to love me once . . .  in this last 
hour at least. .
. . I know, of course, that I do not desen·e your love, 
bur . . .  but . . .  Oh, my angel ! '" 
Several times in the course of this spech Zina, sobing herself, tried 
to stop him. But he did not listen to her; he was tormented by a 
longing to express himself, and he went on speaking, though with 
difficulty, gasping in a hoarse and chok.ing voice. 

Uncle's 'Dream 
335 
"If you hadn't met me, if you hadn't loved me, you would have 
lived !" said Zina. "Oh, why, why did we meet! "  
"No, m y  darling, do not reproach yourself with m y  dying," the sick 
man went on . ..  I am the only person to blame for everything! How 
PlUCh vanity there was in it! Romantic foolishness! Have they told 
you my foolish history, Zina ? You see, two years ago there was a 
convict here, a criminal and murderer ; but when it came to punish· 
ment, he turned out to be the most cowardly creature. Knowing that 
they would not Bog a sick man, he got hold of some spirit, put tobacco 
in it and drank it. He was attacked with such violent sickness, vomit­
ing blod, and it lasted so long, that it affected his lungs. He was 
moved to the hospital, and within a few months he died of rapid con­
sumption. Weiņ my angel, I thought of that convict that very day 
.
.
•
 
you know, after that note . . .  and made up my mind to destroy myself 
in the same way ; but why do you think I chose consumption ? Why 
didn't I strangle myself or drown myself ? Was I afraid of immediate 
death ? Perhap5 it was that ; but I keep fancying, Zinotchka, that even 
in this I could not lay aside romantic foolishness! Anyway, I had in 
my mind at the time the thought : how picturesque it would be, here 
I should lie in bed dying of consumption, while you would be dis­
tresed and unhappy at having sent me into consumption ; you would 
come to me confesing yourself guilty, would fall on your knees before 
me . . . .  I should forgive you, ahould die in your arms. It was silly, 
Zinotchka, silly, wasn't it?" 
"Don't speak of it! "  said :Una ; "don't say that ! You are not like that. 
Let us rather remember something else, that was good and happy in 
our past! "  
"It is bitter to me, my darling, that is why I talk of it. I haven't sen 
10 for a year and a half. I should like to open my heart to you now. 
You know ever since then I have been utterly alone, and I think there 
has not been one moment when I have not thought of you, my 
precious one. And do you know what, Zinotchka ? How I longed to 
do something, to desene that you should change your opinion of me! 
Until lately I did not believe that I should die. You know I was not 
laid up at first, for a long time I was walking about after my lungs 
were affected. And what absurd projects I had ! I dreamed, for instance, 
of becoming all at once a great poet and publishing in the Nous of the 
FtJtheriand a poem unlike anything in the world. I thought of pouring 
into it all my feelings, all my soul, so that wherever you might be, I 
should be with you, always reminding you of me with my poem, and 
the very best of my dreams was that you would think at last and say, 

336 
The Short 'Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
'No! he is not such a bad man as I thought!' It was stupid, Zinotchka, 
wasn't it?" 
"No, no, Vasya, no!" said Zina. 
She fell on his breast and kissed his hands. 
"And how jealous I was of you all this time! I believe I should have 
died if I had heard of your marriage. :t sent, I kept watch on you, I 
spied . . . .  She was constantly going" (and he nodded towards his 
mother). "You did not love Mozglyakov, did you, Zinotchka? Oh, 
my angel! Will you remember me when I am dead? I know you will 
remember; but years will pass, the heart will grow harder, you will 
grow cold, there will be winter in your soul, and you will forget me, 
Zinotchka! . . .  
" 
"No, no, never! I shall not marry . . . .  You are my first . . .  and mine 
for ever . . . .  " 
"Everything dies, Zinotchka, even memories . . . .  And our noble feel­
ings die. Common-sense takes their place. What is the use of repining? 
Make use of life, Zina. Live long, live happily. Love some one else, if 
you can love; there is no loving the dead! Only think of me from time 
to time; do not remember what was bad, forgive the bad; but you 
know there was good, too, in our love, Zinotchka. Oh, golden days 
that never can return! . . .  Listen, my angel, I always loved the evening 
hour of sunset. Think of me sometimes at that hour! Oh, no, no! Why 
die? Oh, how I long to come back to life again! Remember, my dear, 
remember, remember that time. It was spring then, the sun was 
shining so brightly, the flowers were in blossom, it was like a holiday 
all round us; and now look, look!" 
And with a wasted hand the poor fellow pointed to the dingy, 
frozen window. Then he clutched Zina's hands, pressed them to his 
eyes and sobbed bitterly, bitterly. His sobs almost lacerated his racked 
breast. 
And the whole day he was sobbing in anguish and misery. Zina did 
her best to comfort him, but she was half dead with misery. She told 
him that she would never forget him, and that she would never love 
another man as she loved him. He believed her, smiled, kissed her 
hands, but memories of the past only kindled fresh suffering in his 
soul. So passed the whole day. Meanwhile Marya Alexandrovna in 
alarm sent a dozen times to Zina entreating her to return home and 
not to ruin herself completely in public opinion. At last, when it was 
getting dark, almost beside herself with horror, she made up her mind 
to go to Zina herself. Calling her daughter out into the other room, 
she besought her almost on her knees "to turn aside this last worst 

Uncle's 'Dream 
337 
dagger from her heart." Zina went out to her feeling ill, her head was 
burning. She listened and did not understand her mother. Marya Alex­
androvna went away at last in despair, for Zina was determined to stay 
the night in the dying man's house. She did not leave his bedside all 
night. But the sick man grew worse and worse. The day came at last, 
but there was no hope that the sufferer would live through it. The 
old mother seemed frantic, she walked about as though she could not 
take it in, giving her son medicines which he would not take. His 
agony lasted a long time. He could not speak, and only incoherent, 
husky sounds broke from his throat. Up to the very last moment he 
gazed at Zina, still sought her with his eyes, and when the light in 
his eyes was beginning to grow dim, he still, with a straying, uncertain 
hand, felt for her hand to press it in his. Meanwhile the short winter 
day was passing. And when the last farewell gleam of sunshine gilded 
the solitary frozen window of the little room, the soul of the sufferer 
parted from his exhausted body and floated after that last ray. The 
old mother, seeing her adored boy lying dead before her, clasped her 
hands, uttered a shriek, and threw herself upon his breast. 
"It is you, you snake in the grass, have been his ruin! You, accursed 
girl, with your ill deeds have parted us and been his undoing." 
But Zina did not hear her. She stood over the dead man as though 
she had lost all comprehension. At last she bent down, made the sign 
of the cross over him, kissed him, and walked mechanically out of the 
room. Her eyes were burning, her head was going round. Her agoniz­
ing experiences, her two nights without sleep, almost deprived her of 
reason. She vaguely felt that all her past had been, as it were, torn out 
of her heart, and that a new life was beginning, gloomy and menacing. 
But before she had gone ten paces, Mozglyakov seemed to spring out 
of the earth before her; he seemed to be purposely lying in wait for 
her at that spot. 
"Zinaida Afanasyevna," he began in a timorous whisper, looking 
nervously around him, for it was hardly dark yet, "Zinaida Afanasy্ 
evna, of course I am an ass. That is, if you like I am not an ass now, 
for you see, anyway, I have behaved honourably. But still I am sorry 
for having been an ass .
.
.
•
 I am afraid I am muddled, Zinaida Afanasy­
evna, but that is due to all sorts of reasons . . .  
" 
Zina gazed at him almost unconsciously, and went on her way in 
silence. As it was difficult for two to go abreast on the raised wood,.n 
pavement, and as Zina did not move aside, Pavel Alexandrovitch 
jumped off the pavement and ran by her side below, peeping up con­
tinually into her face. 

338 
The Short Novels of Vostoevsky 
"Zinaida Afanasyevna," he went on, "I have reflected, and if you are 
willing, I am prepared to renew my offer. I am ready to forget every­
thing, Zinaida Afanasyevna, the whole disgrace, and to forgive it, but 
only on one condition: so long as we are here-let it all be kept secret. 
You will go away from here as soon as possible; I shall follow you 
secretly; we will be married in some remote place so that no one shall 
see it, and then at once we will go to Petersburg, travelling with posting 
'1orses, so you should only take a little portmanteau. Eh? Do you agree, 
Zinaida, Afanasyevna? Tell me quickly! I can't wait about, we might 
be seen together." 
Zina made no answer, she only looked at Mozglyakov; but the 
look was such that he understood at once, took off his hat, bowed 
himself off, and vanished at the first turning into a side street. 
"What is the meaning of it?" he thought. "That evening, the day 
before yesterday, she was all softness and sentiment, and took all the 
blame on herself? She changes from day to day, it seems!" 
And meanwhile one event was following another in Mordasov. A 
tragic circumstance had occurred. After being driven to the hotel by 
Mozglyakov, the old Prince was taken ill the same night, and danger­
ously ill. The people of Mordasov heard the news next morning. Kalist 
Stanislavitch scarcely left his bedside. In the evening there was a con­
sultation of all the Mordasov doctors. The invitations to request their 
attendance were written in Latin. But in spite of the Latin the Prince 
had already lost consciousness, was delirious, kept asking Kalist Stan­
islavitch to sing him a ballad, and talking about wigs; at times he 
seemed frightened and cried out. The doctors decided that the hospi­
tality of Mordasov had set up inflammation of the stomach, which had 
somehow passed (probably on the journey) to the brain. They ad­
mitted the possibility also of some moral shock. They summed up in 
conclusion by saying that the Prince had been for a long time past pre­
disposed to death, and so would certainly die. On the last point they were 
not mistaken, for three days later the poor old man died at the hotel. 
This was a great shock to the people of Mordasov. No one had 
expected the affair to take such a serious turn. They flocked in crowds 
to the hotel where the dead body was lying; they discussed and de­
bated, nodded their heads, and ended by severely censuring "the luckless 
Prince's murderers," understanding, of course, by that term, Marya 
Alexandrovna and her daughter. Every one felt that this affair from 
its extremely scandalous character might easily gain an unpleasant 
publicity, would perhaps reach faraway parts, and all sorts of possi­
bilities were talked over and discussed. All this time Mozglyakov wa$ 

Uncle's 7Jream 
339 
in the greatest fuss and flurry, and at last his head was in a perfect 
whirl. He was in that state of mind when he saw Zina. His position 
was certainly difficult. He had brought the Prince into the town, he 
had moved him to the hotel, and now he did not know what to do 
with the dead man, where to bury him, whom to inform of his death! 
Should the body be taken to Duhanovo? Besides, he considered him­
self a nephew. He trembled with apprehension that he might be 
blamed for the venerable old man's death. "Very likely there will be 
talk of it in Petersburg in the best society!" he thought with a shudder. 
He could not extract advice of any sort from his Mordasov acquaint­
ances; they were all overcome by sudden consternation, they rushed 
away from the dead body and left Mozglyakov in gloomy isolation. 
But all at once the scene was completely transformed. Early the next 
morning a new visitor arrived in the town. Of this visitor all Mordasov 
instantly began talking, but they spoke of him mysteriously in a 
whisper, staring at him out of every chink and every window when 
he drove along the High Street on his way to the Governor's. Even 
Pyotr Mihalovitch seemed overawed, and did not know what tone to 
take with his visitor. The visitor was no other than the renowned 
Prince Shtchepetilov, a relative of the old Prince's, a man still youngish, 
about thirty-five, with shoulder-knots and the epaulettes of a colonel. 
The sight of those shoulder-knots struck awe into the hearts of all 
subordinate officials. The police-master, for instance, completely lost 
his head-in a moral sense, of course; physically he put in an appear­
ance, though it was a very stiff and constrained appearance. It was at 
last learned that Prince Shtchepetilov had come from Petersburg, 
calling on the way at Duhanovo. Finding no one at Duhanovo, he 
Rew off in pursuit of his uncle to Mordasov, where he had been thun­
derstruck by the news of the old man's death and the rumours con­
cerning the circumstances attending it. Pyotr Mihalovitch was actually 
a little nervous as he gave the necessary explanations; and indeed 
every one in Mordasov had a guilty air. Moreover, the visitor had such 
a stern, such a dissatisfied face, though one would have thought it 
impossible to be dissatisfied with the fortune he was inheriting. He at 
once took everything into his own hands; Mozglyakov promptly and 
with shame effaced himself before the real, not self-styled, nephew 
and vanished-no one knew where. It was decided to move the dead 
body at once to the monastery, where a requiem service was arranged. 
All the directions were given by the old Prince's kinsman brieRy, drily, 
and sternly, but with tact and decorum. Next day all ৎhe town assem­
bled at the monastery to hear the requiem service. An absurd rumour 

340 
The Short N.ovels of 1Jostoevsk.y 
was current among the ladies that Marya Alexandrovna would appear 
at the church in person, and on her knees before the coffin would pray 
aloud for forgiveness, and that this all had to be in accordance with 
the law. All this, of course, proved to be nonsense, and Marya Alexan­
drovna did not come to the church. We forgot to say that immediately 
after Zina's return to the house, her mother decided that very evening 
to move to their country house, considering it impossible to remain 
longer in the town. There she listened anxiously from her seclusion 
to the rumours from the town, sent to find out about the new arrival, 
and was all the time in a state of fever. The road from the monastery 
to Duhanovo passed less than three-quarters of a mile from her win­
dows, and so Marya Alexandrovna could command a convenient view 
of the long procession which stretched from the monastery to Duhanovo 
after the service. The coffin was upon a high hearse; and after it 
stretched a long string of carriages escorting it to the point where the 
road turns off to the town. And that gloomy hearse could be seen a 
long way further, a black patch against the white snow-covered plain, 
moving slowly with becoming dignity. But Marya Alexandrovna could 
not look at it long, she walked away from the window. 
A week later she moved to Moscow with her daughter and Afanasy 
Matveyitch, and a month later the news reached Mordasov that Marya 
Alexandrovna's country house as well as her town house were for 
sale. And so this comme-il-faut lady was lost to Mord:.sov for ever! 
Even this could not pass without ill-natured jibes. It was asserted, for 
instance, that Afanasy Matveyitch was being sold with their country 
place . . . .  One year passed and then J. second, and M:.rya Alexandrovna 
was almost forgotten. Alas! that is how it always is in life! It was 
said, however, that she had bought another country place, and had 
moved to another provincial town, where, of course, she had already 
taken control of everything; that Zina was still unmarried, that Afanasy 
Matveyitch . . .  However, it is hardly worth while to repeat these 
rumours, they were all very untrustworthy. 
Three years have passed since I wrote the last line of the first part 
of my Mordasov chronicle, and who would have supposed that I should 
have occasion to open my manuscript again and to add another piece 
of news to my story? Well, here it is! I will begin with Pavel Alexan­
drovitch Mozglyakov. When he disappeared from Mordasov he went 
straight to Petersburg, where he successfully obtained the post in the 
service that had long been promised him. He soon forgot all the 
incidents at. Mordasov, threw himself into the vortex of social life on 

Uncle's Vream 
341 
Vassilyevsky Island and had a gay time of it, flirted, kept up with the 
times, fell in love, made an offer, swallowed another refusal, and 
before he had digested it, was led by idleness and the frivolity of his 
character to get for himself a post on an expedition which was being 
sent to one of the remotest borders of our boundless fatherland, for 
inspection or for some other object, I don't know for certain what. The 
party successfully traversed all the forest and deserts, and at last, after 
long peregrinations, arrived in the chief town of that remote region to 
call on the Governor-General. He was a tall, lean, stern general, an 
old military man, who had been often wounded in battle, and had 
two stars and a white cross on his breast. He received the expedition 
with dignity and decorum, and invited all the officials to a ball which 
was to be given that very evening on the occasion of the name day of 
the governor's wife. Pavel Alexandrovitch was very much pleased. 
Attiring himself in his Petersburg suit in which he intended to produce 
an effect, he walked with a free and easy air into the big reception 
hall, but he was at once somewhat taken aback at the sight of the 
numbers of thick and plaited epaulettes and civilian uniforms with stars 
on their breasts. He had to pay his respects to the governor's wife, of 
whom he had heard that she was young and very good-looking. He 
went up to her, indeed, with aplomb, but was suddenly petrified with 
amazement. Before him stood Zina in a resplendent ball-dress and 
diamonds, looking proud and haughty. She completely failed to recog­
nize Pavel Alexandrovitch. Her eyes glided over his face and at once 
turned to some one else. Astounded, Pavel Alexandrovitch moved to 
one side, and in the crowd came into collision with a timid young 
official who seemed to be frightened at finding himself at the gover­
nor's ball. Pavel Alexandrovitch immediately began to question him, 
and learned the most interesting facts. He learned that the governor 
had married two years ago, when he had visited Moscow, and that he 
had married a very wealthy young lady of a distinguished family; that 
the governor's wife "was awfully good-looking, even one might say 
a beauty of the first order, but that she behaved extremely proudly, 
and only danced with generals"; that at the present ball there were 
in all nine generals, their own and visitors, including the actual civil 
councillors; "that the governor's wife had a mamma who lived with 
her, and that this mamma belonged to the highest society, and was 
very clever," but that the mamma herself was completely dominated 
by the daughter, while the general himself simply doted on his spouse. 
Mozglyakov faltered a question about Afanasy Matveyitch, but they 
had no conception of his existence in "the remote region." Regaining 

)·l2 
The Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
his confidence a little, Mozglyakov walked about the rooms and soon 
saw Marya Alexandrovna, gorgeously attired, brandishing a costly fan 
and talking with animation to a personage of the fourth class. Round 
her clustered several ladies evidently anxious to propitiate her, and 
Marya Alexandrovna was apparently very gracious to all of them. 
Mozglyakov ventured to introduce himself. Marya Alexandrovna 
seemed a little startled, but almost instantly recovered herself. She 
graciously condescended to recognize Pavel Alexandrovitch, questioned 
him about Petersburg acquaintances, asked him why he was not 
abroad. To Mordasov she made no allusion whatever, as though such 
a place had no existence on earth. At last, after mentioning the name 
of a distinguished Petersburg prince and inquiring after his health, 
though Mozglyakov had no acquaintance whatever with the prince in 
question, she turned imperceptibly to a grand personage who was 
approaching, whose grey locks were fragrant with scent, and a minute 
later had completely forgotten Pavel Alexandrovitch, though he re­
mained standing before her. With his hat in his hand and a sarcastic 
smile on his face, Mozglyakov returned to the great hall. Considering 
for some unknown reasons that he was insulted and even wounded, he 
resolved not to dance. A morose and absent expression and a biting 
Mephistophelean smile never left his face the whole evening. He leaned 
in a picturesque attitude against a column (as luck would have it, 
there were columns in the hall), and during the whole ball, that is for 
several hours together, he remained standing at the same place watch­
ing Zina. But alas! all his antics, all his striking attitudes, his disil­
lusioned air and all the rest of it were thrown away. Zina completely 
failed to observe him. At last, enraged and with legs aching from long 
standing, hungry because as an unhappy lover he could not remain to 
supper, he returned to his lodgings quite worn out and feeling as 
though he had been beaten by some one. For a long while he did not 
go to bed, recalling the past which he had so long forgotten. Next 
morning new instructions arrived, and with relief Mozglyakov suc­
ceeded in being entrusted with the execution of them. He felt positively 
lighter-hearted as he drove out of the town. Snow was lying like a 
dazzling shroud over the boundless, deserted plain. In the distance on 
the very horizon stretched dark forests. 
The mettlesome horses dashed along, flinging the powdery snow 
with their hoofs. The sledge bell tinkled, Pavel Alexandrovitch sank 
into thought, and then into dreams, and then into a sweet sleep. He 
woke at the third posting station, feeling fresh and well, with quite 
different thoughts in his mind. 

CJ:he eternal 
Husband 


THE eTERNAL HUSBAND 
Chapter 1 
VELCHANINOV 
THE summer had come and, contrary to expectations, Velchani­
nov remained in Petersburg. The trip he had planned to the south of 
Russia had fallen through, and the end of his case was not in sight. 
This case-a lawsuit concerning an estate-had taken a very unfortu­
nate turn. Three months earlier it had appeared to be quite straight­
forward, almost impossible to contest; but suddenly everything was 
changed. "And, in fact, everything has changed for the worse!" Vel­
chaninov began frequently and resentfully repeating that phrase to 
himself. He was employing an adroit, expensive, and distinguished 
lawyer, and was not sparing money; but through impatience and lack 
of confidence he had been tempted to meddle in the case himself too. 
He read documents and wrote statements which the lawyer rejected 
point-blank, ran from one court to another, collected evidence, and 
probably hindered everything; the lawyer complained, at any rate, 
and tried to pack him off to a summer villa. But Velchaninov could 
not even make up his mind to go away. The dust, the stifling heat, 
the white nights of Petersburg, that always fret the nerves were what 
he was enjoying in town. His flat was near the Grand Theatre; he had 
only recently taken it, and it, too, was a failure. "Everything is a fail­
ure!" he thought. His nervousness increased every day; but he had for 
a long time past been subject to nervousness and hypochondria. 
He was a man whose life had been full and varied, he was by no 
means young, thirty-eight or even thirty-nine, and his "old age," as he 
expressed it himself, had come upon him "quite unexpectedly"; but he 
realized himself that he had grown older less by the number than by 
the quality, so to say, of his years, and that if he had begun to be 
aware of waning powers, the change was rather from within than from 
without. In appearance he was still strong and hearty. He was a tall, 
sturdily-built fellow, with thick flaxen hair without a sign of greynes$ 
ĺ45 

346 
'Ih¬ Short N.ovds of 'Dosto¬vskJ 
and a long fair beard almost half-way down his chest; at first sight he 
seemed somewhat slack and clumsy, but if you looked more attentively, 
you would detect at once that he was a man of excellent breeding, who 
had at some time received the education of an aristocrat. Velchaninov's 
manners were still free, assured and even gracious, in spite of his 
acquired grumpiness and slackness. And he was still, even now, full of 
the most unhesitating, the most snobbishly insolent self-confidence, the 
depth of which he did not himself suspect, although he was a man 
not merely intelligent, but even sometimes sensible, almost cultured 
and unmistakably gifted. His open and ruddy face had been in old days 
marked by a feminine softness of complexion which attracted the 
notice of women; and even now some people, looking at him, would 
say: "What a picture of health! What a complexion!" And yet this 
picture of health was cruelly subject to nervous depression. His eyes 
were large and blue, ten years earlier they had possessed great fascina­
tion; they were so bright, so gay, so careless that they could not but 
attract every one who carne in contact with him. Now that he was 
verging on the forties, the brightness and good-humour were almost 
extinguished. Those eyes, which were already surrounded by tiny 
wrinkles, had begun to betray the cynicism of a worn-out man of 
doubtful morals, a duplicity, an ever-increasing irony and another 
shade of feeling, which was new: a shade of sadness and of pain­
a sort of absent-minded sadness as though about nothing in particular 
and yet acute. This sadness was especially marked when he was alone. 
And, strange to say, this man who had been only a couple of years 
before fond of noisy gaiety, careless and good-humoured, who had been 
so capital a teller of funny stories, liked nothing now so well as being 
absolutely alone. He purposely gave up a great number of acquaint­
ances whom he need not have given up even now, in spite of his 
financial difficulties. It is true that his vanity counted for something 
in this. With his vanity and mistrustfulness he could not have endured 
the society of his old acquaintances. But, by degrees, in solitude even 
his vanity began to change its character. It grew no less, quite the 
contrary, indeed; but it began to develop into a special sort of vanity 
which was new in him; it began at times to suffer from different 
causes-from unexpected causes which would have formerly been quite 
inconceivable, from causes of a "higher order" than ever before­
"if one may use such an expression, if there really are higher or lower 
causes . . . .  " This he added on his own account. 
Yes, he had even come to that; he was worrying about some sort of 
higher ideas of which he would never have thought twice in earlier 

T h¬ ft¬rnal Husband 
347 
days. In his own mind and in his conscience he called "higher" all 
"ideas" at which (he found to his surprise) he could not laugh in his 
heart-there had never been such hitherto-in his secret heart only, 
of course; oh, in company it was a different matter! He knew very 
well, indeed, that-if only the occasion were to arise-he would the 
very next day, in spite of all the mysterious and reverent resolutions 
of his conscience, with perfect composure disavow all these "higher 
ideas" and be the first to turn them into ridicule, without, of course, 
admitting anything. And this was really the case, in spite of a certain 
and, indeed, considerable independence of thought, which he had of 
late gained at the expense of the "lower ideas" that had mastered 
him till then. And how often, when he got up in the morning, he 
began to be ashamed of the thoughts and feelings he had passed 
through during a sleepless night! And he had suffered continually of 
late from sleeplessness. He had noticed for some time past that he had 
become excessively sensitive about everything, trifles as well as matters 
of importance, and so he made up his mind to trust his feelings as 
little as possible. But he could not overlook some facts, the reality of 
which he was forced to admit. Of late his thoughts and sensations 
were sometimes at night completely transformed, and for the most 
part utterly unlike those which came to him in the early part of the 
day. This struck him-and he even consulted a distinguished doctor 
who was, however, an acquaintance; he spoke to him about it jocosely, 
of course. The answer he received was that the transformation of ideas 
and sensations, and even the possession of two distinct sets of thoughts 
and sensations, was a universal fact among persons "who think and 
feel," that the convictions of a whole lifetime were sometimes trans­
formed under the melancholy influences of night and sleeplessness; 
without rhyme or reason most momentous decisions were taken; but 
all this, of course, was only true up to a certain point-and, in fact, 
if the subject were too conscious of the double nature of his feelings, 
.>o that it began to be a source of suffering to him, it was certainly a 
symptom of approaching illness; and then steps must be taken at once. 
The best thing of all was to make a radical change in the mode of 
life, to alter one's diet, or even to travel. Relaxing medicine was 
beneficial, of course. 
Velchaninov did not care to hear more; but to his mind it was 
conclusively shown to be illness. 
"And so all this is only illness, all these 'higher ideas' are mere 
illness and nothing more!" he sometimes exclaimed to himself resent­
fully. He was very loth to admit this. 

348 
'!he Short Novels of VostoevskJ 
Soon, however, what had happened exclusively in the hours of the 
night began to be repeated in the morning, only with more bitterness 
than at night, with anger instead of remorse, with irony instead of 
emotion. What really happened was that certain incidents in his past, 
even in his distant past, began suddenly, and God knows why, to come 
more and more frequently back to his mind, but they came back in 
quite a peculiar way. Velchaninov had, for instance, complained for a 
long time past of loss of memory : he would forget the faces of 
acquaintances, who were offended by his cutting them when they 
met; he sometimes completely forgot a book he had read months 
before; and yet in spite of this loss of memory, evident every day (and 
a source of great uneasiness to him), everything concerning the re­
mote past, things that had been quite forgotten for ten or fifteen years, 
would sometimes come suddenly into his mind now with such amaz­
ing exactitude of details and impressions that he felt as though he were 
living through them again. Some of the facts he remembered had been 
so completely forgotten that it seemed to him a miracle that they could 
be recalled. But this was not all, and, indeed, what man of wide ex­
perience has not some memory of a peculiar sort? But the point was 
that all that was recalled came back now with a quite fresh, surprising 
md, till then, inconceivable point of view, and seemed as though 
some one were leading up to it on purpose. Why did some things he 
remembered strike him now as positive crimes? And it was not a 
question of the j udgments of his mind only: he would have put little 
faith in his gloomy, solitary and sick mind; but it reached the point 
of curses and almost of tears, of inward tears. Why, two years before, 
he would not have believed it if he had '-Jeen told that he would ever 
shed tears! At first, however, what he remembered was rather of a 
mortifying than of a sentimental character: he recalled certain failures 
and humiliations in society; he remembered, for instance, how he had 
been slandered by an intriguing fellow, and in consequence refused 
admittance to a certain house; how, for instance, and not so long ago, 
he had been publicly and unmistakably insulted, and had not chal­
lenged the offender to a duel; how in a circle of very pretty women 
he had been made the subject of an extremely witty epigram and had 
found no suitable answer. He even recollected one or two unpaid 
debts-trifling ones, it is true, but debts of honour--()wing to people 
whom he had given up visiting and even spoke ill of. He was also 
worried (but only in his worst moments) by the thought of the two 
fortunes, both considerable ones, which he had squandered in the 

'1 he eternal Husband 
349 
stupidest way possible. But soon he began to remember things of a 
"higher order." 
Suddenly, for instance, apropos of nothing, he remembered the 
forgotten, utterly forgotten, figure of a harmless, grey-headed and 
absurd old clerk, whom he had once, long, long ago, and with abso­
lute impunity, insulted in public simply to gratify his own conceit, 
simply for the sake of an amusing and successful jest, which was re­
peated and increased his prestige. The incident had been so completely 
forgotten that he could not even recall the old man's surname, though 
all the surroundings of the incident rose before his mind with incred­
ible clearness. He distinctly remembered that the old man was defend­
ing his daughter, who was unmarried, though no longer quite young, 
and had become the subject of gossip in the town. The old man had 
begun to answer angrily, but he suddenly burst out crying before the 
whole company, which made some sensation. They had ended by 
making him drunk with champagne as a joke and getting a hearty 
laugh out of it. And now when, apropos of nothing, V elchaninov re­
membered how the poor old man had sobbed and hidden his face in 
his hands like a child, it suddenly seemed to him as though he had 
never forgotten it. And, strange to say, it had all seemed to him very 
amusing at the time, especially some of the details, such as the way 
he had covered his face with his hands; but now it was quite the 
contrary. 
Later, he recalled how, simply as a joke, he had slandered the very 
pretty wife of a schoolmaster, and how the slander had reached the 
husband's ears. Velchaninov had left the town soon after and never 
knew what the final consequences of his slander had been, but now he 
began to imagine how all might have ended-and there is no knowing 
to what lengths his imagination might not have gone if this memory 
had not suddenly been succeeded by a much more recent reminiscence 
of a young girl of the working-class, to whom he had not even felt 
attracted, and of whom, it must be admitted, he was actually ashamed. 
Yet, though he could not have said what had induced him, he had got 
her into trouble and had simply abandoned her and his child without 
even saying good-bye (it was true, he had no time to spare), when 
he left Petersburg. He had tried to find that girl for a whole year 
afterwards, but he had not succeeded in tracing her. He had, it seemed, 
hundreds of such reminiscences-and each one of them seemed to 
bring dozens of others in its train. By degrees his vanity, too, began to 
suffer. 

350 
T h% Short N.ovds of TJosto%vskJ 
We have said already that his vanity had degenerated into something 
peculiar. That was true. At moments (rare moments, however), he 
even forgot himself to such a degree that he ceased to be ashamed of 
not keeping his own carriage, that he trudged on foot from one court 
to another, that he began to be somewhat negligent in his dress. And 
if some one of his own acquaintance had scanned him with a sarcastic 
stare in the street or had simply refused to recognize him, he might 
really have had pride enough to pass him by without a frown. His 
indifference would have been genuine, not assumed for effect. Of 
course, this was only at times : these were only the moments of forget­
fulness and nervous irritation, yet his vanity had by degrees grown less 
concerned with the subjects that had once affected it, and was becom­
ing concentrated on one question, which haunted him continually. 
"Why, one would think," he began reflecting satirically sometimes 
(and he almost always began by being satirical when he thought about 
himself), "why, one would think some one up aloft were anxious for 
the reformation of my morals, and were sending me these cursed 
reminiscences and 'tears of repentance'! So be it, but it's all useless! 
It is all shooting with blank cartridge! As though I did not know for 
certain, more certainly than certainty, that in spite of these fits of 
tearful remorse and self-reproach, I haven't a grain of independence 
for all my foolish middle age! Why, if the same temptation were to turn 
up to-morrow, if circumstances, for instance, were to make it to my 
interest to spread a rumour that the schoolmaster's wife had taken 
presents from me, I should certainly spread it, I shouldn't hesitate­
and it would be even worse, more loathsome than the first time, just 
because it would be the second time and not the first time. Yes, if I 
were insulted again this minute by that little prince whose leg I shot 
off eleven years ago, though he was the only son of his mother, I 
should challenge him at once and condemn him to crutches again. So 
they are no better than blank cartridges, and there's no sense in them! 
And what's the good of remembering the past when I've not the 
slightest power of escaping from myself?" 
And though the adventure with the schoolmaster's wife was not 
repeated, though he did not condemn any one else to crutches, the very 
idea that it inevitably would be the same, if the same circumstances 
arose, almost killed him . . .  at times. One cannot, in reality, suffer 
from memories all the time; one can rest and enjoy oneself in the 
intervals. 
So, indeed, Velchaninov did : he was ready to enjoy himself in the 
intervals; yet his sojourn in Petersburg grew more and more unpleas-

The eternal Husband 
351 
ant as time went on. July was approaching. Intermittently he had 
flashes of determination to give up everything, the lawsuit and all, 
and to go away somewhere without looking back, to go suddenly, on 
the spur of the moment, to the Crimea, for instance. But, as a rule, 
an hour later he had scorned the idea and had laughed at it: "These 
hateful thoughts won't stop short at sending me to the south, if once 
they've begun and if I've any sense of decency, and so it's useless to 
run away from them, and, indeed, there's no reason to. 
"And what's the object of running away?" he went on brooding 
in his despondency; "it's so dusty here, so stifling, everything in the 
house is so messy. In those law-courts where I hang about among those 
busy people, there is such a scurrying to and fro like mice, such :t 
mass of sordid cares! All the people left in town, all the faces that flit 
by from morning till night so naively and openly betray their self­
love, their guileless insolence, the cowardice of their little souls, the 
chicken-heartedness of their little natures-why, it's a paradise for a 
melancholy man, seriously speaking! Everything is open, everything 
is clear, no one thinks it necessary to hide anything as they do among 
our gentry in our summer villas or at watering-places abroad-and so 
it's more deserving of respect, if only for its openness and simplicity! 
.
.
.
 I won't go away! I'll stay here if I burst!" 
Chapter 2 
TilE GENTLEMAN WITH CRAPE 0Ĺ HIS HAT 
I T WAS the third of July. The heat and stuffiness were insuffer­
able. The day had been a very busy one for Velchaninov; he had had 
to spend the whole morning in walking and driving from place to 
place, and he had before him the prospect of an unavoidable visit that 
evening to a gentleman-a lawyer and a civil councillor-whom he 
hoped to catch unawares at his villa out of town. At six o'clock Vel­
chaninov went at last into a restaurant (the fare was not beyond criti­
cism, though the cooking was French) on the Nevsky Prospect, near 
the Police Bridge. He sat down at the little table in his usual corner 
and asked for the dinner of the day. 
He used to eat the dinner that was provided for a rouble and paid 
extra for the wine, and he regarded this as a sacrifice to the unsettled 
state of his finances and an act of prudence on his part. Though he 

352 
The Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
wondered how he could possibly eat such stuff, he nevertheless used to 
devour it to the last crumb-and every time with as much appetite as 
though he had not eaten for three days before. "There's something 
morbid about it," he would mutter to himself sometimes, noticing his 
appetite. But on this occasion he took his seat at his little table in a 
very bad humour, tossed his hat down angrily, put his elbows on the 
table, and sank into thought. 
Though he could be so polite and, on occasion, so loftily imper­
turbable, he would probably now, if some one dining near him had 
been noisy, or the boy waiting on him had failed to understand at the 
first word, have been as blustering as a junker and would perhaps 
have made a scene. 
The soup was put before him. He took up the ladle, but before he 
had time to help himself, he dropped it, and almost jumped up from 
the table. A surprising idea suddenly dawned upon him : at that 
instant-and God knows by what process-he suddenly realized the 
cause of his depression, of the special extra depression which had tor­
mented him of late for several days together, had for some unknown 
reason fastened upon him and for some unknown cause refused to be 
shaken off; now he suddenly saw it all and it was as plain as a 
pikestaff. 
"It's all that hat," he muttered as though inspired. "It's nothing but 
that cursed bowler hat with that beastly mourning crape that is the 
cause of it all!" 
He began pondering-and the more he pondered the more morose 
he grew, and the more extraordinary "the whole adventure" seemed to 
him. 
"But . . .  it is not an adventure, though," he protested, distrustful 
of himself. "As though there were anything in the least like an adven­
ture about it!" 
All that had happened was this. Nearly a fortnight before (he did 
not really remember, but he fancied it was about a fortnight), he had 
first met somewhere in the street, near the corner of Podyatchesky 
Street and Myestchansky Street, a gentleman with crape on his hat. 
The gentleman was like any one else, there was nothing peculiar about 
him, he passed quickly, but he stared somewhat too fixedly at Vel­
chaninov, and for some reason at once attracted his attention in a 
marked degree. His countenance struck Velchaninov as familiar. He 
had certainly at some time met it somewhere. "But I must have seen 
thousands of faces in my life, I can't remember them all!" 
Before he had gone twenty paces further he seemed to have for-

'I he eternal Husband 
353 
gotten the encounter, in spite of the impression made at first. But 
the impression persisted the whole day-and it was somewhat singular, 
it took the form of a peculiar undefined annoyance. Now, a fortnight 
later, he remembered all that distinctly; he remembered, too, what he 
had failed to grasp at the time-that is, what his annoyance was due 
to; and he had so utterly failed to grasp it that he had not even con­
nected his ill-humour all that evening with the meeting that morning. 
But the gentleman had lost no time in recalling himself to Vel­
chaninov's mind, and next day had come across the latter in the Nevsky 
Prospect again, and again stared at him rather strangely. Velchaninov 
dismissed him with a curse and immediately afterwards wondered 
why he cursed. It is true that there are faces that at once arouse an 
undefined and aimless aversion. 
"Yes, I certainly have met him somewhere," he muttered thought­
fully, an hour after the meeting. And he remained in a very bad 
humour the whole evening afterwards; he even had a bad dream at 
night, and yet it never entered his head that the whole cause of this 
new fit of despondency was nothing but that gentleman in mourning, 
although he did not once think of him that evening! He had even been 
wrathful at the moment that such a "wretched object" could occupy 
his attention as long as it did and would certainly have thought it de­
grading to ascribe his agitation to him, if it had ever occurred to his 
mind to do so. Two days later they met again in a crowd coming off 
one of the Nevsky steamers. On this third occasion Velchaninov was 
ready to swear that the gentleman with the crape on his hat recognized 
him and made a dash for him, but was borne away in the crush; he 
fancied he had even had the "effrontery" to hold out his hand to him; 
perhaps he had even cried out and shouted his name. That, however, 
Velchaninov had not heard distinctly, but . . .  "Who is the low fel­
low, though, and why does he not come up to me, if he really does 
know me, and if he is so anxious to?" he thought angrily, as he got 
into a cab and drove towards Smolny monastery. Half-an-hour later 
he was noisily arguing with his lawyer, but in the evening and the 
night he was suffering again from the most abominable and most 
fantastic attack of acute depression. "Am I in for a bilious attack?" 
he wondered uneasily, looking at himself in the looking-glass. 
This was the third meeting. Afterwards, for five days in succession, 
he met "no one," and not a sign was seen of the low fellow. And yet 
the gentleman with the crape on his hat was continually in his mind. 
With some surprise Velchaninov caught himself wondering: "What's 
the matter with me-am I sick on his account, or what? H'ml 
.
.
•
 

354 
'I he Short 'Novels of Dostoevsky 
and he must have a lot to do in Petersburg, too-and for whom is he 
wearing crape? He evidently recognized me, but I don't recognize 
him. And why do these people put on crape? It's out of keeping with 
him somehow . . . .  I fancy if I look at him closer, I shall recognize 
him . . .  
," 
And something seemed faintly stirring in his memory, like some 
familiar but momentarily forgotten word, which one tries with all 
one's might to recall; one knows it very well and knows that one 
knows it; one knows exactly what it means, one is close upon it and 
yet it refuses to be remembered, in spite of one's efforts. 
"It was . . .  It was long ago . . .  and it was somewhere . . .  There 
was . . .  there was . . .  but, damn the fellow, whatever there was or 
wasn't . . .  ," he cried angrily all at once; "it is not worth while to 
demean and degrade myself over that wretched fellow . . . .  
" 
He grew horribly angry, but in the evening, when he suddenly 
remembered that he had been angry that morning, and "horribly" 
angry, it was extremely disagreeable to him; he felt as though some 
one had caught him in something shameful. He was bewildered and 
surprised. 
"Then there must be reasons for my being so angry . . .  apropos 
of nothing . . .  at a mere reminiscence . . .  " He left the thought un­
finished. 
And next day he felt angrier than ever, but this time he fancied 
he had grounds for it, and that he was quite right in feeling so; "It was 
unheard-of insolence," he thought. What had happened was the fourth 
meeting. The gentleman with crape on his hat had suddenly made 
his appearance again, as though he had sprung out of the earth. Vel­
chaninov had just caught in the street the indispensable civil councillor 
before mentioned, of whom he was still in pursuit, meaning to pounce 
on him unawares at his summer villa, for the gentleman, whom Vel­
chaninov scarcely knew, though it was so necessary to see him about 
his business, on that occasion as on this eluded him, and was evidently 
keeping out of sight and extremely reluctant to meet him. Delighted 
at coming across him at last, Velchaninov walked hurriedly beside 
him, glancing into his face and straining every effort to bring the 
wily old fellow to the discussion of a certain subject, in which the 
latter might be indiscreet enough to let slip the facts of which he had 
so long been on the track; but the crafty old man had his own views, 
and kept putting him off with laughter or silence-and it was just at 
this extremely absorbing moment that Velchaninov descried on the 
opposite pavement the gentleman with crape on his hat. He was stand-

Th¬ eternal Husband 
355 
ing staring at them both-he was watching them, that was evident, 
and seemed to be jeering at them. 
"Damnation!" cried Velchaninov in a fury, as he left the civil 
councillor at his destination and ascribed his failure with him to the 
sudden appearance of that "impudent fellow." "Damnation! is he spy­
ing on me? He's evidently following me. Hired by some one, perhaps, 
and . . .  and . . .  and, by Jove! he was jeering at me! By Jove! I'll thrash 
him . . . .  I'm sorry I've no stick with me! I'll buy a stick! I won't let it 
pass. Who is he? I insist on knowing who he is." 
It was three days after this fourth meeting that Velchaninov was at 
his restaurant, as we have described him, agitated in earnest and even 
somewhat overwhelmed. He could not help being conscious of it him­
self, in spite of his pride. He was forced at last, putting all the circum­
stances together, to suspect that all his depression-all this peculiar de­
spondency and the agitation that had persisted for the last fortnight­
was caused by no other than this gentleman in mourning, "nonentity 
as he was." 
"I may be a hypochondriac," thought Velchaninov, "and so I am 
ready to make a mountain out of a mole-hill, but does it make it any 
better for me that all this is perhaps only fancy! Why, if every rogue 
like that is going to be able to upset one in this way, why . . .  it's . . .  
why? . . .  
" 
Certainly in the meeting of that day (the fifth), which had so agi­
tated Velchaninov, the mountain had proved to be little more than a 
mole-hill: the gentleman had as before darted by him, but this time 
without scrutinizing Velchaninov, and without, as before, betraying 
that he recognized him; on the contrary, he dropped his eyes and 
seemed to be very anxious to escape being noticed. Velchaninov turned 
round and shouted at the top of his voice-
"Hi! you with the crape on your hat! Hiding now! Stop! Who are 
you?" 
The question (and his shouting altogether) was very irrational, but 
Velchaninov only realized that after he had uttered it. The gentleman 
turned round at the shout, stood still for a minute disconcerted, smiled, 
seemed on the point of doing or saying something, was obviously for a 
minute in a state of the utmost indecision, then he suddenly turned and 
rushed away without looking back. Velchaninov looked after him with 
astonishment. 
"And what if it's a case of my forcing myself on him, not his forcing 
himself on me?" he thought. "And that's all it amounts to?" 
When he had finished dinner he made haste to set off to the summer 

356 
'l he Short Novels of 7Jostoevsky 
villa to see the civil councillor. He did not find him; he was informed 
that "his honour had not returned that day, and probably would not 
come back till three or four o'clock in the morning, as he was staying 
in town to a birthday party." This was so mortifying that, in his first 
fury, Velchaninov decided himself to go to the birthday party, and 
even set off to do so; but reflecting on the road that it was a long way 
to go, he dismissed the cab and trudged home on foot to his flat near 
the Grand Theatre. He felt that he wanted exercise. He must, at all 
costs, overcome his usual sleeplessness, and sleep sound that night, to 
soothe his excited nerves; and in order to sleep he must anyway be 
tired. And, as it was a long walk, it was half-past ten before he reached 
home, and he certainly was very tired. 
Though he so criticized the flat that he had taken the previous March, 
and abused it so malignantly-excusing himself to himself on the plea 
that he was only "camping there temporarily," and stranded in Peters­
burg through that "damned lawsuit"-the flat was by no means so bad 
and so unsuitable as he made out. The approach was certainly rather 
dark and "grubby" under the gateway, but the flat itself, on the second 
storey, consisted of two big, lofty and bright rooms, separated from 
one another by a dark entry, and looking one into the street, the other 
into the courtyard. Adjoining the room the windows of which looked 
into the courtyard was a small study, which had been designed for a 
bedroom; but Velchaninov kept it littered with books and papers; 
he slept in one of the larger rooms, the one that looked into the street. 
He had a bed made up on the sofa. The furniture was quite decent, 
though second-hand, and he had besides a few articles of value-the 
relics of his former prosperity: bronze and china, and big, genuine 
Bokhara rugs; even two good pictures had been preserved; but every­
thing had been unmistakably untidy and even dusty and nothing had 
been put in its place ever since his servant, Pelagea, had gone home to 
Novgorod for a holiday and left him alone. The oddity of having a 
solitary female servant for a bachelor and man of the world who was 
still anxious to keep up the style of a gentleman almost made Velchan­
inov blush, though he was very well satisfied with his Pelagea. The 
girl had come to him when he was taking the flat in the spring, from 
a family of his acquaintance who were going abroad, and she had put 
the flat to rights. But when she went away he could not bring himself 
to engage another woman; to engage a manservant was not worth 
while for a short time; besides, he did not like menservants. And so it 
was arranged that the sister of the porter's wife should come in every 
morning to clear up and that Velchaninov should leave the key at the 

'l he eternal Husband 
357 
porter's lodge when he went out. She did absolutely nothing, merely 
pocketed her wages; and he suspected her of pilfering. Yet he dis৏ 
missed everything with a shrug and was positively glad that he was 
left quite alone in the flat. But there are limits to everything; and at 
some jaundiced moments the "filth" was absolutely insufferable to his 
nerves, and he almost always went into his rooms with a feeling of 
repugnance on returning home. 
But this time he barely gave himself time to undress; flinging him৐ 
self on the bed, he irritably resolved to think of nothing, but to go to 
sleep "this minute," whatever might happen; and, strange to say, he 
did fall asleep as soon as his head touched the pillow; such a thing 
had not happened to him for almost a month. 
He slept for nearly three hours, but his sleep was uneasy, and he had 
strange dreams such as one has in fever. He dreamed of some crime 
which he had committed and concealed and of which he was accused 
by people who kept coming up to him. An immense crowd collected, 
but more people still came, so that the door was not shut but remained 
open. But his whole interest was centered on a strange person, once 
an intimate friend of his, who was dead, but now somehow suddenly 
came to see him. What made it most worrying was that Velchaninov 
did not know the man, had forgotten his name and could not recall it. 
All he knew was that he had once liked him very much. All the other 
people who had come up seemed expecting from this man a final word 
that would decide Velchaninov's guilt or innocence, and all were 
waiting impatiently. But he sat at the table without moving, was mute 
and would not speak. The noise did not cease for a moment, the 
general irritation grew more intense, and suddenly in a fury Velchan৑ 
inov struck the man for refusing to speak, and felt a strange enjoyment 
in doing it. His heart thrilled with horror and misery at what he had 
done, but there was enjoyment in that thrill. Utterly exasperated, he 
struck him a second time and a third, and, drunk with rage and terror, 
which reached the pitch of madness, but in which there was an intense 
enjoyment, he lost count of his blows, and went on beating him with৒ 
out stopping. He wanted to demolish it all, all. Suddenly something 
happened: they all shrieked horribly and turned round to the door, as 
though expecting something, and at that instant there came the sound 
of a ring at the bell, repeated three times, with violence enough to 
pull the bell off. Velchaninov woke up and was wide-awake in an in৓ 
stant. He leapt headlong out of bed and rushed to the door; he was 
absolutely convinced that the ring at the bell was not a dream and 
that some one really had rung at his bell that moment. "It would be 

358 
'I he Short Novels of 7Jostoevsk.y 
too unnatural for such a distinct, such a real, palpable ring to be only 
a dream!" 
But to his surprise the ring at the bell turned out to be a dream, too. 
He opened the door, went out on the landing, even peeped down the 
stairs-there was absolutely no one there. The bell hung motionless. 
Surprised, but relieved, he went back into his room. When he had 
lighted a candle he remembered that he had left the door closed but 
not locked or bolted. He had sometimes in the past forgotten when he 
came home to lock the door for the night, not thinking it of much 
importance. 
Pelagea had often given him a talking-to about it. He went back 
into the passage, shut the door, opened it once more and looked out 
on the landing, but only fastened the door on the inside with the hook, 
without taking the trouble to turn the key. The clock struck half-past 
two; so he must have slept three hours. 
His dream had so disturbed him that he did not want to go to bed 
again at once, and made up his mind to walk up and down his room 
for half an hour or-"Time enough to smoke a cigar"-he thought. 
Hastily dressing, he went to the window and lifted the thick stuff 
curtain and the white blind behind it. It was already daylight in the 
street. The light summer nights of Petersburg always worked on his 
nerves and of late had intensified his insomnia, so that it was expressly 
on this account that he had, a fortnight previously, put up thick stuff 
curtains which completely excluded the light when they were fully 
drawn. Letting in the daylight and forgetting the lighted candle on 
the table, he fell to pacing up and down the room, still oppressed by 
a sort of sick and heavy feeling. The impression of the dream was still 
upon him. A re:l feeling of distress that he should have been capable 
of raising his hand against that man and beating him still persisted. 
"That man doesn't exist, and never has existed; it's all a dream. Why 
am I worrying about it?" 
He began thinking with exasperation, as though all his troubles were 
concentrated on this, that he was certainly beginning to be ill-"a sic:k 
man. 
, 
It was always painful to him to think that he was getting old and 
growing feebler, and in his bad moments he exaggerated his age and 
failing powers on purpose to irritate himself. 
"Old age," he muttered; "I'm getting quite old, I'm losing my 
memory, I see apparitions, I dream dreams, bells ring . . . .  Damn it 
all, I know from experience that such dreams are always a sign of 
fever with me . . . .  I am convinced that all this business with the crape 

The eternal Husband 
359 
gentleman is a dream too. I was certainly right yesterday: it's I, I, who 
am pestering him, not he me. I've woven a romance about him, and 
1 am hiding under the table in my fright at it. And why do I call him 
a low fellow? He may be a very decent person. His face is not attractive, 
certainly, though there is nothing particularly ugly about it; he's 
dressed like any one else. Only in his eyes there's something . . . .  Here 
I'm at it again! I'm thinking about him again! ! What the devil does 
the look in his eyes matter to me? Can't I get on without that? . . .  
" 
Among the thoughts that kept starting up in his mind, one rankled 
painfully: he felt suddenly convinced that this gentleman with the 
crape on his hat had once been an acquaintance on friendly terms with 
him, and now sneered at him when he met him because he knew 
some great secret about him in the past and saw him now in such a 
humiliating position. He went mechanically to the window, meaning 
to open it and get a breath of the night air, and-and he suddenly 
shuddered all over: it seemed to him that something incredible and 
unheard-of was suddenly happening before his eyes. 
He had not yet opened the window but he made haste to slip be­
hind the corner of the window and hide himself: on the deserted 
pavement opposite he had suddenly seen directly facing the house 
the man with the crape on his hat. The gentleman was standing on 
the pavement looking towards his windows, but evidently not noticing 
him, stared inquisitively at the house as though considering something. 
He seemed to be deliberating and unable to decide: he lifted his hand 
and seemed to put his finger to his forehead. At last he made up his 
mind : he took a cursory glance round, and began stealthily on tiptoe 
crossing the street. Yes : he had gone in at the gateway by the little 
gate (which sometimes in summer was left unbolted till three o'clock). 
"He's coming to me," flashed on Velchaninov's mind, and, also on 
tiptoe, he ran headlong to the door and stood before it silent and numb 
with suspense, softly laying his trembling right hand on the hook of 
the door he had just fastened, listening intently for the sound of foot­
steps on the stairs. 
His heart beat so violently that he was afraid he might not hear the 
stranger come up on tiptoe. He did not understand what it meant, but 
he felt it all with tenfold intensity. His dream seemed to have melted 
into reality. Velchaninov was by temperament bold. He sometimes 
liked to display fearlessness in the face of danger even if he were only 
admiring himself with no one else to look at him. But now there was 
something else as well. The man who had so lately been given up to 
hypochondria and nervous depression was completely transformed; he 

360 
The Short Novels of Vostoevsky 
was not the same man. A nervous, noiseless laugh broke f::om him. 
From behind the closed door he divined every movement of the 
stranger. 
"Ah! now he's coming in, he has come in, he's looking about him; 
he's listening downstairs; he's holding his breath, stealing up . . .  ah! 
He has taken hold of the handle, he's pulling it, trying it! He reckoned 
on its not being locked! So he knows I sometimes forget to lock it! 
He's pulling at the handle again; why, does he imagine that the hook 
will come out ? It's a pity to part! Isn't it a pity to let him go like this?" 
And indeed everything must have happened just as he pictured it; 
some one really was standing on the other side of the door, and was 
softly and noiselessly trying the lock, and was pulling at the handle 
and-"Of course, he had his object in doing so." But by now Velchani­
nov had resolved to settle the question, and with a sort of glee got ready 
for the moment. He had an irresistible longing to unfasten the hook, 
suddenly to fling open the door, and to confront the "bugbear" face 
to face. "What may you be doing here, pray, honoured sir ?" 
And so he did : seizing the moment, he suddenly lifted the hook, 
pushed the door and-almost fell over the gentleman with crape on 
his hat. 
Chapter 3 
PAVEL PAVLOVITCH TRUSOTSKY 
THE latter stood speechless, rooted to the spot. They stood facing 
one another in the doorway, and stared fixedly into each other's faces. 
Some moments passed and suddenly-Velchaninov recognized his 
visitor! 
At the same time the visitor evidently realized that Velchaninov 
recognized him fully. There was a gleam in his eye that betrayed it. 
In one instant his whole face melted into a sugary smile. 
"I have the pleasure, I believe, of addressing Alexey Ivanovitch?" 
he almost chanted in a voice of deep feeling, ludicrously incongruous 
with the circumstances. 
"Surely you are not Pavel Pavlovitch Trusotsky?" Velchaninov 
brought out with an air of perplexity. 
"We were acquainted nine years ago at T--, and if you will allow 
'le to remind you-we were intimately acquainted." 

'I he eternal Husband 
361 
"Yes . . .  to be sure, but now it's three o'clock, and for the last ten 
minutes you've been trying whether my door was locked or not." 
"Three o'clock!" cried the visitor, taking out his watch and seeming 
positively grieved and surprised; "why, so it is. Three! I beg your 
pardon, Alexey Ivanovitch, I ought to have considered before coming 
up: I'm quite ashamed. I'll come again and explain, in a day or two, 
but now . . .  " 
"No! If there's to be an explanation will you kindly give it me this 
minute!" Velchaninov caught him up. "Please walk inside, into this 
room-no doubt you intended to come into the room yourself, and 
have not turned up in the middle of the night simply to try the lock." 
He was excited and at the same time disconcerted, and felt that he 
could not grasp the position. He was even somewhat ashamed-there 
proved to be neither mystery nor danger. The whole phantasmagoria 
had proved to be nothing; all that had turned up was the foolish figure 
of some Pavel Pavlovitch. And yet he did not believe that it was all 
so simple; he had a vague presentiment and dread of something. Mak­
ing his visitor sit down in an arm-chair, he seated himself impatiently 
on his bed, not a yard away, bent forward with his hands on his knees 
and waited irritably for him to speak. He scanned him greedily and 
remembered him. But, strange to say, the man was silent, quite silent, 
and seemed not to realize that he was "in duty bound" to speak at 
once; on the contrary, he, too, gazed at Velchaninov with a look of 
expectation. It was possible that he was simply timid, feeling at first 
a certain awkwardness like a mouse in a trap; but Velchaninov flew 
into a rage. 
"What do you mean by it!" he cried; "you are not a phantom or a 
dream, I suppose! You've not come to play at being dead, surely? 
Explain yourself, my good man!" 
The visitor fidgeted, smiled, and began warily-
"So far as I see, what strikes you most of all is my coming at such an 
hour and under such peculiar circumstances . . . .  So that, remember­
ing all the past, and how we parted-it's really strange to me now 
• 
. . . Though, indeed, I had no intention of calling, and it has only 
happened by accident . . . .  " 
"How by accident? Why, I saw you through the window run across 
the street on tiptoe!" 
"Ah, you saw me! So perhaps you know more about it all than I do! 
But I'm only irritating you . . . .  You see, I arrived here three weeks ago 
on business of my own .
.
.
•
 I am Pavel Pavlovitch Trusotsky, you 
know; you recognized me yourself. I am here to try to get transferred 

362 
The Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
to another province, and to a post in another department considerably 
superior . . . .  But all that's neither here nor there, though . . .  The 
point is, if you must know, that I have been hanging about here for 
the last three weeks, and I seem to be spinning out my business on 
purpose-that is, the business of my transfer-and really, if it comes 
off I do believe I shan't notice that it has come off and shall stay on 
in your Petersburg, feeling as I do now. I hang about as though I had 
lost sight of my object and, as it were, pleased to have lost sight of it­
feeling as I do! . . .  
" 
"Feeling how?" Velchaninov asked, frowning. 
The visitor raised his eyes to him, lifted his hat and pointed to the 
crape on it. 
"Why, look; that's how I'm feeling." 
Velchaninov gazed blankly first at the crape and then at the counte­
nance of his visitor. Suddenly the colour rushed into his cheeks and 
he grew terribly agitated. 
"Surely not Natalya Vassilyevna ?" 
"Yesl Natalya Vassilyevna! Last March . . .  consumption, and almost 
suddenly, after two or three months' illness! And I am left-as you see!" 
As he said this the visitor, in deep emotion, put out his hands on 
each side, the hat with the crape on it flapping in his left one, while 
he made a low bow that displayed his bald head for ten seconds at least. 
His air and his gesture seemed to revive Velchaninov; an ironical 
and even provocative smile hovered on his lips-but only for a mo­
ment: the news of the death of this lady (whom he had known so long 
ago and had long ago succeeded in forgetting) gave him a shock which 
was a complete surprise to him. 
"Is it possible? "-he muttered the first words that came to his tongue­
"and why didn't you come straight and tell me?" 
"I thank you for your sympathy. I see it and appreciate it, in spite 
of . . .  
" 
"In spite of? "  
"In spite of so many years of separation, you have just shown such 
sympathy for my sorrow and even for me that I am, of course, sensible 
of gratitude. That was all I wanted to express. It's not that I had 
doubts of my friends: I can find here the truest friends at once­
Stepan Mihalovitch Bagautov, for instance. But you know, Alexey 
Ivanovitch, our acquaintance with you-friendship rather, as I grate­
fully recall it-was over nine years ago, you never came back to us; 
there was no interchange of letters . . . .  
" 
The visitor :hanted his phrases as though to music, but all the while 

'l he eternal Husband 
363 
!hat he was holding forth he looked at the floor, though, no doubt, all 
the time he saw everything. But Velchaninov had by now regained 
his composure. 
With a very strange impression, which grew stronger and stronger, 
he listened to Pavel Pavlovitch and watched him, and when the latter 
suddenly paused, the most incongruous and surprising ideas rushed 
in a sudden flash into his mind. 
"But how was it I didn't recognize you till now?" he cried, growing 
more animated. "Why, we've stumbled across each other five times 
in the street!" 
"Yes; I remember that, too; you were constantly crossing my path­
twice, or perhaps three times . . . .  " 
"That is, you were constantly coming upon me, not I upon you." 
Velchaninov stood up and suddenly, quite unexpectedly, he began 
laughing. Pavel Pavlovitch paused, looked at him attentively, but at 
once continued-
"And as for your not recognizing me, you might well have for­
gotten me, and, besides, I've had smallpox and it has left some traces 
on my face." 
"Smallpox? To be sure, he has had smallpox! However did you--" 
"Manage that ? Anything may happen. One never can tell, Alcxey 
Ivanovitch; one does have such misfortunes." 
"Only it's awfully funny all the same. But continue, continue, my 
dear friend!" 
"Though I met you, too . . 
." 
"Stay! Why did you say 'manage that' just now? I meant to use a 
much more polite expression. But go on, go on!" 
For some reason he felt more and more good-humoured. The feel­
ing of shock was completely effaced by other emotions. He walked 
up and down the room with rapid steps. 
"Even though I met you, and though when I set out for Petersburg 
I intended to seek you out, yet now, I repeat, I have been feeling so 
broken in spirit . . .  and mentally shattered ever since March . . .  " 
"Oh, yes! shattered since March .
.
•
. Stop a minute. Don't you 
smoke?" 
"As you know, in old days when Natalya Vassilyevna was living 
I . . .  
" 
"To be sure, to be sure; and since March?" 
"Just a cigarette, perhaps." 
"Here is a cigarette. Light it-and go on! Go on, it's awfully--" 

364 
'l he Short N.ove/s of 'Dostoevsky 
And, lighting a cigar, Velchaninov quickly settled himself on the 
bed again. 
Pavel Pavlovitch paused. 
"But how excited you are yourself. Are you quite in good health?" 
"Oh, damn my health!" Velchaninov was suddenly exasperated. 
"Continue!" 
The visitor, for his part, looking at his companion's agitation, seemed 
better pleased and grew more self-confident. 
"But what is there to continue?" he began again. "Imagine, Alexey 
Ivanovitch, in the first place, a man destroyed-that is, not simply 
destroyed, but fundamentally, so to say; a man whose existence is 
transformed after twenty years of married life, wandering about the 
streets with no consistent object, as though in a wilderness, almost in 
a state of oblivion, and finding a certain fascination in that oblivion. 
It is natural that sometimes when I meet an acquaintance, even a 
real friend, I purposely go out of my way to avoid approaching him, 
at such a moment of oblivion, I mean. And at another moment one 
remembers everything so, and so longs to see any one who has wit­
nessed that recent past, gone now never to return, and has taken part 
in it, and one's heart beats so violently that one is ready to risk throw­
ing oneself upon a friend by night as well as by day, even though one 
might have to wake him up at four o'clock in the morning on purpose . 
. . . I have made a mistake about the time only, not about our friend­
ship; for this moment more than makes up for it. And as for the time, 
I really thought it was only twelve, feeling as I do. One drinks the 
cup of one's sorrow till one is drunk with it. And it's not sorrow, 
indeed, but the novelty of my state that crushes me . . . .  " 
"How strangely you express yourself!" Velchaninov observed gloom-
ily, becoming extremely grave again. 
"Yes, I do express myself strangely . . . .  " 
"And you're . . .  not joking?" 
"Joking!" exclaimed Pavel Pavlovitch in pained surprise, "and at the 
moment when I am announcing the sad . . .  " 
"Ach, don't speak of that, I entreat you!" 
Velchaninov got up and began pacing the room again. 
So passed five minutes. The visitor seemed about to get up too, but 
Velchaninov shouted: "Sit still, sit still!" and Pavel Pavlovitch obedi­
ently sank back into his arm-chair at once. 
"But, how you have changed though," Velchaninov began again, 
suddenly stopping before him as though all at once struck by the 

'l he eternal Husband 
365 
thought. "You're dreadfully changed! Extraordinarily! Quite a differ­
ent person." 
"That's not strange: nine years." 
"No, no, no, it's not a question of years! It's incredible how you've 
changed in appearance; you've become a different man!" 
"That, too, may well be, in nine years." 
"Or is it since March!" 
"He-he!" Pavel Pavlovitch sniggered slily. "That's a funny idea of 
yours . . . .  But if I may venture-what is the change exactly?" 
"You ask what! The Pavel Pavlovitch I used to know was such a 
solid, decorous person, that Pavel Pavlovitch was such a clever chap, 
and now-this Pavel Pavlovitch is a regular vaurien!" 
He was at that stage of irritability in which even reserved people 
say more than they ought. 
"Vattrien! You think so? And not a clever chap now-not clever?" 
Pavel Pavlovitch chuckled with relish. 
"Clever chap be damned! Now I daresay you really are too clever." 
"I'm insolent, but this low fellow's more so and . . .  and what is 
his object?" Velchaninov was thinking all the while. 
"Ach, dearest, most precious friend!" cried the visitor suddenly, 
growing extremely agitated and turning round in his chair. "What are 
we saying? \Ve are not in the world now, we're not in the society of 
the great and the worldly! We're two old friends, very old friends! 
And we've come together in the fullest sincerity to recall to one another 
the priceless bond of friendship of which the dear departed was the 
precious link!" 
And he was so carried away by the ecstasy of his feeling that he 
bowed his head as before, hiding his face in his hat. V elchaninov 
watched him with aversion and uneasiness. 
"What if he's simply a buffoon," flashed through his mind; "but 
n-no, n-no! I don't think he's drunk-he may be drunk, though :· his 
face is red. Even if he were drunk-it comes to the same thing. What's 
he driving at? \Vhat does the low fellow want?" 
"Do you remember, do you remember," cried Pavel Pavlovitch, 
removing the hat a little and seeming more and more carried away 
by his reminiscences, "do you remember our expeditions into the 
country, our evenings and little parties with dancing and innocent 
games at the house of His Excellency, our most hospitable Semyon 
Semyonovitch ? And how we used to read together, the three of us, 
in the evening! And our first acquaintance with you, when you .-:ailed 
on me that morning to make inquiries about your business, and even 

366 
7' he Short N.ot1els of VostoetlskJ 
began to speak rather warmly, and suddenly Natalya Vassilyevna 
came in, and within ten minutes you had become a real friend of the 
family and so you were for a whole year, exactly as in Turgenev's 
play A Provincial Lady." 
Velchaninov paced slowly up and down, looked at the floor, listened 
with impatience and repulsion, but-listened intently. 
"The thought of A Provincial Lady never entered my head," he 
interrupted, somewhat confused, "and you never used to talk in such a 
shrill voice and such .
.
•
 unnatural language. What is that for?" 
"I certainly used to be more silent-that is, I was more reserved," 
Pavel Pavlovitch interposed hurriedly. "You know I used to prefer 
listening while the dear departed talked. You remember how she 
used to talk, how wittily . . . . And in regard to A Provincial Lady and 
Stupendyev particularly, you are quite right, for I remember it was 
we ourselves, the precious departed and I, used to speak of that at 
quiet moments after you'd gone away-comparing our first meeting 
with that drama, for there really was a resemblance. About Stupendyev 
especially." 
"What Stupendyev? Damn him!" cried Velchaninov, and he actu­
ally stamped, utterly disconcerted at the mention of "Stupendyev," 
owing to a disturbing recollection that was evoked by the name. 
"Stupendyev is a character, a character in a play, the husband in 
A Provincial Lady," Pavel Pavlovitch piped in a voice of honeyed 
sweetness; "but it belonged to a different series of our precious and 
happy memories, when after your departure Stepan Mihalovitch 
Bagautov bestowed his friendship on us, exactly as you did, for five 
whole years." 
"Bagautov ? What do you mean ? What Bagautov?" Velchaninov 
stood still as though petrified. 
"Bagautov, Stepan Mihalovitch, who bestowed his friendship on 
us, a year after you and . . .  and exactly as you did." 
"Good heavens, yes! I know that!" cried V elchaninov, recovering 
himself at last. "Bagautov! Why, of course, he had a berth in your 
town . . . .  
" 
"He had, he had! At the Governor's! From Petersburg. A very 
elegant young man, belonging to the best society!" Pavel Pavlovitch 
exclaimed in a positive ecstasy. 
"Yes, yes, yes! What was I thinking of? \Vhy, he, too . . .  " 
"He too, he too," Pavel Pavlovitch repeated in the same ecstasy, 
catching up the word his companion had incautiously dropped. "He 
too! \Veil, we acted A Provincial Lady at His Excellency's, our most 

367 
hospitable Semyon Semyonovitch's private theatre-Stepan Mihalov৔ 
itch was the 'count,' I was the 'husband,' and the dear departed was 
'The Provincial Lady'-only they took away the 'husband's' part from 
me, Natalya Vassilyevna insisted on it, so that I did not act the 'hus­
band' because I was not fitted for the part . . . .  " 
"How the devil could you be Stupendyev? You're pre-eminently 
Pavel Pavlovitch Trusotsky and not Stupendyev," said Velchaninov, 
speaking with coarse rudeness and almost trembling with irritation. 
"Only, excuse me; Bagautov's in Petersburg, I saw him myself in the 
spring! Why don't you go and see him too?" 
"I have been every blessed day, for the last fortnight. I'm not ad­
mitted! He's ill, he can't see me! And, only fancy, I've found out from 
first-hand sources that he really is very dangerously ill! The friend of 
six years. Ach, Alexey lvanovitch, I tell you and I repeat it, that some­
times one's feelings are such that one longs to sink into the earth; yes, 
really; at another moment one feels as though one could embrace any 
one of those who have been, so to say, witnesses and participators of 
the past and simply that one may weep, absolutely for nothing else but 
that one may weep . . . .  " 
"Well, anyway, I've had enough of you for to-day, haven't I?" 
Velchaninov brought out abruptly. 
"More than enough, more!" Pavel Pavlovitch got up from his seat at 
once. "It's four o'clock, and, what's worse, I have so selfishly upset 
you . . . .  " 
"Listen, I will be sure to come and see you myself, and th.en, I hope 
. . .  Tell me straight out, tell me frankly, you are not drunk to-day?" 
"Drunk! Not a bit of it. . . . 
" 
"Hadn't you been drinking just before you came, or earlier?" 
"Do you know, Alexey lvanovitch, you're in a regular fever." 
"I'll come and see you to-morrow morning before one o'clock." 
"And I've been noticing for a long time that you seem, as it were, 
delirious," Pavel Pavlovitch interrupted with zest, still harping on the 
same subject. "I feel conscience-stricken, really, that by my awkward­
ness . . .  but I'm going, I'm going! And you lie down and get some 
sleep!" 
"Why, you haven't told me where you're living," Velchaninov 
called hastily after him. 
"Didn't I tell you? At the Pokrovsky Hotel." 
"What Pokrovsky Hotel?" 
"Why, close to the Pokrovsky Church, close by, in the side street. 

368 
The Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
I've forgotten the name of the street and I've forgotten the number, 
only it's close by the Pokrcvsky Church." 
"I shall find it!" 
"You'll be very welcome." 
He was by now on his way downstairs. 
"Stay," Velchaninov shouted after him again; "you are not going 
to give me the slip?" 
"How do you mean, give you the slip?" cried Pavel Pavlovitch, 
staring at him open-eyed and turning round to smile on the third step. 
Instead of answering, Velchaninov shut the door with a loud slam, 
carefully locked it and fastened the hook. Returning to the room, he 
spat as though he had been in contact with something unclean. 
After standing for some five minutes in the middle of the room, he 
flung himself on the bed without undressing and in one minute fell 
asleep. The forgotten candle burnt itself out on the table. 
Chapter 4 
THE WIFE, THE HUSBAND AND THE LOVER 
H E SLEPT very soundly and woke up at half-past nine; he re­
membered everything instantly, sat down on his bed and began at 
once thinking of "that woman's death." The shock of the sudden news 
of that death the night before had left a certain agitation and even 
pain. That pain and agitation had only for a time been smothered by 
a strange idea while Pavel Pavlovitch was with him. 
But now, on waking up, all that had happened nine years before 
rose before his mind with extraordinary vividness. 
This woman, this Natalya Vassilyevna, the wife of "that Trusotsky," 
he had once loved, and he had been her lover for the whole year that 
he had spent at T--, ostensibly on business of his own (that, too, 
was a lawsuit over a disputed inheritance), although his presence had 
not really been necessary for so long. The real cause of his remaining 
was this intrigue. The liaison and his love had such complete possession 
of him that it was as though he were in bondage to Natalya Vassily­
evna, and he would probably have been ready on the spot to do any­
thing, however monstrous and senseless, to satisfy that woman's 
slightest caprice. 
He had never felt anything of the sort before. At the end of the 

The eternal Husband 
369 
year, when separation was inevitable, although it was expected to be 
only a brief one, Velchaninov was in such despair, as the fatal time 
drew near, that he proposed to Natalya Vassilyevna that she should 
elope with him, that he should carry her off from her husband, that 
they should throw up everything and that she should come abroad 
with him for ever. Nothing but the jibes and firm determination of 
the lady (who had, probably from boredom, or to amuse herself, 
quite approved of the project at first) could have dissuaded him and 
forced him to go alone. And actually, before two months had passed, 
he was asking himself in Petersburg the question which had always 
remained unanswered. Had he really loved that woman or had it been 
nothing but an "infatuation"? And it was not levity or the influence 
of some new passion that had given rise to this question : for those 
first two months in Petersburg he had been plunged in a sort of 
stupefaction and had scarcely noticed any woman, although he had at 
once mixed with his former acquaintances again and had seen a 
hundred women. At the same time he knew that if he were trans­
ported that moment to T- he would promptly fall under the yoke 
of that woman's fascination again, in spite of any questions. Even five 
years later his conviction was unchanged. But five years later he used 
to admit this to himself with indignation and he even thought of "that 
woman" herself with hatred. He was ashamed of that year at T-; 
he could not even understand how such a "stupid" passion could have 
been possible for him, Velchaninov. All his memories of that passion 
had become absurd to him; and he blushed to the point of tears and 
was tormented by conscience-pricks at the thought of it. It is true that 
a few years later he had become somewhat calmer; he tried to forget 
it all-and almost succeeded. And now, all at once, nine years after­
wards, all this had so suddenly and strangely risen up before him 
again, after hearing that night of the death of Natalya Vassilyevna. 
Now, sitting on his bed, with confused thoughts crowding in dis­
order on his mind, he felt and realized clearly one thing only-that 
in spite of the "shock" he had felt at the news, he was nevertheless 
quite undisturbed by the fact of her death. "Can it be that I have no 
feeling for her?" he asked himself. It is true that he had now no 
feeling of hatred for her, and that he could criticize her more im­
partially, more fairly. In the course of those nine years of separation 
he had long since formulated the view that Natalya Vassilyevna 
belonged to the class of absolutely ordinary provincial ladies moving 
in good provincial society "and, who knows? perhaps she really was 
such, perhaps it was only I who idealized her so fantastically." He had 

370 
The Short 'N.ovels of 1Jostoevsky 
always suspected, however, that there might be an error in that view; 
and he felt it even now. And, indeed, the facts were opposed to it; this 
Bagautov, too, had for several years been connected with her and 
apparently he, too, had been "under the yoke of her fascination." 
Bagautov certainly was a young man belonging to the best Petersburg 
society and, as he was a most "empty-headed fellow," he could only 
have had a successful career in Petersburg (V elchaninov used to say 
of him). Yet he had neglected Petersburg-that is, sacrificed his most 
important interests-and remained for five years in T-- solely on 
account of that woman! Yes, and he had finally returned to Petersburg, 
perhaps only because he, too, had been cast off like "an old, worn-out 
shoe." So there must have been in that woman something exceptional­
a power of attracting, of enslaving, of dominating. 
And yet one would have thought that she had not the gifts with 
which to attract and to enslave. She was not exactly pretty; perhaps 
she was actually plain. She was twenty-eight when Velchaninov first 
knew her. Though not altogether beautiful, her face was sometimes 
charmingly animated, but her eyes were not pretty: there was some­
thing like an excess of determination in them. She was very thin. On 
the intellectual side she had not been well educated; her keen intelli­
gence was unmistakable, though she was one-sided in her ideas. Her 
manners were those of a provincial lady and at the same time, it is 
true, she had a great deal of tact; she had artistic taste, but showed 
it principally in knowing how to dress. In character she was resolute 
and domineering; she could never make up her mind to compromise 
in anything: it was all or nothing. In difficult positions her firmness 
and stoicism were amazing. She was capable of generosity and at the 
same time would be utterly unjust. To argue with that lady was 
impossible: "twice two makes four" meant nothing to her. She never 
thought herself wrong or to blame in anything. Her continual decep­
tion of her husband and the perfidies beyond number which she 
practised upon him did not weigh on her in the least. But, to quote 
Velchaninov's own comparison, she was like the "Madonna of the 
Flagellants," who believes implicitly herself that she is the mother of 
God-so Natalya Vassilyevna believed implicitly in everything she did. 
She was faithful to her lover, but only as long as he did not bore 
her. She was fond of tormenting her lover, but she liked making up 
for it too. She was of a passionate, cruel and sensual type. She hated 
depravity and condemned it with exaggerated severity and-was her­
self depraved. No sort of fact could have made her recognize her own 
depravity. "Most likely she gem΄inely does not know it," Velchaninov 

The eternal Husband 
371 
thought about her even before he left T-. (We may remark, by the 
way, that he was the accomplice of her depravity.) "She is one of those 
women who are born to be unfaithful wives. Such women never be­
come old maids; it's a law of their nature to be married to that end. 
The husband is the first lover, but never till after the wedding. No one 
gets married more adroitly and easily than this type of woman. For 
her first infidelity the husband is always to blame. And it is all accom­
panied by the most perfect sincerity: to the end they feel themselves 
absolutely right and, of course, entirely innocent." 
Velchaninov was convinced that there really was such a type of 
woman; but, on the other hand, he was also convinced that there was 
a type of husband corresponding to that woman, whose sole vocation 
was to correspond with that feminine type. To his mind, the essence 
of such a husband lay in his being, so to say, "the eternal husband," 
or rather in being, all his life, a husband and nothing more. "Such a 
man is born and grows up only to be a husband, and, having married, 
is promptly transformed into a supplement of his wife, even when he 
happens to have unmistakable character of his own. The chief sign 
of such a husband is a certain decoration. He can no more escape 
wearing horns than the sun can help shining; he is not only unaware 
of the fact, but is bound by the very laws of his nature to be unaware of 
it." Velchaninov firmly believed in the existence of these two types and 
in Pavel Pavlovitch Trusotsky's being a perfect representative of one 
of them. The Pavel Pavlovitch of the previous night was, of course, 
very different from the Pavel Pavlovitch he had known at T--. He 
found him incredibly changed, but Velchaninov knew that he was 
bound to have changed and that all that was perfectly natural; 
Trusotsky could only as long as his wife was alive have remained all 
that he used to be, but, as it was, he was only a fraction of a whole, 
suddenly cut off and set free; that is, something wonderful and unique. 
As for the Pavel Pavlovitch of the past at T--, this is how Vel­
chaninov remembered him and recalled him now. 
"Of course, at T--, Pavel Pavlovitch had been simply a husband," 
and nothing more. If he were, for instance, an official in the service 
as well, it was solely because such a position was one of the obligations 
of his married life; he was in the service for the sake of his wife and 
her social position in T--, though he was in himself zealous in his 
duties. He was thirty-five then and was possessed of some little fortune. 
He showed no special ability in his department and showed no special 
lack of it either. He used to mix with all the best people in the prov­
ince and was said to be on an excellent footing with them. Natalya 

372 
The Short N.ovels of 'DostoevskY 
Vassilyevna was deeply respected in T--; she did not, however, 
greatly appreciate that, accepting it as simply her due, but in her own 
house she was superb at entertaining guests, and Pavel Pavlovitch had 
been so well trained by her that he was able to behave with dignity 
even when entertaining the highest magnates of the province. Perhaps 
(it seemed to Velchaninov) he had intelligence too, but as Natalya 
Vassilyevna did not like her spouse to talk too much, his intelligence 
was not very noticeable. Perhaps he had many natural good qualities, 
as well as bad ones. But his good qualities were kept under a shade, 
as it were, and his evil propensities were almost completely stifled. 
Velchaninov remembered, for instance, that Pavel Pavlovitch some· 
times betrayed a disposition to laugh at his neighbours, but this was 
sternly forbidden him. He was fond, too, at times of telling anecdotes; 
but a watch was kept on that weakness too, and he was only allowed 
to tell such as were brief and of little importance. He had a weakness 
for a festive glass outside the house and was even capable of drinking 
too much with a friend; but this failing had been severely nipped in 
the bud. And it is noteworthy that no outside observer would have 
said that Pavel Pavlovitch was a hen-pecked husband; Natalya Vas­
silyevna seemed an absolutely obedient wife, and most likely believed 
herself to be one. It was possible that Pavel Pavlovitch loved Natalya 
Vassilyevna passionately; but no one noticed it, and, indeed, it was 
impossible to notice it, and this reserve was probably due to her 
domestic discipline. Several times during his life at T-- Velchaninov 
had asked himself whether the husband had any suspicion at all of 
his wife's intrigue. Several times he questioned Natalya Vassilyevna 
seriously about it, and always received the answer, uttered with a 
certain annoyance, that her husband knew nothing and never could 
know anything about it and that "it was no concern of his." Another 
characteristic of hers was that she never laughed at Pavel Pavlovitch 
and did not consider him absurd or very plain and would, indeed, 
have taken his part very warmly if any one had dared to show him 
incivility. Having no children, she was naturally bound to become a 
society woman, but her home life, too, was essential to her. Social 
pleasures never had complete sway of her, and at home she was very 
fond of needlework and looking after the house. Pavel Pavlovitch had 
recalled, that night, the evenings they had spent in reading; it hap· 
pened that sometimes V elchaninov read aloud and sometimes Pavel 
Pavlovitch : to Velchaninov's surprise he read aloud excellently. Mean· 
while, Natalya Vassilyevna did sewing as she listened, always calmly 
and serenely. They read a novel of Dickens, something from a Russian 

The eternal Husband 
373 
magazine, sometimes even something "serious." Natalya Vassilyevna 
highly appreciated Velchaninov's culture, but appreciated it in silence, 
as something final and established, of which there was no need to talk. 
Altogether, her attitude to everything intellectual and literary was 
rather one of indifference, as to something irrelevant though perhaps 
useful. Pavel Pavlovitch sometimes showed considerable warmth on 
the subject. 
The liaison at T- was broken suddenly when on V elchaninov's 
side it had reached its zenith-that is, almost the point of madness. In 
reality he was abruptly dismissed, though it was all so arranged that 
he went away without grasping that he had been cast off "like a 
worthless ol.:l shoe." 
Six weeks before his departure, a young artillery officer who had 
just finished at the training college arrived in T-- and took to 
visiting the Trusotskys. Instead of three, they were now a party of 
four. Natalya Vassilyevna welcomed the boy graciously but treated 
him as a boy. No suspicion crossed Velchaninov's mind and indeed 
he had no thought to spare for it, for he had just been told that sep­
aration was inevitable. One of the hundreds of reasons urged by 
Natalya Vassilyevna for his leaving her as soon as possible was that 
she believed herself to be with child : and therefore, naturally, he 
must disappear at once for three or four months at least, so that it 
would not be so easy for her husband to feel any doubt if there were 
any kind of gossip afterwards. It was rather a far-fetched argument. 
After a stormy proposition on the part of Velchaninov that she 
should fly with him to Paris or America, he departed alone to Peters­
burg, "only for a brief moment, of course," that is, for no more than 
three months, or nothing would have induced him to go, in spite of 
any reason or argument. Exactly two months later he received in 
Petersburg a letter from Natalya Vassilyevna asking him never to 
return, as she already loved another; she informed him that she had 
been mistaken about her condition. This information was superfluous. 
It was all clear to him now: he remembered the young officer. With 
that it was all over for good. He chanced to hear afterwards, some 
years later, that Bagautov had appeared on the scene and spent five 
whole years there. He explained the disproportionate duration of that 
affair partly by the fact that Natalya Vassilyevna, by now, was a good 
deal older, and so more constant in her attachments. 
He remained sitting on his bed for nearlv an hour: at last he roused 
himself, rang for Mavra to bring his coffee, drank it hastԠh·, and at 
eleven o'clock set out to look for the PokrovskY Hotel. In going rhere 

374 
'I h¬ Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
he had a special idea which had only come to him in the morning. 
He felt somewhat ashamed of his behaviour to Pavel Pavlovitch the 
night before and now he wanted to efface the impression. 
The whole fantastic business with the door handle, the night before, 
he now put down to chance, to the tipsy condition of Pavel Pavlovitch 
and perhaps to something else, but he did not really know, exactly, why 
he was going now to form new relations with the former husband, 
when everything had so naturally and of its own accord ended be­
tween them. Something attracted him. He had received a peculiar 
impression and he was attracted in consequence of it. 
Chapter 5 
LIZA 
PAVEL PAVLOVITCH had no idea of "giving him the slip," 
and goodness knows why Velchaninov had asked him the question 
the night before; he was, indeed, at a loss to explain it himself. At his 
first inquiry at a little shop near the Pokrovsky Church, he was di­
rected to the hotel in the side street a couple of paces away. At the 
hotel, it was explained that M. Trusotsky was staying in the lodge 
close by in the courtyard, in furnished rooms at Marya Sysoevna's. 
Going up the narrow, wet and very dirty stone stairs to the second 
storey, where these rooms were, he suddenly heard the sound of crying. 
It seemed like the crying of a child of seven or eight; the sound was 
distressing; he heard smothered sobs which would break out and with 
them the stamping of feet and shouts of fury, which were smothered, 
too, in a hoarse falsetto voice, evidently that of a grown-up man. 
This man seemed to be trying to suppress the child and to be very 
anxious that her crying should not be heard, but was making more 
noise than she was. The shouts sounded pitiless, and the child seemed 
to be begging forgiveness. In a small passage at the top, with doors on 
both sides of it, Velchaninov met a tall, stout, slovenly-looking peasant 
woman of forty and asked for Pavel Pavlovitch. She pointed towards 
the door from which the sounds were coming. There was a look of 
some indignation on the fat, purple face of this woman. 
"You see how he amuses himself!" she said gruffiy and went down­
stairs. 
Velchaninov was just about to knock at the door, but on second 

The fternal Husband 
375 
thoughts he walked straight in. In a small room, roughly though 
amply furnished with common painted furniture, stood Pavel Pav­
lovitch without his coat and waistcoat. With a flushed and exasperated 
face he was trying, by means of shouts, gesticulations and even 
(Velchaninov fancied) kicks, to silence a little girl of eight, shabbily 
:lressed in a short, black, woollen frock. She seemed to be actually 
in hysterics, she gasped hysterically and held out her hands to Pavel 
Pavlovitch as though she wanted to clutch at him, to hug him, to 
beseech and implore him about something. In one instant the whole 
scene was transformed: seeing the visitor, the child cried out and 
dashed away into a tiny room adjoining, and Pavel Pavlovitch, for a 
moment disconcerted, instantly melted into smiles, exactly as he had 
done the night before when Velchaninov flung open the door upoo 
him on the stairs. 
"Alexey Ivanovitch!" he cried, in genuine surprise. "I could never 
have expected . . .  but come in, come in! Here, on the sofa, or here in 
the arm-chair, while I . . .  " 
And he rushed to put on his coat, forgetting to put on his waistcoat. 
"Stay as you are, don't stand on ceremony." 
Velchaninov sat down in the chair. 
"No, allow me to stand on ceremony; here, now I am more respect­
able. But why are you sitting in the corner? Sit here in the arm-chair, 
by the table . . . .  Well, I didn't expect you, I didn't expect you!" 
He, too, sat down on the edge of a rush-bottomed chair, not beside 
his "unexpected" visitor, but setting his chair at an angle so as to sit 
more nearly facing him. 
"Why didn't you expect me? Why, I told you last night that I would 
come at this time." 
"I thought you wouldn't come; and when I reflected on all that 
happened yesterday, on waking this morning, I despaired of ever see­
ing you again." 
Meanwhile Velchaninov was looking about him. The room was in 
disorder, the bed was not made, clothes were lying about, on the table 
were glasses with dregs of coffee in them, crumbs and a bottle of 
champagne, half full, with the cork out and a glass beside it. He 
stole a glance towards the next room, but there all was quiet; the 
child was in hiding and perfectly still. 
"Surely you are not drinking that now?" said Velchaninov, indicat­
ing the champagne. 
"The remains . . .  " said Pavel Pavlovitch in confusion. 
"Well, you have changed!" 

376 
'I he Short Novels of VostocvskJ 
"It's a bad habit, come upon me all at once; yes, really, since that 
date. I'm not lying! I can't restrain myself. Don't be uneasy, Alexey 
lvanovitch. I'm not drunk now, and I'm not going to play the fool 
now as I did at your flat yesterday; but I'm telling the truth, it's all 
since then. And if any one had told me six months ago that I should 
break down like this, if I'd been shown myself in the looking-glass­
! shouldn't have believed it." 
"You were drunk last night, then?" 
"I was," Pavel Pavlovitch admitted in a low voice, looking down 
in embarrassment. "And you see I wasn't exactly drunk then, but I had 
been a little before. I want to explain, because I'm always worse a little 
while after. If I get ever so little tipsy, it is followed by a sort of vio­
lence and foolishness, and I feel my grief more intensely too. It's 
because of my grief, perhaps, I drink. Then I'm capable of playing 
all sorts of pranks and I push myself forward quite stupidly and insult 
people for nothing. I must have presented myself very strangely to 
you yesterday?" 
"Do you mean to say you don't remember?" 
"Not remember! I remember it all. . . .  " 
"You see, Pavel Pavlovitch, that's just what I thought," Velchaninov 
said in a conciliatory voice. "\Vhat's more, I was myself rather irrita­
ble with you last night and . . .  too impatient, I readily admit it. I don't 
feel quite well at times, and then your unexpected arrival last night . . .  
" 
"Yes, at night, at night!" Pavel Pavlovitch shook his head, as though 
surprised and disapproving. "And what possessed me! Nothing would 
have induced me to come in to you if you had not opened the door 
yourself; I should have gone away from the door. I came to you a week 
ago, Alexey lvanovitch, and you were not at home, but perhaps I 
should never have come again. I have some pride, too, Alexey lvanov­
itch, although I do recognize the position I am in. We met in the street, 
too, and I kept thinking: 'Why, he must recognize me and yet he 
turns away; nine years are no joke,' and I couldn't make up my mind 
to come. And last night I had wandered from the Petersburg Side 
and I forgot the time. It all came from that" (he pointed to the bottle), 
"and from my feelings. It was stupid! Very! And if it had been any 
one but you-for you've come to see me even after what happened 
yesterday, for the sake of old times-1 should have given up all hope 
of renewing our acquaintance!" 
Velchaninov listened attentively. The man seemed to him to be 
speaking sincerely and even with a certain dignity; and yet he did not 
believe one word he had heard since he came into the room. 

The eternal Husband 
377 
"Tell me, Pavel Pavlovitch, you are not alone here, then? Whose 
little girl is that I found with you just now?" 
Pavel Pavlovitch was positively amazed and raised his eyebrows, 
but he looked frankly and pleasantly at Velchaninov. 
"Whose little girl? Why, it's Liza!" he said, with an affable smile. 
"What Liza?" muttered Velchaninov, with a sort of inward tremor. 
The shock was too sudden. When he came in and saw Liza, just 
before, he was surprised, but had absolutely no presentiment of the 
truth, and thought nothing particular about her. 
"Yes, our Liza, our daughter Liza!" Pavel Pavlovitch smiled. 
"Your daughter ? Do you mean that you and Natalya . . .  Natalya 
Vassilyevna had children ?" Velchaninov asked timidly and mistrust­
fully, in a very low voice. 
"Why, of course! But there, upon my word, how should you have 
heard of it? What am I thinking about! It was after you went away, 
God blessed us with her!" 
Pavel Pavlovitch positively jumped up from his chair in some agita­
tion, though it seemed agreeable too. 
"I heard nothing about it," said Velchaninov, and he turned pale. 
"To be sure, to be sure; from whom could you have heard it?" said 
Pavel Pavlovitch, in a voice weak with emotion. "My poor wife and 
I had lost all hope, as no doubt you remember, and suddenly God 
sent us this blessing, and what it meant to me-He only knows! 
Just a year after you went away, I believe. No, not a year, not nearly 
a year. Wait a bit; why, you left us, if my memory does not deceive 
me, in October or November, I believe." 
"I left T-- at the beginning of September, the twelfth of Sep­
tember; I remember it very well." 
"In September, was it? H'm! . . .  what was I thinking about?" cried 
Pavel Pavlovitch, much surprised. "Well, if that's so, let me see: you 
went away on the twelfth of September, and Liza was born on the 
eighth of May, s৕eptember-October-November-December-Jan­
uary-February-March-April-a little over eight months! And if 
you only knew how my poor wife . . .  " 
"Show me . . .  call her . . .  " Velchaninov faltered in a breaking voice. 
"Certainly!" said Pavel Pavlovitch fussily, at once breaking off what 
he was saying, as though it were of no consequence. "Directly, directly, 
I'll introduce her!" 
And he went hurriedly into the other room to Liza. 
Fully three or perhaps four minutes passed; there was a hurried, 
rapid whispering in the room, and he just caught the sound of Liza's 

378 
The Short Novels of VostoevskJ 
voice. "She's begging not to be brought in," thought V elchaninov. 
At last they came out. 
"You see, she's all confusion," said Pavel Pavlovitch; "she's so shy, 
and so proud . . .  the image of my poor wife!" 
Liza came in, looking down and no longer tearful; her father was 
holding her hand. She was a tall, slim, very pretty little girl. She 
raised her big blue eyes to glance with curiosity at the visitor, looked at 
him sullenly, and dropped them again at once. Her eyes were full of 
that gravity one sees in children when they are left alone with a 
stranger and, retreating into a corner, look out solemnly and mis­
trustfully at the unfamiliar visitor; but she had, perhaps, some other 
thought, by no means childish, in her mind-so Velchaninov fancied. 
Her father led her straight up to him. 
"This is an uncle Mother used to know long ago; he was our friend. 
Don't be shy, hold out your hand." 
The child bent forward a little, and timidly held out her hand. 
"Natalya Vassilyevna would not have her trained to curtsey, but 
taught her to make a little bow, and hold out her hand in the English 
fashion," he added by way of explanation to Velchaninov, watching 
him intently. 
Velchaninov knew that he was being watched, but had quite ceased 
to trouble himself to conceal his emotion; he sat perfectly still in his 
chair, held Liza's hand in his and gazed at the child. But Liza was 
in great anxiety about something, and, forgetting her hand in the 
visitor's hand, she kept her eyes fixed on her father. She listened 
apprehensively to all that he said. Velchaninov recognized those big 
blue eyes at once, but what struck him most of all was the wonderful 
soft whiteness of her face and the colour of her hair; these character­
istics were so marked and so significant. Her features and the lines of 
the lips reminded him vividly of Natalya Vassilyevna. Meanwhile, 
Pavel Pavlovitch had for some time been telling him something, 
speaking, it seemed, with very great warmth and feeling, but Vel­
chaninov did not hear him. He only caught the last sentence-
" . . .  so that you can't imagine our joy at this gift from the Lord, 
Alexey lvanovitch! She became everything to me as soon as she came 
to us, so that I used to think that even if my tranquil happiness should, 
by God's will, be at an end, Liza would always be left me; that I 
reckoned upon for certain!" 
"And Natalya Vassilyevna ?" Velchaninov queried. 
"Natalya Vassilyevna ?" said Pavel Pavlovitch al!ectedly. "You know 
her way, you remember that she never cared to say a great deal, but 

7' he t'temal Husband 
379 
the way she said good-bye to her on her death-bed 
. everything 
came out then! I said just now 'on her death-bed,' but yet only a day 
before her death she was upset and angry, said that they were trying 
to cure her with drugs, that there was nothing wrong with her but an 
ordinary fever, and that neither of our doctors understood it, and that 
as soon as Koch came back (do you remember our old friend the 
army doctor?) she would be up again in a fortnight! But there! five 
hours before her decease she remembered that in three weeks' time we 
must visit her aunt, Liza's godmother, on her name day . . .  
" 
Velchaninov suddenly got up from his chair, still holding the child's 
hand. Among other things it struck him that there was something 
reproachful in the intense look the child kept fixed upon her father. 
"She's not ill?" he asked hurriedly and somewhat strangely. 
"I don't think so, but . . .  our circumstances are here so . . .  " said 
Pavel Pavlovitch, with mournful solicitude. "She's a strange child and 
nervous at all times; after her mother's death she was ill for a fort­
night, hysterical. Why, what a weeping and wailing we had just before 
you came in . . .  do you hear, Liza, do you hear ? And what was it all 
about? All because I go out and leave her; she says it shows I don't 
love her any more as I used to when mother was alive-that's her 
complaint against me. And a child like that who ought to be playing 
with her toys, instead of fretting over a fantastic notion like that. 
Though here she has no one to play with." 
"Why, how . . .  you're surely not alone here?" 
"Quite alone; the servant only comes in once a day." 
"And you go out and leave her like this alone?" 
"What else could I do? And when I went out yesterday I locked her 
in, into that little room there, that's what the tears have been about 
to-day. But what else could I do? Judge for yourself: the day before 
yesterday she went down when I was out, and a boy threw a stone at 
her in the yard and hit her on the head. Or else she begins crying 
and runs round to all the lodgers in the yard, asking where I've gone. 
And that's not nice, you know. And I'm a nice one, too; I go out for 
an hour and come back next morning; that's what happened yesterday. 
It was a nice thing, too, that while I was away the landlady let her 
out, sent for a locksmith to break the lock-such a disgrace-! literally 
feel myself a monster. All mental aberration, all mental aberration . . . .  
" 
"Father!" the child said timidly and uneasily. 
"There you are, at it again! You're at the same thing again. What did 
I tell you just now?" 

380 
The Short Novels of VostoevskJ 
"I won't, I won't!" Liza repeated in terror, hurriedly clasping her 
hands before him. 
"You can't go on like this in these surroundings," Velchaninov said 
impatiently, in a voice of authority. "Why, you . . .  why, you're a man 
of property; how is it you're living like this-in this lodge and in such 
surroundings?" 
"In the lodge? But, you see, we may be going away in a week's time, 
and we've wasted a great deal of money already, even though I have 
property . . . .  " 
"Come, that's enough, that's enough." Velchaninov cut him short 
with increasing impatience, as it were expressing plainly "There's no 
need to talk. I know all that you have to say, and I know with what 
feelings you are speaking." 
"Listen, I'll make a suggestion. You said just now that you'll be 
staying a week, maybe possibly even a fortnight. I know a household 
here, that is, a family where I'm quite at home-have known them 
twenty years. The father, Alexandr Pavlovitch Pogoryeltsev, is a Privy 
Councillor; he might be of use to you in your business. They are at 
their summer villa now. They've got a splendid villa. Klavdia Petrovna 
is like a sister to me or a mother. They have eight children. Let me 
take Liza to them at once . . .  that we m:1y lose no time. They will be 
delighted to take her in for the whole time you are here, and will treat 
her like their own child, their own child!" 
He was terribly impatient and did not disguise it. 
"That's scarcely possible," said Pavel Pavlovitch, with a grimace, 
looking, so Velchaninov fancied, slily in his face. 
"Why, why impossible?" 
"Why, how can I let the child go so suddenly-with such a real 
friend as you, of course-I don't mean, but into a house of strangers, 
and of such high rank, where I don't know how she'd be received 
either?" 
"But I've told you that I'm like one of the family!" cried Velchaninov, 
almost wrathfully. "Klavdia Petrovna will be delighted to take her at 
a word from me-as though it were my child. Damn it all! \Vhy, 
you know yourself that you only say all this for the sake of saying 
something . . .  there's nothing to discuss!" 
He positively stamped his foot. 
"I only mean, won't it seem strange? I should have to go and see 
her once or twice anyway, or she would be left without a father! He­
he! . . .  and in such a grand household." 
"But it's the simplest household, not 'grand' at all!" shouted Vel-

The eternal Husband 
331 
chaninov. "I tell you there are a lot of children. She'll revive there, 
that's the whole object . . . .  And I'll introduce you myself to-morrow, 
if you like. And of course you would have to go to thank them; we'll 
drive over every day, if you like." 
"It's all so . . .  " 
"Nonsense! And, what's more, you know that yourself! Listen. Come 
to me this evening, and stay the night, perhaps, and we'll set off early 
in the morning so as to get there at twelve." 
"My benefactor! And even to stay the night with you 
.
•
•
 " Pavel 
Pavlovitch agreed suddenly in a tone of fervent feeling. "You are 
doing me a charity literally . . . .  Where is their villa?" 
"Their villa is in Lyesnoe." 
"Only, I say, what about her dress? For, you know, in such a dis­
tinguished household and in their summer villa, too, you know your­
self . . .  a father's heart .
•
•
 " 
"What about her dress? She's in mourning. She couldn't be dressed 
differently, could she? It's the most suitable one could possibly 
imagine! The only thing is she ought to have clean linen . . .  a clean 
tucker .
.
•
 
" 
Her tucker and what showed of her underlinen were, in fact, very 
dirty. 
"She must change her things at once," said Pavel Pavlovitch fussily, 
"and we'll get together the rest of what she needs in the way of under­
clothes; Marya Sysoevna has got them in the wash." 
"Then you should tell them to fetch a carriage," Velchaninov inter­
posed; "and make haste if you can." 
But a difficulty presented itself: Liza resolutely opposed it; she had 
been listening all the time in terror, and, if Velchaninov had had 
time to look at her attentively while he was persuading Pavel Pav­
lovitch, he would have seen a look of utter despair upon her little face. 
"I am not going," she said firmly, in a low voice. 
"There, there! You see, she's her mother over again." 
"I'm not my mother over again, I'm not my mother over again!" 
cried Liza in despair, wringing her little hands, and as it were trying 
to defend herself before her father from the awful reproach of being 
like her mother. "Father, Father, if you leave me . . .  " 
She suddenly turned on Velchaninov, who was in dismay. 
"If you take me I'll .
•
.
 " 
But before she had time to say more, Pavel Pavlovitch clutched her 
by the arm and with undisguised exasperation dragged her almost 
by the collar into the little room. Whispering followed for some 

382 
T lze Slzort Novels of Vostoevsky 
minutes; there was the sound of suppressed crying. Velchaninov was 
on the point of going in himself, but Pavel Pavlovitch came out and 
with a wry smile announced that she was coming directly. Velchaninov 
tried not to look at him and kept his eyes turned away. 
Marya Sysoevna appeared. She was the same peasant woman that 
he had met just before in the passage; she began packing the linen she 
had brought with her in a pretty little bag belonging to Liza. 
"Are you taking the little girl away then, sir?" she asked, addressing 
Velchaninov. "Have you a family, then ? It's a good deed, sir: she's 
a quiet child; you are taking her from a perfect Bedlam." 
"Come, come, Marya Sysoevna!" muttered Pavel Pavlovitch. 
"Marya Sysoevna, indeed! That's my name, right enough. It is 
a Bedlam here, isn't it? Is it the proper thing for a child that can 
understand to see such disgraceful goings-on ? They've fetched you a 
carriage, sir-to Lyesnoe, is it?" 
"Yes, yes." 
"Well, it's a blessing you came!" 
Liza came out pale and, looking down, took her bag. Not one glance 
in Velchaninov's direction; she restrained herself and did not, as before, 
rush to embrace her father, even at parting; evidently she was un­
willing to look at him either. Her father kissed her decorously on the 
head and patted it; her lips twitched as he did so and her little chin 
quivered, but still she did not raise her eyes to her father. Pavel 
Pavlovitch looked pale, and his hands were trembling-Velchaninov 
noticed that distinctly, though he was doing his utmost not to look 
:.J.t him. The one thing he longed for was to get away as quickly as 
possible. 
"After all, it's not my fault," he thought. "It was bound to be so." 
They went downstairs; there Marya Sysoevna kissed Liza good-bye, 
and only when she was sitting in the carriage Liza lifted her eyes to 
her father, flung up her hands and screamed; another minute and she 
would have flung herself out of the carriage to him, but the horses 
had started. 

The eternal Husband 
383 
Chapter 6 
A NEW FANCY OF AN IDLE MAN 
ARE you feeling ill?" asked Velchaninov in alarm. "I will tell 
them to stop, I'll tell them to bring water . . . .  " 
She turned her eyes upon him and looked at him passionately, re­
proachfully. 
"Where are you taking me?" she asked sharply and abruptly. 
"It's a very nice family, Liza. They're in a delightful summer villa 
now; there are a lot of children; they'll love you; they are kind. Don't 
be angry with me, Liza; I only wish for your good." 
How strange it would have seemed to all who knew him if any one 
could have seen him at that moment. 
"How . . .  how . . .  how . . .  how horrid you are!" said Liza, choking 
with stifled tears, glaring at him with her beautiful eyes full of anger. 
"Liza, I . . .  " 
"You are wicked, wicked, wicked, wicked!" 
She wrung her hands. Velchaninov was completely at a loss. 
"Liza, darling, if you knew how despairing you make me!" 
"Is it true that he will come to-morrow? Is it true?" she asked 
peremptorily. 
"Yes, yes, I'll bring him myself; I'll take him with me and bring 
him." 
"He'll deceive me," she whispered, looking down. 
"Doesn't he love you, Liza?" 
"He doesn't love me." 
"Does he ill-treat you? Does he?" 
Liza looked at him gloomily and was mute. She turned away from 
him again and sat with her eyes obstinately cast down. He began trying 
to coax her; he talked to her warmly, he was in a perfect fever. Liza 
listened with mistrust and hostility, but she did listen. Her attention 
delighted him extremely; he even began explaining to her what was 
meant by a man's drinking. He told her that he loved her himself 
and would look after her father. Liza lifted her eyes at last and looked 
at him intently. He began telling her how he used to know her mother 
and he saw that what he told her interested her. Little by little she 
began answering his questions, though cautiously and in monosylla· 

384 
The Short Novels of Vostoevsky 
bles. She still stubbornly refused to answer his leading questions; she 
remained obstinately silent about everything to do with her relations 
with her father in the past. As he talked to her, Velchaninov took her 
hand in his as before and heid it; she did not pull it away. The child 
was not silent all the time, however; she let out in her confused answers 
that she loved her father more than her mother, because he had always 
been fonder of her, and her mother had not cared so much for her, 
but that when her mother was dying she had kissed her and cried a 
great deal when every one had gone out of the room and they were 
left alone . . .  and that now she loved her more than any one, more 
than any one, more than any one in the world, and every night she 
loved her more than any one. But the child was certainly proud. Re­
alizing that she had spoken too freely, she suddenly shrank into her­
self again and glanced with positive hatred at Velchaninov, who had 
led her into saying so much. Towards the end of the journey her 
hysterical agitation almost passed off, but she sank into brooding and 
had the look of a wild creature, sullen and gloomily, resolutely stub­
born. The fact that she was being taken to a strange family, in which 
she had never been before, seemed for the time being not to trouble 
her much. What tormented her was something else. 
Velchaninov saw that; he guessed that she lvas ashamed before him, 
that she was ashamed of her father's having so easily let her go with 
him, of his having, as it were, flung her into his keeping. 
"She is ill," he thought, "perhaps very ill; she's been worried to 
death . . . .  Oh, the drunken, abject beast! I understand him now!" 
He urged on the driver; he rested his hopes on the country, the fresh 
air, the garden, the children, and the new, unfamiliar life, and then, 
later on . . .  But of what would come afterwards he had no doubts 
at all; of the future he had the fullest, brightest hopes. One thing only 
he knew for certain: that he had never before felt what he was ex­
periencing now and that it would never leave him all his life. 
"Here was an object, here was life!" he thought triumphantly. 
A great many thoughts flashed upon his mind, but he did not dwell 
upon them and obstinately put away details; so long as he avoided 
details it all seemed clear and unassailable. His plan of action was 
self-evident. 
"It will be possible to work upon that wretch," he mused, "by our 
united forces, and he will leave Liza in Petersburg at the Pogoryeltsevs', 
though at first only temporarily, for a cenain time, and will go away 
alone, and Liza will be left to me; that's the whole thing. What more 

'l he eternal Husband 
385 
do I want? And . . .  of course, he wants that himself; or else why does 
he torment her?" 
At last they arrived. The Pogoryeltsevs' country home really was 
a charming place; they were met first of all by a noisy crowd of chil­
dren, flocking out into the porch. Velchaninov had not been there 
for a long time, and the children were in a frenzy of delight; they 
were fond of him. The elder ones shouted to him at once, before he 
got out of the carriage-
"And how about the case, how is your case getting on?" 
The cry was caught up even by the smallest, and they shrieked it 
mirthfully in imitation of their elders. They used to tease him about 
the lawsuit. But, seeing Liza, they surrounded her at once and began 
scrutinizing her with intent, dumb, childish curiosity. Klavdia Petrovna 
came out, followed by her husband. She and her husband, too, began 
with a laughing question about the lawsuit. 
Klavdia Petrovna was a lady about thirty-seven, a plump and still 
good-looking brunette, with a fresh, rosy face. Her husband was fifty­
five, a shrewd and clever man, but above everything good-natured. 
Their house was in the fullest sense of the word "a home" to Vel­
chaninov, as he had said himself. But underlying this was the special 
circumstance that, twenty years before, Klavdia Petrovna had been on 
the point of marrying Velchaninov, then a student, hardly more than 
a boy. It was a case of first love, ardent, ridiculous and splendid. It had 
ended, however, in her marrying Pogoryeltsev. Five years later they 
had met again, and it had all ended in a quiet, serene friendship. 
A certain warmth, a peculiar glow suffusing their relations, had re­
mained for ever. All was pure and irreproachable in Velchaninov's 
memories of this friendship, and it was the dearer to him for being 
perhaps the solitary case in which this was so. Here in this family he 
was simple, unaffected and kind; he used to fondle the children, he 
admitted all his failings, confessed his shortcomings, and never gave 
himself airs. He swore more than once to the Pogoryeltsevs that he 
should before long give up the world, come and live with them and 
never leave them again. In his heart he thought of this project seriously. 
He told them all that was necessary about Liza in some detail; but 
a mere request from him was enough, without any special explana­
tions. Klavdia Petrovna kissed the "orphan" and promised for her part 
to do everything. The children took possession of Liza and carried 
her off to play in the garden. 
After half an hour of lively conversation Velchaninov got up and 

386 
The Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
began saying good-bye. He was so impatient that every one noticed 
it. They were all astonished; he had not been to see them for three 
weeks and now he was going in half an hour. He laughed and pledged 
himself to come next day. They remarked that he seemed to be in a 
state of great excitement; he suddenly took Klavdia Petrovna's hand 
and, on the pretext of having forgotten to tell her something important, 
drew her aside into another room. 
"Do you remember what I told you-you alone-what even your 
husband does not know-<>£ my year at T--?" 
"I remember perfectly; you often talked of it." 
"It was not talking, it was a confession, to you alone, to you alone! 
I never told you the surname of that woman; she was the wife of this 
man Trusotsky. She is dead, and Liza is her daughter-my daughter!" 
"Is it certain? You are not mistaken?" Klavdia Petrovna asked with 
some excitement. 
"It's perfectly certain, perfectly certain; I am not mistaken!" Vel­
chaninov pronounced ecstatically. 
And as briefly as he could, in haste and great excitement, he told her 
everything. Klavdia Petrovna already knew the whole story, but not 
the lady's name. 
Velchaninov had always been so alarmed at the very idea that any 
one who knew him might ever meet Madame Trusotsky and think 
that lze could so have loved that woman, that he had not till that day 
dared to reveal "that woman's" name even to Klavdia Petrovna, his 
one friend. 
"And the father knows nothing?" asked Klavdia Petrovna, when 
she had heard his story. 
"Y-yes, he does know 
.
.
.
•
 It worries me that I've not got to the 
bottom of it yet!" Velchaninov went on eagerly. "He knows, he 
knows; I noticed it to-day and yesterday. But I must know how much 
he knows. That's why I'm in a hurry now. He is coming to me this 
evening. I can't imagine, though, how he can have found out-found 
out everything, I mean. He knows about Bagautov, there's no doubt 
of that. But about me? You know how clever women are in reas­
suring their husbands in such cases! If an angel came down from 
heaven-the husband would not believe him, but he would believe his 
wife! Don't shake your head and don't blame me; I blame myself 
and have blamed myself, for the whole affair, long ago, long ago! 
.
.
•
 
You see, I was so certain he knew when I was there this morning that 
I compromised myself before him. Would you believe it, I felt so 
wretched and ashamed at having met him so rudely yesterday (I will 

T h% eternal Husband 
387 
tell you all about it fully afterwards). He came to me yesterday from 
an irresistible, malicious desire to let me know that he knew of the 
wrong done him, and knew who had done it; that was the whole 
reason of his stupid visit when he was drunk. But that was so natural 
on his part! He simply came to work off his resentment! I was alto­
gether too hasty with him this morning and yesterday! Careless­
stupid! I betrayed myself to him. Why did he turn up at a moment 
when I was upset ? I tell you he's even been tormenting Liza, tor­
menting the child, and probably that, too, was to work off his resent­
ment-to vent his malice if only on the child! Yes, he is spiteful­
insignificant as he is, yet he is spiteful; very much so, indeed. In 
himself he is no more than a buffoon, though, God knows, in old 
days he seemed to be a very decent fellow within his limits-it's so 
natural that he should be going to the dogs! One must look at it from 
a Christian point of view! And you know, my dear, my best of friends, 
l want to be utterly different to him; I want to be kind to him. That 
would be really a 'good deed' on my part. For, you know, after all, I 
have wronged him! Listen, you know there's something else I must 
tell you. On one occasion in T-- I was in want of four thousand 
roubles, and he lent me the money on the spot, with no security, and 
showed genuine pleasure at being of use to me; and, do you know, 
I took it then, I took it from his hands. I borrowed money from him, 
do you understand, as a friend!" 
"Only be more careful," Klavdia Petrovna anxiously observed, in 
response to all this. "And what a state of ecstasy you're in; I feel uneasy 
about you! Of course, Liza will be like a child of my own now. But 
there's so much, so much still to be settled! The great thing is that you 
must be more circumspect; you absolutely must be more circumspect 
when you are happy or so ecstatic; you're too generous when you are 
happy," she added, with a smile. 
They all came out to see Velchaninov off. The children, who had 
been playing with Liza in the garden, brought her with them. They 
seemed to look at her with more amazement now than at first. Liza 
was overcome with shyness when, at parting, Velchaninov kissed her 
before them all, and warmly repeated his promise to come next day 
with her father. To the last minute she was silent and did not look at 
him, but then suddenly she clutched at his arm and drew him aside, 
fixing an imploring look on him; she wanted to tell him something. 
He promptly took her away into another room. 
"What is it, Liza?" he asked her tenderly and reassuringly; but she, 

388 
The Short Novels of Vostoevsky 
still looking about her apprehensively, drew him into the furthest 
corner; she wanted to be hidden from them all. 
"What is it, Liza? What's the matter?" 
She was dumb, she could not bring herself to speak; she gazed fixedly 
with her blue eyes into his face, and every feature of her little face 
expressed nothing but frantic terror. 
"He'll . . .  hang himself! "  she whispered, as though in delirium. 
"Who will hang himself?" asked Velchaninov in dismay. 
"He, he! He tried to hang himself with a cord in the night!" the 
child said breathlessly. "I saw him! He tried to hang himself with a 
cord, he told me so, he told me so! He meant to before, he always 
meant to . . .  I saw him in the night . . . .  
" 
"Impossible," whispered Velchaninov in amazement. 
She suddenly fell to kissing his hands; she cried, almost choking 
with sobs, begged and besought him, but he could make nothing of 
her hysterical whisperings. And the tortured face of that terror-stricken 
child who looked to him as her last hope remained printed on his 
memory for ever, haunting him awake and visiting his dreams. 
"And can she, can she really love him so much?" he thought, 
jealously and enviously, as with feverish impatience he returned to 
town. "She had told me herself that morning that she loved her 
mother more . . .  perhaps she hated him and did not love him at all! 
. . .  And what did that mean : he will hang himself? What did she 
mean by that ? Would the fool hang himself?" . . .  He must find out, 
he must certainly find out! He must get to the bottom of it as soon 
as possible-once and for all. 
Chapter 7 
TI:IE HUSBAND AND THE LOVER KISS EACH OTHER 
HE WAS in terrible haste "to find out." 
"This morning I was so overwhelmed. This morning I hadn't the 
time to realize the position," he thought, recalling his first sight of 
Liza, "but now I must find out." To find out more quickly he was on 
the point of telling the driver to take him to Trusotsky's lodging, but 
on second thoughts decided: "No, better let him come to me, and 
meanwhile I'll make haste and get this accursed legal business oil 
my hands." 

'!he etemal Husband 
389 
He set to work feverishly; but this time he was conscious himself 
that he was very absent-minded and that he was hardly capable that 
day of attending to business. At five o'clock, when he went out to 
dinner, he was struck for the first time by an absurd idea : that perhaps 
he rea!1y was only hindering the progress of his case, by meddling in 
the lawsuit himself, fussing about in the law-courts and hunting up 
his lawyer, who was already beginning to hide from him. He laughed 
gaily at his supposition. "If this idea had occurred to me yesterday, 
I should have been dreadfully distressed," he added, even more gaily. 
In spite of his gaiety, he grew more and more preoccupied and more 
and more impatient. He fell to musing at last; and though his restless 
thought clutched at one thing after another, he could arrive at nothing 
that would satisfy him. 
"I must have that man!" he decided finally. "I must solve the riddle 
of that man, and then make up my mind. It's-a duel!" 
Returning home at seven o'clock, he did not find Pavel Pavlovitch 
and was extremely surprised, then extremely wrathful, and later still 
extremely depressed; finally he began to be actually frightened. 
"God knows, God knows how it will end!" he repeated, as he walked 
about the room or stretched himself on the sofa, continually looking 
at his watch. At last, about nine o'clock, Pavel Pavlovitch appeared. 
"If the fellow were trying to dupe me, he couldn't have caught me at a 
more favourable time--1 feel so unhinged at this moment," he thought, 
his confidence completely restored and his spirits rising again. 
To his brisk and cheerful inquiry why he was so late coming, Pavel 
Pavlovitch gave a wry smile, seated himself with a free and easy air, 
very different from his manner the night before, and carelessly threw 
his hat with the crape on it on another chair close by. Velchaninov 
at once noticed this free and easy manner and made a note of it. 
Calmly, without wasting words, with none of the excitement he had 
shown in the morning, he told him, as though giving a report, how he 
৖1ad taken Liza, how kindly she had been received, how good it would 
be for her, and little by little, as though forgetting Liza, he imper­
ceptibly turned the conversation entirely on the Pogoryeltsevs-what 
charming people they were, how long he had known them, what a 
splendid and influential man Pogoryeltsev was, and so on. Pavel 
Pavlovitch listened inattentively and from time to time glanced up 
from under his brows at the speaker with an ill-humoured and craft)' 
sneer. 
"You're an impulsive person," he muttered, with a particularly 
disagreeable smile. 

390 
The Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
"You're rather ill-humoured to-day, though," Velchaninov observed 
with vexation. 
"And why shouldn't I be ill-humoured, like every one else! "  Pavel 
Pavlovitch cried out suddenly, just as though he had only been wait­
ing for that to bounce out. 
"You're at liberty to please yourself," laughed Velchaninov. "I won­
dered if anything had happened to you." 
"So it has!" the other exclaimed, as though boasting that something 
had happened. 
"What is it?" 
Pavel Pavlovitch delayed answering for a little. 
"Why, our Stepan Mihalovitch has played me a trick . . .  Bagautov, 
that elegant young Petersburg gentleman of the best society." 
"Was he not at home again?" 
"No, this time he was at home. For the first time I was admitterl, 
and I gazed upon his face . . .  only he was dead! "  
"Wha-at! Bagautov is dead ?" Velchaninov was awfully surprised, 
though there was no apparent reason for his being so surprised. 
"Yes. For six years our true and constant friend! Only yesterday, 
almost at midday, he died, and I knew nothing of it! I was going 
maybe that very minute to inquire after his health. To-morrow there 
will be the service and the funeral, he's already in his coffin. The coffin 
is lined with crimson-coloured velvet trimmed with gold . . .  he died of 
brain fever. I was admitted-! was admitted to gaze upon his face! 
I told them at the door that I was an intimate friend, that was why 
I was admitted. \Vhat's one to think of the way he's treated me now, 
my true and constant friend for six long years-I ask you that? Perhaps 
it was only on his account I came to Petersburg!" 
"But what are you angry with him for?" laughed Velchaninov. 
"Why, he did not die on purpose!" 
"But I speak with my heart full of regret; he was a precious friend; 
this was what he meant to me." 
And all at once, quite unexpectedly, Pavel Pavlovitch put up his two 
fingers like two horns on his bald forehead and went off into a low, 
prolonged chuckle. He sat like that, chuckling, for a full half-minute, 
staring into Velchaninov's face in a frenzy of malignant insolence. 
The latter was petrified as though at the sight of some ghost. But his 
stupefaction lasted but one brief instant; a sarcastic and insolently 
composed smile came slowly upon his lips. 
"What's the meaning of that?" he asked, carelessly drawling the 
words. 

The eternal Husband 
391 
"The meaning of it is-horns!" Pavel Pavlovitch rapped out, taking 
away his fingers from his forehead at last. 
"That is . . . your horns?" 
"My own, generously bestowed!" Pavel Pavlovitch said with a very 
nasty grimace. Both were silent. 
"You're a plucky fellow, I must say!" Velchaninov pronounced. 
"Because I showed you my decorations? Do you know, Alexey 
Ivanovitch, you'd better offer me something! You know I entertained 
you every blessed day for a whole year at T--. Send for just one 
bottle, my throat is dry." 
"With pleasure; you should have said so before. What will you 
have?" 
"Why you? Say we; we'll drink together, won't we?" said Pavel 
Pavlovitch, gazing into his face with a challenging but at the same 
time strangely uneasy look. 
"Champagne?" 
"\Vhat else? It's not the time for vodka yet . . . .  " 
Velchaninov got up deliberately, rang for Mavra and gave instruc­
tions. 
"To the joy of our delightful meeting after nine years' absence," 
said Pavel Pavlovitch, with a quite superfluous and inappropriate 
snigger. "Now you, and you only, are the one friend left me! Stepan 
Mihalovitch Bagautov is no more! As the poet says-
" 'Great Patrocus is no more, 
Vile Thersites still lives on !' " 
And at the word "Thersites" he poked himself in the chest. 
"You'd better hurry up and speak out, you swine; I don't like hints," 
Velchaninov thought to himself. His anger was rising and for a long 
time he had hardly been able to restrain himself. 
"Tell me," he said in a tone of vexation, "since you accuse Stepan 
Mihalovitch," (he could not call him simply Bagautov now) "I should 
have thought you would have been glad that the man who has wronged 
you is dead; why are you angry about it?" 
"Glad? Why glad? "  
"I imagine those must be your feelings." 
"He-he! You are quite mistaken about my feelings on that subject; 
as some wise man has said, 'A dead enemy is good, but a living one 
is better,' he-he!" 
"But you ,şaw him living every day for five years, I believe; you 

392 
'I he Short Novels of VostoevskJ 
had time to get tired of the sight of him," Velchaninov observed, with 
spiteful impertinence. 
"But you don't suppose I knew then . . .  you don't suppose I knew ?" 
Pavel Pavlovitch blurted out suddenly, just as though he had bounced 
out from behind a corner again, and as though he were delighted to 
be asked a question he had long been waiting for. 
"What do you take me for, then, Alexey Ivanovitch ?" 
And there was a gleam in his face of something quite new and 
unexpected, which seemed to transform his countenance, till then full 
of spite and abjectly grimacing. 
"Is it possible you didn't know, then ?" said Velchaninov, discon­
certed and completely taken by surprise. 
"Is it possible I knew? Is it possible I knew ? Oh, you race of 
Jupiters! For you a man's no more than a dog, and you judge all 
according to your own petty nature. I tell you that! You can swallow 
that!" And he banged frantically on the table with his fist, but was 
at once dismayed at the bang and began to look apprehensive. 
Velchaninov assumed an air of dignity. 
"Listen, Pavel Pavlovitch. It's absolutely nothing to me, as you can 
see for yourself, whether you knew, or whether you didn't. If you 
didn't know, it's to your credit in any case, though . . .  I can't under­
ৗtand, however, why you've chosen to make this confidence to 
X ,  
me .
. . .  
"I didn't mean you . . .  don't be angry. I didn't mean you . . .  " mut­
tered Pavel Pavlovitch, looking down. 
Mavra came in with the champagne. 
"Here it is!" cried Pavel Pavlovitch, evidently relie\'ed at her en­
trance. "Glasses, my good girl, glasses; splendid! We ask for nothing 
more, my dear. And uncorked already! Honour and glory to you, 
charming creature! Come, you can go!" 
And with renewed courage he looked impudently at Velchaninov 
a gam. 
"Confess," he chuckled suddenly, "that all this is \'ery interesting and 
by no means 'absolutely nothing to you,' as you were pleased to 
declare; so much so that you would be disappointed if I were to get up 
this minute and go away without explaining myself." 
"I really shouldn't be disappointed." 
"Oh, that's a lie!" was what Pavel Pavlovitch's smile expressed. 
"Well, let's come to business!" And he filled his glass. 
"Let's drink," he pronounced, taking up the glass, "to the health of 
our friend departed in God, Stepan Mihalovitch." 

'l he eternal Husband 
393 
He raised his glass, and drank it. 
"I'm not going to drink such a health," said Velchaninov, putting 
down his glass. 
"Why not? It's a pleasant toast." 
"I say, weren't you drunk when you came in just now?" 
"I had had a little. But why?" 
"Nothing particular, but I thought last night, and this morning still 
more, that you were genuinely grieved at the loss of Natalya Vassily­
evna." 
"And who told you that I'm not genuinely grieved at the loss of her 
now?" Pavel Pavlovitch bounced out again, exactly as though he were 
worked by springs. 
"And I didn't mean that; but you must admit that you may be 
mistaken about Stepan Mihalovitch, and it is-a grave matter." 
Pavel Pavlovitch smiled craftily and winked. 
"And wouldn't you like to know how I found out about Stepan 
Mihalovitch ?" 
Velchaninov flushed. 
"I tell you again that it's nothing to me." . . .  "Hadn't I better chuck 
him out this minute, bottle and all?" he thought furiously, and he 
flushed a deeper crimson. 
"That's all right!" said Pavel Pavlovitch, as though trying to en­
courage him, and he poured himself out another glass. 
"I will explain at once how I found out all about it, and so gratify 
your ardent desire . . .  for you are an ardent man, Alexey lvanovitch, 
a terribly ardent man! He-he! Only give me a cigarette, for ever 
since March . .
. I" 
"Here's a cigarette for you." 
"I have gone to the dogs since March, Alexey Ivanovitch, and I'll 
tell you how it's all happened-listen. Consumption, as you know your­
self, my best of friends," he grew more and more familiar, "is a curious 
disease. Consumptives have scarcely a suspicion they may be dying 
to-morrow and then all in a minute they're dead. I tell you that only 
five hours before, Natalya Vassilyevna was planning a visit a fortnight 
later to her aunt, thirty miles away. You are aware, too, probably, of 
the practice, or rather bad habit-common in many ladies and very 
likely in their admirers as well--of preserving all sorts of rubbish in 
the way of love-letters . . . .  It would be much safer to put them in the 
stove, wouldn't it? No, every scrap of paper is carefully stored away 
in a box or a necessaire; even docketed in years, and in months, and 
in series. Whether it's a comfort to them-1 don't know; but, no doubt, 

394 
The Short N.otds of 'DostoctskJ 
it's for the sake of agreeable memories. Since only five hours before her 
end she was arranging to go to visit her aunt, Natalya Vassilyevna 
naturally had no thought of death to the very last hour. She was still 
expecting Koch. So it happened that Natalya Vassilyevna died, and 
an ebony box inlaid with mother-of-pearl and silver was left standing 
on her bureau. And it was a charming box, with a lock and key, an 
heirloom that had come to her from her grandmother. In that box 
everything lay revealed, absolutely everything; all, without exception, 
with the year and the day, everything for the last twenty years. And 
as Stepan Mihalovitch had a distinct literary bent (he actually sent a 
passionate love story to a journal), his contributions ran into the hun­
dreds-to be sure they were spread out over five years. Some specimens 
had been annotated in Natalya Vassilyevna's own handwriting. A 
pleasant surprise for a husband. \Vhat do you think of it?" 
Velchaninov reflected hurriedly and felt sure that he had never sent 
Natalya Vassilyevna a single letter, not a note of any kind. Though he 
had written twice from Petersburg, his letters, in accordance with a 
compact between them, had been addressed to the husband as well as 
the wife. To Natalya Vassilyevna's last letter, in which she had decreed 
his banishment, he had never answered. 
When he had ended his story, Pavel Pavlovitch paused for a full 
minute with an importunate and expectant smile. 
"Why do you give me no answer to my little question?" he brought 
out at last, with evident anxiety. 
"What little question ?" 
"\Vhy, the pleasant surprise for a husband on opening that box." 
"Oh! what is it to do with me!" exclaimed Velchaninov, with a 
gesture of disgust, and he got up and walked about the room. 
"And I bet you're thinking now, you're a swine to have shown me 
your shame. He-he! You're a very fastidious man . . .  you are." 
"I think nothing about it. On the contrary, you are so much exas­
perated by the death of the man who wronged you and you've drunk 
so much wine, too. I see nothing extraordinary in all this; I quite 
understand why you wanted Bagautov alive, and I am ready to respect 
your annoyance: but . . ." 
"And what did I want Bagautov for, do you suppose?" 
"That's your affair." 
"I bet that you were thinking of a duel!" 
"Damn it all!" cried Velchaninov, growing more and more unable 
to control himself. "I imagine that a decent man . . .  in such cases does 
not stoop to ridiculous babble, to stupid antics, to ludicrous complaints 

The eternal Husband 
395 
and disgusting insinuations, by which he only degrades himself more, 
but acts openly, directly, straightforwardly-like a decent man!" 
"He-he! but perhaps I'm not a decent man!" 
"That's your affair again .
•
.
 but in that case, what the devil did you 
want Bagautov alive for?" 
"Why, if only to see a friend. We'd have had a bottle and drunk 
together." 
"He wouldn't have drunk with you." 
"Why not? Noblesse oblige! Here, you're drinking with me; m 
what way is he better than you? "  
"I haven't drunk with you." 
"Why such pride all of a sudden?" 
Velchaninov suddenly broke into a nervous and irritable laugh. 
"Damnation! Why, you are really a 'predatory type'! I thought you 
were only 'the eternal husband,' and nothing more!" 
"What do you mean by 'the eternal husband,' what's that?" Pavel 
Pavlovitch suddenly pricked up his ears. 
"Oh, it's one type of husband . . .  it would be a long story. You'd 
better clear out, it's time you were gone; I'm sick of you." 
"And predatory? You said 'predatory'!" 
"I said you were a 'predatory type'; I said it ironically." 
"What do you mean by a 'predatory type'? Tell me, please, Alexey 
lvanovitch, for God's sake, or for Christ's sake!" 
"Corne, that's enough, that's enough!" cried Velchaninov, suddenly 
growing horribly angry. "It's time you were off. Get along." 
"No, it's not enough!" Pavel Pavlovitch flared up; "even though 
you are sick of me it's not enough, for we must drink together and 
clink glasses! Let us drink together, and then I'll go, but as it is it's not 
enough!" 
"Pavel Pavlovitch! Will you go to the devil to-day or will you not?" 
"I can go to the devil, but first we'll drink! You said that you would 
not drink with me; but I want you to drink with me!" 
There was no grimacing, no sniggering about him now. He seemed 
all at once entirely transformed, and to have become in his whole tone 
and appearance so completely the opposite of the Pavel Pavlovitch of 
the moment before that Velchaninov was quite taken aback. 
"Do let us drink, Alexey lvanovitch! Don't refuse me," Pavel Pav­
lovitch persisted, gripping his hand tightly and looking strangely into 
his eyes. 
Clearly there was more at stake than merely drinking. 

396 
'I he Short N.ovels of Vostoevsky 
"Yes, it you like," muttered Velchaninov; "but how can we? . . .  
There's nothing left but the dregs . . . .  " 
"There are just two glasses left, it's thick, but we'll drink it and clink 
glasses! Here, take your glass." 
They clinked their glasses and emptied them. 
"Since that's so-since that's so . . .  Ach!" 
Pavel Pavlovitch clutched his forehead in his hand and remained 
for some moments in that position. Velchaninov had a feeling every 
moment that he would speak out and utter the very final word. But 
Pavel Pavlovitch uttered nothing; he simply gazed at him and smiled 
again the same sly, knowing smile. 
"What do you want of me, you drunken fellow! You're playing the 
fool with me!" Velchaninov shouted furiously, stamping. 
"Don't shout, don't shout; what is there to shout for?" cried Pavel 
Pavlovitch, gesticulating hurriedly. ''I'm not playing the fool, I'm not 
playing the fool! Do you know what you are to me now?" 
And he suddenly seized his hand and kissed it. Velchaninov was 
utterly taken aback. 
"That's what you mean to me now! And now-and now I'll go to 
the devil as soon as you please!" 
"Wait a minute, stay!" cried Velchaninov, recovering himself. "I 
forgot to tell you . . . . 
" 
Pavel Pavlovitch turned back from the door. 
"You see," muttered Velchaninov, very quickly, flushing crimson 
and looking away, "you must be at the Pogoryeltsevs' to-morrow . . .  
to make their acquaintance and thank them ; you must . . .  " 
"Certainly, I must. I understand that, of course!" Pavel Pavlovitch 
acquiesced with the utmost readiness, waving his hand quickly as 
though to protest that there was no need to remind him. 
"And besides, Liza is very anxious to see you. I promised her . . .  " 
"Liza!" Pavel Pavlovitch turned back. "Liza? Do you know what 
Liza has meant to me and means ? Has meant and still means!" he 
cried all at once, almost frantically. "But . . .  But of that later, all that 
can be later . . . .  But now it's not enough that we've drunk tt.>gether, 
Alexey Ivanovitch, I must have something else to be satisfied . . . .  " 
He laid his hat on a chair and gazed at him, gasping for breath a 
little as he had done just before. 
"Kiss me, Alexey Ivanovitch!" he suggested suddenly. 
"You're drunk!" Velchaninov declared, stepping back. 
"Yes, but kiss me all the same, Alexey I vanovitch. Oh, kiss me! 
Why, I kissed your hand just now." 

'1 he eternal Husband 
397 
For some minutes Velchaninov was silent, as though stunned by a 
blow on the head. But suddenly he bent down to Pavel Pavlovitch, 
whose face was on a level with his shoulder, and kissed him on the 
lips, which smelt very strongly of spirits. He was not, however, per­
fectly certain that he had kissed him. 
"Wei৘ now, now 
.
•
•
•
 " Pavel Pavlovitch cried again in a drunken 
frenzy, his drunken eyes flashing; "now I'll tell you; I thought then, 
What if he too? What if that one, I thought, what if he too •
.
.
 whom 
can I trust after that!" 
Pavel Pavlovitch suddenly burst into tears. 
"So you understand, you're the one friend left me now!" 
And he ran with his hat out of the room. V elchaninov again stood 
still for some minutes in the same place, just as he had done after Pavel 
Pavlovitch's first visit. 
"Ah! a drunken fool and nothing more!" He waved his hand, 
dismissing the subject. 
"Absolutely nothing more," he repeated energetically as he undressed 
and got into bed. 
Chapter 8 
LIZA ILL 
NEXT morning Velchaninov walked about his room expecting 
Pavel Pavlovitch, who had promised to arrive in good time to go to 
the Pogoryeltsevs. As he smoked and sipped his coffee he was conscious 
at every moment that he was like a man who on waking up in the 
morning cannot forget for one instant that he has received a slap in 
the face overnight. "H'm! . . .  he quite understands the position and 
will take his revenge on me through Liza!" he thought with horror. 
The charming figure of the poor child rose mournfully before him 
for a moment. His heart beat faster at the thought that he would soon, 
within two hours, see his Liza again. "Ah! it's no use talking about it!" 
he decided hotly-"It's my whole life and my whole object now! what 
do slaps in the face or memories of the past matter? What has my life 
been till now? Muddle and sadness 
.
•
.
 but now . . .  it's all different, 
everything's changed!" 
But in spite of his enthusiasm, he grew more and more doubtful. 
"He is tormenting me by means of Liza-that's clear! And he is 

398 
The Short Novels of Vostoevsky 
tormenting Liza too. It's in that way he will devour me utterly in 
revenge for everything. H'm! . . .  Of course, I can't allow him to go 
on as he did yesterday"-he flushed crimson all at once-"and . . .  here 
it's twelve o'clock, though, he doesn't come." 
He waited a long time, till half-past twelve, and his depression grew 
more and more acute. Pavel Pavlovitch did not appear. At last the 
thought that had long been stirring in his mind, that Pavel Pavlovitch 
had not come on purpose, simply in order to get up another scene like 
that of the night before, put the finishing touch to his irritation. "He 
knows that I depend on him, and what a state Liza will be in now. 
And how can I appear before her without him?" 
At last he could stand it no longer, and at one o'clock he rushed off 
to the Pokrovsky Hotel alone. At the lodging he was told that Pavel 
Pavlovitch had not slept at home, but had only turned up at nine 
o'clock in the morning, had stayed no more than a quarter of an hour, 
and then gone out again. Velchaninov stood at the door of Pavel 
Pavlovitch's room, listening to what the servant said, and mechani­
cally turned the handle of the locked door and pulled it backwards and 
forwards. Realizing what he was doing, he uttered a curse and asked 
the servant to take him to Marya Sysoevna. But the landlady, hearing 
he was there, came out readily. 
She was a good-natured woman. "A woman with generous feelings," 
as V elchaninov said of her when he was reporting his conversation 
afterwards to Klavdia Petrovna. Inquiring briefly about his journey 
with the child the day before, Marya Sysoevna launched out into 
accounts of Pavel Pavlovitch's doings. In her words : "If it had not 
been for the child, she would have sent him about his business long 
ago. He was turned out of the hotel because of his disorderly be­
haviour. Wasn't it wicked to bring home a wench ,with him when 
there was a child here old enough to understand? He was shouting: 
'She will be your mother, if I choose!' And, would you believe it ? what 
that street wench did, she even spat in his face. 'You're not my daugh­
ter, but he's a --!' she cried." 
"Really!" Velchaninov was horrified. 
"I heard it myself. Though the man was drunk till he was almost 
senseless, yet it was very wrong before the child; though she is but 
young, she broods over everything in her mind! The child cries. I 
can see she is worried to death. And the other day there was a terrible 
thing done in our building: a clerk, so folks say, took a room in the 
hotel overnight, and in the morning hanged himself. They say he 
had squandered all his money. People flocked to see. Pavel Pavlovitch 

The eternal Husband 
399 
was not at home, and the child was running about with no one to look 
after her; I looked, and there she was in the passage among the people, 
and peeping in behind the others: she was looking so strangely at the 
body. I brought her away as quickly as I could. And what do you 
think-she was all of a tremble, she looked quite black in the face, 
and as soon as I brought her in she flopped on the floor in a faint. 
She struggled and writhed, and it was all I could do to bring her 
round. It was a fit, and she's been poorly ever since that hour. He 
heard of it, came home, and pinched her all over-for he's not one for 
beating, he's more given to pinching her, and afterwards, when he 
came home after having a drop, he'd frighten her: 'I'll hang myself 
too,' he'd say; 'you'll make me hang myself; on this blind<ord here,' 
he'd say; and he'd make a noose before her eyes. And she'd be beside 
herself-she'd scream and throw her little arms round him: 'I won't!' 
she'd cry, 'I never will again.' It was pitiful." 
Though V elchaninov had expected something strange, this story 
amazed him so much that he could not believe it. 
Marya Sysoevna told him a great deal more; on one occasion, for 
instance, had it not been for Marya Sysoevna Liza might have thrown 
herself out of the window. 
Velchaninov went out of the house reeling as though he were drunk. 
"I'll knock him on the head like a dog!" was the thought that 
floated before his mind. And for a long time he kept repeating it to 
himself. 
He took a cab and drove to the Pogoryeltsevs. On the way the 
carriage was obliged to stop at the cross-roads, near the bridge on the 
canal, over which a long funeral procession was passing. And on both 
sides of the bridge there were several carriages waiting in a block; 
people on foot were stopped too. It was a grand funeral and there was 
a very long string of carriages following it, and lo and behold! in the 
windows of one of these carriages Velchaninov caught a passing 
glimpse of the face of Pavel Pavlovitch. He would not have believed 
his eyes if Pavel Pavlovitch had not thrust his head out and nodded 
to him with a smile. Evidently he was delighted at recognizing Vel­
chaninov; he even began beckoning to him from the carriage. Velchani­
nov jumped out of his cab and, in spite of the crush, in spite of the 
police, and in spite of the fact that Pavel Pavlovitch's carriage was driv­
ing on to the bridge, he ran right up to the window. Pavel Pavlovitch 
was alone. 
"What's the matter with you?" cried Velchaninov; "why didn't you 
come? How is it you are here?" 

400 
'[he Short N.ovels of 'Dostoevsky 
''I'm repaying a debt. Don't shout, don't shout, I am repaying :t 
debt," sniggered Pavel Pavlovitch, screwing up his eyes, jocosely. "I'm 
following the mortal remains of my faithful friend, Stepan Mihalov­
itch." 
"That's all nonsense, you drunken, senseless man," Velchaninov 
shouted louder than ever, though he was taken aback for an instant. 
"Get out this minute and come into the cab with me." 
"I can't, it's a duty . . . .  " 
"I'll drag you out!" Velchaninov yelled. 
"And I'll scream! I'll scream!" said Pavel Pavlovitch, sniggering as 
jocosely as before, as though it were a game, though he did huddle 
into the furthest corner of the carriage. . . 
. 
"Look out, look out! you'll be run over!" shouted a policeman. 
At the further end of the bridge a carriage cutting across the proces­
sion did, in fact, cause a commotion. Velchaninov was forced to skip 
back; the stream of carriages and the crowd of people immediately 
carried him further away. \Vith a curse he made his way back of the 
cab. 
"৙o matter, I couldn't have taken a fellow like that with me, at any 
rate!" he thought, with a feeling of bewildered anxiety that persisted. 
\Vhen he told Klavdia Petrovna Marya Sysoevna's story and de­
scribed the strange meeting in the funeral procession, she grew very 
thoughtful. 
"I feel afraid for you," she said. "You ought to break off all rela­
tions with him, and the sooner the better." 
"He's a drunken fool and nothing more!" Velchaninov cried pas­
sionately; "as though I could be afraid of him! And how can I break 
off relations with him when there's Liza to be considered. Think of 
Liza!" 
Liza meanwhile was lying ill; she had begun to be feverish the 
evening before and they were expecting a celebrated doctor, for whom 
they had sent an express messenger to the town in the morning. This 
completed Velchaninov's distress. 
Klavdia Petroma took him to the invalid. 
"I watched her very carefully yesterday," she observed, stopping 
outside Liza's room. "She's a proud and reserved child; she is ashamed 
that she is here, and that her father has cast her off; that's the whole 
cause of her illness, to my thinking." 
"How cast her off? Why do you say he's cast her off?" 
"The very fact that he let her come here, among complete strangers 
and with a man . . .  who's almost a stranger, too, or on such terms . . .  
" 

'I he eternal Husband 
401 
"But it was I took her, I took her by force; I don't perceive . . .  " 
"Oh, my God, and even Liza, a child, perceives it! It's my belief 
that he simply won't come at all." 
Liza was not astonished when she saw Velchaninov alone; she only 
smiled mournfully and turned her feverishly hot little head to the 
wall. She made no response to Velchaninov's timid efforts to comfort 
her and his fervent promises to bring her father next day without 
fail. On coming away from her, he suddenly burst into tears. 
It was evening before the doctor came. After examining the patient, 
he alarmed them all from the first word, by observing that they had 
done wrong not to have sent for him before. When it was explained 
to him that the child had been taken ill only the evening before, he 
was at first incredulous. 
"It all depends how things go on to-night," he said in conclusion. 
After giving various instructions, he went :1way, promising to come 
again next day as early as possible. Velchaninov would have insisted 
on staying the night, but Klavdia Petrovna begged him once more 
"to try and bring that monster." 
"Try once more," Velchaninov retorted in a frenzy. "Why, this 
time I'll tie him h:1nd and foot and carry him here in my arms!" The 
idea of tying Pavel Pavlovitch hand and foot aml carrying him there 
took possession of him and made him violently impatient to carry it 
out. "I don't feel in the least guilty towards him now, not in the least!" 
he said to Klavdia Petrovna, as he said good-bye. "I take back all the 
abject, snivelling things I said here yesterday," he added indignantly. 
Liza was lying with her eyes shut, apparently asleep; she seemed to 
be better. When Velchaninov cautiously bent over her head, to say 
good-bye and to kiss, if only the edge of her garment, she suddenly 
opened her eyes, as though she had been expecting him, and whispered 
to him-
"Take me away!" 
It was a gentle, pitiful prayer, without a shade in it of the irritability 
of the previous day, but at the same time he could hear in it the 
conviction that he would not do what she asked. Velchaninov, in com­
plete despair, began trying to persuade her that this was impossible. 
In silence she closed her eyes and did not utter another word, as 
though she did not see or hear him. 
On getting into Petersburg he told the driver to take him straight 
to Pokrovsky Hotel. It was ten o'clock; Pavel Pavlovitch was not in his 
lodging. Velchaninov spent a full half-hour in waiting for him and 
walking up and down the passage in sickening suspense. Marya Syso-

402 
'llze Short N.ove/s of Vostoevsky 
evna assured him at last that Pavel Pavlovitch would not be back till 
early next morning. "Then I will come early in the morning," Vel­
chaninov decided, and, beside himself, he set off for home. 
But what was his astonishment when, at the door of his flat, he 
learned from Mavra that his yesterday's visitor had been waiting for 
him since ten o'clock. 
"And has been pleased to drink tea here, and has sent out for wine 
again, and has given me a blue note to get it." 
Chapter 9 
AN APPARITIOĳ 
PAVEL PA VLOVITCH had made himself exceedingly com­
fortable. He was sitting in the same chair as the day before, smoking 
a cigarette, and had just poured himself out the fourth and last glass 
from a bottle of wine. The teapot and an unfinished glass of tea were 
standing on a table close by. His flushed face was beaming with bliss. 
He had even taken off his coat, as it was warm, and was sitting in his 
waistcoat. 
"Excuse me, most faithful of friends!" he cried, seeing Velchaninov 
and jumping up to put on his coat. "I took it off for the greater enjoy­
ment of the moment. . . ." 
Velchaninov went up to him menacingly. 
"Are you not quite drunk yet? Is it still possible to talk to you?" 
Pavel Pavlovitch was a little flustered. 
"No, not quite . . . .  I've been commemorating the deceased, but . . .  
not quite . . . .  
" 
"Will you understand me too?" 
"That's what I've come for, to understand you." 
"Well, then; I begin by telling you straight out that you are a 
worthless scoundrel!" cried Velchaninov. 
"If you begin like that, how will you end? "  Pavel Pavlovitch pro­
tested, evidently cowed, but V elchaninov went on shouting without 
heeding him. 
"Your daughter is dying, she is ill; have you abandoned her or not?" 
"Can she really be dying?" 
"She is ill, ill, exceedingly, dangerously illl" 
"Possibly some little fit . . .  " 

The eternal Husband 
403 
''Don't talk nonsense! She is ex-ceed-ing-ly, dangerously ill! You 
ought to have gone if only to . . .  " 
"To express my gratitude, my gratitude for their hospitality! I 
quite understand that! Alexey Ivanovitch, my precious, perfect friend" 
-he suddenly clutched Velchaninov's hand in both of his, and with 
drunken sentimentality, almost with tears, as though imploring for­
giveness, he kept crying out: "Alexey Ivanovitch, don't shout, don't 
shout! Whether I die or fall drunk into the Neva-what does it matter 
in the real significance of things? We have plenty of time to go to 
Mr. Pogoryeltsev . . . .  " 
Velchaninov pulled himself together and restrained himself a little. 
"You're drunk, and so I don't understand the sense of what you 
are saying," he observed sternly. "I am always ready to have things 
out with you, shall be glad to, in fact, as soon as possible . . . .  I've 
come indeed . . . .  But first of all I warn you that I shall take steps: 
you must stay the night here! To-morrow morning I'll take you and 
we'll go together. I won't let you go," he yelled again. "I'll tie you up 
and carry you there in my arms! . . .  Would you like this sofa?" 
he said breathlessly, pointing to a wide, soft sofa, which stood oppo­
site the one against the other wall, where he used to sleep himself. 
"By all means, I can sleep anywhere . . . .  " 
"Not anywhere, but on that sofa! Here, take your sheets, your quilt, 
your pillow." All these Velchaninov took out of the cupboard and 
hurriedly flung them to Pavel Pavlovitch, who held out his arms sub­
missively. "Make the bed at once, make it at once!" 
Pavel Pavlovitch, loaded with his burden, stood in the middle of the 
room as though hesitating, with a broad drunken grin on his drunken 
face. But at a second menacing shout from V elchaninov he suddenly 
began bustling about at full speed; he pushed back the table and 
began, sighing and groaning, to unfold the sheets and make the bed. 
Velchaninov went to assist him ; he was, to some extent, appeased by 
the alarm and submissiveness of his visitor. 
"Finish your glass and go to bed," he ordered him again; he felt as 
though he could not help giving orders. "You sent for that wine your­
self, didn't you?" 
"Yes . . . .  I knew you wouldn't send for any more, Alexey Ivanov­
itch." 
"It was well you knew it, and there is something more you must 
know too. I tell you once more I've taken measures, I won't put up 
with any more of your antics, I won't put up with your drunken 
kisses as I did yesterday." 

404 
'l he Short 'Novels of Vostoevsky 
"I understand myself, Alexey Ivanovitch, that that was only possible 
once," sniggered Pavel Pavlovitch. 
Hearing his answer, Velchaninov, who had been striding up and 
down the room, stopped almost solemnly before Pavel Pavlovitch. 
"Pavel Pavlovitch, tell me frankly! You're a sensible man, I've 
recognized that again, but I assure you, you are on the wrong tack! 
Speak straightforwardly, act straightforwardly and I give you my word 
of honour I will answer any question you like." 
Pavel Pavlovitch grinned his broad grin again, which was enough 
in itself to drive Velchaninov to fury. 
"Stop!" Velchaninov shouted again. "Don't sham, I see through 
you! I repeat : I give you my word of honour, that I am ready to 
answer anything and you shall receive every satisfaction possible, that 
is every sort, even the impossible! Oh, how I wish you could under­
stand me! . . .  
" 
"Since you are so good"-Pavel Pavlovitch moved cautiously towards 
him-"1 was much interested in what you said last night about a 
'predatory type'! .
.
•
 
" 
Velchaninov, with a curse, fell to pacing about the room more rapidly 
than ever. 
"No, Alexey Ivanovitch, don't curse, because I'm so much interested, 
.1.nd have come on purpose to make sure . . . .  I'm not very ready with 
my tongue, but you must forgive me. You know of that 'predatory 
type,' and of that 'peaceable type' I read in a magazine, in the literary 
criticism. I remembered it this morning . . .  only I had forgotten it, 
and to tell the truth I did not understand it at the time. This is what 
I wanted you to explain: the deceased, Stepan Mihalovitch Bagautov­
was he 'predatory' or 'peaceable'? How do you classify him ?" 
Velchaninov still remained silent, and did not cease his pacing up 
and down. 
"The predatory type," he began, stopping suddenly in exasperation, 
"is the man who would sooner have put poison in Bagautov's glass 
when drinking champagne with him in honour of their delightful 
meeting, as you drank with me yesterday, than have followed his coffin 
to the cemetery as you have to-day, the devil only knows from what 
secret, underground, loathsome impulse and distorted feeling that only 
degrades you! Yes, degrades you!" 
"It's true that I shouldn't have gone," Pavel Pavlovitch assented; 
"but you do pitch into me . . . .  " 
"It's not the man," Velchaninov, getting hotter, went on shouting, 
without heeding him; "it's not the man who poses to himself as 

The eternal Husband 
405 
goodness knows what, who reckons up his score of right and wrong, 
goes over and over his grievance as though it were a lesson, frets, goes 
in for all sorts of antics and apishness, hangs on people's necks-and 
most likely he has been spending all his time at it too! Is it true that 
you tried to hang yourself-is it?" 
"When I was drunk, I did talk wildly-! don't remember. It isn't 
quite seemly, Alexey lvanovitch, to put poison in wine. Apart from the 
fact that I am a civil servant of good repute, you know I have money 
of my own, and, what's more, I may want to get married again." 
"Besides, you'll be sent to the gallows." 
"To be sure, that unpleasantness also, though nowadays they admit 
many extenuating circumstances in the law-courts. I'll tell you a kill­
ing little anecdote, Alexey I vanovitch. I thought of it this morning 
in the carriage. I wanted to tell you of it then. You said just now 
'hangs on people's necks.' You remember, perhaps, Semyon Petrovitch 
Livtsov, he used to come and see us when you were in T--; well, 
his younger brother, who was also a young Petersburg swell, was in 
attendance on the governor at V--, and he, too, was distinguished 
for various qualities. He had a quarrel with Golubenko, a colonel, in 
the presence of ladies and the lady of his heart, and considered himself 
insulted, but he swallowed the affront and concealed it; and, mean­
while, Golubenko cut him out with the lady of his heart and made her 
an offer. And what do you think? This Livtsov formed a genuine 
friendship with Golubenko, he quite made it up with him, and, 
what's more, insisted on being his best man, he held the wedding 
crown, and when they came from under the wedding crown, he went 
up to kiss and congratulate Golubenko; and in the presence of the 
governor and all the honourable company, with his swallow-tail coat, 
and his hair in curl, he sticks the bridegroom in the stomach with a 
knife-so that he rolled over! His own best man! What a disgrace! 
And, what's more, when he'd stabbed him like that, he rushed about 
crying: 'Ach! what have I done! Oh, what is it I've done!' with 
floods of tears, trembling all over, flinging himself on people's necks, 
even ladies. 'Ach, what have I done!' he kept saying. 'What have I done 
now!' He-he-he! he was killing. Though one feels sorry for Golu­
benko, perhaps, but after all he recovered." 
"I don't see why you told me the story," observed Velchaninov, 
frowning sternly. 
"Why, all because he stuck the knife in hiiT', you know," Pavel 
Pavlovitch tittered; "you can see he was not the type, but a snivelling 
fellow, since he forgot all good manners in his horror and flung him-

406 
'1 he Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
self on the ladies' necks in the presence of the governor-but you see 
he stabbed him, he got his own back! That was all I meant." 
"Go to hell!" Velchaninov yelled suddenly, in a voice not his own, 
as though something had exploded in him. "Go to hell with your 
underground vileness; you are nothing but underground vileness. 
You thought you'd scare me-you base man, torturing a child; you 
scoundrel, you scoundrel, you scoundrel!" he shouted, beside himself, 
gasping for breath at every word. 
A complete revulsion came over Pavel Pavlovitch which actually 
seemed to sober him; his lips quivered. 
"It is you, Alexey lvanovitch, call me a scoundrel, you call me?" 
But Velchaninov had already realized what he had done. 
"I am ready to apologize," he answered, after a pause of gloomy 
hesitation; "but only if you will act straightforwardly at once yourself." 
"In your place I would apologize without any ifs, Alexey lvanov­
itch." 
"Very good, so be it," said Velchaninov, after another slight pause. 
"I apologize to you; but you'll admit yourself, Pavel Pavlovitch, that, 
after all this, I need not consider that I owe you anything. I'm speak­
ing with reference to the whole matter and not only to the present 
incident." 
"That's all right, why consider?" Pavel Pavlov itch sniggered, though 
he kept his eyes on the ground. 
"So much the better, then, so much the better! Finish your wine and 
go to bed, for I won't let you go, anyway . . . .  " 
"Oh, the wine . . . .  " Pavel Pavlovitch seemed, as it were, a little 
disconcerted. He went to the table, however, and finished the last glass 
of wine he had poured out so long before. 
Perhaps he had drunk a great deal before, for his hand trembled and 
he spilt part of the wine on the floor, and on his shirt and waistcoat. 
He finished it all, however, as though he could not bear to leave a 
drop, and respectfully replacing the empty glass on the table, he went 
submissively to his bed to undress. 
"But wouldn't it be better for me not to stay the night?" he brought 
out for some reason, though he had taken off one boot and was 
holding it in his hand. 
"No, it wouldn't," Velchaninov answered wrathfully, still pacing 
up and down the room without looking at him. 
Pavel Pavlovitch undressed and got into bed. A quarter of an hour 
later Velchaninov went to bed too, and put out the candle. 
He fell asleep uneasily The new element that had turned up unex-

The etemal Husband 
407 
pectedly and complicated the whole business more than ever worried 
him now, and at the same time he felt that he was for some reason 
ashamed of his uneasiness. He was just dozing off, but he was waked 
up all at once by a rustling sound. He looked round at once towards 
Pavel Pavlovitch's bed. The room was dark (the curtains were drawn), 
but V elchaninov fancied that Pavel Pavlovitch was not lying down, 
but was sitting on the bed. 
"What's the matter?" Velchaninov called to him. 
"A ghost," Pavel Pavlovitch said, scarcely audibly, after a brief 
pause. 
"What do you mean, what sort of ghost?" 
"There in that room, I seem to see a ghost in the doorway." 
"Whose ghost?" V elchaninov asked again, after a pause. 
"Natalya Vassilyevna's." 
V elchaninov stood up on the rug, and looked across the passage, 
into the other room, the door of which always stood open. There were 
only blinds instead of curtains on the window, and so it was much 
lighter there. 
"There's nothing in that room and you are drunk. Go to bed!" said 
Velchaninov. He got into bed and wrapped himself in the quilt. 
Pavel Pavlovitch got into bed, too, without uttering a word. 
"And have you ever seen ghosts before?" Velchaninov asked sud-
denly, ten minutes afterwards. 
Pavel Pavlovitch, too, was silent for a while. 
"I thought I saw one once," he responded faintly. 
Silence followed again. 
Velchaninov could not have said for certain whether he had been 
asleep or not, but about an hour had passed when he suddenly turned 
round again: whether he was roused again by a rustle, he was not sure, 
but felt as though in the pitch-dark something white was standing 
over him, not quite close, but in the middle of the room. He sat up in 
bed and for a full minute gazed into the darkness. 
"Is that you, Pavel Pa v lovitch ?" he said, in a failing voice. 
His own voice ringing out suddenly in the stillness and the dark 
seemed to him somehow strange. 
No answer followed, but there could be no doubt that some one 
was standing there. 
"Is that you . . .  Pavel Pavlovitch?" he repeated, more loudly­
so loudly, in fact, that if Pavel Pavlovitch had been quietly asleep in 
his bed he would certainly have waked up and answered. 
But again no answer came, yet he fancied that the white, hardly 

408 
7' he Short Novels of 'DostoevskY 
distinguishable figure moved nearer to him. Then something strange 
followed : something seemed to explode within him, exactly as it had 
that evening, and he shouted at the top of his voice, in a most hideous, 
frantic voice, gasping for breath at each word: 
"If you . . .  drunken fool . . .  dare to imagine . . .  that you can 
. . .  frighten me, I'll turn over to the wall, I'll put the bedclothes 
over my head, and won't turn round again all night . . .  to show you 
how much I care . . .  if you were to stand there till morning . . .  like 
a fool . . .  and I spit upon you . . .  
" 
And he spat furiously in the direction, as he supposed, of Pavel 
Pavlovitch, turned over to the wall, drew the bedclothes over his head 
as he had said and grew numb in that position, not stirring a muscle. 
A deathlike silence followed. Whether the phantom was moving nearer 
or standing still he could not tell, but his heart was beating, beating, 
beating violently. Fully five minutes passed, and suddenly, two steps 
from him, he heard the meek and plaintive voice of Pavel Pavlovitch. 
"I got up, Alexey lvanovitch, to look for the . . .  " (and he men­
tioned a quite indispensable domestic article). "I didn't find one 
there . . . .  I meant to look quietly under your bed." 
"Why didn't you speak when I shouted ?" Velchaninov asked m 
a breaking voice, after an interval of half a minute. 
"I was frightened, you shouted so . . . .  I was frightened." 
"There in the corner on the left, in the little cupboard. Light the 
candle . . . .  " 
"I can do without the candle," Pavel Pavlovitch brought out meekly, 
making for the corner. "Forgive me, Alexey lvanovitch, for disturbing 
you so . . . .  I was so bewildered . . .  " 
But Velchaoi•,ov made no reply. He still lay with his face to the 
wall, and lay so all night, without once turning over. Whether it was 
that he wanted to do as he had said and so show his contempt-he 
did not know himself what he was feeling; his nervous irritability 
passed at last almost into delirium, and it was a long time before he 
went to sleep. \Vaking next morning between nine and ten, he jumped 
up and sat up in bed, as though some one had given him a shove­
but Pavel Pavlovitch was not in the room-the unmade bed stood 
there empty; he had crept away at dawn. 
"I knew it would be so," cried Velchaninov, slapping himself on the 
forehead. 

The eternal Husband 
409 
Chapter 10 
I N  11-IE CEMETERY 
THE doctor's fears turned out to be justified; Liza was suddenly 
worse-worse than Velchaninov and Klavdia Petrovna had imagined 
possible the evening before. Velchaninov found the invalid conscious 
in the morning, though she was in a high fever; afterwards he declared 
that she had smiled and even held out her feverish little hand to him. 
\Vhether this was really so, or whether he had imagined it, in an un­
conscious effort to comfort himself, he had no time to make sure; 
by nightfall the sick child was unconscious, and she remained so till 
the end. Ten days after her coming to the Pogoryeltsevs she died. 
It was a sorrowful time for Velchaninov; the Pogoryeltsevs were 
very anxious about him. He spent those bitter days for the most part 
with them. During the last days of Liza's illness he would sit for 
whole hours together in a corner apparently thinking of nothing; 
Kla\'dia Petro\·na attempted to distract his mind, but he made little 
response, and seemed to find it a burden e\'en to talk to her. Kla\'dia 
Petrovna had not expected that "all this would have such an effecr 
upon him." The children succeeded best in rousing him; in their com. 
pany he sometimes even laughed, but almost every hour he would 
get up from his chair and go on tiptoe to look at the invalid. He some­
times fancied that she recognized him. He had no hope of her recovery, 
nor had any one, but he could not tear himself away from the room 
in which she lay dying, and usually sat 'in the next room. 
On two occasions in the course of those days, however, he showed 
great activity: he roused himself and rushed off to Petersburg to the 
doctors, called on all the most distinguished of them, and arranged 
for a consultation. The second and last consultation took place the 
evening before Liza's death. Three days before that Klavdia Petrovna 
urged upon V elchaoinov the necessity of seeking out M. T rusotsky: 
pointing out that "if the worst happened, the funeral would be im­
possible without him." V elchaninov mumbled in reply that he would 
write to h;m. Pogoryeltsev thereupon declared that he would under­
take to find him through the police. Velchaninov did finally write a 
note of two lines and took it to the Pokrovsky Hotel. Pavel Pavlov­
itch, as usual, was not at home, and he left the letter for him with 
Marya Sysoevna. 

410 
r he Short N.otels of 'DostOCtiSky 
At last Liza died, on a beautiful summer evening at sunset, and only 
then Velchaninov seemed to wake up. When they dressed the dead 
child in a white frock that belonged to one of Klavdia Petrovna's 
daughters and was kept for festivals, and laid her on the table in the 
drawing-room with flowers in her folded hands, he went up to Klavdia 
Petrovna with glittering eyes, and told her that he would bring the 
"murderer" at once. Refusing to listen to their advice to put off going 
till next day, he !'et off for Petersburg at once. 
He knew where to find Pavel Pavlovitch; he had not only been to 
fetch the doctors when he went to Petersburg before. He had some­
times fancied during those days that if he brought her father to Liza, 
and she heard his voice, she might come to herself; so he had fallen 
to hunting for him like one possessed. Pavel Pavlovitch was in the 
same lodging as before, but it was useless for him to inquire there: 
"He hasn't slept here for the last three nights or been near the place," 
Marya Sysoevna reported; "and if he does come he's bound to be 
drunk, and before he's been here an hour he's off :gain: he's going to 
rack and ruin." The waiter at the Pokrovsky Hotel told Velchaninov, 
among other things, that Pavel Pavlovitch used to visit some young 
women in Voznesensky Prospect. Velchaninov promptly looked up 
these young women. When he had treated them and made them 
presents these persons readily remembered their visitor, chiefly from 
the crape on his hat, after which, of course, they abused him roundly 
for not having been to see them again. One of them, Katya, undertook 
"to find Pavel Pavlovitch any time, because nowadays he was always 
with Mashka Prostakov, and he had no end of money, and she ought 
to have been Mashka Prohvostov (i. e. scoundrelly) instead of Prosta­
kov (i. e. simple), and she'd been in the hospital, and if she (the 
speaker) liked she could pack the wench off to Siberia-she had only 
to say the word." Katya did not, however, look up Pavel Pavlovitch on 
that occasion, but she promised faithfully to do so another time. It was 
on her help that Velchaninov was reckoning now. 
On reaching Petersburg at ten o'clock, he went at once to ask for 
her, paid the keeper to let her go, and set off to search with her. He 
did not know himself what he was going to do with Pavel Pavlovitch: 
whether he would kill him, or whether he was looking for him simply 
to teH him of his daughter's death and the necessity of his presence 
at the funeral. At first they were unsuccessful. It turned out that this 
Mashka had had a fight with Pavel Pavluvitch two days before, and 
that a cashier "had broken his head with a stool." In fact, for a long 
time the search was in vain, and it was only at two o'clock in the 

'!he ctemal Husband 
411 
afternoon that Velchaninov, coming out of an "establishment," to 
which he had been sent as a likely place, unexpectedly hit up against 
him. 
Pavel Pavlovitch, hopelessly drunk, was being conducted to this 
"establishment" by two ladies, one of whom was holding his arm and 
supporting him. They were followed by a tall, sturdy fellow, who 
was shouting at the top of his voice and threatening Pavel Pavlovitch 
with all sorts of horrors. He bawled among other things that "Pavel 
Pavlovitch was exploiting him and poisoning his existence." There 
seemed to have been some dispute about money; the women were 
much frightened and flustered. Seeing Velchaninov, Pavel Pavlovitch 
rushed to him with outstretched hands and screamed as though he 
were being murdered: 
"Brother, defend me!" 
At the sight of Velchaninov's athletic figure the bully promptly dis­
appeared; Pavel Pavlovitch in triumph shook his fist after him with 
a yell of victory; at that point V elchaninov seized him by the shoulder 
in a fury, and, without knowing why he did it, shook him until his 
teeth chattered. Pavel Pavlovitch instantly ceased yelling and stared at 
his tormentor in stupid, drunken terror. Probably not knowing what 
to do with him next, Velchaninov folded him up and sat him on the 
curbstone. 
"Liza is dead!" he said to him. 
Pavel Pavlovitch, still staring at Velchaninov, sat on the curbstone 
supported by one of the ladies. He understood at last, and his face 
suddenly looked pinched. 
"Dead . . .  " he whispered strangely. Whether his face wore his 
loathsome, drunken grin, or whether it was contorted by some feeling, 
V elchaninov could not distinguish, but a moment later Pavel Pav­
lovitch, with an effort, lifted his trembling hand to make the sign of 
the cross; his trembling hand dropped again without completing it. 
A little while after he slowly got up from the curbstone, clutched at 
his lady and, leaning upon her, went on his way, as though oblivious 
-as though Velchaninov had not been present. But the latter seized 
him by the shoulder again. 
"Do you understand, you drunken monster, that without you she 
can't be buried?" he shouted breathlessly. 
Pavel Pavlovitch turned his head towards him. 
"The artillery 
.
•
.
 the lieutenant . . .  do you remember him?" he 
໓tammered. 
"Wha-at!" yelled Velchaninov, with a sickening pang. 

412 
'I he Short 'Novels of Vostoevsky 
"There's her father for you! Find him-for the burial." 
"You're lying," Velchaninov yelled like one distraught. "You say 
that from spite . . . .  I knew you were preparing that for me." 
Beside himself, he raised his terrible fist to strike Pavel Pavlovitch. 
In another minute he might have killed him at one blow; the ladies 
squealed and were beating a retreat, but Pavel Pavlovitch did not turn 
a hair. His face was contorted by a frenzy of ferocious hatred. 
"Do you know," he said, much more steadily, almost as though he 
were sober, "our Russian . . .  ?" (and he uttered an absolutely unprint­
able term of abuse). "Well, you go to it, then!" 
Then with a violent effort he tore himself out of Velchaninov's 
hands, stumbled and almost fell down. The ladies caught him and this 
time ran away, squealing and almost dragging Pavel Pavlovitch after 
them. Velchaninov did not follow them. 
On the afternoon of the next day a very presentable-looking, middle­
aged government clerk in uniform arrived at the Pogoryeltsevs' villa 
and politely handed Klavdia Petrovna an envelope addressed to her 
by Pavel Pavlovitch Trusotsky. In it was a letter enclosing three hun­
dred roubles and the legal papers necessary for the burial. Pavel Pav­
lovitch wrote briefly, respectfully, and most properly. He warmly 
thanked Her Excellency for the kind sympathy she had shown for the 
little motherless girl, for which God alone could repay her. He wrote 
vaguely that extreme ill-health would prevent him from coming to 
arrange the funeral of his beloved and unhappy daughter, and he 
could only appeal to the angelic kindness of Her Excellency's heart. 
The three hundred roubles were, as he explained later in the letter, 
to pay for the funeral, and the expenses caused by the child's illness. If 
any of this money were left over he must humbly and respectfully beg 
that it might be spent on "a perpetual mass for the rest of the soul 
of the departed." The clerk who brought the letter could add nothing 
in explanation; it appeared, indeed, from what he said that it was only 
at Pavel Pavlovitch's earnest entreaty that he had undertaken to de­
liver the letter to Her Excellency. Pogoryeltsev was almost offended at 
the expression "the expenses caused by the child's illness," and after 
setting aside fifty roubles for the funeral-since it was impossible to 
prevent the father from paying for his child's burial-he proposed to 
send the remaining two hundred and fifty roubles back to M. Tru­
sotsky at once. Klavdia Petrovna finally decided not to send back the 
two hundred and fifty roubles, but only a receipt from the cemetery 
church for that sum in payment for a perpetual mass for the repose of 
the soul of the deceased maiden Elizaveta. This receipt was afterwards 

The eternal Husband 
413 
given to Velchaninov to be despatched to Pavel Pavlovitch. V elchani­
nov posted it to his lodging. 
After the funeral he left the villa. For a whole fortnight he wandered 
about the town aimless and alone, so lost in thought that he stumbled 
against people in the street. Sometimes he would lie stretched out on 
his sofa for days together, forgetting the commonest things of every­
day life. Several times the Pogoryeltsevs went to ask him to go to 
them; he promised to go, but immediately forgot. Klavdia Petrovna 
even went herself to see him, but did not find him at home. The same 
thing happened to his lawyer; the lawyer had, indeed, something to 
tell him : his lawsuit had been very adroitly settled and his opponents 
had come to an amicable arrangement, agreeing to accept an insig­
nificant fraction of the disputed inheritance. All that remained was to 
obtain V elchaninov's own consent. When at last he did find him at 
home, the lawyer was surprised at the apathy and indifference with 
which Velchaninov, once such a troublesome client, listened to his 
explanation. 
The very hottest days of July had come, but Velchaninov was 
oblivious of time. His grief ached in his heart like a growing abscess, 
and he was distinctly conscious of it and every moment with agoniz­
ing acuteness. His chief suffering was the thought that, before Liza 
had had time to know him, she had died, not understanding with 
what anguish he loved her! The object in life of which he had had 
such a joyful glimpse had suddenly vanished into everlasting darkness. 
That object-he thought 
of it every moment now-was that Liza 
should be conscious of his love every day, every hour, all her life. "No 
one has a higher object and no one could have," he thought some­
times, with gloomy fervour. "If there are other objects none can be 
holier than that!" "By my love for Liza," he mused, "all my old putrid 
and useless life would be purified and expiated; to make up for my 
own idle, vicious and wasted life I would cherish and bring up that 
pure and exquisite creature, and for her sake everything would be 
forgiven me and I could forgive myself everything." 
All these conscious thoughts always rose before his mind, together 
with the vivid, ever-present and ever-poignant memory of the dead 
child. He re-created for himself her little pale face, remembered every 
expression on it: he thought of her in the coffin decked with flowers, 
and as she had lain unconscious in fever, with fixed and open eyes. 
He suddenly remembered that when she was lying on the table he had 
noticed one of her fingers, which had somehow turned black during 
her illness; this had struck him so much at the time, ar.d he had fcL 

414 
'1 h% Short Novels of Vosto%vsky 
so sorry for that poor little finger, that for the first time he thought 
of seeking out Pavel Pavlovitch and killing him; until that time he 
had been "as though insensible." Was it wounded pride that had 
tortured her wounded heart, or was it those three months of suffering 
at the hands of her father, whose love had suddenly changed to hatred, 
who had insulted her with shameful word:., laughing at her terror, 
and had abandoned her at last to strangers? All this he dwelt upon 
incessantly in a thousand variations. "Do you know what Liza has 
been to me? "-he suddenly recalled the drunkard's exclamation and 
felt that that exclamation was sincere, not a pose, and that there was 
love in it. "How could that monster be so cruel to a child whom he 
had loved so much, and is it credible?" But every time he made haste 
to dismiss that question and, as it were, brush it aside; there was 
something awful in that question, something he could not bear and 
could not solve. 
One day, scarcely conscious where he was going, he wandered into 
the cemetery where Liza was buried and found her little grave. He had 
not been to the cemetery since the funeral; he had always fancied it 
would be too great an agony, and had been afraid to go. But, strange 
to say, when he had found her little grave and kissed it, his hearr 
felt easier. It was a fine evening, the sun was setting; all round the 
graves the lush green grass was grO\-ving; the bees were humming in 
a wild rose close by; the flowers and wreaths left by the children and 
Klavdia Petrovna on Liza's gra,·e were lying there with the petals 
half dropping. There was a gleam of something like hope in his 
heart after many days. 
"How serene!" he thought, feeling the stillness of the cemetery, and 
looking at the clear, peaceful sky. 
A rush of pure, calm faith flooded his soul. 
"Liza has sent me this, it's Liza speaking to me," he thought. 
It was quite dark when he left the cemetery and went home. Not 
far from the cemetery gates, in a low-pitched wooden house on the 
road, there was some sort of eating-house or tavern; through the win­
dows he could see people sitting at the tables. It suddenly seemed to 
him that one of them close to the window was Pavel Pavlovitch, and 
that he saw him, too, and was staring at him inquisitively. He walked 
on, and soon heard some one pursuing him; Pavel Pavlovitch was, in 
fact, running after him; probably he had been attracted and encour­
aged by Velchaninov's conciliatory expression as he watched him from 
the window. On overtaking him he smiled timidly, but it was not his 
old drunken smile; he was actually not drunk. 

'1 he eternal Husband 
"Good໔vening," he said. 
"Good-evening," answered Velchaninov. 
Chapter 11 
PAVEL PAVLOVITCH MEANS TO MARRY 
415 
As HE responded with this "Good-evening," he was surprised at 
himself. It struck him as extremely strange that he met this man now 
without a trace of anger, and that in his feeling for him at that 
moment there was something quite different, and actually, indeed, a 
sort of impulse towards something new. 
"\Vhat an agreeable evening," observed Pavel Pavlovitch, looking 
into his face. 
"You've not gone away yet," Velchaninov observed, not by way of a 
question, but simply making that reflection aloud as he walked on. 
"Things have dragged on, but-l've obtained a post with an increase 
of salary. I shall be going away the day after to-morrow for certain." 
"You've got a post?" he said this time, asking a question. 
"Why shouldn't I?" Pavel Pavlovitch screwed up his face. 
"Oh, I only asked . . .  " Velchaninov said, disclaiming the insinua­
tion, and, with a frown, he looked askance at Pavel Pavlovitch. 
To his surprise, the attire, the hat with the crape band and the 
whole appearance of M. Trusotsky were incomparably more present­
able than they had been a fortnight before. 
"What was he sitting in that tavern for?" he kept wondering. 
"I was intending, Alexey Ivanovitch, to communicate with you on 
a subject for rejoicing," Pavel Pavlovitch began again. 
"Rejoicing?" 
"I'm going to get married." 
"What?" 
"After sorrow comes rejoicing, so it is always in life; I should be so 
gratified, Alexey Ivanovitch, if . . .  but-I don't know, perhaps you're 
in a hurry now, for you appear to be . . .  
" 
"Yes, I am in a hurry . . .  and I'm unwell too." 
He felt a sudden and intense desire to get rid of him; his readiness 
for some new feeling had vanished in a flash. 
"I should have liked • 
. 
." 

416 
'llze Short 'Novels of 'DostoevskY 
Pavel Pavlovitch did not say what he would have liked; Velchani­
nov was silent. 
"In that case it must be later on, if only we meet again . . .  " 
"Yes, yes, later on," Velchaninov muttered rapidly, without stopping 
or looking at him. 
They were both silent again for a minute; Pavel Pavlovitch went 
on walking beside him. 
"In that case, good-bye till we meet again," Pavel Pavlovitch brought 
out at last. 
"Good-bye; I hope . 
• 
." 
Velchaninov returned home thoroughly upset again. Contact with 
"that man" was too much for him. As he got into bed he asked 
himself again : "Why was he at the cemetery ?" 
Next morning he made up his mind to go to the Pogoryeltse\'S. He 
made up his mind to go reluctantly; sympathy from any one, even 
from the Pogoryeltsevs, was too irksome for him now. But they were 
so anxious about him that he felt absolutely obliged to go. He sud­
denly had a foreboding that he would feel horribly ashamed at their 
first meeting again. 
Should he go or not, he thought, as he made haste to finish his 
breakfast; when, to his intense amazement, Pavel Pavlovitch walked in. 
In spite of their meeting the day before Velchaninov could never 
have conceived that the man would come to see him again, ami was 
so taken aback that he stared at him and did not know what to say. 
But Pavel Pavlovitch was equal to the occasion. He greeted him, and 
sat down on the very same chair on which he had sat on his last 
visit. Velchaninov had a sudden and peculiarly vivid memory of that 
visit, and gazed uneasily and with repulsion at his visitor. 
"You're surprised ?" began Pavel Pavlovitch, interpreting Velchani­
nov's expression. 
He seemed altogether much more free and easy than on the previous 
day, and at the same time it could be detected that he was more nerv­
ous than he had been then. His appearance was particularly curious. 
M. Trusotsky was not only presentably but quite foppishly dressed­
in a light summer jacket, light-coloured trousers of a smart, close­
fitting cut, a light waistcoat; gloves, a gold lorgnette, which he had 
suddenly adopted for some reason. His linen was irreproachable; he 
even smelt of scent. About his whole get-up there was something 
ridiculous, and at the same time strangely and unpleasantly suggestive. 
"Of course, Alexey lvanovitch," he went on, wriggling, "I'm sur­
prising you by coming, and I'm sensible of it. But there is always, 

'I he eternal Husband 
417 
so I imagine, preserved between people, and to my mind there should 
be preserved, something higher, shouldn't there? Higher, I mean, than 
all the conditions and even unpleasantnesses that may come to pass . 
. . . Shouldn't there?" 
"Pavel Pavlovitch, say what you have to say quickly, and without 
ceremony," said Velchaninov, frowning. 
"In a couple of words," Pavel Pavlovitch began hastily, "I'm going 
to get married and I am just setting off to see my future bride. They 
are in a summer villa too. I should like to have the great honour to 
make bold to introduce you to the family, and have come to ask an 
unusual favour," (Pavel Pavlovitch bent his head humbly) "to beg 
you to accompany me . . . .  
" 
"Accompany you, where?" Velchaninov stared with open eyes. 
"To them, that is, to their villa. Forgive me, I am talking as though 
in a fever, and perhaps I've not been clear; but I'm so afraid of your 
declining." 
And he looked plaintively at Velchaninov. 
"Do you want me to go with you now to see your future bride?" 
Velchaninov repeated, scrutinizing him rapidly, unable to believe his 
eyes or ears. 
"Yes," said Pavel Pavlovitch, extremely abashed. "Don't be angry, 
Alexey lvanovitch. It's not impudence; I only beg you most humbly 
as a great favour. I had dreamed that you might not like, that being so, 
to refuse . . . .  " 
"To.begin with, it's utterly out of the question." Velchaninov turned 
round uneasily. 
"It is merely an intense desire on my part and nothing more," Pavel 
Pavlovitch went on, imploring him. "I will not conceal, either, that 
there are reasons for it, but I should have preferred not to have re­
vealed them till later, and for the present to confine myself to the very 
earnest request . . . .  " 
And he positively got up from his seat to show his deference. 
"But in any case it is quite impossible, you must admit that your­
self . . . .  " 
Velchaninov, too, stood up. 
"It is quite possible, Alexey lvanovitch. I was proposing to present 
you as a friend; and besides, you are an acquaintance of theirs already; 
you see, it's to Zahlebinin's, to his villa. The civil councillor, Zahle­
binin." 
"What?" cried Velchaninov. 
It was the civil councillor for whom he had been constantly iooking 

418 
The Short Novels of 1Jostoevsk.y 
for a month before, and had never found at home. He had, as it 
turned out, been acting in the interests of the other side. 
"Yes, yes; yes, yes," said Pavel Pavlovitch, smiling and seeming to 
be greatly encouraged by Velchaninov's great astonishment; "the very 
man, you remember, whom you were walking beside, and talking to, 
while I stood opposite watching you; I was waiting to go up to him 
when you had finished. Twenty years ago we were in the same office, 
and that day, when I meant to go up to him after you had finished, 
I had no idea of the sort. It occurred to me suddenly, only a week 
ago." 
"But, upon my word, they are quite a decent family," said Vel­
chaninov, in naive surprise. 
"Well, what then, if they arc ?" Pavel Pavlovitch grimaced. 
"No, of course, I didn't mean . . .  only as far as I've observed when 
I was there . . .  
" 
"They remember, they remember your being there," Pavel Pavlov­
itch put in joyfully; "only you couldn't have seen the family then; 
but he remembers you and has a great esteem for you. \Ve talked of 
you with great respect." 
"But when you've only been a widower three months?" 
"But you see the wedding will not be at once; the wedding will be 
in nine or ten months, so that the year of mourning will be over. I 
assure you that everything is all right. To begin with, Fedosey Petro­
vitch has known me from a boy; he knew my late wife; he knows 
my style of living, and what people think of me, and what's more, 
I have property, and I'm receiving a post with increase of salary-so 
all that has weight." 
"Why, is it his daughter?" 
"I will tell you all about it.'' Pavel Pavlovitch wriggled ingratiat­
ingly. "Allow me to light a cigarette. And you'll see her yourself 
to-day too. To begin with, such capable men as Fedosey Petrovitch 
are sometimes very highly thought of here in Petersburg, if they suc­
ceed in attracting notice. But you know, apart from his salary and the 
additional and supplementary fees, bonuses, hotel expenses, and 
moneys given in rcl:cf, he has nothing-that is, nothing substantial 
that could be called a capital. They are comfortably off, but there is no 
possibility of saving where there's a family. Only imagine : Fedosey 
Petrovitch has eight girls, and only one son, still a child. If he were to 
die to-morrow there would be nothing left but a niggardly pension. 
And eight girls! just imagine-only imagine-what it must run into 
&imply for their shoes! Of these eight girls five are grown up, the 

Th% et¬mal Husband 
419 
eldest is four-and-twenty (a most charming young lady, as you will 
see) and the sixth, a girl of fifteen, is still at the high school. Of course, 
husbands must be found for the five elder ones, and that ought to be 
done in good time, as far as possible, so their father ought to bring 
them out, and what do you suppose that will cost? And then I turn 
up, the first suitor they have had in the house, and one they know all 
about, that I really have property, I mean. Well, that's all." 
Pavel Pavlovitch explained with fervour. 
"You're engaged to the eldest?" 
"N-no, I . . .  no, not to the eldest; you see, I'm proposing for the 
sixth, the one who is still at the high school." 
"\Vhat?" said Velchaninov, with an involuntary smile. "Why, you 
say she's only fifteen!" 
"Fifteen now; but in nine months she'll be sixteen, she'll be sixteen 
and three months, so what of it? But as it would be improper at 
present, there will be no open engagement but only an understanding 
with the parents . . . .  I assure you that everything is all right!" 
"Then it's not settled yet?" 
"Yes, it is settled, it's all settled. I assure you, all is as it should be." 
"And does she know?" 
"Well, it's only in appearance, for the sake of propriety, that they 
are not telling her; of course she knows." Pavel Pavlovitch screwed 
up his eyes insinuatingly. "\Veil, do you congratulate me, Alexey 
Ivanovitch?" Pavel Pavlovitch concluded very timidly. 
"But what should I go there for? However," he added hurriedly, 
"since I'm not going in any case, don't trouble to find a reason." 
"Alexey Ivanovitch . . .  " 
"But do you expect me to get in beside you and drive off there with 
you? Think of it!" 
The feeling of disgust and aversion came back after the momentary 
distraction of Pavel Pavlovitch's chatter about his future bride. In an­
other minute he would have turned him out. He even felt angry with 
himself for some reason. 
"Do, Alexey Ivanovitch, do, and you won't regret it!" Pavel Pavlov­
itch implored him in a voice fraught with feeling. "No, no, no!"­
he waved his hands, catching an impatient and determined gesture 
from Velchaninov. "Alexey Ivanovitch, Alexey lvanovitch, wait a bit 
before you decide! I see that you have perhaps misunderstood me. Of 
course, I know only too well that you cannot be to me, nor I to you 
. . .  that we're not comrades; I am not so absurd as not to understand 
that. And that the favour I'm asking of you will not pledge you to 

420 
7' he Short 'Novels of Vostoevsky 
anything in the future. And, indeed, I'm going away after to-morrow 
altogether, absolutely; just as though nothing had happened. Let this 
day be a solitary exception. I have come to you resting my hopes on 
the generosity of the special feelings of your heart, Alexey Ivanovitch 
-those feelings which might of late have been awakened . . .  I think 
I'm speaking clearly, am I not ?" 
Pavel Pavlovitch's agitation reached an extreme point. Velchaninov 
looked at him strangely. 
"You ask for some service from me?" he questioned, hesitatingly, 
"and are very insistent about it. That strikes me as suspicious; I should 
like to knm·; more about it." 
"The only service is that you should come with me. And afterwards, 
on our way back, I will unfold all to you as though at confession. 
Alexey Ivanovitch, believe me!" 
But Velchaninov still refused, and the more stubbornly because he 
was conscious of an oppressive and malignant impulse. This evil im­
pulse had been faintly stirring within him from the very beginning, 
ever since Pavel Pavlovitch had talked of his future bride: whether 
it was simply curiosity, or some other quite obscure prompting, he 
felt tempted to consent. And the more he felt tempted, the more he 
resisted. He sat with his elbow on one hand, and hesitated. 
Pavel Pavlovitch beside him kept coaxing and persuading. 
"Very good, I'll come," he consented all at once, uneasily and almost 
apprehensively, getting up from his seat. 
Pavel Pavlovitch was extremely delighted. 
"But, Alexey lvanovitch, you must change your clothes now," Pavel 
Pavlovitch cajoled him, hanging gleefully about him ; "put on your 
best suit." 
"And why must he meddle in this, too, strange fellow ?" V elchani­
nov thought to himself. 
"This is not the only service I'm expecting of you, Alexey Ivanov­
itch. Since you have given your consent, please be my adviser." 
"In what, for example?" 
"The great question, for instance, of crape. Which would be more 
proper, to remove the crape, or keep it on?" 
"As you prefer." 
· "No, I want you to decide; what would you do yourself in my 
place, that is, if you had crape on your hat? My own idea is that, if I 
retain it, it points to the constancy of my feelings, and so is a flattering 
recommendation." 

The et̴nal Husband 
421 
"Take it off, of course." 
"Do you really think it's a matter of course?" Pavel Pavlovitch hesi-
tated. "1\'o, I think I had better keep it . . . .  " 
"As you like." 
"He doesn't trust me, that's a good thing," thought Velchaninov. 
They went out; Pavel Pavlovitch gazed with satisfaction at Vel-
chaninov's smartened appearance; his countenance seemed to betray 
an even greater degree of deference and of dignity! Velchaninov won­
dered at him and even more at himself. A very good carriage stood 
waiting for them at the gate. 
"So you had a carriage all ready too? So you felt sure I should 
come?" 
"I engaged the carriage for myself, but I did feel confident that you 
would consent to accompany me," Pavel Pavlovitch replied, with the 
air of a perfectly happy man. 
"Ah, Pavel Pavlovitch," Velchaninov said, laughing as it were irri­
tably when they were in the carriage and had set off, "weren't you too 
sure of me?" 
"But it's not for you, Alexey lvanovitch, it's not for you to tell me 
that I'm a fool for it," Pavel Pavlovitch responded, in a voice full of 
feeling. 
"And Liza," thought Velchaninov, and at once hastened to dismiss 
the thought of her as though afraid of sacrilege. And it suddenly 
seemed to him that he was so petty, so insignificant at that moment; 
it struck him that the thought that had tempted him was a thought 
so small and nasty . . .  and he longed again, at all costs, to fling it all 
up, and to get out of the carriage at once, even if he had to thrash 
Pavel Pavlovitch. But the latter began talking and the temptation 
mastered his heart again. 
"Alexey lvanovitch, do you know anything about jewels?" 
"What sort of jewels?" 
"Diamonds." 
"Yes." 
"I should like to take a little present. Advise me, should I or not?" 
"I think you shouldn't." 
"But I feel I should so like to," returned Pavel Pavlovitch, "only, 
what am I to buy? A whole set, that is, a brooch, earrings, bracelets, 
or simply one article?" 
"How much do you want to spend?" 
"About four hundred or five hundred roubles?" 

422 
'I he Short N.ovels of 'Dostoevsky 
"Oughl" 
"Is it too much, or what?" asked Pavel Pavlovitch in a flutter. 
"Buy a single bracelet for a hundred roubles." 
Pavel Pavlovitch was positively mortified; he was so eager to spend 
more and buy a "whole set" of jewels. He persisted. They drove to a 
shop. It ended, however, in his only buying a bracelet, and not the 
one that he wanted to, but the one that Velchaninov fixed upon. Pavel 
Pavlovitch wanted to take both. When the jeweller, who had asked 
a hundred and seventy-five roubles for the bracelet, consented to take 
a hundred and fifty for it, Pavel Pavlovitch was positively vexed; he 
would have paid two hundred if that sum had been asked, he was so 
eager to spend more. 
"It doesn't matter, does it, my being in a hurry with presents ?" he 
gushed blissfully, when they had set off again. "They're not grand 
people, they are very simple. The innocent creatures are fond of little 
presents," he said, with a sly and good-humoured grin. "You smiled 
just now, Alexey Ivanovitch, when you heard she was fifteen ; but 
that's just what bowled me over; that she was still going to school 
with the satchel on her arm full of copy books and pens, he-he! That 
satchel fascinated mel It's innocence that charms me, Alexey lvanov­
itch; it's not so much beauty of face, it's that. She giggles in the curner 
with her school friend, and how she laughs, my goodness! And what 
at? It's all because the kitten jumped off the chest of drawers on to the 
bed and was curled up like a little ball. . . .  And then there's that scent 
of fresh apples! Shall I take off the crape?" 
"As you please." 
"I will take it off." 
He took off his hat, tore off the crape and flung it in the road. 
Velchaninov saw that his face was beaming with the brightest hopes, 
as he replaced his hat upon his bald head. 
"Can it be that he is really like this?'' he thought, feeling genuinely 
angry; "can it be there isn't some trick in his inviting me? Can he 
be really reckoning on my generosity?" he went on, almost offended 
at the last supposition. "What is he-a buffoon, a fool, or the 'eternal 
husband'-but it's impossible!" 

'I h% et%rnal Husband 
423 
Chapter 12 
AT THE ZAHLEBININS' 
THE Zahlebinins were really a "very decent family," as Velchani­
nov had expressed it, and Zahlebinin himself had an assured position 
in a government office and was well thought of by his superiors. All 
.hat Pavel Pavlovitch had said about their income was true too: "They 
live very comfortably, but if he dies there'll be nothing left." 
Old Zahlebinin gave Velchaninov a warm and affable welcome, and 
his former "foe" seemed quite like a friend. 
"I congratulate you, it was better so," he began at the first word, 
with a pleasant and dignified air. "I was in favour of settling it out of 
court myself and Pyotr Karlovitch (Velchaninov's lawyer) is priceless 
in such cases. \Vell, you get sixty thousand without any bother, without 
delay and dispute! And the case might have dragged on for three 
years!" 
Velchaninov was at once presented to Madame Zahlebinin, an 
elderly lady of redundant figure, with a very simple and tired-looking 
face. The young ladies, too, began to sail in one after the other or in 
couples. But a very great many young ladies made their appearance; 
by degrees they gathered to the number of ten or twelve-Velchaninov 
lost count of them; some came in, others went out. But among them 
several were girl friends from the neighbouring villas. The Zahlebinins' 
villa, a large wooden house, built in quaint and whimsical style, with 
parts added at different periods, had the advantage of a big garden; 
but three or four other villas looked into the garden on different sides, 
and it was common property, an arrangement which naturally led to 
friendly relations among the girls of the different households. From the 
first words of conversation Velchaninov observed that he was expected, 
and that his arrival in the character of a friend of Pavel Pavlovitch, 
anxious to make their acquaintance, was hailed almost triumphantly. 
His keen and experienced eye quickly detected something special; 
from the over-cordial welcome of the parents, from a certain peculiar 
look about the girls and their get-up (though, indeed, it was a holiday), 
from all that, the suspicion dawned upon him that Pavel Pavlovitch 
had been scheming and, very possibly, without, of course, saying it in 
so many words, had been suggesting a conception of him as a bachelor 

424 
T lu Short N.ove/s of Vostoevsk.y 
of property and of the "best society," who was suffering from ennu, 
and very, very likely to make up his mind to "change his state and 
settle down," especially as he had just come into a fortune. The manner 
and the appearance of the eldest Mademoiselle Zahlebinin, Katerina 
Fedosyevna, the one who was twenty-four and who had been described 
by Pavel Pavlovitch as a charming person, struck him as being in keep­
ing with that idea. She was distinguished from her sisters by her dress 
and the original way in which her luxuriant hair was done. Her sisters 
and the other girls all looked as though they were firmly convinced 
that Velchaninov was making their acquaintance "on Katya's account" 
and had come "to have a look at her." Their glances and even some 
words, dropped in the course of the day, confirmed him in this sur­
mise. Katerina Fedosyevna was a tall blonde of generous proportions, 
with an exceedingly sweet face, of a gentle, unenterprising, even torpid 
character. "Strange that a girl like that should still be on hand," Vel­
chaninov could not help thinking, watching her with pleasure. "Of 
course, she has no dowry and she'll soon grow too fat, but meantime 
lots of men would admire her . . . .  " All the other sisters, too, were 
nice-looking, and among their friends there were several amusing and 
even pretty faces. It began to divert him; he had come, moreover, with 
special ideas. 
Nadyezhda Fedosyevna, the sixth, the schoolgirl and Pavel Pav­
lovitch 's bride-elect, did not appear till later. Velchaninov awaited her 
coming with an impatience which surprised him and made him laugh 
at himself. At last she made her entrance, and not without effect, 
accompanied by a lively, keen-witted girl friend, a brunette with a 
comical face whose name was Marie Nikititchna, and of whom, as 
was at once apparent, Pavel Pavlm'itch stood in great dread. This 
Marie Nikititchna, a girl of twenty-three, with a mocking tongue and 
really clever, was a nursery governess in a friend's family. She had 
long been accepted by the Zahlebinins as one of themselves and was 
thought a great deal of by the girls. It was evident that Nadya found 
her indispensable now. Velchaninov discerned at once that all the girls 
were antagonistic to Pavel Pavlovitch, even the friends, and two min­
utes after Nadya's arrival he had made up his mind that she detested 
him. He ob,erved, too, that Pavel Pavlovitch either failed to notice this 
or refused to. 
Nadya was unquestionably the handsomest of the lot-a little bru­
nette with a wild, untamed look and the boldness of a nihilist; a 
roguish imp with blazing eyes, with a charming but often malicious 
smile, with wonderful lips and teeth, slender and graceful, her face 

7' he eternal Husband 
425 
stiil child-like but glowing with the dawn of thought. Her age was 
evident in every step she took, in every word she uttered. It appeared 
afterwards that Pavel Pavlovitch did see her for the first time with an 
American leather satchel on her arm, but this time she had not got it. 
The presentation of the bracelet was a complete failure, and, in­
deed, made an unpleasant impression. As soon as Pavel Pavlovitch saw 
his "future bride" come into the room he went up to her with a smirk. 
He presented it as a testimony "of the agreeable gratification he had 
experienced on his previous visit on the occasion of the charming song 
sung by Nadyezhda Fedosyevna at the piano . . . .  " He stammered, 
could not finish, and stood helpless, holding out the case with the 
bracelet and thrusting it into the hand of Nadyezhda Fedosyevna, who 
did not want to take it, and, crimson with shame and anger, drew 
back her hands. She turned rudely to her mother, whose face betrayed 
embarrassment, and said aloud: 
"I don't want to take it, maman!" 
"Take it and say thank you," said her father, with calm severity: 
but he, too, was displeased. "Unnecessary, quite unnecessary!" he 
muttered reprovingly to Pavel Pavlovitch. 
Nadya, seeing there was no help for it, took the case and, dropping 
her eyes, curtsied, as tiny children curtsey-that is, suddenly bobbed 
down, and popped up again as though on springs. One of her sisters 
went up to look at it and Nadya handed her the case unopened, 
showing, for her part, that she did not care to look at it. The bracelet 
was taken out and passed from one to the other; but they all looked 
at it in silence, and some even sarcastically. Only the mother mur· 
mured that the bracelet was very charming. Pavel Pavlovitch was ready 
to sink into the earth. 
V elchaninov came to the rescue. 
He began talking, loudly and eagerly, about the first thing that 
occurred to him, and before five minutes were over he had gained the 
attention of every one in the drawing-room. He was a brilliant master 
of the art of small talk-that is, the art of seeming perfectly frank and 
at the same time appearing to consider his listeners as frank as himself. 
He could, with perfect naturalness, appear when necessary to be the 
most light-hearted and happy of men. He was very clever, too, in 
slipping in a witty remark, a jibe, a gay insinuation or an amusing pun, 
always as it were accidentally and as though unconscious of doing it­
though the epigram or pun and the whole conversation, perhaps, had 
been prepared and rehearsed long, long before and even used on more 
than one previous occasion. But at the present moment nature and 

426 
'I he Short N.ovels of 7Jostoevsk.y 
art were at one, he felt that he was in the mood and that something 
was drawing him on; he felt the most absolute confidence in himself 
and knew that in a few minutes all these eyes would be turned upon 
him, all these people would be listening only to him, talking to no one 
but him, and laughing only at what he said. And, in fact, the laughter 
soon came, by degrees the others joined in the conversation-and he 
was exceedingly clever in making other people talk-three or four 
voices could be heard at once. The bored and weary face of Madame 
Zahlebinin was lighted up almost with joy; it was the same with 
Katerina Fedosyevna, who gazed and listened as though enchanted. 
Nadya watched him keenly from under her brows; it was evident that 
she was prejudiced against him. This spurred him on the more. The 
"mischievous" Marie Nikititchna succeeded in getting in rather a good 
thrust at him; she asserted quite fictitiously that Pavel Pavlovitch had 
introduced him as the friend of his boyhood, so putting with obvious 
intent at least seven years on to his age. But even the malicious Marie 
Nikititchna liked him. Pavel Pavlovitch was completely nonplussed. 
He had, of course, some idea of his friend's abilities and at first was 
delighted at his success; he tittered himself and joined in the conver­
sation; but by degrees he seemed to sink into thoughtfulness, and 
finally into positive dejection, which was clearly apparent in his 
troubled countenance. 
"Well, you're a visitor who doesn't need entertaining," old Zahlebi­
nin commented gaily, as he got up to go upstairs to his own room, 
where, in spite of the holiday, he had some business papers awaiting 
his revision; "and, only fancy, I thought of you as the most gloomy, 
hypochondriacal of young men. What mistakes one makes!" 
They had a piano; Velchaninov asked who played, and suddenly 
turned to Nadya : 
"I believe you sing?" 
"Who told you ?" Nadya snapped out. 
"Pavel Pavlovitch told me j ust now." 
"It's not true. I only sing for fun. I've no voice." 
"And I've no voice either, but I sing." 
"Then you'll sing to us ? Well, then, I'll sing to you," said Nadya, 
her eyes gleaming; "only not now, but after dinner. I can't endure 
music," she added. ''I'm sick of the piano: they're all singing and 
playing from morning to night here-Katya's the only one worth 
hearing." 
Velchaninov at once took this up, and it appeared that Katerina 
Fedosyevna was the only one who played the piano seriously. He at 

The eternal Husband 
427 
once begged her to play. Every one was evickmly pleased at his ad­
dressing Katya, and the mamma positively flushed crimson with grati­
fication. Katerina Fedosyevna got up, smiling, and went to the piano, 
and suddenly, to her own surprise, she flushed crimson and was horri­
bly abashed that she, such a big girl, four-and-twenty and so stout, 
should be blushing like a child-and all this was written clearly on her 
face as she sat down to play. She played something from Haydn 
and played it carefully though without expression, but she was shy. 
When she had finished Velchaninov began warmly praising to her, 
not her playing but Haydn, and especially the little thing which she 
had played, and she was evidently so pleased and listened so gratefully 
and happily to his praises, not of herself but of Haydn, that he could 
not help looking at her with more friendliness and attention: "Ah, 
but you are a dear!" was reflected in the gleam of his eye-and every 
one seemed instantly to understand that look, especially Katerina 
Fedosyevna herself. 
"You have a delightful garden," he said, suddenly addressing the 
company and looking towards the glass door that led on to the balcony. 
"What do you say to our all going into the garden ?" 
"Let us, let us! "  they shrieked joyfully, as though he had guessed 
the general wish. 
They walked in the garden till dinner-time. Madame Zahlebinin, 
though she had been longing to have a nap, could not resist going 
out with them, but wisely sat down to rest on the verandah, where she 
at once began to doze. In the garden Velchaninov and the girls got 
on to still more friendly terms. He noticed that several very young 
men from the villas joined them; one was a student and another simply 
a high school boy. They promptly made a dash each for his girl, and 
it was evident that they had come on their account; the third, a very 
morose and dishevelled-looking youth of twenty, in huge blue spec­
tacles, began, with a frown, whispering hurriedly with Marie Niki­
titchna and Nadya. He scanned Velchaninov sternly, and seemed to 
consider it incumbent upon himself to treat him with extraordinary 
contempt. Some of the girls suggested that they should play games. 
To Velchaninov's question, what games they played, they said all 
sorts of games, and catch-catch, but in the evening they would play 
proverbs-that is, all would sit down and one would go out, the others 
choose a proverb-for instance: .. More haste, less speed," and when 
the one outside is called in, each in turn has to say one sentence to him. 
One, for instance, m\J6t say a sentence in which there is the word 

̵28 
CJ'he Short Novels of Vostoevslzy 
"more,'' the second, on.: in which there is the word "haste," and so on. 
And from their sentences he must guess the proverb. 
"That must be very amusing," said Velchaninov. 
"Oh, no, it's awfully boring," cried two or three voices at once. 
"Or else we play at acting," Nadya observed, suddenly addressing 
him. "Do you see that thick tree, round which there's a seat: behind 
that tree is behind the scenes, and there the actors sit, say a king, a 
queen, a princess, a young man-just as any one likes; each one enters 
when he chooses and says anything that comes into his head, and that's 
the game." 
"But that's delightfull" Velchaninov repeated again. 
"Oh, no, it's awfully d)JII! At first it did turn out amusing, but lately 
it's always been senseless, for no one knows how to end it; perhaps 
with you, though, it will be more interesting. \Ve did think you were 
a friend of Pavel Pavlovitch's, though, but it seems he was only 
bragging. I'm very glad you have come .
.
•
 for one thing . . . .  " 
She looked very earnestly and impressively at Velchaninov and at 
once walked away to Marie Nikititchna. 
"We're going to play proverbs this evening," one of the girl friends 
whom Velchaninov had scarcely noticed before, and with whom he 
had not exchanged a word, whispered to him confidentially. "They're 
all going to make fun of Pavel Pavlovitch, and you will too, of course." 
"Ah, how nice it is that you've come, we were all so dull," observed 
.lnother girl in a friendly way. She was a red-haired girl with freckles, 
and a face absurdly flushed from walking and the heat. Goodness 
knows where she had sprung from; Velchaninov had not noticed her 
till then. 
Pavel Pavlovitch's uneasiness grew more and more marked. In the 
garden Velchaninov made great friends with Nadya. She no longer 
looked at him from under her brows as she had at first; she seemed to 
have laid aside her critical attitude towards him, and laughed, skipped 
about, shrieked, and twice even seized him by the hand; she was 
extremely happy, she continued to take not the slightest notice of Pavel 
Pavlovitch, and behaved as though she were not aware of his existence. 
Velchaninov felt certain that there was an actual plot against Pavel 
Pavlovitch; Nadya and the crowd of girls drew Velchaninov aside, 
while some of the other girl friends lured Pavel Pavlovitch on various 
pretexts in another direction; but the latter broke away from them, and 
ran full speed straight to them-that is, to Velchaninov and Nadya, and 
suddenly thrust his bald head in between them with uneasy curiosity. 
He hardly attempted to restrain himself; the naivete of his gestures 

The eternal Husband 
429 
and actions were sometimes amazing. He could not resist trying once 
more to turn Velchaninov's attention to Katerina Fedosyevna; it was 
clear to her now that he had not come on her account, but was much 
more interested in Nadya; but her expression was just as sweet and 
good-humoured as ever. She seemed to be happy simply at being beside 
them and listening to what their new visitor was saying; she, poor 
thing, could never keep up her share in a conversation cleverly. 
"What a darling your sister Katerina Fedosyevna is!" Velchaninov 
said aside to Nadya. 
"Katya! No one could have a kinder heart than she has. She's an 
angel to all of us. I adore her," the girl responded enthusiastically. 
At last dinner came at five o'clock; and it was evident that the 
dinner, too, was not an ordinary meal, but had been prepared expressly 
for visitors. There were two or three very elaborate dishes, which 
evidently were not part of their ordinary fare, one of them so strange 
that no one could find a name for it. In addition to the everyday wine 
there was a bottle of Tokay, obviously for the benefit of the visitors; 
at the end of dinner champagne was brought in for some reason. Old 
Zahlebinin took an extra glass, became extraordinarily good-humoured 
and ready to laugh at anything Velchaninov said. 
In the end Pavel Pavlovitch could not restrain himself. Carried away 
by the spirit of rivalry he suddenly attempted to make a pun too; at the 
end of the table, where he was sitting by Madame Zahlebinin, there 
was a sudden roar of loud laughter from the delighted girls. 
"Papa, Papa! Pavel Pavlovitch has made a pun too," the fourth and 
fifth Zahlebinin girls shouted in unison. "He says we're 'damsels who 
dazzle all. •
.
 .' " 
"Ah, so he's punning too! Well, what was his pun?" the old man 
responded sedately, turning patronizingly to Pavel Pavlovitch and 
smiling in readiness for the expected pun. 
"Why, he says we're 'damsels who dazzle all.' " 
"Y-yes, well, and what then?" The old man did not understand and 
smiled more good-humouredly in expectation. 
"Oh, Papa, how tiresome you are; you don't understand. Why, 'dam­
sels' and then 'dazzle'; 'damsel' is like 'dazzle,' 'damsels who dazzle 
all . . .  
.' " 
"A-a-ah," the old man drawled in a puzzled voice. "H'm, well, he'll 
make a better one next time!" 
And the old man laughed good-humouredly. 
"Pavd Pavlovitch, you can't have all the perfections at once," Marie 

430 
'[ h% Short N.ovds of Vosto%vsk,y 
Nikititchna jerked aloud. "Oh, my goodness! he's got a bone in his 
throat," she exclaimed, jumping up from her chair. 
There was a positive hubbub, but that was just what Marie Nikit­
itchna wanted. Pavel Pavlovitch had simply choked over the wine 
which he was sipping to cover his confusion, but Marie Nikititchna 
vowed and declared that it was a "fish bone," that she had seen it 
herself and that people sometimes died of it. 
"Slap him on the nape of the neck," some one shouted. 
"Yes, really that's the best thing to do!" the old man approved aloud. 
Eager volunteers were already at him; Marie Nikititchna and the 
red-haired girl (who had also been invited to dinner), and, finally, 
the mamma herself, greatly alarmed ; every one wanted to slap Pavel 
Pavlovitch on the back. Jumping up from the table, Pavel Pavlovitch 
wriggled away and was for a full minute asseverating that he had 
swallowed his wine too quickly and that the cough would soon be 
over, while the others realized that it was all a trick of Marie Nikit­
itchna's. 
"But, really, you tease . . .  !" Madame Zahlebinin tried to say sternly 
to Marie Nikititchna : but she broke down and laughed as she very 
rarely did, and that made quite a sensation of a sort. 
After dinner they all went out on the verandah to drink coffee. 
"And what lovely days we're having!" said the old man, looking with 
pleasure into the garden, and serenely admiring the beauties of nature. 
"If only we could have some rain. Enjoy yourselves and God bless 
you! And you enjoy yourself too," he added, patting Pavel Pavlovitch 
on the shoulder as he went out. 
\Vhen they had all gone out into the garden again, Pavel Pavlovitch 
suddenly ran up to Velchaninov and pulled him by the sleeve. 
"Just one minute," he whispered impatiently. 
They turned into a lonely side path. 
"No, in this case, excuse me, no, I won't give up . . . " he stuttered 
in a furious whisper, clutching Velchaninov's arm. 
"What? what?" Velchaninov asked, opening his eyes in amazement. 
Pavel Pavlovitch stared at him mutely, his lips moved, and he 
smiled furiously. 
"Where are you going ? Where are you ? Everything's ready," they 
heard the ringing, impatient voices of the girls. 
V elchani nov shrugged his shoulders and returned to the rest of the 
party. 
Pavel Pavlovitch, too, ran after him. 

'1 he eternal Husband 
431 
"I'll bet he asked you for a handkerchief," said Marie Nikititchna; 
"he forgot one last time too." 
"He'll always forget it!" the fifth Zahlebinin girl put in. 
"He's forgotten his handkerchief, Pavel Pavlovitch has forgotten 
his handkerchief, Mamma, Pavel Pavlovitch has forgotten his pocket­
handkerchief, Mamma, Pavel Pavlovitch has a cold in his head again!" 
cried voices. 
"Then why doesn't he say so! You do stand on ceremony, Pavel 
Pavlovitch!" Madame Zahlebinin drawled in a sing-song voice. "It's 
dangerous to trifle with a cold; I'll send you a handkerchief directly. 
And why has he always got a cold in his head?" she added, as she 
moved away, glad of an excuse for returning home. 
"I have two pocket-handkerchiefs and I haven't a cold in my head!" 
Pavel Pavlovitch called after her, but the lady apparently did not grasp 
what he said, and a minute later, when Pavel Pavlovitch was ambling 
after the others, keeping near Velchaninov and Nadya, a breathless 
maidservant overtook him and brought him a handkerchief. 
"Proverbs, a game of proverbs," the girls shouted on all sides, as 
though they expected something wonderful from "a game of proverbs." 
They fixed on a place and sat down on a seat; it fell to Marie 
Nikititchna's lot to guess; they insisted that she should go as far away 
as possible and not listen; in her absence they chose a proverb and 
distributed the words. Marie Nikititchna returned and guessed the 
proverb at once. The proverb was: "It's no use meeting troubles half­
way." 
Marie Nikititchna was followed by the young man with dishevelled 
hair and blue spectacles. They insisted on even greater precautions with 
him-he had to stand in the arbour and keep his face to the fence. 
The gloomy young man did what was required of him contemptu­
ously, and seemed to feel morally degraded by it. When he was called 
he could guess nothing, he went the round of all of them and listened 
to what they said twice over, spent a long time in gloomy meditation, 
but nothing came of it. They put him to shame. The proverb was: 
"To pray to God and serve the Czar ne'er fail of their reward." 
"And the proverb's disgusting!" the exasperated young man ex­
claimed indignantly, as he retreated to his place. 
"Oh, how dull it is!" cried voices. 
Velchaninov went out; he was hidden even further off; he, too, 
failed to guess. 
"Oh, how dull it is!" more voices cried. 

432 
The Short Novels of 7Jostoevsky 
"Well, now, I'll go out," said Nadya. 
"No, no, let Pavel Pavlovitch go out now, it's Pavel Pavlovitch's 
turn," they all shouted, growing more animated. 
Pavel Pavlovitch was led away, right up to the fence in the very 
corner, and made to stand facing it, and that he might not look round, 
the red-haired girl was sent to keep watch on him. Pavel Pavlovitch, 
who had regained his confidence and almost his cheerfulness, was 
determined to do his duty properly and stood stock-stili, gazing at the 
fence and not daring to turn round. The red-haired girl stood on 
guard twenty paces behind him nearer to the party in the arbour, 
and she exchanged signals with the girls in some excitement; it was 
evident that all were expecting something with trepidation; something 
was on foot. Suddenly the red-haired girl waved her arms as a signal 
to the arbour. Instantly they all jumped up and ran off at breakneck 
speed. 
"Run, you run, too," a dozen \'oices whispered to Velchaninov, al­
most with horror at his not running. 
"What's the matter? What has happened?" he asked, hurrying after 
them. 
"Hush, don't shout! Let him stand there staring at the fence while 
we all run away. See, Nastya is running." 
The red-haired girl (Nastya) was running at breakneck speed, wav­
ing her hands as though something extraordinary had happened. They 
all ran at last to the other side of the pond, the very opposite corner of 
the garden. When Velchaninov had got there he saw that Katerina 
Fedosyevna was hotly disputing with the others, especially with Nadya 
and Marie Nikititchna. 
"Katya, darling, don't be angry!'' said Nadya, kissing her. 
"Very well, I won't tell Mamma, but I shall go away myself, for it's 
very horrid. \Vhat must he be feeling at the fence there, poor man!" 
She went away-from pity-but all the others were merciless and 
as ruthless as before. They all insisted sternly that when Pavel Pav­
lovitch came back, Velchaninov should take no notice of him, as 
though nothing had happened. 
"And let us all play catch-catch! "  cried the red-haired girl ecstatically. 
It was at least a quarter of an hour before Pavel Pavlovitch rejoined 
the party. For two-thirds of that time he had certainly been standing 
at the fence. The game was in full swing, and was a great success­
everybody was shouting and merry. Frantic with rage, Pavel Pav­
lovitch went straight up to Velchanino\' and pulled at his sleeve again. 
"Just half a minute!" 

'I he eternal Husband 
433 
"Good gracious, what does he want with his half-minutes!" 
"He's borrowing a handkerchief again," was shouted after him once 
more. 
"Well, this time it was you ;  now it's all your doing • . . •  
" 
Pavel Pavlovitch's teeth chattered as he said this. 
Velchaninov interrupted him, and mildly advised him to be livelier, 
or they would go on teasing him. "They tease you because you are 
cross when all the rest are enjoying themselves." To his surprise, these 
words of advice made a great impression on Pavel Pavlovitch; he 
subsided at once-so much so, in fact, that he went back to the party 
with a penitent air and submissively took his place in the game; after 
which they left him alone and treated him like the rest-and before 
half an hour had passed he had almost regained his spirits. In all the 
games when he had to choose a partner he picked out by preference 
the red-haired traitress, or one of the Zahlebinin sisters. But to his still 
greater surprise Velchaninov noticed that Pavel Pavlovitch did not 
dare try to speak to Nadya, although he continually hovered about 
her. At any rate he accepted his position, as an object of scorn and 
neglect to her, as though it were a fitting and natural thing. But 
towards the end they played a prank upon him again. 
The game was "hide-and-seek." The one who hid, however, was 
allowed to run anywhere in the part of the garden allotted him. Pavel 
Pavlovitch, who had succeeded in concealing himself completely in 
some thick bushes, conceived the idea of running out and making a 
bolt for the house. He was seen and shouts were raised; he crept 
hurriedly upstairs to the first floor, knowing of a place behind a chest 
of drawers where he could hide. But the red-haired girl flew up after 
him, crept on tiptoe to the door and turned the key on him. All left 
off playing and ran just as they had done before to the other side of 
the pond, at the further end of the garden. Ten minutes later, Pavel 
Pavlovitch, becoming aware that no one was looking for him, peeped 
out of the window. There was no one to be seen. He did not dare to 
call out for fear of waking the parents; the maids had been sternly 
forbidden to answer Pavel Pavlovitch's call or go to him. Katerina 
Fedosyevna might have unlocked him, but, returning to her room and 
sitting down to dream a little, she had unexpectedly fallen asleep too. 
And so he stayed there about an hour. At last the girls came, as it 
were by chance, in twos or threes. 
"Pavel Pavlovitch, why don't you come out to us? Oh, it has been 
fun! We've been playing at acting. Alexey Ivanovitch has been acting 
'a young man.' " 

434 
The Short N.ovels of 1JostoevskJI 
"Pavel Pavlovitch, why don't you come, we want to admire youl" 
others observed as they passed. 
"Admire what now?" they suddenly heard the voice of Madame 
Zahlebinin, who had only just woken up and made up her mind to 
come out into the garden and watch the "children's" games while 
waiting for tea. 
"But here's Pavel Pavlovitch," they told her, pointing to the window 
where Pavel Pavlovitch's face, pale with anger, looked out with a wry 
smile. 
"It's an odd fancy for a man to sit alone, when you're all enjoying 
yourselves!" said the mamma, shaking her head. 
Meanwhile, Nadya had deigned to give Velchaninov an explanation 
of her words that she "was glad he had come for one reason." 
The explanation took place in a secluded avenue. Marie Nikititchna 
purposely summoned Velchaninov, who was taking part in some 
game and was horribly bored, and left him alone in the avenue with 
Nadya. 
"I am absolutely convinced," she said boldly, in a rapid patter, "that 
you are not such a great friend of Pavel Pavlovitch's as he boasted 
you were. I am reckoning on you as the one person who can do me a 
very great service." She took the case out of her pocket. "I humbly beg 
you to give this back to him at once, as I shall never speak to him 
again in my life. You can say so from me, and tell him not to dare 
to force his company and his presents on me. I'll let him know the rest 
through other people. Will you be so kind as to do what I want?" 
"Oh, for mercy's sake, spare mel" Velchaninov almost cried out, 
waving his hand. 
"What? Spare you?" Nadya was extraordinarily surprised at his 
refusal, and she gazed at him round-eyed. 
The tone she had assumed for the occasion broke down immediately, 
and she was almost in tears. 
Velchaninov laughed. 
"I don't mean that . . . .  I should be very glad . . .  but I have my 
own account to settle with him . . . . " 
"I knew that you were not his friend and that he was telling lies!" 
Nadya interrupted quickly and passionately. ''I'll never marry him, 
I tell you! Never! I can't understand how he could presume . . .  Only 
you must give him back his disgusting present or else what shall I do? 
I particularly, particularly want him to have it back to-day, the same 
day, so that his hopes may be crushed, and if he sneaks about it to 
Papa he shall see what he gets by it." 

The eternal Husband 
435 
And from behind the bushes there suddenly emerged the young 
man in the blue spectacles. 
"It's your duty to return the bracelet," he blurted out furiously, 
pouncing on Velchaninov. "If only from respect for the rights of 
women, that is-if you are capable of rising to the full significance 
of the question." 
But before he had time to finish Nadya tugged at his sleeve with 
all her might, and drew him away from Velchaninov. 
"My goodness, how silly you are, Predposylov!" she cried. "Go 
away, go away, go away, and don't dare to listen; I told you to stand 
a long way off!" . . .  She stamped her little foot at him, and when he 
had crept back into the bushes she still walked up and down across 
the path, with her eyes flashing and her arms folded before her, as 
though she were beside herself with anger. 
"You wouldn't believe how silly they are!" She stopped suddenly 
before Velchaninov. "It amuses you, but think what it means to me." 
"That's not hf:, it's not hf:, is it?" laughed Velchaninov. 
"Of course it isn't, and how could you imagine it!" cried Nadya, 
smiling and blushing. "That's only his friend. But I can't understand 
the friends he chooses; they all say that he's a 'future leader,' but I 
don't understand it . . . . Alexey Ivanovitch, I've no one I can appeal 
to; I ask you for the last time, will you give it back?" 
"Oh, very well, I will; give it me." 
"Ah, you are kind, you are good!" she cried, delighted, handing 
him the case. "I'll sing to you the whole evening for that, for I sing 
beautifully, do you know. I told you a fib when I said I didn't like 
music. Oh, you must come again-once at any rate; how glad I should 
be. I would tell you everything, everything, everything, and a great 
deal more besides, because you're so kind-as kind, as kind, as-as 
Katya!" 
And when they went in to tea she did sing him two songs, in an 
utterly untrained and hardly mature, but pleasant and powerful voice. 
When they came in from the garden Pavel Pavlovitch was stolidly 
sitting with the parents at the tea-table, on which the big family 
samovar was already boiling, surrounded by cups of Sevres china. He 
was probably discussing very grave matters with the old people, as two 
days later he was going away for nine whole months. He did not 
glance at the party as they came in from the garden, and particularly 
avoided looking at Velchaninov. It was evident, too, that he had not 
been sneaking and that all was serene so far. 
But when Nadya began singing he put himseli forward at once. 

436 
r lze Slzort N.otJels of 7JostoetJS l(y 
Nadya purposely ignored one direct question he addressed her, but 
this did not disconcert Pavel Pavlovitch, or make him hesitate. He 
stood behind her chair and his whole manner showed that this was 
his place and he was not going to give it up to any one. 
"Alexey lvanovitch sings, Mamma; Alexey lvanovitch wants to 
sing, Mamma!" almost all the girls shouted at once, crowding round 
the piano at which Velchaninov confidently installed himself, in­
tending to play his own accompaniment. The old people came in, 
and with them Katerina Fedosyevna, who had been sitting with them, 
pouring out the tea. 
Velchaninov chose a song of Glinka's, now familiar to almost every 
one-
"In the glad hour when from thy lips 
Come murmurs tender as a dove's." 
He sang it, addressing himself entirely to Nadya, who was standing 
at his elbow nearer to him than any one. His voice had passed its 
prime, but what was left of it showed that it had once been a fine 
one. Velchaninov had, twenty years before, when he was a student, 
the luck to hear that song for the first time sung by Glinka himself, 
at the house of a friend of the composer's. It was at a literary and 
artistic bachelor gathering, and Glinka, growing expansive, played 
and sang his own favourite compositions, among them this song. He, 
too, had little voice left then, but Velchaninov remembered the great 
impression made by that song. A drawing-room singer, however 
skilful, would never have produced such an ctTect. In that song the 
intensity of passion rises, mounting higher and higher at every line, at 
every word; and, from this very intensity, the least trace of falsity, of 
exaggeration or unreality, such as passes muster so easily at an opera, 
would distort and destroy the whole value of it. To sing that slight 
but exceptional song it was essential to have truth, essential to have 
real inspiration, real passion, or a complete poetical comprehension of 
it. Otherwise the song would not only be a failure but might even 
appear unseemly and almost shameless: without them it would be 
impossible to express such intensity of passion without arousing re­
pulsion, but truth and simplicity saved it. Velchaninov remembered 
that he had made a success with this song on some occasion. He had 
almost reproduced Glinka's manner of singing, but now, from the 
first note, from the first line, there was a gleam of inspiration in 
his singing which quivered in his voice. 
At e,·ery word the torrent of feeling was more fervent and more 
holdly displayed; in the last lines the cry of passion is heard, and when, 

The eternal Husband 
437 
with blazing eyes, Velchaninov addressed the last words of the song 
to Nadya-
"Grown bolder, in thine eyes I gaze; 
Draw close my lips, can hear no more, 
I long to kiss thee, kiss thee, kiss thee! 
I long to kiss thee, kiss thee, kiss thee!"-
she trembled almost with alarm, and even stepped back; the colour 
rushed into her cheeks, and at the same time Velchaninov seemed to 
catch a glimpse of something responsive in her abashed and almost 
dismayed little face. The faces of all the audience betrayed their 
enchantment and also their amazement: all seemed to feel that it was 
disgraceful and impossible to sing like that, and yet at the same time 
all their faces were flushed and all their eyes glowed and seemed to 
be expecting something more. Among those faces Velchaninov had a 
vision especially of the face of Katerina Fedosyevna, which looked 
almost beautiful. 
"What a song," old Zahlebinin muttered, a little flabbergasted; 
"but . . .  isn't it too strong? charming, but strong . . . .  
" 
"Yes . . .  " Madame Zahlebinin chimed in, but Pavel Pavlovitch would 
not let her go on; he dashed forward suddenly like one possessed, so 
far forgetting himself as to seize Nadya by the arm and pull her away 
from Velchaninov ; he skipped up to him, gazed at him with a des­
perate face and quivering lips that moved without uttering a sound. 
"Half a minute," he uttered faintly at last. 
Velchaninov saw that in another minute the man might be guilty 
of something ten times as absurd; he made haste to take his arm and, 
regardless of the general amazement, drew him out into the verandah, 
and even took some steps into the garden with him, where it was 
now almost dark. 
"Do you understand that you must go away with me this minute?" 
said Pavel Pavlovitch. 
"No, I don't understand . . . .  
" 
"Do you remember," Pavel Pavlovitch went on, in his frenzied 
whisper, "do you remember that you insisted that I should tell you 
everything, everything openly, 'the very last word . .  .' do you remem­
ber? Well, the time has come to say that word . . .  let us go!" 
Velchaninov thought a minute, looked at Pavel Pavlovitch and 
agreed to go. 
The sudden announcement of their departure upset the parents, 
and made all the girls horribly indignant. 

438 
'I he Short N.ovels of VostoevskJ 
"At least have another cup of tea," said Madame Zahlebinin plain­
tively. 
"Come, what's upset you ?" old Zahlebinin said in a tone of severity 
and displeasure, addressing Pavel Pavlovitch, who stood simpering 
and silent. 
"Pavel Pavlovitch, why are you taking Alexey Ivanovitch away?" 
the girls began plaintively, looking at him with exasperation. 
Nadya gazed at him so wrathfully that he positively squirmed, but 
he did not give way. 
"You see, Pavel Pavlovitch has reminded me-many thanks to him 
for it-of a very important engagement which I might have missed," 
Velchaninov said, smiling, as he shook hands with Zahlebinin, and 
bowed to the mamma and the girls, especially distinguishing Katerina 
Fedosyevna in a manner apparent to all. 
"We are very grateful for your visit and shall always be glad to see 
you," Zahlebinin said ponderously, in conclusion. 
"Ah, we shall be so delighted 
•
.
.
 
" the mamma chimed in with 
feeling. 
"Come again, Alexey lvanovitch, come again!" numerous voices 
were heard calling from the verandah, when he had already got into 
the carriage with Pavel Pavlovitch ; there was perhaps one voice that 
called more softly than the others, "Come again, dear. dear Alexey 
lvanovitch." 
"That's the red-haired girV' thought Velchaninov. 
Chapter 13 
ON WHOSE SIDE MOST? 
HE MIGHT think about the red-haired girl, and yet his soul was 
in agonies of vexation and remorse. And, indeed, during the whole 
of that day, which seemed on the surface so amusingly spent, a feeling 
of acute depression had scarcely left him. Before singing the song he 
did not know how to get away from it; perhaps that was why he had 
sung it with such fervour. 
"And I could demean myself like that . . .  tear myself away from 
everything," he began reproaching himself, but he hurriedly cut ³hart 
his thoughts. Indeed, it seemed to him humiliating to lament; it was 
a great deal more pleasant to be angry with some one. 

The eternal Husband 
439 
"Fool!" he whispered wrathfully, with a side glance at the silent 
figure of Pavel Pavlovitch sitting beside him in the carriage. 
Pavel Pavlovitch remained obstinately silent, perhaps concentrated 
on preparing what he had got to say. With an impatient gesture he 
sometimes took off his hat and wiped his brow with his handkerchief. 
"Perspiring!" Velchaninov thought spitefully. 
On one occasion only Pavel Pavlovitch addressed a question to the 
coachman. "Is there going to be a storm ?" he asked. 
"Storm, indeed! Not a doubt of it; it's been brewing up all day." 
The sky was indeed growing dark and there were flashes of lightning 
in the distance. 
They reached the town about half-past ten. 
"I am coming in with you, of course," Pavel Pavlovitch warned 
him, not far from the house. 
"I understand, but I must tell you that I feel seriously unwell." 
"I won't stay, I won't stay long." 
When they went in at the gate, Pavel Pavlovitch ran in at the 
porter's lodge to find Mavra. 
"What were you running off there for?" V elchaninov said sternly, 
as the latter overtook him and they went into the room. 
"Oh . . .  nothing 
.
.
•
 the driver . . .  " 
"I won't have you drink!" 
No answer followed. Velchaninov lighted the candle, and Pavel 
Pavlovitch at once sat down on the chair. Velchaninov remained 
standing before him, with a frown on his face. 
"1, too, promised to say my 'last' word," he began, with an inward, 
still suppressed irritation. "Here it is-that word: I consider on my 
ronscience that everything between us is over, so that, in fact, there 
is nothing for us to talk about-do you hear ?-nothing; and so 
wouldn't it be better for you to go away at once, and I'll close the door 
after you?" 
"Let us settle our account, Alexey lvanovitch," said Pavel Pavlovitch, 
looking in his face, however, with peculiar mildness. 
"Set-tle our ac<ount!" repeated Velchaninov, greatly surprised. 
"That's a strange thing to say! Settle what account? Bah! Isn't that 
perhaps that 'last word' you promised .
•
.
 to reveal to me?" 
"It is." 
"We've no account to settle; we settled our account long agol" 
Velchaninov pronounced proudly. 
"Can you really think so?" Pavel Pavlovitch brought out in a voice 

440 
The Short Novels of VostoevskJ 
full of feeling, clasping his hands strangely and holding them before 
his breast. 
V elchaninov made him no answer, but continued pacing up and 
down the room. "Liza! Liza!" he was moaning in his heart. 
"What did you want to settle, though ?" he asked him, frowning, 
after a rather prolonged silence. 
Pavel Pavlovitch had been following him about the room with his 
eyes all this time, still holding his hands clasped before him. 
"Don't go there again," he almost whispered in a voice of entreaty, 
and he suddenly got up from his chair. 
"What! So that's all you are thinking about ?" Velchaninov laughed 
spitefully. "You've surprised me all day, though!" he was beginning 
malignantly, but suddenly his whole face changed. "Listen," he said 
mournfully, with deep and sincere feeling; "I consider that I have 
never lowered myself as I have to-day-to begin with, by consenting 
to go with you, and then-by what happened there . . . .  It was so 
paltry, so pitiful. . . .  I've defiled and debased myself by mixing myself 
up in it . . .  and forgetting .
.
.
 But there!" he cried hastily. "Listen, 
you attacked me to-day in an unguarded moment when I was nervous 
and ill . . .  but there's no need to justify myself! I'm not going there 
again, and I assure you I take no interest in them whatever," he con­
cluded resolutely. 
"Really, really?" cried Pavel Pavlovitch, not disguising his relief 
and excitement. 
Velchaninov looked at him contemptuously, and began pacing up 
and down the room again. 
"You seem to have made up your mind to be happy?" he could 
not refrain from observing. 
"Yes," Pavel Pavlovitch repeated naively, in a low voice. 
"\Vhat is it to me," Velchaninov reflected, "that he's a buffoon and 
only spiteful through stupidity ? I can't help hating him, though he 
isn't worth it!" 
"I am 'the eternal husband'!" said Pavel Pavlovitch, with an abjectly 
submissive smile at his own expense. "I heard that expression from 
you, Alexey Ivanovitch, long ago, when you were staying with us in 
those days. I remember a great many of your sayings in that year. 
Last time, when you said here, 'the eternal husband,' I reflected ... 
Mavra came in with a bottle of champagne and two glasses. 
"Forgive me, Alexey Ivanovitch ; you know that I can't get on 
without it! Don't think it's impudence; look upon me as an outsider 
not on your level." 

The Eternal Husband 
441 
"Yes . . ." Velchaninov muttered with repugnance, "but I assure 
you I feel unwell. . . .  " 
"Directly . . .  directly . . .  in one minute," said Pavel Pavlovitch 
fussily; "just one little glass because my throat . . .  " 
He greedily tossed off a glassful at a gulp and sat down, looking 
almost tenderly at Velchaninov. 
Mavra went out. 
"How beastly!" Velchaninov murmured. 
"It's only those girl friends," Pavel Pavlovitch said confidently, all 
of a sudden completely revived. 
"What? Ah, yes, you are still at that 
.
.
•
.
 " 
"It's only those girl friends! And then she's so young; we have our 
little airs and graces! They're charming, in fact. But then-then, you 
know, I shall be her slave; when she's treated with deference, when she 
sees something of society . . .  she'll be transformed." 
"I shall have to give him back that bracelet, though," thought Vel­
chaninov, scowling, as he felt the case in his pocket. 
"You say that I'm resolved to be happy? I must get married, Alexey 
Ivanovitch," Pavel Pavlovitch went on confidentially and almost 
touchingly, "or what will become of me? You see for yourself!" He 
pointed to the bottle. "And that's only one-hundredth of my vices. I 
can't get on at all without marriage and-without new faith; I shall 
have faith and shall rise up again." 
"But why on earth do you tell me this?" Velchaninov asked, almost 
bursting with laughter. It all struck him as wild. "But tell me," he 
cried, "what was your object in dragging me out there ? What did 
you want me there for?" 
"As a test . . .  " Pavel Pavlovitch seemed suddenly embarrassed. 
"A test of what?" 
"The effect . . . .  You see, Alexey I vanovitch, it's only a week alto­
gether 
.
•
•
 I've been looking round there." (Pavel Pavlovitch grew 
more and more confused.) "Yesterday I met you and thought: 'I've 
never yet seen her in outside, so to say, society, that is, in men's, except 
my own . . .  .' A stupid idea; I feel that myself now; unnecessary. I 
expected too much •
.
.
 it's my horrible character . . . .  " 
He suddenly raised his head and flushed crimson. 
"Can he be telling the whole truth?" V elchaninov was petrified with 
surpnse. 
"Well, and what then ?" he asked. 
Pavel Pavlovitch gave a sugary and, as it were, crafty smile. 
"It's only charming childishness! It's all those girl friends! Only 

442 
The Short Novels of Vostoevsky 
forgive me for my stupid behaviour before you to-day, Alexey Ivanov­
itch; I never will again; and indeed it will never happen again." 
"And I shan't be there again," said Velchaninov, with a smile. 
"That's partly what I mean." 
V elchaninov felt a little piqued. 
"But I'm not the only man in the world, you know," he observed 
irritably. 
Pavel Pavlovitch .flushed again. 
"It's sad for me to hear that, Alexey Ivanovitch, and, believe me, 
I've such a respect for Nadyezhda Fedosyevna . . .  " 
"Excuse me, excuse me, I didn't mean anything; it only seems a 
iittle strange to me that you have such an exaggerated idea of my 
attractions . . .  and . . .  such genuine confidence in me." 
"I had such confidence just because it was after all . . .  that happened 
in the past." 
"Then if so, you look upon me even now as a most honourable 
man ?" said Velchaninov, suddenly halting. 
At another time he would have been horrified at the naivete of his 
own question. 
"I always thought you so," said Pavel Pavlovitch, dropping his eyes. 
"\Vhy, of course . . . . I didn't mean that; that is, not in that sense. 
I only meant to say that, in spite of any . . .  preconceptions . . .  " 
"Yes, in spite of preconceptions." 
"When you came to Petersburg?" Velchaninov could not resist 
asking, though he felt how utterly monstrous was his curiosity. 
"When I came to Petersburg, too, I looked upon you as the most 
honourable of men. I always respected you, Alexey Ivanovitch." 
Pavel Pavlovitch raised his eyes and looked candidly, without a trace 
of embarrassment, at his opponent. Velchaninov was suddenly panic­
stricken; he was not at all anxious that anything should happen, or 
that anything should overstep a certain line, especially as he had 
provoked it. 
"I loved you, Alexey Ivanovitch," Pavel Pavlovitch articulated, as 
though he had suddenly made up his mind to speak, "and all that year 
at T- I loved you. You did not notice it," he went on, in a voice 
that quivered, to Velchaninov's positive horror; "I was too insignifi­
cant, compared with you, to let you see it. And there was no need, 
indeed, perhaps. And I've thought of you all these nine years, because 
there has never been another year in my life like that one." (Pavel 
Pavlovitch's eyes began to glisten.) "I remembered many of your 
phrases and sayings, your thoughts. I always thought of you as a 

The eternal Husband 
443 
man with a passion for every noble feeling, a man of education, of the 
highest education and of ideas: 'Great ideas spring not so much from 
noble intelligence as from noble feeling.' You said that yourself; per­
haps you've forgotten it, but I remembered it. I always looked on you, 
therefore, as a man of noble feeling . . .  and therefore believed in you 
-in spite of anything . .  .'' 
His chin suddenly began quivering. Velchaninov was in absolute 
terror; this unexpected tone must be cut short at all costs. 
"That's enough, Pavel Pavlovitch, please," he muttered, flushing and 
irritably impatient. "And why," he screamed suddenly, "why do you 
fasten upon a man when he is nervous and ill, when he is almost 
delirious, and drag him into this darkness . . .  when it's . . .  when it's 
-nothing but delusion, mirage, and falsity, and shameful, and un­
natural, and-exaggerated-and that's what's worst, that's what's most 
shameful-that it is so exaggerated! And it's all nonsense; we are 
both vicious, underground, loathsome people. . . .  And if you like 
I'll prove that you don't like me at all, but hate me with all your 
might, and that you're lying, though you don't know it; you insisted 
on taking me there, not with the absurd object of testing your future 
bride (what an idea!) ; you saw me yesterday and felt vindictive, and 
took me there to show me and say to me, 'See what a prize! She will 
be mine; do your worst now!' You challenged me, perhaps you didn't 
know it yourself; that's how it was, for that's what you were feeling 
. . .  and without hating me you couldn't have challenged me like 
that; and so you hate me!" 
He rushed about the room as he shouted this. What harassed and 
mortified him most of all was the humiliating consciousness that he 
was demeaning himself so far to Pavel Pavlovitch. 
"I wanted to be reconciled with you, Alexey Ivanovitch!" the other 
articulated suddenly, in a rapid whisper, and his chin began twitching 
again. 
Velchaninov was overcome by furious rage, as though no one had 
ever insulted him so much. 
"I tell you again," he yelled, "that you're fastening upon a man 
who's nervous and ill . . .  that you're fastening upon him to extort 
something monstrous from him in delirium! We . . .  we are men of 
different worlds, understand that, and . . .  and . . .  between us lies a 
grave!" he added in a furious whisper, and suddenly realized what 
he had done . . . .  
"And how do you know"-Pavel Pavlovitch's face was suddenly 
pale and distorted-"how do you know what that little grave here 

44 
'I he Short 'Novels of 7Jostoevsky 
means 
for me!" he cried, stepping up to Velchaninov with a 
ridiculous but horrible gesture, pressed his fist against his heart. "I 
know that little grave here, and we both stand at the side of that little 
grave, but on my side there is more than on yours, more . . .  " he whis­
pered as though in delirium, still thumping at his heart with his fist, 
" 
, 
more, more, more . . .  
Suddenly an extraordinarily loud ring at the door brought both of 
them to their senses. The bell rang so violently that it seemed as though 
some one had vowed to break it at the first pull. 
"People don't ring like that to see me," said Velchaninov in per­
plexity. 
"Nor to see me either," Pavel Pavlovitch whispered timidly, recov­
ering himself too, and at once turning into the old Pavel Pavlovitch 
a gam. 
Velchaninov scowled and went to open the door. 
"M. Velchaninov, if I'm not mistaken?" they heard in a ringing, 
youthful, and exceptionally self-confident voice in the passage. 
"What is it?" 
"I have trustworthy information," continued the ringing voice, "that 
a certain Trusotsky is with you at this moment. I must see him 
instantly." 
It would certainly have pleased Velchaninov at that moment to have 
given the self-confident young gentleman a vigorous kick and to have 
sent him flying out on the stairs; but he thought a moment, moved 
aside and let him in. 
"Here is M. T rusotsky; come in. . . ." 
Chapter 14 
SASHENKA AND NADENKA 
THERE walked into the room a very young man, of about nine­
teen, perhaps even less-to judge from the youthfulness of his hand­
some, self-confident, upturned face. He was fairly well dressed, or at 
any rate his clothes looked well on him; in height he was a little above 
the average; the black hair that hung in thick locks about his head, 
and the big, bold, dark eyes were particularly conspicuous in his face. 
Except that his nose was rather broad and turned up, he was a hand­
some fellow. He walked in solemnly. 

The eternal Husband 
445 
"I believe I have the opportunity of conversing with M. Trusotsky," 
he pronounced in a measured tone, emphasizing with peculiar relish 
the word "opportunity"-giving him to understand thereby that he did 
not consider it either an "honour" or a "pleasure" to converse with M. 
Trusotsky. 
Velchaninov began to grasp the position; something seemed to be 
.iawning on Pavel Pavlovitch too. There was a look of uneasiness in 
his face; but he stood his ground. 
"Not having the honour of your acquaintance," he answered ma­
jestically, "I imagine that you cannot have business of any sort with 
me. 
" 
"You had better hear me first and then give your opinion," the 
young man admonished him self-confidently, and, taking out a tor­
toiseshell lorgnette hanging on a cord, he examined through it the 
bottle of champagne standing on the table. When he had calmly 
completed his scrutiny of the bottle, he folded up the lorgnette and 
turned to Pavel Pavlovitch again. 
"Alexandr Lobov." 
"What do you mean by Alexandr Lobov?" 
"That's me. Haven't you heard of me?" 
"No." 
"How should you, though ? I've come on important business that 
chiefly concerns you. Allow me to sit down; I'm tired." 
"Sit down," Velchaninov urged him; but the young man succeeded 
in sitting down before being invited to do so. 
In spite of the increasing pain in his chest Velchaninov was inter­
ested in this impudent youth. In his pretty, childlike and rosy face, 
he fancied a remote resemblance to Nadya. 
"You sit down too," the lad suggested to Pavel Pavlovitch, motion­
ing him with a careless nod of the head to a seat opposite. 
"Don't trouble; I'll stand." 
"You'll be tired. You needn't go away, M. Velchaninov, if you like 
to stay." 
"I've nowhere to go; I'm at home." 
"As you please. I must confess I should prefer you to be present 
while I have an explanation with this gentleman. Nadyezhda Fedosy­
evna gave me rather a flattering account of you." 
"Bah! When had she time to do that?" 
"Why, just now after you left; I've just come from there, too. I've 
something to tell you, M. Trusotsky." He turned round to Pavel 
Pavlovitch, who was standing. "We-that is, Nadyezhda Fedosy-

446 
'I he Short Novels of Vostoev.d(y 
evna and I," he went on, letting his words drop one by one as 
he lolled carelessly in the arm-chair; "we've cared for each other for 
ever so long, and have given each other our promise. You are in our 
way now; I've come to suggest that you should clear out. Will it suit 
you to act on my suggestion?" 
Pavel Pavlovitch positively reeled; he turned pale, but a diabolical 
smile came on to his lips at once. 
"No, it won't suit me at all," he rapped out laconically. 
"You don't say so!" The young man turned round in the arm-chair 
and crossed one leg over the other. 
"I don't know who it is I'm speaking to," added Pavel Pavlovitch. 
"I believe, indeed, that there's no object in continuing our conversa­
tion." 
Uttering this, he too thought fit to sit down. 
"I told you you would be tired," the youth observed casually. "I 
told you j ust now that my name is Alexandr Lobov, and that 
Nadyezhda and I are pledged to one another; consequently you can't 
say, as you did j ust now, that you don't know who it is you have to 
deal with; you can't imagine, either, that I have nothing more to say 
to you; putting myself aside, it concerns Nadyezhda Fedosyevna, whom 
you persist in pestering so insolently. And that alone is sufficient 
reason for an explanation." 
All this he let drop, word by word, through his closed lips, with the 
air of a coxcomb who did not deign to articulate his words; he even 
drew out his lorgnette again and turned it upon something while he 
was talking. 
"Excuse me, young man!" Pavel Pavlovitch exclaimed irritably; 
but the young man instantly snubbed him. 
"At any other time I should certainly forbid your calling me 'young 
man,' but now you will admit that my youth is my chief advantage 
over you, and that you would have been jolly glad, this morning, for 
instance, when you presented your bracelet, to be a tiny bit younger." 
"Ah, you sprat!" murmured Velchaninov. 
"In any case, sir," Pavel Pavlovitch corrected himself with dignity, 
"I do not consider the reasons you have advanced-most unseemly 
and dubious reasons-sufficient to continue discussing them. I see that 
this is all a foolish and childish business. To-morrow I'll make in­
quiries of my highly respected friend, Fedosey Semyonovitch; and 
now I beg you to retire." 
"Do you see the sort of man he is?" the youth cried at once, unable 
to sustain his previous tone, and turning hotly to Velchaninov. "It's not 

'I he eternal Husband 
447 
enough for him that they've put out their tongues at him to-day and 
kicked him out-he'll go to-morrow to tell tales of us to the old man! 
Won't you prove by that, you obstinate man, that you want to take 
the girl by force, that you want to buy her of people in their dotage 
who in our barbarous state of society retain authority over her? I 
should have thought it would have been enough for you that she's 
shown you how she despises you; why, she gave you back your inde­
cent present to-day, your bracelet. What more you you want?" 
"No one has returned me a bracelet, and it's utterly out of the 
question!" Pavel Pavlovitch said, startled. 
"Out of the question? Do you mean to say M. Velchaninov has not 
given it you?" 
"Damnation take you!" thought Velchaninov. "Nadyezhda Fedosy­
evna did commission me," he said, frowning, "to give you this case, 
Pavel Pavlovitch. I refused to take it, but she begged me . . .  here it is 
•
.
.
 I'm annoyed . . . .  " 
He took out the case and, much embarrassed, laid it before Pavel 
Pavlovitch, who was struck dumb. 
"Why didn't you give it to him before?" said the young gentleman, 
addressing Velchaninov severely. 
"As you see, I hadn't managed to do so yet," the latter replied, 
frowning. 
"That's queer." 
"Wha-a-at?" 
"You must admit it's queer, anyway. Though I am ready to allow 
there may be a misunderstanding." 
Velchaninov felt a great inclination to get up at once and pull the 
saucy urchin's ears, but he could not refrain from bursting out laugh­
ing in his face; the boy promptly laughed too. It was very different 
with Pavel Pavlovitch; if Velchaninov could have observed the terri­
ble look he turned upon him when Velchaninov was laughing at 
Lobov, he would have realized that at that instant the man was passing 
through a momentous crisis. . . . But though Velchaninov did not 
see that glance, he felt that he must stand by Pavel Pavlovitch. 
"Listen, M. Lobov," he began in a friendly tone; "without entering 
into discussion of other reasons upon which I don't care to touch, I 
would only point out to you that, in paying his addresses to Nadyezhda 
Fedosyevna, Pavel Pavlovitch can in any case boast of certain qualifi. 
cations: in the first place, the fact that everything about him is known 
to that estimable family; in the second place, his excellent and highly 
respectable position; finally, his fortune, and consequently: he must 

448 
The Short N.ovels of 'DostoevskY 
naturally be surprised at the sight of a rival like you-a man, perhaps, 
of great merit, but so exceedingly young that he can hardly take you 
for a serious suitor . . .  and so he is justified in asking you to retire." 
"What do you mean by 'exceedingly young'? I was nineteen last 
month. By law I could have been married long ago. That's all I can say." 
"But what father could bring himself to give you his daughter now 
-even if you were to be a millionaire in the future or some benefactor 
of mankind? At nineteen a man cannot even answer for himself, and 
you are ready to take the responsibility of another person's future, that 
is, the future of another child like yourself! Why, do you think it's 
quite honourable? I have ventured to speak frankly to you because you 
appealed to me just now as an intermediary between you and Pavel 
Pavlovitch." 
"Ah, to be sure, his name's Pavel Pavlovitch!" observed the boy; 
"how is it I kept fancying that he was Vassily Petrovitch? Well," he 
went on, addressing Velchaninov, "you haven't surprised me in the 
least; I knew you were all like that! It's odd, though, that they talked 
of you as a man rather new in a way. But that's all nonsense, though ; 
far from there being anything dishonourable on my part, as you so 
freely expressed it, it's the very opposite, as I hope to make you see: 
to begin with, we've pledged our word to each other, and, what's more, 
I've promised her, before two witnesses, that if she ever falls in love 
with some one else, or simply regrets ha\·ing married me and wants 
to separate, I will at once give her a formal declaration of my infidelity 
-and so will support her petition for divorce. \Vhat's more, in case 
I should later on go back upon my word and refuse to give her that 
declaration, I will give her as security on our wedding-day an I 0 U 
for a hundred thousand roubles, so that if I should be perverse about 
the declaration she can at once change my I 0 U and me into the 
bargain! In that way everything will be secured and I shouldn't be 
risking anybody's future. That's the first point." 
"I bet that fellow-What's-his-name?-Predposylov invented that for 
you!" cried Velchaninov. 
"He, he, he!" chuckled Pavel Pavlovitch viciously. 
"\Vhat's that gentleman sniggering about? You guessed right, it was 
Predposylov's idea; and you must admit it was a shrewd one. The 
absurd law is completely paralyzed by it. Of course, I intend to love 
her for ever. and she laughs tremendously; at the same time it's in­
genious, and you must admit that it's honourable, and that it's not 
every man who would consent to do it." 

'l he eternal Husband 
449 
"To my thinking, so far from being honourable, it's positively dis­
gusting." 
The young man shrugged his shoulders. 
"Again you don't surprise me," he observed, after a brief silence. 
"I have given up being surprised at that sort of thing long ago. 
Predposylov would tell you flatly that your lack of comprehension of 
the most natural things is due to the corruption of your most ordinary 
feelings and ideas by a long life spent idly and absurdly. But possibly 
we don't understand one another; they spoke well of you anyway . . .  
you're fifty, I suppose, aren't you?" 
"Kindly keep to the point." 
"Excuse my indiscretion and don't be annoyed; I didn't mean any­
thing. I will continue: I'm by no means a future millionaire, as you 
expressed it (and what an idea!) ; I ha,·e nothing but what I stand up 
in, but I have complete confidence in my future. I shan't be a hero or 
a benefactor of mankind either, but I shall keep myself and my wife. 
Of course, I've nothing now; I was brought up in their house, you see, 
from childhood . . . .  " 
"How was that?" 
"\Veil, you see, I'm the son of a distant relation of Zahlebinin's wife, 
and when all my people died and left me at eight years old, the old 
man took me in and afterwards sent me to the high school. He's really 
a good-natured man, if you care to know . . . .  
" 
"I know that." 
"Yes; a bit antiquated in his ideas, but kind-hearted. It's a long 
time now, of course, since I was under his guardianship; I want to 
earn my own living, and to owe no one anything." 
"How long have you been independent?" Velchaninov inquired. 
"\Vhy, four months." 
"Oh, well, one can understand it then: you've been friends from 
childhood! Well, have you a situation, then ?" 
"Yes, a private situation, in a notary's office, for twenty-five roubles 
a month. Of course, only for the time, but when I made my offer I 
hadn't even that. I was serving on the railway then for ten roubles 
a month, but only for the time." 
"Do you mean to say you've made an offer of marriage?" 
"Yes, a formal offer, and ever so long ago-over three weeks." 
"Well, and what happened?" 
"The old man laughed awfully at first, and then was awfully angry, 
and locked her up upstairs. But Nadya held out heroically. But that 
was all because he was a bit crusty with me before, for throwing up 

450 
7' he Short N.ovels of 'DostoevskY 
the berth in his deparunent which he had got me into four months 
ago, before I went to the railway. He's a capital old chap, I tell you 
again, simple and jolly at home, but you can't fancy what he's like as 
soon as he's in his office! He's like a Jove enthroned! I naturally let 
him know that I was not attracted by his manners there, but the chief 
trouble was through the head clerk's assistant : that gentleman took it 
into his head that I had been 'rude' to him, and all that I said to him 
was that he was undeveloped. I threw them all up, and now I'm at a 
notary's." 
"And did you get much in the department?" 
"Oh, I was not on the regular staff! The old man used to give me 
an allowance too; I tell you he's a good sort, but we shan't give in, 
all the same. Of course, twenty-five roubles is not enough to support 
a wife, but I hope soon to have a share in the management of Count 
Zavileysky's neglected estates, and then to rise to three tbousand straight 
off, or else I shall become a lawyer. People are always going to law 
nowadays . . . .  Bah! What a clap of thunder! There'll be a storm; it's 
a good thing I managed to get here before it; I came on foot, I ran 
almost all the way." 
"But, excuse me, if so, when did you manage to talk things over with 
Nadyezhda Fedosyevna, especially if they refuse you admittance?" 
"Why, one can talk over the fence! Did you notice that red-haired 
girl?" he laughed. "She's very active on our side, and Marie Nikititchna 
too; ah, she's a serpent, that Marie Nikititchna! . . .  Why do you 
wince? Are you afraid of the thunder?" 
"No, I'm unwell, very unwell. . . .  " 
Velchaninov, in positive agony from the pain in his chest, got up 
and tried to walk about the room. 
"Oh, then, of course, I'm in your way . . . .  Don't be uneasy, I'm just 
going!" 
And the youth jumped up from his seat. 
"You're not in the way; it's no matter," said Velchaninov cour­
teously. 
"How can it be no matter? 'When Kobylnikov had a stomach-ache' 
. . .  do you remember in Shtchedrin? Are you fond of Shtchedrin?" 
"Yes." 
"So am I. Well, Vassily . . .  oh, hang it, Pavel Pavlovitch, let's 
finish!" He turned, almost laughing, to Pavel Pavlovitch. "I will once 
more for your comprehension formulate the question: do you consent 
to make a formal withdrawal of all pretensions in regard to Nadyezhda 

'1 he eternal Husband 
451 
Fedosyevna to the old people to-morrow, in my presence?" 
"I certainly do not." Pavel Pavlovitch, too, got up from his seat with 
an impatient and exasperated air. "And I beg you once more to spare 
me . . .  for alf this is childish and silly." 
"You had better look out." The youth held up a warning finger 
with a supercilious smile. "Don't make a mistake in your calculations! 
Do you know what such a mistake leads to? I warn you that in nine 
months' time, when you have had all your expense and trouble, and 
you come back here, you'll be forced to give up Nadyezhda Fedosyevna, 
or if you don't give her up it will be the worse for you; that's what 
will be the end of it! I must warn you that you're like the dog in the 
manger-excuse me, it's only a comparison-getting nothing yourself 
and preventing others. From motives of humanity I tell you again : 
reflect upon it, force yourself for once in your life to reflect rationally." 
"I beg you to spare me your sermonizing!" cried Pavel Pavlovitch 
furiously; "and as for your nasty insinuations, I shall take measures 
to-morrow, severe measures!" 
"Nasty insinuations? What do you mean by that? You're nasty 
yourself, if that's what you've got in your head. However, I agree to 
wait till to-morrow, but if . . .  Ah, thunder again! Good-bye; very glad 
to make your acquaintance"-he nodded to Velchaninov and ran off, 
apparently in haste to get back before the storm and not to get caught 
in the rain. 
Chapter 15 
THE ACCOUNT I S  SETTLED 
You see? You see?" Pavel Pavlovitch skipped up to Velchaninov as 
son as the youth had departed. 
"Yes; you've no luck!" said Velchaninov carelessly. 
He would not have said those words had he not been tortured and 
exasperated by the pain in his chest, which was growing more and 
more acute. 
"It was because you felt for me, you didn't give me back the bracelet, 
wasn't it?" 
"I hadn't time .
•
•
•
 
" 

452 
'!he Short N.otels of 1Jostoet1sky 
"You felt for me from your heart, like a true friend?" 
"Oh yes, I felt for you," said Velchaninov, in exasperation. 
He told him brieRy, however, how the bracelet had been returned 
to him, and how Nadyezhda Fedosyevna had almost ·forced him to 
assist in returning it 
.
.
.
•
 
"You understand that nothing else would have induced me to take 
it; I've had unpleasantness enough apart from that!" 
"You were fascinated and took it?" sniggered Pavel Pavlovitch. 
"That's stupid on your part; however, I must excuse you. You saw 
for yourself j ust now that I'm not the leading person, that there are 
others in this affair." 
"At the same time you were fascinated." 
Pavel Pavlovitch sat down and filled up his glass. 
"Do you imagine I'd give way to that wretched boy? I'll make mince­
meat of him, so there! I'll go over to-morrow and polish him off. 
We'll smoke out that spirit from the nursery." 
He emptied his glass almost at a gulp and filled it again ; he began, 
in fact, to behave in an unusually free and easy way. 
"Ah, Nadenka and Sashenka, the sweet little darlings, he-he-he!" 
He was beside himself with anger. There came another louder clap 
of thunder, followed by a blinding flash of lightning, and the rain 
began streaming in bucketfuls. Pavel Pavlovitch got up and closed the 
open window. 
"He asked you whether you were afraid of the thunder, he-he. 
Velchaninov afraid of thunder! Kobylnikov-what was it-Kobylni­
kov . . .  and what about being fifty too-eh? Do you remember?" 
Pavel Pavlovitch sneered diabolically. 
"You've established yourself here, it seems! "  observed Velchaninov, 
hardly able to articulate the words for the pain in his chest. "I'll lie 
down, you can do what you like." 
"Why, you couldn't turn a dog out in weather like this!" Pavel 
Pavlovitch retorted in an aggrieved tone, seeming almost pleased, how­
ever, at having an excuse for feeling aggrieved. 
"All right, sit down, drink . . .  stay the night, if you like!" muttered 
Velchaninov. He stretched himself on the sofa and uttered a faint 
groan. 
"Stay the night? And you won't be afraid?" 
"What of?" said Velchaninov, suddenly raising his head. 
"Oh, nothing. Last time you were so frightened, or was it my 
fancy?" 

'I he eternal Husband 
453 
"You're stupid!" Velchaninov could not help saying. He turned his 
head to the wall angrily. 
"All right," responded Pavel Pavlovitch. 
The sick man fell asleep suddenly, a minute after lying down. The 
unnatural strain upon him that day in the shattered state of his health 
had brought on a sudden crisis, and he was as weak as a child. But 
the pain asserted itself again and got the upper hand of sleep and 
weariness; an hour later he woke up and painfully got up from the 
sofa. The storm had subsided; the room was full of tobacco smoke, on 
the table stood an empty bottle, and Pavel Pavlovitch was asleep on 
another sofa. He was lying on his back, with his head on the sofa 
cushion, fully dressed and with his boots on. His lorgnette had slipped 
out of his pocket and was hanging down almost to the floor. His hat 
was lying on the ground beside it. Velchaninov looked at him morosely 
and did not attempt to wake him. Writhing with pain and pacing 
about the room, for he could no longer bear to lie down, he moaned 
and brooded over his agonies. 
He was afraid of that pain in his chest, and not without reason. He 
had been liable to these attacks for a very long time, but they had only 
occurred at intervals of a year or two. He knew that they came from 
the liver. At first a dull, not acute, but irritating feeling of oppressior. 
was, as it were, concentrated at some point in the chest, under the 
shoulder-blade or higher up. Continually increasing, sometimes for 
ten hours at a stretch, the pain at last would reach such a pitch, the 
oppression would become so insupportable, that the sufferer began to 
have visions of dying. On his last attack, a year before, he was, when 
the pain ceased after ten hours of suffering, so weak that he could 
scarcely move his hands as he lay in bed, and the doctor had allowed 
him to take nothing for the whole day but a few teaspoonfuls of weak 
tea and of bread soaked in broth, like a tiny baby. The attacks were 
brought on by different things, but never occurred except when his 
nerves were out of order. It was strange, too, how the attack passed 
off; sometimes it was possible to arrest it at the very beginning, during 
the first half-hour, by simple compresses, and it would pass away 
completely at once; sometimes, as on his last attack, nothing was of 
any use, and the pain only subsided after numerous and continually 
recurring paroxysms of vomiting. The doctor confessed afterwards that 
he believed it to be a case of poisoning. It was a long time to wait till 
morning, and he didn't want to send for the doctor at night; besides, 
he didn't like doctors. At last he could not control himself and began 

454 
'!he Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
moaning aloud. His groans waked Pavel Pavlovitch; he sat up on the 
sofa, and for some time listened with alarm and bewilderment, watch­
ing Velchaninov, who was almost running backwards and forwards 
through the two rooms. The bottle of champagne had had a great 
effect upon him, evidently more than usual, and it was some time 
before he could collect himself. At last he grasped the position and 
rushed to Velchaninov, who mumbled something in reply to him. 
"It's the liver, I know it!" cried Pavel Pavlovitch, becoming ex­
tremely animated all at once. "Pyotr Kuzmitch Polosuhin used to 
suffer just the same from liver. You ought to have compresses. Pyotr 
Kuzmitch always had compresses . . . . One may die of it! Shall I run 
for Mavra ?" 
"No need, no need!" Velch:minov waved him off irritably. "I want 
nothing." 
But Pavel Pavlovitch, goodness knows why, seemed beside himself, 
as though it were a question of saving his own son. Without heeding 
Velchaninov's protests, he insisted on the necessity of compresses and 
also of two or three cups of weak tea to be drunk on the spot, "and 
not simply hot, but boiling!" He ran to Mavra, without waiting for 
permission, with her laid a fire in the kitchen, which always stood 
empty, and blew up the samovar; at the same time he succeeded in 
getting the sick man to bed, took off his clothes, wrapped him up in 
a quilt, and within twenty minutes had prepared tea and compresses. 
"This is a hot plate, scalding hot!" he said, almost ecstatically, apply­
ing the heated plate, wrapped up in a napkin, on Velchaninov's aching 
chest. "There are no other compresses, and plates, I swear on my 
honour, will be even better : they were laid on Pyotr Kuzmitch, I saw 
it with my own eyes, and did it with my own hands. One may die of 
it, you know. Drink your tea, swallow it; never mind about scalding 
yourself; life is too precious . . .  for one to be squeamish." 
He quite flustered Mavra, who was half asleep; the plates were 
changed every three or four minutes. After the third plate and the 
second cup of tea, swallowed at a gulp, Velchaninov felt a sudden relief. 
"If once they've shifted the pain, thank God, it's a good sign!" cried 
Pavel Pavlovitch, and he ran joyfully to fetch a fresh plate and a fresh 
cup of tea. 
"If only we can ease the pain. If only we can keep it under!" he 
kept repeating. 
Half an hour later the pain was much less, but the sick man was so 
exhausted that in spite of Pavel Pavlovitch's entreaties he refused to 

'I h% etłnal Husband 
455 
"put up with just one more nice little plate." He was so weak that 
everything was dark before his eyes. 
"Sleep, sleep," he repeated in a faint voice. 
"To be sure," Pavel Pavlovitch assented. 
"You'll stay the night . . . .  What time is it?" 
"It's nearly two o'clock, it's a quarter to." 
"You'll stay the night." 
"I will, I will." 
A minute later the sick man called Pavel Pavlovitch again. 
"You, you," he muttered, when the latter had run up and was bend­
ing over him; "you are better than I am! I understand it all, all 
.
.
.
• 
Thank you." 
"Sleep, sleep," whispered Pavel Pavlovitch, and he hastened on tip­
toe to his sofa. 
As he fell asleep the invalid heard Pavel Pavlovitch noiselessly 
making up a bed for himself and taking off his clothes. Finally, putting 
out the candle, and almost holding his breath for fear of waking the 
patient, he stretched himself on his sofa. 
There is no doubt that Velchaninov did sleep and that he fell asleep 
very soon after the candle was put out; he remembered this clearly 
afterwards. But all the time he was asleep, up to the very moment that 
he woke up, he dreamed that he was not asleep, and that in spite of his 
exhaustion he could not get to sleep. At last he began to dream that 
he was in a sort of waking delirium, and that he could not drive 
away the phantoms that crowded about him, although he was fully 
conscious that it was only delirium and not reality. The phantoms 
were all familiar figures; his room seemed to be full of people; and 
the door into the passage stood open; people were coming in in 
crowds and thronging the stairs. At the table, which was set in the 
middle of the room, there was sitting one man໕xactly as in the 
similar dream he had had a month before. Just as in that dream, this 
man sat with his elbows on the table and would not speak; but this 
time he was wearing a round hat with crape on it. "What! could it 
have been Pavel Pavlovitch that time too?" Velchaninov thought, but, 
glancing at the face of the silent man, he convinced himself that it was 
some one quite different. "Why has he got crape on ?" Velchaninov 
wondered. The noise, the talking and the shouting of the people 
crowding round the table, was awful. These people seemed to be 
even more intensely exasperated against V elchaninov than in the pre­
vious dream; they shook their fists at him, and shouted something to 
him with all their might, but what it was exactly he could not make 

456 
The Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
out. "But it's delirium, of course, I know it's delirium!" he thought; 
"I know I couldn't get to sleep and that I've got up now, because it 
made me too wretched to go on lying down . . . .  " But the shouts, the 
people, their gestures were so lifelike, so real, that sometimes he was 
seized by doubt: "Can this be really delirium ? Good heavens! What 
do these people want of me? But . . .  if it were not an hallucination, 
would it be possible that such a clamour should not have waked Pavel 
Pavlovitch all this time? There he is asleep on the sofa!" At last some­
thing suddenly happened again, j ust as in that other dream; all of 
them made a rush for the stairs and they were closely packed in the 
doorway, for there was another crowd forcing its way into the room. 
These people were bringing something in with them, something big 
and heavy; he could hear how heavily the steps of those carrying it 
sounded on the stairs and how hurriedly their panting voices called 
to one another. All the people in the room shouted : "They're bringing 
it, they're bringing it"-all eyes were flashing and fixed on V elchani­
nov; all of them pointed towards the stairs, menacing and triumphant. 
Feeling no further doubt that it was reality and not hallucination, he 
stood on tiptoe so as to peep over the people's heads and find out as 
soon as possible what they were bringing up the stairs. His heart was 
beating, beating, beating, and suddenly, exactly as in that first dream, 
he heard three violent rings at the bell. And again it was so distinct, 
so real, so unmistakable a ring at the bell, that it could not be only a 
dream . . . .  
But he did not rush to the door as he had done on awaking then. 
What idea guided his first movement and whether he had any idea at 
the moment it is impossible to say, but some one seemed to prompt 
him what he must do: he leapt out of bed and, with his hands 
stretched out before him as though to defend himself and ward off 
an attack, rushed straight towards the place where Pavel Pavlovitch 
was asleep. His hands instantly came into contact with other hands, 
stretched out above him, and he clutched them tight; so, some one 
already stood bending over him. The curtains were drawn, but 
it was not quite dark, for a faint light came from the other room 
where there were no such curtains. Suddenly, with an acute pain, 
something cut the palm and fingers of his left hand, and he instantly 
realized that he had clutched the blade of a knife or razor and was 
grasping it tight in his hand . . . .  And at the same moment something 
fell heavily on the floor with a thud. 
Velchaninov was perhaps three times as strong as Pavel Pavlovitch, 
yet the struggle between them lasted a long while, fully three minutes. 

'!he eternal Husband 
457 
He soon got him down on the Aoor and bent his arms back behind 
him, but for some reason he felt he must tie his hands behind him. 
Holding the murderer with his wounded left hand, he began with his 
right fumbling for the cord of the window curtain and for a long time 
could not find it, but at last got hold of it and tore it from the window. 
He wondered himself afterwards at the immense effort required to do 
this. During those three minutes neither of them uttered a word; 
nothing was audible but their heavy breathing and the muffied sounds 
of their struggling. Having at last twisted Pavel Pavlovitch's arms be­
hind him and tied them together, Velchaninov left him on the Aoor, 
got up, drew the curtain from the window and pulled up the blind. 
It was already light in the deserted street. Opening the window, he 
stood for some moments draw;ing in deep breaths of fresh air. It was 
a little past four. Shutting the window, he went hurriedly to the cup­
board, took out a clean towel and bound it tightly round his left hand 
to stop the bleeding. At his feet an open razor was lying on the carpet; 
he picked it up, shut it, put it in the razor-case, which had been left 
forgotten since the morning on the little table beside Pavel Pavlovitch's 
sofa, and locked it up in his bureau. And, only when he had done all 
that, he went up to Pavel Pavlovitch and began to examine him. 
Meantime, the latter had with an effort got up from the floor, and 
seated himself in an arm-chair. He had nothing on but his shirt, not 
even his boots. The back and the sleeves of his shirt were soaked with 
blood; but the blood was not his own, it came from Velchaninov's 
wounded hand. Of course it was Pavel Pavlovitch, but any one meet­
ing him by chance might almost have failed to recognize him at the 
minute, so changed was his whole appearance. He was sitting awk­
wardly upright in the arm-chair, owing to his hands being tied behind 
his back, his face looked distorted, exhausted and greenish, and he 
quivered all over from time to time. He looked at Velchaninov fixedly, 
but with lustreless, unseeing eyes. All at once he smiled vacantly, and, 
nodding towards a bottle of water that stood on the table, he said in 
a meek half-whisper-
"\Vater, I should like some water." 
Velchaninov filled a glass and began holding it for him to drink. 
Pavel Pavlovitch bent down greedily to the water; after three gulps he 
raised his head and looked intently into the face of Velchaninov, who 
was standing beside him with the glass in his hand, but without utter­
ing a word he fell to drinking again. When he had finished he sighed 
deeply. Velchaninov took his pillow, seized his outer garments and 
went into the other room, locking Pavel Pavlovitch into the first room. 

458 
7' he Short Novels of Vostoevsky 
The pain had passed off completely, but he was conscious of extreme 
weakness again after the momentary effort in which he had displayed 
an unaccountable strength. He tried to reflect upon what had hap­
pened, but his thoughts were hardly coherent, the shock had been too 
great. Sometimes there was a dimness before his eyes lasting for ten 
minutes or so, then he would start, wake up, recollect everything, re­
member his smarting hand bound up in a blood-stained towel, and 
would fall to thinking greedily, feverishly. He came to one distinct con­
clusion-that is, that Pavel Pavlovitch certainly had meant to cut his 
throat, but that perhaps only a quarter of an hour before had not 
known that he would do it. The razor-case had perhaps merely caught 
his eye the evening before, and, without arousing any thought of it 
at the time, had remained in his memory. (The razors were always 
locked up in the bureau, and only the morning before, Velchaninov 
had taken them out to shave round his moustache and whiskers, as he 
sometimes did.) 
"If he had long been intending to murder me he would have got a 
knife or pistol ready; he would not have reckoned on my razor, which 
he had never seen till yesterday evening," was one reflection he made 
among others. 
It struck six o'clock at last; Velchaninov roused himself, dressed, 
and went in to Pavel Pavlovitch. Opening the door, he could not 
understand why he had locked Pavel Pavlovitch in, instead of turning 
him out of the house. To his surprise, the criminal was fully dressed; 
most likely he had found some way of untying his hands. He was 
sitting in the arm-chair, but got up at once when Velchaninov went in. 
His hat was already in his hand. His uneasy eyes seemed in haste to 
say-
"Don't begin talking; it's no use beginning; there's no need to talk." 
"Go," said Velchaninov. "Take your bracelet," he added, calling 
after him. 
Pavel Pavlovitch turned back from the door, took the case with the 
bracelet from the table, put it in his pocket and went out on the stairs. 
Velchaninov stood at the door to lock it behind him. Their eyes met 
for the last time; Pavel Pavlovitch stopped suddenly, for five seconds 
the two looked into each other's eyes-as though hesitating; finally 
Velchaninov waved his hand faintly. 
"Well, go!" he said in a low voice, and locked the door. 

'!he eternal Htsband 
459 
Chapter 16 
ANALYSIS 
A FEELING of immense, extraordinary relief took possession of 
him; something was over, was settled; an awful weight of depression 
had vanished and was dissipated for ever. So it seemed to him. It had 
lasted for five weeks. He raised his hand, looked at the towel soaked 
with blood and muttered to himself: "Yes, now everything is abso­
lutely at an end!" And all that morning, for the first time in three 
weeks, he scarcely thought of Liza-as though that blood from his cut 
fingers could "settle his account" even with that misery. 
He recognized clearly that he had escaped a terrible danger. "These 
people," he thought, "just these people who don't know a minute 
beforehand whether they'll murder a man or not-as soon as they take 
a knife in their trembling hands and feel the hot spurt of blood on 
their fingers don't stick at cutting your throat, but cut off your head, 
'clean off,' as convicts express it. That is so." 
He could not remain at home and went out into the street, feeling 
convinced that he must do something, or something would happen to 
him at once; he walked about the streets and waited. He had an intense 
longing to meet some one, to talk to some one, even to a stranger, and 
it was only that which led him at last to think of a doctor and of the 
necessity of binding up his hand properly. The doctor, an old acquaint­
ance of his, examined the wound, and inquired with interest how it 
could have happened. Velchaninov laughed and was on the point of 
telling him all about it, but restrained himself. The doctor was obliged 
to feel his pulse and, hearing of his attack the night before, persuaded 
him to take some soothing medicine he had at hand. He was reassuring 
about the cuts: "They could have no particularly disagreeable results." 
Velchaninov laughed and began to assure him that they had already 
had the most agreeable results. An almost irresistible desire to tell the 
whole story came over him twice again during that day, on one occa­
sion to a total stranger with whom he entered into conversation at a 
tea-shop. He had never been able to endure entering into conversation 
with strangers in public places before. 
He went into a shop to buy a newspaper; he went to his tailor's and 
ordered a suit. The idea of visiting the Pogoryeltsevs was still distaste-

460 
The Short 'Novels of 'DostoevskY 
ful to him, and he did not think of them, and indeed he could not have 
gone to their villa: he kept expecting something here in the town. He 
dined with enjoyment, he talked to the waiter and to his fellow-diners, 
and drank half a bottle of wine. The possibility of the return of his 
illness of the day before did not occur to him; he was convinced that 
the illness had passed off completely at the moment when, after falling 
asleep so exhausted, he had, an hour and a half later, sprung out of bed 
and thrown his assailant on the floor with such strength. Towards 
evening he began to feel giddy, and at moments was overcome by 
something like the delirium he had had in his sleep. It was dusk when 
he returned home, and he was almost afraid of his room when he 
went into it. It seemed dreadful and uncanny in his flat. He walked 
up and down it several times, and even went into his kitchen, where 
he had scarcely ever been before. "Here they were heating plates yes­
terday," he thought. He locked the door securely and lighted the 
candles earlier than usual. As he locked the door he remembered, half 
an hour before, passing the porter's lodge, he had called Mavra and 
asked her whether Pavel Pavlovitch had come in his absence, as though 
he could possibly have come. 
After locking himself in carefully, he opened the bureau, took out 
the razor-case and opened the razor to look at it again. On the white 
bone handle there were still faint traces of blood. He put the razor back 
in the case and locked it up in the bureau again. He felt sleepy; he 
felt that he must go to bed at once--or "he would not be fit for to­
morrow." He pictured the next day for some reason as a momentous 
and "decisive" day. 
But the same thoughts that had haunted him all day in the street 
kept incessantly and persistently crowding and jostling in his sick 
brain, and he kept thinking, thinking, thinking, and for a long time 
could not get to sleep . . . .  
"If it is settled that he tried to murder me accidentally.'' he went on 
pondering, "had the idea ever entered his head before, if only as a 
dream in a vindictive moment?" 
He decided that question strangely-that "Pavel Pavlovitch did want 
to kill him, but the thought of the murder had never entered his head." 
In short : "Pavel Pavlovitch wanted to kill him, but didn't know he 
wanted to kill him. It's senseless, but that's the truth," thought Vel­
chaninov. "It was not to get a post and it was not on Bagautov's 
account he came here, though he did try to get a post here, and did 
run to see Bagautov and was furious when he died; he thought no 

The eternal Husband 
461 
more of him than a chip. He came here on my account and he came 
here with Liza 
.
.
•
 
"And did I expect that he . . .  would murder me?" He decided that 
he did, that he had expected it from the moment when he saw him in 
the carriage following Bagautov's funeral. "I began, as it were, to 
expect something . . .  but, of course, not that; but, of course, not that 
he would murder me! . . .  
"And can it be that all that was true?" he exclaimed again, suddenly 
raising his head from the pillow and opening his eyes. "All that that 
. . .  madman told me yesterday about his love for me, when his chin 
quivered and he thumped himself on the breast with his fist? 
"It was the absolute truth," he decided, still pondering and analyzing, 
"that Quasimodo from T-- was quite sufficiently stupid and noble 
to fall in love with the lover of his wife, about whom he noticed 
nothing suspicious in twenty years! He had been thinking of me with 
respect, cherishing my memory and brooding over my utterances 
for nine years. Good heavens! and I had no notion of it! He could 
not haYe been lying yesterday! But did he love me yesterday when he 
declared his feeling and said 'Let us settle our account'? Yes, it was 
from hatred that he loved me; that's the strongest of all loves . . .  
"Of course it may have happened, of course it must have happened 
that I made a tremendous impression on him at T--. Tremendous 
and 'gratifying' is just what it was, and it's just with a Schiller like 
that, in the outer form of a Quasimodo, that such a thing could happen! 
He magnified me a hundredfold because I impressed him too much in 
his philosophic solitude . . . .  It would be interesting to know by what 
I impressed him. Perhaps by my clean gloves and my knowing how 
to put them on. Quasimodos are fond of all that is aesthetic. Ough! 
aren't they fond of it! A glove is often quite enough for a noble 
heart, and especially one of these 'eternal husbands.' The rest they 
supply themselves a thousand times, and are ready to fight for you, 
to satisfy your slightest wish. What an opinion he had of my powers 
of fascination! Perhaps it was just my powers of fascination that made 
the most impression on him. And his cry then, 'If that one, too . . .  
whom can one trust!' After that cry one may well become a wild 
beast! . . . 
"H'm! He comes here 'to embrace me and to weep,' as he expressed 
it in the most abject way-that is, he came here to murder me and 
thought he came 'to embrace me and to weep.' . . .  He brought Liza 
too. But, who knows? if I had wept with him, perhaps, really, he 

462 
The Short Novels of 7Jostoevsky 
would have forgiven me, for he had a terrible longing to forgive me! 
. . .  At the first shock all that was changed into drunken antics and 
caricature, and into loathsome, womanish whining over his wrongs. 
(Those horns! those horns he made on his forehead! )  He came drunk 
on purpose to speak out, though he was playing the fool; if he had 
not been drunk, even he could not have done it . . . .  And how he 
liked playing the fool, didn't he like it! Ough! wasn't he pleased, too, 
when he made me kiss him! Only he didn't know then whether he 
would end by embracing me or murdering me. Of course, it's turned 
out that the best thing was to do both. A most natural solution! Yes 
indeed, nature dislikes monstrosities and destroys them with natural 
solutions. The most monstrous monster is the monster with noble feel­
ings; I know that by personal experience, Pavel Pavlovitch! Nature 
is not a tender mother, but a stepmother to the monster. Nature gives 
birth to the deformed, but instead of pitying him she punishes him, 
and with good reason. Even decent people have to pay for embraces 
and tears of forgiveness nowadays, to say nothing of men like you 
and me, Pavel Pavlovitch! 
"Yes, he was stupid enough to take me to see his future bride. Good 
heavens! His future bride! Only a Quasimodo like that could have 
conceived the notion of 'rising again to a new life' by means of the 
innocence of Mademoiselle Zahlebinin! But it was not your fault, 
Pavel Pavlovitch, it was not your fault : you're a monster, so everything 
about you is bound to be monstrous, your dreams and your hopes. 
But, though he was a monster, he had doubts of his dream, and that 
was why he needed the high sanction of Velchaninov whom he so 
revered. He wanted Velchaninov to approve, he wanted him to reas­
sure him that the dream was not a dream, but something real. He 
took me there from a devout respect for me and faith in the nobility 
of my feelings, believing, perhaps, that there, under a bush, we should 
embrace and shed tears near all that youthful innocence. Yes! That 
'eternal husband' was obliged, sooner or later, to punish himself for 
everything, and to punish himself he snatched up the razor-by acci­
dent, it is true, still he did snatch it up! 'And yet he stuck him with a 
knife, and yet he ended by stabbing him in the presence of the Gov­
ernor.' And, by the way, had he any idea of that sort in his mind when 
he told me that anecdote about the best man? And was there really 
anything that night when he got out of bed and stood in the middle 
of the room ? H'm! •
.
.
 No, he stood there then as a joke. He got up 
for other reasons, and when he saw that I was frightened of him he 
did not answer me for ten minutes because he was very much pleased 

1 h% eternal Husband 
463 
that I was frightened of him 
.
•
•
•
 It was at that moment, perhaps, 
when he stood there in the dark, that some idea of this sort first 
dawned upon him 
.
.
.
•
 
"Yet if I had not forgotten that razor on the table yesterday­
maybe nothing would have happened. Is that so? Is that so? To be sure 
he had been avoiding me before-why, he had not been to see me for 
a fortnight; he had been hiding from me to spare me! Of course, he 
picked out Bagautov first, not me! Why, he rushed to heat plates for 
me in the night, thinking to create a diversion-from the knife to pity 
and tenderness! . . .  He wanted to save himself and me, too-with 
his hot plates! . . .  
" 
And for a long time the sick brain of this "man of the world" went 
on working in this way, going round and round in a circle, till he 
grew໖ calmer. He woke up next morning with the same headache, but 
with a quite new and quite unexpected terror in his heart. 
This new terror came from the positive conviction, which suddenly 
grew strong within him, that he, Velchaninov (a man of the world), 
would end it all that day by going of his own free will to Pavel Pav­
lovitch. Why? What for? He had no idea and, with repugnance, 
refused to know; all that he knew was that, for some reason, he would 
go to him. 
This madness, however-he could give it no other name-did, as it 
developed, take a rational form and fasten upon a fairly legitimate 
pretext : he had even, the day before, been haunted by the idea that 
Pavel Pavlovitch would go back to his lodging and hang himself, like 
the clerk about whom Marya Sysoevna had told him. This notion of 
the day before had passed by degrees into an unreasoning but per­
sistent conviction. "Why should the fool hang himself?" he kept pro­
testing to himself every half-minute. He remembered Liza's words 
. . .  "Yet in his place, perhaps, I should hang myself" •
.
.
 he reflected 
once. 
It ended by his turning towards Pavel Pavlovitch instead of going 
to dinner. "I shall simply inquire of Marya Sysoevna," he decided. 
But before he had come out into the street he stopped short in the 
gateway. "Can it be, can it be?" he cried, turning crimson with shame. 
"Can it be that I'm crawling there, to 'embrace and shed tears'? That 
senseless abjectness was all that was needed to complete the ignominy!" 
But from that "senseless abjectness" he was saved by the providence 
that watches over all decent and well-bred people. He had no sooner 
stepped into the street when he stumbled upon Alexandr Lobov. The 
young man was in breathless haste and excitement. 

464 
'I he Short Novels of DostoevskY 
"I was coming to see you! What do you think of our friend Pavel 
Pavlovitch, now?" 
"He's hanged himself!" Velchaninov muttered wildly. 
"Who's hanged himself? What for ?" cried Lobov, with wide-open 
eyes. 
"Never mind . . .  I didn't mean anything; go on." 
"Tfoo! damn it all! what funny ideas you have, though. He's not 
hanged himself at all (why should he hang himself?). On the con­
trary-he's gone away. I've only just put him into the train and seen 
him off. Tfoo! how he drinks, I tell you! We drank three bottles, 
Predposylov with us-but how he drinks, how he drinks! He was 
singing songs in the train. He remembered you, blew kisses, sent you 
his greetings. But he is a scoundrel, don't you think so?" 
The young man certainly was a little tipsy; his flushed face, his 
shining eyes and faltering tongue betrayed it unmistakably. 
Velchaninov laughed loudly. 
"So in the end they finished up with Briiderschaft! Ha-ha! They 
embraced and shed tears! Ah, you Schilleresque poets!" 
"Don't call me names, please. Do you know he's given it all up over 
there? He was there yesterday, and he's been there to-day. He sneaked 
horribly. They locked Nadya up-she's sitting in a room upstairs. 
There were tears and lamentations, but we stood firm! Dut how he 
does drink, I say, doesn't he drink! And, I say, isn't he mauvais ton, 
at least not mauvais ton exactly, what shall I call it? . . .  He kept 
talking of you, but there's no comparison between you! You're a 
gentleman anyway, and really did move in decent society at one time 
and have only been forced to come down now through poYerty or 
something 
.
.
.
•
 Goodness knows what, I couldn't quite understand 
him." 
"Ah, so he spoke to you of me in those terms?" 
"He did, he did; don't be angry. To be a good citizen is better than 
being in aristocratic society. I say that because in Russia nowadays 
one doesn't know whom to respect. You'll agree that it's a serious 
malady of the age, when people don't know whom to respect, isn't it ?" 
"It is, it is; what did he say?" 
"He? Who? Ah, to be sure! Why did he keep saying 'Velchaninov 
fifty, but a rake,' why but a rake and not and a rake; he laughed and 
repeated it a thousand times over. He got into the train, sang a song 
and burst out crying-it was simply revolting, pitiful, in fact-from 
drunkenness. Oh! I don't like fools! He fell to throwing money to 
the beggars for the peace of the soul of Lizaveta-his wife, is that?" 

The eternal Husband 
"His daughter." 
"\Vhat's the matter with your hand?" 
"I cut it." 
465 
"Never mind, it will get better. Damn him, you know, it's a good 
thing he's gone, but I bet anything that he'll get married directly he: 
arrives-he will-won't he ?" 
"Why, but you want to get married, too, don't you?" 
"Me? That's a different matter. What a man you are, really! If 
you are fifty, he must be sixty: you must look at it logically, my dear 
sir! And do you know I used, long ago, to be a pure Slavophil by 
conviction, but now we look for dawn from the West . . . .  But, good­
bye; I'm glad I met you without going in; I won't come in, don't ask 
me, I've no time to spare! . . .  
" 
And he was just running off. 
"Oh, by the way," he cried, turning back; "why, he sent me to 
you with a letter! Here is the letter. Why didn't you come to see him 
off?" 
Velchaninov returned home and opened the envelope addressed to 
him. 
There was not one line from Pavel Pavlovitch in it, but there was 
a different letter. Velchaninov recognized the handwriting. It was an 
old letter, written on paper yellow with age, with ink that had changed 
colour. It had been written to him ten years before, two months after 
he had left T-- and returned to Petersburg. But the letter had never 
reached him; he had received a different one instead of it; this was 
clear from the contents of this old yellow letter. In this letter Natalya 
Vassilyevna took leave of him for ever, and confessed that she loved 
some one else, just as in the letter he had actually received; but she 
also did not conceal from him that she was going to have a child. On 
the contrary, to comfort him, she held out hopes that she might find 
a possibility of handing over the future child to him, declared hence­
forth that they had other duties-in short, there was little logic, but 
the object was clear : that he should no longer trouble her with his 
love. She even sanctioned his coming to T-- in a year's time to have 
a look at the child. God knows why she changed her mind and sent 
the other letter instead. 
Velchaninov was pale as he read it, but he pictured to himself Pavel 
Pavlovitch finding that letter and reading it for the first time, before 
the opened ebony box inlaid with mother-of-pearl which was an heir­
loom in the family. 
"He, too, must have turned pale as a corpse," he thought, catching 

46 
'llze Slzort Novels of Vostoevsky 
a glimpse of his own face in the looking-glass. "He must have read it 
and closed his eyes, and opened them again hoping that the letter 
would have changed into plain white paper 
.
.
•
.
 Most likely he had 
done that a second time and a third! •
.
.
 
" 
Chapter 17 
THE ETERNAL HUSBAND 
ALMOST exactly two years had passed since the incidents we 
have described. We meet Velchaninov again on a beautiful summer 
day, in the train on one of our newly opened railways. He was going 
to Odessa for his own pleasure, to see one of his friends, and also with 
a view to something else of an agreeable nature. He hoped through 
that friend to arrange a meeting with an extremely interesting woman 
whose acquaintance he had long been eager to make. \Vithout going 
into details we will confine ourselves to observing that he had become 
entirely transformed, or rather reformed, during those two years. Of 
his old hypochondria scarcely a trace remained. Of the various "rem­
iniscences" and anxiety-the result of illness which had beset him two 
years before in Petersburg at the time of his unsuccessful lawsuit­
nothing remained but a certain secret shame at the consciousness of 
his faint-heartedness. \Vhat partly made up for it was the conviction 
that it would never happen again, and that no one would ever know 
of it. It was true that at that time he had given up all society, had 
even begun to be slovenly in his dress, had crept away out of sight of 
every one-and that, of course, must have been noticed by all. But he 
so readily acknowledged his transgressions, and at the same time with 
such a self-confident air of new life and vigour, that "every one" 
immediately forgave his momentary falling away; in fact, those whom 
he had given up greeting were the first to recognize him and hold out 
their hands, and without any tiresome questions-just as though he 
had been absent on his own personal affairs, which were no business 
of theirs, and had only just come back from a distance. The cause 
of all these salutary changes for the better was, of course, the winning 
of his lawsuit. Velchaninov gained in all sixty thousand roubles-no 
great sum, of course, but of extreme importance to him; to begin with, 
he felt himself on firm ground again, and so he felt satisfied at heart; 
he knew for certain now that he would not, "like a fool," squander 

The eternal Husband 
467 
this money, as he had squandered his first two fortunes, and that he 
had enough for his whole life. "However the social edifice may totter, 
whatever trumpet call they're sounding," he thought sometimes, as 
he watched and heard all the marvellous and incredible things that 
were being done around him and all over Russia; "whatever shape 
people and ideas may take, I shall always have just such a delicate, 
dainty dinner as I am sitting down to now, and so I'm ready to face 
anything." This voluptuous, comfortable thought by degrees gained 
complete possession of him and produced a transformation in his 
physical, to say nothing of his moral, nature. He looked quite a differ­
ent man from the "sluggard" whom we have described two years be­
fore and to whom such unseemly incidents had befallen-he looked 
cheerful, serene and dignified. Even the ill-humoured wrinkles that 
had begun to appear under his eyes and on his forehead had almost 
been smoothed away; the very tint of his face had changed, his skin 
was whiter and ruddier. 
At the moment he was sitting comfortably in a first-class carriage 
and a charming idea was suggesting itself to his mind. The next sta­
tion was a junction and there was a new branch line going off to the 
right. He asked himself, "How would it be to give up the direct way 
for the moment and turn off to the right?" There, only two stations 
away, he could visit another lady of his acquaintance who had only 
just returned from abroad, and was now living in a provincial isola­
tion, very tedious for her, but favourable for him; and so it would be 
possible to spend his time no less agreeably than at Odessa, especially 
as he would not miss his visit there either. But he was still hesitating 
and coulcl not quite make up 1lis mind; he was waiting for something 
to decide l1im. Meanwhile, the station was approaching and that some­
thing was not far off. 
At this station the train stopped forty minutes, and the passengers 
had the chance of having dinner. At the entrance to the dining-room 
for the passengers of the first and second class there was, as there 
usually is, a crowd of impatient and hurried people, and as is also 
usual, perhaps, a scandalous scene took place. A lady from a second­
class carriage, who was remarkably pretty but somewhat too gor­
geously dressed for travelling, wa໗ dragging after her an Uhlan, a 
very young and handsome officer, who was trying to tear himself out 
of her hands. The youthful officer was extremely drunk, and the lady, 
to all appearance some elder relative, would not let him go, probably 
apprehending that he would make a dash for the refreshment bar. 
Meanwhile, in the crush, the Uhlan was jostled by a young merchant 

468 
The Short Novels of Vostoevsky 
who was also disgracefully intoxicated. He had been hanging about 
the station for the last two days, drinking and scattering his money 
among the companions who surrounded him, without succeeding in 
getting into the train to continue his journey. A scuffie followed; the 
officer shouted; the merchant swore; the lady was in despair, and, 
trying to draw the Uhlan away from the conflict, kept exclaiming 
in an imploring voice, "Mitenka! Mitenka!" This seemed to strike 
the young merchant as too scandalous; every one laughed, indeed, 
but the merchant was more offended than ever at the outrage, as he 
conceived it, on propriety. 
"Oh, I say: Mitenka!" he pronounced reproachfully, mimicking 
the shrill voice of the lady. "And not ashamed before folks!" 
He went staggering up to the lady, who had rushed to the first chair 
and succeeded in making the Uhlan sit down beside her, stared at 
them both contemptuously and drawled in a sing-song voice­
"You're a trollop, you are, dragging your tail in the dirt! "  
The lady uttered a shriek and looked about her piteously for some 
means of escape. She was both ashamed and frightened, and, to put 
the finishing touch, the officer sprang up from the chair and, with a 
yell, made a dash at the merchant, but, slipping, fell back into the 
chair with a flop. The laughter grew louder around them, and no 
one dreamed of helping her; but Velchaninov came to the rescue; 
he seized the merchant by the collar and, turning him round, thrust 
him five paces away from the frightened lady. And with that the scene 
ended; the merchant was overwhelmed by the shock and by Vel­
chaninov's impressive figure; his companions led him away. The dig­
nified countenance of the elegantly dressed gentleman produced a 
strong effect on the jeering crowd : the laughter subsided. The lady 
flushed and, almost in tears, was overflowing with expressions of grati­
tude. The Uhlan mumbled: "Fanks, fanks!" and made as though to 
hold out his hand to V elchaninov, but instead of doing so suddenly 
took it into his head to recline at full length with his feet on the chairs. 
"Mitenka!" the lady moaned reproachfully, clasping her hands in 
horror. 
Velchaninov was pleased with the adventure and with the whole 
situation. The lady attracted him; she was evidently a wealthy pro­
vincial, gorgeously but tastelessly dressed, and with rather ridiculous 
manners-in fact, she combined all the characteristics that guarantee 
success to a Petersburg gallant with designs on the fair sex. A con­
versation sprang up; the lady bitterly complained of her husband, who 
"had disappeared as soon as he had got out of the carriage and so was 

7' he eternal Husband 
469 
the cause of it all, for whenever he is wanted he runs ofl somewhere." 
"Naturally," the Uhlan muttered. 
"Ah, Mitenka!" She: clasped her hands again. 
"Well, the husband will catch it," thought Velchaninov. 
"What is his name? I will go and look for him," he suggested. 
"Pal Palitch," responded the Uhlan. 
"Your husband's name is Pavel Pavlovitch ?" Velchaninov asked, 
with curiosity, and suddenly a familiar bald head was thrust between 
him and the lady. In a flash he had a vision of the Zahlebinins' garden, 
the innocent games and a tiresome bald head being incessantly thrust 
between him and Nadyezhda Fedosyevna. 
"Here you are at last!" cried his wife hysterically. 
It was Pavel Pavlovitch himself; he gazed in wonder and alarm at 
Velchaninov, as panic-stricken at the sight of him as though he had 
been a ghost. His stupefaction was such that he evidently could not 
for some minutes take in what his offended spouse was explaining in 
a rapid and irritable flow of words. At last, with a start, he grasped all 
the horror of his position : his own guilt, and Mitenka's behaviour, 
"and that this monsieur" (this was how the lady for some reason de­
scribed Velchaninov) "has been a saviour and guardian angel to us, 
while you-you are always out of the way when you are wanted .
.
•
.
 
" 
Velchaninov suddenly burst out laughing. 
"Why, we are friends, we've been friends since childhood!" he 
exclaimed to the astonished lady. Putting his right arm with patron­
izing familiarity round the shoulders of Pavel Pavlovitch, who smiled a 
pale smile, "Hasn't he talked to you of Velchaninov?" 
"No, he never has," the lady responded, somewhat disconcerted. 
"You might introduce me to your wife, you faithless friend!" 
"Lipotchka . . .  it really is M. Velchaninov," Pavel Pavlovitch was 
beginning, but he broke off abashed. 
His wife turned crimson and flashed an angry look at him, probably 
for the "Lipotchka." 
"And, only fancy, he never let me know he was married, and never 
invited me to the wedding, but you, Olimpiada . . .  
" 
"Semyonovna," Pavel Pavlovitch prompted. 
"Semyonovna," the Uhlan, who had dropped asleep, echoed sud­
denly. 
"You must forgive him, Olimpiada Semyonova, for my sake, in 
honour of our meeting . . .  he's a good husband." 
And Velchaninov gave Pavel Pavlovitch a friendly slap on thC' 
shoulder. 

470 
The Short 'Novels of VostoevskJ 
"I was . . .  I was only away for a minute, my love," Pavel Pavlov­
itch was beginning to say. 
"And left your wife to be insulted," Lipotchka put in at once. 
''When you're wanted there's no finding you, when you're not wanted 
you're always at hand . . .  " 
"Where you're not wanted, where you're not wanted 
.
•
.
 where 
vou're not wanted . . .  " the Uhlan chimed in. 
Lipotchka was almost breathless with excitement; she knew it was 
not seemly before Velchaninov, and flushed but could not restrain her­
self. 
"Where you shouldn't be you are too attentive, too attentive!" she 
burst out. 
"Under the bed . . .  he looks for a lover under the bed-where 
he shouldn't 
.
•
.
 where he shouldn't 
•
.
.
 
" muttered Mitenka, sud­
denly growing extremely excited. 
But there was no doing anything with Mitenka by now. It all ended 
pleasantly, however, and they got upon quite friendly terms. Pavel 
P໘1vlovitch was sent to fetch coffee and soup. Olimpiada Semyonovna 
explained to Velchaninov that they were on their way from 0-, 
where her husband had a post in the service, to spend two months at 
their country place, that it was not far off, only thirty miles from the 
station, that they had a lovely house and garden there, that they always 
h:d the house full of visitors, that they had neighbours too, and if 
Alexey lvanovitch would be so good as to come and stay with them 
"in their rustic solitude" she would welcome him "as their guardian 
angel," for she could not recall without horror what would have 
happened, if . . .  and so on, and so on-in fact, he was "her guardian 
angel. . . .  
" 
"And saviour, and saviour," the Uhlan insisted, with heat. 
Yelchaninov thanked her politely, and replied that he was always at 
her service, that he was an absolutely idle man with no duties of any 
໙ort, and that Olimpiada Semyonovna's invitation was most flatter­
ing. He followed this at once with sprightly conversation, successfully 
introducing two or three compliments. Lipotchka blushed with pleas­
ure, and as soon as Pavel Pavlovitch returned she told him enthu­
siastically that Alexey lvanovitch had been so kind as to accept her 
invitation to spend a whole month with them in the country, and had 
promised to come in a week. Pavel Pavlovitch smiled in mute despair. 
Olimpiada Semyonovna shrugged her shoulders at him, and turned 
her eyes up to the ceiling. At last they got up; again a gush of grati­
tude, again the "guardian angel," again "Mitenka," and Pavel Pavlov-

'!he eternal Husband 
471 
itch at last escorted his wife and the Uhlan to their compartment. 
Velchaninov lighted a cigar and began pacing to and fro on the 
balcony in front of the station; he knew that Pavel Pavlovitch would 
run out again at once to talk to him till the bell rang. And so it hap­
pened. Pavel Pavlovitch promptly appeared before him with an 
uneasy expression in his face and whole figure. Velchaninov laughed, 
took him by the elbow in a friendly way, led him to the nearest bench, 
sat down himself, and made him sit down beside him. He remained 
silent; he wanted Pavel Pavlovitch to be the first to speak. 
"So you are coming to us?" faltered the latter, going straight to the 
point. 
"I knew that would be it! You haven't changed in the least!" 
laughed Velchaninov. "Why, do you mean to say"-he slapped him 
again on the shoulder-"do you mean to say you could seriously 
imagine for a moment that I could actually come and stay with you, 
and for a whole month too-ha-ha?" 
Pavel Pavlovitch was all of a twitter. 
"So you-are not coming!" he cried, not in the least disguising his 
relief. 
"I'm not coming, I'm not coming!" Velchaninov laughed com 
placently. 
He could not have said himself, however, why he felt so particularly 
amused, but he was more and more amused as time went on. 
"Do you really . . .  do you really mean it?" 
And saying this, Pavel Pavlovitch actually jumped up from his seat 
in a flutter of suspense. 
"Yes, I've told you already that I'm not coming, you queer fellow." 
"If that's so, what am I to say to Olimpiada Semyonovna a week 
hence, when she will be expecting you and you don't come?" 
"What a difficulty! Tell her I've broken my leg or something of that 
sort." 
"She won't believe it," Pavel Pavlovitch drawled plaintively. 
"And you'll catch it?" Velchaninov went on laughing. "But I 
observe, my poor friend, that you tremble before your delightful wife 
-don't you?" 
Pavel Pavlovitch tried to smile, but it did not come off. That Vel­
chaninov had refused to visit them was a good thing, of course, but 
that he should be over-familiar to him about his wife was disagreeable. 
Pavel Pavlovitch winced; Velchaninov noticed it. Meanwhile the 
second bell rang; they heard a shrill voice from the train anxiously 
calling Pavel Pavlovitch. The latter moved, fidgeted in his chair, but 

472 
The Short Novels of VostoevskJ 
did not rise at the first summons, evidently expecting something more 
from Velchaninov, no doubt another assurance that he would not 
come and stay with them. 
"What was your wife's maiden name?" Velchaninov inquired, as 
though unaware of Pavel Pavlovitch's anxiety. 
"She is our priest's daughter," replied the latter in uneasy trepida-
tion, listening and looking towards the train. 
"Ah, I understand, you married her for her beauty." 
Pavel Pavlovitch winced again. 
"And who's this Mitenka with you?" 
"Oh, he's a distant relation of ours-that is, of mine; the son of my 
deceased cousin. His name's Golubtchikov, he was degraded for dis­
orderly behaviour in the army, but now he has been promoted again 
and we have been getting his equipment . . . .  He's an unfortunate 
young man . . . .  " 
"To be sure, the regular thing; the party's complete," thought Vel­
chaninov. 
"Pavel Pavlovitch!" the call came again from the train, and by now 
with a marked tone of irritation in the voice. 
"Pal Palitch!" they heard in another thick voice. 
Pavel Pavlovitch fidgeted and moved restlessly again, but Velchani­
nov took him by the elbow and detained him. 
"How would you like me to go this minute and tell your wife how 
you tried to cut my throat?" 
"What, what!" Pavel Pavlovitch was terribly alarmed. "God for­
bid!" 
"Pavel Pavlovitch! Pavel Pavlovitch !" voices were heard calling 
a gam. 
"Well, be off now!" said Velchaninov, letting him go at last, and 
still laughing genially. 
"So you won't come?" Pavel Pavlovitch whispered for the last time, 
almost in despair, and even put his hands before him with the palms 
together in his old style. 
"Why, I swear I won't come! Run, there'll be trouble, you know." 
And with a flourish he held out his hand to him-and was startled 
at the result : Pavel Pavlovitch did not take his hand, he even drew 
his own hand back. 
The third bell rang. 
In one instant something strange happened to both of them :  both 
seemed transformed. Something, as it were, quivered and burst out 
in Velchaninov, who had been laughing only just before. He clutched 

The eternal Husband 
473 
Pavel Pavlovitch by the shoulder and held him in a tight and furious 
gnp. 
"If I-1 hold out this hand to you," showing the palm of his left 
hand, where a big scar from the cut was still distinct, "you certainly 
might take it!" he whispered, with pale and trembling lips. 
Pavel Pavlovitch, too, turned pale, and his lips trembled too; a con­
vulsive quiver ran over his face. 
"And Liza?" he murmured in a rapid whisper, and suddenly his 
lips, his cheeks and his chin began to twitch and tears gushed from his 
eyes. 
V elchaninov stood before him stupefied. 
"Pavel Pavlovitch! Pavel Pavlovitch!" they heard a scream from the 
train as though some one were being murdered-and suddenly the 
whistle sounded. 
Pavel Pavlovitch roused himself, flung up his hands and ran full 
speed to the train; the train was already in motion, but he managed 
to hang on somehow, and went flying to his compartment. Vel­
chaninov remained at the station and only in the evening set off on 
his original route in another train. He did not turn off to the right 
to see his fair friend-he felt too much out of humour. And how he 
regretted it afterwards! 


Cihe Vouble 
A 
P E T E R S
B
U R G  P O E M  


CIHE VOUBLE 
( A  PETERSBURG POEM ) 
Chapter 1 
J T WAS a little before eight o'clock in the morning when Yakov 
Petrovitch Golyadkin, a titular councillor, woke up from a long sleep. 
He yawned, stretched, and at last opened his eyes completely. For 
two minutes, however, he lay in his bed without moving, as though 
he were not yet quite certain whether he were awake or still asleep, 
whether all that was going on around him were real and actual, or the 
continuation of his confused dreams. Very soon, however, Mr. Golyad­
kin's senses began more clearly and more distinctly to receive their 
habitual and everyday impressions. The dirty green, smoke-begrimed, 
dusty walls of his little room, with the mahogany chest of drawers 
and chairs, the table painted red, the sofa covered with American 
leather of a reddish colour with little green flowers on it, and the 
clothes taken ofT in haste overnight and flung in a crumpled heap on 
the sofa, looked at him familiarly. At last the damp autumn day, 
muggy and dirty, peeped into the room through the dingy window 
pane with such a hostile, sour grimace that Mr. Golyadkin could not 
possibly doubt that he was not in the land of Nod, but in the city of 
Petersburg, in his own flat on the fourth storey of a huge block of 
buildings in Shestilavotchny Street. When he had made this important 
discovery Mr. Golyadkin nervously closed his eyes, as though re­
gretting his dream and wanting to go back to it for a moment. But a 
minute later he leapt out of bed at one bound, probably all at once 
grasping the idea about which his scattered and wandering thoughts 
had been revolving. From his bed he ran straight to a little round 
looking-glass that stood on his chest of drawers. Though the sleepy, 
short-sighted countenance and rather bald head reflected in the look­
ing-glass were of such an insignificant type that at first sight ໚hey 
would certainly not have attracted particular attention in any one, yet 
the owner of the countenance was satisfied with all that he saw in the 
looking-glass. "What a thing it would be," said Mr. Golyadkin in an 
477 

478 
'!he Short Novels of 'DostoevskY 
undertone, "what a thing it would be if I were not up to the mark 
to-day, if something were amiss, if some intrusive pimple had made 
its appearance, or anything else unpleasant had happened; so far, 
however, there's nothing wrong, so far everything's all right." 
Greatly relieved that everything was all right, Mr. Golyadkin put 
the looking-glass back in its place and, although he had nothing on 
his feet and was still in the attire in which he was accustomed to go 
to bed, he ran to the little window and with great interest began 
looking for something in the courtyard, upon which the windows of 
his flat looked out. Apparently what he was looking for in the yard 
quite satisfied him too; his face beamed with a self-satisfied smile. 
Then, after first peeping, however, behind the partition into his valet 
Petrushka's little room and making sure that Petrushka was not there, 
he went on tiptoe to the table, opened the drawer in it and, fumbling 
in the furthest corner of it, he took from under old yellow papers and 
all sorts of rubbish a shabby green pocket-book, opened it cautiously, 
and with care and relish peeped into the furthest and most hidden 
fold of it. Probably the roll of green, grey, blue, red and particoloured 
notes looked at Golyadkin, too, wilh approval: with a radiant face he 
laid the open pocket-book before him and rubbed his hands vigorously 
in token of the greatest satisfaction. Finally, he took it out-his com­
forting roll of notes-and, for the hundredth time since the previous 
day, counted them over, carefully smoothing out every note between 
his forefinger and his thumb. 
"Seven hundred and fifty roubles in notes," he concluded at last, 
in a half-whisper. "Seven hundred and fifty roubles, a noteworthy 
sum! It's an agreeable sum," he went on, in a voice weak and trem­
bling with gratification, as he pinched the roll with his fingers and 
smiled significantly; "it's a very agreeable sum! A sum agreeable to 
any one! I should like to see the man to whom that would be a trivial 
sum! There's no knowing what a man might not do with a sum like 
that . . . .  What's the meaning of it, though ?" thought Mr. Golyadkin; 
"where's Petrushka ?" And still in the same attire he peeped behind 
the partition again. Again there was no sign of Petrushka ; and the 
samovar standing on the floor was beside itself, fuming and raging in 
solitude, threatening every minute to boil over, hissing and lisping in 
its mysterious language, to Mr. Golyadkin something like, "Take me, 
good people, I'm boiling and perfectly ready." 
"Damn the fellow," thought Mr. Golyadkin. "That lazy brute might 
really drive a man out of all patience ; where's he dawdling now?" 
In just indignation he went out into the hall, which consisted of a 

'I he 'Double 
479 
little corridor at the end of which was a door into the entry, and saw 
his servant surrounded by a good-sized group of lackeys of all sorts, 
a mixed rabble from outside as well as from the flats of the house. 
Petrushka was telling something, the others were listening. Appar­
ently the subject of the conversation, or the conversation itself, did not 
please Mr. Golyadkin. He promptly called Petrushka and returned to 
his room, displeased_and even upset. "That beast would sell a man 
for a halfpenny, and his master before any one," he thought to him­
self: "and he has sold me, he certainly has. I bet he has sold me for a 
farthing. Well ?" 
"They've brought the livery, sir." 
"Put it on, and come here." 
When he had put on his livery, Petrushka, with a stupid smile on 
his face, went in to his master. His costume was incredibly strange. 
He had on a much-worn green livery, with frayed gold braid on it, 
apparently made for a man a yard taller than Petrushka. In his hand 
he had a hat trimmed with the same gold braid and with a feather 
in it, and at his hip hung a footman's sword in a leather sheath. 
Finally, to complete the picture, Petrushka, who always liked to be 
in neglige, was barefooted. Mr. Golyadkin looked at Petrushka from 
all sides and was apparently satisfied. The livery had evidently been 
hired for some solemn occasion. It might be observed, too, that dur­
ing his master's inspection Petrushka watched him with strange ex­
pectancy and with marked curiosity followed every movement he 
made, which extremely embarrassed Mr. Golyadkin. 
"\Veil, and how about the carriage?" 
"The carriage is here too." 
"For the whole day?" 
"For the whole day. Twenty-five roubles." 
"And have the boots been sent?" 
"Yes." 
"Dolt! can't even say, 'Yes, sir.' Bring them here." 
Expressing his satisfaction that the boots fitted, Mr. Golyadkin asked 
for his tea, and for water to wash and shave. He shaved with great 
care and washed as scrupulously, hurriedly sipped his tea and pro­
ceeded to the principal final process of attiring himself: he put on an 
almost new pair of trousers; then a shirt-front with brass studs, and a 
very bright and agreeably flowered waistcoat; about his neck he tied 
a gay, particoloured cravat, and finally drew on his coat, which was 
also newish and carefully brushed. As he dressed, he more than once 
looked lovingly at his boots, lifted up first one leg and then the other, 

480 
The Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
admired their shape, kept muttering something to himself, and from 
time to time made expressive grimaces. Mr. Golyadkin was, however, 
extremely absent-minded that morning, for he scarcely noticed the 
little smiles and grimaces made at his expense by Petrushka, who was 
helping him dress. At last, having arranged everything properly and 
having finished dressing, Mr. Golyadkin put his pocket-book in his 
pocket, took a final admiring look at Petrushka, who had put on his 
boots and was therefore also quite ready, and, noticing that e\'erything 
was done and that there was nothing left to wait for, he ran hurriedly 
and fussily out on to the stairs, with a slight throbbing at his heart. 
The light-blue hired carriage with a crest on it rolled noisily up to the 
steps. Petrushka, winking to the driver and some of the gaping crowd, 
helped his master into the carriage; and, hardly able to suppress an 
idiotic laugh, shouted in an unnatural voice : "Off!" jumped up on the 
footboard, and the whole turnout, clattering and rumbling noisily, 
rolled into the Nevsky Prospect. As soon as the light-blue carriage 
dashed out of the gate, Mr. Golyadkin rubbed his hands convulsively 
and went oiT into a slow, noiseless chuckle, like a jubilant man who 
has succeeded in bringing off a splendid performance and is as pleased 
as Punch with the performance himself. Immediately after his access 
of gaiety, however, laughter was replaced by a strange and anxious 
expression on the face of Mr. Golyadkin. Though the weather was 
damp and muggy, he let down both windows of the carriage and 
began carefully scrutinizing the passers-by to left and to right, at once 
assuming a decorous and sedate air when he thought any one was 
looking at him. At the turning from Liteyny Street into the Nevsky 
Prospect he was startled by a most unpleasant sensation and, frowning 
like some poor wretch whose corn has been accidentally trodden on, 
he huddled with almost panic-stricken haste into the darkest corner of 
his carriage. 
He had seen two of his colleagues, two young clerks serving in the 
same government department. The young clerks were also, it seemed 
to Mr. Golyadkin, extremely amazed at meeting their colleague in 
such a way; one of them, in fact, pointed him out to the other. Mr. 
Golyadkin even fancied that the other had actually called his name, 
which, of course, was very unseemly in the street. Our hero concealed 
himself and did not respond. "The silly youngsters!" he began reflect­
ing to himself. "\Vhy, what is there strange in it ? A man in a car­
riage, a man needs to be in a carriage, and so he hires a carriage. 
They're simply noodles! I know them-simply silly youngsters, who 
still need thrashing! They want to be paid a salary for playing pitch-

Th% 'Double 
481 
farthing and dawdling about, that's all they're fit for. I'd let them all 
know, if only .
.
•
 
" 
Mr. Golyadkin broke off suddenly, petrified. A smart pair of Kazan 
horses, very familiar to Mr. Golyadkin, in a fashionable droshky, drove 
rapidly by on the right side of his carriage. The gentleman sitting in 
the droshky, happening to catch a glimpse of Mr. Golyadkin, who was 
rather incautiously poking his head out of the carriage window, also 
appeared to be extremely astonished at the unexpected meeting and, 
bending out as far as he could, looked with the greatest curiosity and 
interest into the corner of the carriage in which our hero made haste 
to conceal himself. The gentleman in the droshky was Andrey Filip­
povitch, the head of the office in which Mr. Golyadkin served in the 
capacity of assistant to the chief clerk. Mr. Golyadkin, seeing that 
Andrey Filippovitch recognized him, that he was looking at him open­
eyed and that it was impossible to hide, blushed up to his ears. 
"Bow or not ? Call back or not ? Recognize him or not ?" our hero 
wondered in indescribable anguish. "Or pretend that I am not myself, 
but somebody else strikingly like me, and look as though nothing 
were the matter. Simply not I, not l-and that's all," said Mr. Golyad­
kin, taking off his hat to Andrey Filippovitch and keeping his eyes 
fixed upon him. "I'm . . .  I'm all right," he whispered with an effort; 
'·'I'm . . .  quite all right. It's not I, it's not l-and that is the fact of 
the matter." 
Soon, however, the droshky passed the carriage, and the magnetism 
of his chief's eyes was at an end. Yet he went on blushing, smiling 
and muttering something to himself . . . .  
"I was a fool not to call back," he thought at last. "I ought to have 
taken a bolder line and behaved with gentlemanly openness. I ought 
to have said, 'This is how it is, Andrey Filippovitch, I'm asked to the 
dinner too,' and that's all it is!" 
Then, suddenly recalling how taken aback he had been, our hero 
flushed as hot as fire, frowned, and cast a terrible defiant glance at the 
front corner of the carriage, a glance calculated to reduce all his foes 
to ashes. At last, he was suddenly inspired to pull the cord attached 
to the driver's elbow, and stopped the carriage, telling him to drive 
back to Liteyny Street. The fact was, it was urgently necessary for 
Mr. Golyadkin, probably for the sake of his own peace of mind, to 
say something very interesting to his doctor, Krestyan lvanovitch. 
And, though he had made Krestyan lvanovitch's acquaintance quite 
recently, having, indeed, only paid him a single visit, and that one the 
previous week, to consult him about some symptom. But a doctor, as 

482 
The Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
they say, is like a priest, and it would be stupid for him to keep out of 
sight, and, indeed, it was his duty to know his patients. "Will it be all 
right, though," our hero went on, getting out of the carriage at the 
door of a five-storey house in Liteyny Street, at which he had told the 
driver to stop the carriage : "Will it be all right? Will it be proper ? 
Will it be appropriate? After all, though," he went on, thinking as he 
mounted the stairs out of breath and trying to suppress the beating 
of his heart, which had the habit of beating on all other peopie··s stair­
cases, "after all, it's on my own business and there's nothing repre­
hensible in it . . . .  It would be stupid to keep out of sight. Why, of 
course, I shall behave as though I were quite all right, and have simply 
looked in as I passed . . . .  He will see that it's all just as it should be." 
Reasoning like this, Mr. Golyadkin mounted to the second storey 
and stopped before flat number five, on which there was a handsome 
brass door-plate with the inscription-
KRE.STYAN lv.\XO\"ITCH Run:o-;sPITZ 
Doctor of Medicine and Surgery 
Stopping at the door, our hero made haste to assume an air of 
propriety, ease, and even of a certain affability, and prepared to pull 
the bell. As he was about to do so he promptly and rather appro­
priately reflected that it might be better to come to-morrow, and that 
it was not very pressing for the moment. But as he suddenly heard foot­
steps on the stairs, he immediately changed his mind again and at 
once rang Krestyan Ivanovitch's bell-with an air, moreover, of great 
determination. 
Chapter 2 
THE doctor of medicine and surgery, Krestyan Ivanovitch Ruten 
spitz, a very hale, though elderly man, with thick eyebrows and 
whiskers that were beginning to turn grey, eyes with an expressive 
gleam in them that looked capable of routing every disease, and, lastly, 
with orders of some distinction on his breast, was sitting in his con­
sulting-room that morning in his comfortable arm-chair. He was drink­
ing coffee, which his wife had brought him with her own hand, 
smoking a cigar and from time to time writing prescriptions for his 
patients. After prescribing a draught for an old man who was suffer-

The Vouble 
483 
ing from haemorrhoids and seeing the aged patient out by the side 
door, Kre>tyan Ivanovitch sat down to await the next visitor. 
Mr. Golyadkin walked in. 
Apparently Krestyan Ivanovitch did not in the least expect nor 
desire to see Mr. Golyadkin, for he was suddenly taken aback for a 
moment, and his countenance unconsciously assumed a strange and, 
one may almost say, a displeased expression. As Mr. Golyadkin almost 
always turned up inappropriately and was thrown into confusion 
whenever he approached any one about his own little affairs, on this 
occasion, too, he was desperately embarrassed. Having neglected to 
get ready his first sentence, which was invariably a stumbling-block 
for him on such occasions, he muttered something-apparently an 
apology-and, not knowing what to do next, took a chair and sat 
down, but, realizing that he had sat down without being asked to do 
so, he was immediately conscious of his lapse, and made haste to efface 
his offence against etiquette and good breeding by promptly getting 
up again from the seat he had taken uninvited. Then, on second 
thoughts, dimly perceiving that he had committed two stupid blunders 
at once, he immediately decided to commit a third-that is, tried to 
right himself, muttered something, smiled, blushed, was overcome 
with embarrassment, sank into expressive silence, and finally sat down 
for good and did not get up again. Only, to protect himself from all 
contingencies, he looked at the doctor with that defiant glare which 
had an extraordinary power of figuratively crushing Mr. Golyadkin's 
enemies and reducing them to ashes. This glance, moreover, expressed 
to the full Mr. Golyadkin's independence-that is, to speak plainly, 
the fact that Mr. Golyadkin was "all right," that he was "quite him­
self, like everybody else," and that there was "nothing wrong in his 
upper storey." Krestyan lvanovitch coughed, cleared his throat, appar­
ently in token of approval and assent to all this, and bent. an inquisi­
torial interrogative gaze upon his visitor. 
"I have come to trouble you a second time, Krestyan Ivanovitch," 
began Mr. Golyadkin, with a smile, "and now I venture to ask your 
indulgence a second time . . . .  " He was obviously at a loss for words. 
"H'm . . .  Yes!" pronounced Krestyan Ivanovitch, puffing out a 
spiral of smoke and putting down his cigar on the table, "but you 
must follow the treatment prescribed you; I explained to you that 
what would be beneficial to your health is a change of habits 
.
.
.
•
 
Entertainment, for instance, and, well, friends-you should visit your 
acquaintances, and not be hostile to the bottle; and likewise keep cheer·· 
ful company." 

484 
The Short Novels of 7Jostoevsky 
Mr. Golyadkin, still smiling, hastened to observe that he thought he 
was like every one else, that he lived by himself, that he had entertain­
ments like every one else . . .  that, of course, he might go to the 
theatre, for he had the means like every one else, that he spent the day 
at the office and the evenings at home, that he was quite all right; he 
even observed, in passing, that he was, so far as he could see, as good 
as any one, that he lived at home, and, finally, that he had Petrushka. 
At this point Mr. Golyadkin hesitated. 
"H'm! no, that is not the order of proceeding I want; and that is not 
at all what I would ask you. I am interested to know, in general, are 
you a great lover of cheerful company? Do you take advantages of 
festive occasions; and, well, do you lead a melancholy or a cheerful 
manner of life?" 
"Krestyan I vanovitch, I . . .  " 
"H'm! . . .  I tell you," interrupted the doctor, "that you must have 
a radical change of life, must, in a certain sense, break in your char­
acter." (Krestyan lvanovitch laid special stress on the words "break in," 
and paused for a moment with a very significant air.) "Must not 
shrink from gaiety, must visit entertainments and clubs, and in any 
case, be not hostile to the bottle. Sitting at home is not right for you 
. . .  sitting at home is impossible for you." 
"I like quiet, Krestyan lvanovitch," said Mr. Golyadkin, with a sig­
nificant look at the doctor and evidently seeking words to express his 
ideas more successfully : "In my flat there's only me and Petrushka . 
. . . I mean my man, Krestyan lvanovitch. I mean to say, Krestyan 
lvanovitch, that I go my way, my own way, Krestyan lvanovitch. I 
keep myself to myself, and so far as I can see am not dependent on 
any one. I go out for walks, too, Krestyan lvanovitch." 
"What? Yes! well, nowadays there's nothing agreeable in walking: 
the climate's extremely bad." 
"Quite so, Krestyan lvanovitch. Though I'm a peaceable man, 
Krestyan Ivanovitch, as I've had the honour of explaining to you 
already, yet my way lies apart, Krestyan lvanovitch. The ways of life 
are manifold . . . .  I mean . . .  I mean to say, Krestyan lvanovitch . 
. 
• 
. Excuse me, Krestyan lvanovitch, I've no great gift for eloquent 
speaking." 
"H'm . . .  you say .
•
.
 
" 
"I say, you must excuse me, Krestyan lvanovitch, that as far as I 
can see I am no great hand at eloquence in speaking," Mr. Golyadkin 
articulated, stammering and hesitating, in a half-aggrieved voice. "In 
that respect, Krestyan lvanovitch, I'm not quite like other people," he 

The Vouble 
485 
added, with a peculiar smile, "I can't talk much, and have never learnt 
to embellish my speech with literary graces. On the other hand, I act, 
Krestyan lvanovitch; on the other hand, I act, Krestyan Ivanovitch." 
"H'm . . .  How's that . . .  you act?" responded Krestyan lvanovitch. 
Then silence followed for half a minute. The doctor looked some­
what strangely and mistrustfully at his visitor. Mr. Golyadkin, for his 
part, too, stole a rather mistrustful glance at the doctor. 
"Krestyan lvanovitch," he began, going on again in the same tone 
as before, somewhat irritated and puzzled by the doctor's extreme 
obstinacy: "I like tranquillity and not the noisy gaiety of the world. 
Among them, I mean, in the noisy world, Krestyan lvanovitch, one 
must be able to polish the floor with one's boots . . .  " (here Mr. Gol­
yadkin made a slight scrape on the floor with his toe) ; "they expect 
it, and they expect puns too . . .  one must know how to make a 
perfumed compliment . . .  that's what they expect there. And I've 
not learnt to do it, Krestyan Ivanovitch, I've never learnt all those 
tricks, I've never had the time. I'm a simple person, and not ingenious, 
and I've no external polish. On that side I surrender, Krestyan lvanov­
itch, I lay down my arms, speaking in that sense." 
All this Mr. Golyadkin pronounced with :m air which made it per­
fectly clear that our hero was far from regretting that he was laying 
down his arms in that sense and that he had not learnt these tricks; 
quite the contrary, indeed. As Krestyan lvanovitch listened to him, 
he looked down with a very unpleasant grimace on his face, seeming 
to have a presentiment of something. Mr. Golyadkin's tirade was fol­
lowed by a rather long and significant silence. 
"You have, I think, departed a little from the subject,'' Krestyan 
lvanovitch said at last, in a low voice: "I confess I cannot altogether 
understand you." 
"I'm not a great hand at eloquent speaking, Krestyan lvanovitch; 
I've had the honour to inform you, Krestyan lvanovitch, already," 
said Mr. Golyadkin, speaking this time in a sharp and resolute tone. 
"H'm!" . . .  
"Krestyan lvanovitch!" began Mr. Golyadkin again in a low but 
more significant voice, in a somewhat solemn style and emphasizing 
every point: "Krestyan lvanovitch, when I came in here I began with 
apologies. I repeat the same thing again, and again ask for your in­
dulgence. There's no need for me to conceal it, Krestyan Ivanovitch. 
I'm an unimportant man, as you know; but, fortunately for me, I do 
not regret being an unimportant man. Quite the contrary, indeed, 
Krestyan lvanovitch, and, to be perfectly frank, I'm proud that I'm not 

486 
'I h% Short N.otds of 7Josto%tlskJ' 
a great man but an unimportant man. I'm not one to intrigue and 
I'm proud of that too, I don't act on the sly, but openly, without 
cunning, and although I could do harm too, and a great deal of harm, 
indeed, and know to whom and how to do it, Krestyan Ivanovitch, 
yet I won't sully myself, and in that sense I wash my hands. In that 
sense, I say, I wash them, Krestyan Ivanovitch!" Mr. Golyadkin paused 
expressively for a moment; he spoke with mild fervour. 
"I set to work, Krestyan Ivanovitch," our hero continued, "direct!໛, 
openly, by no devious ways, for I disdain them, and leave them to 
others. I do not try to degrade those who are perhaps purer than you 
and I . . .  that is, I mean, I and they, Krestyan Ivanovitch-I didn't 
mean you. I don't like insinuations; I've no taste for contemptible 
duplicity; I'm disgusted by slander and calumny. I only put on a mask 
at a masquerade, and don't wear one before people every day. I only 
ask you, Krestyan Ivanovitch, how you would revenge yourself upon 
your enemy, your most malignant enemy-the one you would con­
sider such ?" Mr. Golyadkin concluded with a challenging glance at 
Krestyan Ivanovitch. 
Though Mr. Golyadkin pronounced this with the utmost distinct­
ness and clearness, weighing his words with a self-confident air and 
reckoning on their probable effect, yet meanwhile he looked at Krest­
yan Ivanovitch with anxiety, with great anxiety, with extreme anxiety. 
Now he was all eyes, and timidly waited for the doctor's answer with 
irritable and agonized impatience. But to the perplexity and com­
plete amazement of our hero, Krestyan Ivanovitch only muttered 
something to himself; then he moved his arm-chair up to the table. 
and rather drily though politely announced something to the effect 
that his time was precious, and that he did not quite understand ; that 
he was ready, however, to attend to him as far as he was able, but he 
would not go into anything further that did not concern him. At this 
point he took the pen, drew a piece of paper towards him, cut out of 
it the usual long strip, and announced that he would immediately 
prescribe what was necessary. 
"No, it's not necessary, Krestyan Ivanovitch! No, that's not neces­
sary at all!" said Mr. Golyadkin, getting up from his seat, and clutch­
ing Krestyan Ivanovitch's right hand. "That isn't what's wanted, 
Krestyan Ivanovitch." 
And, while he said this, a queer change came over him. His grey 
eyes gleamed strangely, his lips began to quiver, all the muscles, all 
the features of his face began moving and working. He was trembling 
all over. After stopping the doctor's hand, Mr. Golyadkin followed 

The 'Double 
487 
his first movement by standing motionless, as though he had no con­
fidence in himself and were waiting for some inspiration for further 
action. 
Then followed a rather strange scene. 
Somewhat perplexed, Krestyan Ivanovitch seemed for a moment 
rooted to his chair and gazed open-eyed in bewilderment at Mr. Gol­
yadkin, who looked at him in exactly the same way. At last Krestyan 
Ivanovitch stood up, gently holding the lining of Mr. Golyadkin's 
coat. For some seconds they both stood like that, motionless, with their 
eyes fixed on each other. Then, however, in an extraordinarily strange 
way came Mr. Golyadkin's second movement. His lips trembled, his 
chin began twitching, and our hero quite unexpectedly burst into 
tears. Sobbing, shaking his head and striking himself on the chest with 
his right hand, while with his left clutching the lining of the doctor's 
coat, he tried to say something and to make some explanation, but 
could not utter a word. 
At last Krestyan Ivanovitch recovered from his amazement. 
"Come, calm yourself!" he brought out at last, trying to make Mr. 
Golyadkin sit down in an arm-chair. 
"I have enemies, Krestyan Ivanovitch, I have enemies; I have 
malignant enemies who have sworn to ruin me . . . .  " Mr. Golyadkin 
answered in a frightened whisper. 
"Come, come, why enemies? You mustn't talk about enemies! You 
really mustn't. Sit down, sit down," Krestyan Ivanovitch went on, 
getting Mr. Golyadkin once for all into the arm-chair. 
}.lr. Golyadkin sat down at last, still keeping his eyes fixed on the 
doctor. \Vith an extremely displeased air, Krestyan Ivanovitch strode 
from one end of the room to another. A long silence followed. 
''I'm grateful to you, Krestyan Ivanovitch, I'm very grateful, and 
I'm very sensible of all you've done for me now. To my dying day I 
shall never forget your kindness, Krestyan Ivanovitch," said Mr. Gol­
yadkin, getting up from his seat with an offended air. 
"Come, give over! I tell you, give over!" Krestyan lvanovitch re­
sponded rather sternly to Mr. Golyadkin's outburst, making him sit 
down again. 
"\Veil, what's the matter? Tell me what is unpleasant," Krestyan 
Ivanovitch went on, "and what enemies are you talking about? What 
is wrong?" 
"No, Krestyan lvanovitch, we'd better leave that now," answered 
Mr. Golyadkin, casting down his eyes; "let us put all that aside for 
the time 
•
•
.
.
 Till another time, Krestyan Ivanovitch, till a more 

488 
The Short Novels of VostocvskJ 
convenient moment, when everything will be discovered and the mask 
falls off certain faces, and something comes to light. But, meanwhile, 
now, of course, after what has passed between us . . .  you will agree 
yourself, Krestyan lvanovitch . . .  Allow me to wish you good-morn­
ing, Krestyan lvanovitch," said Mr. Golyadkin, getting up gravely 
and resolutely and taking his hat. 
"Oh, well . . .  as you like . . .  h'm 
•
•
•
 
" (A moment of silence 
followed.) "For my part, you know 
.
.
•
 whatever I can do . . .  and 
I sincerely wish you well." 
"I understand you, Krestyan lvanovitch, I understand: I understand 
you perfectly now . . . .  In any case excuse me for having troubled 
you, Krestyan lvanovitch." 
"H'm, no, I didn't mean that. However, as you please; go on tak­
ing the medicines as before. . . . " 
"I will go on with the medicines as you say, Krestyan lvanovitch. 
I will go on with them, and I will get them at the same chemist's . . . .  
To be a chemist nowadays, Krestyan lvanovitch, is an important 
business . . . .  
" 
"How so? In what sense do you mean?" 
"In a very ordinary sense, Krestyan lvanovitch. I mean to say that 
nowadays that's the way of the world . . . .  
" 
"H'm . . .  " 
"And that every silly youngster, not only a chemist's boy, turns up 
his nose at respectable people." 
"H'm. How do you underst:.md that?" 
"I'm speaking of a certain person, Krestyan lvanovitch . . .  of a 
common acquaintance of ours, Krestyan lvanovitch, of Vladimir Sem­
yonovitch . . . .  
" 
"Ah!" 
"Yes, Krestyan lvanovitch : and I know certain people, Krestyan 
Ivanovitch, who don't quite keep to the general rule of telling the 
truth, sometimes." 
"Ah! How so?" 
"\Vhy, yes, it is so: but that's neither here nor there : they sometimes 
manage to serve you up a fine egg in gravy." 
"What ? Serve up what?" 
"An egg in gravy, Krestyan lvanovitch. It's a Russian saying. They 
know how to congratulate some one at the right moment, for instance; 
there are people like that." 
"Congr:ttulate?" 

'I he Vouble 
489 
"Yes, congratulate, Krestyan Ivanovitch, as some one I know very 
well did the other day!" 
"Some one you know very well . . .  Ahl how was that?" said 
Krestyan Ivanovitch, looking attentively at Mr. Golyadkin. 
"Yes, some one I know very well indeed congratulated some one 
else I know very well-and, what's more, a comrade, a friend of his 
heart, on his promotion, on his receiving the rank of assessor. This was 
how it happened to come up: 'I am exceedingly glad of the oppor­
tunity to offer you, Vladimir Semyonovitch, my congratulations, my 
sincere congratulations, on your receiving the rank of assessor. And 
I'm the more pleased, as all the world knows that there are old 
women nowadays who tell fortunes.' " 
At this point Mr. Golyadkin gave a sly nod, and screwing up his 
eyes, looked at Krestyan lvanovitch. 
"H'm. So he said that . . . .  " 
"He did, Krestyan Ivanovitch, he said it and glanced at once at 
Andrey Filippovitch, the uncle of our Prince Charming, Vladimir 
Semyonovitch. But what is it to me, Krestyan lvanovitch, that he has 
been made an assessor? \Vhat is it to me? And he wants to get married 
and the milk is scarcely dry on his lips, if I may be allowed the ex­
pression. And I said as much. Vladimir Semyonovitch, said II I've said 
everything now; allow me to withdraw." 
"H'm . . .  
" 
"Yes, Krestyan lvanovitch, allow me now, I say, to withdraw. But, 
to kill two birds with one stone, as I twitted our young gentleman 
with the old women I turned to Klara Olsufyevna (it all happened 
the day before yesterday at Olsufy lvanovitch's), and she had only 
just sung a song full of feeling, 'You've sung songs full of feeling, 
madame,' said I, 'but they've not been listened to with a pure heart.' 
And by that I hinted plainly, Krestyan lvanovitch, hinted plainly, that 
they were not running after her now, but looking higher . . . .  
" 
"Ah! And what did he say?" 
"He swallowed the pill, Krestyan lvanovitch, as the saying is.'' 
"Yes, Krestyan Ivanovitch. To the old man himself, too, I said, 
'Olsufy lvanovitch,' said I, 'I know how much I'm indebted to you, I 
appreciate to the full all the kindness you've showered upon me from 
my childhood up. But open your eyes, Olsufy lvanovitch,' I said. 
'Look about you. I myself do things openly and aboveboard, Olsufy 
Ivanovitch.' " 
"Oh, really!" 

490 
'The Short 'N.ovels of 'Dostoevsky 
"Yes, Kresty:m Ivanovitch. Really . . . .  " 
"What did he say ?" 
"Yes, what, indeed, Krestyan Ivanovitch ? He mumbled one thing 
and another, and 'I know you,' and that 'his Excellency was a benevo­
lent man'-he rambled on . . . .  But, there, you know! he's begun to 
be a bit shaky, as they say, with old age." 
"Ah! so that's how it is now . . . .  " 
"Yes, Krestyan Ivanovitch. And that's how we all are! Poor old 
man! He looks towards the grave, breathes incense, as they say, \·\'hile 
they concoct a piece of womanish gossip and he listens to it; without 
him they wouldn't . . .  
" 
"Gossip, you say ?" 
"Yes, Krestyan I vanovitch, they've concocted a womanish scandal. 
Our bear, too, had a finger in it, and his nephew, our Prince Charm­
ing. They've joined hands with the old women and, of course, they'\'e 
concocted the affair. Would you believe it? They plotted the murder 
of some one! . . .  
" 
"The murder of some one?" 
"Yes, Krestyan Ivanovitch, the moral murder of some one. They 
spread about . . .  I'm speaking of a man I know very well." 
Krestyan I vanovitch nodded. 
"They spread rumours about him . . .  I confess I'm ashamed to 
repeat them, Krestyan I vanovitch." 
"H'm" . . .  
"They spread a rumour that he had signed a promise to marry 
though he was already engaged in another quarter . . .  and would 
you believe it, Krestyan Ivanov itch, to whom ?" 
"Really?" 
"To a cook, to a disreputable German woman from \\'hom he used 
to get his dinners; instead of paying what he owed, he offered her his 
hand." 
"Is that what they say?" 
"\Vould you believe it, Krestya.n Ivanovitch ? A low German, a 
nasty shameless German, Karolina Ivanovna, if you know . . .  
" 
"I confess, for my part . . .  
" 
"I understand you, Krestyan lvanovitch, I understand, and for my 
part I feel it . . . .  
" 
"Tell me, please, where are you living now?" 
"\Vhere am I living now, Krestyan Ivanovitch ?" 
"Yes . . .  I want . . .  I believe, you used to live . . .  
" 
"Yes, Krestyan Ivanovitch, I did, I used to. To be sure I lived!" 

The Vouble 
491 
answered Mr. Golyadkin, accompanying his words with a little laugh, 
and somewhat disconcerting Krestyan Ivanovitch by his answer. 
"No, you misunderstood me; I meant to say . . .  " 
"I, too, meant to say, Krestyan Ivanovitch, I meant it too," Mr. 
Golyadkin continued, laughing. "But I've kept you far too long, 
Krestyan Ivanovitch. I hope you will allow me now, to wish you good­
morning." 
"H'm . . .  " 
"Yes, Krestyan Ivanovitch, I understand you; I fully understand 
you now," said our hero, with a slight flourish before Krestyan Ivanov­
itch. "And so permit me to wish you good-morning . . . .  " 
At this point our hero made a scrape with the toe of his boot and 
walked out of the room, leaving Krestyan Ivanovitch in the utmost 
amazement. As he went down the doctor's stairs he smiled and rubbed 
his hands gleefully. On the steps, breathing the fresh air and feeling 
himself at liberty, he was certainly prepared to admit that he was the 
happiest of mortals, and thereupon to go straight to his office-when 
suddenly his carriage rumbled up to the door: he glanced at it and 
remembered everything. Petrushka was already opening the carriage 
door. Mr. Golyadkin was completely overwhelmed by a strong and 
unpleasant sensation. He blushed, as it were, for a moment. Some­
thing seemed to stab him. He was just about to raise his foot to the 
carriage step when he suddenly turned round and looked towards 
Krestyan Ivanovitch's window. Yes, it was so! Krestyan Ivanovitch 
was standing at the window, was stroking his whiskers with his right 
hand and staring with some curiosity at the hero of our story. 
"That doctor is silly," thought Mr. Golyadkin, huddling out of sight 
in the carriage; "extremely silly. He may treat his patients all right, 
but still . . .  he's as stupid as a post." 
Mr. Golyadkin sat down, Petrushka shouted "Off!" and the carriage 
rolled towards Nevsky Prospect again. 
Chapter 3 
ALL that morning was spent by Mr. Golyadkin in a strange 
bustle of activity. On reaching the Nevsky Prospect our hero told the 
driver to stop at the bazaar. Skipping out of his carriage, he ran to the 
Arcade, accompanied by Petrushka, and went straight to a shop where 
gold and silver articles were for sale. One could see from his very air 

492 
The Short Novels of VostoevskJ 
that he was overwhelmed with business and had a terrible amount to 
do. Arranging to purchase a complete dinner- and tea-service for 
fifteen hundred roubles and including in the bargain for that sum a 
cigar-<:ase of ingenious form and a silver shaving-set, and finally, 
asking the price of some other articles, useful and agreeable in their 
own way, he ended by promising to come without fail next day, or 
to send for his purchases the same day. He took the number of the 
shop, listening attentively to the shopkeeper, who was very pressing 
for a small deposit, said that he should have it all in good time. After 
which he took leave of the amazed shopkeeper and, followed by a 
regular flock of shopmen, walked along the Arcade, continually look­
ing round at Petrushka and diligently seeking out fresh shops. On the 
way he dropped into a money-<:hanger's and changed all his big notes 
into small ones, and though he lost on the exchange, his pocket-book 
was considerably fatter, which evidently afforded him extreme satis­
faction. Finally, he stopped at a shop for ladies' dress-materials. Here, 
too, after deciding to purchase goods for a considerable sum, Mr. 
Golyadkin promised to come again, took the number of the shop and, 
on being asked for a deposit, assured the shopkeeper that he "should 
have a deposit too, all in good time." Then he visited several other 
shops, making purchases in each of them, asked the price of various 
things, sometimes arguing a long time with the shopkeeper, going out 
of the shop and returning two or three times-in fact, he displayed 
exceptional activity. From the Arcade our hero went to a well-known 
furniture shop, where he ordered furniture for six rooms; he admired 
a fashionable and very ingenious toilet table for ladies' use in the 
latest style, and, assuring the shopkeeper that he would certainly send 
for all these things, walked out of the shop, as usual promising a de­
posit. Then he went off somewhere else and ordered something more. 
In short, there seemed to be no end to the business he had to get 
through. At last, Mr. Golyadkin seemed to grow heartily sick of it 
all, and he began, goodness knows why, to be tormented by the stings 
of conscience. Nothing would have induced him now, for instance, 
to meet Andrey Filippovitch, or even Krestyan lvanovitch. 
At last, the town clock struck three. When Mr. Golyadkin finally 
took his seat in the carriage, of all the purchases he had made that 
morning he had, it appeared, in reality only got a pair of gloves and 
a bottle of scent, that cost a rouble and a half. As it was still rather 
early, he ordered his coachman to stop near a well-known restaurant 
in Nevsky Prospect which he only knew by reputation, got out of the 

The 'Double 
493 
carriage, and hurried in to have a light lunch, to rest and to wait for 
the hour fixed for the dinner. 
Lunching as a man lunches who has the prospect before him of 
going out to a sumptuous dinner, that is, taking a snack of something 
in order to still the pangs, as they say, and drinking one small glass of 
vodka, Mr. Golyadkin established himself in an arm-chair and, mod­
estly looking about him, peacefully settled down to an emaciated 
nationalist paper. After reading a couple of lines he stood up and 
looked in the looking-glass, set himself to rights and smoothed himself 
down; then he went to the window and looked to see whether his 
carriage was there . . .  then he sat down again in his place and took 
up the paper. It was noticeable that our hero was in great excitement. 
Glancing at his watch and seeing that it was only a quarter past three 
and that he had consequently a good time to wait and, at the same 
time, opining that to sit like that was unsuitable, Mr. Golyadkin 
ordered chocolate, though he felt no particular inclination for it at 
the moment. Drinking the chocolate and noticing that the time had 
moved on a little, he went up to pay his bill. 
He turned round and saw facing him two of his colleagues, the 
same two he had met that morning in Liteyny Street-young men, 
very much his juniors both in age and in rank. Our hero's relations 
with them were neither one thing nor the other, neither particularly 
friendly nor openly hostile. Good manners were, of course, observed 
on both sides : there was no closer intimacy, nor could there he. The 
meeting at this moment was extremely distasteful to Mr. Golyadkin. 
He frowned a little, and was disconcerted for an instant. 
"Yakov Petrovitch, Yakov Petrovitch!" chirped the two register 
clerks. "Y au here? What brings you? . . .  
" 
"Ah, it is you, gentlemen," Mr. Golyadkin interrupted hurriedly, 
somewhat embarrassed and scandalized by the amazement of the 
clerks and by the abruptness of their address, but feeling obliged, 
however, to appear jaunty and free and easy. "You've deserted, gentle­
men, he-he-he . . . .  " Then, to keep up his dignity and to conde­
scend to the juveniles, with whom he never overstepped certain limits, 
he attempted to slap one of the youths on the shoulder; but this effort 
at good fellowship did not succeed and, instead of being a well-bred 
little jest, produced quite a different effect. 
"Well, and our bear, is he still at the office?" 
"Who's that, Y akov Petrovitch?" 
"Why, the bear. Do you mean to say you don't know whose name 

494 
The Short Novels of Dostoevsky 
that is? 
" Mr. Golyadkin laughed and turned to the cashier to 
take his change. 
"I mean Andrey Filippovitch, gentlemen," he went on, finishing 
with the cashier, and turning to the clerks this time with a very serious 
face. The two register clerks winked at one another. 
"He's still at the office and asking for you, Y akov Petrovitch," 
answered one of them. 
"At the office, eh! In that case, let him stay, gentlemen. And asking 
for me, eh?" 
"He was asking for you, Yakov Petrovitch; but what's up with you, 
scented, pomaded, and such a swell? . . .  
" 
"Nothing, gentlemen, nothing! that's enough," answered Mr. Gol­
yadkin, looking away with a constrained smile. Seeing that Mr. Gol­
yadkin was smiling, the clerks laughed aloud. Mr. Golyadkin was a 
little offended. 
"I'll tell you as friends, gentlemen," our hero said, after a brief 
silence, as though making up his mind (which, indeed, was the case) 
to reveal something to them. "You all know me, gentlemen, but 
hitherto you've known me only on one side. No one is to blame for 
that and I'm conscious that the fault has been partly my own." 
Mr. Golyadkin pursed up his lips and looked significantly at the 
clerks. The clerks winked at one another again. 
"Hitherto, gentlemen, you have not known me. To explain myself 
here and now would not be quite appropriate. I will only touch on it 
lightly in passing. There are people, gentlemen, who dislike round­
about ways and only mask themselves at masquerades. There are 
people who do not see man's highest avocation in polishing the floor 
with their boots. There are people, gentlemen, who refuse to say that 
they are happy and enjoying a full life when, for instance, their 
trousers set properly. There are people, finally, who dislike dashing 
and whirling about for no object, fawning, and licking the dust, and 
above all, gentlemen, poking their noses where they are not wanted . 
. . . I've told you almost everything, gentlemen; now allow me to 
withdraw . . . .  
" 
Mr. Golyadkin paused. As the register clerks had now got all that 
they wanted, both of them with great incivility burst into shouts of 
laughter. Mr. Golyadkin flared up. 
"Laugh away, gentlemen, laugh away for the time being! If you 
live long enough you will see," he said, with a feeling of offended 
dignity, taking his hat and retreating to the door. 
"But I will say more, gentlemen," he added, turning for the last time 

The Vouble 
495 
to the register clerks, "I will say more-you are both here with me 
face to face. This, gentlemen, is my rule: if I fail I don't lose heart, if 
I succeed I persevere, and in any case I am never underhand. I'm not 
one to intrigue-and I'm proud of it. I've never prided myself on 
diplomacy. They say, too, gentlemen, that the bird flies itself to the 
hunter. It's true and I'm ready to admit it; but who's the hunter, and 
who's the bird in this case? That is still the question, gentlemen!" 
Mr. Golyadkin subsided into eloquent silence, and, with a most 
significant air, that is, pursing up his lips and raising his eyebrows as 
high as possible, he bowed to the clerks and walked out, leaving them 
in the utmost amazement. 
"What are your orders now?" Petrushka asked, rather gruffly; he 
was probably weary of hanging about in the cold. "What are your 
orders ? "  he asked Mr. Golyadkin, meeting the terrible, withering 
glance with which our hero had protected himself twice already that 
morning, and to which he had recourse now for the third time as he 
came down the steps. 
"To the Ismailovsky Bridge." 
"To the Ismailovsky Bridge! Off!" 
"Their dinner will not begin till after four, or perhaps five o'clock," 
thought Mr. Golyadkin; "isn't it early now? However, I can go a little 
early; besides, it's only a family dinner. And so I can go sans faroru. 
as they say among well-bred people. Why shouldn't I go sans fafons? 
The bear told us, too, that it would all be sans fafons, and so I will be 
the same . . . .  " Such were Mr. Golyadkin's reflections and r,1eanwhile 
his excitement grew more and more acute. It could be seen that he 
was preparing himself for some great enterprise, to say nothing more; 
he muttered to himself, gesticulated with his right hand, continually 
looked out of his carriage window, so that, looking at Mr. Golyadkin, 
no one would have said that he was on his way to a good dinner, and 
only a simple dinner in his family circle-sans fafons, as they say 
among well-bred people. Finally, just at Ismailovsky Bridge, Mr. 
Golyadkin pointed out a house; and the carriage rolled up noisily and 
stopped at the first entrance on the right. Noticing a feminine figure 
at the second-storey window, Mr. Golyadkin kissed his hanC: to her. He 
had, however, not the slightest idea what he was doing, for he felt 
more dead than alive at the moment. He got out of the carriage pale, 
distracted; he mounted the steps, took off his hat, mechanically 
straightened himself, and though he felt a slight trembling in his knees, 
he went upstairs. 
"Olsufy lvanovitch?" he inquired of the man who opened the door. 

496 
The Short Novels of Vostoevsky 
"At home, sir; at least he's not at home, his honour's not at home." 
"What? What do you mean, my good man? 1-l've come to dinner, 
brother. Why, you know me?" 
"To be sure I know you! I've orders not to admit you." 
"You . . .  you, brother . . .  you must be making a mistake. It's I, my 
boy, I'm invited; I've come to dinner," Mr. Golyadkin announced, 
taking off his coat and displaying unmistakable intentions of going 
into the room. 
"Allow me, sir, you can't, sir. I've orders not to admit you. I've orders 
to refuse you. That's how it is." 
Mr. Golyadkin turned pale. At that very moment the door of the 
inner room opened and Gerasimitch, Olsufy lvanovitch's old butler, 
came out. 
"You see the gentleman wants to go in, Emelyan Gerasimitch, and 
I . . .  " 
"And you're a fool, Alexeitch. Go inside and send the rascal Semyon­
itch here. It's impossible," he said politely but firmly, addressing Mr. 
Golyadkin. "It's quite impossible. His honour begs you to excuse him; 
he can't see you." 
"He said he couldn't see me?" Mr. Golyadkin asked uncertainly. 
"Excuse me, Gerasimitch, why is it impossible?" 
"It's quite impossible. I've informed your honour; they said 'Ask 
him to excuse us.' They can't see you.'' 
"Why not? How's that? Why? "  
"Allow me, allow me! . .  . '' 
"How is it, though? It's out of the question! Announce me 
.
•
•
•
 
How is it ? I've come to dinner . . . .  
" 
"Excuse me, excuse me . . . .  
" 
"Ah, well, that's a different matter, they asked to be excused : but, 
allow me, Gerasimitch; how is it, Gerasimitch?" 
"Excuse me, excuse me!" replied Gerasimitch, very firmly putting 
away Mr. Golyadkin's hand and making way for two gentlemen who 
walked into the entry that very instant. The gentlemen in question 
were Andrey Filippovitch and his nephew, Vladimir Semyonovitch. 
Both of them looked with amazement at Mr. Golyadkin. Andrey 
Filippovitch seemed about to say something, but Mr. Golyadkin had 
by now made up his mind; he was by now walking out of Olsufy 
lvanovitch's entry, blushing and smiling, with eyes cast down and 
a countenance of helpless bewilderment. "I will come afterwards, 
Gerasimitch; I will explain myself: I hope that all this will without 
delay be explained in due season. . . .'' 

The 'Double 
497 
"Yakov Petrovitch, Yakov Petrovitch 
•
•
•
 
" He heard the voice of 
Andrey Filippovitch following him. 
Mr. Golyadkin was by that time on the first landing. He turned 
quickly to Andrey Filippovitch. 
"What do you desire, Andrey Filippovitch?" he said in a rather 
resolute voice. 
"What's wrong with you, Yakov Petrovitch? In what way?" 
"No matter, Andrey Filippovitch. I'm on my own account here. This 
is my private life, Andrey Filoppovitch." 
"What's that ?" 
"I say, Andrey Filippovitch, that this is my private life, and as for 
my being here, as far as I can see, there's nothing reprehensible to be 
found in it as regards my official relations." 
"What! As regards your official . . .  What's the matter with you, my 
good sir?" 
"Nothing, Andrey Filippovitch, absolutely nothing; an impudent 
slut of a girl, and nothing more . . . .  
" 
"What! What ? "  Andrey Filippovitch was stupefied with amazement. 
Mr. Golyadkin, who had up till now then looked as though he would 
fly into Andrey Filippovitch's face, seeing that the head of his office 
was laughing a little, almost unconsciously took a step forward. An­
drey Filippovitch jumped back. Mr. Golyadkin went up one step 
and then another. Andrey Filippovitch looked about him uneasily. 
Mr. Golyadkin mounted the stairs rapidly. Still more rapidly Andrey 
Filippovitch darted into the flat and slammed the door after him. 
Mr. Golyadkin was left alone. Everything grew dark before his eyes. 
He was utterly nonplussed, and stood now in a sort of senseless hesi­
tation, as though recalling something extremely senseless, too, that had 
happened quite recently. "Ech, ech!" he muttered, smiling with con­
straint. Meanwhile, there came the sounds of steps and voices on the 
stairs, probably of other guests invited by Olsufy Ivanovitch. Mr. 
Golyadkin recovered himself to some extent; put up his raccoon collar, 
concealing himself behind it as far as possible, and began going down­
stairs with rapid little steps, tripping and stumbling in his haste. He 
felt overcome by a sort of weakness and numbness. His confusion was 
such that, when he came out on the steps, he did not even wait for 
his carriage but walked across the muddy court to it. When he 
reached his carriage and was about to get into it, Mr. Golyadkin 
inwardly uttered a desire to sink into the earth, or to hide in a mouse­
hole together with his carriage. It seemed to him that everything in 
Olsufy Ivanovitch's house was looking at him now out of every win-

T lze Slzort N.ovels of 7Jostoevsfo· 
dow. He knew that he would certainly die on the spot if he were to 
go back. 
"What are you laughing at, blockhead?" he said in a rapid mutter 
to Petrushka, who was preparing to help him into the carriage. 
"What should I laugh at? I'm not doing anything; where are we 
to drive now?" 
"Go home, drive on . . . .  
" 
"Home, off!" shouted Petrushka, climbing on to the footboard. 
"What a crow's croak!" thought Mr. Golyadkin. Meanwhile, the 
carriage had driven a good distance from Ismailovsky Bridge. Sud­
denly our hero pulled the cord with all his might and shouted to the 
driver to turn back at once. The coachman turned his horses and 
within two minutes was driving into Olsufy lvanovitch's yard again. 
"Don't, don't, you fool, back!" shouted Mr. Golyadkin-and, as 
though he were expecting this order, the driver made no reply but, 
without stopping at the entrance, drove all round the courtyard and 
out into the street again. 
Mr. Golyadkin did not drive home, hut, after passing the Semyonov­
sky Bridge, told the driver to return to a side street and stop near a 
restaurant of rather modest appearance. Getting out of the carriage, 
our hero settled up with the driver and so got rid of his equipage at 
last. He told Petrushka to go home and await his return, while he 
went into the restaurant, took a private room and ordered dinner. He 
felt very ill and his brain was in the utmost confusion and chaos. For 
a long time he walked up and down the room in agitation ; at last he 
sat down in a chair, propped his brow in his hands and began doing 
his very utmost to consider and settle something relating to his present 
position. 
Chapter 4 
THAT day the birthday of Klara Olsufyevna, the only daughter 
of the civil councillor, Berendyev, at one time Mr. Golyadkin's bene­
factor and patron, was being celebrated by a brilliant and sumptuous 
dinner-party, such as had not been seen for many a long day within 
the walls of the flats in the neighbourhood of lsmailovsky Bridge­
a dinner more like some Balthazar's feast, with a suggestion of some­
thing Babylonian in its brilliant luxury and style, with Veuve Clicquot 
champagne, with oysters and fruit from Eliseyev's and Milyutin's, 

The 1Jouble 
499 
with all sorts of fatted calves, and all grades of the government service. 
This festive day was to conclude with a brilliant ball, a small birthday 
ball, but yet brilliant in its taste, its distinction and its style. Of course, 
I am willing to admit that similar balls do happen sometimes, though 
rarely. Such balls, more like family rejoicings than balls, can only be 
given in such houses as that of the civil councillor, Berendyev. I will 
say more: I even doubt if such balls could be given in the houses of 
all civil councillors. Oh, if I were a poet! such as Homer or Pushkin, 
I mean, of course; with any lesser talent one would not venture-! 
should certainly have painted all that glorious day for you, oh, my 
readers, with a free brush and brilliant colours! Yes, I should begin 
my poem with my dinner, I should lay special stress on that striking 
and solemn moment when the first goblet was raised to the honour 
of the queen of the fete. I should describe to you the guests plunged 
in a reverent silence and expectation, as eloquent as the rhetoric of 
Demosthenes; I should describe for you, then, how Andrey Filip­
povitch, having as the eldest of the guests some right to take prece­
dence, adorned with his grey hairs and the orders that well befit grey 
hairs, got up from his seat and raised above his head the congratulatory 
glass of sparkling wine-brought from a distant kingdom to celebrate 
such occasions and more like heavenly nectar than plain wine. I would 
portray for you the guests and the happy parents raising their glasses, 
too, after Andrey Filippovitch, and fastening upon him eyes full of 
expectation. I would describe for you how the same Andrey Filip­
povitch, so often mentioned, after dropping a tear in the glass, deliv­
ered his congratulations and good wishes, proposed the toast and 
drank the health . . .  but I confess, I freely confess, that I could not do 
justice to the solemn moment when the queen of the fete, Klara 
Olsufyevna, blushing like a rose in spring, with the glow of bliss and 
of modesty, was so overcome by her feelings that she sank into the 
arms of her tender mamma; how that tender mamma shed tears, and 
how the father, Olsufy lvanovitch, a hale old man and a privy council­
lor, who had lost the use of his legs in his long years of service and been 
rewarded by destiny for his devotion with investments, a house, some 
small estates, and a beautiful daughter, sobbed like a little child and 
announced through his tears that his Excellency was a benevolent man. 
I could not, I positively could not, describe the enthusiasm that fol­
lowed that moment in every heart, an enthusiasm clearly evinced in 
the conduct of a youthful register clerk (though at that moment he 
was more like a civil councillor than a register clerk), who was moved 
to tears, too, as he listened to Andrey Filippovitch. In his turn, too, 

500 
The Short Novels vf 'Dostoevsky 
Andrey Filippovitch was in that solemn moment quite unlike a col­
legiate councillor and the head of an office in the department-yes, he 
was something else •
.
.
 what, exactly, I do not know, but not a 
collegiate councillor. He was more exalted! Finally . . .  Oh, why do 
I not possess the secret of lofty, powerful language, of the sublime 
style, to describe these grand and edifying moments of human life, 
which seem created expressly to prove that virtue sometimes triumphs 
over ingratitude, free-thinking, vice and envy! I will say nothing, but 
in silence-which will be better than any eloquence-! will point to 
that fortunate youth, just entering on his twenty-sixth spring-to 
Vladimir Semyonovitch, Andrey Filippovitch's nephew, who in his 
turn now rose from his seat, who in his turn proposed a toast, and 
upon whom were fastened the tearful eyes of the parents, the proud 
eyes of Andrey Filippovitch, the modest eyes of the queen of the fete, 
the solemn eyes of the guests, and even the decorously envious eyes 
of some of the young man's youthful colleagues. I will say nothing 
of that, though I cannot refrain from observing that everything in 
that young man-who was, indeed, speaking in a complimentary sense, 
more like an elderly than a young man-everything, from his bloom­
ing cheeks to his assessorial rank, seemed almost to proclaim aloud the 
lofty pinnacle a man can attain through morality and good principles! 
I will not describe how Anton Antonovitch Syetotchkin, a little old 
man as grey as a badger, the head clerk of a department, who was a 
colleague of Andrey Filippovitch's and had once been also of Olsufy 
lvanovitch's, and was an old friend of the family and Klara Olsufy­
evna's godfather, in his turn proposed a toast, crowed like a cock, and 
cracked many little jokes; how by this extremely proper breach of 
propriety, if one may use such an expression, he made the whole 
company laugh till they cried, and how Klara Olsufyevna, at her 
parents' bidding, rewarded him for his jocularity and politeness with 
a kiss. I will only say that the guests, who must have felt like kinsfolk 
and brothers after such a dinner, at last rose from the table, and the 
elderly and more solid guests, after a brief interval spent in friendly 
conversation, interspersed with some candid, though, of course, very 
polite and proper, observations, went decorously into the next room 
and, without losing valuable time, promptly divided themselves up 
into parties and, full of the sense of their O\vn dignity, installed them­
selves at tables covered with green baize. Meanwhile, the ladies estab­
lished in the drawing-room suddenly became very affable and began 
talking about dress-materials. And the venerable host, who had lost 
the use of his legs in the service of loyalty and religion, and had been 

The 'Double 
501 
rewarded with all the blessings we have enumerated above, began 
walking about on crutches among his guests, supported by Vladimir 
Semyonovitch and Klara Olsufyevna, and he, too, suddenly becoming 
extremely affable, decided to improvise a modest little dance, regard­
less of expense; to that end a nimble youth (the one who was more 
like a civil councillor than a youth) was despatched to fetch musicians, 
and musicians to the number of eleven arrived, and exactly at half­
past eight struck up the inviting strains of a French quadrille, followed 
by various other dances. . . . It is needless to say that my pen is too 
weak, dull, and spiritless to describe the dance that owed its inspiration 
to the genial hospitality of the grey-headed host. And how, I ask, can 
the modest chronicler of Mr. Golyadkin's adventures, extremely in­
teresting as they are in their own way, how can I depict the choice 
and rare mingling of beauty, brilliance, style, gaiety, polite solidity 
and solid politeness, sportiveness, joy, all the mirth and playfulness of 
these wives and daughters of petty officials, more like fairies than 
ladies-in a complimentary sense-with their lily shoulders and their 
rosy faces, their ethereal figures, their playfully agile homeopathic­
to use the exalted language appropriate-little feet? How can I de­
scribe to you, finally, the gallant officials, their partners-gay and 
solid youths, steady, gleeful, decorously vague, smoking a pipe in the 
intervals between the dancing in a little green room apart, or not 
smoking a pipe in the intervals between the dances, every one of them 
with a highly respectable surname and rank in the service-all steeped 
in a sense of the elegant and a sense of their own dignity; almost all 
speaking French to their partners, or if Russian, using only the most 
well-bred expressions, compliments and profound observations, and 
only in the smoking-room permitting themselves some genial lapses 
from this high tone, some phrases of cordial and friendly brevity, such, 
for instance, as : " 'Pon my soul, Petka, you rake, you did kick off that 
polka in style," or, "I say, Vasya, you dog, you did give your partner 
a time of it." For all this, as I've already had the honour of explaining, 
oh, my readers! my pen fails me, and therefore I am dumb. Let us 
rather return to Mr. Golyadkin, the true and only hero of my very 
truthful tale. 
The fact is that he found himself now in a very strange position, to 
say the least of it. He was here also, gentlemen-that is, not at the 
dance, but almost at the dance; he was "all right, though; he could 
take care of himself," yet at this moment he was a little astray; he 
was standing at that moment, strange to say-on the landing of the 
back stairs to Olsufy Ivanovitch's flat. But it was "all right" his stand-

502 
The Short Novels of VostoevskJ 
ing there; he was "quite well." He was standing in a corner, huddled 
in a place which was not very warm, though it was dark, partly hidden 
by a huge cupboard and an old screen, in the midst of rubbish, litter, 
and odds and ends of all sorts, concealing himself for the time being 
and watching the course of proceedings as a disinterested spectator. 
He was only looking on now, gentlemen; he, too, gentlemen, might go 
in, of (':ourse •
.
•
 why should he not go in? He had only to take one 
step and he would go in, and would go in very adroitly. Just now, 
though he had been standing nearly three hours between the cupboard 
and the screen in the midst of the rubbish, litter, and odds and ends 
of all sorts, he was only quoting, in his own justification, a memorable 
phrase of the French minister, Villesle: "All things come in time to 
him who has the strength to wait." Mr. Golyadkin had read this 
sentence in some book on quite a different subject, but now very aptly 
recalled it. The phrase, to begin with, was exceedingly appropriate to 
his present position, and, indeed, why should it not occur to the mind 
of a man who had been waiting for almost three hours in the cold 
and the dark in expectation of a happy ending to his adventures? After 
quoting very appropriately the phrase of the French minister, Villeslc, 
Mr. Golyadkin immediately thought of the Turkish vizier, Mart­
simiris, as well as of the beautiful .Margravine Luise, whose story he 
had read also in some book. Then it occurred to his mind that the 
Jesuits made it their rule that any means were justified if only the 
end were attained. Fortifying himself somewhat with this historical 
fact, Mr. Golyadkin said to himself, What were the Jesuits? The 
Jesuits were every one of them very great fools; that he was better than 
any of them; that if only the refreshment-room would be empty for 
one minute (the door of the refreshment-room opened straight into 
the passage to the back stairs, where Mr. Golyadkin was in hiding 
now), he would, in spite of all the Jesuits in the world, go straight in, 
first from the refreshment-room into the tea-room, then into the room 
where they were now playing cards, and then straight into the hall 
where they were now dancing the polka, and he would go in, he would 
certainly go in, in spite of anything he would go in-he would slip 
through-and that would be all, no one would notice him; and once 
there he would know what to do. 
Well, so this is the position in which we find the hero of our per­
fectly true story, though, indeed, it is difficult to explain what was 
passing in him at that moment. The fact is that he had made his way 
to the back stairs, and to the passage, on the ground that, as he sai-:1, 
"Why shouldn't he? And everyone did go that way"; but he had not 

The 1Jouble 
503 
ventured to penetrate further, evidently he did not dare to do so . . .  
"not because there was anything he did not dare, but just because he 
did not care to, because he preferred to be in hiding"; so here he was, 
waiting now for a chance to slip in, and he had been waiting for it 
two hours and a half. "Why not wait? Villesle himself had waited. 
But what had Villesle to do with it?" thought Mr. Golyadkin: "How 
does Villesle come in? But how am I to . . .  to go and walk in? •
.
•
 
Ech, you dummy!" said Mr. Golyadkin, pinching his benumbed cheek 
with his benumbed fingers; "you silly fool, you silly old Golyadkin­
silly fool of a surname!" . . .  
But these compliments paid to himself were only by the way and 
without any apparent aim. Now he was on the point of pushing for­
ward and slipping in; the refreshment-room was empty and no one was 
in sight. Mr. Golyadkin saw all this through the little window; in 
two steps he was at the door and had already opened it. "Should he 
go in or not? Come, should he or not? I'll go in . . .  why not? to the 
bold all ways lie open!" Reassuring himself in this way, our hero 
suddenly and quite unexpectedly retreated behind the screen. "No," 
he thought. "Ah, now, somebody's coming in? Yes, they've come in; 
why did I dawdle when there were no people about? Even so, shall 
I go and slip in ? . . .  No, how slip in when a man has such a temper­
ament! Fie, what a low tendency! I'm as scared as a hen! Being scared 
is our special line, that's the fact of the matter! To be abject on every 
occasion is our line: no need to ask us about that. Just stand here like 
a post and that's all! At home I should be having a cup of tea now . 
. . . It would be pleasant, too, to have a cup of tea. If I come in later 
Petrushka'll grumble, maybe. Shall I go home? Damnation take all 
this! I'll go and that'll be the end of it!" Reflecting on his position 
in this way, Mr. Golyadkin dashed forward as though some one had 
touched a spring in him; in two steps he found himself in the refresh­
ment-room, flung off his overcoat, took off his hat, hurriedly thrust these 
things into a corner, straightened himself and smoothed himself down; 
then . . .  then he moved on to the tea-room, and from the tea-room 
darted into the next room, slipped almost unnoticed between the card­
players, who were at the tip-top of excitement, then . . .  Mr. Golyadkin 
forgot everything that was going on about him, and went straight 
as an arrow into the drawing-room. 
As luck would have it they were not dancing. The ladies were 
promenading up and down the room in picturesque groups. The 
gentlemen were standing about in twos and threes or flitting about 
the room engaging partners. Mr. Golyadkin noticed nothing of this. 

504 
The Short Novels of 'DostoevskY 
He saw only Klara Olsufyevna, near her Andrey Filippovitch, then 
Vladimir Semyonovitch, two or three officers, and, finally, two or three 
other young men who were also very interesting and, as any one 
could see at once, were either very promising or had actually done 
something . . . .  He saw some one else too. Or, rather, he saw nobody 
and looked at nobody . . . but, moved by the same spring which had 
sent him dashing into the midst of a ball to which he had not been 
invited, he moved forward, and then forwarder and forwarder. On 
the way he jostled against a councillor and trod on his foot, and inci­
dentally stepped on a very venerable old lady's dress and tore it a 
little, pushed against a servant with a tray and then ran against some­
body else, and, not noticing all this, or rather noticing it but at the 
same time looking at no one, pressing further and further forward, he 
suddenly found himself facing Klara Olsufyevna. There is no doubt 
whatever that he would, with the utmost delight, without winking 
an eyelid, have sunk through the earth at that moment; but what has 
once been done cannot be recalled . . .  can never be recalled. What 
was he to do? "If I fail I don't lose heart, if I succeed I persevere." 
Mr. Golyadkin was, of course, not "one to intrigue," and "not accom­
plished in the art of polishing the floor with his boots." . . .  And so, 
indeed, it proved. Besides, the Jesuits had some hand in it too . . .  
though Mr. Golyadkin had no thoughts to spare for them now! All 
the moving, noisy, talking, laughing groups were suddenly hushed 
as though at a signal and, little by little, crowded round Mr. Golyadkin. 
He, however, seemed to hear nothing, to see nothing, he could not 
look . . .  he could not possibly look at anything; he kept his eyes on 
the floor and so stood, giving himself his word of honour, in passing, 
to shoot himself one way or another that night. Making this vow, Mr. 
Golyadkin inwardly said to himself, "Here goes!" and to his own 
great astonishment began unexpectedly to speak. 
He began with congratulations and polite wishes. The congratula­
tions went off well, but over the good wishes our hero stammered. 
He felt that if he stammered all would be lost at once. And so it turned 
out-he stammered and floundered . . .  floundering, he blushed crim­
son; blushing, he was overcome with confusion. In his confusion he 
raised his eyes; raising his eyes he looked about him ; looking about 
him-he almost swooned . . . .  Every one stood still, every one was 
silent, every one was waiting; a little way off there was whispering; 
a little nearer there was laughter. Mr. Golyadkin fastened a humble, 
imploring look on Andrey Filippovitch. Andrey Filippovitch re­
sponded with such a look that if our hero had not been utterly crushed 

The 1Jouble 
505 
already he certainly would have been crushed a second time-that 
is, if that were possible. The silence lasted long. 
"This is rather concerned with my domestic circumstances and my 
private life, Andrey Filippovitch," our hero, half-dead, articulated in 
a scarcely audible voice; "it is not an official incident, Andrey Filip­
povitch 
.
•
.
.
 
" 
"For shame, sir, for shame!" Andrey Filippovitch pronounced in 
a half-whisper, with an indescribable air of indignation; he pro­
nounced these words and, giving Klara Olsufyevna his arm, he turned 
away from Mr. Golyadkin. 
"I've nothing to be ashamed of, Andrey Filippovitch," answered 
Mr. Golyadkin, also in a whisper, turning his miserable eyes about 
him, trying helplessly to discover in the amazed crowd something 
on which he could gain a footing and retrieve his social position. 
"Why, it's all right, it's nothing, gentlemen! Why, what's the mat­
ter? Why, it might happen to any one," whispered Mr. Golyadkin, 
moving a little away and trying to escape from the crowd surrounding 
him. 
They made way for him. Our hero passed through two rows of 
inquisitive and wondering spectators. Fate drew him on. He felt that 
himself, that fate was leading him on. He would have given a great 
deal, of course, for a chance to be back in the passage by the back 
stairs, without having committed a breach of propriety; but as that 
was utterly impossible he began trying to creep away into a corner and 
to stand there-modestly, decorously, apart, without interfering with 
any one, without attracting especial attention, but at the same time to 
win the favourable notice of his host and the company. At the same 
time Mr. Golyadkin felt as though the ground were giving way under 
him, as though he were staggering, falling. At last he made his wໜy to a 
corner and stood in it, like an unconcerned, rather indifferent specta­
tor, leaning his arms on the backs of two chairs, taking complete 
possession of them in that way, and trying, as far as he could, to glance 
confidently at Olsufy lvanovitch's guests, grouped about him. Standing 
nearest him was an officer, a tall and handsome fellow, beside whom 
Golyadkin felt himself an insect. 
"These two chairs, Lieutenant, are intended, one for Klara Olsufy­
evna, and the other for Princess Tchevtchehanov; I'm taking care of 
them for them," said Mr. Golyadkin breathlessly, turning his imploring 
eyes on the officer. The lieutenant said nothing, but turned away with a 
murderous smile. Checked in this direction, our hero was about to 
try his luck in another quarter, and directly addressed an important 

506 
The Slzort Novels of 1Jostoevsk.y 
councillor with a cross of great distinction on his breast. But the 
councillor looked him up and down with such a frigid stare that Mr. 
Golyadkin felt distinctly as though a whole bucketful of cold water 
had been thrown over him. He subsided into silence. He made up his 
mind that it was better to keep quiet, not to open his lips, and to show 
that he was "all right," that he was ''like every one else," and that his 
position, as far as he could see, was quite a proper one. With this 
object he riveted his gaze on the lining of his coat, then raised his 
eyes and fixed them upon a very respectable-looking gentleman. "That 
gentleman has a wig on," thought Mr. Golyadkin ; "and if he takes 
off that wig he will be bald, his head will be as bare as the palm of 
my hand." Having made this important discovery, Mr. Golyadkin 
thought of the Arab emirs, whose heads are left bare and shaven if 
they take off the green turbans they wear as a sign of their descent 
from the prophet Mahomet. Then, probably from some special con­
nection of ideas with the Turks, he thought of Turkish slippers and 
at once, apropos of that, recalled the fact that Andrey Filippovitch 
was wearing boots, and that his boots were more like slippers than 
boots. It was evident that Mr. Golyadkin had become to some extent 
reconciled to his position. "What if that chandelier," flashed through 
Mr. Golyadkin's mind, "were to come down from the ceiling and fall 
upon the company? I should rush at once to save Klara Olsufyevna. 
'Save her!' I should cry. 'Don't be alarmed, madame, it's of no conse· 
quence, I will rescue you, I.' Then . . .  " At that moment Mr. Golyadkin 
looked about in se:uch of Klara Olsufyevna, and saw Gerasimitch, 
Olsufy lvanovitch's old butler. Gerasimitch, with a most anxious and 
solemnly official air, was making straight for him. Mr. Golyadkin 
started and frowned from an unaccountable but most disagreeable 
sensation; he looked about him mechanically; it occurred to his mind 
if only he could somehow creep off somewhere, unobserved, on the 
sly-simply disappear, that is, behave as though he had done nothing 
at all, as though the matter did not concern him in the least! . . .  But 
before our hero could make up his mind to do anything, Gerasimitch 
was standing before him. 
"Do you see, Gerasimitch," said our hero, with a little smile, ad· 
dressing Gerasimitch; "you go and tell them-do you see the candle 
there in the chandelier, Gerasimitch ?-it will be falling down directly: 
so, you know, you must tell them to see to it; it really will fall down, 
Gerasimi tch. . . ." 
"The candle? No, the candle's standing straight ; but somebody is 
asking for you, sir." 

The 1Jouble 
507 
"Who is asking for me, Gerasimitch?" 
"I really can't say, sir, who it is. A man with a message. 'Is Yakov 
Petrovitch Golyadkin here?' says he. 'Then call him out,' says he, 'on 
very urgent and important business . .  .' you see.'' 
"No, Gerasimitch, you are making a mistake; in that you are mak­
ing a mistake, Gerasimitch.'' 
"I doubt it, sir.'' 
"No, Gerasimitch, it isn't doubtful; there's nothing doubtful about 
it, Gerasimitch. Nobody's asking for me, but I'm quite at home here­
that is, in my right place, Gerasimitch.'' 
Mr. Golyadkin took breath and looked about him. Yes! every one 
in the room, all had their eyes fixed upon him, and were listening 
in a sort of solemn expectation. The men had crowded a little nearer 
and were all attention. A little further away the ladies were whisper­
ing together. The master of the house made his appearance at no great 
distance from Mr. Golyadkin, and though it was impossible to detect 
from his expression that he, too, was taking a close and direct interest 
in Mr. Golyadkin's position, for everything was being done with 
delicacy, yet, nevertheless, it all made our hero feel that the decisive 
moment had come for him. Mr. Golyadkin saw clearly that the time 
had come for a bold stroke, the chance of putting his enemies to 
shame. Mr. Golyadkin was in great agitation. He was aware of a 
sort of inspiration and, in a quivering and impressive voice, he began 
again, addressing the waiting butler-
"No, my dear fellow, no one's calling for me. You are mistaken. 
I will say more : you were mistaken this morning, too, when you 
assured me . . .  dared to assure me, I say," (he raised his voice) "that 
Olsufy lvanovitch, who has been my benefactor as long as I can 
remember and has, in a sense, been a father to me, was shutting his 
door upon me at the moment of solemn family rejoicing for his pater­
nal heart." (Mr. Golyadkin looked about him complacently, but with 
deep feeling. A tear glittered on his eyelash.) "I repeat, my friend," 
our hero concluded, "you were mistaken, you were cruelly and un­
pardonably mistaken . . . .  " 
The moment was a solemn one. Mr. Golyadkin felt that the eiTect 
was quite certain. He stood with modestly downcast eyes, expecting 
Olsufy lvanovitch to embrace him. Excitement and perplexity were 
apparent in the guests, even the inflexible and terrible Gerasimitch 
faltered over the words "I doubt it . . .  " when suddenly the ruthless 
orchestra, apropos of nothing, struck up a polka. All was lost, all 
was scattered to the winds. Mr. Golyadkin started; Gerasimitch stepped 

508 
'I he Slzort Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
back; everything in the room began undulating like the sea; and 
Vladimir Semyonovitch led the dance with Klara Olsufyevna, while 
the handsome lieutenant followed with Princess Tchevtchehanov. On­
lookers, curious and delighted, squeezed in to watch them dancing the 
polka-an interesting, fashionable new dance which every one was 
crazy over. Mr. Golyadkin was, for the time, forgotten. But suddenly 
all were thrown into excitement, confusion and bustle; the music 
ceased . . .  a strange incident had occurred. Tired out with the dance, 
and almost breathless with fatigue, Klara Olsufyevna, with glowing 
cheeks and heaving bosom, sank into an arm-chair, completely ex­
hausted . . . .  All hearts turned to the fascinating creature, all vied w-ith 
one another in complimenting her and thanking her for the pleasure 
conferred on them-all at once there stood before her Mr. Golyadkin. 
He was pale, extremely perturbed; he, too, seemed completely ex­
hausted, he could scarcely move. He was smiling for some reason, he 
stretched out his hand imploringly. Klara Olsufyevna was so taken 
aback that she had not time to withdraw hers and mechanically got 
up at his invitation. Mr. Golyadkin lurched forward, first once, then 
a second time, then lifted his leg, then made a scrape, then gave a 
sort of stamp, then stumbled . . .  he, too, wanted to dance with Klara 
Olsufyevna. Klara Olsufyevna uttered a shriek; every one rushed to 
release her hand from Mr. Golyadkin's, and in a moment our hero 
was carried almost ten paces away by the rush of the crowd. A circle 
formed round him too. Two old ladies, whom he had almost knocked 
down in his retreat, raised a great shrieking and outcry. The con­
fusion was awful; all were asking questions, every one was shouting, 
every one was finding fault. The orchestra was silent. Our hero whirled 
round in his circle and mechanically, with a semblance of a smile, 
muttered something to himself, such as, "\Vhy not?" and "that the 
polka, so far, at least, as he could see, was a new and very interesting 
dance, invented for the diversion of the ladies . . .  but that since things 
had taken this turn, he was ready to consent." But Mr. Golyadkin's 
consent no one apparently thought of asking. Our hero was suddenly 
aware that some one's hand was laid on his arm, that another hand 
was pressed against his back, that he was with peculiar solicitude 
being guided in a certain direction. At last he noticed that he was 
going straight to the door. Mr. Golyadkin wanted to say something, 
to do something . . . . But no, he no longer wanted to do anything. 
He only mechanically kept laughing in answer. At last he was aware 
that they were putting on his greatcoat, that his hat was thrust over 
\tis eyes; finally he felt that he was in the entry on the stairs in the 

'The 'Double 
509 
dark and cold. At last he stumbled, he felt that he was falling down a 
precipice; he tried to cry out-and suddenly found himself in the 
courtyard. The air blew fresh on him, he stood still for a minute; at 
that very instant, the strains reached him of the orchestra striking up 
again. Mr. Golyadkin suddenly recalled it all; it seemed to him that 
all his flagging energies came back to him again. He had been standing 
as though riveted to the spot, but now he started off and rushed away 
headlong, anywhere, into the air, into freedom, wherever chance might 
take him. 
Chapter 5 
I T WAS striking midnight from all the clock towers in Petersburg 
when Mr. Golyadkin, beside himself, ran out on the Fontanka Quay, 
close to the lsmailovsky Bridge, fleeing from his foes, from persecution, 
from a hailstorm of nips and pinches aimed at him, from the shrieks of 
excited old ladies, from the Ohs and Ahs of women and from the 
murderous eyes of Andrey Filippovitch. Mr. Golyadkin was killed­
killed entirely, in the full sense of the word, and if he still preserved 
the power of running, it was simply through some sort of miracle, a 
miracle in which at last he refused himself to believe. It was an awful 
November night-wet, foggy, rainy, snowy, teeming with colds in 
the head, fevers, swollen faces, quinsies, inflammations of all kinds 
and descriptions-teeming, in fact, with all the gifts of a Petersburg 
November. The wind howled in the deserted streets, lifting up the 
black water of the canal above the rings on the bank, and irritably 
brushing against the lean lamp-posts which chimed in with its 
howling in a thin, shrill creak, keeping up the endless squeaky, 
jangling concert with which every inhabitant of Petersburg is so 
familiar. Snow and rain were falling both at once. Lashed by the 
wind, the streams of rain-water spurted almost horizontally, as though 
from a fireman's hose, pricking and stinging the face of the luckless 
Mr. Golyadkin like a thousand pins and needles. In the stillness of the 
night, broken only by the distant rumbling of carriages, the howl of 
the wind and the creaking of the lamp-posts, there was the dismal 
sound of the splash and gurgle of water, rushing from every roof, 
every porch, every pipe and every cornice, on to the granite of the 
pavement. There was not a soul, near or far, and, indeed, it seemed 
there could not be at such an hour and in such weather. And so only 

510 
The Short Novels of Vostoevsky 
Mr. Golyadkin, alone with his despair, was fleeing in terror along the 
pavement of Fontanka, with his usual rapid little step, in haste to get 
home as soon as possible to his flat on the fourth storey in Shes­
tilavotchny Street. 
Though the snow, the rain, and all the nameless horrors of a raging 
snowstorm and fog, under a Petersburg November sky, were attacking 
Mr. Golyadkin, already shattered by misfortunes, were showing him 
no mercy, giving him no rest, drenching him to the bone, glueing up 
his eyelids, blowing right through him from all sides, baffling and 
perplexing him-though all this was hurled upon Mr. Golyadkin at 
once, as though conspiring and combining with all his enemies to 
make a grand day, evening, and night for him, in spite of all this Mr. 
Golyadkin was almost insensible to this final proof of the persecution 
of destiny: so violent had been the shock and the impression made 
upon him a few minutes before at the civil councillor Berendyev's! If 
any disinterested spectator could have glanced casually at Mr. Golyad­
kin's painful progress, he would instantly have grasped the awful 
horror of his pitiful plight and would certainly have said that Mr. 
Golyadkin looked as though he wanted to hide from himself, as though 
he were trying to run away from himself! Yes! It was really so. One 
may say more: Mr. Golyadkin did not want only to run away from 
himself, but to be obliterated, to cease to be, to return to dust. At the 
moment he took in nothing surrounding him, understood nothing of 
what was going on about him, and looked as though the miseries of 
the stormy night, of the long tramp, the rain, the snow, the wind, all 
the cruelty of the weather, did not exist for him. The golosh slipping 
off the boot on Mr. Golyadkin's right foot was left behind in the snow 
and slush on the pavement of Fontanka, and Mr. Golyadkin did not 
think of turning back to get it, did not, in fact, notice that he had 
lost it. He was so perplexed that, in spite of everything surrounding 
him, he stood several times stock-stili in the middle of the pavement, 
completely possessed by the thought of his recent horrible humiliation; 
at that instant he was dying, disappearing; then he suddenly set off 
again like mad and ran and ran without looking back, as though he 
were pursued, as though he were fleeing from some still more awful 
calamity . . . .  The position was truly awful! . . .  At last Mr. Golyadkin 
halted in exhaustion, leaned on the railing in the attitude of a man 
whose nose has suddenly begun to bleed, and began looking intently 
at the black and troubled waters of the canal. There is no knowing 
what length of time he spent like this. All that is known is that at 
that instant Mr. Golyadkin reached such a pitch of despair, was so 

The 'Double 
511 
harassed, so tortured, so exhausted, and so weakened in what feeble 
faculties were left him that he forgot everything, forgot the lsmailov­
sky Bridge, forgot Shestilavotchny Street, forgot his present plight . . . .  
After all, what did it matter to him? The thing was done. The de­
cision was affirmed and ratified; what could he do? All at once .
.
•
 
all at once he started and involuntarily skipped a couple of paces aside. 
With unaccountable uneasiness he began gazing about him; but no 
one was there, nothing special had happened, and yet . . .  and yet he 
fancied that just now, that very minute, some one was standing near 
him, beside him, also leaning on the railing, and-marvellous to relate! 
-had even said something to him, said something quickly, abruptly, 
not quite intelligibly, but something quite private, something con­
cerning himself. 
"Why, was it my fancy ?" said Mr. Golyadkin, looking round once 
more. "But where am I standing? . . .  Ech, ech," he thought finally, 
shaking his head, though he began gazing with an uneasy, miserable 
feeling into the damp, murky distance, straining his sight and doing 
his utmost to pierce with his short-sighted eyes the wet darkness that 
stretched all round him. There was nothing new, however, nothing 
special caught the eye of Mr. Golyadkin. Everything seemed to be all 
right, as it should be, that is, the snow was falling more violently, more 
thickly and in larger flakes, nothing could be seen twenty paces away, 
the lamp-posts creaked more shrilly than ever and the wind seemed 
to intone its melancholy song even more tearfully, more piteously, 
like an importunate beggar whining for a copper to get a crust of 
bread. At the same time a new sensation took possession of Mr. 
Golyadkin's whole being: agony upon agony, terror upon terror . . .  
a feverish tremor ran through his veins. The moment was insufferably 
unpleasant! "Well, it's no matter," he said, to encourage himself. 
"Well, no matter; perhaps it's no matter at all, and there's no stain 
on any one's honour. Perhaps it's as it should be," he went on, without 
understanding what he was saying. "Perhaps it will all be for the best 
in the end, and there will be nothing to complain of, and every one 
will be justified." 
Talking like this and comforting himself with words, Mr. Golyadkin 
shook himself a little, shook off the snow which had drifted in thick 
layers on his hat, his collar, his overcoat, his tie, his boots and every­
thing-but his strange feeling, his strange, obscure misery he could not 
get rid of, could not shake off. Somewhere in the distance there was 
the boom of a cannon shot. "Ach, what weather!" thought our hero. 

512 
The Short N.otJels of 'DostoetJsky 
"Tchoo! Isn't there going to be a flood? It seems as though the water 
has risen so violently." 
Mr. Golyadkin had hardly said or thought this when he saw a person 
coming towards him, belated, no doubt, like him, through some 
accident. An unimportant, casual incident, one might suppose, but for 
some unknown reason Mr. Golyadkin was troubled, even scared, and 
rather flurried. It was not that he was exactly afraid of some ill-inten­
tioned man, but j ust that "perhaps . . .  after all, who knows, this be­
lated individual," flashed through Mr. Golyadkin's mind, "maybe he's 
that very thing, maybe he's the very principal thing in it, and isn't 
here for nothing, but is here with an object, crossing my path and 
provoking me." Possibly, however, he did not think this precisely, but 
only had a passing feeling of something like it-and very unpleasant. 
There was no time, however, for thinking and feeling. The stranger 
was already within two paces. Mr. Golyadkin, as he invariably did, 
hastened to assume a quite peculiar air, an air that expressed clearly 
that he, Golyadkin, kept himself to himself, that he was "all right," 
that the road was wide enough for all, and that he, Golyadkin, was 
not interfering with any one. Suddenly he stopped short as though 
petrified, as though struck by lightning, and quickly turned round 
after the figure which had only just passed him-turned as though 
some one had given him a tug from behind, as though the wind had 
turned him like a weathercock. The passer-by vanished quickly in 
the snowstorm. He, too, walked quickly; he was dressed like Mr. 
Golyadkin and, like him, too, wrapped up from head to foot, and he, 
too, tripped and trotted along the pavement of Fontanka with rapid 
little steps that suggested that he was a little scared. 
"What-what is it ?" whispered Mr. Golyadkin, smiling mistrust­
fully, though he trembled all over. An icy shiver ran down his back. 
Meanwhile, the stranger had vanished completely; there was no sound 
of his step, while Mr. Golyadkin still stood and gazed after him. At 
last, however, he gradually came to himself. 
"Why, what's the meaning of it? "  he thought with vexation. "Why, 
have I really gone out of my mind, or what ?" He turned and went 
on his way, making his footsteps more rapid and frequent, and doing 
his best not to think of anything at all. He even closed his eyes at last 
with the same object. Suddenly, through the howling of the wind and 
the uproar of the storm, the sound of steps very close at hand reached 
his ears again. He started and opened his eyes. Again a rapidly ap­
proaching figure stood out black before him, some twenty paces away. 
This little figure was hastening, tripping along, hurrying nervously; 

The 'Double 
513 
the distance between them grew rapidly less. Mr. Golyadkin could by 
now get a full view of this second belated companion. He looked 
full at him and cried out with amazement and horror; his legs gave 
way under him. It was the same individual who had passed him ten 
minutes before, and who now quite unexpectedly turned up facing 
him again. But this was not the only marvel that struck Mr. Golyadkin. 
He was so amazed that he stood still, cried out, tried to say something, 
and rushed to overtake the stranger, even shouted something to him, 
probably anxious to stop him as quickly as possible. The stranger did, in 
fact, stop ten paces from Mr. Golyadkin, so that the light from the 
lamp-post that stood near fell full upon his whole figure-stood still, 
turned to Mr. Golyadkin, and with impatient and anxious face 
waited to hear what he would say. 
"Excuse me, possibly I'm mistaken," our hero brought out m a 
quavering voice. 
The stranger in silence, and with an air of annoyance, turned and 
rapidly went on his way, as though in haste to make up for the two 
seconds he had wasted on Mr. Golyadkin. As for the latter, he was 
quivering in every nerve, his knees shook and gave way under him, 
and with a moan he squatted on a stone at the edge of the pavement. 
There really was reason, however, for his being so overwhelmed. The 
fact is that this stranger seemed to him now somehow familiar. That 
would have been nothing, though. But he recognized, almost certainly 
recognized this man. He had often seen him, that man, had seen him 
some time, and very lately too; where could it have been? Surely not 
yesterday ? But, again, that was not the chief thing that Mr. Golyadkin 
had often seen him before; there was hardly anything special about 
the man; the man at first sight would not have aroused any special 
attention. He was just a man like any one else, a gentleman like all 
other gentlemen, of course, and perhaps he had some good qualities 
and very valuable ones too-in fact, he was a man who was quite 
himself. Mr. Golyadkin cherished no sort of hatred or enmity, not 
even the slightest hostility towards this man-quite the contrary, it 
would seem, indeed-and yet (and this was the real point) he would 
not for any treasure on earth have been willing to meet that man, and 
especially to meet him as he had done now, for instance. We may 
say more: Mr. Golyadkin knew that man perfectly well: he even knew 
what he was called, what his name was; and yet nothing would have 
induced him, and again, for no treasure on earth would he have con­
sented to name him, to consent to acknowledge that he was called 
so-and-so, that his father's name was this and his surname was that. 

514 
The Short Novels of VostoevskJI 
Whether Mr. Golyadkin's stupefaction lasted a short time or a long 
time, whether he was sitting for a long time on the stone of the 
pavement I cannot say; but, recovering himself a little at last, he sud­
denly fell to running, without looking round, as fast as his legs could 
carry him; his mind was preoccupied, twice he stumbled and almost 
feU-and through this circumstance his other boot was also bereaved 
of its galosh. At last Mr. Golyadkin slackened his pace a little to get 
breath, looked hurriedly round and saw that he had already, without 
being aware of it, run right across Fontanka, had crossed the Anitch­
kov Bridge, had passed part of the Nevsky Prospect and was now 
standing at the turning into Liteyny Street. Mr. Golyadkin turned into 
Liteyny Street. His position at that instant was like that of a man 
standing at the edge of a fearful precipice, while the earth is bursting 
open under him, is already shaking, moving, rocking for the last time, 
Lllling, drawing him into the abyss, and yet the luckless wretch has 
not the strength, nor the resolution, to leap back, to avert his eyes 
from the yawning gulf below; the abyss draws him and at last he leaps 
into it of himself, himself hastening the moment of his destruction. 
Mr. Golyadkin knew, felt and was firmly convinced that some other 
evil would certainly befall him on the way, that some unpleasantness 
would overtake him, that he would, for instance, meet his stranger 
once more: but-strange to say-he positively desired this meeting, 
considered it inevitable, and all he asked was that it might all be 
quickly over, that he should be relieved from his position in one way 
or another, but as soon as possible. And meanwhile he ran on and 
on, as though moved by some external force, for he felt a weakness 
and numbness in his whole being: he could not think of anything, 
though his thoughts caught at everything like brambles. A little lost 
dog, soaked and shivering, attached itself to Mr. Golyadkin, and ran 
beside him, scurrying along with tail and ears drooping, looking at 
him from time to time with timid comprehension. Some remote, long­
forgotten idea-some memory of something that had happened long 
ago-came back into his mind now, kept knocking at his brain as 
with a hammer, vexing him and refusing to be shaken alT. 
"Ech, that horrid little cur!" whispered Mr. Golyadkin, not under­
standing himself. 
At last he sa'" his stranger at the turning into ltalyansky Street. 
But this time the stranger was not coming to meet him, but was going 
in the same direction as he was, and he, too, was running, a few steps 
in front. At last they turned into Shestilavotchny Street. 
Mr. Golyadkin caught his breath. The stranger stopped exactly 

The 'Double 
515 
before the house in which Mr. Golyadkin lodged. He heard a nng 
at the bell and almost at the same time the grating of the iron bolt. 
The gate opened, the stranger stooped, darted in and disappeared. 
Almost at the same instant Mr. Golyadkin reached the spot and like 
an arrow flew in at the gate. Heedless of the grumbling porter, he ran, 
gasping for breath, into the yard, and immediately saw his interesting 
companion, whom he had lost sight of for a moment. 
The stranger darted towards the staircase which led to Mr. Golyad­
kin's Aat. Mr. Golyadkin rushed after him. The stairs were dark, damp 
and dirty. At every turning there were heaped-up masses of refuse 
from the flats, so that any unaccustomed stranger who found himself 
on the stairs in the dark was forced to travel to and fro for half an 
hour in danger of breaking his legs, cursing the stairs as well as the 
friends who lived in such an inconvenient place. But Mr. Golyadkin's 
companion seemed as though familiar with it, as though at home; he 
ran up lightly, without difficulty, showing a perfect knowledge of 
his surroundings. Mr. Golyadkin had almost caught him up; in fact, 
once or twice the stranger's coat flicked him on the nose. His heart 
stood still. The stranger stopped before the door of Mr. Golyadkin's 
flat, knocked on it, and (which would, however, have surprised Mr. 
Golyadkin at any other time) Petrushka, as though he had been sit­
ting up in expectation, opened the door at once and, with a candle in 
his hand, followed the stranger as the latter went in. The hero of our 
story dashed into his lodging beside himself; without taking off his 
hat or coat he crossed the little passage and stood still in the doorway 
of his room, as though thunderstruck. All his presentiments had come 
true. All that he had dreaded and surmised was coming to pass in 
reality. His breath failed him, his head was in a whirl. The stranger, 
also in his coat and hat, was sitting before him on his bed, and with a 
faint smile, screwing up his eyes, nodded to him in a friendly way. 
Mr. Golyadkin wanted to scream, but could not-to protest in some 
way, but his strength failed him. His hair stood on end, and he almost 
fell down with horror. And, indeed, there was good reason. He 
recognized his nocturnal visitor. The nocturnal visitor was no other 
than himself-Mr. Golyadkin himself, another Mr. Golyadkin, but 
absolutely the same as himself-in fact, what is called a double in 
every respect. 
• 
•
•
 

516 
The Short 'Novels of Vostocvsky 
Chapter 6 
Ar EIGHT o'clock next morning Mr. Golyadkin woke up in his 
bed. At once all the extraordinary incidents of the previous day and 
the wild, incredible night, with all its almost impossible adventures, 
presented themselves to his imagination and memory with terrifying 
vividness. Such intense, diabolical malice on the part of his enemies, 
and, above all, the final proof of that malice, froze Mr. Golyadkin's 
heart. But at the same time it was all so strange, incomprehensible, 
wild, it seemed so impossible that it was really hard to credit the whole 
business; Mr. Golyadkin was, indeed, ready to admit himself that it 
was all an incredible delusion, a passing aberration of the fancy, a 
darkening of the mind, if he had not fortunately known by bitter 
experience to what lengths spite will sometimes carry any one, what 
a pitch of ferocity an enemy may reach when he is bent on revenging 
his honour and prestige. Besides, Mr. Golyadkin's exhausted limbs, 
his heavy head, his aching back, and the malignant cold in his head 
bore vivid witness to the probability of his expedition of the previous 
night and upheld the reality of it, and to some extent of all that had 
happened during that expedition. And, indeed, Mr. Golyadkin had 
known long, long before that something was being got up among 
them, that there was some one else with them. But after all, thinking 
it over thoroughly, he made up his mind to keep quiet, to submit and 
not to protest for the time. 
"They are simply plotting to frighten me, perhaps, and when they 
see that I don't mind, that I make no protest, but keep perfectly quiet 
and put up with it meekly, they'll give it up, they'll give it up of 
themselves, give it up of their own accord." 
Such, then, were the thoughts in the mind of Mr. Golyadkin as, 
stretching in his bed, trying to rest his exhausted limbs, he waited for 
Petrushka to come into his room as usual. . . .  He waited for a full 
quarter of an hour. He heard the lazy scamp fiddling about with the 
samovar behind the screen, and yet he could not bring himself to call 
him. We may say more: Mr. Golyadkin was a litte afraid of confront­
ing Petrushka. 
"Why, goodness knows," he thought, "goodness knows how that 
rascal looks at it all. He keeps on saying nothing, but he has his own 
ideas." 

Tlze 'Double 
517 
At last the door creaked and Petrushka came in with a tray in his 
hands. Mr. Golyadkin stole a timid glance at him, impatiently waiting 
to see what would happen, waiting to see whether he would not say 
something about a certain circumstance. But Petrushka said nothing; 
he was, on the contrary, more silent, more glum and ill-humoured 
than usual; he looked askance from under his brows at everything; 
altogether it was evident that he was very much put out about some· 
thing; he did not even once glance at his master, which, by the way, 
rather piqued the latter. Setting all he had brought on the table, he 
turned and went out of the room without a word. 
"He knows, he knows, he knows all about it, the scoundrel!" Mr. 
Golyadkin grumbled to himself as he took his tea. Yet our hero did 
not address a single question to his servant, though Petrushka came 
into his room several times afterwards on various errands. Mr. Golyad· 
kin was in great trepidation of spirit. He dreaded going to the office. 
He had a strong presentiment that there he would find something 
that would not be "just so." 
"You may be sure," he thought, "that as soon as you go you will 
light upon something! Isn't it better to endure in patience? Isn't it 
better to wait a bit now? Let them do what they like there; but I'd 
better stay here a bit to-day, recover my strength, get better, and think 
over the whole affair more thoroughly, then afterwards I could seize 
the right moment, fall upon them like snow from the sky, and get off 
scot free myself." 
Reasoning like this, Mr. Golyadkin smoked pipe after pipe; time 
was flying. It was already nearly half-past nine. 
"Why, it's half-past nine already," thought Mr. Golyadkin; "it's 
late for me to make my appearance. Besides, I'm ill, of course I'm ill, 
I'm certainly ill; who denies it? What's the matter with me? If they 
send to make inquiries, let the executive clerk come; and, indeed, what 
is the matter with me really? My back aches, I have a cough, and a 
cold in my head; and, in fact, it's out of the question for me to go 
out, utterly out of the question in such weather. I might be taken 
ill and, very likely, die; nowadays especially the death-rate is so 
high . . . .  
" 
With such reasoning Mr. Golyadkin succeeded at last in setting his 
conscience at rest, and defended himself against the reprimands he 
expected from Andrey Filippovitch for neglect of his duty. As a rule 
in such cases our hero was particularly fond of justifying himself in 
his own eyes with all sorts of irrefutable arguments, and so completely 
setting his conscience at rest. And so now, having completely soothed 

518 
'l he Short 'N.otels of 'Dostoe11sky 
his conscience, he took up his pipe, filled it, and had no sooner settled 
down comfortably to smoke, when he jumped up quickly from the 
sofa, flung away the pipe, briskly washed, shaved, and brushed his 
hair, got into his uniform and so on, snatched up some papers, and 
flew off to the office. 
Mr. Golyadkin went into his department timidly, in quivering 
expectation of something unpleasant-an expectation which was none 
the less disagreeable for being vague and unconscious; he sat timidly 
down in his invariable place next the head clerk, Anton Antonovitch 
Syetotchkin. Without looking at anything or allowing his attention to 
be distracted, he plunged into the contents of the papers that lay 
before him. He made up his mind and vowed to himself to avoid, as 
far as possible, anything provocative, anything that might compromise 
him, such as indiscreet questions, jests, or unseemly allusions to any 
incidents of the previous evening; he made up his mind also to abstain 
from the usual interchange of civilities with his colleagues, such as 
inquirieໝ after health and such like. But evidently it was impossible, 
out of the question, to keep to this. Anxiety and uneasiness in regard 
to anything near him that was annoying always worried him far more 
than the annoyance itself. And that was why, in spite of his inward 
vows to refrain from entering into anything, whatever happened, and 
to keep aloof from everything. Mr. Golyadkin from time to time, on 
the sly, very, very quietly, raised his head and stealthily looked about 
him to right and to left, peeped at the countenances of his colleagues, 
and tried to gather whether there were not something new and par­
ticular in them referring to himself and with sinister moti\·es con­
cealed from him. He assumed that there must be a connection between 
all that had happened yesterday and all that surrounded him now. 
At last, in his misery, he began to long for something-goodness 
knows what-to happen to put an end to it-even some calamity­
he did not care. At this point destiny caught Mr. Golyadkin: he had 
hardly felt this desire when his doubts were solved in the strangest 
and most unexpected manner. 
The door leading from the next room suddenly gave a soft and 
timid creak, as though to indicate that the person about to enter was 
a very unimportant one, and a figure, very familiar to Mr. Golyadkin, 
stood shyly before the very table at which our hero was seated. The 
latter did not raise his head-no, he only stole a glance at him, the 
tiniest glance; but he knew all, he understood all, to every detail. He 
grew hot with shame, and buried his devoted head in his papers with 
precisely the same object with which the ostrich, pursued by hunters, 

The 'Double 
519 
hides his head in the burning sand. The new arrival bowed to Andrey 
Filippovitch, and thereupon he heard a voice speaking in the regula­
tion tone of condescending politeness with which all persons in author­
ity address their subordinates in public offices. 
"Take a seat here," said Andrey Filippovitch, motioning the new­
comer to Anton Antonovitch's table. "Here, opposite Mr. Golyadkin, 
and we'll soon give you something to do." 
Andrey Filippovitch ended by making a rapid gesture that dec­
orously admonished the newcomer of his duty, and then he imme­
diately became engrossed in the study of the papers that lay in a heap 
before him. 
Mr. Golyadkin lifted his eyes at last, and that he did not fall into 
a swoon was simply because he had foreseen it all from the first, that 
he had been forewarned from the first, guessing in his soul who the 
stranger was. Mr. Golyadkin's first movement was to look quickly 
about him, to see whether there were any whispering, any office joke 
being cracked on the subject, whether any one's face was agape with 
wonder, whether, indeed, some one had not fallen under the table 
from terror. But to his intense astonishment there was no sign of any­
thing of the sort. The behaviour of his colleagues and companions 
surprised him. It seemed contrary to the dictates of common-sense. 
Mr. Golyadkin was positively scared at this extraordinary reticence. 
The fact spoke for itself; it was a strange, horrible, uncanny thing. 
It was enough to rouse any one. All this, of course, only passed rapidly 
through Mr. Golyadkin'f. mind. He felt as though he were burning 
in a slow fire. And, indeed, there was enough to make him. The figure 
that was sitting opposite Mr. Golyadkin now was his terror, was 
his shame, was his nightmare of the evening before; in short, was Mr. 
Golyadkin himself, not the Mr. Golyadkin who was sitting now in his 
chair with his mouth wide-open and his pen petrified in his hand, not 
the one who acted as assistant to his chief, not the one who liked to 
efface himself and slink away in the crowd, not the one whose deport­
ment plainly said, "Don't touch me and I vvon't touch you," or, "Don't 
interfere with me, you see I'm not touching you"; no, this was another 
Mr. Golyadkin, quite different, yet, at the same time, exactly like the 
first-the same height, the same figure, the same clothes, the same 
baldness; in fact, nothing, absolutely nothing, was lacking to com­
plete the likeness, so that if one were to set them side by side, nobody, 
absolutely nobody, could have undertaken to distinguish which was 
the real Golyadkin and which was the counterfeit, which was the 

520 
'The Short Novels of 'DostoevskY 
old one and which was the new one, which was the original and which 
was the copy. 
Our hero was-if the comparison can be made-in the position of 
a man upon whom some practical joker has stealthily, by way of jest, 
turned a burning-glass. 
"What does it mean? Is it a dream ?" he wondered. "Is it reality or 
the continuation of what happened yesterday? And besides, by what 
right is this all being done? Who sanctioned such a clerk, who author­
ized this? Am I asleep, am I in a waking dream?" 
Mr. Golyadkin tried pinching himself, even tried to screw up his 
courage to pinch some one else . . . . No, it was not a dream, and that 
was all about it. Mr. Golyadkin felt that the sweat was trickling down 
him in big drops; he felt that what was happening to him was some­
thing incredible, unheard-of, and for that very reason was, to complete 
his misery, utterly unseemly, for Mr. Golyadkin realized and felt how 
disadvantageous it was to be the first example of such a burlesque 
adventure. He even began to doubt his own existence, and though 
he was prepared for anything and had been longing for his doubts to 
be settled in any way whatever, yet the actual reality was startling in 
its unexpectedness. His misery was poignant and overwhelming. At 
times he lost all power of thought and memory. Coming to himself 
after such a moment, he noticed that he was mechanically and un­
consciously moving the pen over the paper. Mistrustful of himself, 
he began going over what he had written-and could make nothing 
of it. At last the other Mr. Golyadkin, who had been sitting discreetly 
and decorously at the table, got up and disappeared through the door 
into the other room. Mr. Golyadkin looked round-everything was 
quiet; he heard nothing but the scratching of pens, the rustle of. 
turning over pages, and conversation in the corners furthest from 
Andrey Filippovitch's scat. Mr. Golyadkin looked at Anton An­
tonovitch, and as, in all probability, our hero's countenance fully re­
flected his real condition and harmonized with the whole position, 
and was consequently, from one point of view, very remarkable, good­
natured Anton Antonovitch, laying aside his pen, inquired after his 
health with marked sympathy. 
"I'm very well, thank God, Anton Antonovitch," said Mr. Golyad­
kin, stammering. "I am perfectly well, Anton Antonovitch. I am all 
right now, Anton Antonovitch," he added uncertainly, not yet fully 
trusting Anton Antonovitch, whose name he had mentioned so often. 
"I fancied you were not quite well: though that's not to be won-

The 'Double 
521 
dered at; no, indeed! Nowadays especially there's such a lot of illness 
going about. Do you know . . .  " 
"Yes, Anton Antonovitch, I know there is such a lot of illness .
.
•
 
I did not mean that, Anton Antonovitch," Mr. Golyadkin went on, 
looking intently at Anton Antonovitch. "You see, Anton Antonovitch, 
I don't even know how you, that is, I mean to say, how to approach 
this matter, Anton Antonovitch . . . .  " 
"How so? I really . . .  do you know •
.
.
 I must confess I don't quite 
understand; you must 
.
•
.
 you must explain, you know, in what way 
you are in difficulties," said Anton Antonovitch, beginning to be in 
difficulties himself, seeing that there were actually tears in Mr. Golyadޓ 
kin's eyes. 
"Really, Anton Antonovitch .
. . I . . .  here . . .  there's a clerk here, 
Anton Antonovitch . . .  
" 
"\Veil! I don't understand now." 
"I mean to say, Anton Antonovitch, there's a new clerk here." 
"Yes, there is; a namesake of yours." 
"What? "  cried Mr. Golyadkin. 
"I say a namesake of yours; his name's Golyadkin too. Isn't he a 
brother of yours ?" 
"No, Anton Antonovitch, I . . .  " 
"H'm! you don't say so! Why, I thought he must be a relation of 
yours. Do you know, there's a sort of family likeness." 
Mr. Golyadkin was petrified with astonishment, and for the moment 
he could not speak. To treat so lightly such a horrible, unheardؓ£ 
thing, a thing undeniably rare and curious in its way, a thing which 
would have amazed even an unconcerned spectator, to talk of a family 
resemblance when he could see himself as in a looking-glass! 
"Do you know, Yakov Petrovitch, what I advise you to do?" Anton 
Antonovitch went on. "Go and consult a doctor. Do you know, you 
look somehow quite unwell. Your eyes look peculiar . . .  you know, 
there's a peculiar expression in them." 
"No, Anton Antonovitch, I feel, of course •
.
.
 that is, I keep wantໞ 
ing to ask about this clerk." 
"Well?" 
"That is, have not you noticed, Anton Antonovitch, something 
peculiar about him, something very marked?" 
"That is . . .  ?" 
"That is, I mean, Anton Antonovitch, a striking likeness with some, 
body, for instance; with me, for instance? You spoke just now, you 
see, Anton Antonovitch, of a family likeness. You let slip the remark. 

522 
The Short N.ovels of Vostoevsk.y 
. . .  You know there really are sometimes twins exactly alike, like two 
drops of water, so that they can't be told apart. Well, it's that that 
I mean." 
"To be sure," said Anton Antonovitch, after a moment's thought, 
speaking as though he were struck by the fact for the first time; "yes, 
indeed! You are right, there is a striking likeness, and you are quite 
right in what you say. You really might be mistaken for one another," 
he went on, opening his eyes wider and wider; "and, do you know, 
Yakov Petrovitch, it's positively a marvellous likeness, fantastic, in fact, 
as the saying is; that is, just as you . . .  Have you observed, Y akov 
Petrovitch? I wanted to ask you to explain it; yes, I must confess I 
didn't take particular notice at first. It's wonderful, it's really wonder­
ful! And, you know, you are not a native of these parts, are you, Yakov 
Petrovitch?" 
"No." 
"He is not from these parts, you know, either. Perhaps he comes 
from the same part of the country as you do. Where, may I make bold 
to inquire, did your mother live for the most part?" 
"You said . . .  you say, Anton Antonovitch, that he is not a native 
of these parts?" 
"No, he is not. And, indeed, how strange it is!" continued the talk­
ative Anton Antonovitch, for whom it was a genuine treat to gossip. 
"It may well arouse curiosity; and yet, you know, you might often 
pass him by, brush against him, without noticing anything. But you 
mustn't be upset about it. It's a thing that does happen. Do you know, 
the same thing, I must tell you, happened to my aunt on my mother's 
side; she saw her own double before her death . . .  
" 
"No, !-excuse my interrupting you, Anton Antonovitch-I wanted 
to find out, Anton Antonovitch, how that clerk •
.
.
 that is, on what 
footing is he here?" 
"In place of Semyon Ivanovitch, to fill the vacancy left by his death; 
the post was vacant, so he was appointed. Do you know, I'm told poor 
dear Semyon Ivanovitch left three children, all tiny tots. The widow 
fell at the feet of his Excellency. They do say she's hiding something; 
she's got a bit of money, but she's hiding it." 
"No, Anton Antonovitch, I was still referring to that circumstance." 
"You mean . . .  ? To be sure! But why are you so interested in that? 
I tell you not to upset yourself. All this is temporary to some extent. 
Why, after all, you know, you have nothing to do with it. So it has 
been ordained by God Almighty, it's His will, and it is sinful repining. 
His wisdom is apparent in it. And as far as I can make out, Yakov 

The 'Double 
523 
Petrovitch, you are not to blame in any way. There are all sorts of 
strange things in the world! Mother Nature is liberal with her gifts, 
and you are not called upon to answer for it, you won't be responsible. 
Here, for instance, you have heard, I expect, of those-what's their 
name?--()h, the Siamese twins who are joined together at the back, 
live and eat and sleep together. I'm told they get a lot of money." 
"Allow me, Anton Antonovitch . . .  " 
"I understand, I understand! Yes! But what of it? It's no matter, 
I tell you, as far as I can see there's nothing for you to upset yourself 
about. After all, he's a clerk-as a clerk he seems to be a capable man. 
He says his name is Golyadkin, that he's not a native of this district, 
and that he's a titular councillor. He had a personal interview with 
his Excellency." 
"And how did his Excellency . . .  ?" 
"It was all right; I am told he gave a satisfactory account of himself, 
gave his reasons, said, 'It's like this, your Excellency,' :md that he was 
without means and anxious to enter the service, and would be particu­
larly flattered to be serving under his Excellency . . .  all that was 
proper, you know; he expressed himself neatly. He must be a sensible 
man. But of course he came with a recommendation; he couldn't have 
got in without that. . . .  " 
"Oh, from whom . . .  that is, I mean, who is it has had a hand in 
this shameful business?" 
"Yes, a good recommendation, I'm told; his Excellency, I'm told, 
laughed with Andrey Filippovitch." 
"Laughed with Andrey Filippovitch ?" 
"Yes, he only j ust smiled and said that it was all right, and that he 
had nothing against it, so long as he did his duty . . . .  " 
"Well, and what more? You relieve me to some extent, Anton 
Antonovitch; go on, I entreat you." 
"Excuse me, I must tell you again . . . .  Well, then, come, it's noth­
ing, it's a very simple matter; you mustn't upset yourself, I tell you, 
and there's nothing suspicious about it . . . .  " 
"No. I . . .  that is, Anton Antonovitch, I want to ask you, didn't his 
Excellency say anything more . . .  about me, for instance ?" 
"\Veil! To be sure! No, nothing of the sort; you can set your mind 
quite at rest. You know it is, of course, a rather striking circumstance, 
and at first •
•
•
 why, here, I, for instance, I scarcely noticed it. I really 
don't know why I didn't notice it till you mentioned it. But you can 
set your mind at rest entirely. He said nothing particular, absolutely 

524 
The Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
nothing," added good-natured Anton Antonovitch, getting up from 
his chair. 
"So then, Anton Antonovitch, I . . .  
" 
"Oh, you must excuse me. Here I've been goss1pmg about these 
trivial matters, and I've business that is important and urgent. I must 
inquire about it." 
"Anton Antonovitch!" Andrey Filippovitch's voice sounded, sum­
moning him politely, "his Excellency has been asking for you." 
"This minute, I'm coming this minute, Andrey Filippovitch." And 
Anton Antonovitch, taking a pile of papers, flew off first to Andrey 
Filippovitch and then into his Excellency's room. 
"Then what is the meaning of it?" thought Mr. Golyadkin. "Is 
there some sort of game going on? So the wind's in that quarter now . 
. . . That's just as well; so things have taken a much pleasanter turn," 
our hero said to himself, rubbing his hands, and so delighted that he 
scarcely knew where he was. "So our position is an ordinary thing. 
So it turns out to be all nonsense, it comes to nothing at all. No one 
has done anything really, and they are not budging, the rascals, they 
are sitting busy over their work ; that's splendid, splendid! I like the 
good-natured fellow, I've always liked him, and I'm always ready to 
respect him . . .  though it must be said one doesn't know what to 
think; this Anton Antonovitch . . .  I'm afraid to trust him ; his hair's 
very grey, and he's so old he's getting shaky. It's an immense and 
glorious thing that his Excellency said nothing, and let it pass! It's 
a good thing! I approve! Only why does Andrey Filippovitch interfere 
with his grins? What's he got to do with it ? The old rogue. Always 
on my track, always, like a black cat, on the watch to run across a 
man's path, always thwarting and annoying a man, always annoying 
and thwarting a man . . . .  " 
Mr. Golyadkin looked around him again, and again his hopes 
revived. Yet he felt that he was troubled by one remote idea, an un­
pleasant idea. It even occurred to him that he might try somehow 
to make up to the clerks, to be the first in the field even (perhaps 
when leaving the office or going up to them as though about his 
work), to drop a hint in the course of conversation, saying, "This is 
how it is, what a striking likeness, gentlemen, a strange circumstance, 
a burlesque farce!"-that is, treat it all lightly, and in this way sound 
the depth of the danger. "Devils breed in still waters," our hero con­
cluded inwardly. 
Mr. Golyadkin, however, only contemplated this; he thought better 
of it in time. He realized that this would be going too far. "That's 

The 'Double 
525 
your temperament," he said to himself, tapping himself lightly on 
the forehead; "as soon as you gain anything you are delighted! You're 
a simple soul! No, you and I had better be patient, Yakov Petrovitch; 
let us wait and be patient!" 
Nevertheless, as we have mentioned already, Mr. Golyadkin was 
buoyed up with the most confident hopes, feeling as though he had 
risen from the dead. 
"No matter," he thought, "it's as though a hundred tons had been 
lifted off my chest! Here is a circumstance, to be sure! The box has 
been opened by lifting the lid. Krylov is right, a clever chap, a rogue, 
that Krylov, and a great fable-writer! And as for him, let him work 
in the office, and good luck to him so long as he doesn't meddle or 
interfere with any one; let him work in the office-! consent and 
approve!" 
Meanwhile the hours were passing, flying by, and before he noticed 
the time it struck four. The office was closed. Andrey Filippovitch 
took his hat, and all followed his example in due course. Mr. Gol­
yadkin dawdled a little on purpose, long enough to be the last to go 
out when all the others had gone their several ways. Going out into 
the street he felt as though he were in Paradise, so that he even felt 
inclined to go a longer way round, and to walk along the Nevsky 
Prospect. 
"To be sure this is destiny," thought our hero, "this unexpected 
turn in affairs. And the weather's more cheerful, and the frost and the 
little sledges. And the frost suits the Russian, the Russian gets on 
capitally with the frost. I like the Russian. And the dear little snow, 
and the first few flakes in autumn ; the sportsman would say, 'It would 
be nice to go shooting hares in the first snow.' Well, there, it doesn•t 
matter." 
This was how Mr. Golyadkin's enthusiasm found expression. Yet 
something was fretting in his brain, not exactly melancholy, but at 
times he had such a gnawing at his heart that he did not know how to 
find relief. 
"Let us wait for the day, though, and then we shall rejoice. And, 
after all, you know, what does it matter? Come, let us think it over, 
let us look at it. Come, let us consider it, my young friend, let us 
consider it. \Vhy, a man's exactly like you in the first place, abso­
lutely the same. Well, what is there in that? If there is such a man, 
why should I weep over it? What is it to me? I stand aside, I whist!ໟ 
to myself, and that's all! That's what I laid myself open to, and that's 
all about it! Let him work in the office! Well, it's strange and mar-

526 
Th% Short Novds of 'Dosto%vsky 
vellous, they say, that the Siamese twins 
.
.
•
 But why bring in the 
Siamese twins? They are twins, of course, but even great men, you 
know, sometimes look queer creatures. In fact, we know from history 
that the famous Suvorov used to crow like a cock . . . .  But there, he 
did all that with political motives ; and he was a great general . . .  
but what are generals, after all ? But I keep myself to myself, that's 
all, and I don't care about any one else, and, secure in my innocence, 
I scorn my enemies. I am not one to intrigue, and I'm proud of it. 
Genuine, straightforward, neat and nice, meek and mild." 
All at once Mr. Golyadkin broke off, his tongue failed him and he 
began trembling like a leaf; he even closed his eyes for a minute. 
Hoping, however, that the object of his terror was only an illusion, 
he opened his eyes at last and stole a timid glance to the right. No, it 
was not an illusion! . . .  His acquaintance of that morning was 
tripping along by his side, smiling, peeping into his face, and appar­
ently seeking an opportunity to begin a conversation with him. The 
conversation was not begun, however. They both walked like this 
for about fifty paces. All Mr. Golyadkin's efforts were concentrated on 
muffiing himself up, hiding himself in his coat and pulling his hat 
down as far as possible over his eyes. To complete his mortification, 
his companion's coat and hat looked as though they had been taken 
off Mr. Golyadkin himself. 
"S1r," our hero articulated at last, trying to speak almost in a 
whisper, and not looking at his companion, "we are going different 
ways, I believe . . . .  I am convinced of it, in fact," he said, after a 
brief pause. "I am convinced, indeed, that you quite understand me," 
he added, rather severely, in conclusion. 
"I could have wished . . .  
" his companion pronounced at last, 
"I could have wished . . .  no doubt you will be magnanimous and 
pardon me . . .  I don't know to whom to address myself here 
.
.
•
 
my circumstances . . .  I trust you will pardon my intrusiveness. I 
fancied, indeed, that, moved by compassion, you showed some interest 
in me this morning. On my side, I felt drawn to you from the first 
moment. I . . .  " 
A this point Mr. Golyadkin inwardly wished that his companion 
might sink into the earth. 
"If I might venture to hope that you would accord me an indulgent 
hearing, Yakov Petrovitch •
.
.
 
" 
"\V e-here, we-we . . . you had better come home with me," 
answered Mr. Golyadkin. "We will cross now to the other side of the 

527 
Nevsky Prospect, it will be more convenient for us there, and then 
by the little back street .
•
.
 we'd better go by the back street." 
"Very well, by all means let us go by the back street," our hero's 
meek companion responded timidly, suggesting by the tone of his 
reply that it was not for him to choose, and that in his position he 
was quite prepared to accept the back street. As for :Mr. Golyadkin, 
he was utterly unable to grasp what was happening to him. He could 
not believe in himself. He could not get over his amazement. 
Chaptef 7 
HE RECOVERED himself a little on the staircase as he went up 
to his flat. 
"Oh, I'm a sheep's-head," he railed at himself inwardly. "Where 
am I taking him ?  I am thrusting my head into the noose. What will 
Petrushka think, seeing us together ? What will the scoundrel dare 
to imagine now ? He's suspicious . . . .  
" 
But it was too late to regret it. Mr. Golyadkin knocked at the door; 
it was opened, and Petrushka began taking off the visitor's coat as 
well as his master's. Mr. Golyadkin looked askance, j ust stealing a 
glance at Petrushka, trying to read his countenance and divine what 
he was thinking. But to his intense astonishment he saw that his 
servant showed no trace of surprise, but seemed, on the contrary, to 
be expecting something of the sort. Of course he did look morose, as 
it was; he kept his eyes turned away and looked as though he would 
like to fall upon somebody. 
"Hasn't somebody bewitched them all to-day?" thought our hero. 
"Some devil must have got round them. There certainly must be 
something peculiar in the whole lot of them to-day. Damn it all, what 
a worry it is!" 
Such were Mr. Golyadkin's thoughts and reflections as he led his 
visitor into his room and politely asked him to sit down. The visiror 
appeared to be greatly embarrassed, he was very shy, and humbly 
watched every movement his host made, caught his glance, and 
semed trying to divine his thoughts from them. There was a down­
trodden, crushed, scared look about all his gestures, so that-if the 
comparison may be allowed-he was at that moment rather like the 
man who, having lost his clothes, is dressed up in somebody else's : 
the sleeves work up to the elbows, the waist is almost up to his neck, 

528 
The Short Novels of 'DostoevskY 
and he keeps every minute pulling down the short waistcoat; he 
wriggles sideways and turns away, tries to hide himself, or peeps into 
every face, and listens whether people are talking of his position, 
laughing at him or putting him to shame-and he is crimson with 
shame and overwhelmed with confusion and wounded vanity . . . .  
Mr. Golyadkin put down his hat in the window, and carelessly sent it 
flying to the floor. The visitor darted at once to pick it up, brushed off 
the dust, and carefully put it back, while he laid his own on the floor 
near a chair, on the edge of which he meekly seated himself. This 
little circumstance did something to open Mr. Golyadkin's eyes; he 
realized that the man was in great straits, and so did not put himself 
out for his visitor as he had done at first, very properly leaving all 
that to the man himself. The visitor, for his part, did nothing either; 
whether he was shy, a little ashamed, or from politeness was waiting 
for his host to begin is not certain and would be difficult to determine. 
At that moment Petrushka came in ; he stood still in the doorway, and 
fixed his eyes in the direction furthest from where the visitor and 
his master were seated. 
"Shall I bring in dinner for two?" he said carelessly, in a husky 
voice. 
"I-I don't know . . .  you . . .  yes, bring dinner for two, my boy." 
Petrushka went out. Mr. Golyadkin glanced at his visitor. The latter 
crimsoned to his ears. Mr. Golyadkin was a kind-hearted man, and so 
in the kindness of his heart he at once elaborated a theory. 
"The fellow's hard up," he thought. "Yes, and in h1s situation 
only one day. Most likely he's suffered in his time. Maybe his good 
clothes are all that he has, and nothing to get him a dinner. Ah, poor 
fellow, how crushed he seems! But no matter; in a way it's better so 
• 
• . . Excuse me," began Mr. Golyadkin, "allow me to ask what I may 
call you." 
"I . . .  I . . .  I'm Y akov Petrovitch," his visitor almost whispered, 
as though conscience-stricken and ashamed, as though apologizing for 
being called Yakov Petrovitch too. 
"Y akov Petrovitch!" repeated our hero, unable to conceal his con­
fusion. 
"Yes, just so 
.
•
.
.
 The same name as yours," responded the meek 
visitor, venturing to smile and speak a little jocosely. But at once he 
drew back, assuming a very serious air, though a little disconcerted, 
noticing that his host was in no joking mood. 
"You . . .  allow me to ask you, to what am I indebted for the 
honour .
. . ?" 

The 'Double 
529 
"Knowing your generosity and your benevolence," interposed the 
visitor in a rapid but timid voice, half rising from his seat, "I have 
ventured to appeal to you and to beg for your . . .  acquaintance and 
protection .
.
•
 
" he concluded, choosing his phrases with difficulty 
and trying to select words not too flattering or servile, that he might 
not compromise his dignity and not so bold as to suggest an un­
seemly inequality. In fact, one may say the visitor behaved like a 
gentlemanly beggar with a darned waistcoat, with an honourable pass­
port in his pocket, who has not yet learnt by practice to hold out his 
hand properly for alms. 
"You perplex me," answered Mr. Golyadkin, gazing round at him­
self, his walls and his visitor. "In what could I . . .  that is, I mean, 
in what way could I be of service to you ?" 
"I felt drawn to you, Y akov Petrovitch, at first sight, and, graciously 
forgive me, I built my hopes on you-1 made bold to build my hopes 
on you, Yakov Petrovitch. I . . .  I'm in a desperate plight here, 
Yakov Petrovitch ; I'm poor, I've had a great deal of trouble, Yakov 
Petrovitch, and have only recently come here. Learning that you, with 
your innate goodness and excellence of heart, are of the same name .
.
•
 
" 
Mr. Golyadkin frowned. 
"Of the same name as myself and a native of the same district, 
I made up my mind to appeal to you, and to make known to you my 
difficult position." 
"Very good, very good; I really don't know what to say," Mr. 
Golyadkin responded in an embarrassed voice. "We'll have a talk after 
dinner . . . .  
" 
The visitor bowed; dinner was brought in. Petrushka laid the table, 
and Mr. Golyadkin and his visitor proceeded to partake of it. The 
dinner did not last long, for they were both in a hurry, the host 
because he felt ill at ease, and was, besides, ashamed that the dinner 
was a poor one-he was partly ashamed because he wanted to give the 
visitor a good meal, and partly because he wanted to show him he did 
not live like a beggar. The visitor, on his side too, was in terrible 
confusion and extremely embarrassed. When he had finished the 
piece o£ bread he had taken, he was afraid to put out his hand to take 
another piece, was ashamed to help himself to the best morsels, and 
was continually assuring his host that he was not at all hungry, that 
the dinner was excellent, that he was absolutely satisfied with it, and 
should not forget it to his dying day. When the meal was over Mr. 
Golyadkin lighted his pipe, and offered a second, which was brought 

530 
'I he Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
in, to the visitor. They sat facing each other, and the visitor began 
telling his adventures. 
Mr. Golyadkin junior's story lasted for three or four hours. His 
history was, however, composed of the most trivial and wretched, if 
one may say so, incidents. It dealt with details of service in some law­
court in the provinces, of prosecutors and presidents, of some depart­
ment intrigues, of the depravity of some registration clerks, of an 
inspector, of the sudden appointment of a new chief in the depart­
ment, of how the second Mr. Golyadkin had suffered, quite without 
any fault on his part; of his aged aunt, Pelagea Semyonovna; of how, 
through various intrigues on the part of his enemies, he had lost his 
si໠uation, and had come to Petersburg on foot; of the harassing and 
wretched time he had spent here in Petersburg, how for a long time 
he had tried in vain to get a job, had spent all his money, had nothing 
left, had been living almost in the street, lived on a crust of bread and 
washed it down with his tears, slept on the bare floor, and finally how 
some good Christian had exerted himself on his behalf, had given 
him an introduction, and had nobly got him into a new berth. Mr. 
Golyadkin's visitor shed tears as he told his story, and wiped his eyes 
with a blue-check handkerchief that looked like oilcloth. He ended 
by making a clean breast of it to Mr. Golyadkin, and confessing that 
he was not only for the time without means of subsistence and money 
for a decent lodging, but had not even the wherewithal to fit himself 
out properly, so that he had not, he said in conclusion, been able to 
get together enough for a pair of wretched boots, and that he had had 
to hire a uniform for the time. 
. 
Mr. Golyadkin was melted; he was genuinely touched. Even though 
his visitor's story was the paltriest story, every word of it was like 
heavenly manna to his heart. The fact was that Mr. Golyadkin was 
beginning to forget his last misgivings, to surrender his soul to free­
dom and rejoicing, and at last mentally dubbed himself a fool. It was 
all so natural! And what a thing to break his heart over, what a thing 
to be so distressed about! To be sure there was, there really was, one 
ticklish circumstance-but, after all, it was not a misfortune; it could 
be no disgrace to a man, it could not cast a slur on his honour or ruin 
his career, if he were innocent, since Nature herself was mixed up in it. 
Moreover, the visitor begged for protection, wept, railed at destiny, 
6eemed such an artless, pitiful, insignificant person, with no craft or 
malice about him, and he seemed now to be ashamed himself, though 
perhaps on different grounds, of the strange resemblance of his counte­
nance with that of Mr. Golyadkin's. His behaviour was absolutely 

The 'Double 
531 
unimpeachable; his one desire was to please his host, and he looked 
as a man looks who feels conscience-stricken and to blame in regard 
to some one else. If any doubtful point were touched upon, for in­
stance, the visitor at once agreed with Mr. Golyadkin's opinion. If by 
mistake he advanced an opinion in opposition to Mr. Golyadkin's, and 
afterwards noticed that he had made a slip, he immediately corrected 
his mistake, explained himself and made it clear that he meant the 
same thing as his host, that he thought as he did and took the same 
view of everything as he did. In fact, the visitor made every possible 
effort to "make up to" Mr. Golyadkin, so that the latter made up his 
mind at last that his visitor must be a very amiable person in every 
way. Meanwhile, tea was brought in; it was nearly nine o'clock. Mr. 
Golyadkin felt in a very good humour, grew lively and skittish, let 
himself go a little, and finally plunged into a most animated and 
interested conversation with his visitor. In his festive moments Mr. 
Golyadkin was fond of telling interesting anecdotes. So now he told 
the visitor a great deal about Petersburg, about its entertainments 
and attractions, about the theatre, the clubs, about Briilov's picture, 
and about the two Englishmen who came from England to Peters­
burg on purpose to look at the iron railing of the Summer Garden, 
and returned at once when they had seen it; about the office; about 
Olsufy Ivanovitch and Andrey Filippovitch; about the way that Russia 
was progressing, was hour by hour progressing towards a state of 
perfection, so that 
"Arts and letters flourish here to-day"; 
about an anecdote he had lately read in the Northern Bee concerning 
a boa-constrictor in India of immense strength; about Baron Bram­
beus, and so on. In short, Mr. Golyadkin was quite happy, first, be­
cause his mind was at rest; secondly, because, so far from being afraid 
of his enemies, he was quite prepared now to challenge them all to 
mortal combat; thirdly, because he was now in the role of patron 
and was doing a good deed. Yet he was conscious at the bottom of his 
heart that he was not perfectly happy, that there was still a hidden 
worm gnawing at his heart, though it was only a tiny one. He was 
extremely worried by the thought of the previous evening at Olsufy 
Ivanovitch's. He would have given a great deal now for nothing to 
have happened of what took place then. 
"It's no matter, though!" our hero decided at last, and he firmly 
resolved in his heart to behave well in future and never to be guilty 
of such pranks again. As Mr. Golyadkin was now completely worked 

532 
The Short N.ovels of 'Dostoevsky 
up, and had suddenly become almost blissful, the fancy took him to 
have a jovial time. Rum was brought in by Petrushka, and punch was 
prepared. The visitor and his host drained a glass each, and then a 
second. The visitor appeared even more amiable than before, and gave 
more than one proof of his frankness and charming character; he en­
tered keenly into Mr. Golyadkin's joy, seemed only to rejoice in his 
rejoicing, and to look upon him as his one and only benefactor. Tak­
ing up a pen and a sheet of paper, he asked Mr. Golyadkin not to look 
at what he was going to write, but afterwards showed his host what 
he had written. It turned out to be a verse of four lines, written with 
a good deal of feeling, in excellent language and handwriting, and 
evidently was the composition of the amiable visitor himself. The 
lines were as follows-
"If thou forget me, 
I shall not forget thee; 
Though all things may be, 
Do not thou forget me." 
With tears in his eyes Mr. Golyadkin embraced his companion, and, 
completely overcome by his feelings, he began to initiate his friend into 
some of his own secrets and private affairs, Andrey Filippovitch and 
Klara Olsufyevna being prominent in his remarks. 
"Well, you may be sure we shall get on together, Yakov Petrov­
itch," said our hero to his visitor. "You and I will take to each other 
like fish to the water, Yakov Petrovitch; we shall be like brothers; 
we'll be cunning, my dear fellow, we'll work together; we'll get up an 
intrigue, too, to pay them out. To pay them out we'll get up an in­
trigue too. And don't you trust any of them. I know you, Yakov 
Petrovitch, and I understand your character; you'll tell them every­
thing straight out, you know, you're a guileless soul! You must hold 
aloof from them all, my boy." 
His companion entirely agreed with him, thanked Mr. Golyadkin, 
and he, too, grew tearful at last. 
"Do you know, Yasha," Mr. Golyadkin went on in a shaking voice, 
weak with emotion, "you must stay with me for a time, or stay with 
me for ever. We shall get on together. What do you say, brother, eh? 
And don't you worry or repine because there's such a strange circum­
stance about us now; it's a sin to repine, brother; it's nature! And 
Mother Nature is liberal with her gifts, so there, brother Yasha! It's 
from love for you that I speak, from brotherly love. But we'll be cun­
ning, Yasha; we'll lay a mine, too, and we'll make them laugh the 
other side of their mouths." 

rhe 'Double 
533 
They reached their third and fourth glasses of punch at last, and 
then Mr. Golyadkin began to be aware of two sensations: the one that 
he was extraordinarily happy, and the other that he could not stand 
upon his legs. The guest was, of course, invited to stay the night. A 
bed was somehow made up on two chairs. Mr. Golyadkin junior de­
clared that under a friend's roof the bare floor would be a soft bed, 
that for his part he could sleep anywhere, humbly and gratefully; 
that he was in Paradise now, that he had been through a great deal of 
trouble and grief in his time; he had seen ups and downs, had all sorts 
of things to put up with, and-who could tell what the future would 
be?-maybe he would have still more to put up with. Mr. Golyadkin 
senior protested against this, and began to maintain that one must 
put one's faith in God. His guest entirely agreed, observing that there 
was, of course, no one like God. At this point Mr. Golyadkin senior 
observed that in certain respects the Turks were right in calling upon 
God even in their sleep. Then, though disagreeing with certain learned 
professors in the slanders they had promulgated against the Turkish 
prophet Mahomet and recognizing him as a great politician in his 
own line, Mr. Golyadkin passed to a very interesting description of 
an Algerian barber's shop which he had read in a book of miscellanies. 
The friends laughed heartily at the simplicity of the Turks, but paid 
due tribute to their fanaticism, which they ascribed to opium . . . . At last 
the guest began undressing, and thinking in the kindness of his heart 
that very likely he hadn't even a decent shirt, Mr. Golyadkin went 
behind the screen to avoid embarrassing a man who had suffered 
enough, and partly to reassure himself as far as possible about Pe­
trushka, to sound him, to cheer him up if he could, to be kind to the 
fellow so that every one might be happy and that everything might 
be pleasant all round. It must be remarked that Petrushka still rather 
bothered Mr. Golyadkin. 
"You go to bed now, Pyotr," Mr. Golyadkin said blandly, going 
into his servant's domain; "you go to bed now and wake me up at 
eight o'clock. Do you understand, Petrushka?" 
Mr. Golyadkin spoke with exceptional softness and friendliness. But 
Petrushka remained mute. He was busy making his bed, and did not 
even turn round to face his master, which he ought to have done out 
of simple respect. 
"Did you hear what I said, Pyotr?" Mr. Golyadkin went on. "You 
go to bed now and wake me to-morrow at eight o'clock; do you 
understand ?" 

534 
The Short N.otels of 'Dostoet1s/ry 
"Why, I know that; what's the use of telling me?" Petrushka 
grumbled to himself. 
"Well, that's right, Petrushka; I only mentioned it that you might 
be happy and at rest. Now we are all happy, so I want you, too, to 
be happy and satisfied. And now I wish you good-night. Sleep, 
Petrushka, sleep; we all have to work . . . .  Don't think anything 
amiss, my man . . .  " Mr. Golyadkin began, but stopped short. "Isn't 
this too much ?" he thought. "Haven't I gone too far? That's how it 
always is; I always overdo things." 
Our hero felt much dissatisfied with himself as he left Petrushka. 
He was, besides, rather wounded by Petrushka's grumpiness and 
rudeness. "One jests with the rascal, his master does him too much 
honour, and the rascal does not feel it," thought Mr. Golyadkin. "But 
there, that's the nasty way of all that sort of people!" 
Somewhat shaken, he went back to his room, and, seeing that his 
guest had settled himself for the n!ght, he sat down on the edge of his 
bed for a minute. 
"Come, you must own, Yasha," he began in a whisper, wagging 
his head, "you're a rascal, you know; what a way you've treated me! 
You see, you've got my name, do you know that?" he went on, jesting 
in a rather familiar way with his visitor. At last, saying a friendly 
good-night to him, Mr. Golyadkin began preparing for the night. The 
visitor meanwhile began snoring. Mr. Golyadkin in his turn got into 
bed, laughing and whispering to himself: "You are drunk to-day, my 
dear fellow, Yakov Petrovitch, you rascal, you old Golyadkin-what 
a surname to have! \Vhy, what are you so pleased about ? You'll be 
crying to-morrow, you know, you sniveller; what am I to do with 
you?" 
At this point a rather strange sensation pervaded Mr. Golyadkin's 
whole being, something like doubt or remorse. 
"I've been over-excited and let myself go," he thought; "now I've 
a noise in my head and I'm drunk; I couldn't restrain myself, ass 
that I am! and I've been babbling bushels of nonsense, and, like a 
rascal, I was planning to be so sly. Of course, to forgive and forget 
injuries is the height of virtue; but it's a bad thing, nevertheless! Yes, 
that's so!" 
At this point Mr. Golyadkin got up, took a candle and went on 
tiptoe to look once more at his sleeping guest. He stood over him for 
a long time, meditating deeply. 
"An unpleasant picture! A burlesque, a regular burlesque, and 
that's the fact of the matter!" 

The Voub/e 
535 
At last Mr. Golyadkin settled down finally. There was a humming, 
a buzzing, a ringing in his head. He grew more and more drowsy . . .  
tried to think about something, to remember something very inter­
esting, to decide something very important, some delicate question­
but could not. Sleep descended upon his devoted head, and he slept as 
people generally do sleep who are not used to drinking and have con­
sumed five glasses of punch at some festive gathering. 
Chapter 8 
MR. GOLY AD KIN woke up next morning at eight o'clock as 
usual; as soon as he was awake he recalled all the adventures of the 
previous evening-and frowned as he recalled them. "Ugh, I did play 
the fool last night! "  he thought, sitting up and glancing at his visitor's 
bed. But what was his amazement when he saw in the room no trace, 
not only of his visitor, but even of the bed on which his visitor had 
slept! 
"What does it mean?" Mr. Golyadkin almost shrieked. "What can 
it be? What does this new circumstance portend?" 
While Mr. Golyadkin was gazing in open-mouthed bewilderment 
at the empty spot, the door creaked and Petrushka came in with the 
tea-tray. 
"Where, where?" our hero said in a voice hardly audible, pointing 
to the place which had been occupied by his visitor the night before. 
At first Petrushka made no answer and did not look at his master, 
but fixed his eyes upon the corner to the right till Mr. Golyadkin 
felt compelled to look into that corner too. After a brief silence, how­
ever, Petrushka in a rude and husky voice answered that his master 
was not at home. 
"You idiot; why, I'm your master, Petrushka!" said Mr. Golyadkin 
in a breaking voice, looking open-eyed at his servant. 
Petrushka made no reply, but he gave Mr. Golyadkin such a look 
that the latter crimsoned to his ears-looked at him with an insulting 
reproachfulness almost equivalent to open abuse. Mr. Golyadkin was 
utterly flabbergasted, as the saying is. At last Petrushka explained 
that the other one had gone away an hour and a half ago, and would 
not wait. His answer, of course, sounded truthful and probable; it 
was evident that Petrushka was not lying; that his insulting look and 
the phrase the other one employed by him were only the result of the 

536 
'I he Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
disgusting circumstance with which he was already familiar, but still 
he understood, though dimly, that something was wrong, and that 
destiny had some other surprise, not altogether a pleasant one, in store 
for him. 
"All right, we shall see," he thought to himself. "We shall see in 
due time; we'll get to the bottom of all this . . . .  Oh, Lord, have 
mercy upon us!" he moaned in conclusion, in quite a different voice. 
"And why did I invite him, to what end did I do all that? Why, I am 
thrusting my head into their thievish noose myself; I am tying the 
noose with my own hands. Ach, you fool, you fool! You can't resist 
babbling like some silly boy, some chancery clerk, some wretched crea໡ 
ture of no class at all, some rag, some rotten dishclout; you're a 
gossip, an old woman! . . .  Oh, all ye saints! And he wrote verses, 
the rogue, and expressed his love for me! How could . . .  How 
can I show him the door in a polite way if he turns up again, the 
rogue ? Of course, there are all sorts of ways and means. I can say this 
is how it is, my salary being so limited . . .  Or scare him off in some 
way saying that, taking this and that into consideration, I am forced 
to make clear . . .  that he would have to pay an equal share of the 
cost of board and lodging, and pay the money in advance. H'm! No, 
damn it all, no! That would be degrading to me. It's not quite delicate! 
Couldn't I do something like this : suggest to Petrushka that he should 
annoy him in some way, should be disrespectful, be rude, and get rid 
of him in that way. Set them at each other in some way . . . .  No, 
damn it all, no! It's dangerous and again, if one looks at it from that 
point of view-it's not the right thing at all! Not the right thing at all! 
l3ut there, even if he doesn't come, it will be a bad lookؓut, too! I 
babbled to him last night! . . .  Ach, it's a bad lookؓut, a bad lookޔ 
out! Ach, we're in a bad way! Oh, I'm a cursed fool, a cursed fool! 
You can't train yourself to behave as you ought, you can't conduct 
yourself reasonably. \Veil, what if he comes, and refuses. And God 
grant he may come! I should be very glad if he did come . . . .  
" 
Such were Mr. Golyadkin's reflections as he swallowed his tea and 
glanced continually at the clock on the wall. 
"It's a quarter to nine; it's time to go. And something v.'ill happen! 
What will there be there? I should like to know what exactly lies hidޔ 
den in this-that is, the object, the aim, and the various intrigues. It 
would be a good thing to find out what all these people are plotting, 
and what will be their first step . . . .  
" 
Mr. Golyadkin could endure it no longer. He threw down his 
unfinished pipe, dressed and set off for the office, anxious to ward off 

The 'Double 
537 
the danger if possible and to reassure himself about everything by his 
presence in person. There was danger: he knew himself that there was 
danger. 
"We . . .  will get to the bottom of it," said Mr. Golyadkin, taking 
off his coat and goloshes in the entry. "We'll go into all these matters 
immediately." 
Making up his mind to act in this way, our hero put himself to 
rights, assumed a correct and official air, and was just about to pass 
into the adjoining room, when suddenly, in the very doorway, he 
jostled against his acquaintance of the day before, his friend and com໢ 
panion. Mr. Golyadkin junior seemed not to notice Mr. Golyadkin 
senior, though they met almost nose to nose. Mr. Golyadkin junior 
seemed to be busy, to be hastening somewhere, was breathless; he had 
such an official, such a business-like air that it seemed as though any 
one could read in his face: 'Entrusted \Vith a special commission.' . . . 
"Oh, it's you, Yakov Petrovitch!" said our hero, clutching the hand 
of his last night's visitor. 
"Presently, presently, excuse me, tell me about it afterwards," cried 
Mr. Golyadkin junior, dashing on. 
"But, excuse me; I believe, Y akov Petrovitch, you wanted . . .  " 
"What is it ? Make haste and explain." 
At this point his visitor of the previous night halted as though 
reluctantly and against his will, and put his ear almost to Mr. Gol­
yadkin's nose. 
"I must tell you, Yakov Petrovitch, that I am surprised at behaviour 
•
.
.
 behaviour which seemingly I could not have expected at all." 
"There's a proper form for everything. Go to his Excellency's sec໣ 
retary and then appeal in the proper way to the directors of the office. 
Have you got your petition?" 
"You . . .  I really don't know, Yakov Petrovitch! You simply 
amaze me, Yakov Petrovitch! You certainly don't recognize me or, 
with your characteristic gaiety, you are joking.'' 
"Oh, it's you," said Mr. Golyadkin j unior, seeming only now to 
recognize Mr. Golyadkin senior. "So it's you? Well, have you had a 
good night?" 
Then, smiling a little-a formal and conventional smile, by no 
means the sort of smile that was befitting (for, after all, he owed a 
debt of gratitude to Mr. Golyadkin senior)-smiling this formal and 
conventional smile, Mr. Golyadkin junior added that he was very glad 
Mr. Golyadkin senior had had a good night; then he made a slight 
bow and shuffiing a little with his feet, looked to the right, and to the 

538 
'I he Short Novels of 7Jostoevsky 
left, then dropped his eyes to the floor, made for the side door and 
muttering in a hurried whisper that he had a special commission, 
dashed into the next room. He vanished like an apparition. 
"Well, this is queer!" muttered our hero, petrified for a moment; 
"this is queer! This is a strange circumstance." 
At this point Mr. Golyadkin felt as though he had pins and needles 
all over him. 
"However," he went on to himself, as he made his way to his depart­
ment, "however, I spoke long ago of such a circumstance: I had a 
presentiment long ago that he had a special commission. Why, I 
said yesterday that the man must certainly be employed on some 
special commission." 
"Have you finished copying out the document you had yesterday, 
Yakov Petrovitch?" Anton Antonovitch Syetotchkin asked Mr. Gol­
yadkin, when the latter was seated beside him. "Have you got it 
here?" 
"Yes," murmured Mr. Golyadkin, looking at the head clerk with 
a rather helpless glance. 
"That's right! I mention it because Andrey Filippovitch has asked 
for it twice. I'll be bound his Excellency wants it . . . .  " 
"Yes, it's finished . . . .  
" 
"Well, that's all right then." 
"I believe, Anton Antonovitch, I have always perfomed my duties 
properly. I'm always scrupulous over the work entrusted to me by my 
superiors, and I attend to it conscientiously." 
"Yes. Why, what do you mean by that?" 
"I mean nothing, Anton Antonovitch. I only want to explain, Anton 
Antonovitch, that I . . .  that is, I meant to express that spite and 
malice sometimes spare no person whatever in their search for their 
daily and revolting food . . . .  " 
"Excuse me, I don't quite understand you. \Vhat person are you 
alluding to?" 
"I only meant to say, Anton Antonovitch, that I'm seeking the 
straight path and I scorn going to work in a roundabout way. That 
I am not one to intrigue, and that, if I may be allowed to say so, I 
may very justly be proud of it. . . .  " 
"Yes. That's quite so, and to the best of my comprehension I thor­
oughly endorse your remarks; but allow me to tell you, Yakov Petrov­
itch, that personalities are not quite permissible in good society, that 
I, for instance, am ready to put up with anything behind my back­
for everv one's abused behind his back-but to my face, if you ple.'lse,. 

The 'Double 
539 
my good sir, I don't allow any one to be impudent. I've grown grey 
in the government service, sir, and I don't allow any one to be impu-
dent to me in my old age . . . .  
" 
"No, Anton Antonovitch . . .  you see, Anton Antonovitch . . .  you 
haven't quite caught my meaning. To be sure, Anton Antonovitch, 
I for my part could only think it an honour . . . .  
" 
"Well, then, I ask your pardon too. We've been brought up in the 
old school. And it's too late for us to learn your new-fangled ways. 
I believe we've had understanding enough for the service of our coun­
try up to now. As you are aware, sir, I have an order of merit for 
twenty-five years' irreproachable service . . . .  
" 
"I feel it, Anton Antonovitch, on my side, too, I quite feel all that. 
But I didn't meant that, I am speaking of a mask, Anton Antonov­
itch . . . .  " 
"A mask?" 
"Again you •
•
.
 I am apprehensive that you are taking this, too, 
in a wrong sense, that is the sense of my remarks, as you say yourself, 
Anton Antonovitch. I am simply enunciaring a theory, that is, I am 
advancing the idea, Anton Antonovitch, that persons who wear a mask 
have become far from uncommon, and that nowadays it is hard to 
recognize the man beneath the mask . . . .  " 
"Well, do you know, it's not altogether so hard. Sometimes it's fairly 
easy. Sometimes one need not go far to look for it." 
"No, you know, Anton Antonovitch, I say, I say of myself, that I, 
for instance, do not put on a mask except when there is need of it; 
that is simply at carnival time or at some festive gathering, speaking 
in the literal sense; but that I do not wear a mask before people in 
daily life, speaking in another less obvious sense. That's what I meant 
to say, Anton Antonovitch." 
"Oh, well, but we must drop all this, for now I've no time to spare," 
said Anton Antonovitch, getting up from his seat and collecting some 
papers in order to report upon them to his Excellency. "Your business, 
as I imagine, will be explained in due course without delay. You will 
see for yourself whom you should censure and whom you should 
blame, and thereupon I humbly beg you to spare me from further pri­
vate explanations and arguments which interfere with my work . . . .  
" 
"No, Anton Antonovitch," Mr. Golyadkin, turning a little pale, 
began to the retreating figure of Anton Antonovitch : "I had no 
thought of the kind." 
"What does it mean?" our hero went on to himself, when he was 

540 
The Short Novels of Vostoevsky 
left alone. "What quarter is the wind in now, and what is one to make 
of this nt:w turn?" 
At the very time when our bewildered and half-crushed hero was 
setting himself to solve this new question, there was a sound of move­
ment and bustle in the next room, the door opened and Andrey 
Filippovitch, who had been on some business in his Excellency's study, 
appeared breathless in the doorway, and called to Mr. Golyadkin. 
Knowing what was wanted and anxious not to keep Andrey Filippov­
itch waiting, Mr. Golyadkin leapt up from his seat, and as was fitting 
immediately bustled for all he was worth geLting the manuscript that 
was required finally neat and ready and preparing to follow the 
manuscript and Andrey Filippovitch into his Excellency's study. Sud­
denly, almost slipping under the arm of Andrey Filippovitch, who 
was standing right in the doorway, Mr. Golyadkin junior darted into 
the room in breathless haste and bustle, with a solemn and resolutely 
official air; he bounded straight up to Mr. Golyadkin senior, who was 
expecting nothing less than such a visitation. 
"The papers, Yakov Petrovitch, the papers . . .  His Excellency has 
been pleased to ask for them; have you got them ready? "  Mr. Gol­
yadkin senior's friend whispered in a hurried undertone. "Andrey 
Filippovitch is waiting for you . . . .  " 
"I know he is waiting without your telling me," said Mr. Golyadkin 
•enior, also in a hurried whisper. 
"No, Yakov Petrovitch, I did not mean that; I did not mean that at 
all, Yakov Petrovitch, not that at all; I sympathize with you, Yakov 
Petrovitch, and am moved by genuine interest." 
"Which I most humbly beg you to spare me. Allow me, allow 
" 
me . . .  
"You'll put it in an envelope, of course, Yakov Petrovitch, and 
you'll put a mark in the third page; allow me, Yakov Petrovitch . . . .  " 
"You allow me, if you please . . . .  " 
"But, I say, there's a blot here, Y akov Petrovitch; did you know 
there was a blot here? . . .  
" 
At this point Andrey Filippovitch called Yakov Petrovitch a second 
time. 
"One moment, Andrey Filippovitch, I'm only just . . .  Do you 
understand Russian, sir?" 
"It would be best to take it out with a penknife, Yakov Petrovitch. 
You had better rely upon me; you had better not touch it yourself, 
Yakov Petrovitch, rely upon me-I'll do it with a penknife . . .  " 
Andrey Filippovitch called Mr. Golyadkin a third time. 

The 'Double 
541 
"But, allow me, where's the blot? I don't think there's a blot at all." 
"It's a huge blot. Here it is! Here, allow me, I saw it here . . .  
you just let me, Yakov Petrovitch, I'll just touch it with the penknife, 
I'll scratch it out with the penknife from true-hearted sympathy. 
There, like this; see, it's done." 
At this point, and quite unexpectedly, Mr. Golyadkin junior over­
powered Mr. Golyadkin senior in the momentary struggle that had 
arisen between them, and so, entirely against the latter's will, sud­
denly, without rhyme or reason, took possession of the document re­
quired by the authorities, and instead of scratching it out with the 
penknife in true-hearted sympathy as he had perfidiously promised 
Mr. Golyadkin senior, hurriedly rolled it up, put it under his arm, in 
two bounds was beside Andrey Filippovitch, who noticed none of his 
manoeuvres, and flew with the latter into the Director's room. Mr. 
Golyadkin remained as though riveted to the spot, holding the pen­
knife in his hand and apparently on the point of scratching something 
out with it . . . .  
Our hero could not yet grasp his new position. He could not at 
once recover himself. He felt the blow, but thought that it was some­
how all right. In terrible, indescribable misery he tore himself at last 
from his seat, rushed straight to the Director's room, imploring heaven 
on the way that it might somehow all be arranged satisfactorily ancl 
so would be all right . . . .  In the furthermost room, which adjoined the 
Director's private room, he ran straight upon Andrey Filippovitch in 
company with his namesake. Both of them were coming back; Mr. 
Golyadkin moved aside. Andrey Filippovitch was talking with 
a 
good-humoured smile, Mr. Golyadkin senior's namesake was smiling, 
too, fawning upon Andrey Filippovitch and tripping about at a re­
spectful distance from him, and was whispering something in his 
ear with a delighted air, to which Andrey Filippovitch assented with 
a gracious nod. In a flash our hero grasped the whole position. The 
fact was that the work had surpassed his Excellency's expectations (as 
he learnt afterwards), and was finished punctually by the time it was 
needed. His Excellency was extremely pleased with it. It was even 
said that his Excellency had said "Thank you" to Mr. Golyadkin 
junior, had thanked him warmly, had said that he would remember it 
on occasion and would never forget it . . . .  Of course, the first thing 
Mr. Golyadkin did was to protest, to protest with the utmost vigour of 
which he was capable. Pale as death, and hardly knowing what he 
was doing, he rushed up to Andrey Filippovitch. But the latter, hear­
ing that Mr. Golyadkin's business was a private matter. refused to 

542 
The Short Novels of 1Jostoevsk.y 
listen, observing firmly that he had not a minute to spare even for his 
own affairs. 
The curtness of his tone and his refusal struck Mr. Golyadkin. 
"I had better, perhaps, try in another quarter .
.
.
•
 I had better 
appeal to Anton Antonovitch." 
But to his disappointment Anton Antonovitch was not available . 
either: he, too, was busy over something somewhere! 
"Ah, it was not without design that he asked me to spare him 
explanation and discussion!" thought our hero. "This was what the 
old rogue had in his mind! In that case I shall simply make bold to 
approach his Excellency." 
Still pale and feeling that his brain was in a complete ferment, 
greatly perplexed as to what he ought to decide to do, Mr. Golyad­
kin sat down on the edge of the chair. "It would have been a great 
deal better if it had all been just nothing," he kept incessantly think­
ing to himself. "Indeed, such a mysterious business was utterly im­
probable. In the first place, it was nonsense, and secondly it could not 
happen. Most likely it was imagination, or something else happened, 
and not what really did happen; or perhaps I went myself . . .  and 
somehow mistook myself for some one else . . .  in short, it's an utterly 
impossible thing." 
Mr. Golyadkin had no sooner made up his mind that it was an 
utterly impossible thing than Mr. Golyadkin junior flew into the 
room with papers in both hands as well as under his arm. Saying 
two or three words about business to Andrey Filippovitch as he passed, 
exchanging Femarks with one, polite greetings with another, and 
familiarities with a third, Mr. Golyadkin junior, having apparently 
no time to waste, seemed on the point of leaving the room, but luckily 
for Mr. Golyadkin senior he stopped near to the door to say a few 
words as he passed two or three clerks who were at work there. Mr. 
Golyadkin senior rushed straight at him. As soon as Mr. Golyadkin 
junior saw Mr. Golyadkin senior's movement he began immediately, 
with great uneasiness, looking about him to make his escape. But our 
hero already held his last night's guest by the sleeve. The clerks sur­
rounding the two titular councillors stepped back and waited with 
curiosity to see what would happen. The senior titular councillor 
realized that public opinion was not on his side, he realized that they 
were intriguing against him: which made it all the more necessary to 
hold his own now. The moment was a decisive one. 
"Well!" said Mr. Golyadkin junior, looking rather impatiently at Mr. 
Golyadkin senior. 

The Vouble 
543 
The latter could hardly breathe. 
"I don't know," he began, "in what way to make plain to you the 
strangeness of your behaviour, sir." 
"Well. Go on." At this point Mr. Golyadkin junior turned round 
and winked to the clerks standing round, as though to give them to 
understand that a comedy was beginning. 
"The impudence and shamelessness of your manners with me, sir, 
in the present case, unmasks your true character . . . better than any 
words of mine could do. Don't rely on your trickery: it is worth· 
less . . . .  " 
"Come, Yakov Petrovitch, tell me now, how did you spend the 
night?" answered Mr. Golyadkin junior, looking Mr. Golyadkin senior 
straight in the eye. 
"You forget yourself, sir," said the titular councillor, completely 
flabbergasted, hardly able to feel the floor under his feet. "I trust that 
you will take a different tone . . . .  " 
"My darling!" exclaimed Mr. Golyadkin junior, making a rather 
unseemly grimace at Mr. Golyadkin senior, and suddenly, quite un­
expectedly, under the pretence of caressing him, he pinched his chubby 
cheek with two fingers. 
Our hero grew as hot as fire . . . .  As soon as Mr. Golyadkin junior 
noticed that his opponent, quivering in every limb, speechless with 
rage, as red as a lobster, and exasperated beyond all endurance, might 
actually be driven to attack him, he promptly and in the most shame­
less way hastened to be beforehand with his victim. Patting him two 
or three times on the cheek, tickling him two or three times, playing 
with him for a few seconds in this way while his victim stood rigid 
and beside himself with fury to the no little diversion of the young 
men standing round, Mr. Golyadkin junior ended with a most revolt­
ing shamelessness by giving Mr. Golyadkin senior a poke in his rather 
prominent stomach, and with a most venomous and suggestive smile 
said to him: "You're mischievous, brother Yakov, you are mischievous! 
We'll be sly, you and I, Yakov Petrovitch, we'll be sly." 
Then, and before our hero could gradually come to himself after 
the last attack, Mr. Golyadkin junior (with a little smile beforehand 
to the spectators standing round) suddenly assumed a most business· 
like, busy and official air, dropped his eyes to the floor and, drawing 
himself in, shrinking together, and pronouncing rapidly "on a special 
commission" he cut a caper with his short leg, and darted away into 
the next room. Our hero could not believe his eyes and was still unable 
to pull himself together . . . .  

544 
The Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
At last he roused himself. Recognizing in a flash that he was ruined, 
in a sense annihilated, that he had disgraced himself and sullied his 
reputation, that he had been turned into ridicule and treated with 
contempt in the presence of spectators, that he had been treacherously 
insulted by one whom he had looked on only the day before as his 
greatest and most trustworthy friend, that he had been put to utter con­
fusion, Mr. Golyadkin senior rushed in pursuit of his enemy. At the 
moment he would not even think of the witnesses of his ignominy. 
"They're all in a conspiracy together," he said to himself; "they 
stand by each other and set each other on to attack me." After taking 
a dozen steps, however, our hero perceived clearly that all pursuit 
would be vain and useless, and so he turned back. "You won't get 
away," he thought, "you will get caught one day; the wolf will have 
to pay for the sheep's tears." 
With ferocious composure and the most resolute determination Mr. 
Golyadkin went up to his chair and sat down upon it. "You won't 
escape," he said again. 
Now it was not a question of passive resistance: there was deter­
mination and pugnacity in the air, and any one who had seen how 
Mr. Golyadkin at that moment, flushed and scarcely able to restrain 
his excitement, stabbed his pen into the inkstand and with what fury 
he began scribbling on the paper, could be certain beforehand that the 
matter would not pass off like this, and could not end in a simple, 
womanish way. In the depth of his soul he formed a resolution, and 
in the depth of his heart swore to carry it out. To tell the truth he still 
did not quite know how to act, or rather did not know at all, but 
never mind, that did not matter! 
"Imposture and shamelessness do not pay nowadays, sir. Imposture 
and shamelessness, sir, lead to no good, but lead to the halter. Grishka 
Otrepyov was the only one, sir, who gained by imposture, deceiving 
the blind people and even that not for long." 
In spite of this last circumstance Mr. Golyadkin proposed to wait 
till such time as the mask should fall from certain persons and some­
thing should be made manifest. For this it was necessary, in the first 
place, that office hours should be over as soon as possible, and till 
then our hero proposed to take no step. Then, when office hours were 
over, he would take one step. He knew then how he must act after 
taking that step, how to arrange his whole plan of action, to abase the 
horn of arrogance and crush the snake gnawing the dust in con­
temptible impotence. To allow himself to be treated like a rag used for 
wiping dirty boots, Mr. Golyadkin could not. He could not consent to 

The 'Double 
545 
that, especially in the present case. Had it not been for that last insult, 
our hero might, perhaps, have brought himself to control his anger; 
he might, perhaps, have been silent, have submitted and not have pro­
tested too obstinately; he would just have disputed a little, have made 
a slight complaint, have proved that he was in the right, then he would 
have given way a little, then, perhaps, he would have given way a little 
more, then he would have come round altogether, then, especially 
when the opposing party solemnly admitted that he was right, per­
haps, he would have overlooked it completely, would even have been 
a little touched, there might even, perhaps-who could tell?-spring up 
a new, close, warm friendship, on an even broader basis than the 
friendship of last night, so that this friendship might, in the end, 
completely eclipse the unpleasantness of the rather unseemly resem­
blance of the two individuals, so that both the titular councillors might 
be highly delighted, and might go on living till they were a hundred, 
and so on. To tell the whole truth, Mr. Golyadkin began to regret a 
little that he had stood up for himself and his rights, and had at once 
come in for unpleasantness in consequence. 
"Should he give in," thought Mr. Golyadkin, "say he was joking, I 
would forgive him. I would forgive him even more if he would 
acknowledge it aloud. But I won't let myself be treated like a rag. 
And I have not allowed even persons very different from him to treat 
me so, still less will I permit a depraved person to attempt it. I am not 
a rag. I am not a rag, sir!" 
In short, our hero made up his mind. "You're in fault yourself, sir!" 
he thought. He made up his mind to protest, and to protest with all 
his might to the very last. That was the sort of man he was! He could 
not consent to allow himself to be insulted, still less to allow himself 
to be treated as a rag, and, above all, to allow a thoroughly vicious 
man to treat him so. No quarrelling, however, no quarrelling! Possibly 
if some one wanted, if some one, for instance, actually insisted on 
turning Mr. Golyadkin into a rag, he might have done so, might have 
done so without opposition or punishment (Mr. Golyadkin was him­
self conscious of this at times), and he would have been a rag and 
not Golyadkin-yes, a nasty, filthy rag; but that rag would not have 
been a simple rag, it would have been a rag possessed of dignity, it 
would have been a rag possessed of feelings and sentiments, even 
though dignity was defenceless and feelings could not assert them­
selves, and lay hidden deep down in the filthy folds of the rag, still 
the feelings were there. . . 
. 
The hours dragged on incredibly slowly; at last it struck four. Soon 

546 
'1 he Short N.ovels of 'Dostoevsky 
after, all got up and, following the head of the department, moved 
each on his homeward way. Mr. Golyadkin mingled with the crowd; 
he kept a vigilant look-<>ut, and did not lose sight of the man he 
wanted. At last our hero saw that his friend ran up to the office 
attendants who handed the clerks their overcoats, and hung about 
near them waiting for his in his usual nasty way. The minute was a 
decisive one. Mr. Golyadkin forced his way somehow through the 
crowd and, anxious not to be left behind, he, too, began fussing about 
his overcoat. But Mr. Golyadkin's friend and companion was given 
his overcoat first because on this occasion, too, he had succeeded, as 
he always did, in making up to them, whispering something to them, 
cringing upon them and getting round them. 
After putting on his overcoat, Mr. Golyadkin junior glanced ironi­
cally at Mr. Golyadkin senior, acting in this way openly and defiantly, 
looked about him with his characteristic insolence, finally he tripped 
to and fro among the other clerks-no doubt in order to leave a good 
impression on them-said a word to one, whispered something to an­
other, respectfully accosted a third, directed a smile at a fourth, 
gave his hand to a fifth, and gaily darted downstairs. Mr. Golyadkin 
senior flew after him, and to his inexpressible delight overtook him 
on the last step, and seized him by the collar of his overcoat. It seemed 
as though Mr. Golyadkin junior was a little disconcerted, and he 
looked about him with a helpless air. 
"What do you mean by this?" he whispered to Mr. Golyadkin at 
last, in a weak voice. 
"Sir, if you are a gentleman, I trust that you remember our friendly 
relations yesterday," said our hero. 
"Ah, yes! Well ? Did you sleep well?" 
Fury rendered Mr. Golyadkin senior speechless for a moment. 
"I slept well, sir . . .  but allow me to tell you, sir, that you are 
playing a very complicated game . . . .  
" 
"Who says so? My enemies say that," answered abruptly the man 
who called himself Mr. Golyadkin, and saying this, he unexpectedly 
freed himself from the feeble hand of the real Mr. Golyadkin. As 
soon as he was free he rushed away from the stairs, looked around 
him, saw a cab, ran up to it, got in, and in one moment vanished from 
Mr. Golyadkin senior's sight. The despairing titular councillor, aban­
doned by all, gazed about him, but there was no other cab. He tried to 
run, but his legs gave way under him. With a look of open-mouthed 
astonishment on his countenance, feeling crushed and shrivelled up, 
he leaned helplessly against a lamp-post, and remained so for some 

The 7Jouhle 
547 
minutes in the middle of the pavement. It seemed as though all were 
over for Mr. Golyadkin. 
Chapter 9 
E VERYTHING, apparently, and even nature itself, seemed up in 
arms against Mr. Golyadkin; but he was still on his legs and uncon­
quered; he felt that he was unconquered. He was ready to struggle. 
He rubbed his hands with such feeling and such energy when he 
recovered from his first amazement that it could be deduced from his 
very air that he would not give in. Yet the danger was imminent; it 
was evident; Mr. Golyadkin felt it; but how to grapple with it, with 
this danger ?-that was the question. The thought even flashed through 
Mr. Golyadkin's mind for a moment, "After all, why not leave it so, 
simply give it up? Why, what is it ? Why, it's nothing. I'll keep apart 
as though it were not 1," thought Mr. Golyadkin. "I'll let it all pass; 
it's not I, and that's all about it; he's separate too, maybe he'll give it 
up too; he'll hang about, the rascal, he'll hang about. He'll come back 
and give it up again. That's how it will be! I'll take it meekly. And, 
indeed, where is the danger? Come, what danger is there? I should 
like any one to tell me where the danger lies in this business. It is a 
trivial affair. An everyday affair . . . .  
" 
At this point Mr. Golyadkin's tongue failed; the words died away 
on his lips; he even swore at himself for this thought; he convicted 
himself on the spot of abjectness, of cowardice for having this thought; 
things were no forwarder, however. He felt that to make up his mind 
to some course of action was absolutely necessary for him at the 
moment; he even felt that he would have given a great deal to any 
one who could have told him what he must decide to do. Yes, but how 
could he guess what? Though, indeed, he had no time to guess. In 
any case, that he might lose no time he took a cab and dashed home. 
"Well ? What are you feeling now?" he wondered; "what are you 
graciously pleased to be thinking of, Y akov Petrovitch ? What are you 
doing? What are you doing now, you rogue, you rascal? You've 
brought yourself to this plight, and now you are weeping and 
whimpering!" 
So Mr. Golyadkin taunted himself as he jolted along in the vehicle. 
To taunt himself and so to irritate his wounds was, at this time, a 
great satisfaction to Mr. Golyadkin, almost a voluptuous enjoyment. 

548 
The Short 'Novels of VostoevskY 
"Well," he thought, "if some magician were to turn up now, or if 
it could come to pass in some official way and I were told : 'Give a 
finger of your right hand, Golyadkin-and it's a bargain with you; 
there shall not be the other Golyadkin, and you will be happy, only 
you won't have your finger'-yes, I would sacrifice my finger, I would 
certainly sacrifice it, I would sacrifice it without winking .
•
.
.
 The 
devil take it all!" the despairing titubr councillor cried at last. "Why, 
what is it all for? Well, it all had to be; yes, it absolutely had to; 
yes, just this had to be, as though nothing else were possible! And it 
was all right at first. Every one was pleased and happy. But there, it 
had to be! There's nothing to be gained by talking, though; you must 
act." 
And so, almost resolved upon some action, Mr. Golyadkin reached 
home, and without a moment's delay snatched up his pipe and, sucking 
at it with all his might and puffing out clouds of smoke to right and 
to left, he began pacing up and down the room in a state of violent 
excitement. Meanwhile, Petrushka began laying the table. At last Mr. 
Goly:1dkin made up his mind completely, flung Jsidc his pipe, put on 
his overcoat, said he would not dine Jt home and ran out of the flat. 
Petrushka, panting, overtook him on the stairs, bringing the hat he h:1d 
forgotten. Mr. Golyadkin took his hat, WJnted to say something inci­
dentally to justify himself in Petrushka's eyes thJt the btter might not 
think Jnything particubr, such as, "\VhJt a queer circumstance! here 
he forgot his hat-Jnd so on," but as Petrushka walked away Jt once 
and would not even look Jt him, Mr. Golyadkin put on his hat without 
further expbnation, ran downstairs, Jnd repeJting to himself thJt per­
hJps everything might be for the best, and thJt Jfhirs would somehow 
be arranged, though he WJs conscious among other things of a cold 
chill right down to his heels, he went out into the street, took a cab Jnd 
hastened to Andrey Filippovitch's. 
"Would it not be better to-morrow, though?" thought Mr. Golyad­
kin, as he took hold of the bell-rope of Andrey Filippovitch's flat. 
"And, besides, what can I say in particular? There is nothing particu­
lar in it. It's such a wretched affair, yes, it really is wretched, paltry, yes, 
that is, almost a paltry affair .
•
.
 yes, that's what it all is, the incident . 
. . . " Suddenly Mr. Golyadkin pulled at the bell; the bell rang; foot­
steps were heard within . . . .  Mr. Golyadkin cursed himself on the spot 
for his hastiness and Judacity. His recent unpleasant experiences, which 
he had almost forgotten over his work, and his encounter with Andrey 
Filippovitch immediately came back into his mind. But by now it was 
too late to run away : the door opened. Luckily for Mr. Golyadkin he 

The 1Jouble 
549 
was informed that Andrey Filippovitch had not returned from the 
office and had not dined at home. 
"I know where he dines: he dines near the Ismailovsky Bridge," 
thought our hero; and he was immensely relieved. To the footman's 
inquiry what message he would leave, he said: "It's all right, my good 
man, I'll look in later," and he even ran downstairs with a certain 
cheerful briskness. Going out into the street, he decided to dismiss the 
cab and paid the driver. When the man asked for something extra, 
saying he had been waiting in the street and had not spared his horse 
for his honour, he gave him five kopecks extra, and even willingly; 
and then walked on. 
"It really is such a thing," thought Mr. Golyadkin, "that it cannot be 
left like that; though, if one looks at it that way, looks at it sensibly, 
why am I hurrying about here, in reality? Well, yes, though, I will 
go on discussing why I should take a lot of trouble; why I should rush 
about, exert myself, worry myself and wear myself out. To begin with, 
the thing's done and there's no recalling it . . .  of course, there's no 
recalling it! Let us put it like this : a man turns up with a satisfactory 
reference, said to be a capable clerk, of good conduct, only he is a poor 
man and has suffered many reverses-all sorts of ups and downs­
well, poverty is not a crime: so I must stand aside. Why, what non­
sense it is! Well, he came; he is so made, the man is so made by nature 
itself, that he is as like another man as though they were two drops of 
water, as though he were a perfect copy of another man; how could 
they refuse to take him into the department on that account? If it is 
fate, if it is only fate, if it is only blind chance that is to blame-is he 
to be treated like a rag, is he to be refused a job in the office? •
•
.
 Why, 
what would become of justice after that? He is a poor man, hopeless, 
downcast; it makes one's heart ache: compassion bids one care for him! 
Yes! There's no denying, there would be a fine set of head officials, if 
they took the same view as a reprobate like me! What an addlepate I 
am! I have foolishness enough for a dozen! Yes, yes! They did right, 
and many thanks to them for being good to a poor, luckless fellow . 
. . . \Vhy, let us imagine for a moment that we are twins, that we had 
been born twin brothers, and nothing else-there it is! Well, what of 
it? Why, nothing! All the clerks can get used to it . . . .  And an out­
sider, coming into our office, would certainly find nothing unseemly or 
offensive in the circumstance. In fact, there is really something touch­
ing in it; to think that the divine Providence created two men exactly 
alike, and the heads of the department, seeing the divine handiwork, 
provided for two twins. It would, of course," Mr. Golyadkin went 

550 
The Short N.ot1els of TJostoetskJ 
on, drawing a breath and dropping his voice, "it would, of course .
•
.
 
it would, of course, have been better if there had been . . .  if there had 
been nothing of this touching kindness, and if there had been no twins 
either . . . .  The devil take it all! And what need was there for it? And 
what was the particular necessity that admitted of no delay! My good­
ness! The devil has made a mess of it! Besides, he has such a character, 
too, he's of such a playful, horrid disposition-he's such a scoundrel, 
he's such a nimble fellow! He's such a toady! Such a lickspittle! He's 
such a Golyadkin! I daresay he will misconduct himself; yes, he'll dis­
grace my name, the blackguard! And now I have to look after him and 
wait upon him! What an infliction! But, after all, what of it? It doesn't 
matter. Granted, he's a scoundrel, well, let him be a scoundrel, but to 
make up for it, the other one's honest; so he will be a scoundrel and 
I'll be honest, and they'll say that this Golyadkin's a rascal, don't take 
any notice of him, and don't mix him up with the other; but the other 
one's honest, virtuous, mild, free from malice, always to be relied upon 
in the service, and worthy of promotion; that's how it is, very good 
•
.
.
 but what if . . .  what if they get us mixed up! . . .  He is equal to 
anything! Ah, Lord, have mercy upon us! . . .  He will counterfeit a 
man, he will counterfeit him, the rascal-he will change one man for 
another as though he were a rag, and not reflect that a man is not a 
rag. Ach, mercy on us! Ough, what a calamity!" . . .  
Reflecting and lamenting in this way, Mr. Golyadkin ran on, re­
gardless of where he was going. He came to his senses in Nevsky 
Prospect, only owing to the chance that he ran so neatly full tilt into 
a passer-by that he saw stars in his eyes. Mr. Golyadkin muttered his 
excuses without raising his head, and it was only after the passer-by, 
muttering something far from flattering, had walked a considerable 
distance away, that he raised his nose and looked about to see where 
he was and how he had got there. Noticing when he did so that he was 
close to the restaurant in which he had sat for a while before the dinner­
party at Olsufy Ivanovitch's, our hero was suddenly conscious of a 
pinching and nipping sensation in his stomach; he remembered that 
he had not dined; he had no prospect of a dinner-party anywhere. And 
so, without losing precious time, he ran upstairs into the restaurant to 
have a snack of something as quickly as possible, and to avoid delay 
by making all the haste he could. And though everything in the res­
taurant was rather dear, that little circumstance did not on this occasion 
make Mr. Golyadkin pause, and, indeed, he had no time to pause over 
such a trifle. In the brightly lighted room the customers were standing 
in rather a crowd round the counter, upon which lay heaps of all sorts 

'I he 'Double 
551 
of such edibles as are eaten by well-bred persons at lunch. The waiter 
scarcely had time to fill glasses, to serve, to take money and give 
change. Mr. Golyadkin waited for his turn and modestly stretched out 
his hand for a savoury patty. Retreating into a corner, turning his back 
on the company and eating with appetite, he went back to the attend­
ant, put down his plate and, knowing the price, took out a ten-kopeck 
piece and laid the coin on the counter, catching the waiter's eye as 
though to say, "Look, here's the money, one pie," and so on. 
"One rouble ten kopecks is your bill," the waiter filtered through his 
teeth. 
Mr. Golyadkin was a good deal surprised. 
"You are speaking to me? . . .  I . . .  I took one pie, I believe." 
"You've had eleven," the man retorted confidently. 
"You . . . so it seems to me . . .  I believe, you're mistaken . . . .  I 
really took only one pie, I think." 
"I counted them; you took eleven. Since you've had them you must 
pay for them; we don't give anything away for nothing." 
Mr. Golyadkin was petrified. "What sorcery is this, what is happen­
ing to me? "  he wondered. Meanwhile, the man waited for Mr. Golyad­
kin to make up his mind; people crowded round Mr. Golyadkin; he 
was already feeling in his pocket for a silver rouble, to pay the full 
amount at once, to avoid further trouble. "Well, if it was eleven, it 
was eleven," he thought, turning as red as a lobster. "Why, what does 
it matter if eleven pies have been eaten? Why, a man's hungry, so he 
eats eleven pies; well, let him eat, and may it do him good; and there's 
nothing to wonder at in that, and there's nothing to laugh at •
.
.
.
 
" 
At that moment something seemed to stab Mr. Golyadkin. He 
raised his eyes and-at once he guessed the riddle. He knew what the 
sorcery was. All his difficulties were solved . . . .  
In the doorway of the next room, almost directly behind the waiter 
and facing Mr. Golyadkin, in the doorway which, till that moment, 
our hero had taken for a looking-glass, a man was standing-he Wali 
standing, Mr. Golyadkin was standing-not the original Mr. Golyad­
kin, the hero of our story, but the other Mr. Golyadkin, the new Mr. 
Golyadkin. The second Mr. Golyadkin was apparently in excellent 
spirits. He smiled to Mr. Golyadkin the first, nodded to him, winked, 
shuffied his feet a little, and looked as though in another minutŃ he 
would vanish, would disappear into the next room, and then go out, 
maybe, by a back way out; and there it would be, and all pursuit would 
be in vain. In his hand he had the l?st morsel of the tenth pie, and 

552 
T lte Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
before Mr. Golyadkin's very eyes he popped it into his mouth and 
smacked his lips. 
"He has impersonated me, the scoundrel!" thought Mr. Golyadkin, 
flushing hot with shame. "He is not ashamed of the publicity of it! 
Do they see him ? I fancy no one notices him . . . .  " 
Mr. Golyadkin threw down his rouble as though it burnt his fingers, 
and without noticing the waiter's insolently significant grin, a smile of 
triumph and serene power, he extricated himself from the crowd, and 
rushed away without looking round. "We must be thankful that at 
least he has not completely compromised any one!" thought Mr. 
Golyadkin senior. "We must be thankful to him, the brigand, and to 
fate, that everything was satisfactorily settled. The waiter was rude, 
that was all. But, after all, he was in the right. One rouble and ten 
kopecks were owing: so he was in the right. 'We don't give things 
away for nothing,' he said! Though he might have been more polite, 
the rascal. . . 
." 
All this Mr. Golyadkin said to himself as he went downstairs to the 
entrance, but on the last step he stopped suddenly, as though he had 
been shot, and suddenly flushed till the tears came into his eyes at the 
insult to his dignity. After standing stock-still for half a minute, he 
stamped his foot resolutely, at one bound leapt from the step into the 
street and, without looking round, rushed breathless and unconscious 
of fatigue back home to his flat in Shestilavotchny Street. When he 
got home, without changing his coat, though it was his habit to change 
into an old coat at home, without even stopping to take his pipe, he 
sat down on the sofa, drew the inkstand towards him, took up a pen, 
got a sheet of notepaper, and with a hand that trembled from inward 
excitement, began scribbling the following epistle. 
"Dear Sir Yakov Petrovitch! 
"I should not take up my pen if my circumstances, and your own 
action, sir, had not compelled me to that step. Believe me that nothing 
but necessity would have induced me to enter upon such a discussion 
with you, and therefore, first of all, I beg you, sir, to look upon this 
step of mine not as a premeditated design to insult you, but as the 
inevitable consequence of the circumstance that is a bond between us 
nO\V." 
("I think that's all right, proper, courteous, though not lacking in 
force and firmness . . . .  I don't think there is anything for him to take 
offence at. Besides, I'm fully within my rights," thought Mr. Golyad­
kin, reading over what he had written.) 

The 'Double 
553 
"Your strange and sudden appearance, sir, on a stormy night, after 
the coarse and unseemly behaviour of my enemies to me, for whom 
I feel too much contempt even to mention their names, was the start­
ing-point of all the misunderstanding existing between us at the present 
time. Your obstinate desire to persist in your course of action, sir, and 
forcibly to enter the circle of my existence and all my relations in 
practical life, transgresses every limit imposed by the merest politeness 
and every rule of civilized society. I imagine there is no need, sir, 
for me to refer to the seizure by you of my papers, and particularly 
to your taking away my good name, in order to gain the favour of my 
superiors-favour you have not deserved. There is no need to refer 
here either to your intentional and insulting refusal of the necessary 
explanation in regard to us. Finally, to omit nothing, I will not allude 
here to your last strange, one may even say, your incomprehensible 
behaYiour to me in the coffee-house. I am far from lamenting over the 
needless-for me-loss of a rouble; but I cannot help expressing my 
indignation at the recollection of your public outrage upon me, to the 
detriment of my honour, and what is more, in the presence of several 
persons of good breeding, though not belonging to my circle of 
acquaintance." 
("Am I not going too far?" thought Mr. Golyadkin. "Isn't it too 
much; won't it be too insulting-that taunt about good breeding, for 
instance? . . .  But there, it doesn't matter! I must show him the reso­
luteness of my character. I might, however, to soften him, flatter him, 
and butter him up at the end. But there, we shall see.") 
"But I should not weary you with my letter, sir, if I were not firmly 
convinced that the nobility of your sentiments and your open, candid 
character would suggest to you yourself a means for retrieving all 
lapses and returning everything to its original position. 
"With full confidence I venture to rest assured that you will not 
take my letter in a sense derogatory to yourself, and at the same time 
that you will not refuse to explain yourself expressly on this occasion 
by letter, sending the same by my man. 
"In expectation of your reply, I have the honour, dear sir, to remain, 
"Your humble servant, 
"Y. GoLYADKIN." 
"Well, that is quite all right. The thing's done, it has come to letter­
writing. But who is to blame for that? He is to blame himself: by his 
own action he reduces a man to the necessity of resorting to epistolary 
composition. And I am within my rights . . . .  
" 

554 
'I he Short 'Novels of VostoevskJI 
Reading over his letter for the last time, Mr. Golyadkin folded it up, 
sealed it and called Petrushka. Petrushka came in looking, as usual, 
sleepy and cross about something. 
"You will take this letter, my boy •
•
•
 do you understand?" 
Petrushka did not speak. 
"You will take it to the department; there you must find the secre­
tary on duty, Vahramyev. He is the one on duty to-day. Do you 
understand that?" 
"I understand." 
" 'I understand'! He can't even say, 'I understand, sir!' You must 
osk for the secretary, Vahramyev, and tell him that your master desired 
you to send his regards, and humbly requests him to refer to the address 
book of our office and find out where the titular councillor, Golyadkin, 
is living?' 
Petrushka remained mute, and, as Mr. Golyadkin fancied, smiled. 
"Well, so you see, Pyotr, you have to ask him for the address, and 
find out where the new clerk, Golyadkin, lives." 
"Yes." 
"You must ask for the address and then take this letter there. Do 
you understand?" 
"I understand." 
"If there . . .  where you have to take the letter, that gentleman to 
whom you have to give the letter, that Golyad:{in . . .  What are you 
laughing at, you blockhead?" 
"What is there to laugh at? What is it to me! I wasn't doing any­
thing, sir. It's not for the likes of us to laugh .
•
•
.
 
" 
"Oh, well . . .  if that gentleman should ask, 'How is your master, 
how he is?'; if he . . . well, if he should ask you anything-you hold 
your tongue, and answer, 'My master is all right, and begs you for 
an answer to his letter.' Do you understand?" 
"Yes, sir." 
"Well, then, say, 'My master is all right and quite well,' say, 'and 
is just getting ready to pay a call : and he asks you,' say, 'for an answer 
in writing.' Do you understand?" 
"Yes.'' 
"Well, go along, then.'' 
"Why, what a bother I have with this blockhead too! He's laughing, 
and there's nothing to be done. What's he laughing at? I've lived to 
see trouble. Here I've lived like this to see trouble. Though perhaps it 
may all turn out for the best . . . .  That rascal will be loitering about 
for the next two hours now, I expect; he'll go off somewhere else 
.
.
.
•
 

'I he 'Double 
555 
There's no sending him anywhere. What a misery it is! . . .  What 
misery has come upon me!" 
Feeling his troubles to the full, our hero made up his mind to remain 
passive for two hours till Petrushka returned. For an hour of the time 
he walked about the room, smoked, then put aside his pipe and sat 
down to a book, then he lay down on the sofa, then took up his pipe 
again, then again began running about the room. He tried to think 
things over but was absolutely unable to think about anything. At last 
the agony of remaining passive reached the climax and Mr. Golyadkin 
made up his mind to take a step. "Petrushka will come in another 
hour," he thought. "I can give the key to the porter, and I myself can, 
so to speak . . .  I can investigate the matter; I shall investigate the 
matter in my own way." 
Without loss of time, in haste to investigate the matter, Mr. Golyad­
kin took his hat, went out of the room, locked up his flat, went in to 
the porter, gave him the key, together with ten kopecks-Mr. Golyad­
kin had become extraordinarily free-handed of late-and rushed off. 
Mr. Golyadkin went first on foot to the lsmailovsky Bridge. It took 
him half an hour to get there. When he reached the goal of his journey 
he went straight into the yard of the house so familiar to him, and 
glanced up at the windows of the civil councillor Berendyev's flat. 
Except for three windows hung with red curtains all the rest was dark. 
"Olsufy Ivanovitch has no visitors to-day," thought Mr. Golyadkin; 
"they must all be staying at home to-day." 
After standing for some time in the yard, our hero tried to decide 
on some course of action. But he was apparently not destined to reach 
a decision. Mr. Golyadkin changed his mind, and with a wave of his 
hand went back into the street. 
"No, there's no need for me to go to-day. What could I do here? 
. . .  No, I'd better, so to speak . . .  I'll investigate the matter personally." 
Coming to this conclusion, Mr. Golyadkin rushed off to his office. 
He had a long way to go. It was horribly muddy, besides, and the wet 
snow lay about in thick drifts. But it seemed as though difficulty did 
not exist for our hero at the moment. He was drenched through, it is 
true, and he was a good deal spattered with mud. 
"But that's no matter, so long as the object is obtained." 
And Mr. Golyadkin certainly was nearing his goal. The dark mass 
of the huge government building stood up black before his eyes. 
"Stay," he thought; "where am I going, and what am I going to 
do here? Suppose.! do find out where he lives? Meanwhile, Petrushka 
wUl certainly have come back and brought me the answer. I am only 

556 
The Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
wasting my precious time, I am simply wasting my time. T໤ough 
shouldn't I, perhaps, go in and see Vahramyev? But, no, I'll go later 
. 
• . . Ech! There was no need to have gone out at all. But, there, it's my 
temperament! I've a knack of always seizing a chance of rushing aheacl 
of things, whether there is a need to or not . . . . H'm! 
.
•
.
 what time 
is it? It must be nine by now. Petrushka might come and not find me 
at home. It was pure folly on my part to go out .
•
•
.
 Ech, it is really 
a nuisance!" 
Sincerely acknowledging that he had been guilty of an act of folly, 
our hero ran back to Shestilavotchny Street. He arrived there, weary 
and exhausted. From the porter he learned that Petrushka had not 
dreamed of turning up yet. 
"To be sure! I foresaw it would be so," thought our hero; "and 
meanwhile it's nine o'clock. Ech, he's such a good-for-nothing chap! 
He's always drinking somewhere! Mercy on us! What a day has fallen 
to my miserable lot!" 
Reflecting in this way, Mr. Golyadkin unlocked his flat, got a light, 
took off his outdoor things, lighted his pipe and, tired, worn out, 
exhausted and hungry, lay down on the sofa and waited for Petrushka. 
The candle burnt dimly; the light flickered on the wall . . . .  Mr. Gol­
yadkin gazed and gazed, and thought and thought, and fell asleep at 
last, worn out. 
It was late when he woke up. The candle had almost burnt down, 
was smoking and on the point of going out. Mr. Golyadkin jumped 
up, shook himself, and remembered it all, absolutely all. Behind 
the screen he heard Petrushka snoring lustily. Mr. Golyadkin rushed 
to the window-not a light anywhere. He opened the movable pane­
all was still; the city was asleep as though it were dead : so it must 
have been two or three o'clock; so it proved to be, indeed; the clock 
behind the partition made an effort and struck two. Mr. Golyadkin 
rushed behind the partition. 
He succeeded, somehow, though only after great exertions, in rous­
ing Petrushka, and making him sit up in his bed. At that moment the 
candle went out completely. About ten minutes passed before Mr. 
Golyadkin succeeded in finding another candle and lighting it. In the 
interval Petrushka had fallen asleep again. 
"You scoundrel, you worthless fellow!" said Mr. Golyadkin, shak­
ing him up again. "Will you get up, will you wake?" After half an 
hour of effort Mr. Golyadkin succeeded, however, in rousing his 
servant thoroughly, and dragging him out from behind the partition. 

The 'Double 
557 
Only then, our hero remarked the fact that Petrushka was what is 
called dead-drunk and could hardly stand on his legs. 
"You good-for-nothing fellow!" cried Mr. Golyadkin; "you ruffian! 
You'll be the death of me! Good heavens! whatever has he done with 
the letter? Ach, my God! where is it? . . .  And why did I write it? 
As though there were any need for me to have written it! I went 
scribbling away out of pride, like a noodle! I've got myself into this 
fix out of pride! That is what dignity does for you, you rascal, that 
is dignity! . . .  Come, what have you done with the letter, you ruffian? 
To whom did you give it?" 
"I didn't give any one any letter; and I never had any letter . . .. 
so there! "  
Mr. Golyadkin wrung his hands i n  despair. 
"Listen, Pyotr . . . listen to me, listen to me . . . .  " 
"I am listening . . . .  " 
"Where have you been?-Answer . . . . " 
"Where have I been? . . .  I've been to see good people! What is it 
to me!" 
"Oh, Lord, have mercy on us! Where did you go, to begin with? 
Did you go to the department? 
.
•
•
 Listen, Pyotr, perhaps you're 
drunk?" 
"Me drunk! If I should be struck on the spot this minute, not a drop, 
not a drop-so there . . . .  
" 
"No, no, it's no matter you're being drunk . . . .  I only asked; it's all 
right your being drunk; I don't mind, Petrushka, I don't mind . . . .  
Perhaps it's only that you have forgotten, but you'll remember it all. 
Come, try to remember-have you been to that clerk's, to Vahramyev's; 
have you been to him or not?" 
"I have not been, and there's no such clerk. Not if I were this 
minute . . .  
" 
"No, no, Pyotr! No, Petrushka, you know I don't mind. Why, you 
see I don't mind 
.
•
.
.
 Come, what happened ? To be sure, it's cold and 
damp in the street, and so a man has a drop, and it's no matter. I am 
not angry. I've been drinking myself to-day, my boy 
.
.
.
•
 Come, think 
and try and remember, did you go to Vahramyev?" 
"Well, then, now, this is how it was, it's the truth-1 did go, if this 
very minute . . .  " 
"Come, that is right, Petrushka, that is quite right that you've been. 
You see I'm not angry . . . .  Come, come," our hero went on, coaxing 
his servant more and more, patting him on the shoulder and smiling 
to him, "come, you had a little nip, you scoundrel. . . .  You had two-

558 
'I he Short Novels of Vostoevsk,y 
penn'orth of something, I suppose? You're a sly rogue! Well, that's 
no matter; come, you see that I'm not angry 
•
.
•
.
 I'm not angry, my 
boy, I'm not angry . . . .  " 
"No, I'm not a sly rogue, say what you like . . . . I only went to see 
some good friends. I'm not a rogue, and I never have been a 
rogue . . . .  
" 
"Oh, no, no, Petrushka; listen, Petrushka, you know I'm not scold­
ing when I called you a rogue. I said that in fun, I said it in a good 
sense. You see, Petrushka, it is sometimes a compliment to a man 
when you call him a rogue, a cunning fellow, that he's a sharp chap 
and would not let any one take him in. Some men like it . . . .  Come, 
come, it doesn't matter! Come, tell me, Petrushka, without keeping 
anything back, openly, as to a friend . . . did you go to Vahramyev's, 
and did he give you the address ?" 
"He did give me the address, he did give me the address too. He's 
a nice gentleman! 'Your master,' says he, 'is a nice man,' says he, 'very 
nice man,' says he, 'I send my regards,' says he, 'to your master, thank 
him and say that I like him,' says he-'how I do respect your master,' 
says he. 'Because,' says he, 'your master, Petrushka,' says he, 'is a good 
man, and you,' says he, 'Petrushka, are a good man too . . .  .' " 
"Ah, mercy on us! But the address, the address! You Judas!" The 
last word Mr. Golyadkin uttered almost in a whisper. 
"And the address . . .  he did give the address too.'' 
"He did? Well, where does Golyadkin, the clerk Golyadkin, the 
titular councillor, live?" 
" 'Why,' says he, 'Golyadkin will be now at Shestilavotchny Street. 
When you get into Shestilavotchny Street take the stairs on the right 
and it's the fourth floor. And there,' says he, 'you'll find Golyad­
kin . . .  .' " 
"You scoundrel!" our hero cried, out of patience at last. "You're 
a ruffian! Why, that's my address; why, you are talking about me. 
But there's another Golyadkin; I'm talking of the other one, you 
scoundrel!" 
"Well, that's as you please! What is it to me? Have it your own 
way . . . .  " 
"And the letter, the letter?" . . .  
"\Vhat letter? There wasn't any letter, and I didn't see any letter." 
"But what have you done with it, you rascal?" 
"I delivered the letter, I delivered it. He sent his regards. 'Thank 
you,' says he, 'your master's a nice man,' says he. 'Give my regards,' 
says he, 'to your master . . .  .' "  

'I he 7Jouble 
559 
"But who said that? Was it Golyadkin said it?" 
Petrushka said nothing for a moment, and then, with a broad grin, 
he stared straight into his master's face 
.
.
.
•
 
"Listen, you scoundrel!" began Mr. Golyadkin, breathless, beside 
himself with fury; "listen, you rascal, what have you done to me? 
Tell me what you've done to me! You've destroyed me, you villain, 
you've cut the head off my shoulders, you Judas!" 
"Well, have it your own way! I don't care," said Petrushka in a 
resolute voice, retreating behind the screen. 
"Come here, come here, you ruffian .
.
•
 ," 
"I'm not coming to you now, I'm not coming at all. What do I 
care, I'm going to good folks. . . . Good folks live honestly, good 
folks live without falsity, and they never have doubles . . . .  
" 
Mr. Golyadkin's hands and feet went icy cold, his breath failed 
him . . . .  
"Yes," Petrushka went on, "they never have doubles. God doesn't 
affiict honest folk . . .  
," 
"You worthless fellow, you are drunk! Go to sleep now, you ruffian! 
And to-morrow you'll catch it," Mr. Golyadkin added in a voice 
hardly audible. As for Petrushka, he muttered something more; then 
he could be heard getting into bed, making the bed creak. After a 
prolonged yawn, he stretched; and at last began snoring, and slept 
the sleep of the just, as they say. Mr. Golyadkin was more dead than 
alive. Petrushka's behaviour, his very strange hints, which were yet so 
remote that it was useless to be angry at them, especially as they were 
uttered by a drunken man, and, in short, the sinister turn taken by 
the affair altogether, all this shook Mr. Golyadkin to the depths of 
his being. 
"And what possessed me to go for him in the middle of the night?" 
said our hero, trembling all over from a sickly sensation. "What the 
devil made me have anything to do with a drunken man! What could 
I expect from a drunken man? Whatever he says is a lie. But what 
was he hinting at, the ruffian? Lord, have mercy on us! And why did 
I write all that letter? I'm my own enemy, I'm my own murderer! 
As if I couldn't hold my tongue? I had to go scribbling nonsense! 
And what now! You are going to ruin, you are like an old rag, and 
yet you worry about your pride; you say, 'my honour is wounded,' 
you must stick up for your honour! My own murderer, that is what 
I am!" 
Thus spoke Mr. Golyadkin and hardly dared to stir for terror. At 
last his eyes fastened upon an object which excited his interest to the 

560 
The Short 'Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
utmost. In terror lest the object that caught his attention should prove 
to be an illusion, a deception of his fancy, he stretched out his hand 
to it with hope, with dread, with indescribable curiosity . . . . No, it 
was not a deception! Not a delusion! It was a letter, really a letter, 
undoubtedly a letter, and addressed to him. Mr. Golyadkin took the 
letter from the table. His heart beat terribly. 
"No doubt that scoundrel brought it," he thought, "put it there, 
and then forgot it; no doubt that is how it happened: no doubt that is 
just how it happened . . . .  " 
The letter was from Vahramyev, a young fellow-clerk who had 
once been his friend. "I had a presentiment of this though," thought 
our hero, "and I had a presentiment of all that there will be in the 
letter . . . .  
" 
The letter was as follows-
"Dear Sir Yakov Petrovitch! 
"Your servant is drunk, and there is no getting any sense out of 
him. For that reason I prefer to reply by letter. I hasten to inform you 
that the commission you've entrusted to me-that is, to deliver a letter 
to a certain person you know, I agree to carry out carefully and exactly. 
That person, who is very well known to you and who has taken the 
place of a friend to me, whose name I will refrain from mentioning 
(because I do not wish unnecessarily to blacken the reputation of a 
perfectly innocent man), lodges with us at Karolina Ivanovna's, in 
the room in which, when you were among us, the infantry officer from 
Tambov used to be. That person, however, is always to be found in 
the company of honest and true-hearted persons, which is more than 
one can say for some people. I intend from this day to break off all 
connection with you; it's impossible for us to remain on friendly 
terms and to keep up the appearance of comradeship congruous with 
them. And, therefore, I beg you, my dear sir, immediately on the 
receipt of this candid letter from me, to send me the two roubles you 
owe me for the razor of foreign make which I sold you seven months 
ago, if you will kindly remember, when you were still living with us 
in the lodgings of Karolina Ivanovna, a lady whom I respect from 
the bottom of my heart. I am acting in this way because you, from 
the accounts I hear from sensible persons, have lost your dignity and 
reputation and have become a source of danger to the morals of the 
innocent and uncontaminated. For some persons are not straightfor­
ward, their words are full of falsity and their show of good intentions 
is suspicious. People can always be found capable of insulting Karolina 

'I he 'Double 
561 
lvanovna, who is always irreproachable in her conduct, and an honest 
woman, and, what's more, a maiden lady, though no longer young­
though, on the other hand, of a good foreign family-and this fact 
I've been asked to mention in this letter by several persons, and I speak 
also for myself. In any case you will learn all in due time, if you 
haven't learnt it yet, though you've made yourself notorious from one 
end of the town to the other, according to the accounts I hear from 
sensible people, and consequently might well have received intelligence 
relating to you, my dear sir, in many places. In conclusion, I beg to 
inform you, my dear sir, that a certain person you know, whose name 
I will not mention here, for certain honourable reasons, is highly 
respected by right-thinking people, and is, moreover, of lively and 
agreeable disposition, and is equally successful in the service and in 
the society of persons of common sense, is true in word and in friend­
ship, and does not insult behind their back those with whom he is on 
friendly terms to their face. 
"In any case, I remain 
"Your obedient servant, 
"N. V AHRAMYEV." 
"P.S. You had better dismiss your man: he is a drunkard and prob­
ably gives you a great deal of trouble; you had better engage Yevstafy, 
who used to be in service here, and is now out of a place. Your present 
servant is not only a drunkard, but, what's more, he's a thief, for only 
last week he sold a pound of lump sugar to Karolina lvanovna at less 
than cost price, which, in my opinion, he could not have done other­
wise than by robbing you in a very sly way, little by little, at different 
times. I write this to you for your own good, although some people 
can do nothing but insult and deceive everybody, especially persons 
of honesty and good nature; what is more, they slander them behind 
their back and misrepresent them, simply from envy, and because they 
can't call themselves the same. 
"V." 
After reading Vahramyev's 1etter our hero remained for a long 
time sitting motionless on his sofa. A new light seemed breaking 
through the obscure and baffling fog which had surrounded him for 
the last two days. Our hero seemed to reach a partial understanding . 
. . . He tried to get up from the sofa to take a turn about the room, 
to rouse himself, to collect his scattered ideas, to fix them upon a certain 
subject and then to set himself to rights a little, to think over his 
position thoroughly. But as soon as he tried to stand up he fell back 

562 
The Short 'Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
again at once, weak and helpless. "Yes, of course, I had a presentiment 
of all that; how he writes though, and what is the real meaning of 
his words? Supposing I do understand the meaning; but what is it 
leading to? He should have said straight out: this and that is wanted, 
and I would have done it. Things have taken such a turn, things have 
come to such an unpleasant pass! Oh, if only to-morrow would make 
haste and come, and I could make haste and get to work! I know now 
what to do. I shall say this and that, I shall agree with his arguments, 
I won't sell my honour, but . . .  maybe; but he, that person we know 
of, that disagreeable person, how does he come to be mixed up in it? 
And why has he turned up here? Oh, if to-morrow would make haste 
and come! They'll slander me before then, they are intriguing, they 
are working to spite me! The great thing is not to lose time, and now, 
for instance, to write a letter, and to say this and that and that I 
agree to this and that. And as soon as it is daylight to-morrow send it 
off, before he can do anything . . . and so checkmate them, get in 
before them, the darlings . . . .  They will ruin me by their slanders, 
and that's the fact of the matter! "  
Mr. Golyadkin drew the paper to him, took up a pen and wrote the 
following missive in answer to the secretary's letter-
"Dear Sir Nestor Ignatyevitch! 
"With amazement mingled with heartfelt distress I have perused 
your insulting letter to me, for I see clearly that you are referring 
to me when you speak of certain discreditable persons and false 
friends. I see with genuine sorrow how rapidly the calumny has 
spread and how deeply it has taken root, to the detriment of my 
prosperity, my honour and my good name. And this is the more 
distressing and mortifying that even honest people of a genuinely 
noble way of thinking and, what is even more important, of straight­
forward and open dispositions, abandon the interests of honourable 
men and with all the qualities of their hearts attach themselves to the 
pernicious corruption, which in our difficult and immoral age has 
unhappily increased and multiplied so greatly and so disloyally. In 
conclusion, I will say that the debt of two roubles of which you remind 
me I regard as a sacred duty to return to you in its entirety. 
"As for your hints concerning a certain person of the female sex, 
concerning the intentions, calculations and various designs of that 
person, I can only tell you, sir, that I have but a very dim and obscure 
understanding of those insinuations. Permit me, sir, to preserve my 
honourable way of thinking and my good name undefiled, in any 

Th% 'Doubt% 
563 
case. I am ready to stoop to an explanation in person, preferring a 
personal interview to a written explanation as more secure, and I am, 
moreover, ready to enter into conciliatory proposals on mutual terms, 
of course. To that end I beg you, my dear sir, to convey to that person 
my readiness for a personal arrangement and, what is more, to beg 
her to fix the time and place of the interview. It grieved me, sir, to 
read your hints of my having insulted you, having been treacherous 
to our original friendship and having spoken ill of you. I ascribe this 
misunderstanding to the abominable calumny, envy and ill-will of 
those whom I may justly stigmatize as my bitterest foes. But I suppose 
they do not know that innocence is strong through its very innocence, 
that the shamelessness, the insolence and the revolting familiarity of 
some persons, sooner or later gains the stigma of universal contempt; 
and that such persons come to ruin through nothing but their own 
worthlessness and the corruption of their own hearts. In conclusion, 
I beg you, sir, to convey to those persons that their strange pretensions 
and their dishonourable and fantastic desire to squeeze others out of 
the position which those others occupy, by their very existence in this 
world, and to take their place, are deserving of contempt, amazement, 
compassion and, what is more, the madhouse; moreover, such efforts 
are severely prohibited by law, which in my opinion is perfectly just, 
for every one ought to be satisfied with his own position. Every one 
has his fixed position, and if this is a joke it is a joke in very bad taste. 
I will say more: it is utterly immoral, for, I make bold to assure you, 
sir, my own views which I have expounded above, in regard to keep­
ing one's own place, are purely moral. 
"In any case I have the honour to remain 
"Your humble servant, 
"Y. GoLYADKIN." 
Chapter 10 
ALTOGETHER, we may say, the adventures of the previous day 
had thoroughly unnerved Mr. Golyadkin. Our hero passed a very bad 
night; that is, he did not get thoroughly off to sleep for five minutes: 
as though some practical joker had scattered bristles in his bed. He 
spent the whole night in a sort of half-sleeping state, tossing from side 
to side, from right to left, moaning and groaning, dozing off for a 
moment, waking up again a minute later. and all was accompanied 

564 
7' he Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
by a strange misery, vague memories, hideous visions-in fact, every­
thing disagreeable that can be imagined •
.
.
.
 
At one moment the figure of Andrey Filippovitch appeared before 
him in a strange, mysterious half-light. It was a frigid, wrathful figure, 
with a cold, harsh eye and with stiffiy polite words of blame on its 
lips . . .  and as soon as Mr. Golyadkin began going up to Andrey 
Filippovitch to defend himself in some way and to prove to him that 
he was not at all such as his enemies represented him, that he was like 
this and like that, that he even possessed innate virtues of his own, 
superior to the average-at once a person only too well known for 
his discreditable behaviour appeared on the scene, and by some most 
reYolting means instantly frustrated poor Mr. Golyadkin's efforts, on 
the spot, almost before the latter's eyes, blackened his reputation, 
trampled his dignity in the mud, and then immediately took posses­
sion of his place in the service and in society. 
At another time Mr. Golyadkin's head felt sore from some sort of 
slight blow of late conferred and humbly accepted, received either in 
the course of daily life or somehow in the performance of his duty, 
against which blow it was difficult to protest . . . .  And while Mr. Gol­
yadkin was racking his brains over the question why it was so difficult 
to protest even against such a blow, this idea of a blow gradually 
melted away into a different form-into the form of some familiar, 
trifling, or rather important piece of nastiness which he had seen, 
heard, or even himself committed-and frequently committed, indeed, 
and not on nasty grounds, not from any nasty impulse, even, but just 
because it happened-sometimes, for instance, out of delicacy, another 
time owing to his absolute defencelessness-in fact, because . . .  because, 
in fact, Mr. Golyadkin knew perfectly well because of what! At this 
point Mr. Golyadkin blushed in his sleep, and, smothering his blushes, 
muttered to himself that in this case he ought to be able to show the 
strength of his character, he ought to be able to show in this case the 
remarkable strength of his character, and then wound up by asking 
himself, "What, after all, is strength of character? Why understand 
• 
? 
" 
It now . . . .  
But what irritated and enraged Mr. Golyadkin most of all was that 
invariably, at such a moment, a person well known for his undignified 
burlesque behaviour turned up uninvited, and, regardless of the fact 
that the matter was apparently settled, he, too, would begin muttering, 
with an unseemly little smile, "\Vhat's the use of strength of character! 
How could you and I, Y akov Petrovitch, have strength of charac­
ter? 
.
.
.
 
" 

The Vouhle 
565 
Then Mr. Golyadkin would dream that he was in the company of 
a number of persons distinguished for their wit and good breeding; 
that he, Mr. Golyadkin, too, was conspicuous for his wit and polite­
ness, that everybody liked him, even some of his enemies who were 
present began to like him, which was very agreeable to Mr. Golyadkin; 
that every one gave him precedence, and that at last Mr. Golyadkin 
himself, with gratification, overheard the host, drawing one of the 
guests aside, speak in his, Mr. Golyadkin's, praise . . .  and all of a 
sudden, apropos of nothing, there appeared again a person, notorious 
for his treachery and brutal impulses, in the form of Mr. Golyadkin 
junior, and on the spot, at once, by his very appearance on the scene, 
Mr. Golyadkin junior destroyed the whole triumph and glory of Mr. 
Golyadkin senior, eclipsed Mr. Golyadkin senior, trampled him in the 
mud, and, at last, proved clearly that Golyadkin senior-that is, the 
genuine one-was not the genuine one at all but the sham, and that 
he, Golyadkin junior, was the real one; that, in fact, Mr. Golyadkin 
senior was not at all what he appeared to be, but something very dis­
graceful, and that consequently he had no right to mix in the society 
of honourable and well-bred people. And all this was done so quickly 
that Mr. Golyadkin had not time to open his mouth before all of them 
were subjugated, body and soul, by the wicked, sham Mr. Golyadkin, 
and with profound contempt rejected him, the real and innocent Mr. 
Golyadkin. There was not one person left whose opinion the infamous 
Mr. Golyadkin would not have changed round. There was not left one 
person, even the most insignificant of the company, to whom the false 
and worthless Mr. Golyadkin would not make up in his blandest 
manner, upon whom he would not fawn in his own way, before whom 
he would not burn sweet and agreeable incense, so that the flattered 
person simply sniffed and sneezed till the tears came, in token of the 
intensest pleasure. 
And the worst of it was that all this was done in a flash : the 
swiftness of movement of the false and worthless Mr. Golyadkin 
was marvellous! He scarcely had time, for instance, to make up to 
one person and win his good graces-and before one could wink 
an eye he was at another. He stealthily fawns on another, drops a 
smile of benevolence, twirls on his short, round, though rather wooden­
iooking leg, and already he's at a third, and is cringing upon a third, 
he's making up to him in a friendly way; before one has time to open 
one's mouth, before one has time to feel surprised, he's at a fourth, at 
the same manoeuvres with him-it was horrible: sorcery and nothing 
else! And every one was pleased with him and everybody liked him, 

566 
'I h| Short N.ovds of 7Josto|vskJ 
and every one was exalting him, and all were proclaiming in chorus 
that his politeness and sarcastic wit were infinitely superior to the 
politeness and sarcastic wit of the real Mr. Golyadkin and putting the 
real and innocent Mr. Golyadkin to shame thereby and rejecting the 
veritable Mr. Golyadkin, and shoving and pushing out the loyal Mr. 
Golyadkin, and showering blows on the man so well known for his 
love towards his fellow-creatures! . . .  
In misery, in terror and in fury, the cruelly treated Mr. Golyadkin 
ran out into the street and began trying to take a cab in order to drive 
straight to his Excellency's, or, at any rate, to Andrey Filippovitch's, 
but-horror! the cabman absolutely refused to take Mr. Golyadkin, 
saying, "We cannot drive two gentlemen exactly alike, sir ;  a good 
man tries to live honestly, your honour, and never has a double." 
Overcome with shame, the unimpeachable, honest Mr. Golyadkin 
looked round and did, in fact, assure himself with his own eyes that 
the cabman and Petrushka, who had joined them, were all quite right, 
for the depraved Mr. Golyadkin was actually on the spot, beside him, 
close at hand, and with his characteristic nastiness was again, at this 
critical moment, certainly preparing to do something very unseemly, 
and quite out of keeping with that gentlemanliness of character which 
is usually acquired by good breeding-that gentlemanliness of which 
the loathsome Mr. Golyadkin the second was always boasting on 
every opportunity. Beside himself with shame and despair, the utterly 
ruined though perfectly just Mr. Golyadkin dashed headlong away, 
wherever fate might lead him ; but with every step he took, with 
every thud of his foot on the granite of the pavement, there leapt up 
as though out of the earth a Mr. Golyadkin precisely the same, per­
fectly alike, and of a revolting depravity of heart. And all these pre­
cisely similar Golyadkins set to running after one another as soon as 
they appeared, and stretched in a long chain like a file of geese, 
hobbling after the real Mr. Golyadkin, so there was nowhere to escape 
from these duplicates-so that Mr. Golyadkin, who was in every way 
deserving of compassion, was breathless with terror; so that at last a 
terrible multitude of duplicates had sprung into being; so that the 
whole town was obstructed at last by duplicate Golyadkins, and the 
police officer, seeing such a breach of decorum, was obliged to seize 
all these duplicates by the collar and to put them into the watch­
house, which happened to be beside him . . . .  Numb and chill with 
horror, our hero woke up, and numb and chill with horror felt that 
his waking state was hardly more cheerful. . . .  It was oppressive and 

'!he TJouble 
567 
harrowing 
.
•
.
.
 He was overcome by such anguish that it seemed .. ɿ 
though some one were gnawing at his heart. 
At last Mr. Golyadkin could endure it no longer. "This shall not 
be!" he cried, resolutely sitting up in bed, and after this exclamation 
he felt fully awake. 
It seemed as though it were rather late in the day. It was unusually 
light in the room. The sunshine filtered through the frozen panes 
and flooded the room with light, which surprised M. Golyadkin not 
a little and, so far as Mr. Golyadkin could remember, at least, there 
had scarcely ever been such exceptions in the course of the heavenly 
luminary before. Our hero had hardly time to wonder at this when 
he heard the clock buzzing behind the partition as though it was just 
on the point of striking. "Now," thought Mr. Golyadkin, and he 
prepared to listen with painful suspense . . . .  
But to complete M. Golyadkin's astonishment, the clock whirred 
and only struck once. 
"What does this mean?" cried our hero, finally leaping out of bed. 
And, unable to believe his ears, he rushed behind the screen just as 
he was. It actually was one o'clock. Mr. Golyadkin glanced at Pe­
trushka's bed; but the room did not even smell of Petrushka: his bed 
had long been made and left, his boots were nowhere to be seen either 
-an unmistakable sign that Petrushka was not in the house. Mr. 
Golyadkin rushed to the door: the door was locked. "But where is he, 
where is Petrushka?" he went on in a whisper, conscious of intense 
excitement and feeling a perceptible tremor run all over him . . .  Sud­
denly a thought floated into his mind . . .  Mr. Golyadkin rushed to 
the table, looked all over it, felt all round-yes, it was true, his letter 
of the night before to Vahramyev was not there. Petrushka was 
nowhere behind the screen either, the clock had just struck one, and 
some new points were evident to him in Vahramyev's letter, points 
that were obscure at first sight though now they were fully explained. 
Petrushka had evidently been bribed at last! "Yes, yes, that was so!" 
"So this was how the chief plot was hatched!" cried Mr. Golyadkin, 
slapping himself on the forehead, opening his eyes wider and wider; 
"so in that filthy German woman's den the whole power of evil lies 
hidden now! So she was only making a strategic diversion in direct­
ing me to the lsmailovsky Bridge-she was putting me off the scent, 
confusing me (the worthless witch), and in that way laying her mines! 
Yes, that is so! If one only looks at the thing from that point of view, 
all of this is bound to be so, and the scoundrel's appearance on the 

568 
The Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
scene is fully explained : it's all part and parcel of the same thing. 
They've kept him in reserve a long while, they had him in readiness 
for the evil day. This is how it has all turned out! This is what it has 
come to. But there, never mind. No time has been lost so far." 
At this point Mr. Golyadkin recollected with horror that it was 
past one in the afternoon. "What if they have succeeded by now? . . .  " 
He uttered a moan .
•
.
.
 "But, no, they are lying, they've not had time­
we shall see . . . . " 
He dressed after a fashion, seized paper and a pen, and scribbled 
the following missive-
"Dear Sir Yakov Petrovitch! 
"Either you or I, but both together is out of the question! And so 
I must inform you that your strange, absurd, and at the same time 
impossible desire to appear to be my twin and to give yourself out as 
such serves no other purpose than to bring about your complete dis­
grace and discomfiture. And so I beg you, for the sake of your 0\\1'11 
advantage, to step aside and make way for really honourable men of 
loyal aims. In the opposite case I am ready to determine upon extreme 
measures. I lay down my pen and await . . .  However, I remain ready 
to oblige or to meet you with pistols. 
"Y. GoLY:\DKls." 
Our hero rubbed his hands energetically when he had finished the 
letter. Then, pulling on his greatco:n and putting on his hat, he un­
locked his flat with a spare key and set off for the department. He 
reached the office but could not make up his mind to go in-it was 
by now too late. It was half-past two by Mr. Golyadkin's watch. All 
at once a circumstance of apparently little importance settled some 
doubts in Mr. Golyadkin's mind : a flushed and breathless figure 
suddenly made its appearance from behind the screen of the depart­
ment building and with a stealthy movement like a rat he darted up 
the steps and into the entry. It was a copying clerk called Ostafyev, 
a man Mr. Golyadkin knew very well, who was rather useful and ready 
to do anything for a trifle. Knowing Ostafyev's weak spot and sur­
mising that after his brief, unavoidable absence he would probably 
be greedier than ever for tips, our hero made up his mind not to be 
sparing of them, and immediately darted up the steps, and then into 
the entry after him, called to him and, with a mysterious air, drew 
him aside into a convenient corner behind a huge iron stove. And 
having led him there, our hero began questioning him. 

T lz% 'Doubl% 
569 
"Well, my dear fellow, how are things going in there . . .  you under­
stand me?" . . .  
"Yes, your honour, I wish you good health, your honour." 
"All right, my good man, all right; but I'll reward you, my good 
fellow. \Veil, you see, how are things?" 
"What is your honour asking?" At this point Ostafyev held his 
hand as though by accident before his open mouth. 
"You see, my dear fellow, this is how it is . . .  but don't you imagine 
. . .  Come, is Andrey Filippovitch here?" 
"Yes, he is here." 
"And are the clerks here? "  
"Yes, sir, they are here as usual." 
"And his Excellency too?" 
"And his Excellency too." Here the man held his hand before his 
open mouth again, and looked rather curiously and strangely at Mr. 
Golyadkin, so at least our hero fancied. 
"And there's nothing special there, my good man?" 
"໥o, sir, certainly not, sir." 
"So there's nothing concerning me, my friend. Is there nothing going 
on there-that is, nothing more than . . . eh? nothing more, you 
understand, my friend ?" 
"!'\o, sir, I've heard nothing so far, sir." Again the man put his hand 
before his mouth and again looked rather strangely at Mr. Golyadkin. 
The fact was, Mr. Golyadkin was trying to read Ostafyev's counte­
nance, trying to discover whether there was not something hidden in 
it. And, in fact, he did look as though he were hiding something: 
Ostafyev seemed to grow colder and more churlish, and did not enter 
into Mr. Golyadkin's interests with the same sympathy as at the 
beginning of the conversation. "He is to some extent justified," thought 
Mr. Golyadkin. "After all, what am I to him? Perhaps he has already 
been bribed by the other side, and that's why he has just been absent. 
But, here, I'll try him . . . .  " Mr. Golyadkin realized that the moment 
for kopecks had arrived. 
"Here, my dear fellow . . . .  
" 
''I'm feelingly grateful for your honour's kindness." 
"I'll give you more than that." 
"Yes, your honour." 
"I'll give you some more directly, and when the business is over 
I'll give you as much again. Do you understand ?" 
The clerk did not speak. He stood at attention and stared fixedly at 
Mr. Golyadkin. 

570 
7' he Short N.otels of 'DostoetskJ' 
"Come, tell me now: have you heard nothing about me? 
" 
"I think, so far, I have not . . .  so to say . . .  nothing so far." Ostafyev, 
like Mr. Golyadkin, spoke deliberately and preserved a mysterious air, 
moving his eyebrows a little, looking at the ground, trying to fall into 
the suitable tone, and, in fact, doing his very utmost to earn what had 
been promised him, for what he had received already he reckoned as 
already earned. 
"And you know nothing?" 
"So far, nothing, sir." 
"Listen . . .  you know . . .  maybe you will know . . .  " 
"Later on, of course, maybe I shall know." 
"It's a poor look-out," thought our hero. "Listen : here's something 
more, my dear fellow." 
"I am truly grateful to your honour." 
"\Vas Vahramyev here yesterday ? . . .  " 
"Yes, sir." 
"And . . .  somebody else? . . .  Was he? . . .  Try and remember, 
brother." 
The man ransacked his memory for a moment, and could think of 
nothing appropriate. 
"No, sir, there wasn't anybody else." 
"H'm!" a silence followed. 
"Listen, brother, here's some more; tell me all, every detail." 
"Yes, sir," Ostafyev had by now become as soft as silk; which was 
just what Mr. Golyadkin needed. 
"Explain to me now, my good man, what footing is he on?" 
"All right, sir, a good one, sir," answered the man, gazing open-eyed 
at Mr. Golyadkin. 
"How do you mean, all right ?" 
"Well, it's just like that, sir." Here Ostafyev twitched his eyebrows 
significantly. But he was utterly nonplussed and didn't know what 
more to say. 
"It's a poor look-out," thought Mr. Golyadkin. 
"And hasn't anything more happened . . .  m there . . .  about 
Vahramyev?" 
"But everything is just as usual." 
"Think a little." 
"There is, they say •
•
.
 
" 
"Come, what ?" 
Ostafyev put his hand in front of his mouth. 
"\Vasn't there a letter . . .  from here . . .  to me ?" 

The 'Double 
571 
"Mihyeev the attendant went to Vahramyev's lodging, to their 
German landlady, so I'll go and ask him, if you like." 
"Do me the favour, brother, for goodness' sake! . . .  I only mean 
. . .  you mustn't imagine anything, brother, I only mean . . .  Yes, 
you question him, brother, find out whether they are not getting up 
something concerning me. Find out how he is acting. That is what I 
want; that is what you must find out, my dear fellow, and then I'll 
reward you, my good man . . . .  
" 
"I will, your honour, and Ivan Semyonovitch sat in your place to-day, 
. 
" 
s1r. 
"Ivan Semyonovitch ? Oh! really, you don't say so." 
"Andrey Filippovitch told him to sit there." 
"Re-al-ly! How did that happen? You must find out, brother; for 
God's sake find out, brother; find it all out-and I'll reward you, my 
dear fellow; that's what I want to know . . .  and don't you imagine 
anything, broL໦er. .
.
•
 
" 
"Just so, sir, just so; I'll go at once. And aren't you going in to-day, 
. X " 
Slr. 
"No, my friend; I only looked round, I only looked round, you 
know. I only came to have a look round, my friend, and I'll reward 
you afterwards, my friend." 
"Yes, sir." The man ran rapidly and eagerly up the stairs and Mr. 
Golyadkin was left alone. 
"It's a poor look-out!" he thought. "Ech, it's a bad business, a bad 
business! Ech! things are in a bad way with us now! What does it all 
mean? What did that drunkard's insinuations mean, for instance, and 
whose trickery was it ? Ah! I know now whose it was. And what a 
thing this is. No doubt they found out and made him sit there 
.
.
•
•
 
But, after all, did they sit him there? It was Andrey Filippovitch sat 
him there, he sat Ivan Semyonovitch there himself; why did he make 
him sit there and with what object? Probably they found out .
.
•
 
That is Vahramyev's work-that is, not Vahramyev, he is as stupid as 
an ashen post, Vahramyev is, and they are all at work on his behalf, 
and they egged that scoundrel on to come here for the same purpose, 
and the German woman brought up her grievance, the one-eyed 
hussy. I always suspected that this intrigue was not without an object 
and that in all this old-womanish gossip there must be something, 
and I said as much to Krestyan lvanovitch, telling him they'd sworn 
to cut a man's throat-in a moral sense, of course-and they pounced 
upon Karolina lvanovna. Yes, there are master hands at work in this, 
one can see! Yes. sir. there are master hands at work here, and not 

572 
The Short N.ovds of 'Dostoevsky 
Vahramyev's. I've said already that Vahramyev is stupid, but . . .  I 
know who it is behind it all, it's that rascal, that impostor! It's only 
that he relies upon, which is partly proved by his successes in the best 
society. And it would certainly be desirable to know on what footing 
he stands now. What is he now among them ? Only, why have they 
taken Ivan Semyonovitch ? What the devil do they want with Ivan 
Semyonovitch ? Could not they have found any one else? Though it 
would come to the same thing whoever it had been, and the only 
thing I know is that I have suspected Ivan Semyonovitch for a long 
time past. I noticed long ago what a nasty, horrid old man he was­
they say he lends money and takes interest like any Jew. To be sure, 
the bear's the leading spirit in the whole affair. One can detect the 
bear in the whole affair. It began in this way. It began at the Ismailov­
sky Bridge; that's how it began . . . .  
" 
At this point Mr. Golyadkin frowned, as though he had taken a bite 
out of a lemon, probably remembering something very unpleasant. 
"But, there, it doesn't matter," he thought. "I keep harping on my 
own troubles. What will Ostafyev find out? Most likely he is staying 
on or has been delayed somehow. It is a good thing, in a sense, that 
I am intriguing like this, and am laying mines on my side too. I've 
only to give Ostafyev ten kopecks and he's . . .  so to speak, on my 
side. Only the point is, is he really on my side? Perhaps they\·e got 
him on their side too . . .  and they are carrying on an intrigue by 
means of him on their side too. He looks a ruffian, the rascal, a regular 
ruffian; he's hiding something, the rogue. 'N'o, nothing,' says he, 'and 
I am deeply grateful to your honour,' says he. You ruffian, you! "  
He heard a noise . . .  Mr. Golyadkin shrank up and skipped behind 
the stove. Some one came down stairs and went out into the street. 
"Who could that be going away now?" our hero thought to himself. 
A minute later footsteps were audible again . . . .  At this point Mr. 
Golyadkin could not resist poking the very tip of his nose out beyond 
his corner-he poked it out and instantly withdrew it again, as though 
some one had pricked it with a pin. This time some one he knew well 
was coming-that is, the scoundrel, the intriguer and the reprobate­
he was approaching with his usual mean, tripping little step, prancing 
and shuffling with his feet as though he were going to kick some one. 
"The rascal," said our hero to himself. 
Mr. Golyadkin could not, however, help observing that the rascal 
had under his arm a huge green portfolio belonging to his Excellency. 
"He's on a special commission again," thought Mr. Golyadkin, flush­
ing crimson and shrinking into himself more than ever from vexation. 

The 7Jouble 
573 
As soon as Mr. Golyadkin junior had slipped past Mr. Golyadkin 
senior without observing him in the least, footsteps were heard for 
the third time, and this time Mr. Golyadkin guessed that these were 
Ostafyev's. It was, in fact, the sleek figure of a copying clerk, Pisarenko 
by name. This surprised Mr. Golyadkin. Why had he mixed up other 
people in their secret? our hero wondered. What barbarians! nothing 
is sacred to them! "Well, my friend?" he brought out, addressing 
Pisarenko: "who sent you, my friend? . . .  " 
"I've come about your business. There's no news so far from any 
one. But should there be any we'll let you know." 
"And Ostafyev ?" 
"It was quite impossible for him to come, your honour. His Exޓ 
cellency has walked through the room twice, and I've no time to stay." 
"Thank you, my good man, thank you . . .  only, tell me . . .  " 
"Upon my word, sir, I can't stay . . . .  They are asking for us every 
minute . . .  but if your honour will stay here, we'll let you know if 
anything happens concerning your little ailair." 
"No, my friend, you just tell me . . .  
" 
"Excuse me, I've no time to stay, sir," said Pisarenko, tearing himself 
away from Mr. Golyadkin, who had clutched him by the lapel of his 
coat. "I really can't. If your honour will stay here we'll let you know." 
"In a minute, my good man, in a minute! In a minute, my good 
fellow! I tell you what, here's a letter; and I'll reward you, my good 
man. 
, 
"Yes, sir." 
"Try and give it to Mr. Golyadkin, my dear fellow." 
"Golyadkin ?" 
"Yes, my man, to Mr. Golyadkin." 
"Very good, sir; as soon as I get off I'll take it, and you stay here, 
meanwhile; no one will see you here . . . .  " 
"No, my good man, don't imagine . . .  I'm not standing here to avoid 
being seen. But I'm not going to stay here now, my friend . . . .  I'll 
be close here in the side street. There's a coffee໧house near here; so 
I'll wait there, and if anything happens, you let me know about any໨ 
thing, you understand?" 
"Very good, sir. Only let me go; I understand." 
"And I'll reward you," Mr. Golyadkin called after Pisarenko, when 
he had at last released him . . . .  
"The rogue seemed to be getting rather rude," our hero reflected as 
he stealthily emerged from behind the stove. "There's some other 
dodge here. That's clear . . . .  At first it was one thing and another . 
·
•
 

574 
'1 he Short N.ove/s of 'Dostoevsky 
he really was in a hurry, though; perhaps there's a great deal to do 
in the office. And his Excellency had been through the room twice . 
. . . How did that happen? . . .  Ough! never mind! It may mean 
nothing, perhaps; but now we shall see . . . .  " 
At this point Mr. Golyadkin was about to open the door, intending 
to go out into the street, when suddenly, at that very instant, his Ex­
cellency's carriage dashed up to the door. Before Mr. Golyadkin had 
time to recover from the shock, the door of the carriage was opened 
from within and a gentleman j umped out. This gentleman was no 
other than Mr. Golyadkin junior, who had only gone out ten minutes 
before. Mr. Golyadkin senior remembered that the Director's flat was 
only a couple of paces away. 
"He has been out on a special commission," our hero thought to 
himself. 
Meanwhile, Mr. Golyadkin junior took out of the carriage a thick 
green portfolio and other papers. Finally, giving some orders to the 
coachman, he opened the door, almost ran up against Mr. Golyadkin 
senior, purposely avoided noticing him, acting in this way expressly 
to annoy him, and mounted the office staircase at a rapid canter. 
"It's a bad look-out," thought Mr. Golyadkin. "This is what it has 
come to now! Oh, good Lord! look at him." 
For half a minute our hero remained motionless. At last he made 
up his mind. Without pausing to think, though he was aware of a 
violent palpitation of the heart and a tremor in all his limbs, he ran 
up the stairs after his enemy. 
"Here goes; what does it matter to me? I have nothing to do with 
the case," he thought, taking off his hat, his greatcoat and his goloshes 
in the entry. 
When Mr. Golyadkin walked into his office, it was already getting 
dusk. Neither Andrey Filippovitch nor Anton Antonovitch was in 
the room. Both of them were in the Director's room, handing in re­
ports. The Director, so it was rumoured, was in haste to report to a 
still higher Excellency. In consequence of this, and also because twi­
light was coming on, and the office hours were almost over, several 
of the clerks, especially the younger ones, were, at the moment when 
our hero entered, enjoying a period of inactivity; gathered together 
in groups, they were talking, arguing, and laughing, and some of the 
most youthful-that is, belonging to the lowest grades in the service, 
had got up a game of pitch-farthing in a corner, by a window. Know­
ing what was proper, and feeling at the moment a special need to 
conciliate and get on with them, Mr. Golyadkin immediately ap-

The 'Double 
575 
proached those with whom he used to get on best, in order to wish 
them good-day, and so on. But his colleagues answered his greetings 
rather strangely. He was unpleasantly impressed by a certain coldness, 
even curtness, one might almost say severity, in their manner. No one 
shook hands with him. Some simply said, "Good-day" and walked 
away; others barely nodded; one simply turned away and pretended 
not to notice him; at last some of them-and what mortified Mr. 
Golyadkin most of all, some of the youngsters of the lowest grades, 
mere lads who, as Mr. Golyadkin justly observed about them, were 
capable of nothing but hanging about and playing pitch-farthing at 
every opportunity-little by little collected round Mr. Golyadkin, 
formed a group round him and almost barred his way. They all 
looked at him with a sort of insulting curiosity. 
It was a bad sign. Mr. Golyadkin felt this, and very judiciously de­
cided not to notice it. Suddenly a quite unexpected event completely 
finished him off, as they say, and utterly crushed him. 
At the moment most trying to Mr. Golyadkin senior, suddenly, as 
though by design, there appeared in the group of fellow clerks sur­
rounding him the figure of Mr. Golyadkin junior, gay as ever, smiling 
a little smile as ever, nimble, too, as ever; in short, mischievous, skip­
ping and tripping, chuckling and fawning, with sprightly tongue and 
sprightly toe, as always, precisely as he had been the day before at a 
very unpleasant moment for Mr. Golyadkin senior, for instance. 
Grinning, tripping and turning with a smile that seemed to say 
"good-evening," to every one, he squeezed his way into the group of 
clerks, shaking hands with one, slapping another on the shoulder, 
putting his arm round another, explaining to a fourth how he had 
come to be employed by his Excellency, where he had been, what he 
had done, what he had brought with him; to the fifth, probably his 
most intimate friend, he gave a resounding kiss-in fact, everything 
happened as it had in Mr. Golyadkin's dream. When he had skipped 
about to his heart's content, polished them all off in his usual way, 
disposed them all in his favour, whether he needed them or not, when 
he had lavished his blandishments to the delectation of all the clerks, 
Mr. Golyadkin junior suddenly, and most likely by mistake, for he 
had not yet had time to notice his senior, held out his hand to Mr. 
Golyadkin senior also. Probably also by mistake-though he had had 
time to observe the dishonourable Mr. Golyadkin junior thoroughly, 
our hero at once eagerly seized the hand so unexpectedly held out to 
him and pressed it in the warmest and friendliest way, pressed it with 
a strange, quite unexpected, inner feeling, with a tearful emotion. 

576 
'1 he Short Novels of Vostoevsky 
Whether our hero was misled by the first movement of his worthless 
foe, or was taken unawares, or, without recognizing it, felt at the 
bottom of his heart how defenceless he was-it is difficult to say. The 
fact remains th;Jt Mr. Golyadkin senior, apparently knowing what he 
was doing, of his own free will, before witnesses, solemnly shook 
hands with him whom he called his mortal foe. But what was the 
amazement, the stupefaction and fury, what was the horror and the 
shame of Mr. Golyadkin senior, when his enemy and mortal foe, the 
dishonourable Mr. Golyadkin junior, noticing the mistake of that 
persecuted, innocent, perfidiously deceived man, without a trace of 
shame, of feeling, of compassion or of conscience, pulled his hand 
away with insulTerable rudeness and insolence. V.'hat w::s worse, he 
shook the hand ::Js though it h::d been polluted with something 
horrid ;  what is more, he spat aside with disgust, accompanying this 
with a most insulting gesture; worse still, he drew out his handker­
chief and, in the most unseemly way, wiped all the fingers that had 
rested for one moment in the hand of Mr. Golyadkin senior. While 
he did this Mr. Golyadkin j unior looked about him in his character­
istic horrid way, took c::re that every one should see what he was 
doing, glanced into people's eyes ::nd evidently tried to insinuate to 
every one everything that was most unpleasant in regard to Mr. 
Golyadkin senior. Mr. Golyadkin j unior's revolting beh::viour seemed 
to arouse general indign::tion ::mong the clerks that surrounded them; 
even the frivolous youngsters showed their disple::sure 
. .A murmur 
of protest rose on ::ll sides. Mr. Golyadkin could niJt but discern the 
general feeling; but suddenly-an ::ppropriate witticism that bubbled 
from the lips of Mr. Golyadkin junior sh::ttered, ::nnihilated our 
hero's last hopes, ::nd inclined the b:tlance again in favour of his deadly 
and undeserving foe. 
"He's our Russian Faublas, gentlemen; allow me to introduce the 
youthful Faublas," piped Mr. Golyadkin junior, with his characteris­
tic insolence, pirouetting and threading his way ::mong the clerks, and 
directing their attention to the petrified though genuine Mr. Goly::d­
kin. "Let us kiss e:tch other, d:rling," he went on with insuiTerable 
familiarity, ::ddressing the m::Jn he had so treacherously insulted. Mr. 
Golyadkin junior's unworthy jest seemed to touch a responsive chord, 
for it contained an artful allusion to an incident with which all were 
app::rently familiar. Our hero was painfully conscious of the hand of 
his enemies. But he h::d made up his mind by now. With glowing 
eyes, with pale face, with a fixed smile he tore himself somehow out of 
the crowd and with uneven, hurried steps m::de str::ight for his Ex-

T lze TJouble 
577 
cellency's private room. In the room next to the last he was met by 
Andrey Filippovitch, who had only just come out from seeing his 
Excellency, and although there were present in this room at the mo­
ment a good number of persons of whom Mr. Golyadkin knew 
nothing, yet our hero did not care to take such a fact into considera­
tion. Boldly, resolutely, directly, almost wondering at himself and 
inwardly admiring his own courage, without loss of time he accosted 
Andrey Filoppovitch, who was a good deal surprised by this unex­
pected attack. 
"Ah! . . .  What is it . . .  what do you want?" asked the head of the 
division, not hearing Mr. Golyadkin's hesitating words. 
"Andrey Filippovitch, may . . .  might I, Andrey Filippovitch, may 
.I have a conversation with his Excellency at once and in private?" our 
hero said resolutely and distinctly, fixing the most determined glance 
on Andrey Filippovitch. 
"What next! Of course not." Andrey Filippovitch scanned Mr. Gol­
yadkin from head to foot. 
"I say all this, Andrey Filippovitch, because I am surprised that no 
one here unmasks the impostor and scoundrel." 
"Wha-a-at!" 
"Scoundrel, Andrey Filippovitch!" 
"Of whom are you pleased to speak in those terms ?" 
"Of a certain person, Andrey Filippovitch; I'm alluding, Andrey 
Filippovitch, to a certain person; I have the right . . .  I imagine, An­
drey Filippovitch, that the authorities would surely encourage such 
action," added Mr. Golyadkin, evidently hardly knowing what he was 
saying. "Andrey Filippovitch . . . but no doubt you see yourself, 
Andrey Filippovitch, that this honourable action is a mark of my 
loyalty in every way-of my looking upon my superior as a father, 
Andrey Filippovitch; I as much as to say look upon my benevolent 
superior as a father and blindly trust my fate to him. It's as much as 
to say . . .  you see . . .  " At this point Mr. Golyadkin's voice trembled 
and two tears ran down his eyelashes. 
As Andrey Filippovitch listened to Mr. Golyadkin he was so aston­
ished that he could not help stepping back a couple of paces. Then he 
looked about him uneasily . . . .  It is difficult to say how the matter 
would have ended. But suddenly the door of his Excellency's room was 
opened, and he himself came out, accompanied by several officials. 
All the persons in his room followed in a string. His Excellency called 
Andrey Filippovitch and walked beside him, beginning to discuss 
some business details. When all had set off and gone out of the room, 

578 
Th% Short 'N.ovds of Vosto%vskJ 
Mr. Golyadkin woke up. Growing calmer, he took refuge under the 
wing of Anton Antonovitch, who came last in the procession and who, 
Mr. Golyadkin fancied, looked stern and anxious. "I've been talking 
nonsense, I've been making a mess of it again, but there, never mind," 
he thought. 
"I hope, at least, that you, Anton Antonovitch, will consent to listen 
to me and to enter into my position," he said quietly, in a voice that 
still trembled a little. "Rejected by all, I appeal to you. I am still at 
a loss to understand what Andrey Filippovitch's words mean, Anton 
Antonovitch. Explain them to me if you can .
.
•
.
 
" 
"Everything will be explained in due time," Anton Antonovitch 
replied sternly and emphatically, and as :Mr. Golyadkin fancied with 
an air that gave him plainly to understand that Anton Antonovitch 
did not wish to continue the conversation. "You will soon know all 
about it. You will be officially informed about everything to-day." 
"What do you mean by officially informed, Anton Antonovitch? 
Why officially?" our hero asked timidly. 
"It is not for you and me to discuss what our superiors decide upon, 
Yakov Petrovitch." 
"Why our superiors, Anton Antonovitch ?" said our hero, still more 
intimidated ; "why our superiors? I don't sec what reason there is to 
trouble our superiors in the matter, Anton Antonovitch . . . .  Perhaps 
you mean to say something about yesterday's doings, Anton An­
tonovitch ?" 
"Oh no, nothing to do with yesterday; there's something else amiss 
with you." 
· 
"\Vhat is there amiss, Anton Antonovitch ? I believe, Anton An­
tonovitch, that I have done nothing amiss." 
"Why, you were meaning to be sly with some one," Anton An­
tonovitch cut in sharply, completely flabbergasting Mr. Golyadkin. 
Mr. Golyadkin started, and turned as white as a pocket-handker­
chief. 
"Of course, Anton Antonovitch," he said, in a voice hardly audible, 
"if one listens to the voice of calumny and hears one's enemies' tales, 
without heeding what the other side has to say in its defence, then, of 
course . . .  then, of course, Anton Antonovitch, one must suffer 
innocently and for nothing." 
"To be sure; but your unseemly conduct, in injuring the reputation 
of a virtuous young lady belonging to that benevolent, highly dis-
tinguished and well-known family who had befriended you 
" 
"What conduct do you mean, Anton Antonovitch ?" 

The 'Double 
579 
"What I say. Do you know anything about your praiseworthy con­
duct in regard to that other young lady who, though poor, is of 
honourable foreign extraction ?" 
"Allow me, Anton Antonovitch . . .  if you would kindly listen to 
me, Anton Antonovitch . . .  " 
"And your treacherous behaviour and slander of another person, 
your charging another person with your own sins. Ah, what do you 
call that?" 
"I did not send him away, Anton Antonovitch,'' said our hero, with 
a tremor; "and I've never instructed Petrushka, my man, to do any­
thing of the sort . . . .  He has eaten my bread, Anton Antonovitch, he 
has taken advantage of my hospitality,'' our hero added expressively 
and with deep emotion, so much so that his chin twitched a little and 
tears were ready to start again. 
"That is only your talk, that he has eaten your bread," answered 
Anton Antonovitch, somewhat offended, and there was a perfidious 
note in his voice which sent a pang to Mr. Golyadkin's heart. 
"Allow me most humbly to ask you again, Anton Antonovitch, is 
his Excellency aware of all this business?" 
"Upon my word, you must let me go now, though. I've no time for 
you now . . . .  You '11 know everything you need to know to-day." 
"Allow me, for God"s sake, one minute, Anton Antonovitch." 
"Tell me afterwards . . . .  " 
"No, Anton Antonovitch; I . . .  you see, Anton Antonovitch •
.
.
 
only listen . . .  I am not one for free-thinking, Anton Antonovitch; 
I shun free-thinking; I am quite ready for my part . . .  and, indeed, 
I've given up that idea . . . .  
" 
"Very good, very good. I've heard that already." 
"No, you have not heard it, Anton Antonovitch. It is something 
else, Anton Antonovitch; it's a good thing, really, a good thing and 
pleasant to hear . . . .  As I've explained to you, Anton Antonovitch, I 
admit that idea, that divine Providence has created two men exactly 
alike, and that a benevolent government, seeing the hand of Provi­
dence, provided a berth for two twins. That is a good thing, Anton 
Antonovitch. You see that it is a very good thing, Anton Antonovitch, 
and that I am very far from free-thinking. I look upon my benevolent 
government as a father; I say 'yes,' by all means; you are benevolent 
authorities, and you, of course . . .  A young man must be in the 
service . . . .  Stand up for me, Anton Antonovitch, take my part, 
Anton Antonovitch . . . .  I am all right . . .  Anton Antonovitch, for 
God's sake, one little word more . . .  Anton Antonovitch 
.
.
•
.
 
" 

580 
'I he Short 'N.ovels of 'DostoevskY 
But by now Anton Antonovitch was far away from Mr. Golyadkin . 
. . . Our hero was so bewildered and overcome by all that had hap­
pened and all that he had heard that he did not know where he was 
standing, what he had heard, what he had done, what was being done 
to him, and what was going to be done to him. 
With imploring eyes he sought for Anton Antonovitch in the crowd 
of clerks, that he might justify himself further in his eyes and say 
something to him extremely high-toned and very agreeable, and 
creditable to himself. . . .  By degrees, however, a new light began to 
break upon our hero's bewildered mind, a new and awful light that 
revealed at once a whole perspective of hitherto unknown and utterly 
unsuspected cicumstances . . . .  At that moment somebody gave our 
bewildered hero a poke in the ribs. He looked around. Pisarenko was 
standing before him. 
"A letter, your honour." 
"Ah, you've been out alreaC:y, then, my good man ?" 
"No, it was brought at ten o'clock this morning. Sergey Mihyeev, the 
attendant, brought it from Mr. Vahramyev's lodging." 
"Very good, very good, and I'll reward you now, my dear fellow." 
Saying this, Mr. Golyadkin thrust the letter in the side pocket of 
his uniform and buttoned up every button of it; then he looked round 
him, and to his surprise, found that he was by now in the hall of the 
department, in a group of clerks crowding at the outer door, for office 
hours were over. Mr. Golyadkin had not only failed till that moment 
to observe this circumstance, but had no notion how he suddenly came 
to be wearing his greatcoat and goloshes and to be holding his hat in 
his hand. All the clerks were standing motionless, in reverential ex­
pectation. The fact wns that his Excellency was standing at the bottom 
of the stairs waiting for his carriage, which was for some reason late in 
arriving, and was carrying on a very interesting conversation with 
Andrey Filippovitch and two councillors. At a little distance from 
Andrey Filippovitch stood Anton Antonovitch and se,·eral other clerks, 
who were all smiles, seeing that his Excellency was graciously making 
a joke. The clerks who were crowded at the top of the stairs were 
smiling too, in expectation of his Excellency's laughing again. The 
only one who was not smiling was Fedosyevitch, the corpulent hall­
porter, who stood stiffly at attention, holding the handle of the door, 
waiting impatiently for the daily gratification that fell to his share­
that is, the task of flinging one half of the door wide open with a 
swing of his arm, and then, with J low bow, reverentially making way 
for his Excellency to pass. But the one who seemed to be more de-

The Vouble 
581 
lighted than any and to feel the most satisfaction of all was the worth­
less and ungentlemanly enemy of Mr. Golyadkin. At that instant he 
positively forgot all the clerks, and even gave up tripping and pirouet­
ting in his usual odious w'ay; he even forgot to make up to anybody. 
He was all eyes and ears, he even doubled himself up strangely, no 
doubt in the strained effort to hear, and never took his eyes off his 
Excellency, and only from time to time his arms, legs and head 
twitched with faintly perceptible tremors that betrayed the secret emo­
tions of his soul. 
"Ah, isn't he in a state!" thought our hero. "He looks like a favourite, 
the rascal! I should like to know how it is that he deceives society of 
every class. He has neither brains nor character, neither education nor 
feeling; he's a lucky rogue! Mercy on us! How can a man, when you 
think of it, come and make friends with every one so quickly! And 
he'll get on, I swear the fellow will get on, the rogue will make his 
way-he's a lucky rascal! I should like to know, too what he keeps 
whispering to every one-what plots he is hatching with all these 
people, and what secrets they are talking about. Lord, have mercy on 
us! If only I could . . .  get on with them a little too . . .  say this 
and that and the other. Hadn't I better ask him . . .  tell him I won't 
do it again; say 'I'm in fault, and a young man must serve nowadays, 
your Excellency'? I am not in the least abashed by my obscure posi­
tion-so there! I am not going to protest in any way, either; I shall 
bear it all with meekness and patience, so there! Is that the way to 
behave? . . .  Though you'll never see through him, though, the rascal; 
you can't reach him with anything you say; you can't hammer reason 
into his head . . . .  We'll make an effort, though. I may happen to hit 
on a good moment, so I'll make an effort . . . .  " 
Feeling in his uneasiness, his misery and his bewilderment that he 
couldn't leave things like this, that the critical moment had come, that 
he must explain himself to some one, our hero began to move a little 
towards the place where his worthless and undeserving enemy stood: 
but at that very moment his Excellency's long-expected carriage rolled 
up into the entrance, Fedosyevitch flung open the door and, bending 
double, let his Excellency pass out. All the waiting clerks streamed 
out towards the door, and for a moment separated Mr. Golyadkin 
senior from Mr. Golyadkin junior. 
"You shan't get away!" said our hero, forcing his way through th1: 
crowd while he kept his eyes fixed on the man he wanted. At last the 
crowd dispersed. Our hero felt he was free and flew in pursuit of his 
enemy. 

582 
T lz% Short N.ovds of Vosto%vsky 
Chapter 11 
MR. GOL YADKIN'S breath failed him; he flew as though on 
wings after his rapidly retreating eenemy. He was conscious of im­
mense energy. Yet in spite of this terrible energy he might confidently 
have said that at that moment a humble gnat-had a gnat been able 
to exist in Petersburg at that time of the year-could very easily have 
knocked him down. He felt, too, that he was utterly weak again, that 
he was carried along by a peculiar outside force, that it was not he 
himself who was running, but, on the contrary, that his legs were 
giving way under him, and refused to obey him. This all might turn 
out for the best, however. 
"Whether it is for the best or not for the best," thought Mr. Gol­
yadkin, almost breathless from running so quickly, "but that the game 
is lost there cannot be the slightest doubt now; that I am utterly done 
for is certain, definite, signed and ratified." 
In spite of all this our hero felt as though he had risen from the 
dead, as though he had withstood a battalion, as though he had won a 
victory when he succeeded in clutching the overcoat of his enemy, 
who had already raised one foot to get into the cab he had engaged. 
"My dear sir! My dear sir!" he shouted to the infamous Mr. Gol­
yadkin junior, holding him by the button. "My dear sir, I hope that 
you . . .  " 
"No, please do not hope for anything," Mr. Golyadkin's heartless 
enemy answered evasively, standing with one foot on the step of the 
cab and vainly waving the other leg in the air, in his efforts to get in, 
trying to preserve his equilibrium, and at the same time trying with 
all his might to wrench his coat away from Mr. Golyadkin senior, 
while the latter held on to it with all the strength that had been vouch­
safed to him by nature. 
"Y akov Petrovitch, only ten minutes 
.
•
.
 " 
"Excuse me, I've no time . . .  " 
"You must admit, Yakov Petrovitch . . .  please, Yakov Petrovitch . 
. . . For God's sake, Y akov Petrovitch . . .  let us ha\'e it out-in a 
straightforward way 
•
.
.
 one little second, Y akov Petrovitch . . .  " 
"My dear fellow, I can't stay," answered Mr. Golyadkin's dishonour­
able enemy, with uncivil familiarity, disguised as good-natured hearti-

The 'Double 
583 
ness; "another time, believe me, with my whole soul and all my heart; 
but now I really can't .
.
• " 
"Scoundrel!" thought our hero. "Y akov Petrovitch," he cried miser­
ably. "I have never been your enemy. Spiteful people have describd 
me unjustly . . . .  I am ready, on my side . . .  Yakov Petrovitch, shall 
we go in here together, at once, Y akov Petrovitch ? And with all my 
heart, as you have so justly expressed it just now, and in straightfor­
ward, honourable language, as you have expressed it just now-here 
into this coffee-house; there the facts will explain themselves: they 
will really, Yakov Petrovitch. Then everything will certainly explain 
itself . . . .  
" 
"Into the co!Iee-house? Very good. I am not against it. Let us go 
into the coffee-house on one condition only, my dear, on one condition 
-that these things shall be cleared up. We will have it all out, darling," 
said Mr. Golyadkin junior, getting out of the cab and shamelessly slap­
ping our hero on the shoulder. "You friend of my heart, for your 
sake, Y akov Petrovitch, I am ready to go by the back street (as you 
were pleased to observe so aptly on one occasion, Yakov Petrovitch). 
Why, what a rogue he is! Upon my word, he does just what he likes 
with one!" Mr. Golyadkin's false friend went on, fawning upon him 
and cajoling him with a little smile. The coffee-house which the two 
Mr. Golyadkins entered stood some distance away from the main street 
and was at the moment quite empty. A rather stout German woman 
made her appearance behind the counter. Mr. Golyadkin and his un­
worthy enemy went into the second room, where a puffy-looking boy 
with a closely shaven head was busy with a bundle of chips at the 
stove, trying to revive the smouldering fire. At Mr. Golyadkin junior's 
request chocolate was served. 
"And a sweet little lady-tart," said Mr. Golyadkin junior, with a sly 
wink at Mr. Golyadkin senior. 
Our hero blushed and was silent. 
"Oh, yes, I forgot, I beg your pardon. I know your taste. We are 
sweet on charming little Germans, sir; you and I are sweet on charm­
ing and agreeable little Germans, aren't we, you upright soul ?  We take 
their lodgings, we seduce their morals, they w:in our hearts with their 
beer-soup and their milk-soup, and we give them notes of different 
sorts, that's what we do, you Faublas, you deceiver!" All this Mr. 
Golyadkin junior said, making an unworthy though villainously artful 
allusion to a certain personage of the female sex, while he fawned upon 
our hero, smiled at him with an amiable air, with a deceitful show of 

584 
The Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
being delighted with him and pleased to have met him. Seeing that 
Mr. Golyadkin senior was by no means so stupid and deficient in 
breeding and the manners of good society as to believe in him, the 
infamous man resolved to change his tactics and to make a more open 
attack upon him. After uttering his disgusting speech, the false Mr. 
Golyadkin ended by slapping the real and substantial Mr. Golyadkin 
on the shoulder, with a revolting effrontery and familiarity. Not con­
tent with that, he began playing pranks utterly unfit for well-bred 
society; he took it into his head to repeat his old, nauseous trick-that 
is, regardless of the resistance and faint cries of the indignant Mr. Gol­
yadkin senior, he pinched the latter on the cheek. At the spectacle of 
such depravity our hero boiled within, but was silent . . .  only for the 
time, however. 
"That is the talk of my enemies," he answered at last, in a trembling 
voice, prudently restraining himself. At the same time our hero looked 
round uneasily towards the door. The fact was that Mr. Goly;৚dkin 
junior seemed in excellent spirits, and ready for all sorts of little jokes, 
unseemly in a public place, Jnd, speaking generally, not permissible by 
the laws of good manners, especially in well-bred society. 
"Oh, well, in that case, as you please," Mr. Golyadkin junior grJvely 
responded to our hero's thought, setting down upon the table the 
empty cup which he had gulped down with unseemly greed. "Well, 
there's no need for me to stay long with you, however . . . .  Well, how 
are you getting on now, Yakov Petrovitch ? "  
"There's only one thing I cJn tell you, Yakov Petrovitch," our hero 
Jnswered, with sangfroid and dignity; "I've never been your enemy." 
"H'm . . . .  Oh, whJt about Petrushka? Petrushka is his nJme, I 
fancy? Yes, it is Petrushka! Well, how is he? Well ? The same as 
ever?" 
"He's the sJmc JS ever, too, Y Jkov Petrovitch," answered Mr. Gol­
yadkin senior, some\vhJt amazed. "I don't know, Yakov Petrovitch 
. . .  from my standpoint . . .  from J candid, honourable standpoint, 
Yakov Petrovitch, you must admit, Yakov Petrovitch . . .  " 
"Yes, but you know yourself, Yakov Petrovitch," Mr. Golyadkin 
junior answered in a soft and expressive voice, so posing falsely as a 
sorrowful man overcome with remorse and deserving compJssion. 
"You know yourself we live in difficult times . . . .  I appeal to you, 
Yakov Petrovitch; you are an intelligent man and your reflections are 
just," Mr. Golyadkin junior said in conclusion, flattering Mr. Golyad­
kin senior in an abject way. "Life is not a game, you know yourself, 
Yakov Petrovitch," Mr. Golyadkin junior added, with vast signifi-

The Vouhle 
585 
cance, assuming the character of a clever and learned man, who is 
capable of passing judgments on lofty subjects. 
"For my part, Yakov Petrovitch," our hero answered warmly, "for 
my part, scorning to be roundabout and speaking boldly and openly, 
using straightforward, honourable language and putting the whole 
matter on an honourable basis, I tell you I can openly and honourably 
assert, Yakov Petrovitch, that I am absolutely pure, and that, you know 
it yourself, Yakov Petrovitch, the error is mutual-it may all be the 
world's judgment, the opinion of the slavish crowd . . . .  I speak 
openly, Yakov Petrovitch, everything is possible. I will say, too, Yakov 
Petrovitch, if you judge it in this way, if you look at the matter from a 
lofty, noble point of view, then I will boldly say, without false shame 
I will say, Yakov Petrovitch, it will positively be a pleasure to me to 
discover that I have been in error, it will positively be a pleasure to me 
to recognize it. You know yourself you are an intelligent man and, 
what is more, you arc a gentleman. Without shame, without false 
shame, I am ready to recognize it," he wound up with dignity and 
nobility. 
"It is the decree of destiny, Yakov Petrovitch •
.
.
 but let us drop 
all this," said Mr. Golyadkin junior. "Let us rather use the brief mo­
ment of our meeting for a more pleasant and profitable conversation, 
as is only suitable between two colleagues in the service . . . .  Really, I 
have not succeeded in saying two words to you all this time . . . .  I am 
not to blame for that, Yakov Petrovitch . . . .  " 
"Nor 1," answered our hero warmly, "nor I, either! My heart tells 
me, Yakov Petrovitch, that I'm not to blame in all this matter. Let 
us blame fate for all this, Yakov Petrovitch," added Mr. Golyadkin 
senior, in a quick, conciliatory tone of voice. His voice began little by 
little to soften and to quaver. 
"\Veil! How are you in health? "  said the sinner in a sweet voice. 
"I have a little cough," answered our hero, even more sweetly 
"Take care of yourself. There is so much illness going about, you 
may easily get quinsy; for my part I confess I've begun to wrap myself 
up in flannel." 
"One may, indeed, Yakov Petrovitch, very easily get quinsy," our 
hero pronounced after a brief silence; "Y akov Petrovitch, I see that I 
have made a mistake, I remember with softened feelings those happy 
moments which we were so fortunate as to spend together, under my 
poor, though I venture to say, hospitable roof . . .  " 
"In your letter, however, you wrote something very different," said 

586 
Mr. Golyadkin junior reproachfully, speaking on this occasion­
though only on this occasion-quite justly. 
"Yakov Petrovitch, I was in error 
. .
. . I see clearly now that I was 
in error in my unhappy letter too. Y akov Petrovitch, I am ashamed to 
look at you, Yakov Petrovitch, you wouldn't believe . . .  Give me 
that letter that I rna y tear it to pieces before your eyes, Y akov Petrov­
itch, and if that is utterly impossible I entreat you to read it the other 
way before-precisely the other way before-that is, expressly with a 
friendly intention, giving the opposite sense to the whole letter. I was 
in error. Forgive me, Yakov Petrovitch, I was quite . . .  I was griev­
ously in error, Yakov Petrovitch." 
"You say so?" Mr. Golyadkin's perfidious friend inquired, rather 
casually and indifferently. 
"I say that I was quite in error, Yakov Petrovitch, and that for my 
part, quite without false shame, I am . . .  
" 
"Ah, well, that's all right! That's a nice thing your being in error," 
answered Mr. Golyadkin junior. 
"I even had an idea, Yakov Petrovitch," our candid hero answered 
in a gentlemanly way, completely failing to observe the horrible perfidy 
of his deceitful enemy, "I even had an idea that here were two people 
created exactly alike . . . .  
" 
"Ah, is that your idea ?" 
At this point the notoriously worthless Mr. Golyadkin took up his 
hat. Still failing to observe his treachery, Mr. Golyadkin senior, too, 
got up and with a noble, simple-hearted smile to his false friend, tried 
in his innocence to be friendly to him, to encourage him, and in that 
way to form a new friendship with him. 
"Good-bye, your Excellency," Mr. Golyadkin junior called out sud­
denly. Our hero started, noticing in his enemy's face something posi­
tively Bacchanalian, and, solely to get rid of him, put two fingers into 
the unprincipled man ·s outstretched hand; but then . . .  then his 
enemy's shamelessness passed all bounds. Seizing the two fingers of 
Mr. Golyadkin's hand and at first pressing them, the worthless fellow 
on the spot, before Mr. Golyadkin's eyes, had the effrontery to repeat 
the shameful joke of the afternoon. The limit of human patience was 
໭:xhausted. 
He had just hidden in his pocket the handkerchief with which he 
had wiped his fingers when Mr. Golyadkin senior recovered from the 
shock and dashed after him into the next room, into which his irrecon­
cilable foe had in his usual hasty way hastened to decamp. As though 
perfectly innocent, he was standing at the counter eating pies, and with 

The 1Joublc 
587 
perfect composure, like a virtuous man, was making polite remarks 
to the German woman behind the counter. 
"I can't go into it before ladies," thought our hero, and he, too, went 
up to the counter, so agitated that he hardly knew what he was doing. 
"The tart is certainly not bad! What do you think ?" Mr. Golyadkin 
junior began upon his unseemly sallies again, reckoning, no doubt, 
upon Mr. Golyadkin's infinite patience. The stout German, for her 
part, looked at both her visitors with pewtery, vacant-looking eyes, 
smiling affably and evidently not understanding Russian. Our hero 
flushed red as fire at the words of the unabashed Mr. Golyadkin junior, 
and, unable to control himself, rushed at him with the evident inten­
tion of tearing him to pieces and finishing him off completely, but 
Mr. Golyadkin junior, in his usual mean way, was already far off; 
he took flight, he was already on the steps. It need hardly be said that, 
after the first moment of stupefaction with which Mr. Golyadkin senior 
was naturally overcome, he recovered himself and went at full speed 
after his insulting enemy, who had already got into a cab, whose driver 
was obviously in collusion with him. But at that very instant the stout 
German, seeing both her customers make off, shrieked and rang her 
bell with all her might. Our hero was on the point of flight, but he 
turned back, and, without asking for change, flung her money for him­
self and for the shameless man who had left without paying, and 
although thus delayed he succeeded in catching up with his enemy. 
Hanging on to the side of the cab with all the force bestowed on him by 
nature, our hero was carried for some time along the street, clambering 
upon the vehicle, while Mr. Golyadkin junior did his utmost to dis­
lodge him. Meanwhile the cabman, with whip, with reins, with kicks 
and with shouts urged on his exhausted nag, who quite unexpectedly 
dropped into a gallop, biting at the bit, and kicking with his hind legs 
in a horrid way. At last our hero succeeded in climbing into the cab, 
facing his enemy and with his back to the driver, his knees touching 
the knees and his right hand clutching the very shabby fur collar of 
his depraved and exasperated foe. 
The enemies were borne along for some time in silence. Our hero 
could scarcely breathe. It was a bad road and he was jolted at every 
step and in peril of breaking his neck. Moreover, his exasperated foe 
still refused to acknowledge himself vanquished and was trying to 
shove him off into the mud. To complete the unpleasantness of his 
position the weather was detestable. The snow was falling in heavy 
flakes and doing its utmost to creep under the unfastened overcoat of 
the genuine Mr. Golyadkin. It was foggy and nothing could be seen. 

588 
'llze Slzort Novels of VostoevskJ 
It was difficult to tell through what street and in what direction they 
were being taken . . . .  It seemed to Mr. Golyadkin that what was 
happening to him was somehow familiar. One instant he tried to re­
member whether he had had a presentiment of it the day before, in a 
dream, for instance . . . .  
At last his wretchedness reached the utmost pitch of agony. Leaning 
upon his merciless opponent, he was beginning to cry out. But his cries 
died away upon his lips . . . .  There was a moment when Mr. Gol­
yadkin forgot everything, and made up his mind that all this was of no 
consequence and that it was all nothing, that it was happening in 
some inexplicable manner, and that, therefore, to protest was effort 
thrown away . . . .  But suddenly and almost at the same instant that 
our hero was drawing this conclusion, an unexpected jolt gave quite 
a new turn to the affair. Mr. Golyadkin fell off the cab like a sack 
of flour and rolled on the ground, quite correctly recognizing, at the 
moment of his fall, that his excitement had been very inappropriate. 
Jumping up at last, he saw that they had arrived somewhere; the cab 
was standing in the middle of some courtyard, and from the first 
glance our hero noticed that it was the courtyard of the house in which 
was Olsufy Ivanov itch's flat. At the same instant he noticed that his 
enemy was mounting the steps, probably on his way to Olsufy lvanov­
itch's. In indescribable misery he was about to pursue his enemy. but, 
fortunately for himself, prudently thought better of it. Not forgetting 
to pay the cabman, Mr. Golyadkin ran with all his might along the 
street, regardless of where he was going. The snow was falling heavily 
as before; as before it was muggy, wet, and dark. Our hero did not 
walk, but flew, coming into collision with every one on the way-men, 
women and children, and himself rebounding from every one-men, 
women and children. About him and after him he heard frightened 
vcices, squeals, screams . . . .  But Mr. Golyadkin seemed unconscious 
and would pay no heed to anything . . . .  He came to himself, how­
ever, on the Semyonovsky Bridge, and then only through succeeding in 
tripping against and upsetting two peasant women and the wares they 
were s!!lling, and tumbling over them. 
"That's no matter," though Mr. Golyadkin, "that can easily be set 
right," and he felt in his pocket at once, intending to make up for the 
cakes, apples, nuts and various trifles he had scattered, with a rouble. 
Suddenly a new light dawned upon Mr. Golyadkin; in his pocket he 
felt the letter given him in the morning by the clerk. Remembering 
that there was a tavern he knew close by. he ran to it without a mo­
ment's delay, settled himself at a little table lighted up by a tallow 

The 'Double 
589 
candle, and, taking no notice of anything, regardless of the waiter who 
came to ask for his orders, broke the seal and began reading the fol­
lowing letter, which completely astounded him-
"You noble man, who are suffering for my sake, and will be dear to 
my heart for ever! 
"I am suffering, I am perishing-save me! The slanderer, the 
intriguer, notorious for the immorality of his tendencies, has entangled 
me in his snares and I am undone! I am lost! But he is abhorrent to 
me, while you! . . .  They have separated us, they have intercepted my 
letters to you-and all this has been the work of the vicious man who 
has taken advantage of his one good quality-his likeness to you. A 
man can always be plain in appearance, yet fascinate by his intelli­
gence, his strong feelings and his agreeable manners . . . .  I am ruined! 
I am being married against my will, and the chief part in this intrigue 
is taken by my parent, benefactor and civil councillor, Olsufy lvanov­
itch, no doubt desirous of securing me a place and relations in well­
bred society . . . .  But I have made up my mind and I protest by all the 
powers bestowed on me by nature. Be waiting for me with a carriage 
at nine o'clock this evening at the window of Olsufy lvanovitch's flat. 
We are having another ball and a handsome lieutenant is coming. I 
will come out and we will fly. Moreover, there are other government 
offices in which one can be of service to one's country. In any case, 
remember, my friend, that innocence is strong in its very innocence. 
Farewell. Wait with the carriage at the entrance. I shall throw myself 
into the protection of your arms at two o'clock in the night. 
"Yours till death, 
"KLARA 0r.sUFYEVNA." 
After reading the letter our hero remained for some minutes as 
though petrified. In terrible anxiety, in terrible agitation, white as a 
sheet, with the letter in his hand, he walked several times up and down 
the room; to complete the unpleasantness of his position, though our 
hero failed to observe it, he was at that moment the object of the ex­
clusive attention of every one in the room. Probably the disorder of his 
attire, his unrestrained excitement, his walking or rather running 
about the room, his gesticulating with both hands, perhaps some 
enigmatic words unconsciously addressed to the air, probably all this 
prejudiced Mr. Golyadkin in the opinion of the customers, and even 
the waiter began to look at him suspiciously. Coming to himself, Mr. 
Golyadkin noticed that he was standing in the middle of the room and 
was in an almost unseemly, discourteous manner staring at an old 

590 
The Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
man of very respectable appearance who, having dined and said grace 
oefore the ikon, had sat down again and fixed his eyes upon Mr. Gol­
yadkin. Our hero looked vaguely about him and noticed that every 
one, actually every one, was looking at him with a hostile and sus­
picious air. All at once a retired military man in a red collar asked 
loudly for the Police News. Mr. Golyadkin started and turned crim­
son : he happened to look down and saw that he was in such disorderly 
attire as he would not have worn even at home, much less in a public 
place. His boots, his trousers and the whole of his left side were 
covered with mud; the trouser-strap was torn off his right foot, and his 
coat was even torn in many places. In extreme misery our hero went 
up to the table at which he had read the letter, and saw that the attend­
ant was coming up to him with a strange and impudently peremptory 
expression of face. Utterly disconcerted and crestfallen, our hero began 
to look about the table ᅅt which he was now standing. On the table 
stood a dirty plate, left there from somebody's dinner, a soiled table­
napkin and a knife, fork and spoon that had just been used. "Who 
has been having dinner?" thought our hero. "Can it have been I ?  
Anything is possible! I must have had dinner without noticing it; 
what am I to do?" 
Raising his eyes, Mr. Golyadkin again saw beside him the waiter 
who was about to address him. 
"How much is my bill, my lad ?" our hero inquired, in a trembling 
voice. 
A loud laugh sounded round Mr. Golyadkin, the waiter himself 
grinned. Mr. Golyadkin realized that he had blundered again, and hat! 
done something dreadfully stupid. He was overcome by confusion, 
and to a\'oid standing there with nothing to do he put his hand in his 
pocket to get out his handkerchief; but to the indescribable amazement 
of himself and all surrounding him, he pulled out instead of his hand­
kerchief the bottle of medicine which Krestyan Ivanovitch had pre­
scribed for him four days earlier. "Get the medicine at the same chem­
ist's," floated through Mr. Golyadkin's brain . . . .  
Suddenly he started and almost cried out in horror. A new light 
dawned 
.
.
•
.
 The dark reddish and repulsive liquid had a sinister 
gleam to Mr. Golyadkin's eyes 
.
.
•
.
 The bottle dropped from his 
hands and was instantly smashed. Our hero cried out and stepped 
back a pace to avoid the spilled medicine . . .  he was trembling in 
every limb, and drops of sweat came out on to his brow and temples. 
"So my life is in danger!" Meantime there was a stir, a commotion in 
the room; every one surrounded Mr. Golyadkin, every one talked to 

The 7Jouble 
591 
\fr. Golyadkin, some even caught hold of Mr. Golyadkin. But our 
hero was dumb and motionless, seeing nothing, hearing nothing, feelԲ 
ing nothing 
.
.
.
•
 At last, as though tearing himself from the place, he 
rushed out of the tavern, pushing away all and each who tried to de­
tl.in him; almost unconscious, he got into the first cab that passed him 
and drove to his flat. 
In the entry of his flat he met Mihyeev, an attendant from the office, 
with an official envelope in his hand. 
"I know, my good man, I know all about it," our exhausted hero 
answered, in a weak, miserable voice; "it's official. •
.
•
 
" 
The envelope did, in fact, contain instructions to Mr. Golyadkin, 
signed by Andrey Filippovitch, to give up the business in his hands to 
Ivan Semyonovitch. Taking the envelope and giving ten kopecks to 
the man, Mr. Golyadkin went into his flat and sa\V' that Petrushka was 
collecting all his odds and ends, all his things into a heap, evidently 
intending to abandon Mr. Golyadkin and move to the flat of Karolina 
lvanovna, who had enticed him to take the place of Yevstafy. 
Chapter 12 
PETRUSHKA came in swaggering, with a strangely casual man­
ner and an air of vulgar triumph on his face. It was evident that he 
had some idea in his head, that he felt thoroughly within his rights, 
and he looked like an unconcerned spectator-that is, as though he 
were anybody's servant rather than Mr. Golyadkin's. 
"I say, you know, my good lad," our hero began breathlessly, "what 
time is it?" 
Without speaking, Petrushka went behind his partition, then re­
turned, and in a rather independent tone announced that it was nearly 
half-past seven. 
"Well, that's all right, my lad, that's all right. Come, you see, my 
boy . . .  allow me to tell you, my good lad, that everything, I fancy, 
is at an end between us." 
Petrushka said nothing. 
"Well, now as everything is over between us, tell me openly, as a 
friend, where you have been." 
"Where I've been? To see good people, sir." 
"I know, my good lad, I know. I have always been satisfied with 

592 
Th| Short N.ov|ls of 7Josto|vslr; 
you, and I give you a character 
•
.
•
•
 Well, what are you doing with 
them now?" 
"Why, sir! You know yourself. We all know a decent man won't 
teach you any harm." 
"I know, my dear fellow, I know. Nowadays good people are rare, 
my lad; prize them, my friend. Well, how are they?" 
"To be sure, they •
•
.
 Only I can't serve you any longer, sir, as your 
honour must know." 
"I know, my dear fellow, I know your zeal and devotion; I have 
seen it all, my lad, I've noticed it. I respect you, my friend. I respect a 
good and honest man, even though he's a lackey." 
"Why, yes, to be sure! The likes of us, of course, as you know your­
self, are as good as anybody. That's so. We all know, sir, that there's 
no getting on without a good man." 
"Very well, very well, my boy, I feel it . . . .  Come, here's your 
money and here's your character. Now we'll kiss and say good-bye, 
brother . . . .  Come, now, my lad, I'll ask one service of you, one last 
service," said Mr. Golyadkin, in a solemn voice. "You see, my dear 
boy, all sorts of things happen. Sorrow is concealed in gilded palaces, 
and there's no escaping it. You know, my boy, I've always been kind to 
you, my boy." 
Petrushka remained mute. 
"I believe I've always been kind to you, my dear fellow . . . .  Come, 
how much linen have we now, my dear boy?" 
"Well, it's all there. Linen shirts six, three pairs of socks; four shirt­
fronts; flannel vests; of underlinen two sets. You know all that your-
self. I've got nothing of yours, sir . . . .  I look after my master's be-
longings, sir. I am like that, sir . . .  we all know . . .  and I've . . .  
never been guilty of anything of the sort, sir, you know yourself, 
. 
.. 
SIT •
•
•
•
 
"I trust you, my lad, I trust you. I didn't mean that, my friend, I 
didn't mean that, you know, my lad; I tell you what . . .  
" 
"To be sure, sir, we know that already. Why, when I used to be in 
service at General Stolbnyakov's . . .  I lost the place through the 
family's going away to Saratov . . .  they"ve an estate there . . . .  
" 
"No; I didn•t mean that, my lad, I didn't mean that; don't think 
anything of the sort, my dear fellow . . . .  " 
"To be sure. It's easy, as you know yourself, sir, to take away the 
character of folks like us. And I've always given satisfaction-min­
isters, generals, senators, counts-I've served them all. I've been at 
Prince Svintchatkin's, at Colonel Pereborkin's, at General Nedobarov's 

The 'Double 
593 
-they've gone away too, they've gone to their property. As we all 
know •
•
.
 " 
"Yes, my lad, very good, my lad, very good. And now I'm going 
away, my friend . . . .  A different path lies before each man, no one 
can tell what road he may have to take. Come, my lad, put out my 
clothes now, lay out my uniform too . . .  and my other trousers, my 
sheets, quilts and pillows . . . .  " 
"Am I to pack them all in the bag?" 
"Yes, my lad, yes ; the bag, please. Who knows what may happen to 
us? Come, my dear boy, you can go and find a carriage . . . .  " 
"A carriage? . . .  
" 
"Yes, my lad, a carriage; a roomy one, and take it by the hour. 
And don't you imJgine anything . . . .  " 
"And are you meaning to go far away, sir?" 
"I don't know, my lad, I don't know that either. I think you had 
better pack my feather-bed too. What do you think, my bd? I am 
relying on you, my dear fellow . . . .  
" 
"Is your honour setting off at once?" 
"Yes, my friend, yes! Circumstances have turned out so . . .  so it 
is, my dear fellow, so it is . . . .  
" 
"To be sure, sir; when we were 11 the regiment the same thing 
happened to the lieutenant; they eloped from a country gentle-
, 
.. 
man s .
•
•
.
 
"Eloped ? . . .  How? My dear fellow!" 
"Yes, sir, eloped, and they were married in another house. Every­
thing was got ready beforehand. There was a hue and cry after them; 
the late prince took their part, Jnd so it was all settled . . . .  " 
"They were married, but . . .  how is it, my dear fellow? . . .  How 
did you come to know, my boy?" 
"Why, to be sure! The earth is full of rumours, sir. We know, sir, 
we've all . . .  to be sure, there's no one without sin. Only I'll tell 
you now, sir, let me speak plainly and vulgarly, sir; since it has come 
to this, I must tell you, sir; you have an enemy-you've a rival, sir, 
a powerful rival, so there . . . .  
" 
"I know, my dear fellow, I know; you know yourself, my dear fel­
low . . . .  So, you see, I'm relying upon you. What are we to do now, 
my friend? How do you advise me?" 
"Well, sir, if you are in that way now, if you've come, so to say, 
to such a pass, sir, you'll have to make some purchases, sir-sJy some 
sheets, pillows, another feather-bed, a double one, a good quilt-here at 
the neighbours downstairs-she's a shopkeeper, sir-she has a good 

594 
'l h% Short 'N.ovds of 7Josto%vslzy 
fox-fur cloak, so you might look at it and buy it, you might have a 
look at it at once. You'll need it now, sir; it's a good cloak, sir, satin 
lined with fox . . . .  
" 
"Very good, my lad, very good, I agree; I rely upon you, I rely upon 
you entirely; a cloak by all means, if necessary . . . .  Only make haste, 
make haste! For God's sake make haste! I'll buy the cloak-only please 
make haste! It will soon be eight o'clock. Make haste for God's sake, 
my dear lad! Hurry up, my lad . . . .  
" 
Petrushka ran to gather together a bundle of linen, pillows, quilt, 
sheets, and all sorts of odds and ends, tied them up and rushed head­
long out of the room. Meanwhile, Mr. Golyadkin seized the letter 
once more, but he could not read it. Clutching his devoted head, he 
leaned against the wall in a state of stupefaction. He could not think 
of anything, he could do nothing either, and could not even tell what 
was happening to him. At last, seeing th;tt time \\"; S passing and 
neither Petrushka nor the fur cloak had made an appearance, Mr. 
Golyadkin made up his mind to go himself. Opening the door into 
the entry, he heard below noise, tᅆ1lk, disputing, scuffiing . . . .  Several 
of the women of the neighbouring flats were shouting, talking and 
protesting about something-ᅇ1r. Golyadkin knew what. Petrushka's 
voice was heard : then there was a sound of footsteps. 
".My goodness! They'll bring all the world in here," moaned Mr. 
Golyadkin, wringing his hands in despair and rl!shing back into his 
room. Running back into his room, he fell almost senseless on the sofa 
with his face in the pillow. After lying a minute in this way, he 
jumped up and, without waiting for Petrushka, he put on his goloshes, 
his hat and his greatcoat, snatched up his papers and ran headlong 
downstairs. 
"Nothing is wanted, nothing, my dear fellow! I will manage my­
self-everything myself. I don't need you for the time, and meantime, 
things may take a better turn, perhaps," Mr. Golyadkin muttered to 
Petrushka, meeting him on the stairs; then he ran out into the yard, 
away from the house. There was a faintness at his heart, he had not 
yet made up his mind what was his position, what he was to do, how 
he was to act in the present critical position. 
"Yes, how am I to act? Lord, have mercy on me! And that all this 
should happen!" he cried out at last in despair, tottering along the 
street at random ; "that all this must needs happen! Why, b'.Jt for thiᅈ, 
but for just this, everything would have been put right; at one stroke, 
at one skilful, vigorous, firm stroke it would have been set right. I 
would have my finger cut off to have it set right! And I know, indeed, 

Th% 'Doubt% 
595 
how it would have oeen settled. This is how it would have been man­
aged: I'd have gone on the spot . . .  said how it was 
•
.
.
 'with your 
permission, sir, I'm neither here nor there in it . . .  things aren't done 
like that,' I would say, 'my dear sir, things aren't done like that, there's 
no accepting an impostor in our office; an impostor 
.
•
.
 my dear sir, 
is a man . . .  who is worthless and of no service to his country. Do 
you understand that? Do you understand that, my dear sir?' I should 
say! That's how it would be . . . .  But no . . .  after all, things are not 
like that . . .  not a bit like that . . . .  I am talking nonsense, like a 
fool! A suicidal fool! It's not like that at all, you suicidal fool. . . .  
This is how things are done, though, you profligate man! . . .  Well, 
what am I to do with myself now? Well, what am I going to do with 
myself now ? What am I fit for now? Come, what are you fit for now, 
for instance, you Golyadkin, you, you worthless fellow! Well, what 
now ? I must get a carriage; 'hire a carriage and bring it here,' says she, 
'we shall get our feet wet without a carriage,' says she . . . .  And who 
could ever have thought it! Fie, fie, my young lady! Fie, fie, a young 
lady of virtuous behaviour! Well, well, the girl we all thought so much 
of! You've distinguished yourself, madame, there's no doubt of that! 
you've distinguished yourself! . . .  And it all comes from immoral 
education. And now that I've looked into it and seen through it all I 
see that it is due to nothing else but immorality. Instead of looking 
after her as a child . . .  and the rod at times . . .  they stuff her with 
sweets and dainties, and the old man is always doting over her: saying 
'my dear, my love, my beauty,' saying, 'we'll marry you to a count!' 
. . .  And now she has come forward herself and shown her cards, as 
though to say that's her little game! Instead of keeping her at home as 
a child, they sent her to a boarding-school, to a French madame, an 
emigref:, a Madame Falbalas or something, and she learned all sorts of 
things at that Madame Falbalas', and this is how it always turns out. 
'Come,' says she, 'and be happy! Be in a carriage,' she says, 'at such a 
time, under the windows, and sing a sentimental serenade in the 
Spanish style; I await you and I know you love me, and we will Ay 
together and live in a hut.' But the fact is it's impossible; since it has 
come to that, madame, it's impossible, it is against the law to abduct an 
innocent, respectable girl from her parents' roof without their sanction! 
And, if you come to that, why, what for and what need is there to do 
it? Come, she should marry a suitable person, the man marked out by 
destiny, and that would be the end of it. But I'm in the government 
service, I might lose my berth through it : I might be arrested for it, 
madame! I tell you that! If you did not know it. It's that German 

596 
The Short Novels of Vostoevs ky 
woman's doing. She's at the bottom of it all, the witch; she cooked the 
whole kettle of fish. For they've slandered a man, for they've invented 
a bit of womanship gossip about him, a regular performance by the 
advice of Andrey Filippovitch, that's what it came from. Otherwise 
how could Petrushka be mixed up in it? What has he to do with it ? 
What need for that rogue to be in it? No, I cannot, madame, I cannot 
possibly, not on any account . . . .  No, madame, this time you must 
really excuse me. It's all your doing, madame, it's not all the German's 
doing, it's not the witch's doing at all, but simply yours. For the 
witch is a good woman, for the witch is not to blame in any way; it's 
your fault, madame; it's you who are to blame, let me tell you! I shall 
be charged with a crime through you, madame . . . .  A man might be 
ruined . . .  a man might lose sight of himself, and not be able to 
restrain himself-a wedding, indeed! And how is it all going to end? 
And how will it all be arranged ? I would give a great deal to know 
all that! . . .  " 
So our hero reflected in his despair. Coming to himself suddenly, he 
observed that he was standing somewhere in Liteyny Street. The 
weather was awful : it was a thaw; snow and rain were falling-just 
as at that memorable time when at the dread hour of midnight all Mr. 
Golyadkin's troubles h3d begun. "This is a nice night for a journey!" 
thought Mr. Golyadkin, looking at the weather; "it's death all round . 
• 
• 
. Good Lord! Where am I to find a carriage, for instance? I believe 
there's something black there at the corner. \Ve'll see, we'll investigate 
. 
. 
. 
• Lord, have mercy on us!" our hero went on, bending his weak 
and tottering steps in the direction in which he saw something that 
looked like a cab. 
"No, I know what I'll do; I'll go straight and fall on my knees, if 
I can, and humbly beg, saying, 'I put my fate in your hands, in the 
hands of my superiors'; saying, 'Your Excellency, be a protector and a 
benefactor'; and then I'll say this and that, and explain how it is and 
that it is an unlawful act; 'Do not destroy me, I look upon you as my 
father, do not abandon me .
.
•
 save my dignity, my honour, my name, 
my reputation . . .  and save me from a miscreant, a vicious man 
.
.
.
•
 
He's another person, your Excellency, and I'm another person too; he's 
apart and I am myself by myself too; I am really myself by myself, your 
Excellency ;  really myself by myself,' that's what I shall say. 'I cannot 
be like him. Change him, dismiss him, give orders for him to be 
.:hanged and a godless, licentious impersonation to be suppressed 
.
.
•
 
that it may not be an example to others, your Excellency. I look upon 
you as a father'; those in authority over us, our benefactors and pro-

The Voub/c 
597 
tectors, are bound, of course, to encourage such impulses . . . .  There's 
something chivalrous about it: I shall say, 'I look upon you, my bene· 
factor and superior, as a father, and trust my fate to you, and I will not 
say anything against it; I put myself in your hands, and retire from 
the affair myself' . . .  that's what I would say." 
"Well, my man, are you a cabman?" 
"Yes . . .  " 
"I want a cab for the evening .
.
.
•
 
" 
"And does your honour want to go far ?" 
"For the evening, for the evening; wherever I have to go, my man, 
wherever I have to go." 
"Does your honour want to drive out of town?" 
"Yes, my friend, out of town, perhaps. I don't quite know myself 
yet, I can't tell you for certain, my man. Maybe, you see, it will all be 
settled for the best. We all know, my friend . . .  " 
"Yes, sir, of course we all know. Please God it may." 
"Yes, my friend, yes; thank you, my dear fellow, come, what's your 
fare, my good man ? . . .  " 
"Do you want to set off at once?" 
"Yes, at once, that is, no, you must wait at a certain place . . . .  A 
little while, not long, you'll have to wait . . . .  " 
"Well, if you hire me for the whole time, I couldn't ask less than 
six roubles for weather like this . . . .  
" 
"Oh, very well, my friend; and I thank you, my dear fellow. So, 
come, you can take me now, my good man." 
"Get in; allow me, I'll put it straight a bit-now will your honour 
get in? Where shall I drive?" 
"To the lsmailovsky Bridge, friend." 
The driver plumped down on the box, with difficulty roused his pair 
of lean nags from the trough of hay, and was setting off for the Ismail­
ovsky Bridge. But suddenly Mr. Golyadkin pulled the cord, stopped 
the cab, and besought him in an imploring voice not to drive to the 
Ismailovsky Bridge, but to turn back to another street. The driver 
turned into another street, and ten minutes later Mr. Golyadkin's 
newly hired equipage was standing before the house in which his 
Excellency had a flat. Mr. Golyadkin got out of the carriage, begged 
the driver to be sure to wait and with a sinking heart ran upstairs to 
the third storey and pulled the bell; the door was opened and our hero 
found himself in the entry of his Excellency's flat. 
"Is his Excellency graciously pleased to be at home?" said Mr. Gol­
yadkin, addressing the man who opened the door. 

598 
T ll% Slwrt N.ovds of Vosto%vskJ 
"What do you want?" asked the servant, scrutinizing Mr. Golyad­
kin from head to foot. 
"I, my friend . . .  I am Golyadkin, the titular councillor, Golyadkin . 
. . . To say . . .  something or other . . .  to explain . . .  " 
"You must wait; you cannot . . .  " 
"My friend, I cannot wait; my business is important, it's business 
that admits of no delay . . . .  
" 
"But from whom have you come? Have you brought papers? . . .  " 
"No, my friend, I am on my own account. Announce me, my friend, 
say something or other, explain. I'll reward you, my good man . . . .  " 
"1 cannot. His Excellency is not at home, he has visitors. Come at 
ten o'clock in the morning . . . .  " 
"Take in my name, my good man, I can't wait-it is impossible . 
. . . You'll have to answer for it, my good man." 
"\Vhy, go and announce him! What's the matter with you ; want to 
saYe your shoe leather?" said another lackey, who was lolling on the 
bench and had not uttered a word till then. 
"Shoe leather! I was told not to show any one up, you know; their 
time is the morning." 
"Announce him, have you lost your tongue?" 
"I'll announce him all right-l"ve not lost my tongue. It's not my 
orders; I've told you, it's not my orders. Walk inside." 
Mr. Golyadkin went into the outermost room ; there was a clock on 
the table. He glanced at it : it was half-past eight. His heart ached 
within him. Already he wanted to turn back, but at that Yery moment 
the footman standing at the door of the next room had already boomed 
out Mr. Golyadkin's n:tme. 
"Oh, what lungs," thought our hero in indescribable misery. "Why, 
you ought to have s:tid : 'He has come most humbly and meekly to 
make an explanation . . .  something . . .  be graciously pleased to see 
him.' . . .  Now the whole business is ruined; all my hopes are scat­
tered to the winds. But . . .  however . . .  never mind . . .  .'' 
There was no time to think, moreover. The lackey, returning, said, 
.. Please walk in," and led Mr. Golyadkin into the study. 
\Vhen our hero went in, he felt as though he were blinded, for he 
could see nothing at all. . . .  But three or four figures seemed flitting 
before his eyes: "Oh, yes, they are the visitors," flashed through Mr. 
Golyadkin's mind. At last our hero could distinguish clearly the star 
on the black coat of his Excellency, then by degrees advanced to seeing 
the black coat and at last gained the power of complete vision. 
"What is it?" said a familiar voice above Mr. Golyadkin. 

The 'Double 
"The titular councillor, Golyadkin, your Excellency." 
"Well?" 
"I have come to make an explanation . . . .  " 
"How? . . .  What?" 
599 
"Why, yes. This is how it is. I've come for an explanation, your 
Excellency . . . .  
" 
"But you . . .  but who are you? . . .  
" 
"M-m-m-mist-er Golyadkin, your Excellency, a titular coun­
cillor." 
"Well, what is it you want?" 
"\Vhy, this is how it is, I look upon you as a father; I retire . . .  
defend me from my enemy! 
"What's this? . . .  " 
"We all know . . .  
" 
"What do we all know?" 
Mr. Golyadkin was silent: his chin began twitching a little. 
"Well ?" 
"I thought it was chivalrous, your Excellency . . . .  'There's some­
thing chivalrous in it,' I said, 'and I look upon my superior as a father' 
. . .  this is what I thought; 'protect me, I tear-earfully . . .  b-beg and 
that such imp-impulses ought . . .  to . . .  be encouraged . . . .  " 
His Excellency turned away, our hero for some minutes could disᅉ 
tinguish nothing. There was a weight on his chest. His breathing was 
laboured ; he did not know where he was standing 
.
.
•
.
 He felt 
ashamed and sad. God knows what followed . . . .  Recovering him­
self, our hero noticed that his Excellency was talking with his guests, 
and seemed to be briskly and emphatically discussing something with 
them. One of the visitors Mr. Golyadkin recognized at once. This was 
Andrey Filippovitch; he knew no one else; yet there was another 
person that seemed familiar-a tall, thick-set figure, middle-aged, pos­
sessed of very thick eyebrows and whiskers and a significant sharp 
expression. On his chest was an order and in his mouth a cigar. This 
gentleman was smoking and nodding significantly without taking the 
cigar out of his mouth, glancing from time to time at Mr. Golyadkin. 
Mr. Golyadkin felt awkward; he turned away his eyes and imme­
diately saw another very strange visitor. Through a door which our 
hero had taken for a looking-glass, just as he had done once before-he 
made his appearance-we know who: a very intimate friend and 
acquaintance of Mr. Golyadkin's. Mr. Golyadkin junior had actually 
been till then in a little room close by, hurriedly writing something; 
now, apparently, he was needed-:md he came in with papers under 

600 
T lzc Slzort 'Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
his arm, went up to his Excellency, and while waiting for exclusive 
attention to be paid him succeeded very adroitly in putting his spoke 
into the talk and consultation, taking his place a little behind Andrey 
Filippovitch 's back and partly screening him from the gentleman 
smoking the cigar. Apparently Mr. Golyadkin junior took an extreme: 
interest in the conversation, to which he was listening now in a gen­
tlemanly way, nodding his head, fidgeting with his feet, smiling, 
continually looking at his Excellency-as it were beseeching him with 
his eyes to let him put his word in. 
"The scoundrel," thought Mr. Golyadkin, and involuntarily he took 
a step forward. At this moment his Excellency turned round, and 
came rather hesitatingly towards Mr. Golyadkin. 
"Well, that's all right, that's all right; well, run along, now. I'll look 
into your case, and give orders for you to be taken . . .  
" 
At this point his Excellency glanced at the gentleman with the thick 
whiskers. The latter nodded in assent. 
Mr. Golyadkin felt and distinctly understood that they were taking 
him for something different and not looking at him in the proper 
light at all. 
"In one way or another I must explain myself," he thought; "I must 
say, 'This is how it is, your Excellency.' " 
At this point in his perplexity he dropped his eyes to the floor and 
to his great astonishment he saw a good-sized patch of something 
white on his Excellency's boots. 
"Can there be a hole in them ?" thought Mr. Golyadkin. Mr. Golyad­
kin was, however, soon convinced that his Excellency's boots were not 
split, but were only shining brilliantly-a phenomenon fully explained 
by the fact that they were patent leather and highly polished. 
"It is what they call blick," thought our hero; "the term is used 
particularly in artists' studios; in other places such a reflected light is 
called a rib of light.'' 
At this point Mr. Golyadkin raised his eyes and saw that the time 
had come to speak, for things might easily end badly . . . .  
Our hero took a step forward. 
"I say this is how it is, your Excellency," he said, "and there's no 
accepting impostors nowadays." 
His Excellency made no answer, but rang the bell violently. Our 
hero took another step forward. 
"He is a vile, vicious man, your Excellency," said our hero, beside 
himᅊclf and faint with terror, though he still pointed boldly and 
resolutely at his unworthy twin, who was fidgeting about near his 

'liz¬ 'Doubl¬ 
601 
Excellency. "I say this is how it is, and I am alluding to a well·known 
person." 
There was a general sensation at Mr. Golyadkin's words. Andrey 
Filippovi.tch and the gentleman with the cigar nodded their heads; 
his Excellency impatiently tugged at the bell to summon the servants. 
At this point Mr. Golyadkin junior came forward in his turn. 
"Your Excellency," he said, "I humbly beg permission to speak." 
There was something very resolute in Mr. Golyadkin junior's voice; 
everything showed that he felt himself completely in the right. 
"Allow me to ask you," he began again, anticipating his Excellency's 
reply in his eagerness, and this time addressing Mr. Golyadkin; "alow 
me to ask you, in whose presence you are making this explanation? 
Before whom are you standing, in whose room are you? . . .  
" 
Mr. Golyadkin junior was in a state of extraordinary excitement, 
flushed and glowing with wrath and indignation; there were positively 
tears in his eyes. 
A lackey, appearing in the doorway, roared at the top of his voice 
the name of some new arrivals, the Bassavryukovs. 
"A good aristocratic name, hailing from Little Russia," thought Mr. 
Golyadkin, and at that moment he felt some one lay a very friendly 
hand on his back, then a second hand was laid on his back. Mr. Gol­
yadkin's infamous twin was tripping about in front leading the way; 
and our hero saw clearly that he was being led to the big doors of 
the room. 
"Just as it was at Olsufy Ivanovitch's," he thought, and he found 
himself in the hall. Looking round, he saw beside him two of his 
Excellency's lackeys and his twin. 
"The greatcoat, the greatcoat, the greatcoat, the greatcoat, my friend! 
The greatcoat of my best friend!" whispered the depraved man, 
snatching the coat from one of the servants, and by way of a nasty and 
ungentlemanly joke flinging it straight at Mr. Golyadkin's head. 
Extricating himself from under his coat, Mr. Golyadkin distinctly 
heard the two lackeys snigger. But without listening to anything, or 
paying attention to it, he went out of the hall and found himself on 
the lighted stairs. Mr. Golyadkin junior following him. 
"Good-bye, your Excellency!" he shouted after Mr. Golyadkin senior. 
"Scoundrel!" our hero exclaimed, beside himself. 
"\Veil, scoundrel, then . . .  
" 
"Depraved man! . . . " 
"Well, depraved man, then . . .  " answered Mr. Golyadkin's un­
worthy enemy, and with his characteristic baseness he looked down 

602 
from the top of the stairs straight into Mr. Golyadkin's face as though 
oegging him to go on. Our hero spat with indignation and ran out of 
the front door; he was so shattered, so crushed, that he had no recol· 
lection of how he got into the cab or who helped him in. Coming to 
himself, he found that he was being driven to Fontanka. "To the 
Ismailovsky Bridge, then," thought Mr. Golyadkin. At this point, Mr. 
Golyadkin tried to think of something else, but could not; there was 
something so terrible that he could not explain it . . . .  "Well, never 
mind," our hero concluded, and he drove to the Ismailovsky Bridge. 
Chapter 13 
•
•
•
 IT SEEMED as though the weather meant to change for the 
better. The snow, which had till then been coming down in regular 
clouds, began growing less and less and at last almost ceased. The sky 
became visible and here and there tiny stars sparkled in it. It was 
only wet, muddy, damp and stifling, especially for Mr. Golyadkin, 
who could hardly breathe as it was. His greatcoat, soaked and heavy 
with wet, sent a sort of unpleasant w·arm dampness all through him 
and weighed down his exhausted legs. A feverish shiver sent sharp, 
shooting pains all over him; he was in a painful cold sweat of exhaus· 
tion, so much so that Mr. Golyadkin even forgot to repeat at every 
suitable occasion with his characteristic firmness and resolution his 
favourite phrase that "it all, maybe, most likely, indeed, might turn 
out for the best." "But all this does not matter for the time," our hero 
repeated, still staunch and not down-hearted, wiping from his face the 
cold drops that streamed in all directions from the brim of his round 
hat, which was so soaked that it could hold no more water. Adding 
that all this was nothing so far, our hero tried to sit on a rather thick 
clump of wood, which was lying near a heap of logs in Olsufy Ivanov· 
itch's yard. Of course, it was no good thinking of Spanish serenades or 
silken ladders, but it was quite necessary to think of a modest corner, 
snug and private, if not altogether warm. He felt greatly tempted, 
we may mention in passing, by that corner in the back entry of Olsufy 
Ivanovitch's flat in which he had once, almost at the beginning of this 
true story, stood for more than two hours between a cupboard and an 
old screen among all sorts of domestic odds and ends and useless litter. 
The fact is that Mr. Golyadkin had been standing waiting for two 
whole hours on this occasion in Olsufy lvanovitch's yard. But in re-

The 'Double 
603 
gard to that modest and snug little corner there were certain draw­
backs which had not existed before. The first drawback was the fact 
that it was probably now a marked place and that certain precautionary 
measures had been taken in regard to it since the scandal at Olsufy 
Ivanovitch's last ball. Secondly, he had to wait for a signal from Klara 
Olsufyevna, for there was bound to be some such signal, it was always 
a feature in such cases and, "it didn't begin with us and it won't end 
with us." 
At this point Mr. Golyadkin very appropriately remembered a novel 
he had read long ago in which the heroine, in precisely similar circum· 
stances, signalled to Alfred by tying a pink ribbon to her window. 
But now, at night, in the climate of Petersburg, famous for its damp­
ness and unreliability, a pink ribbon was hardly appropriate and, in 
fact, was utterly out of the question. 
"No, it's not a matter of silk ladders," thought our hero, "and I had 
better stay here quietly and comfortably . . . .  I had better stand here." 
And he selected a place in the yard exactly opposite the window, 
near a stack of firewood. Of course, many persons, grooms and 
coachmen, were continually crossing the yard, and there was, besides, 
the rumbling of wheels and the snorting of horses and so on; yet it 
was a convenient place, whether he was observed or not; but now, 
anyway, there was the advantage of being to some extent in shadow, 
and no one could see Mr. Golyadkin while he himself could see 
everything. 
The windows were brightly lit up, there was some sort of ceremoni­
ous party at Olsufy lvanovitch's. But he could hear no music as yet. 
"So it's not a ball, but a party of some other sort," thought our hero, 
somewhat aghast. "Is it to-day?" floated the doubt through him. "Have 
I made a mistake in the date? Perhaps; anything is possible . . . .  Yes, 
to be sure, anything is possible . . . .  Perhaps she wmte a letter to me 
yesterday, and it didn't reach me, and perhaps it did not reach me 
because Petrushka put his spoke in, the rascall Or it was to-morrow 
in the letter, that is, that I 
.
.
•
 should do everything to-morrow, that 
is-wait with a carriage 
.
•
•
.
 " 
At this point our hero turned cold all over and felt in his pocket 
for the letter, to make sure. But to his surprise the letter was not in 
his pocket. 
"How's this?" muttered Mr. Golyadkin, more dead than alive. 
"Where did I leave it? Then I must have lost it. That is the last straw!" 
he moaned at last. "Oh, if it falls into evil hands! Perhaps it has 
already. Good Lord! What may it not lead to! It may lead to some· 

604 
The Short 'Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
thing such that .
•
.
 Ach, my miserable fate!" At this point Mr. Gol· 
yadkin began trembling like a leaf at the thought that perhaps his 
vicious twin had thrown the greatcoat at him with the object of 
stealing the letter of which he had somehow got an inkling from Mr. 
Golyadkin's enemies. 
"What's more, he's stealing it," thought our hero, "as evidence •
•
.
 
but why evidence! . .  
," 
After the first shock of horror, the blood rushed to Mr. Golyadkin's 
head. Moaning and gnashing his teeth, he clutched his burning head, 
sank back on his block of wood and relapsed into brooding . . . .  But 
he could form no coherent thoughts. Figures kept flitting through his 
brain, incidents came back to his memory, now vaguely, now distinctly, 
the tunes of some foolish songs kept ringing in his ears . . . .  He was 
in great distress, unnatural distress! 
"My God, my God!" our hero thought, recovering himself a little, 
and suppressing a muffled sob, "give me fortitude in the immensity of 
my afflictions! That I am done for, utterly destroyed-of that there 
can be no doubt, and that's all in the natural order of things, since it 
cannot be otherwise. To begin with, I've lost my berth, I've certainly 
lost it, I must have lost it 
.
.
•
.
 Well, supposing things are set right 
somehow. Supposing I have money enough to begin with: I must 
have another lodging, furniture of some sort . . . .  In the first place, I 
shan't have Petrushka. I can get on without the rascal . . .  somehow, 
with help from the people of the house; well, that will be all right! 
I can go in and out when I like, and Petrushka won't grumble 
at my coming in late-yes, that is so; that's why it's a good thing to 
have the people in the house . . . .  Well, supposing that's all right; but 
all that's nothing to do with it, all that's nothing to do with it." 
At this point the thought of the real position again dawned upon Mr. 
Golyadkin's memory. He looked round. 
"Oh, Lord, have mercy on me, have mercy on me! What am I talk­
ing about?" he thought, growing utterly desperate and clutching his 
burning head in his hands 
.
.
.
•
 
"Won't you soon be going, sir?" a voice pronounced above Mr. 
Golyadkin. Our hero started; before him stood his cabman, who was 
also drenched through and shivering; growing impatient, and having 
nothing to do, he had thought fit to take a look at Mr. Golyadkin 
behind the woodstack. 
"I am all right, my friend . . . .  I am coming soon, soon, very soon; 
you wait . . . .  " 
The cabman walked away, grumbling to himself. "What is he 

The 1Jouble 
605 
grumbling about?" Mr. Golyadkin wondered through his tears. "Why, 
I have hired him for the evening, why, I'm . . .  within my rights now 
. . .  that's so! I've hired him for the evening, and that's the end of it. 
If one stands still, it's just the same. That's for me to decide. I am free 
to drive on or not to drive on. And my staying here by the woodstack 
has nothing to do with the case . . .  and don't dare to say anything; 
think, the gentleman wants to stand behind the woodstack, and so 
he's standing behind it . . .  and he is not disgracing any one's honour! 
That's the fact of the matter. 
"I tell you what it is, madame, if you care to know. Nowadays, 
madame, nobody lives in a hut, or anything of that sort. No, indeed. 
And in our industrial age there's no getting on without morality, a 
fact of which you are a fatal example, madame . . . .  You say we must 
get a job as a register clerk and live in a hut on the sea-shore. In the 
first place, madame, there are no register clerks on the sea-shore, and 
in the second place we can't get a job as a register clerk. For supposing, 
for example, I send in a petition, present myself-saying a register 
clerk's place or something of the sort . . .  and defend me from my 
enemy . . .  they'll tell you, madame, they'll say, to be sure . . .  we've 
lots of register clerks, and here you are not at Madame Falbalas', 
where you learnt the rules of good behaviour of which you are such a 
fatal example. Good behaviour, madame, means staying at home, hon­
ouring your father and not thinking about suitors prematurely. Suitors 
will come in good time, madame, that's so! Of course, you are bound to 
have some accomplishments, such as playing the piano sometimes, 
speaking French, history, geography, scripture and arithmetic, that's 
the truth of it! And that's all you need. Cooking, too, cooking cer­
tainly forms part of the education of a well-behaved girl! But as it 
is, in the first place, my fine lady, they won't let you go, they'll raise 
a hue and cry after you, and then they'll lock you up in a nunnery. 
How will it be then, madame? What will you have me do then? Would 
you have me, madame, follow the example of some stupid novels, and 
melt into tears on a neighbouring hillock, gazing at the cold walls of 
your prison house, and finally die, following the example of some 
wretched German poets and novelists. Is that it, madame? But, to begin 
with, allow me to tell you, as a friend, that things are not done like 
that, and in the second place I would have given you and your parents, 
too, a good thrashing for letting you read French books; for French 
books teach you no good. There's a poison in them .
•
.
 a pernicious 
poison, madame! Or do you imagine, allow me to ask you, or do you 
imagine that we shall elope with impunity, or something of that son 

606 
The Short 'Novels of VostoevskJ 
•
.
•
 that we shall have a hut on the shore of the sea and so on; and 
that we shall begin billing and cooing and talking about our feelings, 
and that so we shall spend our lives in happiness and content; and 
then there would be little ones-so then we shall . . .  shall go to our 
father, the civil councillor, Olsufy Ivanovitch, and say, 'we've got a 
little one, and so, on this propitious occasion remove your curse, and 
bless the couple.' No, madame, I tell you again, that's not the way to do 
things, and for the first thing there'll be no billing and cooing, and 
please don't reckon on it. Nowadays, madame, the husband is the 
master and a good, well-brought-up wife should try and please him 
in every way. And endearments, madame, are not in favour, nowadays, 
in our industrial age; the day of Jean Jacques Rousseau is over. The 
husband comes home, for instance, hungry from the office, and asks, 
'Isn't there something to eat, my love, a drop of vodka to drink, a bit 
of salt fish to eat?' So then, madame, you must have the vodka and the 
herring ready. Your husband will eat it with relish, and he won't so 
much as look at you, he'll only say 'Run into the kitchen, kitten,' he'll 
say, 'and look after the dinner,' and at most, once a week he'll kiss 
you, even then rather indifferently . . . .  That's how it will be with us, 
my young lady! Yes, even then, indifferently . . . .  That's how it will 
be, if one considers it, if it has come to one's looking at the thing in 
that way . . . .  And how do I come in? Why have you mixed me up in 
your caprices? 'The noble man who is suffering for your sake and will 
be dear to your heart for ever,' and so on. But in the first place, madame, 
I am not suited to you, you know yourself, I'm not a great hand at 
compliments, I'm not fond of uttering perfumed trifles for the ladies. 
I'm not fond of lady-killers, and I must own I've never been a beauty 
to look at. You won't find any swagger or false shame in me, and I 
tell you so now in all sincerity. This is the fact of the matter: we can 
boast of nothing but a straightforward, open character and common 
sense; we have nothing to do with intrigues. I am not one to intrigue, 
I say so and I'm proud of it-that's the fact of the matter! . . .  I wear 
no mask among straightforward people, and to tell you the whole 
truth . .  .'' 
Suddenly Mr. Golyadkin started. The red and perfectly sopping 
beard of the cabman appeared round the woodstack again . . . .  
"I am coming directly, my friend. I'm coming at once, you know," 
Mr. Golyadkin responded in a trembling and failing voice. 
The cabman scratched his head, then stroked his beard, and moved 
a step forward . . .  stood still and looked suspiciously at Mr. Golyadkin. 
"I am coming directly, my friend ; you see, my friend •
•
.
 I . .
. just 

The 'Double 
607 
a little, you see, only a second! . . . more 
• 
• 
• here, you see, my 
friend . . . .  
" 
"Aren't you coming at all?" the cabman asked at last, definitely 
coming up to Mr. Golyadkin. 
"No, my friend, I'm coming directly. I am waiting, you see, my 
friend . . . .  " 
"So I see . . . .  
" 
"You see, my friend, I 
•
•
•
 What part of the country do you come 
from, my friend?" 
"We are under a master , 
• .  
" 
"And have you a good master? • • •  
" 
"All right . . .  ," 
"Yes, my friend; you stay here, my friend, you see . . . .  Have you 
been in Petersburg long, my friend?" 
"It's a year since I came . . . .  
" 
"And are you getting on all right, my friend?" 
"Middling." 
"To be sure, my friend, to be sure. You must thank Providence, 
my friend. You must look out for straightforward people. Straight­
forward people are none too common nowadays, my friend; he would 
give you washing, food, and drink, my good fellow, a good man 
would. But sometimes you see tears shed for the sake of gold, my 
friend . . .  you see a lamentable example; that's the fact of the matter, 
my friend . . . .  
" 
The cabman seemed to feel sorry for Mr. Golyadkin. "Well, your 
honour, I'll wait. Will your honour be waiting long?" 
"No, my friend, no; I . . .  you know . . .  I won't wait any longer, 
my good man . . . .  What do you think, my friend? I rely upon you. 
I won't stay any longer." 
"Aren't you going at all?" 
"No, my friend, no; I'll reward you, my friend .
•
.
 that's the fact of 
the matter. How much ought I to give you, my dear fellow'?" 
"\Vhat you hired me for, please, sir. I've been waiting here a long 
time; don't be hard on a man, sir." 
"Well, here, my good man, here." 
At this point Mr. Golyadkin gave six whole roubles to the cabman, 
and make up his mind in earnest to waste no more time, that is, to 
clear off straight away, especially as the cabman was dismissed and 
everything was over, and so it was useless to wait longer. He rushed 
out of the yard, went out of the gate, turned to the left and without 
looking round took to his heels, breathless and rejoicing. "Perhaps it 

608 
T h% Short 'N.otds of Vostoetsky 
will all be for the best," he thought, "and perhaps in this way I've run 
away from trouble." Mr. Golyadkin suddenly became all at once light­
hearted." Oh, if only it could turn out for the best!" thought our hero, 
though he put little faith in his own words. "I know what I'll do . . .  " 
he thought. "No, I know, I'd better try the other tack . . . .  Or wouldn't 
it be better to do this? . . .  " In this way, hesitating and seeking for 
the solution of his doubts, our hero ran to the Semyonovsky Bridge; 
but while running to the Semyonovsky Bridge he very rationally and 
conclusively decided to return. 
"It will be better so," he thought. "I had better try the other tack, 
that is . . .  I will just go-I'll look on simply as an outsider, and that 
will be the end of it; I am simply an onlooker, an outsider-and noth­
ing more, whatever happens-it's not my fault, that's the fact of the 
matter! That's how it shall be now." 
Deciding to return, our hero actually did return, the more readily 
because with this happy thought he conceived of himself now as quite 
an outsider. 
"It's the best thing; one's not responsible for anything, and one will 
see all that's necessary . . .  that's the fact of the matter!" 
It was a safe plan and that settled it. Reassured, he crept back under 
the peaceful shelter of his soothing and protecting woodstack, and 
began gazing intently at the window. This time he was not destined 
to gaze and wait for long. Suddenly a strange commotion became 
apparent at all the windows. Figures appeared, curtains were drawn 
back, whole groups of people were crowding to the windows at Olsufy 
lvanovitch's flat. All were peeping out looking for something in the 
yard. From the security of his woodstack, our hero, too, began with 
curiosity watching the general commotion, and with interest craned 
forward to right and to left so far as he could within the shadow of 
the woodstack. Suddenly he started, held his breath and almost sat 
down with horror. It seemed to him-in short, he realized, that they 
were looking for nothing and for nobody but him, Mr. Golyadkinl 
Every one was looking in his direction. It was impossible to escape; 
they saw him . . . .  In a flutter, Mr. Golyadkin huddled as closely as 
he could to the woodstack, and only then noticed that the treacherous 
shadow had betrayed him, that it did not cover him completely. Our 
hero would have been delighted at that moment to creep into a mouse­
hole in the woodstack, and there meekly to remain, if only it had been 
possible. But it was absolutely impossible. In his agony he began at 
last staring openly and boldly at the windows, it was che best thing to 
d0 . . . .  And suddenly he glowed with shame. He had been fully dis-

The 'Double 
609 
covered, every one was staring at him at once, they were all waving 
their hands, all were nodding their heads at him, all were calling to 
him; then several windows creaked as they opened, several voices 
shouted something to him at once . . . .  
"I wonder why they don't whip these naughty girls as children," 
our hero muttered to himself, losing his head completely. Suddenly 
there ran down the steps he (we know who), without his hat or great­
coat, breathless, rubbing his hands, wriggling, capering, perfidiously 
displaying intense joy at seeing Mr. Golyadkin. 
"Yakov Petrovitch," whispered this individual, so notorious for his 
worthlessness, "Yakov Petrovitch, are you here? You '11 catch cold. 
It's chilly here, Yakov Petrovitch. Come indoors." 
"Yakov Petrovitch! No, I'm all right, Yakov Petrovitch," our hero 
muttered in a submissive voice. 
"No, this won't do, Yakov Petrovitch, I beg you, I humbly beg you 
to wait with us. 'Make him welcome and bring him in,' they say, 
'Y akov Petrovitch.' " 
"No, Yakov Petrovitch, you see, I'd better . . .  I had better go home, 
Yakov Petrovitch . . .'' said our hero, burning at a slow fire and 
freezing at the same time with shame and terror. 
"No-no-no-no!" whispered the loathsome person. "No-no-no, 
on no account! Come along," he said resolutely, and he dragged Mr. 
Golyadkin senior to the steps. Mr. Golyadkin senior did not at all 
want to go, but as every one was looking at them, it would have been 
stupid to struggle and resist; so our hero went-though, indeed, one 
cannot say that he went, because he did not know in the least what 
was being done with him. Though, after all, it made no difference! 
Before our hero had time to recover himself and come to his senses, 
he found himself in the drawing-room. He was pale, dishevelled, 
harassed; with lustreless eyes he scanned the crowd-horror! The 
drawing-room, all the rooms, were full to overflowing. There were 
masses of people, a whole galaxy of ladies; and all were crowding 
round Mr. Golyadkin, all were pressing towards Mr. Golyadkin, all 
were squeezing Mr. Golyadkin and he perceived clearly that they were 
all forcing him in one direction. 
"Not towards the door," was the thought that floated through Mr. 
Golyadkin's mind. 
They were, in fact, forcing him not towards the door but Olsufy 
Ivanovitch's easy-chair. On one side of the arm-chair stood Klara 
Olsufyevna, pale, languid, melancholy, but gorgeously dressed. Mr. 
Golyadkin was particularly struck by a little white flower which 

610 
Th( Short N.ovds of Vosto(vskJ 
rested on her superb hair. On the other side of the arm-chair stood 
Vladimir Semyonovitch, clad in black, with his new order in his 
buttonhole. Mr. Golyadkin was led in, as we have described above, 
straight up to Olsufy Ivanovitch-on one side of him Mr. Golyadkin 
junior, who had assumed an air of great decorum and propriety, to 
the immense relief of our hero, while on the other side was Andrey 
Filippovitch, with a very solemn expression on his face. 
"What can it mean?" Mr. Golyadkin wondered. 
When he saw that he was being led to Olsufy Ivanovitch, an idea 
struck him like a flash of lightning. The thought of the intercepted 
letter darted through his brain. In great agony our hero stood before 
Olsufy Ivanovitch's chair. 
"What will he say now?" he wondered to himself. "Of course, it 
will be all aboveboard now, that is, straightforward and, one may say, 
honourable; I shall say this is how it is, and so on." 
But what our hero apparently feared did not happen. Olsufy Ivanov­
itch received Mr. Golyadkin very warmly, and though he did not hold 
out his hand to him, yet as he gazed at our hero, he shook his grey 
and venerable head-shook it with an air of solemn melancholy and 
yet of good-will. So, at least, it seemed to Mr. Golyadkin. He even 
fancied that a tear glittered in Olsufy Ivanovitch's lustreless eyes; he 
raised his eyes and saw that there seemed to be tears. too, on the eye­
lashes of Klara Olsufyevna, who was standing by-that there seemed 
to be something of the same sort even in the eyes of Vladimir Sem­
yonovitch-that the unruffied and composed dignity of Andrey Filip­
povitch had the same significance as the general tearful sympathy­
that even the young man who was so much like a civil councillor, 
seizing the opportunity, was sobbing bitterly . . . .  Though perhaps 
this was only all Mr. Golyadkin's fancy, because he was so much 
moved himself, and distinctly felt the hot tears running down his cold 
.:heeks . . . .  
Feeling reconciled with mankind and his destiny, and filled with 
love at the moment, not only for Olsufy Ivanovitch, not only for the 
whole party collected there, but even for his noxious twin (who 
seemed now to be by no means noxious, and not even to be his twin 
at all, but a person very agreeable in himself and in no way connected 
with him), our hero, in a voice broken with sobs, tried to express his 
feelings to Olsufy Ivanovitch, but was too much overcome by all that 
he had gone through, and could not utter a word; he could only, with 
an expressive gesture, point meekly to his heart . . . .  
At last, probably to soare the feelings of the old man, Andrey Filip-

rr he 7Jottble 
611 
povitch led Mr. Golyadkin a little away, though he seemed to leave 
him free to do as he liked. Smiling, muttering something to himself, 
somewhat bewildered, yet almost completely reconciled with fate and 
his fellow-creatures, our hero began to make his way through the 
crowd of guests. Every one made way for him, every one looked at 
him with strange curiosity and with mysterious, unaccountable sym­
pathy. Our hero went into another room; he met with the same atten­
tion everywhere; he was vaguely conscious of the whole crowd closely 
following him, noting every step he took, talking in undertones among 
themselves of something very interesting, shaking their heads, arguing 
and discussing in whispers. Mr. Golyadkin wanted very much to 
know what they were discussing in whispers. Looking round, he saw 
near him Mr. Golyadkin junior. Feeling an overwhelming impulse 
to seize his hand and draw him aside, Mr. Golyadkin begged the 
other Yakov Petrovitch most particularly to co-operate with him in 
all his future undertakings, and not to abandon him at a critical 
moment. Mr. Golyadkin junior nodded his head gravely and warmly 
pressed the hand of Mr. Golyadkin senior. Our hero's heart was quiv­
ering with the intensity of his emotion. He was gasping for breath, 
however; he felt so oppressed-so oppressed; he felt that all those eyes 
fastened upon him were oppressing and dominating him . . . .  Mr. 
Golyadkin caught a glimpse of the councillor who wore a wig. The 
latter was looking at him with a stern, searching eye, not in the least 
softened by the general sympathy . . . .  
Our hero made up his mind to go straight up to him in order to 
smile at him and have an immediate explanation, but this somehow 
did not come off. For one instant Mr. Golyadkin became almost un­
conscious, almost lost all memory, all feeling. 
When he came to himself again he noticed that he was the centre 
of a large ring formed by the rest of the party round him. Suddenly 
Mr. Golyadkin's name was called from the other room; the shout was 
at once taken up by the whole crowd. All was noise and excitement, 
all rushed to the door of the first room, almost carrying our hero 
along with them. In the crush the hard-hearted councillor in the wig 
was side by side with Mr. Golyadkin, and, taking our hero by the 
hand, he made him sit down beside him opposite Olsufy lvanovitch, 
at some distance from the latter, however. Every one in the room sat 
down; the guests were arranged in rows round Mr. Golyadkin and 
Olsufy lvanovitch. Everything was hushed; every one preserved a 
solemn silence; every one was watching Olsufy lvanovitch, evidently 
exᅋcting something out of the ordinary. Mr. Golyadkin noticed that 

612 
The Short N.ovds of 'Dostoevsky 
beside Olsufy lvanovitch's chair and directly facing the councillor sat 
Mr. Golyadkin junior, with Andrey Filippovitch. The silence was 
prolonged; they were evidently expecting something. 
"Just as it is in a family when some one is setting off on a far jour­
ney. We've only to stand up and pray now," thought our hero. 
Suddenly there was a general stir which interrupted Mr. Golyadkin's 
reflections. Something they had long been waiting for happened. 
"He is coming, he is coming!" passed from one to another in the 
crowd. 
"Who is it that is coming?" floated through Mr. Golyadkin's mind, 
and he shuddered at a strange sensation. "High time too!" said the 
councillor, looking intently at Andrey Filippovitch. Andrey Filippov­
itch, for his part, glanced at Olsufy lvanovitch. Olsufy lvanovitch 
gravely and solemnly nodded his head. 
"Let us stand up," said the councillor, and he made Mr. Golyadkin 
get up. All rose to their feet. Then the councillor took Mr. Golyadkin 
senior by the hand, and Andrey Filippovitch took Mr. Golyadkin 
junior, and in this way these two precisely similar persons were con­
ducted through the expectant crowd surrounding them. Our hero 
looked about him in perplexity; but he was at once checked and his 
attention was called to Mr. Golyadkin junior, who w:1s holding out 
his hand to him. 
"They want to reconcile us," thought our hero, and with emotion 
he held out his hand to Mr. Golyadkin junior; and then-then bent 
his head forward towards him. The other Mr. Golyadkin did the 
same . . . .  
At this point it seemed to Mr. Golyadkin senior that his perfidious 
friend was smiling, that he gave a sly, hurried wink to the crowd of 
onlookers, and that there was something sinister in the face of the 
worthless Mr. Golyadkin junior, that he even made a grimace at the 
moment of his ] udas kiss. . . . 
There was a ringing in Mr. Golyadkin's ears, and a darkness before 
his eyes; it seemed to him that an infinite multitude, an unending 
series of precisely similar Golyadkins were noisily bursting in at every 
door of the room ; but it was too late . . .  the resounding, treacherous 
kiss was over, and . . .  
Then quite an unexpected event occurred. 
• 
. . The door opened 
noisily, and in the doorway stood a man, the very sight of whom 
sent a chill to Mr. Golyadkin's heart. He stood rooted to the spot. A 
cry of horror died away in his choking throat. Yet Mr. Golyadkin 

The Vouble 
613 
knew it all beforehand, and had had a presentiment of something of 
the sort for a long time. The new arrival went up to Mr. Golyadkin 
gravely and solemnly. Mr. Golyadkin knew this personage very well. 
He had seen him before, had seen him very often, had seen him that 
day . . . . This personage was a tall, thick-set man in a black dress-coat 
with a good-sized cross on his breast, and was possesed of thick, very 
black whiskers; noᅌhing was lacking but the cigar in the mouth to 
complete the picture. Yet this person's eyes, as we have mentioned 
already, sent a chill to the heart of Mr. Golyadkin. With a grave and 
solemn air this terrible man approached the pitiable hero of our story. 
. . . Our hero held out his hand to him; the stranger took his hand 
and drew him along with him. . . . With a crushed and desperate 
air our hero looked about him. 
"It's . . . it's Krestyan lvanovitch Rutenspitz, doctor of medicine 
and surgery; your old acquaintance, Yakov Petrovitch!" a detestable 
voice whispered in Mr. Golyadkin's ear. He looked round: it was Mr. 
Golyadkin's twin, so revolting in the despicable meanness of his soul. 
A malicious, indecent joy shone in his countenance; he was rubbing 
his hands with rapture, he was turning his head from side to side in 
ecstasy, he was fawning round every one in delight and seemed ready 
to dance with glee. At last he pranced forward, took a candle from 
one of the servants and walked in front, showing the way to Mr. 
Golyadkin and Krestyan lvanovitch. Mr. Golyadkin heard the whole 
party in the drawing-room rush out after him, crowding and squeez­
ing one another, and all beginning to repeat after Mr. Golyadkin 
himself, "It is all right, don't be afraid, Yakov Petrovitch; this is your 
old friend and acquaintance, you know, Krestyan lvanovitch Ruten­
spitz . . . .  
" 
At last they came out on the brightly lighted stairs; there was a 
crowd of people on the stairs too. The front door was thrown open 
noisily, and Mr. Golyadkin found himself on the steps, together with 
Krestyan lvanovitch. At the entrance stood a carriage with four horses 
that were snorting with impatience. The malignant Mr. Golyadkin 
junior in three bounds flew down the stairs and opened the carriage 
door himself. Krestyan lvanovitch, with an impressive gesture, asked 
Mr. Golyadkin to get in. There was no need of the impressive gesture, 
however; there were plenty of people to help him in . . . .  Faint with 
horror, Mr. Golyadkin looked back. The whole of the brightly lighted 
staircase was crowded with people; inquisitive eyes were looking at 
him from all sides; Olsufy lvanovitch himself was sitting in his easyᅍ 

614 
T h% Short 'N.ov|/s of Vosto%vsky 
chair on the top landing, and watching all that took place with deep 
interest. Every one was waiting. A murmur of impatience passed 
through the crowd when Mr. Golyadkin looked back. 
"I hope I have done nothing . . .  nothing reprehensible . . .  or that 
can call for severity . . .  and general attention in regard to my official 
relations," our hero brought out in desperation. A clamour of talk rose 
all round him, all were shaking their heads, tears started from Mr. 
Golyadkin's eyes. 
"In that case I'm ready . . . .  I have full confidence •
.
.
 and I entrust 
my fate to Krestyan lvanovitch . . . .  
" 
No sooner had Mr. Golyadkin declared that he entrusted his fate to 
Krestyan Ivanovitch than a dreadful, deafening shout of joy came from 
all surrounding him and was repeated in a sinister echo through the 
whole of the waiting crowd. Then Krestyan lvanovitch on one side 
and Andrey Filippovitch on the other helped Mr. Golyadkin into the 
carriage; his double, in his usual nasty way, was helping to get him 
in from behind. The unhappy Mr. Golyadkin senior took his last 
look on all and everything, and, shivering like a kitten that has been 
drenched with cold water-if the comparison may be permitted-got 
into the carriage. Krestyan lvanovitch followed him in immediately. 
The carriage door slammed. There was a swish of the whip on the 
horses' backs . . .  the horses started off . . . .  The crowd dashed after 
Mr. Golyadkin. The shrill, furious shouts of his enemies pursued him 
by way of good wishes for his journey. For some time several persons 
were still running by the carriage that bore away Mr. Golyadkin; but 
by degrees they were left behind, till at last they had all disappeared. 
Mr. Golyadkin's unworthy twin kept up longer than any one. With 
his hands in the trouser pockets of his green uniform he ran on with 
a satisfied air, skipping first to one and then to the other side of the 
carriage, sometimes catching hold of the window-frame and hanging 
on by it, poking his head in at the window, and throwing farewell 
kisses to Mr. Golyadkin. But he began to get tired, he was less and 
less often to be seen, and at last vanished altogether. There was a dull 
ache in Mr. Golyadkin's heart; a hot rush of blood set Mr. Golyadkin's 
head throbbing; he felt stifled, he longed to unbutton himself-to bare 
his breast, to cover it with snow and pour cold water on it. He sank 
at last into forgetfulness . . . .  
When he came to himself, he saw that the horses were taking him 
along an unfamiliar road. There were dark patches of copse on each 
side of it; it was desolate and deserted. Suddenly he almost swooned; 
two fiery eyes were staring at him in the darkness, and those two eyes 

The 7Joubl% 
615 
were glittering with malignant, hellish glee. "That's not Krestyan 
lvanovitch! Who is it? Or is it he? It is. It is Krestyan lvanovitch, but 
not the old Krestyan lvanovitch, it's another Krestyan lvanovitchl 
It's a terrible Krestyan lvanovitch!" .
•
.
 
"Krestyan lvanovitch, I . . .  I believe 
.
•
•
 I'm all right, Krestyan 
lvanovitch," our hero was beginning timidly in a trembling voice, 
hoping by his meekness and submission to soften the terrible Krestyan 
Ivanovitch a little. 
"You get free quarters, wood, with light, and service, the which you 
deserve not," Krestyan lvanovitch's answer rang out, stern and terrible 
as a judge's sentence. 
Our hero shrieked and clutched his head in his hands. Alas! For 
a long while he had been haunted by a presentiment of this. 


The Friend 
of the F amity 


Part 1 
CIHE FRIEND 
OF CIHE FAMILY 
[ I ) 
INTRODUCTION 
WHEN my uncle, Colonel Yegor Ilyitch Rostanev, left the army, 
he settled down in Stepantchikovo, which came to him by inheritance, 
and went on steadily living in it, as though he had been all his life a 
regular country gentleman who had never left his estates. There are 
natures that are perfectly satisfied with every one and can get used to 
everything; such was precisely the disposition of the retired colonel. 
It is hard to imagine a man more peaceable and ready to agree to 
anything. If by some caprice he had been gravely asked to carry some 
one for a couple of miles on his shoulders he would perhaps have done 
so. He was so good-natured that he was sometimes ready to give away 
everything at the first asking, and to share almost his last shirt with 
any one who coveted it. He was of heroic proportions; tall and well 
made, with ruddy cheeks, with teeth white as ivory, with a long brown 
moustache, with a loud ringing voice, and with a frank hearty laugh; 
he spoke rapidly and jerkily. He was at the time of my story about 
forty, and had spent his life almost from his sixteenth year in the 
Hussars. He had married very young and was passionately fond of his 
wife; but she died, leaving in his heart a noble memory that nothing 
could efface. 
When he inherited Stepantchikovo, which increased his fortune to 
six hundred serfs, he left the army, and, as I have said already, settled 
in the country together with his children, Ilyusha a boy of eight, whose 
birth had cost his mother her life, and Sashenka a girl of fifteen, who 
619 

620 
had been brought up at a boarding-school in Moscow. But my uncle's 
house soon became a regular Noah's Ark. This was how it happened. 
Just at the time when he came into the property and retired from 
the army, his mother, who had, sixteen years before, married a certain 
General Krahotkin, was left a widow. At the time of her second mar­
riage my uncle was only a cornet, and yet he, too, was thinking of 
getting married. His mother had for a long time refused her blessing, 
had shed bitter tears, had reproached him with egoism, with ingrati­
tude, with disrespect. She had proved to him that his estates amount­
ing to only two hundred and fifty serfs, were, as it was, barely suffi­
cient for the maintenance of his family (that is, for the maintenance of 
his mamma, with all her retinue of toadies, pug-dogs, Pomeranians, 
Chinese cats and so on). And, in the midst of these reproaches, protests 
and shrill upbraidings, she all at once quite unexpectedly got married 
herself before her son, though she was forty-two years of age. Even in 
this, however, she found an excuse for blaming my poor uncle, declar­
ing that she was getting married solely to secure in her old age the 
refuge denied her by the undutiful egoist, her son, who was con­
templating the unpardonable insolence of making a home of his own. 
I never could find out what really induced a man apparently so 
reasonable as the deceased General Krahotkin to marry a widow of 
forty-two. It must be supposed that he suspected she had money. Other 
people thought that he only wanted a nurse, as he had already had a 
foretaste of the swarm of diseases which assailed him in his old age. 
One thing is certain, the general never had the faintest respect for 
his wife at any time during his married life, and he ridiculed her 
sarcastically at every favourable opportunity. He was a strange person. 
Half educated and extremely shrewd, he had a lively contempt for all 
and every one; he had no principles of any sort; laughed at everything 
and everybody, and in his old age, through the infirmities that were 
the consequence of his irregular and immoral life, he became spiteful, 
irritable and merciless. He had been a successful officer; yet he had 
been forced, through "an unpleasant incident," to resign his commis­
sion, !osing his pension and only just escaping prosecution. This had 
completely soured his temper. Left almost without means, with no 
fortune but a hundred ruined serfs, he folded his hands and never 
during the remaining twelve years of his life troubled himself to in­
quire what he was living on and who was supporting him. At the 
same time he insisted on having all the comforts of life, kept his car­
riage and refused to curtail his expenses. Soon after his marriage he 
lost the use of his legs and spent the last ten years of his life in an 

'I he Jriend of the Jamily 
621 
invalid-chair wheeled about by two seven-foot flunkeys, who never 
heard anything from him but abuse of the most varied kind. The 
carriage, the flunkeys and the invalid-chair were paid for by the un­
dutiful son, who sent his mother his last farthing, mortgaged and 
re-mortgaged his estate, denied himself necessaries, and incurred debts 
almost impossible for him to pay in his circumstances at the time; and 
yet the charge of being an egoist and an undutiful son was persistently 
laid at his door. But my uncle's character was such that at last he quite 
believed himself that he was an egoist, and therefore to punish himself 
and to avoid being an egoist, he kept sending them more and mort: 
money. His mother stood in awe of her husband; but what pleased her 
most was that he was a general, and that through him she was 
"Madame la Generale." 
She had her own apartments in the house, where, during the whole 
period of her husband's semi-existence, she queened it in a society 
made up of toadies, lapdogs, and the gossips of the town. She was an 
important person in her little town. Gossip, invitations to stand god· 
mother at christenings and to give the bride away at weddings, a 
halfpenny rubber, and the respect shown her in all sorts of ways as the 
wife of a general, fully made up to her for the drawbacks of her home 
life. All the magpies of the town came to her with their reports, the 
first place everywhere was always hers-in fact, she got out of her 
position all she could get out of it. The general did not meddle in all 
that; but before people he laughed mercilessly at his wife, asked him· 
self, for instance, such questions as why he had married "such a 
dowdy," and nobody dared contradict him. Little by little all his 
acquaintances left him, and at the same time society was essential to 
him; he loved chatting, arguing; he liked to have a listener always 
sitting beside him. He was a free-thinker and atheist of the old school, 
and so liked to hold forth on lofty subjects. 
But the listeners of the town of N-- had no partiality for lofty 
subjects, and they became fewer and fewer. They tried to get up a 
game of whist in the household; but as a rule the game ended in out. 
breaks on the part of the general, which so terrified his wife and her 
companions that they put up candles before the ikons, had a service 
sung, divined the future with beans and with cards, distributed rolls 
among the prisoners, and looked forward in a tremor to the after· 
dinner hour when they would have to take a hand at whist again and 
at every mistake to endure shouts, screams, oaths and almost blows. 
The general did not stand on ceremony with anybody when something 
was not to his taste; he screamed like a peasant woman, swore like a 

622 
The Short Novels of 'DostoevskY 
coachman, sometimes tore up the cards, threw them about the floor, 
drove away his partners, and even shed tears of anger and vexation­
·md for no more than a knave's having been played instead of a nine. 
At last, as his eyesight was failing, they had to get him a reader; it was 
!hen that Foma Fomitch Opiskin appeared upon the scene. 
I must confess I announce this new personage with a certain solem­
nity. There is no denying that he is one of the principal characters in 
my story. How far he has a claim on the attention of the reader I will 
not explain; the reader can answer that question more suitably and 
more readily himself. 
Foma Fomitch entered General Krahotkin's household as a paid 
companion-neither more nor less. Where he turned up from is 
shrouded in the mists of obscurity. I have, however, made special 
researches and have found out something of the past circumstances of 
this remarkable man. He was said in the first place to have been 
sometime and somewhere in the government service, and somewhere 
or other to have suffered, I need hardly say, "for a good cause." It was 
said, too, that at some time he had been engaged in literary pursuits 
in Moscow. There is nothing surprising in that; Foma Fomitch's 
crass ignorance would, of course, be no hindrance to him in a literary 
career. But all that is known for certain is that he did not succeed in 
anything, and that at last he was forced to enter the general's service 
in the capacity of reader and martyr. There was no ignominy which 
he had not to endure in return for eating the general's bread. It is true 
that in later years, when on the general's death he found himself a 
person of importance and consequence, he more than once assured us 
all that his consenting to be treated as a buffoon was an act of mag­
nanimous self-sacrifice on the altar of friendship; that the general had 
been his benefactor; that the deceased had been a great man mis­
understood, who only to him, Foma, had confided the inmost secrets of 
his soul; that in fact, if he, Foma, had actually at the general's urgent 
desire played the part of v:uious wild beasts and posed in grotesque 
attitudes, this had been solely in order to entertain and distract a 
sulfering friend shattered by disease. But Foma Fomitch's assurances 
and explanations on this score can only be accepted with considerable 
hesitation ; and yet this same Foma Fomitch, even at the time when he 
was a buffoon, was playing a very different part in the ladies' :tpart­
ments of the general's house. How he managed this, it is difficult for 
any one not a specialist in such matters to conceive. The general's lady 
cherished a sort of mysterious reverence for him-why? There is no 
telling. By degrees he acquired over the whole feminine half of the 

r he Jrierzd of the Jami/y 
623 
general's household a marvellous influence, to some extent comparable 
to the influence exercised by the Ivan Yakovlevitches and such-like 
seers and prophets, who are visited in madhouses by certain ladies, 
who devote themselves to the study of their ravings. He read aloud to 
them works of spiritual edification; held forth with eloquent tears on 
the Christian virtues; told stories of his life and his heroic doings; went 
to mass, and even to matins; at times foretold the future; had a pecul­
iar faculty for interpreting dreams, and was a great hand at throwing 
blame on his neighbours. The general had a notion of what was going 
on in the back rooms, and tyrannized over his dependent more merci­
lessly than ever. But Foma's martyrdom only increased his prestige in 
the eyes or Madame Ia Generale and the other females of the household. 
At last everything was transformed. The general died. His death 
was rather original. The former free-thinker and atheist became terror­
stricken beyond all belief. He shed tears, repented, had ikons put up, 
sent for priests. Services were sung, and extreme unction was admin­
istered. The poor fellow screamed that he did not want to die, and even 
asked Foma Fomitch's forgiveness with tears. This latter circumstance 
was an asset of some value to Foma Fomitch later on. Just before the 
parting of the general's soul from the general's body, however, the 
following incident took place. The daughter of Madame Ia Generale by 
her first marriage, my maiden aunt, Praskovya Ilyinitchna, who always 
lived in the general's house, and was one of his favourite victims, quite 
indispensable to him during the ten years that he was bedridden, 
always at his beck and call, and with her meek and simple-hearted 
mildness the one person who could satisfy him, went up to his bedside 
shedding bitter tears, and would have smoothed the pillow under the 
head of the sufferer; but the sufferer still had strength to clutch at 
her hair and pull it violently three times, almost foaming at the mouth 
with spite. Ten minutes later he died. They had sent word to the 
colonel, though Madame Ia Generale had declared that she did not 
want to see him and would sooner die than set eyes on him at such a 
moment. There was a magnificent funeral at the expense, of course, of 
the undutiful son on whom the widowed mother did not wish to set 
her eyes. 
In the ruined property of Knyazevka, which belonged to several 
different owners and in which the general had his hundred serfs, there 
stands a mausoleum of white marble, diversified with laudatory in­
scriptions to the glory of the intellect, talents, nobility of soul, orders 
of merit and rank of the deceased. Foma Fomitch took a prominent 
part in the composition of these eulogies. Madame Ia Generale per-

624 
'l he Short Novels of VostoevskJ 
sisted for a long time in keeping up her dignity and refusing to forgive 
her disobedient son. Sobbing and making a great outcry, surrounded 
by her crowd of toadies and pug-dogs, she kept declaring that she 
would sooner live on dry bread and I need hardly say "soak it in her 
tears," that she would sooner go stick in hand to beg alms under the 
windows than yield to the request of her "disobedient" son that she 
should come and live with him at Stepantchikovo, and that she would 
never, never set foot within his house! As a rule the word foot in this 
connection is uttered with peculiar effect by ladies. Madame Ia Gcn­
erale's utterance of the word was masterly, artistic . . . .  In short, the 
amount of eloquence that was expended was incredible. It must be 
observed that at the very time of these shrill protests, they' were by 
degrees packing up to move to Stepantchikovo. The colonel knocked 
up all his horses driving almost every day thirty miles from Stepan­
tchiko\'O to the town, and it was not till a fortnight after the general's 
funeral that he received permission to appear before the eyes of hiᅎ 
aggrieved parent. Foma Fomitch was employed as go-between. During 
the whole of that fortnight he was reproaching the disobedient son 
and putting him to shame for his "inhuman" conduct, reducing him 
to genuine tears, almost to despair. It is from this time that the incom­
prehensible, inhumanly despotic domination of Foma Fomitch over 
my poor uncle dates. Foma perceived the kind of man he had to deal 
with, and felt at once that his days of playing the buffoon were over, 
and that in the wilds even Foma might pass for a nobleman. And he 
certainly made up for lost time. 
"What will you feel like," said Foma, "if your own mother, the 
authoress, so to speak, of your days, should take a stick and leaning 
on it with trembling hands \\'asted with hunger, should actually begin 
to beg for alms under people's windows? Would it not be monstrous, 
considering her rank as a general's lady and the virtues of her charac­
ter? What would you feel like if she should suddenly come, by mis­
take, of course-but you know it might happen-and should stretch 
out her hand under your windows, while you, her own son, are perhaps 
at that very moment nestling in a feather-bed, and . . .  in fact, in 
luxury? It's awful, awfull But what is most awful of all-allow me to 
speak candidly, Colonel-what is most awful of all is the fact that you 
are standing before me now like an unfeeling post, with your mouth 
open and your eyes blinking, so that it is a positive disgrace, while you 
ought to be ready at the mere thought of such a thing to tear your hair 
out by the roots and to shed streams-what am I saying?-1"ivers, 
Jakes, seas, oceans of tears . . . .  
" 

The Jriend of the Jamily 
625 
In short, Foma in his excessive warmth grew almost incoherent. But 
such was the invariable outcome of his eloquence. It ended of course, 
in Madame Ia Generale together with her female dependents and lap­
dogs, with Foma Fomitch and with Mademoiselle Perepelitsyn, her 
chief favourite, at last honouring Stepantchikovo by her presence. She 
said that she would merely make the experiment of living at her son's 
till she had tested his dutifulness. You can imagine the colonel's posi­
tion while his dutifulness was being tested! At first, as a widow recently 
bereaved, Madame Ia Generale thought it her duty two or three times 
a week to be overcome by despair at the thought of her general, never 
to return; and punctually on each occasion the colonel for some un­
known reason came in for a wigging. Sometimes, especially if visitors 
were present, Madame Ia Generale would send for her grandchildren, 
little Ilyusha and fifteen-year-old Sashenka, and making them sit down 
beside her would fix upon them a prolonged, melancholy, anguished 
gaze, as upon children, ruined in the hands of such a father; she would 
heave deep, painful sighs, and finally melt into mute mysterious tears, 
for at least a full hour. Woe betide the colonel if he failed to grasp 
the significance of those tears! And, poor fellow, he hardly ever suc­
ceeded in grasping their significance, and in the simplicity of his heart 
almost always put in an appearance at such tearful moments, and 
whether he liked it or not came in for a severe heckling. But his filial 
respect in no way decreased and reached at last an extreme limit. In 
short, both Madame Ia Generale and Foma Fomitch were fully con­
scious that the storm which had for so many years menaced them in 
the presence of General Krahotkin had passed away and would never 
return. Madame Ia Generale used at times to fall on her sofa in a 
swoon. A great fuss and commotion arose. The colonel was crushed, 
and trembled like a leaf. 
"Cruel son!" Madame Ia Generale would shriek as she came to. "You 
have lacerated my inmost being . .
. mes entrailles, mes entrailles!" 
"But how have I lacerated your inmost being, Mamma?" the colonel 
would protest timidly. 
"You have lacerated it, lacerated it! He justifies himself, too. He is 
rude. Cruel son! I am dying! . . .  
" 
The colonel was, of course, annihilated. But it somehow happened 
that Madame Ia Generale always revived again. Half an hour later he 
would be taking some one by the button-hole and saying-
"Oh, well, my dear fellow, you see she is a grande dame, the wife of 
a general. She is the kindest-hearted old lady; she is accustomed to all 
this refined . . .  She is on a different level from a blockhead like me! 

626 
7' h% Short N.otJds of Vosto%tJsky 
Now she is angry with me. No doubt I am to blame. My dear fellow, 
I don't know yet what I've done, but no doubt it's my fault . . . .  
" 
It would happen that Mademoiselle Perepelitsyn, an old maid in a 
shawl, with no eyebrows, with little rapacious eyes, with lips thin as a 
thread, with hands washed in cucumber water, and with a spite against 
the whole universe, would feel it her duty to read the colonel a lecture. 
"It's all through your being undutiful, sir; it's all through your being 
an egoist, sir; through your wounding your mamma, sir-she's not 
used to such treatment. She's a general's lady, and you are only a 
colonel, sir." 
"That is Mademoiselle Perepelitsyn, my dear fellow," the colonel 
would observe to his listener; "an excellem lady, she stands up for my 
mother like a rock ! A very rare person! You mustn't imagine that she 
is in a menial position ; she is the daughter of a major herself! Yes, 
indeed." 
But, of course, this was only the pr('lude. The great lady who could 
carry out such a variety of performances in her turn trembled like a 
mouse in the presence of her former dependent. Foma Fomitch had 
completely hcwitched her. She could not make enough of him and she 
saw with his eyes and heard with his ears. A cousin of mine, also a re­
tired hussar, a man still young, though he had been an incredible spend­
thrift, toltl me bluntly and simply that it was his firm conviction, after 
staying for a time at my uncle's, that Madame Ia Generale was on 
terms of improper intimacy with Foma Fomitch. I need hardly say 
that at the time I rejected this supposition with indignation as too 
coarse and simple. No, it was something different, ;md that something 
different I cannot explain withom first explaining to the reader the 
character of Foma Fomitch as I understood it later. 
Imagine the most insignificant, the most cowardly creature, an out­
cast from society, of no service to any one, utterly useless, utterly 
disgusting, but incredibly vain, though entirely destitute of any talent 
by which he might have justified his morbidly sensitive vanity. I hasten 
to add that Foma Fomitch was the incarnation of unbounded vanity, 
but that at the same time it was a special kind of vanity-that is, the 
vanity found in a complete nonentity, and, as is usual in such cases, 
a vanity mortified and oppressed by grievous failures in the past; a 
vanity that has begun rankling long, long ago, and ever since has given 
off em·y and venom, at every encounter, at every success of any one 
clse. I need hardly say that all this was seasoned with the most un­
seemly touchiness, the most insane suspiciousness. It may be asked, 
how is one to account for such vanity? How does it arise, in spite of 

The Jricnd of tlzc Jami/y 
627 
complete insignificance, in pitiful creatures who are forced by their 
social position to know their place? How answer such a question? 
\Vho knows, perhaps, there are exceptions, of whom my hero is one? 
He certainly is an exception to the rule, as will be explained later. But 
allow me to ask : are you certain that those who are completely re­
signed to be your buffoons, your parasites and your toadies, and con­
sider it an honour and a happiness to be so, are you certain that they 
are quite devoid of vanity and envy ? What of the slander and back­
biting and tale-bearing and mysterious whisperings in back corners, 
somewhere aside and at your table? \Vho knows, perhaps, in some of 
these degraded victims of fate, your fools and buffoons, vanity far 
from being dispelled by humiliation is even aggravated by that very 
humiliation, by being a fool and buffoon, by eating the bread of 
dependence and being for ever forced to submission and self-suppres­
sion. Who knows, maybe, this ugly exaggerated vanity is only a false 
fundamentally depraved sense of personal dignity, first outraged, 
perhaps, in childhood by oppression, poverty, filth, spat upon, perhaps, 
in the person of the future outcast's parents before his eyes. But I 
have said that Foma Fomitch was also an exception to the general 
rule; that is true. He had at one time been a literary man slighted 
and unrecognized, and literature is capable of ruining men very dif­
ferent from Foma Fomitch-I mean, of course, when it is not crowned 
with success. I don't know, but it may be assumed that Foma Fomitch 
had been unsuccessful before entering on a literary career; possibly 
in some other calling, too, he had received more kicks than halfpence, 
or possibly something worse. About that, however, I cannot say; but 
I made inquiries later on, and I know for certain that Foma Fomitch 
composed, at some time in Moscow, a romance very much like those 
that were published every year by dozens in the 'thirties, after the 
style of Tile Deliverance of Mo1cow, Tile Cllieftainl of tile Tempe1t, 
SonJ of UJt'e, or tile Ruuians in 1104-novels which in their day 
afforded an agreeable butt for the wit of Baron Brambeus. That was, 
of course, long ago; but the serpent of literary vanity sometimes leaves 
a deep and incurable sting, especially in insignificant and dull-witted 
persons. Foma Fomitch had been disappointed from his first step in 
a literary career, and it was then that he was finally enrolled in the 
vast army of the disappointed, from which all the crazy saints, hermits 
and wandering pilgrims come later on. I think that his monstrous 
boastfulness, his thirst for praise and distinction, for admiration and 
homage, dates from the same period. Even when he was a buffoon he 
got together a group of idiots to do homage to him. Somewhere and 

628 
The Short Novels of 'DostoevskY 
somehow to stand first, to be an oracle, to swagger and give himself 
airs-that was his most urgent craving! As others did not praise him 
he began to praise himself. I have myself in my uncle's house at 
Stepantchikovo heard Foma's sayings after he had become the absolute 
monarch and oracle of the household. "I am not in my proper place 
among you," he would say sometimes with mysterious impressiveness. 
"I am not in my proper place here. I will look round, I will settle you 
all, I will show you, I will direct you, and then good-bye; to Moscow 
to edit a review! Thirty thousand people will assemble every month 
to hear my lectures. My name will be famous at last, and then-woe 
to my enemies." 
But while waiting to become famous the genius insisted upon im­
mediate recognition in substantial form. It is always pleasant to receive 
payment in advance, and in this case it was particularly so. I know 
that he seriously assured my uncle that some great work lay before 
him, Foma, in the future-a work for which he had been summoned 
into the world, and to the accomplishment of this work he was urged 
by some sort of person with wings, who visited him at night, or some­
thing of that kind. This great work was to write a book full of pro­
found wisdom in the soul-saving line, which would set the whole 
world agog and stagger all Russia. And when all Russia was staggered, 
he, Foma, disdaining glory, would retire into a monastery, and in the 
catacombs of Kiev would pray day and night for the happiness of the 
Fatherland. All this imposed upon my uncle. 
\.Yell, now imagine what this Foma, who had been all his life op­
pressed and crushed, perhaps actually beaten too, who was vain and 
secretly lascivious, who had been disappointed in his literary am­
bitions, who had played the buffoon for a crust of bread, who was 
at heart a despot in spite of all his previous abjectness and impotence, 
who was a braggart, and insolent when successful, might become when 
he suddenly found himself in the haven he had reached after so many 
ups and downs, honoured and glorified, humoured and flattered, 
thanks to a patroness who was an idiot and a p:ltron who was im­
posed upon and ready to agree to anything. I must, of course, explain 
my uncle's character more fully, or Foma Fomitch's success cannot 
be understood. But for the moment I will say that Foma was a com­
plete illustration of the saying, "Let him sit down to the table and 
he will put his feet on it." He paid us out for his past! A base soul 
escaping from oppression becomes an oppressor. Foma had been op­
pressed, and he had at once a craving to oppress others; he had been 
the victim of whims and caprices and now he imposed his own whims 

'The Jriend of the Jamily 
629 
and caprices on others. He had been the butt of others, and now he 
surrounded himself with creatures whom he could turn into derision. 
His boasting was ridiculous; the airs he gave himself were incredible; 
nothing was good enough for him; his tyranny was beyond all bounds, 
and it reached such a pitch that simple-hearted people who had not 
witnessed his manoeuvres, but only heard queer stories about him, 
looked upon all this as a miracle, as the work of the devil, crossed 
themselves and spat. 
I was speaking of my uncle. Without explaining his remarkable 
character (I repeat) it is, of course, impossible to understand Foma 
Fomitch's insolent domination in another man's house; it is impossi­
ble to understand the metamorphosis of the cringing dependent into 
the great man. Besides being kind-hearted in the extreme, my uncle 
was a man of the most refined delicacy in spite of a somewhat rough 
exterior, of the greatest generosity and of proved courage. I boldly 
say of "courage"; nothing could have prevented him from fulfilling 
an obligation, from doing his duty-in such cases no obstacle would 
have dismayed him. His soul was as pure as a child's. He was a perfect 
child at forty, open-hearted in the extreme, always good-humoured, 
imagining everybody an angel, blaming himself for other people's 
shortcomings, and exaggerating the good qualities of others, even pre­
supposing them where they could not possibly exist. He was one of 
those very generous and pure-hearted men who are positively ashamed 
to assume any harm of another, are always in haste to endow their 
neighbours with every virtue, rejoice at other people's success, and in 
that way always live in an ideal world, and when anything goes wrong 
always blame themselves first. To sacrifice themselves in the interests 
of others is their natural vocation. Some people would have called 
him cowardly, weak-willed and feeble. Of course he was weak, and 
indeed he was of too soft a disposition; but it was not from lack of 
will, but from the fear of wounding, of behaving cruelly, from ex­
cess of respect for others and for mankind in general. He was, how­
ever, weak-willed and cowardly only when nothing was at stake but 
his own interests, which he completely disregarded, and for this he was 
continually an object of derision, and often with the very people for 
whom he was sacrificing his own advantage. He never believed, how­
ever, that he had enemies; he had them, indeed, but he somehow 
failed to observe them. He dreaded fuss and disturbance in the house 
like fire, and immediately gave way to any one and submitted to 
anything. He gave in through a sort of shy good nature, from a sort 
of shy delicacy. "So be it," he would say, quickly brushing aside all 

630 
The Short N.ove/s of Vostoevsky 
reproaches for his indulgence and weakness; "so be it .
•
.
 that every 
one may be happy and contented!" I need hardly say that he was 
ready to submit to every honourable influence. What is more, an 
adroit rogue might have gained complete control over him, and even 
have lured him on to do wrong, of course misrepresenting the wrong 
action as a right one. My uncle very readily put faith in other people, 
and was often far from right in doing so. When, after many suffer­
ings, he brought himself at last to believe that the man who deceived 
him was dishonest, he always blamed himself first-and sometimes 
blamed himself only. Now, imagine, suddenly queening it in his quiet 
home, a capricious, doting, idiot woman-inseparable from another 
idiot, her idol-a woman who had only feared her general, and was 
now afraid of nothing, and impelled by a craving to make up to her­
self for what she had suffered in the past; and this idiot woman my 
uncle thought it his duty to revere, simply because she was his mother. 
They began with proving to my uncle at once that he was coarse, im­
patient, ignorant and selfish to the utmost degree. The remarkable 
thing is that the idiotic old lady herself believed in what she pro­
fessed. And I believe that Foma Fomitch did also, at least to some 
extent. They persuaded my uncle, too, that Foma had been sent from 
heaven by Divine Providence for the salvation of his soul and the sub­
duing of his unbridled passions; that he was haughty, proud of his 
wealth, and quite capable of reproaching Foma Fomitch for eating 
his bread. My poor uncle was very soon convinced of the depth of 
his degradation, was ready to tear his hair and to beg forgiveness 
.
.
•
.
 
"It's all my own fault, brother," he would say sometimes to one 
of the people he used to talk to. "It's all my fault! One ought to be 
doubly delicate with a man who is under obligations to one . .
.
. I 
mean that I . . .  Under obligations, indeed! I am talking nonsense 
again! He is not under obligations to me at all : on the contrary, 
it is I who am under an obligation to him for living with me! And 
here I have reproached him for eating my bread! . . .  Not that I did 
reproach him, but it seems I made some slip of the tongue-! often 
do make such slips . . . .  And, after all, the man has suffered, he has 
done great things; for ten years in spite of insulting treatment he was 
tending his sick friend! And then his learning . . . .  He's a writer! A 
highly educated man! A very lofty character; in short . . .  
" 
The conception of the highly educated and unfortunate Foma ig­
nominiously treated by the cruel and capricious general rent my uncle's 
heart with compassion and indignation. All Foma's peculiarities, all 
his ignoble doings my uncle at once ascribed to his sufierings, the 

'T h% Jri%nd of th% Jamily 
631 
humiliations he had endured in the past, and the bitterness left by 
them . . . .  He at once decided in his soft and generous heart that one 
could not be so exacting with a man who had suffered as with an 
ordinary person; that one must not only forgive him, but more than 
that, one must, by gentle treatment, heal his wounds, restore him and 
reconcile him with humanity. Setting this object before him he was 
completely fired by it, and lost all power of perceiving that his new 
friend was a lascivious and capricious animal, an egoist, a sluggard, a 
lazy drone-and nothing more. He put implicit faith in Foma's genius 
and learning. I forgot to mention that my uncle had the most naive 
and disinterested reverence for the words "learning" and "literature," 
though he had himself never studied anything. This was one of his 
chief and most guileless peculiarities. 
"He is writing," he would whisper, walking on tiptoe, though he 
was two rooms away from Foma's study. "I don't know precisely what 
he is writing," he added, with a proud and mysterious air, "but no 
doubt he is brewing something, brother 
.
.
. . I mean in the best sense, 
of course; it would be clear to some people, but to you and me, 
brother, it would be just a jumble that 
. . .  I fancy he is writing of 
productive forces of some sort-he said so himself. I suppose that has 
something to do with politics. Yes, his name will be famous! Then 
we shall be famous through him. He told me that himself, brother . . . .  " 
I know for a fact that my uncle was forced by Foma's orders to 
shave off his beautiful fair whiskers. Foma considered that these 
whiskers made my uncle look like a Frenchman, and that wearing 
them showed a lack of patriotism. Little by little Foma began med­
dling in the management of the estate, and giving sage counsels on 
the subject. These sage counsels were terrible. The peasants soon saw 
the position and understood who was their real master, and scratched 
their heads uneasily. Later on I overheard Foma talking to the 
peasants; I must confess I listened. Foma had told us before that he 
was fond of talking to intelligent Russian peasants. So one day he went 
to the threshing floor : after talking to the peasants about the farm­
work, though he could not tell oats from wheat, after sweetly dwelling 
on the sacred obligations of the peasant to his master, after touching 
lightly on electricity and the division of labour, subjects of which I 
need hardly say he knew nothing, after explaining to his listeners 
how the earth went round the sun, and being at last quite touched 
by his own eloquence-he began talking about the ministers. I under­
stood. Pushkin used to tell a story of a father who impressed upon 
his little boy of four that he, his papa, was so brave "that the Czar 

632 
The Short Novels of 'DostoevskY 
loves Papa. 
." So evidently this papa needed this listener of four 
years old! And the peasants always listened to Foma Fomitch with 
cringing respect. 
"And did you get a large salary from royalty, little father?" a grey­
headed old man called Arhip Korotky asked suddenly from the 
crowd of peasants, with the evident intention of being flattering; but 
the question struck Foma Fomitch as familiar, and he could not en­
dure familiarity. 
"And what business ;ԟ that of yours, you lout?" he answered, look­
ing contemptuously at the poor peasant. "Why are you thrusting for­
ward your pug-face? Do you want me to spit in it?" 
Foma Fomitch always talked in that tone to the "intelligent Rus­
sian peasant." 
"You are our father," another peasant interposed; "you know we 
are ignorant people. You may be a major or a colonel or even your 
Excellency, we don't know how we ought to speak to you." 
"You lout!" repeated Foma Fomitch, mollified however. "There are 
salaries and salaries, you blockhead! One will get nothing, though he 
is a general-because he does nothing to deserve it, he is of no service 
to the Czar. But I got twenty thousand when I was serving in the 
Ministry, and I did not take it, I served for the honour of it. I had 
plenty of money of my own. I gave my salary to the cause of public 
enlightenment, and to aid those whose homes had been burnt in 
Kazan." 
"I say! So it was you who rebuilt Kazan, little father?" the amazed 
peasant went on. 
The peasants wondered at Foma Fomitch as a rule. 
"Oh, well, I :ᅏad my share in :::," Foma answered, with a show 
of reluctance, as though vexed with himself for deigning to con­
verse on such a subject with such a person. 
His conversations with my uncle were of a different stamp. 
"\Vhat were you in the past?" Foma would say, for instance, lolling 
after an ample dinner : 1 an easy-<:hair, while a servant stood behind 
him brandishing a fresh lime branch to keep off the flies. "What 
were you like before I came? But now I have dropped into your soul 
a spark of that heavenly fire which is glowing there now. Did I 
drop a spark of heavenly fire into your soul or not? Answer. Did I 
drop a spark or did I not ?" 
Foma Fomitch, indeed, could not himself have said why he asked 
such a question. But my uncle's silence and confusion at once spurred 
him on. He who had been so patient and down-trodden in the past 

The Jriend of the Jamily 
633 
now exploded like gunpowder at the slightest provocation. My uncle's 
silence seemed to him insulting, and he now insisted on an answer. 
"Answer: is the spark glowing in you or not?" 
My uncle hesitated, shrank into himself, and did not know what 
line to take. 
"Allow me to observe that I am waiting," said Foma in an ag­
grieved voice. 
"Mais, repondez done, Yegorushka," put in Madame Ia Generale, 
shrugging her shoulders. 
"I am asking you, is that spark burning within you or not?" Foma 
repeated condescendingly, taking a sweetmeat out of a bonbon box, 
which always stood on a table before him by Madame Ia Generale's 
orders. 
"I really don't know, Foma," my uncle answered at last with de­
spair in his eyes. "Something of the sort, no doubt. . . . You really 
had better not ask or I am sure to say something wrong . . . .  " 
"Oh, very well! So you look upon me as so insignificant as not 
to deserve an answer-that's what you meant to say. But so be it; 
let me be a nonentity." 
"Oh, no, Foma, God bless you! Why, when did I imply that?" 
"Yes, that's just what you did mean to say." 
"I swear I didn't." 
"Oh, very well, then, I lie. So then you charge me with trying to 
pick a quarrel on purpose; it's another insult added to all the past, 
but I will put up with this too . . . .  " 
"Mais, mon fils!" cried Madame Ia Generale in alarm. 
"Foma Fomitch! Mamma!" exclaimed my uncle in despair. "Upon 
my word it's not my fault. Perhaps I may have let slip such a thing 
without knowing it . . . .  You mustn't mind me, Foma; I am stupid, 
you know; I feel I am stupid myself; I feel there is something amiss 
with me . . . .  I know, Foma, I know! You need not say anything," 
he went on, waving his hand. "I have lived forty years, and until now, 
until I knew you, I thought I was all right . . .  like every one else. 
And I didn't notice before that I was as sinful as a goat, an egoist 
of the worst description, and I've done such a lot of mischief that 
it is a wonder the world puts up with me." 
"Yes, you certainly are an egoist," observed Foma, with conviction. 
"Well, I realize myself that I am an egoist now! Yes, that's the end 
of it! I'll correct myself and be better!" 
"God grant you may!" concluded Foma Fomitch, and sighing 

634 
Th% Short N.ovds of Vosto%vsky 
piously he got up from his arm<hair to go to his room for an after­
dinner nap. Foma Fomitch always dozed after dinner. 
To conclude this chapter, may I be allowed to say something about 
my personal relations with my uncle, and to explain how I came to be 
face to face with Foma Fomitch, and with no thought or suspicion 
suddenly found myself in a vortex of the most important incidents 
that had ever happened in the blessed village of Stepantchikovo? With 
this I intend to conclude my introduction and to proceed straight with 
my story. 
In my childhood, when I was left an orphan and alone in the world, 
my uncle took the place of a father to me; educated me at his ex­
pense, and did for me more than many a father does for his own 
child. From the first day he took me into his house I grew warmly 
attached to him. I was ten years old at the time, and I remember that 
we got on capitally, and thoroughly understood each other. \Ve spun 
tops together, and together stole her cap from a very disagreeable 
old lady, who was a relation of both of us. I promptly tied the cap to 
the tail of a paper kite and sent it flying to the clouds. Many years 
afterwards I saw something of my uncle for a short time in Peters­
burg, where I was finishing my studies at his expense. During that 
time I became attached to him with all the warmth of youth : some­
thing generous, mild, truthful, light-hearted and naive to the utmost 
degree struck me in his character and attracted every one. When I 
left the university I spent some time in Petersburg with nothing to 
do for the time, and, as is often the case with callow youths, was con­
vinced that in a very short time I should do much that was very 
interesting and even great. I did not want to leave Petersburg. I wrote 
to my uncle at rather rare intervals and only when I wanted money, 
which he never refused me. Meanwhile, I heard from a house serf of 
my uncle's, who came to Petersburg on some business or other, that 
marvellous things were taking place at Stepantchikovo. These first 
rumours interested and surprised me. I began writing to my uncle 
more regularly. He always answered me somewhat obscurely and 
strangely, and in every letter seemed trying to talk of nothing but 
learned subjects, expressing great expectations of me in the future in a 
literary and scientific line, and pride in my future achievements. At 
last, after a rather long silence, I received a surprising letter from 
him, utterly unlike all his previous letters. It was full of such strange 
hints, such rambling and contradictory statements, that at first I could 
make nothing of it. All th:lt one could see was that the writer was 
in great perturbation. One thing was clear in the letter: my uncle 

The J.rictzd of the Jamily 
635 
gravely, earnestly, almost imploringly urged me as soon as possible 
to marry his former ward, the daughter of a very poor provincial 
government clerk, called Yezhevikin. This girl had received an ex­
cellent education at a school in Moscow at my uncle's expense, and 
was now the governess of his children. He wrote that she was un­
happy, that I might make her happy, that I should, in fact, be doing 
a noble action. He appealed to the generosity of my heart, and prom­
ised to give her a dowry. Of the dowry, however, he spoke somewhat 
mysteriously, timidly, and he concluded the letter by beseeching me to 
keep all this a dead secret. This letter made such an impression on 
me that my head began to go round. And, indeed, what raw young 
man would not have been affected by such a proposition, if only on 
its romantic side? Besides, I had heard that this young governess was 
extremely pretty. Yet I did not know what to decide, though I wrote 
to my uncle that I would set off for Stepantchikovo immediately. 
My uncle had sent me the money for the journey with the letter. 
Nevertheless, I lingered another three weeks in Petersburg, hesitating 
and somewhat uneasy. 
All at once I happened to meet an old comrade of my uncle's, who 
had stayed at Stepantchikovo on his way back from the Caucasus to 
Petersburg. He was an elderly and judicious person, an inveterate 
bachelor. He told me with indignation about Foma Fomitch, and 
thereupon informed me of one circumstance of which I had no idea 
till then: namely, that Foma Fomitch and Madame Ia Generale had 
taken up a notion, and were set upon the idea of marrying my uncle 
to a very strange lady, not in her first youth and scarcely more than 
half-witted, with an extraordinary history, and almost half a million 
of dowry; that Madame Ia Gcnerale had nearly succeeded in convinc­
ing this lady that they were relations, and so alluring her into the 
house; that my uncle, of course, was in despair, but would probably 
end by marrying the half-million of dowry; and that, finally, these 
two wiseacres, Madame Ia Generale and Foma Fomitch, were making 
a terrible onslaught on the poor defenceless governess, and were doing 
their utmost to turn her out of the house, apparently afraid that my 
uncle might fall in love with her, or perhaps knowing that he was 
already in love with her. These last words impressed me. However, 
to all my further questions as to whether my uncle really was or was 
not in love with her, my informant either could not or would not 
give me an exact answer, and indeed he told his whole story briefly, 
as it were reluctantly, and noticeably avoided detailed explanations. 
I thought it over; the news was so strangely contradictory of my 

636 
The Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
uncle's letter and his proposition! . . .  But it was useless to delay. I 
decided to go to Stepantchikovo, hoping not only to comfort my uncle 
and bring him to reason, but even to save him; that is, if possible, 
to turn Foma out, to prevent the hateful marriage with the old maid, 
and finally-as I had come to the conclusion that my uncle's love was 
only a spiteful invention of Foma's-to rejoice the unhappy but of 
course interesting young lady by the offer of my hand, and so on 
and so on. By degrees I so worked myself up that, being young and 
having nothing to do, I passed from hesitation to the opposite ex­
treme; I began burning with the desire to perform all sorts of great 
and wonderful deeds as quickly as possible. I even fancied that I was 
displaying extraordinary generosity by nobly sacrificing myself to 
secure the happiness of a charming and innocent creature; in fact, 
I remember that I was exceedingly well satisfied with myself during 
the whole of my journey. It was July, the sun was shining brightly, 
all around me stretched a vast expanse of fields full of unripe corn . 
. . . I had so long sat bottled up in Petersburg, that I felt as though 
I were only now looking at God's world! 
[ 11 ] 
MR. BAHTCHEYEV 
J WAS approaching my destination. Driving through the little town 
of B--, from which I had only eight miles further to Stepantchikovo, 
I was obliged to stop at the blacksmith's near the town gate, as the 
tyre of the front wheel of my chaise broke. To repair it in some way 
well enough to stand the remaining eight miles was a job that should 
not take very long, and so I made up my mind not to go elsewhere, 
but to remain at the blacksmith's while he set it right. As I got out of 
the chaise I saw a stout gentleman who, like me, had been compelled 
to stop to have his carriage repaired. He had been standing a whole 
hour in the insufferable heat, shouting and swearing, and with fretful 
impatience urging on the blacksmiths who were busy about his fine 
carriage. At first sight this angry gentleman struck me as extremely 
peevish. He was about five-and-forty, of middle height, very stout, 
and pock-marked; his stoutness, his double chin and his puffy, pendant 
cheeks testified to the blissful existence of a landowner. There was 
something feminine about his whole figure which at once caught the 

The Jriend of the Jamily 
637 
eye. He was dressed in loose, comfortable, neat clothes which were, 
however, quite unfashionable. 
I cannot imagine why he was annoyed with me, since he saw me 
for the first time in his life, and had not yet spoken a single word 
to me. I noticed the fact from the extraordinarily furious looks he 
turned upon me as soon as I got out of the carriage. Yet I felt a great 
inclination to make his acquaintance. From the chatter of his servants, 
I gathered that he had just come from Stepantchikovo, from my 
uncle's, and so it was an opportunity for making full inquiries about 
many things. I was just taking off my cap and trying as agreeably 
as possible to observe how unpleasant these delays on the road some­
times were; but the fat gentleman, as it were reluctantly, scanned 
me from head to boots with a displeased and ill-humoured stare, 
muttered something to himself and turned heavily his full back view 
to me. This aspect of his person, however interesting to the observer, 
held out no hopes of agreeable conversation. 
"Grishka! Don't grumble to yourself! I'll thrash you! . . .  " he shouted 
suddenly to his valet, as though he had not heard what I said about 
delays on the journey. 
This Grishka was a grey-headed, old-fashioned servant dressed in a 
long-skirted coat and wearing very long grey whiskers. Judging from 
certain signs, he too was in a very bad humour, and was grumbling 
morosely to himself. An explanation immediately followed between 
the master and the servant. 
"You'll thrash me! Bawl a little louder!" muttered Grishka, as 
though to himself, but so loudly that everybody heard it; and with 
indignation he turned away to adjust something in the carriage. 
"What ? What did you say ? 'Bawl a little louder.' . . .  So you are 
pleased to be impudent!" shouted the fat man, turning purple. 
"What on earth are you nagging at me for? One can't say a word!" 
"Why nag at you? Do you hear that? He grumbles at me and 
I am not to nag at him!" 
"Why, what should I grumble at?" 
"What should you grumble at . . .  you're grumbling, right enough! 
I know what you are grumbling about; my having come away from 
the dinner-that's what it is.'' 
"\Vhat's that to me! You can have no dinner at all for all I care. I 
am not grumbling at you; I simply said a word to the blacksmiths." 
"The blacksmiths . . . .  Why grumble at the blacksmiths?" 
"I did not grumble at them, I grumbled at the carriage." 

638 
T lz% Short N.ovds of Vosto%vskJ 
"And why grumble at the carriage?" 
"What did it break down for ? It mustn't do it again." 
"The carriage . . . .  No, you are grumbling at me, and not at the 
carriage. lt's his own fault and he swears at other people!" 
"Why on earth do you keep on at me, sir? Leave off, please!" 
"Why have you been sitting like an owl all the way, not saying a 
word to me, eh ? You are ready enough to talk at other times!" 
"A fly was buzzing round my mouth, that's why I didn't talk and 
sat like an owl. Why, am I to tell you fairy tales, or what? Take 
Malanya the storyteller with you if you are fond of fairy tales." 
The fat man opened his mouth to reply, but apparently could think 
of nothing and held his peace. The servant, proud of his skill in argu­
ment and his influence over his master displayed before witnesses, 
turned to the workmen with redoubled dignity and began showing 
them something. 
My efforts to make acquaintance were fruitless, and my own awk­
wardness did not help mallers. I was assisted, however, by an unex­
pected incident. A sleepy, unwashed and unkempt countenance 
suddenly peeped out of the window of a closed carriage which had 
stood from time immemorial without wheels in the blacksmith's yard, 
daily though vainly expecting to be repaired. At the appearance of this 
countenance there was a general outburst of laughter from the work­
men. The joke was that the man peeping out of the dismantled car· 
riage was locked in and could not get out. Having fallen asleep in 
it drunk, he was now vainly begging for freedom ; at last he began 
begging some one to run for his tool. All this immensely entertained 
the spectators. 
There are persons who derive peculiar delight :md entertainment 
from strange things. The antics of a drunken peasant, a man stumbling 
and falling down in the street, a wrangle between two women and 
other such incidents arouse at times in some people the most good­
humoured and unaccountable delight. The fat gentleman belonged 
precisely to that class. Little by little his countenance from being sullen 
and menacing began to look pleased and good-humoured, and at last 
brightened up completely. 
"\:Vhy, that's Vassilyev, isn't it?" he asked with interest. "How did 
he get here?" 
"Yes, it is Vassilyev, sir!" was shouted on all sides. 
"He's been on the spree, sir," added one of the workmen, a tall, 
lean, elderly man with a pedantically severe expression of face, who 
seemed disposed to take the lead; "he's been on the spree, sir. It's 

'I he Jriend of the Jamily 
639 
three days since he left his master, and he's lying hidden here; he's 
come and planted himself upon us! Here he is asking for a chisel. 
Why, what do you want a chisel for now, you addlepate? He wants 
to pawn his last tool." 
"Ech, Arhipushka! Money's like a bird, it flies up and flies away 
again! Let me out, for God's sake," Vassilyev entreated in a thin 
cracked voice, poking his head out of the carriage. 
"You stay where you are, you idol; you are lucky to be there!" 
Arhip answered sternly. "You have been drunk since the day before 
yesterday; you were hauled out of the street at daybreak this morning. 
You must thank God we hid you, we told Matvey Ilyitch that you 
were ill, that you had a convenient attack of colic." 
There was a second burst of laughter. 
"But where is the chisel?" 
"Why, our Zuey has got it! How he keeps on about it! A drinking 
man, if ever there was one, Stepan Alexyevitch." 
"He-he-he! Ah, the scoundrel! So that's how you work in the town; 
you pawn your tools!" wheezed the fat man, spluttering with glee, 
quite pleased and suddenly becoming extraordinarily good-humoured. 
"And yet it would be hard to find such a carpenter even in Moscow, 
but this is how he always recommends himself, the ruffian," he added, 
quite unexpectedly turning to me. "Let him out, Arhip, perhaps he 
wants something." 
The gentleman was obeyed. The nail with which they had fastened 
up the carriage door, chiefly in order to amuse themselves at Vas­
silyev's expense when he should wake up, was taken out, and Vas­
silyev made his appearance in the light of day, muddy, dishevelled 
and ragged. He blinked at the sunshine, sneezed and gave a lurch; 
and then putting up his hand to screen his eyes, he looked round. 
"What a lot of people, what a lot of people!" he said, shaking his 
head, "and all, seemingly, so . . .  ober," he drawled, with a sort of 
mournful pensiveness as though reproaching himself: "Well, good­
morning, brothers, good-day." 
Again there was a burst of laughter. 
"Good-morning! Why, see how much of the day is eone, you heed-
less fellow!" 
"Go it, old man!" 
"As we say, have your fling, if it don't last long." 
"He-he-he! he has a ready tongue!" cried the fat man, rolling with 
laughter and again glancing genially at me. "Aren't you ashamed, 
Vassilyev?" 

640 
'The Short N.otels of Vostoet1sky 
"It's sorrow drives me to it! Stepan Alexyevitch, sir, it's sorrow," 
Vassilyev answered gravely, with a wave of his hand, evidently glad 
of another opportunity to mention his sorrow. 
"What sorrow, you booby ?" 
"A trouble such as was never heard of before. We are being made 
over to Foma Fomitch." 
"Whom ? \Vhen ?" cried the fat man, all of a flutter. 
I, too, took a step forward; quite unexpectedly, the question con­
cerned me too. 
"Why, all the people of Kapitonovko. Our master, the colonelᅐod 
give him health-wants to give up all our Kapitonovko, his property, 
to Foma Fomitch. Some seventy souls he is handing over to him. 'It's 
for you, Foma,' says he. 'Here, now, you've nothing of your own, 
one may say; you are not much of a landowner; all you have to keep 
you are two smelts in Lake Ladoga-that's all the serfs your father left 
you. For your parent,' " Vassilyev went on, with a sort of spiteful 
satisfaction, putting touches of venom into his story in all that related 
to Foma Fomitch-" 'for your p;.uent was a gentleman of ancient 
lineage, though from no one knows where, and no one knows who 
he was; he too, like you, lived with the gentry, was allowed to be 
in the kitchen as a charity. But now when I make over Kapitonovko 
to you, you will be a landowner too, and a gentleman of ancient line­
age, and will have serfs of your own. You can lie on the stove and 
be idle as a gentleman . . .  
. ' " 
But Stepan Alexyevitch was no longer listening. The effect pro­
duced on him by Vassilyev's half-drunken story was extraordinary. 
The fat man was so angry that he turned positively purple; his double 
chin was quivering, his little eyes grew bloodshot. I thought he would 
have a stroke on the spot. 
"That's the last straw!" he said, gasping. "That low brute Foma, 
the parasite, a landowner! Tfoo! Go to perdition! Damn it all! Hey, 
you make haste and finish! Home! "  
"Allow me to ask you," I had said, stepping forward uncertainly, 
"you were pleased to mention the name of Foma Fomitch just now; 
I believe his surname, if I am not mistaken, is Opiskin. \Veil, you see, 
I should like . . . in short, I have a special reason for being interested 
in that personage, and I should be very glad to know on my own 
account, how far one may believe the words of this good man that 
his master, Yegor Ilyitch Rostanev, means to make Foma Fomitch a 
present of one of his villages. That interests me extremely, and I . . .  
" 
"Allow me to ask you,'' the fat man broke in, "on what grounds 

T lze Jriend of the Jamily 
641 
are you interested in that personage, as you style him; though to my 
mind 'that damned low brute' is what he ought to be called, and not 
a personage. A fine sort of personage, the scurvy knave! He's a sim-­
ple disgrace, not a personage!" 
I explained that so far I was in complete ignorance in regard to this 
person, but that Yegor Ilyitch Rostanev was my uncle, and that I 
myself was Sergey Alexandrovitch So-and-so. 
"The learned gentleman? My dear fellow! they are expecting you 
impatiently," cried the fat man, genuinely delighted. "Why, I have 
just come from them myself, from Stepantchikovo; I went away from 
dinner, I got up from the pudding, I couldn't sit it out with Fornal 
I quarrelled with them all there on account of that damned Foma . 
. . . Here's a meeting! You must excuse me, my dear fellow. I am 
Stepan Alexyevitch Bahtcheyev, and I remember you that high. 
Well, who would have thought it! . . .  But allow me." 
And the fat man advanced to kiss me. 
After the first minutes of excitement, I at once proceeded to question 
him : the opportunity was an excellent one. 
"But who is this Foma ?" I asked. "How is it h.! has gained the 
upper hand of the whole house? Why don't they kick him out of 
the yard ? I must confess . . .  
" 
"Kick him out ? You must be mad. Why, Yegor Ilyitch tiptoes be­
fore him! Why, once Foma laid it down that Thursday was Wednes­
day, and so every one in the house counted Thursday Wednesday. 'I 
won't have it Thursday, let it be Wednesday!' So there were two 
Wednesdays in one week. Do you suppose I am making it up? I 
am not exaggerating the least little bit. Why, my dear fellow, it's 
simply beyond all belief." 
"I have heard that, but I must confess . . .  " 
"I confess and I confess! The way the man keeps on! What is there 
to confess? No, you had better ask me what sort of jungle I have 
come out of. The mother of Yegor Ilyitch, I mean of the colonel, 
though a very worthy lady and a general's widow too, in my opinion 
is in her dotage; why, that damned Foma is the very apple of her 
eye. She is the cause of it all; it was she brought him into the house. 
He has talked her silly, she hasn't a word to say for herself now, 
though she is called her Excellency-she skipped into marriage with 
General Krahotkin at fifty! As for Yegor Ilyitch's sister, Praskovya 
Ilyinitchna, who is an old maid of forty, I don't care to speak of her. 
It's oh dear, and oh my, and cackling like a hen. I am sick of her­
bless her! The only thing about her is that she is of the female sex; 

642 
'The Short 'N.ove/s of VostoevskJ' 
and so I must respect her for no cause or reason, simply because she 
is of the female sex! Tfoo! It's not the thing for me to speak of her, 
she's your aunt. Alexandra Yegorovna, the colonel's daughter, though 
she is only a little girl-just in her sixteenth year-to my thinking is 
the cleverest of the lot; she doesn't respect Foma; it was fun to see 
her. A sweet young lady, and that's the fact! And why should she 
respect him ? Why, Foma was a buffoon waiting on the late General 
Krahotkin. Why, he used to imitate all sorts of beasts to entertain 
the general! And it seems that in old days Jack was the man ; but now­
adays Jack is the master, and now the colonel, your uncle, treats this 
retired buffoon as though he were his own father. He has set him up 
in a frame, the rascal, and bows down at the feet of the man who 
is sponging upon him. Tfoo!" 
"Poverty is not a vice, however . . .  and I must confess . . .  allow 
me to ask you, is he handsome, clever?" 
"Foma ? A perfect picture!" answered Bahtchcyev, with an extraor­
dinary quiver of spite in his voice. (My questions seemed to irri­
t:lte him, and he began to look at me suspiciously.) "A perfect pic­
ture! Do you hear, good people : he makes him out a beauty! Why, 
he is like a lot of brute beasts in one, if you want to know the whole 
truth, my good man. Though that wouldn't matter if he had wit; 
if only he had wit, the rogue-why, then I would be ready to do vio­
lence to my feelings and agree, maybe, for the sake of wit; but, you 
sec, there's no trace of wit about him whatever! He has cast a spell 
on them all ; he is a regular alchemist! Tfoo! I am tired of talking. 
One ought to curse them and say no more about it. You haYe upset 
me with your talk, my good sir! Hey, you! Are you ready or not ?" 
"RaYen still wants shoeing," Grishka answered gloomily. 
"Raven. I'll let you have a raYen! . . .  Yes, sir, I could tell you a story 
that would simply make you gape with wonder, so that you would 
stay with your mouth open till the Second Coming. Why, I used to 
feel a respect for him myself. Would you believe it? I confess it with 
shame, I frankly confess it, I was a fool. Why, he took me in too. 
He's a know-all. He knows the ins and outs of everything, he's studied 
all the sciences. He ga\'e me some drops; you see, my good sir, I am 
a sick man, a poor creature. You may not believe it, but I am an in­
valid. And those drops of his almost turned me inside out. You just 
keep quiet and listen; go yourself and you will be amazed. Why, he 
will m:ᅑke the colonel shed tears of blood; the colonel will shed 
tears of blood through him, but then it will be too late. You know, 
the whole neighbourhood all around has dropped his acquaintance 

7' he Jriend of the Jamily 
643 
owing to this acc•used Foma. No one can come to the place without 
being insulted by him. I don't count; even officials of high rank he 
doesn't spare. He lectures every one. He sets up for a teacher of moral­
ity, the scoundrel. 'I am a wise man,' says he; 'I am cleverer than all 
of you, you must listen to no one but me, I am a learned man.' Well, 
what of it? Because he is learned, must he persecute people who are 
not? . . .  And when he begins in his learned language, he goes ham­
mering on ta-ta-ta! Ta-ta-ta! I'll tell you his tongue is such a one to 
wag, that if you cut it off and throw it on the dungheap it will go 
on wagging there till a crow picks it up. He is as conceited and puffed 
out as a mouse in a sack of grain. He is trying to climb so high that 
he will overreach himself. Why, here, for instance, he has taken it into 
his head to teach the house serfs French. You can believe it or not, 
as you like. It will be a benefit to him, he says. To a lout, to a servant! 
Tfoo! A shameless fellow, damn him, that is what he is. What does a 
clodhopper want with French, I ask you? And indeed what do the 
likes of us want with French? For gallivanting with young ladies in 
the mazurka or dancing attendance on other men's wives? Profligacy, 
that's what it is, I tell you! But to my thinking, when one has drunk 
a bottle of vodka one can talk in any language. So that is all the 
respect I have for your French language! I dare say you can chatter 
away in French : Ta-ta-ta, the tabby has married the tom," Bahtcheyev 
said, looking at me in scornful indignation. "Are you a learned man, 
my good sir-eh ? Have you gone in for some learned line?" 
"\Vell . . .  I am somewhat interested . . .  " 
"I suppose you have studied all the sciences, too?" 
"Quite so, that is, no . . .  I must own I am more interested now 
in observing . . .  I have been staying in Petersburg, but now I am 
hurrying to my uncle's.'' 
"And who is the attraction at your uncle's? You had better have 
stayed where you were, since you had somewhere to stay. No, my good 
sir, I can tell you, you won't make much way by being learned, and 
no uncle will be of any use to you; you'll get caught in a trap! Why, 
I got quite thin, staying twenty-four hours with them. Would you 
believe that I got thin, staying with them? No, I see you don't believe 
it. Oh, well, you needn't believe it if you don't want to, bless you.'' 
"No, really I quite believe it, only I still don't understand," I an­
swered, more and more bewildered. 
"I believe it, but I don't believe you! You learned gentlemen are all 
fond of cutting capers! All you care about is hopping about on one 
leg and showing off! I am not fond of learned people, my good sir; 

644 
Tlze Short Novels of 'DostoevskY 
they give me the spleen! I have come across your Petersburgers-a 
worthless lot! They are all Freemasons; they spread infidelity in all 
directions; they are afraid of a drop of vodka, as though it would bite 
them-Tfoo! You have put me out of temper, sir, and I don't want 
to tell you anything! After all, I have not been engaged to tell you 
stories, and I am tired of talking. One doesn't pitch into everybody, 
sir, and indeed it's a sin to do it . . . .  Only your learned gentleman 
at your uncle's has driven the footman Vidoplyasov almost out of his 
wits. Vidoplyasov has gone crazy all through Foma Fomitch . . . .  
" 
"As for that fellow Vidoplyasov," put in Grishka, who had till then 
been following the conversation with severe decorum, ''I'd give him a 
flogging. If I came across him, I'd thrash the German nonsense out of 
him. I'd give him more than you could get into two hundred." 
"lle quiet!" shouted his master. "Hold your tongue; no one's talking 
to you." 
"Vidoplyasov," I said, utterly nonplussed and not knowing what to 
say. "Vidoplyasov, what a queer name!" 
"Why is it queer? There you are again. Ugh, you learned gentle­
men, you learned gentlemen!" 
I lost patience. 
"Excuse me," I said, "but why are you so cross with me? What have 
I done? I must own I have been listening to you for half an hour, 
and I still don't know what it is all about . . . .  " 
"\Vhat are you offended about, sir? "  answered the fat man. "There 
is no need for you to take offence! I am speaking to you for your 
good. You mustn't mind my being such a grumbler and shouting at 
my servant just now. Though he is the most natural rascal, my 
Grishka, I like him for it, the scoundrel. A feeling heart has been the 
ruin of me-l tell you frankly; and Foma is to blame for it all. He'll 
be the ruin of me, I'll take my oath of that. Here, thanks to him, I 
have been baking in the sun for two hours. I should have liked to 
have gone to the priest's while these fools were dawdling about over 
their job. The priest here is a very nice fellow. But he has so upset 
me, Foma has, that it has even put me off seeing the priest. What 
a set they all are! There isn't a decent tavern here. I tell you they are 
all scoundrels, every one of them. And it would be a different thing if 
he were some great man in the service," Bahtcheyev went on, going 
back again to Foma Fomitch, whom he seemed unable to shake otT, 
"it would be pardonable perhaps for a man of of rank; but as it is he 
has no rank at all; I know for a fact that he hasn't. He says he has 
suffered in the cause of justice in the year forty something that never 

The Jriend of the Jamily 
645 
was, so we have to bow down to him for that! If the least thing is not 
to his liking-up he jumps and begins squealing: 'They are insulting 
me, they are insulting my poverty, they have no respect for me.' You 
daren't sit down to table without Foma, and yet he keeps them wait­
ing. 'I have been slighted,' he'd say; 'I am a poor wanderer, black bread 
is good enough for me.' As soon as they sit down he turns up, our 
fiddle strikes up again, 'Why did you sit down to table without me? 
So no respect is shown me in anything.' In fact, your soul is not your 
own. I held my peace for a long time, sir, he imagined that I was 
going to fawn upon him, like a lapdog on its hind legs begging; 
'Here, boy, here's a bit, eat it up.' No, my lad, you run in the shafts, 
while I sit in the cart. I served in the same regiment with Y egor Ilyitch, 
you know; I took my discharge with the rank of a Junker, while he 
came to his estate last year, a retired colonel. I said to him, 'Ale, 
you will be your own undoing, don't be too soft with Fornal You'll 
regret it.' 'No,' he would say, 'he is a most excellent person' (meaning 
Foma), 'he is a friend to me; he is teaching me a higher standard of 
life.' \V ell, thought I, there is no fighting against a higher standard; 
if he has set out to teach a higher standard of life, then it is all up. 
What do you suppose he made a to-do about to-day ? To-morrow is 
the day of Elijah the Prophet" (Mr. Bahtcheyev crossed himself), 
"the patron saint of your uncle's son Ilyusha. I was thinking to spend 
the day with them and to dine there, and had ordered a plaything 
from Petersburg, a German on springs, kissing the hand of his be­
trothed, while she wiped away a tear with her handkerchief-a mag­
nificent thing! (I shan't give it now, no thank you; it's lying there in 
my carriage and the German's nose is smashed off; I am taking it 
back.) Yegor Ilyitch himself would not have been disinclined to enjoy 
himself and be festive on such a day, but Foma won't have it. As much 
as to say: '\Vhy are you beginning to make such a fuss over Ilyusha? 
So now you are taking no notice of me.' Eh ? What do you say to a 
goose like that? He is jealous of a boy of eight over his name day! 
'Look here,' he says, 'it is my nameday too.' But you know it will be 
St. Ilya's, not St. Foma's. 'No,' he says, 'that is my name day too!' I 
looked on and put up with it. And what do you think? Now they 
are walking about on tiptoe, whispering, uncertain what to do-to 
reckon Ilya's day as the name day or not, to congratulate him or not. 
If they don't congratulate him he may be offended, if they do he may 
take it for scoffing. Tfoo, what a plague! We sat down to dinner 
•
.
.
.
 
But are you listening, my good sir?" 
"Most certainly I am; I am listening with peculiar gratification, in 

646 
r h( Short N.otds of VostO(tiSk,y 
fact, because through you I have now learned . . .  and . .
. I mus1 
say . . .  " 
"To be sure, with peculiar gratification! I know your peculiar 
gratification . . . .  You are not jeering at me, talking about your gratifi­
cation ?" 
"Upon my word, how could I be jeering? On the contrary. And 
indeed you express yourself with such originality that I am tempted 
to note down your words." 
"What's that, sir, noting down ?" asked Mr. Bahtcheyev, looking 
at me with suspicion and speaking with some alarm. 
"Though perhaps I shall not note them down . . . .  I didn't mean 
anything." 
"No doubt you are trying to flatter me?" 
"Flatter you, what do you mean ?" I asked with surprise. 
"Why, yes. Here you are flattering me now; I am telling you every­
thing like a fool, and later on you will go and write a sketch of me 
somewhere." 
I made haste at once to assure Mr. Bahtcheyev that I was not that 
sort of person, but he still looked at me suspiciously. 
"Not that sort of person ! Who can tell what you are? Perhaps bet­
ter still, Foma there threatened to write an account of me and to send 
it to be published." 
"Allow me to ask," I interrupted, partly from a desire to change 
the conversation. "Is it true that my uncle wants to get married ?" 
"\Vhat if he does? That would not matter. Get married if you h:ve 
a mind to, that's no harm: but something else is . . . .  " added Mr. 
Bahtcheycv medit:tively. "H'm! thJt question, my good sir, I cannot 
answer fully. There arc a lot of females mixed up in the business now, 
like flies in jam; and you know there is no m:king out which wants 
to be married. And as a friend I don't mind telling you, sir, I don't 
like wom:n! It's only talk that she is a humJn being, but in reality 
she is simply a disgr:ce and a danger to the soul's salvation. But that 
your uncle is in love like a Siberian cat, that I can tell you for a fact. 
I'll say no more about that now, sir, you will see for yourself; but 
what's bad is that the business drags on. If you are going to get mar­
ried, get married; but he is afraid to tell Foma and afraid to tell the 
old lady, she will be squealing all over the place and begin kicking 
up a rumpus. She takes Foma's part : 'Foma Fomitch will be hurt,' 
she'd say, 'if a new mistress comes into the house, for then he won't 
be able to stay two hours in it.' The bride will chuck him out by the 
•cruff of his neck, if she is not a fool, and in one way or another will 

'The Jrielld of the Jamily 
647 
make such an upset that he won't be able to find a place anywhere 
in the neighbourhood. So now he is at his pranks, and he and the 
mamma are trying to foist a queer sort of bride on him . . . .  But why 
did you interrupt me, sir ? I wanted to tell you what was most im­
portant, and you interrupted me! I am older than you are, and it is 
not the right thing to interrupt an old man." 
I apologized. 
"You needn't apologize! I wanted to put before you as a learned 
man, how he insulted me to-day. Come, tell me what you think of 
it, if you are a good-hearted man. \Ve sat down to dinner; well, he 
fairly bit my head off at dinner, I can tell you! I saw from the very 
beginning; he sat there as cross as two sticks, as though nothing were 
to his liking. He'd have been glad to drown me in a spoonful of water, 
the viper! He is a man of such vanity that his skin's not big enough 
for him. So he took it into his head to pick a quarrel with me, to teach 
me a higher standard. Asked me to tell him why I was so fat! The 
man kept pestering me, why was I fat and not thin? What do you 
think of that question? Tell me, my good sir. Do you see anything 
witty in it? I answered him very reasonably : 'That's as God has 
ordained, Foma Fomitch. One man's fat and one man's thin; and no 
mortal can go against the decrees of Divine Providence.' That was 
sensible, wasn't it? What do you say? 'No,' said he; 'you have five 
hundred serfs, you live at your ease and do nothing for your country; 
you ought to be in the service, but you sit at home and play your con­
certina'-and it is true when I am depressed I am fond of playing 
on the concertina. I answered very reasonably again : 'How should I 
go into the service, Foma Fomitch ? What uniform could I pinch my 
corpulence into? If I pinched myself in and put on a uniform, and 
sneezed unwarily-all the buttons would fly off, and what's more, 
maybe before my superiors, and, God forbid! they might take it for 
a practical joke, and what then?' Well, tell me, what was there funny 
in that? But there, there was such a roar at my expense, such a ha­
ha-ha and he-he-he .
. 
_ . The fact is he has no sense of decency, I tell 
you, and he even thought fit to slander me in the French dialect: 
'cochon,' he called me. Well, I know what cochon means. 'Ah, you 
damned philosopher,' I thought. 'Do you suppose I'm going to give in 
to you?' I bore it as long as I could, but I couldn't stand it. I got up 
from the table, and before all the honourable company I blurted out 
in his face: 'I have done you an injustice, Foma Fomitch, my kine! 
benefactor.' I said, 'I thought that you were a well-bred man, and you 
turn out to be just as great a hog as any one of us.' I said that and I 

648 
'!he Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
left the table, left the pudding-they were just handing the pudding 
round. 'Bother you and your pudding!' I thought . . . .  
" 
"Excuse me," I said, listening to Mr. Bahtcheyev's whole story; "I 
am ready, of course, to agree with you completely. The point is, 
that so far I know nothing positive . . . .  But I have got ideas of my 
own on the subject, you see." 
"What ideas, my good sir ?" Mr. Bahtcheyev asked mistrustfully. 
"You see," I began, hesitating a little, "it is perhaps not the mo­
ment, but I am ready to tell it. This is what I think : perhaps we are 
both mistaken about Foma Fomitch, perhaps under these oddities 
lies hidden a peculiar, perhaps a gifted nature, who knows? Perhaps 
it is a nature that has been wounded, crushed by sufferings, aveng­
ing itself, so to speak, on all humanity. I have heard that in the past 
he was something like a buffoon; perhaps that humiliated him, morti­
fied him, overwhelmed him . . . .  Do you understand : a man of noble 
nature . . .  perception . . .  and to play the part of a buffoon! . . .  And 
so he has become mistrustful of all mankind and . . .  and perhaps 
if he could be reconciled to humanity . . .  that is, to his fellows, per­
haps he would turn out a rare nature, perhaps even a very remarkable 
one and . . .  and . . .  you know there must be something in the man. 
There is a reason, of course, for every one doing homage to him." 
I was conscious myself that I was maundering horribly. I might 
have been forgiven in consideration of my youth. But Mr. Bahtcheyev 
did not forgive me. He looked gravely and sternly into my face and 
suddenly turned crimson as a turkey cock. 
"Do you mean that Foma's a remarkable man ?" he asked abruptly. 
"Listen, I scarcely myself believe a word of what I said just now. 
It was merely by way of a guess . . . .  
" 
"Allow me, sir, to be so inquisitive as to ask : have you studied 
philosophy?" 
"In what sense?" I asked in perplexity. 
"No, in no particular sense; you answer me straight out, apart from 
any sense, sir: have you studied philosophy or not?" 
"I must own I am intending to study it, but . . .  " 
"There it is!" shouted Mr. Bahtcheyev, giving full rein to his in­
dignation. "Before you opened your mouth, sir, I guessed that you 
were a philosopher! There is no deceiving mel No, thank you! I can 
scent out a philosopher two miles off! You can go and kiss your Foma 
Fomitch. A remarkable man, indeed! Tfoo! confound it all! I thought 
you were a man of good intentions too, while you . . .  Here!" he 

The Jrietzd of the Jami/y 
649 
shouted to the coachman, who had already clambered on the box of 
the carriage which by now had been put in order. "Home!" 
With difficulty I succeeded somehow in soothing him; somehow 
or other he was mollified at last; but it was a long time before he could 
bring himself to lay aside his wrath and look on me with favour. 
Meantime he got into the carriage, assisted by Grishka and Arhip, the 
man who had reproved Vassilyev. 
"Allow me to ask you," I said, going up to the carriage. "Are you 
never coming again to my uncle's?" 
"To your uncle's ? Curse the fellow who has told you that! Do you 
think that I am a consistent man, that I shall keep it up? That's 
just my trouble, that I am not a man, but a rag. Before a week's 
past, I shall fly round there again. And why? There it is, I don't know 
myself why, but I shall go; I shall fight with Foma again. That's 
just my trouble. sir! The Lord has sent that Foma to chastise me for 
my sins. I have as much will as an old woman, there is no consistency 
in me, I am a first-class coward, my good sir. . . .  
" 
\Ve parted friends, however; he even invited me to dine with him. 
"You come, sir, you come, we will dine together; I have got some 
vodka brought on foot from Kiev, and my cook has been in Paris. He 
serves such fricassees, he makes such pasties, that you can only lick 
your fingers and bow down to him, the rascal. A man of culture! 
Only it is a long time since I thrashed him, he is getting spoilt with 
me . . . .  It is a good thing you reminded me . . . .  Do come. I'd invite 
you to come to-day, only somehow I am out of sorts, down in the 
mouth-in fact, quite knocked up. I am a sick man, you know, a 
poor creature. Maybe you won't believe it . . . .  Well, good-bye, sir, it 
is time for me to set sail. And your little trap yonder is ready. And 
tell Foma he had better not come across me; I should give him such 
a sentimental greeting that he . . .  " 
But his last words were out of hearing; the carriage, drawn by 
four strong horses, vanished in clouds of dust. My chaise too was 
ready ;  I got into it and we at once drove through the little town. 
"Of course this gentleman is exaggerating," I thought; "he is too angry 
and cannot be impartial. But, again, all that he said about uncle was 
very remarkable. So that makes two people in the same story, that 
uncle is in love with that young lady . . . .  H'm! Shall I get married 
or not ?" This time I meditated in earnest. 

650 
'1 h( Short N.ovds of VostO(IIS/zy 
[ Ill ] 
MY UNCLE 
I MUST own I was actually a little daunted. My romantic dreams 
suddenly seemed to me extremely queer, even rather stupid, as soon 
as I reached Stepantchikovo. That was about five o'clock in the after­
noon. The road ran by the manor house. I saw again after long ab­
sence the immense garden in which some happy days of my childhood 
had been passed, and which I had often seen afterwards in my dreams, 
in the dormitories of the various schools which undertook my educa­
tion. I jumped out of the carriage a11d walked across the garden to 
the house. I very much wamed to arrive unannounced, to inquire 
for my uncle, to fetch him out and to talk to him first of all. And so 
I did. Passing down the avenue of lime-trees hundreds of years old, 
I went up on to the verandah, from which one passed by a glass door 
into the inner rooms. The verandah was surrounded by flower-beds 
and adorned with pots of expensive flowers. Here I met one of the 
natives, old Gavrila, who had at one time looked after me and was 
now the honoured valet of my uncle. The old fellow was wearing 
spectacles, and was holding in his hand a manuscript book which 
he was reading with great attention. I had seen him three years before 
in Petersburg, where he had come with my uncle, and so he recog­
nized me at once. With exclamations of joy he fell to kissing my hand, 
and as he did so the spectacles fell ofT his nose on to the floor. Such 
devotion on the part of the old man touched me very much. But dis­
turbed by my recent conversation with Mr. Bahtcheyev, I looked first 
at the suspicious manuscript book which had been in Gavrila's hands. 
"What's this, Gavrila? Surely they have not begun teaching you 
French too?" I asked the old man. 
"They :!re teaching me in my old age, like a starling, sir," Gavrila 
answered mournfully. 
"Does Foma himself teach you?" 
"Yes, sir; a very clever man he must be." 
"Not a doubt that he is clever! Does he teach you by conversations ?" 
"By a copy book. sir." 
"Is that what you have in your hands? Ah! French words in Russian 
letters, a sharp dodge! You give in to such a blockhead, such an arrant 
fool, aren't you ashamed, Gavrib ?" I cried, instantly forgetting my 

'I h% Jri%nd of th% Jamily 
651 
:ofty theories about Foma Fromitch for which I had caught it so hotly 
from Mr. Bahtcheyev. 
"How can he be a fool, sir," answered the old man, "if he manages 
our betters as he does ?" 
"H'm, perhaps you are right, Gavrila," I muttered, pulled up by this 
remark. "Take me to my uncle." 
"My falcon! But I can't show myself, I dare not, I have begun to be 
afraid even of him. I sit here in my misery and step behind the flower­
beds when he is pleased to come out." 
"But why are you afraid ?" 
"I didn't know my lesson this morning. Foma Fomitch made me 
go down on my knees, but I didn't stay on my knees. I am too old, 
Sergey Alexandrovitch, for them to play such tricks with me. The 
master was pleased to be vexed at my disobeying Foma Fomitch, 'he 
takes trouble about your education, old grey-beard,' said he; 'he wants 
to teach you the pronunciation.' So here I am walking to and fro 
repeating the vocabulary. Foma Fomitch promised to examine me 
again this evening." 
It seemed to me that there was something obscure about this. 
"There must be something connected with French," I thought, 
"which the old man cannot explain." 
"One question, Gavrila : what sort of man is he? Good-looking, 
tall ?" 
"Foma Fomitch ? No, sir, he's an ugly little scrub of a man." 
"H'm! Wait a bit, Gavrila, perhaps it can be all set right; in fact, 
I can promise you it certainly will be set right. But . . .  where is my 
uncle?" 
"He is behind the stables seeing some peasants. The old men have 
come from Kapitonovko to pay their respects to him. They had heard 
that they were being made over to Foma Fomitch. They want to beg 
not to be." 
"But why behind the stables?" 
"They are frightened, sir . . .  .'' 
I did, in fact, find my uncle behind the stables. There he was, 
&tanding before a group of peasants who were bowing down to the 
ground and earnestly entreating him. Uncle was explaining something 
to them with \llarmth. I went up and called to him. He turned round 
and we rushed into each other's arms. 
He was extremely glad to see me; his delight was almost ecstatic. 
He hugged me, pressed my hands, as though his own son had returned 
to him after escaping some mortal danger, as though by my arrival 

652 
Th% Short Novels of Vosto%vskY 
I had rescued him from some mortal danger and brought with me the 
solution of all his perplexities, as well as joy and lifelong happiness for 
him and all whom he loved. Uncle would not have consented to be 
happy alone. After the first outburst of delight, he got into such a fuss 
that at last he was quite flustered and bewildered. He showered ques­
tions upon me, wanted to take me at once to see his family. \Ve were 
just going, but my uncle turned back, wishing to present me first to 
the peasants of Kapitonovko. Then, I remember, he suddenly began 
talking, apropos of I don't know what, of some Mr. Korovkin, a 
remarkable man whom he had met three days before, on the high road, 
and whom he was very impatiently expecting to pay him a visit. Then 
he dropped Mr. Korovkin too and spoke of something else. I looked at 
him with enjoyment. Answering his hurried questions, I told him 
that I did not want to go into the service, but to continue my studies. 
As soon as the subject of study was broached, my uncle at once knitted 
his brows and assumed an extraordinarily solemn air. Learning that 
of late I had been engaged on mineralogy, he raised his head and 
looked about him proudly, as though he had himself, alone and un­
aided, discovered the whole of that science and written all that was 
published about it. I have mentioned already that he cherished the 
most disinterested reverence for the word "science," the more disinter­
ested that he himself had no scientific knowledge whatever. 
":\h, my boy, there are people in the world who know everything," 
he said to me once, his eyes sparkling with enthusiasm. "One sits 
among them, listens, and one knows one understands nothing of it 
all, and yet one loves it. And why? Because it is in the cause of reform, 
of enlightenment, of the general welfare! That I do understand. Here 
I now travel by train, and my Ilyusha, perhaps, may fly through the 
air . . . .  And then trade, manufactures-those channels, so to say . . .  
that is, I mean, turn it which way you will, it's of service . . . .  It is of 
service, isn't it?" 
But to return to our meeting. 
"But wait a bit, wait a bit, my dear," he began speaking rapidly 
and rubbing his hands, "you will see a man! A rare man, I tell you, a 
learned man, a man of science; 'he will survive his century.' It's a good 
saying, isn't it, 'will survive his century'? Foma explained it to me . 
• 
• . \Vait a little, I will introduce you to him.'' 
"Are you speaking of Foma Fomitch, uncle?" 
"No, r.o, my dear, I was speaking of Korovkin, though Fom:t too, 
he tf)O . . .  but I am simply talking of Korovkin just now," he added, 

The Jrimd of the Jamilj 
653 
for some unknown reason turning crimson, and seeming embarrassed 
as soon as Foma's name was mentioned. 
"What sciences is he studying, uncle?" 
"Science, my boy, science, science in general. I can't tell you which 
exactly, I only know that it is science. How he speaks about railways! 
And, you know," my uncle added in a half-whisper, screwing up his 
right eye significantly, "just a little of the free-thinker. I noticed it, 
especially when he was speaking of marriage and the family . . .  it's 
a pity I did not understand much of it myself (there was no time), 
l would have told you all about it in detail. And he is a man of the 
noblest qualities, too! I have invited him to visit me, I am expecting 
him from hour to hour." 
Meanwhile the peasants were gazing at me with round eyes and 
open mouths as though at some marvel. 
"Listen, uncle," I interrupted him; "I believe I am hindering the 
peasants. No doubt they have come about something urgent. What do 
they want? I must own I suspect something, and I should be very 
glad to hear . . .  " 
Uncle suddenly seemed nervous and flustered. 
"Oh, yes! I had forgotten. Here, you see . . .  what is one to do 
with them ? They have got a notion-and I should very much like to 
know who first started it-they have got a notion, that I am giving 
them away together with the whole of Kapitonovko--do you remem­
ber Kapitonovko? We used to drive out there in the evenings with 
dear Katya-the whole of Kapitonovko with the sixty-eight souls in it 
to Foma Fomitch. 'We don't want to leave you,' they say, and that is 
all about it." 
"So it is not true, uncle, you are not giving him Kapitonovko," 
I cried, almost rapturously. 
"I never thought of it, it never entered my head! And from whom 
did you hear it? Once one drops a word, it is all over the place. And 
why do they so dislike Foma? Wait a little, Sergey, I will introduce 
you to him,'' he added, glancing at me timidly, as though he were 
aware in me, too, of hostility towards Foma Fomitch. "He is a wonder­
ful man, my boy." 
"We want no one but you, no one!" the peasants suddenly wailed 
in chorus. "You are our father, we are your children!" 
"Listen, uncle," I said. "I have not seen Foma Fomitch yet, but . . .  
you see . . .  I have heard something. I must confess that I met Mr. 
Bahtcheyev to-day. However, I have my own idea on that subject. 

654 
'[he Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
Anyway, uncle, finish with the peasants and let them go, and let us 
talk by ourselves without witnesses. I must own, that's what I have 
come for . . . .  " 
"To be sure, to be sure," my uncle assented; "to be sure. We'll dis­
miss the peasants and then we can have a talk, you know, a friendly, 
affectionate, thorough talk. Come," he went on, speaking rapidly and 
addressing the peasants, "you can go now, my friends. And for the 
future come to me whenever there is need; straight to me, and come 
at any time." 
"You are our father, we are your children! Do not give us to Foma 
Fomitch for our undoing! All we, poor people, are beseeching you!" 
the peasants shouted once more. 
"See what fools! But I am not giving you away, I tell you." 
"Or he'll never leave off teaching us, your honour. He does nothing 
but teach the fellows here, so they say." 
"Why, you don't mean to say he is teaching you French ?" I cried, 
almost in alarm. 
"No, sir, so far God has had mercy on us!" answered one of the 
peasants, probably a great talker, a red-haired man with a huge bald 
patch on the back of his head, with a long, scanty, wedge-shaped beard, 
which moved as he talked as though it were a separate individual. 
"No, sir, so far God has had mercy on us." 
"But what does he teach you?" 
"\Veil, your honour, what he teaches us, in a manner of speaking, 
is buying a gold casket to keep a brass farthing in." 
"How do you mean, a brass farthing?" 
"Seryozha, you are mistaken, it's a slander!" cried my uncle, turning 
crimson and looking terribly embarrassed. "The fools have misunder­
stood what was said to them. He merely . . .  there was nothing about 
a brass farthing. There is no need for you to understand everything, 
and shout at the top of your voice," my uncle continued, addressing 
the peasant reproachfully. "One wants to do you good and you don't 
understand, and make an uproar!" 
"Upon my word, uncle, teaching them French?" 
"That's for the sake of pronunciation, Seryozha, simply for the 
pronunciation," said my uncle in an imploring voice. "He said him­
self that it was for the sake of the pronunciation 
.
.
•
.
 Besides, some­
thing special happened in connection with this, which you know 
nothing about and so you cannot judge. You must investigate first and 
then blame . . . .  It is easy to find fault!" 
"But what are you about?" I shouted, turning impetuously to the 

'I he Jriend of the Jamily 
655 
peasants again. "You ought to speak straight out. You should say, 
'This won't do, Foma Fomitch, this is how it ought to be!' You have 
got a tongue, haven't you?" 
"Where is the mouse who will bell the cat, your honour? 'I am 
teaching you, clodhoppers, cleanliness and order,' he says. 'Why is 
your shirt not clean?' vVhy, one is always in a sweat, that's why it 
isn't clean! One can't change every day. Cleanliness won't save you and 
dirt won't kill you." 
"And look here, the other day he came to the threshing floor," began 
another peasant, a tall, lean fellow all in patches and wearing wretched 
bark shoes, apparently one of those men who are always discontented 
about something and always have some vicious venomous word ready 
in reserve. Till then he had been hidden behind the backs of the other 
peasants, had been listening in gloomy silence, and had kept all the 
time on his face an ambiguous, bitterly subtle smile. "He came to 
the threshing floor. 'Do you know,' he said, 'how many miles it is to 
the sun?' 'Why, who can tell? Such learning is not for us but for the 
gentry.' 'No,' says he; 'you are a fool, a lout, you don't understand 
what is good for you; but 1,' said he, 'am an astronomer! I know all 
God's planets.' " 
"Well, and did he tell you how many miles it is to the sun?" my 
uncle put in, suddenly reviving and winking gaily to me, as though to 
say, "See what's coming!" 
"Yes, he did tell us how many," the peasant answered reluctantly, 
not expecting such a question. 
"Well, how many did he say, how many exactly?" 
"Your honour must know best, we live in darkness." 
"Oh, I know, my boy, but do you remember?" 
"Why, he said it would be so many hundreds or thousands, it was 
a big number, he said. More than you could carry in three cartloads." 
"Try and remember, brother! I dare say you thought it would be 
about a mile, that you could reach up to it with your hand. No, my 
boy; you see, the earth is like a round ball, do you understand? "  my 
uncle went on, describing a sphere in the air with his hands. 
The peasant smiled bitterly. 
"Yes, like a ball, it hangs in the air of itself and moves round the 
sun. And the sun stands still, it only seems to you that it moves. 
There's a queer thing! And the man who discovered this was Captain 
Cook, a navigator . . .  devil only knows who did discover it," he 
added in a half-whisper, turning to me. "I know nothing about it 
myself, my boy . . . .  Do you know how far it is to the sun?" 

656 
'I he Short Novels of VostoevskJ 
"I do, uncle," I answered, looking with surprise at all this scene. 
"But this is what I think: of course ignorance means slovenliness; 
but on the other hand . . .  to teach peasants astronomy . . .  
" 
"Just so, just so, slovenliness," my uncle assented, delighted with my 
expression, which struck him as extremely apt. "A noble thought! 
Slovenliness precisely! That is what I have always said . . .  that is, I 
never said so, but I felt it. Do you hear?" he cried to the peasants. 
"Ignorance is as bad as slovenliness, it's as bad as dirt. That's why 
Foma wanted to teach you. He wanted to teach you something good­
that was all right. That's as good as serving one's country-it's as good 
as any official rank. So you sec what science is! Well, that's enough, 
that's enough, my friends. Go, in God's name; and I am glad, glad . 
. . . Don't worry yourselves, I won't forsake you." 
"Protect us, father!" 
"Let us breathe freely!" 
And the pc:.lSants plumped down at his feet. 
"Come, come, that's nonsense. Bow down to God and your Czar, 
and not to me . . . .  Come, go along, behave well, be deserving . . .  
and all that. You know," he said, lllrning suddenly to me as soon as 
the peasants had gone away, and beaming with pleasure, "the peasant 
loves a kind word, and a little present would do no harm. Shall I give 
them something, ch ? What do you think ? In honour of your arrival. 
. .  Shall I or not ?" 
"But you arc a kind of Fro) Silin, uncle, a benevolent person, I see." 
"Oh, one can't help it, my boy, one can't help it ; that's nothing. I 
have been meaning to give them a present for a long time," he said, as 
though excusing himself. "And as for your thinking it funny of me 
to give the peasants a lesson in science, I simply did that, my boy, in 
delight at seeing you, Scryozha. I simply wanted the peasants to hear 
how many miles it was to the sun and gape in wonder. It's amusing to 
sec them gape, my dear . . . .  One seems to rejoice oYer them. Only, 
my boy, don't speak in the drawingᅜroom of my having had an inter­
view with the peasants, you know. I met them behind the stables on 
purpose that we should not be seen. It was impossible to have it there, 
my boy: it is a delicate business, and indeed they came in secret them­
selves. I did it more for their sake . . . .  " 
"Well, here I have come, uncle," I began, changing the conversation 
and anxious to get to the chief point as quickly as possible. "I must 
own your letter so surprised me that I . . .  
" 
"My dear, not a word of that," my uncle interrupted, as though 
in alarm, positively dropping his voice. "Afterwards, afterwards, all that 

7' lze Jrietzd of tlze Jamily 
657 
shall be explained. I have, perhaps, acted wrongly towards you, very 
wrongly, perhaps . . . .  " 
"Acted wrongly towards me, uncle?" 
"Afterwards, afterwards, my dear, afterwards! It shall all be 
explained. But what a fine fellow you have grown! My dear boy! 
How eager I have been to see you! I wanted to pour out my heart, so 
to speak . . .  you are clever, you are my only hope . . .  you and 
Korovkin. I must mention to you that they are all angry with you 
here. Mind, be careful, don't be rash." 
"Angry with me?" I asked, looking at uncle in wonder, unable to 
understand how I could have angered people with whom I was as yet 
unacquainted. "Angry with me?" 
"Yes, with you, my boy. It can't be helped! Foma Fomitch is a little 
. . .  and . . .  well . . .  mother following his example. Be careful, re­
spectful, don't contradict. The great thing is to be respectful. •
.
.
 " 
"To Foma Fomitch, do you mean, uncle?" 
"It can't be helped, my dear; you see, I don't defend him. Certainly 
he has his faults, perhaps, and especially just now, at this particular 
moment . . . .  Ah, Seryozha dear, how it all worries me. And if only 
it could be settled comfortably, if only we could all be satisfied and 
happy! . . .  But who has not faults? We are not perfect ourselves, 
are we?" 
"Upon my word, uncle! Consider what he is doing . . . .  " 
"Oh, my dear! It's all trivial nonsense, nothing more! Here, for 
instance, let me tell you, he is angry with me, and what for, do you 
suppose? . . .  Though perhaps it's my own fault . . . .  I'd better tell 
you afterwards . . . .  " 
"But do you know, uncle, I have formed an idea of my own about 
it," I interrupted, in haste to give expression to my theory. Indeed, we 
both seemed nervous and hurried. "In the first place, he has been a 
buffoon; that has mortified him, rankled, outraged his ideal; and that 
has made his character embittered, morbid, resentful, so to say, against 
all humanity . . . .  But if one could reconcile him with mankind, if 
one could bring him back to himself . . .  " 
"] ust so, just so," cried my uncle, delighted; "that's just it. A gener­
ous idea! And in fact it would be shameful, ungenerous of us to blame 
him! Just so! . . .  Oh, my dear, you understand me; you have brought 
me comfort! If only things could be set straight, somehow! Do you 
know, I am afraid to show myself. Here you have come, and I shall 
certainly catch it from them!" 

658 
'1 h| Short N.ovds of Vosto|vsky 
"Uncle, if that's how it is . . .  " I began, disconcerted by this 
confession. 
"No-no-nol For nothing in the world," he cried, clutching my hands. 
"You are my guest and I wish it!" 
"Uncle, tell me at once," I beg:m insistently, "why did you send 
for me? \Vhat do you expect of me, and, above all, in what way have 
you been to blame towards me?" 
"My dear, don't ask. Afterwards, afterw:>rds; all that shall be 
explained afterwards. I have been very much to blame, perhaps, but I 
wanted to act like an honest man, and . . .  and . . .  you shall marry 
her! You will marry her, if there is one grain of gentlemanly feeling in 
you," he added, flushing all over with some sudden feeling and warmly 
and enthusiastically pressing my hand. "But enough, not another 
word, you will soon see for yourself. It will depend on you . . . .  The 
great thing is that you should be liked, that you should make a good 
impression. Above all-don't be nervous." 
"Come, listen, uncle. Whom have you got there? I must own I have 
been so little in society, that . . .  
" 
"That you are rather frightened," put in my uncle, smiling. "Oh, 
that's no matter. Cheer up, they are all our own people! The great 
thing is to be bold and not afraid. I keep feeling anxious about you. 
Whom have we got there, you ask ? Yes, who is there? . . .  In the first 
place, my mother," he began hurriedly. "Do you remember mamma 
or not ? The most kind-hearted, generous woman, no airs about her­
that one can say; a little of the old school, perhaps, but that's all to the 
good. To be sure she sometimes takes fancies into her head, you know, 
will say one thing and another; she is vexed with me now, but it is 
my own fault, I know it is my own fault. And the fact is-you know 
she is what is called a grande dame, a general's lady . . .  her husband 
was a most excellent man. To begin with, he was a general, a most 
cultivated man; he left no property, but he was covered with wounds 
-he was deserving of respect, in fact. Then there's Miss Pcrepelitsyn ;  
well, she . . .  I don't know . . .  of late she has been rather . . .  her char-
acter is so . . .  but one mustn't find fault with every one. There, never 
mind her . . .  you mustn't imagine she is in a menial position, she's a 
major's daughter herself, my boy, she is mother's confidante and 
favourite, my dear! Then there is my sister Praskovya Ilyinitchna. 
Well, there is no need to say much about her, she is simple and good­
natured, a bit fussy, but what a heard The heart is the great thing. 
Though she is middle-aged, yet, do you know, I really believe that 
queer fellow Bahtcheyev is making up to her. He wants to make a 

T h| Jri|nd of th| Jamily 
659 
match of it. But, mind you don't say a word, it is a secret! Well, and 
who else is there? I won't tell you about the children, you will see for 
yourself. It's Ilyusha's nameday to-morrow •
•
.
.
 Why there, I was 
almost forgetting, we have had staying with us for the last month Ivan 
lvanitch Mizintchikov, your second cousin, I believe; yes, of course, 
he is your second cousin! He has lately given up his commission; he 
was a lieutenant in the Hussars; still a young man. A noble soul! But, 
you know, he has got through his money. I really can't think how 
he managed to get rid of it. Though indeed he had next to nothing, 
but anyway he got through it and ran into debt . . . .  Now he is staying 
with me. I didn't know him at all till lately; he came and introduced 
himself. He is a dear fellow, good-humoured, quiet and respectful. No 
one gets a word out of him. He is always silent. Foma calls him in 
jest the 'silent stranger'-he doesn't mind; he isn't vexed. Foma's 
satisfied, he says Ivan's not very bright. And Ivan never contradicts 
him, but always falls in with everything he says. H'm! he seems so 
crushed . . .  but there, God bless him, you will see for yourself. There 
are guests from the town, Pavel Semyonitch Obnoskin and his mother; 
he's young but a man of superior mind, something mature, steadfast, 
you know . . .  only I don't know how to express it; and what's more, 
of the highest principles; strict morals. And lastly there is staying with 
us, you know, a lady called Tatyana lvanovna; she, too, may be a 
distant relation. You don't know her. She is not quite young, that one 
must own, but . . .  she is not without attractions: she is rich enough 
to buy Stepantchikovo twice over, she has only lately come into her 
money, and has had a wretched time of it till now. Please, Seryozha, 
my boy, be careful; she is such a nervous invalid . . .  something phan­
tasmagoria! in her character, you know. Well, you are a gentleman, 
you will understand ; she has had troubles, you know, one has to be 
doubly careful with a person who has had troubles! But you mustn't 
imagine anything, you know. Of course she has her weaknesses; some­
times she is in such a hurry, she speaks so fast, that she says the wrong 
thing. Not that she lies, don't imagine that . . .  it all comes, my boy, 
from a pure and noble heart, so to say. I mean, even if she does say 
something false, it's simply from excess of noble-heartedness, so to say 
-do you understand ?" 
I fancied that my uncle was horribly confused. 
"Listen, uncle," I began, "I am so fond of you .
.
•
 forgive the direct 
question : are you going to marry some one here or not?" 
"Why, from whom did you hear that?" he answered, blushing like 
a child. "You see, my dear . . .  I'll tell you all about it; in the first place, 

660 
The Shorr N.ove/s of Vostoevsk.y 
I am not going to get married. Mamma, my sister to some extent, and 
most of all Foma Fomitch, whom mamma worships-and with good 
reason, with good reason, he has done a great deal for her-they all 
want me to marry that same Tatyana Ivanovna, as a sensible step for 
the benefit of all. Of course they desire nothing but my good-I under­
stand that, of course; but nothing will induce me to marry-I have 
made up my mind about that. In spite of that I have not succeeded in 
giving them a decided answer, I have not said yes, or no. It always 
happens like that with me, my boy. They thought that I had consented 
and are insisting that to-morrow, in honour of the festi\'e occasion, 
I should declare myself . . .  and so there is such a flutter in preparation 
for to-morrow that I really don't know what line to take! .--\nd besides, 
Foma Fomitch, I don't know why, is vexed with me, and mamma is 
too. I must say, my boy, I have simply been reckoning on you and on 
Korovkin . . . .  I wanted to pour out my troubles, so to say . . . .  
" 
"But how can Korovkin be of any use in this matter, uncle?'' 
"He will help, he will help, my dear-he is a wonderful man; in 
short, a man of learning! I build upon him as on a rock ; a man who 
would conquer anything! How he speaks of domestic happiness! I 
must own I ha\'e been reckoning on you too; I thought you might 
bring them to reason. Consider and judge . . .  granted that I ha\'e been 
to blame, really to blame-I understand all that-I am not without 
feeling. But all the same I might be forgi\'en some day! Then how well 
we should get on together! Oh, my boy, how my Sashenka has grown 
up, she'll be thinking of getting married directly! What a fine boy my 
Ilyusha has become! To-morrow is his nameday. But I am afraid for 
my Sashenka-that's the trouble." 
"Uncle! Where is my portmanteau ? I will change my things and 
make my appearance in a minute, and then . .  :· 
"In the upper room, my boy, in the upper room. I ga\'e orders be­
forehand that as soon as you arrived you should be taken straight up 
there, so that no one should see you. Yes, yes, change your things I 
That's capital, capital, first rate. And meanwhile I will prepare them 
all a little. Well, good luck to us! You know, my boy, we must be 
diplomatic. One is forced to become a T alleyrand. But there, never 
mind. They are drinking tea there now. \Ve ha\'e tea early. Foma 
Fomitch likes to ha\'e his tea as soon as he wakes up; it is better, you 
know. \Veil, I'll go in, then, and you make haste and follow me, don't 
leave me alone; it will be awkward for me, my boy, alone . . . .  But, 
stay! I have another favour to ask of you: don't cry out at me in there 
as you did out here just now-will you ? If you want to make some 

The Jriend of the Jamily 
661 
criticism you can make it afterwards here when we are alone; till then 
hold yourself in and wait! You see, I have put my foot in it already 
with them. They are annoyed with me . . . .  " 
"I say, uncle, from all that I have seen and heard it seems to me 
that you . . . " 
"That I am as soft as butter, eh? Don't mind speaking out!" he 
interrupted me quite unexpectedly. "There is no help for it, my boy. 
I know it myself. Well, so you will come? Come as quick as you can, 
please!" 
Going upstairs, I hurriedly opened my portmanteau, remembering 
my uncle's instructions to come down as soon as possible. As I was 
dressing, I realized that I had so far learned scarcely anything I wanted 
to know, though I had been talking to my uncle for a full hour. That 
struck me. Only one thing was pretty clear to me: my uncle was still 
set upon my getting married; consequently, all rumours to the opposite, 
that is, that my uncle was in love with the same lady himself, were 
wide of the mark. I remember that I was much agitated. Among other 
things the thought occurred to me that by my coming, and by my si. 
lence, I had almost made a promise, given my word, bound myself for 
ever. "It is easy," I thought, "it is easy to say a word which will bind 
one, hand and foot, for ever. And I have not yet seen my proposed 
bride!" And again: why this antagonism towards me on the part of 
the whole family? Why were they bound to take a hostile attitude to 
my coming, as my uncle said they did? And what a strange part my 
uncle was playing here in his own house? What was the cause of his 
secretiveness? \Vhy these worries and alarms? I must own that it all 
struck me suddenly as something quite senseless; and my romantic 
and heroic dreams took flight completely at the first contact with 
reality. Only now after my conversation with my uncle, I suddenly 
realized all the incongruity and eccentricity of his proposition, and felt 
that no one but my uncle would have been capable of making such a 
proposal and in such circumstances. I realized, too, that I was some­
thing not unlike a fool for galloping here full speed at his first word, in 
high delight at his suggestion. I was dressing hurriedly, absorbed in 
my agitating doubts, so that I did not at first notice the man who was 
waiting on me. 
"Will your honour wear the Adelaida coloured tie or the one with 
the little checks on it?" the man asked suddenly, addressing me with 
exceptionally mawkish obsequiousness. 
I glanced at him, and it seemed to me that he, too, was worthy of 
attention. He was a man still young, for a flunkey well dressed, quite 

662 
The Short Novels of 'DostoevskY 
as wei! as man} 
J provincial dandy. The brown coat, the white 
breeches, the straw-coloured waistcoat, the patent-leather boots and the 
pink tie had evidently been selected with intention. All this was bound 
at once to attract attention to the young dandy's refined taste. The 
watch-chain was undoubtedly displayed with the same object. He was 
pale, even greenish in face, and had a long hooked nose, thin and 
remarkably white, as though it were made of china. The smile on his 
thin lips expressed melancholy, a refined melancholy, however. His 
large prominent eyes, which looked as though made of glass, had an 
extraordinarily stupid expression, and yet there was a gleam of refine­
ment in them. His thin soft ears were stuffed up with cotton wool­
also a refinement. His long, scanty, flaxen hair was curled and pomaded. 
His hands were white, clean, and might have been washed in rose­
water; his fingers ended in extremely long dandified pink nails. All 
this indicated a spoilt and idle fop. He lisped and mispronounced the 
letter "r" in fashionable style, raised and dropped his eyes, sighed and 
gave himself incredibly affected airs. He smelt of scent. He was short, 
feeble and flabby-looking, and moved about with knees and haunches 
bent, probably thinking this the height of refinement-in fact, he was 
saturated with refinement, subtlety and an extraordinary sense of his 
own dignity. This last characteristic displeased me, I don't know why, 
and moved me to wrath. 
"So that tie is Adelai'da colour?" I asked, looking severely at the 
young valet. 
"Yes, Adela"ida," he answered, with undisturbed refinement. 
"And is there an Agrafena colour?" 
"No, sir, there cannot be such a colour." 
"Why not?" 
"Agrafena is not a polite name, sir." 
"Not polite! Why not ?" 
"Why, Adelalda, we all know, is a foreign name anyway, a ladylike 
name, but any low pe.Jsant woman can be called Agrafena." 
"Are you out of your mind?" 
"No, sir, I am in my right mind, sir. Of course you are free to call 
me any sort of name, but many generals and even some counts in 
Moscow and Petersburg have been pleased with my conversation, sir." 
"And what's your name?" 
"Vidoplyasov." 
"Ah, so you are Vidoplyasov ?" 
"Just so, sir." 
"\Veil, wait a bit, my lad, and I will make your acquaintance." 

'! h% Jri%nd of th% Jamily 
663 
"It is something like Bedlam here," I thought to myself as I went 
downstairs. 
[ IV ) 
AT TEA 
T EA was being served in the room that gave on to the verandah 
where I had that afternoon met Gavrila. I was much perturbed by my 
uncle's mysterious warnings in regard to the reception awaiting me. 
Youth is sometimes excessively vain, and youthful vanity is almost 
always cowardly. And so it was extremely unpleasant for me when 
immediately going in at the door and seeing the whole party round 
the tea-table, I stumbled over a rug, staggered, and recovering my bal­
ance, flew unexpectedly into the middle of the room. As overwhelmed 
with confusion as though I had at one stroke lost my career, my honour 
and my good name, I stood without moving, turning as red as a crab 
and looking with a senseless stare at the company. I mention this inci­
dent, in itself so trivial, only because of the effect it had on my state of 
mind during the whole of that day, and consequently my attitude to 
some of the personages of my story. I tried to bow, did not fully suc­
ceed, turned redder than ever, flew up to my uncle and clutched at his 
hand. 
"How do you do, uncle?" I gasped out breathlessly, intending to 
say something quite different and much cleverer, but to my own sur­
prise I said nothing but "How do you do?" 
"Glad to see you, glad to see you, my boy," answered my uncle, dis­
tressed on my account. "You know, we have met already. Don't be 
nervous, please," he added in a whisper, "it's a thing that may happen 
to any one, and worse still, one sometimes falls flat! . . .  And now, 
mother, let me introduce to you : this is our young man; he is a little 
overcome at the moment, but I am sure you will like him. My nephew, 
Sergey Alexandrovitch," he added, addressing the company. 
But before going on with my story, allow me, gentle reader, to intro­
duce to you by name the company in which I suddenly found myself. 
This is essential to the orderly sequence of my narrative. 
The party consisted of several ladies and two men besides my uncle 
and me. Foma Fomitch, whom I was so eager to see, and who-even 
then I felt it-was absolute monarch in the house, was not there; he 
was conspicuous by his absence, and seemed to have taken with him 

664 
The Short N.ovds of Vostoevsky 
all brightness from the room. They all looked gloomy and worried. 
One could not help noticing it from the first glance; embarrassed and 
upset as I was at the moment, I yet discerned that my uncle, for in­
stance, was almost as upset as I was, though he was doing his utmost 
to conceal his anxiety under a show of ease. Something was lying like 
a heavy weight on his heart. One of the two gentlemen in the room 
was a young man about five-and-twenty, who turned out to be the 
Obnoskin my uncle had spoken of that afternoon, praising his intelli­
gence and high principles. I did not take to this gentleman at all, 
everything about him savoured of vulgar cl1ic; his dress, in spite of its 
chic, was shabby and common; his face looked, somehow, shabby too. 
His thin flaxen moustaches like a beetle's whiskers, and his unsuccess­
ful wisps of beard, were evidently intended to show that he was a man 
of independent character and perhaps advanced ideas. He was con­
tinually screwing up his eyes, smiling with an affectation of malice; he 
threw himself into attitudes on his chair, and repeatedly stared at me 
through his eyeglass; but when I turned to him, he immediately 
dropped his eyeglass and seemed overcome with alarm. The other 
gentleman was young too, being about twenty-eight. He was my 
cousin, Mizintchikov. He certainly was extremely silent. He did not 
utter a single word at tea, and did not laugh when every one else 
laughed ; but I saw in him no sign of that "crushed" condition my 
uncle had detected; on the contrary, the look in his light brown eyes 
expressed resoluteness and a certain decision of character. Mizintchikov 
was dark and rather good-looking, with black hair; he was very cor­
rectly dressed-at my uncle's expense, as I learned later. Of the ladies 
the one I noticed first of all from her spiteful anaemic face was Miss 
Perepelitsyn. She was sitting near Madame Ia Generale-of whom I 
will give a special account later-not beside her, but deferentially a 
little behind; she was continually bending down and whispering 
something into the ear of her patroness. Two or three elderly lady 
companions were sitting absolutely mute in a row by the window, 
gazing open-eyed at Madame Ia Generale and waiting respectfully for 
their tea. My attention was attracted also by a fat, absolutely redundant 
lady, of about fifty, dressed very tastelessly and gaudily, wearing rouge, 
I believe, though she had hardly any teeth except blackened and 
broken stumps; this fact did not, however, prevent her from mincing, 
screwing up her eyes, dressing in the height of fashion and almost 
making eyes. She was hung round with chains, and like Monsieur 
Obnoskin was continually turning her lorgnette on me. This was his 
mother. Praskovya Ilyinitchna, my meek aunt, was pouring out the 

r he Jriend of the Jamily 
66S 
tea. She obviously would have liked to embrace me after our long 
separation, and of course to have shed a few tears on the occasion, but 
she did not dare. Everything here was, it seemed, under rigorous 
control. Near her was sitting a very pretty black-eyed girl of fifteen, 
who looked at me intently with childish curiosity-my cousin Sashenka. 
Finally, and perhaps most conspicuous of all, was a very strange lady, 
dressed richly and extremely youthfully, though she was far from being 
in her first youth and must have been at least five-and-thirty. Her face 
was very thin, pale, and withered, but extremely animated; a bright 
colour was constantly appearing in her pale cheeks, almost at every 
movement, at every flicker of feeling; she was in continual excitement, 
twisting and turning in her chair, and seemed unable to sit still for a 
minute. She kept looking at me with a kind of greedy curiosity, and 
was continually bending down to whisper something into the ear of 
Sashenka, or of her neighbour on the other side, and immediately 
afterwards laughing in the most childish and simple-hearted way. But 
to my surprise her eccentricities seemed to pass unnoticed by the others, 
as though they had all agreed to pay no attention to them. I guessed 
that this was Tatyana Ivanovna, the lady in whom, to use my uncle's 
expression, "there was something phantasmagoria!," whom they werᅒ 
trying to force upon him as a bride, and whose favour almost every one 
in the house was trying to court for the sake of her money. But I liked 
her eyes, blue and mild; and though there were already crow's-feet 
round the eyes, their expression was so simple-hearted, so merry and 
good-humoured, that it was particularly pleasant to meet them. Of 
Tatyana Ivanovna, one of the real "heroines" of my story, I shall speak 
more in detail later; her history was very remarkable. Five minutes 
after my entrance, a very pretty boy, my cousin Ilyusha, ran in from 
the garden, with his pockets full of knuckle-bones and a top in his 
hand. He was followed by a graceful young girl, rather pale and weary­
looking, but very pretty. She scanned the company with a searching, 
mistrustful, and even timid glance, looked intently at me, and sat 
down by Tatyana Ivanovna. I remember that I could not suppress a 
throb at my heart; I guessed that this was the governess . . . .  I remem­
ber, too, that on her entrance my uncle stole a swift glance at me and 
flushed crimson, then he bent down, caught up Ilyusha in his arms, 
and brought him up to me to be kissed. I noticed, too, that Madame 
Obnoskin first stared at my uncle and then with a sarcastic smile 
turned her lorgnette on the governess. My uncle was very much con­
fused, and not knowing what to do, was on the point of calling to 
Sashenka to introduce her to me; but the girl merely rose from her seat 

666 
The Short N.ovc/s of 'Dostoevsky 
and in silence, with grave dignity, dropped me a curtsey. I liked her 
doing this, however, for it suited her. At the same instant my kindly 
aunt, Praskovya Ilyinitchna, could hold out no longer, and abandon­
ing the tea-tray, dashed up to embrace me; but before I had time to 
say a couple of words to her I heard the shrill voice of Miss Pere­
pe!itsyn hissing out that Praskovya Ilyinitchna seemed to have for­
gotten Madame Ia Generale. "That Madame has asked for her tea, and 
you do not pour it out, and she is waiting." And Praskovya Ilyinitchna, 
leaving me, flew back in all haste to her duties. Madame Ia Generale, 
the most important person of the party, in whose presence all the others 
were on their best behaviour, was a lean, spiteful old woman, dressed 
in mourning-spiteful, however, chiefly from old age and from the 
loss of her mental faculties (which had never been over-brilliant) ;  
even in the past, she had been a nonsensical creature. Her rank as a 
general's wife had made her even stupider and more arrogant. When 
she was in a bad humour the house became a perfect hell. She had two 
ways of displaying her ill-humour. The first was a silent method, when 
the old lady would not open her lips for days together, but maintained 
an obstinate silence and pushed away or even sometimes flung on the 
floor everything that was put before her. The other method was the 
exact opposite-garrulous. This would begin, as a rule, by my grand­
mother's-for she was my grandmother, of course-being plunged into 
a state of extreme despondency, and expecting the end of the world 
and the failure of all her undertakings, foreseeing poverty and every 
possible trouble in the future, being carried away by her own pre­
sentiments, reckoning on her fingers the calamities that were coming, 
and reaching a climax of enthusiasm and intense excitement over the 
enumeration. It always appeared, of course, that she had foreseen all 
this long before, and had said nothing only because she was forced to 
be silent "in this house." But if only she had been treated with respect, 
if only they had cared to listen to her earlier, then, etc., etc. In all this, 
the flock of lady companions and Miss Perepelitsyn promptly followed 
suit, and finally it was solemnly ratified by Foma Fomitch. At the 
minute when I was presented to her she was in a horrible rage, and 
app:trently it was taking the silent form, the most terrible. Every one 
w::s watching her with apprehension. Only Tatyana Ivanovna, who 
was completely unconscious of it all, was in the best of spirits. My 
uncle purposely with a certain solemnity led me up to my grand­
mother; but the latter, making a wry face, pushed awav her cup 
ill-humouredly. 

'I he Jriend of the Jamily 
"Is this that vol-ti-geur?" she drawled through her teeth, addressing 
Miss Perepelitsyn. 
This foolish question completely disconcerted me. I don't understand 
why she called me a voltigeur. But such questions were easy enough to 
her. Miss Perepelitsyn bent down and whispered something in her 
ear, but the old lady waved her off angrily. I remained standing with 
my mouth open and looked inquiringly at my uncle. They all looked 
at one another and Obnoskin even grinned, which I did not like at all. 
"She sometimes talks at random, my boy," my uncle, a little dis­
concerted himself, whispered in my ear; "but it means nothing, it's just 
her goodness of heart. The heart is what one must look at." 
"Yes, the heart, the heart," Tatyana I vanovna's bell-like voice rang 
out. She had not taken her eyes off me all this time, and seemed as 
though she could not sit still in her chair. I suppose the word "heart," 
uttered in a whisper, had reached her ear. 
But she did not go on, though she was evidently longing to express 
herself. \Vhether she was overcome with confusion or some other feel­
ing, she suddenly subsided into silence, flushed extremely red, turned 
quickly to the governess and whispered something in her ear, and 
suddenly putting her handkerchief before her mouth and sinking back 
in her chair, began giggling as though she were in hysterics. I looked 
at them all in extreme amazement; but to my surprise, every one was 
particularly grave and looked as though nothing exceptional had hap­
pened. I realized, of course, the kind of person Tatyana lvanovna was. 
At last I was handed tea, and I recovered myself a little. I don't know 
why, but I suddenly felt that it was my duty to begin a polite con­
versation with the ladies. 
"It was true what you told me, uncle," I began, "when you warned 
me that I might be a little abashed. I openly confess-why conceal it?" 
I went on, addressing Madame Obnoskin with a deprecating smile, 
"that I have hitherto had hardly any experience of ladies' society. And 
just now when I made my entry so unsuccessfully, it seemed to me that 
my position in the middle of the room was very ridiculous and made 
me look rather a simpleton, didn't it? Have you read The Simpleton?" 
I added, feeling more and more lost, blushing at my ingrati:ting 
candour, and glaring at Monsieur Obnoskin, who was still looking 
me up and down with a grin on his face. 
"Just so, just so, just so!" my uncle cried suddenly with extreme 
animation, genuinely delighted that the conversation had been set 
going somehow and that I had recovered myself. "That's no great 

668 
'1 he Short Novels of 'DostoevskY 
matter, my boy, your talking of the likelihood of your being abashed. 
\Veil, you have been, and that's the end of it. But when I first made 
my debut, I actually told a lie, my boy, would you believe that? Yes, 
really, Anfisa Petrovna, I assure you, it's worth hearing. Just after I 
had become a Junker, I went to Moscow, and presented myself to a 
very important lady with a letter of introduction ; that is, she was a very 
haughty woman, but in reality, very good-natured, in spite of what 
they said. I went in-1 was shown up. The drawing-room was full of 
people, chiefly swells. I made my bow and sat down. At the second 
word, she asked me: 'Have you estates in the country?' And I hadn't 
got as much as a hen-what was I to answer? I felt crushed to the 
earth. Every one was looking at me (I was only a young Junker!). 
Why not say: no, I have nothing; and that would have been the right 
thing because it was the truth. But I couldn "t face it! 'Yes,' I said, 'a 
hundred and seventeen serfs.' And why did I stick on that seventeen ? 
If one must tell a lie, it is better to tell it with a round number, isn't 
it? A minute later, through my letter of introduction, it appeared that 
I was as poor as a church mouse, and I had told a lie into the bargain! 
. . .  \Veil, there was no help for it. I took myself ofT as fast as I could, 
and never set foot in the place again. In those days I had nothing, you 
know. All I have got now is three hundred serfs from Uncle Afanasy 
\1atveyitch, and two hundred serfs with Kapitonovko which came to 
me earlier from my grandmother Akulina Panfilovna, a total of more 
than five hundred serfs. That's capital! But from that day I gave up 
lying and don't tell lies now.'' 
"Well, I shouldn't have given it up, if I were you. There is no know­
ing what may happen,'' observed Obnoskin, smiling ironically. 
"To be sure, that's true! Goodness knows what may happen," my 
uncle assented good-naturedly. 
Obnoskin burst into loud laughter, throwing himself back in his 
chair; his mother smiled; Miss Perepclitsyn sniggered in a particularly 
disgusting way; Tatyana lvanovna giggled too, without knowing why, 
and even clapped her hands; in fact, I saw distinctly that my uncle 
counted for nothing in his own house. Sashenka's eyes flashed angrily, 
and she looked steadily at Obnoskin. The governess flushed and looked 
down. My uncle was surprised. 
"Wh;lt is it? What's happened ?" he repeated, looking round at us 
all in perplexity. 
All this time my cousin Mizintchikov was sitting a little way off, 
saying nothing and not even smiling when every one laughed. He 
drank tea zealously, gazed philosophically at the whole company, and 

'I he Jriend of the Jamily 
669 
several times as though in an access of unbearable boredom broke into 
whistling, probably a habit of his, but pulled himseif up in time. 
Obnoskin, who had jeered at my uncle and had attempted to attack 
me, seemed not to dare to glance at Mizintchikov; I noticed that. I 
noticed, too, that my silent cousin looked frequently at me and with 
evident curiosity, as though he was trying to make up his mind what 
sort of person I was. 
"I am certain," Madame Obnoskin minced suddenly, "I am perfectly 
certain Monsieur Serge-that is your name I believe?-that at home, 
in Petersburg, you were not greatly devoted to the ladies. I know that 
there are many, a great many young men nowadays in Petersburg who 
shun the society of ladies altogether. But in my opinion they are all 
free-thinkers. Nothing would induce me to re-gard it as anything but 
unpardonable free-thinking. And I must say it surprises me, young 
man, it surprises me, simply surprises me! . . .  " 
"I have not been into society at all," I answered with extraordinary 
animation. "But that . . .  I imagine at least . . .  is of no consequence. 
I have lived, that is I have generally had lodgings . . .  but that is no 
matter, I assure you. I shall be known one day; but hitherto I have 
always stayed at home . . .  
," 
"He is engaged in learned pursuits," observed my 1.u1cle, drawing 
himself up with dignity. 
"Oh, uncle, still talking of your learned pursuits! . . .  Only fancy," 
I went on with an extraordinarily free and easy air, smirking affably, 
and again addressing Madame Obnoskin, "my beloved uncle is so 
devoted to learning that he has unearthed somewhere on the high 
road a marvellous practical philosopher, a Mr. Korovkin; and his first 
word to me after all these years of separation was, that he was expect­
ing this phenomenal prodigy with the most acute, one may say, im­
patience . . .  from love of learning, of course . . . .  
" 
And I sniggered, hoping to provoke a general laugh at my facetious­
ness. 
"Who is that? Of whom is he talking?" Madame Ia Generale jerked 
out sharply, addressing Miss Perepelitsyn. 
"Yegor Ilyitch has been inviting visitors, learned gentlemen; he 
drives along the highroads collecting them," the lady hissed out. 
My uncle was completely dumbfounded. 
"Oh, yes! I had forgotten," he cried, turning upon me a glance that 
expressed reproach. "I am expecting Korovkin. A man of learning, a 
man who will survive his century . . . .  " 
He broke off and relapsed into silence. Madame la Generale waved 

670 
7' he Short 'N..ovels of Dostoevsky 
her arm, and this time so successfully that she knocked over a cup, 
which flew off the table and was smashed. General excitement followed. 
"She always does that when she is angry; she throws things on the 
floor," my uncle whispered in confusion. "But she only does it when 
she is angry . . . .  Don't stare, my boy, don't take any notice, look the 
other way . . . .  What made you speak of Korovkin ? . . .  " 
But I was looking away already; at that moment I met the eyes ot 
the governess, and it seemed to me that in their expression there was 
something reproachful, even contemptuous; a flush of indignation 
glowed upon her pale cheeks. I understood the look in her face, and 
guessed that by my mean and disgusting desire to make my uncle 
ridiculous in order to make myself a little less so, I had not gained 
much in that young lady's estimation. I cannot express how ashamed 
I felt! 
"I must go on about Petersburg with you," Anfisa Petrovna gushed 
again, when the commotion caused by the breaking of the cup had 
subsided. "I recall with such enjoyment, I may say, our life in that 
charming city . . . .  We were very intimately acquaimed with a family­
do you remember, Pavel, General Polovitsin . . . .  Oh, what a fascinat­
ing, fas-ci-na-ting creature his wife was! You know that aristocratic 
distinction, beau monde! . . .  Tell me, you have most likely met her? 
. . .  I must own I have been looking forward to your being here with 
impatience; I have been hoping to hear a great deal, a very great deal 
about our friends in Petersburg . . . .  
" 
"I am very sorry that I cannot . . .  excuse me . . . .  As I have said 
already, I have rarely been into society, and I don't know General 
Polovitsin; I have never even heard of him," I answered impatiently, 
my affability being suddenly succeeded by a mood of extreme annoy­
ance and irritability. 
"He is studying mineralogy," my incorrigible uncle put in with 
pride. "Is that investigating all sorts of stones, mineralogy, my boy?" 
"Yes, uncle, stones . . . .  
" 
"H'm . . . .  There are a great many sciences and they are all of use! 
And do you know, my boy, to tell you the truth, I did not know what 
mineralogy meam! It's all Greek to me. In other things I am so-so, 
but at learned subjects I am stupid-I frankly confess id" 
"You frankly confess!" Obnoskin caught him up with a snigger. 
"Papa!" cried Sashenka, looking reproachfully at her father. 
"What is it, darling? Oh, dear, I keep interrupting )'OU, Anfisa 
Pctrovna," my uncle caught himself up suddenly, not understanding 
Sashcnka's exclamation. "Please forgive me." 

The Jriend of the Jamily 
671 
"Oh, don't distress yourself," Anfisa Petrovna answered with a sour 
smile. "Though I have said everything already to your nephew, and 
will finish perhaps, Monsieur Serge-that is right, isn't it ?-by telling 
you that you really must reform. I believe that the sciences, the arts .
•
•
 
sculpture, for instance . . .  all those lofty ideas, in fact, have their fas­
ci-na-ting side, but they do not take the place of ladies! . . .  Women, 
women would form you, young man, and so to do without them is 
impossible, young man, impossible, im-poss-ible!" 
"Impossible, impossible," Tatyana lvanovna's rather shrill voice rang 
out again. "Listen," she began, speaking with a sort of childish haste 
and flushing crimson, of course, "listen, I want to ask you some­
thing . . . .  
" 
"Pray do," I answered, looking at her attentively. 
"I wanted to ask you whether you have come to stay long or not?" 
"I really don't know, that's as my affairs . . .  
" 
"Affairs! What sort of affairs can he have? Oh, the mad fellow! . . .  " 
And Tatyana Ivanovna, blushing perfectly crimson and hiding 
behind her fan, bent down to the governess and at once began whisper­
ing something to her. Then she suddenly laughed and clapped her 
hands. 
"Stay! stay!" she cried, breaking away from her confidante and again 
addressing me in a great hurry as though afraid I were going away. 
"Listen, do you know what I am going to tell you? You are awfully, 
awfully like a young man, a fas-ci-na-ting young man! Sashenka, 
Nastenka, do you remember? He is awfully like that madman-do 
you remember, Sashenka? We were out driving when we met him 
. . .  on horseback in a white waistcoat . . .  he put up his eyeglass at 
me, too, the shameless fellow! Do you remember, I hid myself in my 
veil, too, but I couldn't resist putting my head out of the carriage 
window and shouting to him : 'You shameless fellow!' and then I threw 
my bunch of flowers on the road? . . .  Do you remember, Nastenka?" 
And the lady, half-crazy over eligible young men, hid her face in her 
hands, all excitement; then suddenly leaped up from her seat, darted 
to the window, snatched a rose from a bowl, threw it on the floor near 
me and ran out of the room. She was gone in a flash! This time a 
certain embarrassment was apparent, though Madame la Generale 
was again completely unmoved. Anfisa Petrovna, for instance, showed 
no surprise, but seemed suddenly a little troubled and looked with 
anxiety at her son; the young ladies blushed, while Pavel Obnoskin, 
with a look of vexation which at the time I did not understand, got 
up from his chair and went to the window. My uncle was beginning 

672 
The SIJOrt Novels of Vostoevsky 
to make signs to me, but at that instant another person walked into 
the room and drew the attention of all. 
"Ah, here is Yevgraf Larionitch ! Talk of angels!" cried my uncle, 
genuinely delighted. "Well, brother, have you come from the town?" 
"Queer set of creatures! They seem to ha,·e been collected here on pur­
pose!" I thought to myself, not yet understanding fully what was 
passing before my eyes, and not suspecting either that I was probably 
adding another to the collection of queer creatures by appearing among 
them. 
[ v ] 
YEZHEVIKIN 
THERE walked or rather squeezed himself into the room 
(though the doors were very wide ones) a little figure which even in 
the doorway began wriggling, bowing and smirking, looking with 
extraordinary curiosity at all the persons present. It was a little pock­
marked old man with quick and furtive eyes, with a bald patch at the 
top of his head and another at the back, with a look of undefined 
subtle mockery on his rather thick lips. He was wearing a very shabby 
dress-coat which looked as though it were second-hand. One button 
was hanging by a thread; two or three were completely missing. His 
high boots full of holes, and his greasy cap, were in keeping with his 
pitiful attire; he had a very dirty check pocket-handkerchief in his 
hand, with which he wiped the sweat from his brow and temples. I 
noticed that the governess blushed slightly and looked rapidly at me. 
I fancied, too, that there was something proud and challenging in this 
glance. 
"Straight from the town, benefactor! Straight from there, my kind 
protector! I ''rill tell you everything, only first let me pay my respects," 
said the old man. And he made straight for Madame Ia Generale, but 
stopped half-way and again addressed my uncle. 
"You know my leading characteristic, benefactor-a sly rogue, a 
regular sly rogue! You know that as soon as I walk in I make for the 
chief person of the house, I turn my toes in her direction first of all, 
so as from the first step to win favour and protection. A sly rogue, 
my good sir, a sly rogue, benefactor. Allow me, my dear lady, allow 
me, your Excellency, to kiss your dress, or I might sully with my lips 
your hand of gold, of general's rank.'' 

The Jriend of the Jamily 
673 
Madame Ia Generale to my surprise gave him her hand to kiss 
rather graciously. 
"And my respects to you, our beauty," he went on, "Miss Pere­
pelitsyn. There is no help for it, madame, I am a sly rogue. As long ago 
as 1841 it was settled that I was a rogue, when I was dismissed from 
the service just at the time when Valentin Ignatyevitch Tihontsev 
became 'your honour.' He was made an assessor; he was made an 
assessor and I was made a rogue. And, you know, I am so open by 
nature that I make no secret of it. It can't be helped. I have tried living 
honestly, I have tried it, but now I must try something else. Alexandra 
Yegorovna, our little apple in syrup," he went on, going round the 
table and making his way up to Sashenka, "let me kiss your dress; 
there is a smell of apples and all sorts of nice things about you, young 
lady. Our respects to the hero of the day; I have brought you a bow 
and arrow, my little sir. I was a whole morning making it, my lads 
helped me; we will shoot with it presently. And when you grow up 
you will be an officer and cut of1 a Turk's head. Tatyana lvanovna .
.
•
 
but oh, she is not here, my benefactress! Or I would have kissed her 
dress too. Praskovya Ilyinitchna, my kindest friend, I can't get near 
you or I would kiss your foot as well as your hand, so there! Anfisa 
Petrovna, I protest my profound respect for you. I prayed for you 
only to-day, benefactress, on my knees with tears I prayed for you and 
for your son also that God might send him honours of all sorts-and 
talents too, talents especially! And by the way, our humblest duty to 
Ivan Ivanitch Mizintchikov. May God send you all that you desire for 
yourself, for you will never make out, sir, what you do want for your­
self: such a silent gentleman . . . .  Good-day, Nastya! All my small fry 
send their love to you, they talk of you every day. And now a deep bow 
to my host. I come from the town, your honour, straight off from the 
town. And this, no doubt, is your nephew who is being trained in a 
learned faculty? My humble duty, sir; let me have your hand." 
There was laughter. One could see that the old man played the part 
of an amateur clown. His arrival livened the party up. Many did not 
even understand his sarcasms, and yet he had made slight digs at 
them all. Only the governess, whom to my surprise he called simply 
Nastya, blushed and frowned. I was pulling back my hand, but I be­
lieve that was just what the horrid old man wanted. 
"But I only asked to shake it, sir, if you will allow me; not to kiss 
it. And you thought I meant to kiss it? No, my dear sir, for the time 
being I will only shake it. I suppose you took me for the clown of the 
establishment, kind sir?" he said, looking at me mockingly. 

674 
The Short 'N..ovels of 'Dostoevsky 
"N-no, really, I . . .  
" 
"To be sure, sir! If I am a fool, then some one else here is one too. 
Treat me with respect; I am not such a rogue yet as you imagine. 
Though maybe I am a clown too. I am a slave, my wife is a slave, and 
so there is nothing for it but flattery. That's how it is! You get some­
thing by it anyway, if only to make sop for the children. Sugar, scatter 
as much sugar as you can in everything, that will make things more 
wholesome for you. I tell you this in secret, sir; maybe you will have 
need of it. Fortune has been hard on me, that is why I am a clown." 
"He-he-he! The old man is a comical fellow! He always makes us 
laugh!" piped Anfisa Petrovna. 
"My dear madame and benefactress, a fool has a better time of it in 
this world! If I had only known that, I would have enlisted among 
the fools in early childhood, and I dare say by now I might have been 
a wise man. But as it is, I wanted to be a clever man at first, so now 
I am a fool in my old age." 
"Tell me, please," interposed Obnoskin (he probably was not pleased 
by the remark about talents), lolling in a particularly free and easy 
way in his arm-chair and staring at the old man through his eyeglass as 
though at an insect, "tell me, please . . .  I always forget your surname 
. . .  what the deuce is it? . . .  " 
"Oh, my dear sir! Why, my surname, if it please you, is Yezhevikin; 
but what does that matter? Here I have been sitting without a job 
these nine years, I just go on living in accordance with the laws of 
nature. And my children, my children are simply a family of Holm­
skys. As the proverb goes, 'The rich man has calves, the poor man 
has kids.' " 
"Oh, yes . . .  calves . . .  but that's beside the point. Come, listen, I 
have been wanting to ask you a long time : why is it that when you 
come in, you look back at once? It's very funny.'' 
"Why do I look back? Why, I am always fancying, sir, that some 
one behind me wants to slap me on the back and squash me like a fly. 
That is why I look round. I have become a monomaniac, sir." 
Again there was laughter. The governess got up from her seat as 
though she would go away, but sank back in her chair again. There 
was a look of pain and suffering on her face in spite of the colour that 
flooded her cheeks. 
"You know who it is, my boy?" my uncle whispered. "It's lu:r father, 
you know!" 
I stared at my uncle open-eyed. The name of Yezhevikin had com­
pletely slipped out of my mind. I had been playing the hero, had been 

'The Jriend of the Jamily 
675 
dreaming all the journey of my proposed bride, had been building 
magnificent plans for her benefit, and had utterly forgotten her name, 
or rather had taken no notice of it from the first. 
"What, her father ?" I answered, also in a whisper. "Why, I thought 
she was an orphan." 
"It's her father, my boy, her father. And do you know, a most honest, 
a most honourable man and he does not even drink, but only plays 
at being a fool; fearfully poor, my boy, eight children! They live on 
Nastya's salary. He was turned out of the service through his tongue. 
He comes here every week. He is such a proud fellow-nothing will 
induce him to take help. I have offered it, many times I have offered 
it-he won't take it. An embittered man." 
"Well, Y evgraf Larionitch, what news have you?" uncle asked, and 
slapped him warmly on the shoulder, noticing that the suspicious old 
man was already listening to our conversation. 
"What news, benefactor? Valentin Ignatyitch made a statement 
about Trishin's case yesterday. The flour under his charge turned out 
to be short weight. It is that Trishin, madame, who looks at you and 
puffs like a samovar. Perhaps you graciously remember him? So 
Valentin lgnatyitch writes of Trishin: 'If,' said he, 'the often-men­
tioned Trishin could not guard his own niece's honour'-she eloped 
with an officer last year-'how,' said he, 'should he take care of gov­
ernment property ?' He stuck that into his report, by God, I am not 
lying." 
"Fie! What stories you tell!" cried Anfisa Petrovna. 
"Just so, just so, just so! You've overshot the mark, friend Yevgraf," 
my uncle chimed in. "Aid your tongue will be your ruin. You are a 
straightforward man, honourable and upright, I can say that, but you 
have a venomous tongue! And I can't understand how it is you can't 
get on with them. They seem good-natured people, simple . • •  
" 
"Kind friend and benefactor! But it's just the simple man that I am 
afraid of,'' cried the old man with peculiar fervour. 
I liked the answer. I went rapidly up to Yezhevikin and warmly 
pressed his hand. The truth is, I wanted in some way to protest 
against the general tone and to show my sympathy for the old man 
openly. And perhaps, who knows? perhaps I wanted to raise myself 
in the opinion of Nastasya Yevgrafovna! But my movement led to 
no good. 
"Allow me to ask you," I said, blushing and flustered as usual, "have 
you heard of the Jesuits?" 

676 
The Short Novels of VostoevskJ 
"No, my good sir, I haven't; well, maybe something . . .  though how 
should we! But why?" 
"Oh . . .  I meant to tell you something apropos . . . .  But remind me 
some other time. But now let me assure you, I understand you and .
•
.
 
know how to appreciate . . .  " 
And utterly confused, I gripped his hand again. 
"Certainly, I will remind you, sir, certainly. I will write it in golden 
letters. If you will allow me, I'll tie a knot in my handkerchief." 
And he actually looked for a dry corner in his dirty, snuffy handker­
chief, and tied a knot in it. 
"Yevgraf Larionitch, take your tea," said Praskovya Ilyinitchna. 
"Immediately, my beautiful lady; immediately, my princess, I mean, 
not my lady! That's in return for your tea. I met Stepan Alexyevitch 
Bahtcheyev on the road, madame. He was so festive, that I didn't know 
what to make of it! I began to wonder whether he wasn't going to get 
married. Flatter away, flatter away! "  he said in a half-whisper, winking 
at me and screwing up his eyes as he carried his cup by me. "And how 
is it that my benefactor, my chief one, Foma Fomitch, is not to be seen? 
Isn't he coming to tea?" 
My uncle started as though he had been stung, and glanced timidly 
at his mother. 
"I really don't know,'' he answered uncertainly, with a strange 
perturbation. "\Ve sent for him, but he . . .  I don't know really, per­
haps he is indisposed. l have already sent Vidoplyasov and . . .  Perhaps 
I ought to go myself, though ?" 
"I went in to him myself just now," Yezhevikin brought out 
mysteriously. 
"Is it possible!" cried out my uncle in alarm. "\Veil, how was it?" 
"I wem in to him, first of all, I paid him my respects. His honour 
said he should drink his tea in solitude, and then added that a crust 
of dry bread would be enough for him, yes." 
These words seemed to strike absolute terror into my uncle. 
"But you should have explained to him, Yevgraf Larionitch ; you 
should have told him" . . .  my uncle said at last, looking at the old man 
with distress and reproach. 
"I did, I did." 
"Well ?" 
"For a long time he did not deign to answer me. He was sitting over 
some mathematical problem, he was working out something; one could 
see it was a brain-racking problem. He drew the breeches of Pythag­
oras, while I was there, I saw him myself. I repeated it three times, 

'1 he Jriend of the Jamily 
677 
only at the fourth he raised his head and seemed to see me for the first 
time. 'I am not coming,' he said; 'a learned gentleman has arrived 
here now, so I should be out of place beside a luminary like that!' He 
made use of that expression 'beside a luminary.' " 
And the horrid old man stole a sly glance at me. 
"That is just what I expected," cried my uncle, clasping his hands. 
"That's how I thought it would be. He says that about you, Sergey, 
that you are a 'learned gentlemen.' Well, what's to be done now?" 
"I must confess, uncle," I answered with dignity, shrugging my 
shoulders, "it seems to me such an absurd refusal that it is not worth 
noticing, and I really wonder at your being troubled by it .
.
•
 .'' 
"Oh, my boy, you know nothing about it!" he cried, with a vigorous 
wave of his hand. 
"It's no use grieving now, sir,'' Miss Perepelitsyn put in suddenly, 
"since all the wicked causes of it have come from you in the first place, 
Yegor Ilyitch. If you take off your head you don't weep for your hair. 
You should have listened to your mamma, sir, and you would have had 
no cause for tears now.'' 
"\Vhy, how am I to blame, Anna Nilovna? Have some fear of God!" 
said my uncle in an imploring voice, as though begging for an ex­
planation. 
"I do fear God, Yegor Ilyitch; but it all comes from your being an 
egoist, sir, and not loving your mother," Miss Perepelitsyn answered 
with dignity. "Why didn't you respect her wishes in the first place? 
She is your mother, sir. And I am not likely to tell you a lie, sir. I am 
a major's daughter myself, and not just anybody, sir." 
It seemed to me that Miss Perepelitsyn had intervened in the conver­
sation with the sole object of informing us all, and me in particular as a 
newcomer, that she was a major's daughter and not just anybody. 
"It's because he ill-treats his own mother,'' Madame Ia Generale 
herself brought out at last in a menacing voice. 
"Mamma, have mercy on us! How am I ill-treating you?" 
"It is because you are a black-hearted egoist, Yegorushka,'' Madame 
Ia Generale went on, growing more and more animated. 
"Mamma, mamma! in what way am I a black-hearted egoist?" cried 
my uncle, almost in despair. "For five days, for five whole days you 
have been angry with me and will not speak to me. And what for? 
what for? Let them judge me, let the whole world judge me! But let 
them hear my defence too. I have long kept silent, mamma, you would 
not hear me; let these people hear me now. Anfisa Petrovna! Pavel 
Semyonitch, generous Pavel Semyonitch! Sergey, my dear! You are an 

678 
'I he Short 'Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
outsider, you are, so to speak, a spectator. You can judge impar­
tially . . . .  
" 
"Calm yourself, Y egor Ilyitch, calm yourself," cried Anfisa Petrovna, 
"don't kill your mamma." 
"I am not killing my mamma, Anfisa Petrovna; but here I lay bare 
my heart, you can strike at it!" my uncle went on, worked up to the 
utmost pitch as people of weak character sometimes are when they are 
driven out of all patience, though their heat is like the fire of burning 
straws. "I want to say, Anfisa Petrovna, that I am not ill-treating any 
one. I start with saying that Foma Fomitch is the noblest and the most 
honourable of men, and a man of superior qualities too, but . . .  but 
he has been unjust to me in this case." 
"H'm!" grunted Obnoskin, as though he wanted to irritate my uncle 
still more. 
"Pavel Semyonitch, noble-hearted Pavel Semyonitchl Can you really 
think that I am, so to speak, an unfeeling stone? Why, I see, I under­
stand-with tears in my heart, I may say I understand-that all this 
misunderstanding comes from the excess of his afTection for me. But, 
say what you like, he really is unjust in this case. I will tell you all 
about it. I want to tell the whole story, Anfisa Petrovna, clearly and in 
full detail, that you may see from what the thing started, and whether 
mamma is right in being angry with me for not satisfying Foma 
Fomitch. And you listen too, Seryozha," he added, addressing me, 
which he did, indeed, during the rest of his story, as though he were 
afraid of his other listeners and doubtful of their sympathy; "you, too, 
listen and decide whether I am right or wrong. You will see what the 
whole business arose from. A week ago-yes, not more than a week­
my old chief, General Rusapetov, was passing through our town with 
his wife and stepdaughter, and broke the journey there. I was over­
whelmed. I hastened to seize the opportunity, I flew over, presented 
myself and invited them to dinner. He promised to come if it were 
possible. He is a very fine man, I assure you; he is conspicuous for his 
virtues and is a man of the highest rank into the bargain! He has been 
a benefactor to his stepdaughter; he married an orphan girl to an 
admirable young man (now a lawyer at Malinova; still a young man, 
but with, one may say, an all-round education) ; in short, he is a general 
of generals. Well, of course there was a tremendous fuss and bustle in 
the house-cooks, fricassees-! sent for an orchestra. I was delighted, 
of course, and looked festive; Foma Fomitch did not like my being 
delighted and looking festive! He sat down to the table-I remember, 
too, he was handed his favourite jelly and cream-he sat on and an 

The Jriend of the Jamily 
679 
without saying a word, then all at once j umped up. 'I am being in­
sulted, insulted!' 'But why, in what way are you being insulted, Foma 
Fomitch? '  'You despise me now,' he said; 'you are taken up with 
generals now, you think more of generals now than of me.' Well, of 
course I am making a long story short, so to say, I am only giving you 
the pith of it; but if only you knew what he said besides . . .  in a word, 
he stirred me to my inmost depths. What was I to do? I was depressed 
by it, of course; it was a blow to me, I may say. I went about like a 
cock drenched with rain. The festive day arrived. The general sent to 
say he couldn't come, he apologized-so he was not coming. I went to 
Foma. 'Come, Foma,' I said, 'set your mind at rest, he is not coming.' 
And would you believe it, he wouldn't forgive me, and that was the 
end of it. 'I have been insulted,' he said, 'and that is all about it!' I said 
this and that. 'No,' he said. 'You can go to your generals; you think 
more of generals than of me, you have broken our bonds of friendship;: 
he said. Of course, my dear, I understand what he was angry over, I 
am not a block, I am not a sheep, I am not a perfect post. It was, of 
course, from the excess of his affection for me, from jealousy-he says 
that himself-he is jealous of the general on my account, he is afraid 
of losing my aiTection, he is testing me, he wants to see how much 
I am ready to sacrifice for him. 'No,' he said, 'I am just as good as the 
general for you, I am myself "your Excellency" for you! I will be 
reconciled to you when you prove your respect for me.' 'In what way 
am I to prove my respect for you, Foma Fomitch?' 'Call me for a 
whole day "your Excellency," says he, 'then you will prove your 
respect.' I felt as though I were dropping from the clouds; you can 
picture my amazement. 'That will serve you,' said he, 'as a lesson not 
to be in ecstasies at the sight of generals when there are other people, 
perhaps, superior to all your generals.' Well, at that point I lost pa­
tience, I confess it! I confess it openly. 'Foma Fomitch,' I said, 'is such 
a thing possible? Can I take it upon myself to do it? Can I, have I the 
right to promote you to be a general? Think who it is bestows the rank 
of a general! How can I address you as, "your Excellency"? Why, it 
is infringing the decrees of Providence! Why, the general is an honour 
to his country; the general has faced the enemy, he has shed his blood 
on the field of honour. How am I to call you, "your Excellency"?' He 
would not give way, there was no doing anything. 'Whatever you 
want, Foma,' I said, 'I will do anything for you. Here you told me to 
shave off my whiskers because they were not patriotic enough-! 
shaved them off; I frowned, but I did shave them. What is more, I 
will do anything you like, only do give up the rank of a general!' 'No,• 

680 
The Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
said he, 'I won't be reconciled till you call me "your Excellency"; 
that,' said he, 'will be good for your moral character, it will humble 
your spirit!' said he. And so now for a week, a whole week, he won't 
speak to me; he is cross to every one that comes; he heard about you, 
that you were learned-that was my fault; I got warm and said too 
much-so he said he would not set foot in the house if you came into 
it. 'So I am not learned enough for you now,' said he. So there will be 
trouble when he hears now about Korovkin! Come now, please, tell 
me in what way have I been to blame? Was I to take on myself to call 
him 'your Excellency'? Why, it is impossible to live in such a position! 
What did he drive poor Bahtcheyev away from the table to-day for? 
Supposing Bahtcheyev is not a great astronomer, why, I am not a great 
astronomer, and you are not a great astronomer . . . .  Why is it? Why 
is it?" 
"Because you are envious, Yegorushka," mumbled Madame Ia 
Generale again. 
"Mamma," cried my uncle in despair, "you will drive me out of my 
mind! . . .  Those are not your words, you are repeating what others 
say, mammal I am, in fact, made out a stone, a block, a lamp-post and 
not your son." 
"I heard, uncle," I interposed, utterly amazed by his story-"1 heard 
from Bahtcheyev, I don't know whether it was true or not-th:lt Foma 
Fomitch was jealous of Ilyusha's nameday, and declares that to-morrow 
is his nameday too. I must own that this characteristic touch so 
astounded me that I . . .  " 
"His birthday, my dear, his birthday!" my uncle interrupted me, 
speaking rapidly. "He only made a mistake in the word, but he is right; 
to-morrow is his birthday. Truth, my boy, before everything . . . .  " 
"It's not his birthday at all!" cried Sashenka. 
"Not his birthday!" cried my uncle, in a fluster. 
"It's not his birthday, papa. You simply say what isn't true to deceive 
yourself and to satisfy Foma Fomitch. His birthday was in March. 
Don't you remember, too, we went on a pilgrimage to the monastery 
just before, and he wouldn't let any one sit in peace in the carriage? 
He kept crying out that the cushion was crushing his side, and pinch­
ing us; he pinched auntie twice in his ill-humour. 'I am fond of 
camellias,' he said, 'for I have the taste of the most refined society, 
and you grudge picking me any from the conservatory.' And all day 
long he sulked and grizzled and would not talk to us 
.
.
.
•
 
" 
I fancy that if a bomb had fallen in the middle of the room it would 
not have astounded and alarmed them all as much as this open 

'1 he Jriend of the Jamily 
681 
mutiny-and of whom ?-of a little girl who was not even permitted 
to speak aloud in her grandmother's presence. Madame la Generale, 
dumb with amazement and fury, rose from her seat, stood erect and 
stared at her insolent grandchild, unable to believe her eyes. My uncle 
was paralyzed with horror. 
"She is allowed to do just as she likes, she wants to be the death of 
her grandmother!" cried Miss Perepelitsyn. 
"Sasha, Sasha, think what you are saying! What's the matter with 
you, Sasha?" cried my uncle, rushing from one to the other, from his 
mother to Sashenka to stop her. 
"I won't hold my tongue, papa!" cried Sashenka, leaping up from 
her chair with flashing eyes and stamping with her feet. "I won't hold 
my tongue! We have all suffered too long from Foma Fomitch, from 
your nasty, horrid Foma Fomitch! Foma Fomitch will be the ruin of 
us all, for people keep on telling him that he is so clever, generous, 
noble, learned, a mix-up of all the virtues, a sort of potpourri, and like 
an idiot Foma Fomitch believes it all. So many nice things are offered 
to him that any one else would be ashamed; but Foma Fomitch 
gobbles up all that is put before him and asks for more. You'll see, 
he will be the ruin of us all, and it's all papa's fault! Horrid, horrid 
Foma Fomitch! I speak straight out, I am not afraid of any one! He 
is stupid, ill-tempered, dirty, ungentlemanly, cruel-hearted, a bully, a 
mischief-maker, a liar . . . .  Oh, I'd turn him out of the house this 
minute, I would, but papa adores him, papa is crazy over him!" 
"Oh!" shrieked her grandmother, and she fell in a swoon on the 
sofa. 
"Agafya Timofyevna, my angel," cried Anfisa Petrovna, "take my 
smelling-salts! Water, make haste, water!" 
"\Vater, water!" shouted my uncle. "Mamma, mamma, calm your­
self! I beg you on my knees to calm yourself! . . .  " 
"You ought to be kept on bread and water and shut up in a dark 
room . . .  you're a murderess!" Miss Perepelitsyn, shaking with spite, 
hissed at Sashenka. 
"I will be kept on bread and water, I am not afraid of anything!" 
cri;:d Sashenka, moved to frenzy in her turn. "I will defend papa 
because he can't defend himself. Who is he, who is your Foma 
Fomitch compared with papa ? He eats papa's bread and insults papa, 
the ungrateful creature. I would tear him to pieces, your Foma 
Fomitch! I'd challenge him to a duel and shoot him on the spot with 
with two pistols! . . . " 

682 
The Short N.ovels of 'Dostoevsky 
"Sasha, Sasha," cried my uncle in despair. "Another word and I am 
ruined, hopelessly ruined." 
"Papa," cried Sashenka, flinging herself headlong at her father, dis­
solving into tears and hugging him in her arms, "papa, how can you 
ruin yourself like this, you so kind, and good, and merry and clever? 
How can you give in to that horrid ungrateful man, be his plaything 
and let him turn you into ridicule? Papa, my precious papa! . . .  
" 
She burst into sobs, covered her face with her hands and ran out of 
the room. 
A fearful hubbub followed. Madame Ia Generale lay in a swoon. 
My uncle was kneeling beside her kissing her hands. Miss Perepelitsyn 
was wriggling about them and casting spiteful but triumphant glances 
at us. Anfisa Petrovna was moistening the old lady's temples and 
applying her smelling-salts. Praskovya Ilyinitchna was shedding tears 
and trembling, Y ezhevikin was looking for a corner to seek refuge 
in, while the governess stood pale and completely overwhelmed with 
terror. Mizintchikov was the only one who remained unchanged. He 
got up, went to the window and began looking out of it, resolutely 
declining to pay attention to the scene around him. 
All at once Madame Ia Generale sat up, drew herself up and scanned 
me with a menacing eye. 
"Go away!" she shouted, stamping her foot at me. 
I must confess that this I had not in the least expected. 
"Go away! Go out of the house! What has he come for ? Don't let me 
see a trace of him!" 
"Mamma, mamma, what do you mean? Why, this is Seryozha," my 
uncle muttered, shaking all over with terror. "Why, he has come to 
pay us a visit, mamma." 
"What Seryozha? Nonsense. I won't hear a word. Go away! It's 
Korovkin. I am convinced it is Korovkin. My presentiments never 
deceive me. He has come to turn Foma Fomitch out; he has been sent 
for with that very object. I have a presentiment in my heart . . . .  Go 
away, you scoundrel!" 
"Uncle, if this is how it is," I said, spluttering with honest indigna­
tion, "then excuse me, I'll . . .  " And I reached after my hat. 
"Sergey, Sergey, what are you about? . . .  Well, this really is . . .  
Mamma, this is Seryozha! . . .  Sergey, upon my word!" he cried, racing 
after me and trying to take away my hat. "You are my visitor; you'll 
stay, I wish it! She doesn't mean it," he went on in a whisper; "she 
only goes on like this when she is angry . . . .  You only keep out of her 
sight just at first .
•
.
 keep out of the way and it will all pass over. She 

r he Jriend of the Jami/y 
683 
will forgive you, I assure you! She is good-natured, only she works 
herself up. You hear she takes you for Korovkin, but afterwards she 
will forgive you, I assure you . . . .  What do you want?" he cried to 
Gavrila, who came into the room trembling with fear. 
Gavrila came in not alone; with him was a very pretty peasant boy 
of sixteen who had been taken as a house serf, on account of his good 
looks as I heard afterwards. His name was Falaley. He was wearing a 
peculiar costume, a red silk shirt with embroidery at the neck and a 
belt of gold braid, full black velveteen breeches, and goatskin boots 
turned over with red. This costume was designed by Madame la 
Generale herself. The boy was sobbing bitterly, and tears rolled one 
after another from his big blue eyes. 
"What's this now?" cried my uncle. "What has happened? Speak, 
you ruffian!" 
"Foma Fomitch told us to come here; he is coming after us him­
self," answered the despondent Gavrila. "Me for an examination, while 
he . . .  " 
"He?" 
"He has been dancing, sir," answered Gavrila in a tearful voice. 
"Dancing!" cried my uncle in horror. 
"Dancing," blubbered Falaley with a sob. 
"The Komarinsky!" 
"Yes, the Kom-a-rin-sky." 
"And Foma Fomitch found him?" 
"Ye-es, he found me." 
"You'll be the death of me!" cried my uncle. "I am done for!" And 
he clutched his head in both hands. 
"Foma Fomitch!" Vidoplyasov announced, entering the room. 
The door opened, and Foma Fomitch in his own person stood facing 
the perplexed company. 
[ VI ] 
OF TIE WHITE BULL AND TIE KOMARINSKY PEASANT 
BEFORE I have the honour of presenting the reader with Foma 
Fomitch in person, I think it is absolutely essential to say a few words 
about Falaley and to explain what there was terrible in the fact of his 
dancing the Komarinsky and Foma Fomitch's finding him engaged 
in that light-hearted diversion. Falaley was a house serf boy, an orphan 

684 
'I he Short Novels of TJostoevsky 
from the cradle, and a godson of my uncle's late wife. My uncle was 
very fond of him. That fact alone was quite sufficient to make Foma 
Fomitch, after he had settled at Stepantchikovo and gained complete 
domination over my uncle, take a dislike to the latter's favourite, 
Falaley. But Madame Ia Generale took a particular fancy to the boy, 
who, in spite of Foma Fomitch's wrath, remained upstairs in attend­
ance on the family. Madame Ia Generale herself insisted upon it, and 
Foma gave way, storing up the injury-he looked on everything as an 
injury-in his heart and revenging it on every favourable occasion on 
my uncle, who was in no way responsible. Falaley was wonderfully 
good-looking. He had a girlish face, the face of a beautiful peasant 
girl. Madame Ia Generale petted and spoiled him, prized him as 
though he were a rare and pretty toy, and there was no saying which 
she loved best, her little curly black dog Ami or Falaley. We have 
already referred to his costume, which was her idea. The young ladies 
gave him pomatum, and it was the duty of the barber Kuzma to curl 
his hair on holidays. This boy was a strange creature. He could not be 
called a perfect idiot or imbecile, but he was so naive, so truthful and 
simple-hearted, that he might sometimes be certainly taken for a fool. 
If he had a dream, he would go at once to tell it to his master or 
mistress. He joined in the conversation of the gentlefolk without caring 
whether he was interrupting them. He would tell them things quite 
impossible to tell gentlefolks. He would dissolve into the most genuine 
tears when his mistress fell into a swoon or when his master was too 
severely scolded. He sympathized with every sort of distress. He would 
l.ometimes go up to Madame Ia Generale, kiss her hands, and beg her 
not to be cross-and the old lady would magnanimously forgive him 
these audacities. He was sensitive in the extreme, kind-hearted, as free 
from malice as a lamb and as gay as a happy child. They gave him 
dainties from the dinner-table. 
He always stood behind Madame Ia Generale's chair and was aw­
fully fond of sugar. When he was given a lump of sugar he would 
nibble at it with his strong milk-white teeth, and a gleam of inde­
scribable pleasure shone in his merry blue eyes and all over his pretty 
little face. 
For a long time Foma Fomitch raged; but reflecting at last that he 
would get nothing by anger, he suddenly made up his mind to be 
Falaley's benefactor. After first pitching into my uncle for doing 
nothing for the education of his house serfs, he determined at once to 
set about training the poor boy in morals, good manners and French. 

The Jriend of the Jamily 
685 
"What!" he would say in defence of his absurd idea (an idea not 
confined to Foma Fomitch, as the writer of these lines can testify), 
"what! he is always upstairs waiting on his mistress; one day, forget­
ting that he does not know French, she will say to him, for instance: 
'Donnay mooah mon mooshooar'-he ought to be equal to the occa­
sion and able to do his duty even then!" 
But it appeared not only that it was impossible to teach Falaley 
French, but that the cook Andron, the boy's uncle, who had disin­
terestedly tried to teach him to read Russian, had long ago given it up 
in despair and put the alphabet away on the shelf. Falaley was so dull 
at book-learning that he could understand absolutely nothing. More­
over, this led to further trouble. The house serfs began calling Falaley, 
in derision, a Frenchman, and old Gavrila, my uncle's valet, openly 
ventured to deny the usefulness of learning French. This reached Foma 
Fomitch's ears, and bursting with wrath, he made his opponent, 
Gavrila, himself learn French as a punishment. This was the origin of 
the whole business of teaching the servants French which so exas­
perated Mr. Bahtcheyev. It was still worse in regard to manners. Foma 
was absolutely unable to train Falaley to suit his ideas, and in spite of 
his prohibition, the boy would go in to tell him his dreams in the 
morning, which Foma Fomitch considered extremely ill-mannered and 
familiar. But Falaley obstinately remained Falaley. My uncle was, of 
course, the first to suffer for all this. 
"Do you know, do you know what he has done to-day?" Foma 
would exclaim, selecting a moment when all were gathered together 
in order to produce a greater sensation. "Do you know what your 
systematic spoiling is coming to? To-day he gobbled up a piece of pie 
given him at the table; and do you know what he said of it? Come 
here, come here, silly fool; come here, idiot; come here, red face . . . .  
" 
Falaley would come up weeping and rubbing his eyes with both 
hands. 
"What did you say when you greedily ate up your pie? Repeat it 
before every one!" 
Falaley would dissolve in bitter tears and make no answer. 
"Then I'll speak for you, if that's how it is. You said, slapping your­
self on your stuffed and vulgar stomach: 'I've gobbled up the pie as 
Martin did the soap!' Upon my word, Colonel, can expressions like 
that be used in educated society, still more in aristocratic society? Did 
you say it or not? Speak!" 
"I di-id . . .  " Falaley would assent, sobbing. 

686 
The Short Notels of VostoetJsky 
"Well, then, tell me now, does Martin eat soap? Where have you 
seen a Martin who eats soap? Tell me, give me an idea of this phe­
nomenal Martin!" 
Silence. 
"I am asking you," F oma would persist, "who is this Martin ? I want 
to see him, I want to make his acquaintance. Well, what is he? A 
registry clerk, an astronomer, a provincial, a poet, an army captain, a 
serving man-he must have been something. Answer!" 
"A ser-er-ving rna-an," Falaley would answer at last, still weeping. 
"Whose? Who is his master?" 
But Falaley was utterly unable to say who was his master. It would 
end, of course, in Foma Fomitch's rushing out of the room in a passion, 
crying out that he had been insulted ; Madame Ia Generale would 
show symptoms of an attack, while my uncle would curse the hour of 
his birth, beg everybody's pardon, and for the rest of the day walk 
about on tiptoe in his own rooms. 
As ill-luck would have it, on the day after the trouble over Martin 
and the soap, Falaley, who had succeeded in completely forgetting 
about Martin and all his woes of the previous day, informed Foma 
Fomitch as he took in his tea in the morning, that he had had a dream 
about a white bull. This was the last straw! Foma Fomitch was moved 
to indescribable indignation, he promptly summoned my uncle and 
began upbraiding him for the vulgarity of the dream dreamed by his 
Falaley. This time severe steps were taken : Falaley was punished, he 
had to kneel down in the corner. He was sternly forbidden to dream 
of such coarse rustic subjects. 
"What I am angry at," said Foma, "apart from the fact that he really 
ought not to dare to think of blurting out his dreams to me, especially 
a dream of a white bull-apart from that-you must agree, Colonel­
what is the white bull but a proof of coarseness, ignorance and loutish­
ness in your unkempt Falaley? As the thoughts are, so will the dreams 
be. Did I not tell you before that you would never make anything of 
him, and that he ought not to remain upstairs waiting upon the family? 
You will never, never develop that senseless peasant soul into anything 
lofty or poetical. Can't you manage," he went on, addressing Falaley, 
"can't you manage to dream of something elegant, refined, genteel, 
some scene from good society, such as gentlemen playing cards or 
ladies walking in a lovely garden?" 
Falaley promised he would be sure to dream next night of gentle­
men or ladies walking in a lovely garden. 
As he went to bed, Falaley prayed tearfully on the subject and won-

The Jriend of the Jamily 
687 
dered for a long time what he could do so as not to dream of the 
accursed white bull. But deceitful are the hopes of man. On waking 
up next morning, he remembered with horror that he had again been 
dreaming all night of the hateful white bull, and had not dreamed of 
even one lady walking in a lovely garden. This time the consequences 
were singular. Foma Fomitch positiYely declared that he did not be­
lieve in the possibility of such a coincidence, the possibilty of such a 
repetition of a dream, and that Falaley was prompted to say this by 
some one of the household, perhaps even by the colonel himself on 
purpose to annoy Foma Fomitch. There was no end of an uproar, tears 
and reproaches. Madame la Generale was taken ill towards the evening, 
the whole household wore a dejected air. There was still a faint hope 
that the following, that is, the third night, Falaley would be sure to 
have some dream of refined society. What was the universal indigna­
tion when for a whole week, every blessed night, Falaley went on 
dreaming of the white bull and nothing but the white bull. It was no 
use even to think of refined society. 
But the most interesting point was that Falaley was utterly incapa­
ble of thinking of lying, of simply saying that he had dreamed not 
of the white bull, but of a carriage, for instance, full of ladies and 
Foma Fomitch. This was all the more strange since lying indeed would 
not have been so very sinful in so extreme a case. But Falaley was so 
truthful that he positively could not tell a lie even if he wanted to. It 
was, indeed, not even suggested to him by any one. They all knew that 
he would betray himself at the first moment, and Foma Fomitch would 
immediately detect him in lying. What was to be done? My uncle's 
position was becoming intolerable. Falaley was absolutely incorrigible. 
"The poor boy was positively growing thinner from worry. 
The housekeeper Malanya declared that he was bewitched, and 
sprinkled him with magic water. She was ::ssisted in this compassion­
ate and salutary oper::tion by the tender-he::rted Pr::skovya Ilyinitchna, 
but even that was no use. Nothing was of use! 
"The deuce take the d::mned thing!" Falaley s::id. "The same dream 
every night! Every evening I pray, 'Don't let me dream of the white 
bull, don't let me dream of the white bull!' and there it is, there it is, 
the damned beast facing me, huge, with horns and such thick lips, 
oo-oo-oo!" 
My uncle was in despair, but luckily Foma Fomitch seemed all 
at once to have forgotten ::bout the white bull. Of course no one believed 
that Foma Fomitch could forget a circumstance so important. Every 
one assumed with terror that he was keeping the white bull in reserve, 

688 
'!he Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
and would bring it out on the first suitable occasion. It appeared later 
on that Foma Fomitch had no thoughts to spare for the white bull at 
that moment. He had other business in hand, other cares. Other plans 
were maturing in his beneficent and fertile brain. That is why he let 
Falaley breathe in peace, and every one else too had a respite. The boy 
grew gay again, and even began to forget what had happened; even 
the white bull began to visit him less and less frequently, though it still 
at times reminded him of its fantastic existence. In fact, everything 
would have gone well if there had been no such thing as the 
Komarinsky. 
It must be noted that Falaley was an excellent dancer. Dancing was 
his chief accomplishment, even something like his vocation. He danced 
with vigour, with inexhaustible gaiety, and he was particularly fond 
of dancing the Koraminsky Peasant. Not that he was so much 
attracted by the frivolous and in any case inexplicable steps of that 
volatile peasant-no, he liked dancing the Kor.aminsky solely because 
to hear the Komarinsky and not dance to the tune was utterly beyond 
him. Sometimes in the evenings two or three of the footmen, the 
coachmen, the gardener who played the fiddle, and even some of the 
ladies of the servants' hall would gather together in a circle in some 
back yard as far away as possible from Foma Fomitch. Music and 
dances would begin, and finally the Komarinsky would triumphantly 
come into its own. The orchestra consisted of two balalaikas, a guitar, 
a fiddle, and a tambourine, with which the postillion Mityushka was 
a capital hand. Falaley's condition was worth watching at such tirr.es: 
he would dance to complete oblivion of himself, to utter exhaustion, 
encouraged by the shouts and laughter of his audience. He would 
squeal, shout, laugh, clap his hands. He danced as though carried 
away by some intangible outside force with which he could not cope, 
and he struggled persistently to keep up with the continually increas­
ing pace of the reckless tune as he tapped on the ground with his 
heels. These were minutes of real delight to him; and everything 
would have gone happily and merrily if rumours of the Komarinsky 
had not at last reached Foma Fomitch. 
Foma Fomitch was petrified, and sent at once for the colonel. 
"There is only one thing I wish to learn from you," Foma began, 
"have you positively sworn to be the ruin of that luckless idiot or 
not? In the first case I will stand aside at once; if not, then I . . .  
" 
"But what is the matter? What has happened?" cried my uncle, 
alarmed. 

The Jriend of the Jamily 
689 
"You ask what has happened? Do you know that he is dancing the 
Komarinsky?" 
"Well . . .  well, what of it?" 
"Well, what of it!" shrieked Foma. "And you say that-you, their 
master, standing in a sense in the place of their father! But have 
you then a true idea of what the Komarinsky is? Do you know that 
that song describes a debauched peasant, attempting in a state of 
drunkenness the most immoral action? Do you know what sacrilege 
it is that vicious little Russian is committing? He is trampling upon 
the most precious bonds and, so to say, stamping them under his big 
loutish boots, accustomed to tread only the floor of the village inn. 
And do you realize that you have wounded my moral feelings by your 
answer ? Do you realize that you have insulted me personally by your 
answer? Do you understand that or not ?" 
"But, Foma; why, it's only a song, Foma . . . .  " 
"You say only a song! And you are not ashamed that you own to 
me that you know that song-you, a member of honourable society, 
the father of honourable, innocent children and a colonel into the bar­
gain! Only a song! But I am certain that the song is drawn from real 
life. Only a song! But what decent man can without a blush of shame 
admit that he knows that song, that he has ever heard that song? What 
man could ?" 
"Well, but, you see, you know it yourself, Foma, since you ask 
about it," my disconcerted uncle answered in the simplicity of his heart. 
"What, I know it, I . . .  I ?  You have insulted me," Foma Fomitch 
cried at once, leaping up from his chair and spluttering with fury. 
He had never expected such a crushing answer. 
I will not undertake to describe the wrath of Foma Fomitch. The 
colonel was ignominiously driven from the presence of the guardian 
of morality for the ill manners and tactlessness of his reply. But from 
that hour Foma Fomitch vowed to catch Falaley in the act of dancing 
the Komarinsky. In the evening, when every one supposed he was busy 
at work, he stole out into the garden, went the round of the kitchen 
garden, and threaded his way into the hemp paᅓch, from which there 
was a view in the distance of the back yard in which the dances took 
place. He stalked poor Falaley as a sportsman stalks a bird, picturing 
with relish the wigging he would, if he succeeded, give the whole 
household and the colonel in particular. His unwearying efforts were 
at last crowned with success. He had come upon the Komarinsky! It 
will be understood now why my uncle tore his hair when he saw 
Falaley weeping and heard Vidoplyasov announce Foma Fomitch, 

690 
The Short N.ovels of 'Dostoevsky 
who so unexpectedly and at such a moment of perturbation was 
standing before us in person. 
( VII ] 
FOMA FOlVIITCH 
I SCRUTINIZED this gentleman with intense cunos1ty. Gavrila 
had been right in saying that he was an ugly little man. Foma was 
short, with light eyebrows and eyelashes and grizzled hair, with a 
hooked nose, and with little wrinkles all over his face. On his chin 
there was a big wart. He was about fifty. He came in softly with 
measured steps, with his eyes cast down. But yet the most insolent self­
confidence was expressed in his face, and in the whole of his pedantic 
figure. To my astonishment, he made his appearance in a dressing­
gown-of a foreign cut it is true, but still a dressing-gown-and he 
wore slippers too. The collar of his shirt unadorned by any cravat was 
a lay-down one a /'enfant; this gave Foma Fomitch an extremely 
foolish look. He went up to an empty arm-chair, moved it to the table, 
and sat down in it without saying a word to any one. All the hubbub, 
all the excitement that had been raging a minute before, vanished 
instantaneously. There was such a hush that one could have heard a 
pin drop. Madame Ia Generale became as meek as a lamb. The cring­
ing infatuation of this poor imbecile for Foma Fomitch was apparent 
now. She fixed her eyes upon her idol as though gloating over the 
sight of him. Miss Perepelitsyn rubbed her hands with a simper, and 
poor Praskovya Ilyinitchna was visibly trembling with alarm. My 
uncle began bustling about at once. 
"Tea, tea, sister! Only plenty of sugar in it, sister; Foma Fomitch 
likes plenty of sugar in his tea after his nap. You do like plenty of 
sugar, don't you, Foma?" 
"I don't care for any tea just now!" Foma pronounced deliberately 
and with dignity, waving him off with a careworn air. "You always 
keep on about plenty of sugar." 
These words and Foma's entrance, so incredibly ludicrous in its 
pedantic dignity, interested me extremely. I was curious to find out to 
what point, to what disregard of decency, the insolence of this upstart 
little gentleman would go. 
"Foma," cried my uncle. "Let me introduce my nephew Sergey 
Alexandrovitch! He has just arrived." 

7' he Jricnd of the Jamily 
691 
Foma Fomitch looked him up and down. 
"I am surprised that you always seem to take pleasure in systemati­
cally interrupting me, Colonel," he said after a significant silence, 
taking absolutely no notice of me. "One talks to you of something 
serious, and you . . .  discourse .
•
•
 of goodness knows what .
•
.
•
 
Have you seen Falaley?" 
"I have, Foma . . . .  " 
"Ah, you have seen him. Well, I will show you him again though 
you have seen him; you can admire your handiwork . . .  in a moral 
sense. Come here, you idiot! come here, you Dutch-faced fool! Well, 
come along! Don't be afraid!" 
Falaley went up to him with his mouth open, sobbing and gulping 
back his tears. Foma Fomitch looked at him with relish. 
"I called him a Dutch-faced fool with intention, Pavel Semyonitch," 
he observed, lolling at his ease in his low chair and turning slightly 
towards Obnoskin, who was sitting next him. "And speaking gen­
erally, you know, I see no necessity for softening my expressions in any 
case. The truth should be the truth. And however you cover up filth 
it will still remain filth. Why trouble to soften it? It's deceiving oneself 
and others. Only a silly worldly numskull can feel the need of such 
senseless conventions. Tell me-l submit it to your judgment--do you 
find anything lovely in that face? I mean, of course, anything noble, 
lovely, exalted, not just vulgar red cheeks." 
Foma Fomitch spoke quietly, evenly, and with a kind of majestic 
nonchalance. 
"Anything lovely in him ?" answered Obnoskin, with insolent care­
lessness. "I think that he is simply a good piece of roast beef-and 
nothing else." 
"Went up to the looking-glass and looked into it to-day," Foma 
continued, pompously omitting the pronoun /. "I am far from con­
sidering myself a beauty, but I could not help coming to the conclusion 
that there is something in these grey eyes which distinguished me from 
any Falaley. There is thought, there is life, there is intelligence in these 
eyes. It is not myself I am praising. I am speaking generally of our 
class. Now what do you think, can there be a scrap, a grain, of soul 
in that living beefsteak ?  Yes, indeed, take note, Pavel Semyonitch, 
how these people, utterly devoid of thought and ideal, and living by 
meat alone, always have revoltingly fresh complexions, coarsely and 
stupidly fresh! Would you like to know the level of his intellectual 
faculties? Hey, you image! Come nearer, let us admire you. Why 

692 
The Short N.ovcls of 'Dostoevsky 
are you gaping? Do you want to swallow a whale? Are you hand­
some? Answer, are you handsome? "  
"I a-am!" answered Falaley, with smothered sobs. 
Obnoskin roared with laughter. I felt that I was beginning to tremble 
with anger. 
"Do you hear?" Foma went on, turning to Obnoskin in triumph. 
"Would you like to hear something more? I have come to put him 
through an examination. You see, Pavel Semyonitch, there are people 
who are desirous of corrupting and ruining this poor idiot. Perhaps 
I am too severe in my judgment, perhaps I am mistaken; but I speak 
from love of humanity. He was just now dancing the most improper 
of dances. That is of no concern to any one here. But now hear for 
yourself . . . .  Answer : what were you doing just now? Answer, 
answer immediately-do you hear?" 
"I was da-ancing," said Falaley, mastering his sobs. 
"What were you dancing? What dance? Speak!" 
"The Komarinsky 
.
.
.
•
 " 
"The K.omarinsky! And who was that Komarinsky ? What was the 
Komarinsky ? Do you suppose I can understand anything from that 
answer? Come, give us an idea. \Vho was your Komarinsky?" 
"A pea-easant .
.
.
•
 
" 
"A peasant, only a peasant! I am surprised! A remarkable peasant, 
then! Then was it some celebrated peasant, if poems and dances are 
made about him? Come, answer!" 
Foma could not exist without tormenting people, he played with 
his victim like a cat with a mouse; but Falaley remained mute, whim­
pering and unable to understand the question. 
"Answer," Foma persisted. "You are asked what sort of peasant 
was .it? Speak! . . .  Was he a seignorial peasant, a crown peasant, free, 
bond, industrial? There are ever so many sorts of peasants . . . .  " 
"In-dus-tri-al. . . .  " 
"Ah, industrial! Do you hear, Pavel Semyonitch ? A new historical 
fact : the Komarinsky peasant was industrial. H'm . . . .  Well, what 
did that industrial peasant do? For what exploits is he celebrated in 
song . . .  and dance?" 
The question was a delicate one, and since it was put to Falaley, a 
risky one too. 
"Come . . .  Though 
.
•
.
 " Obnoskin began, glancing towards his 
mamma, who was beginning to wriggle on the sofa in a peculiar way. 
But what was to be done? Foma Fomitch's whims were respected as 
law. 

7' he Jriend of the Jamily 
693 
"Upon my word, uncle, if you don't suppress that fool he'll . . .  you 
see what he is working up to-Falaley will blurt out some nonsense, 
I assure you," I whispered to my uncle, who was utterly distracted 
and did not know what line to take. 
"You had really better, Foma . . .  " he began. "Here, I want to 
introduce to you, Foma, my nephew, a young man who is studying 
mineralogy." 
"I beg you, Colonel, not to interrupt me with your mineralogy, a 
subject of which, as far as I am aware, you know nothing, and others 
perhaps little more. I am not a baby. He will answer me that this 
peasant, instead of working for the welfare of his family, has been 
drinking till he is tipsy, has sold his coat for drink, and is running 
about the street in an inebriated condition. That is, as is well known, 
the subject of the poem that sings the praises of drink. Don't be 
uneasy, he knows now what he has to answer. Come, answer: what 
did that peasant do? Come, I have prompted you, I have put the 
words into your mouth. \Vhat I want is to hear it from you yourself, 
what he did, for what he was famous, how he gained the immortal 
glory of being sung by the troubadours. Well?" 
The luckless Falaley looked round him in misery, and not knowing 
what to say, opened and shut his mouth like a carp, hauled out of the 
water on to the sand. 
"I am ashamed to sa-ay!" he bellowed at last in utter despair. 
"Ah, ashamed to say!" bellowed Foma in triumph. "See, that's the 
answer I have wrung out of him, Colonel! Ashamed to say, but not 
ashamed to do. That's the morality which you have sown, which has 
sprung up and which you are now . . .  watering; but it is useless to 
waste words! Go to the kitchen now, Falaley. I'll say nothing to you 
now, out of regard for my audience, but to-day, to-day you will be 
severely and rigorously punished. If not, if this time they put you 
before me, you may stay here and entertain your betters with the 
Komarinksy while I will leave this house to-day! That's enough. I 
have spoken, you can go!" 
"Come, I think you really are severe .
•
.
 
" mumbled Obnoskin. 
"Just so, just so, just so," my uncle began crying out, but he broke 
off and subsided. Foma looked gloomily askance at him. 
"I wonder, Pavel Semyonitch," he went onᅔ "what all our con­
temporary writers, poets, learned men and thinkers are about? How 
is it they pay no attention to what songs are being sung by the Russian 
people and to what songs they are dancing? What have the Pushkins, 
the Lermontovs, the Borozdins been about all this time? I wonder at 

694 
The Short Novels of VostoevskJ 
them. The people dance the Komarinsky, the apotheosis of drunken­
ness, while they sing of forget-me-nots! Why don't they write poems 
of a more moral tone for popular use, why don't they fling aside their 
forget-me-nots? It's a social question. Let them depict a peasant, but 
a peasant made genteeᅕ so to say, a villager and not a peasant; let them 
paint me the village sage in his simplicity, maybe even in his bark 
shoes-! don't object even to that-but brimming over with the virtues 
which-! make bold to say-some over-lauded Alexander of Macedon 
may envy. I know Russia and Russia knows me, that is why I say this. 
Let them portray that peasant, weighed down maybe with a family 
and grey hair, in a stuffy hut, hungry, too, maybe, but contented; not 
repining, but blessing his poverty, and indiiTerent to the rich man's 
gold. Let the rich man at last with softened heart bring him his gold; 
let, indeed, in this the virtues of the peasant be united with the virtues 
of his master, perhaps a grand gentleman. The villager and the grand 
gentleman so widely separated in social grade are made one at last in 
virtue-that is an exalted thought! But what do we see? On one side 
forget-me-nots, and on the other the peasant dashing out of the pot­
house and running about the street in a dishevelled condition! What is 
there poetic in that? Tell me, pray, what is there to admire in that? 
Where is the wit? Where is the grace? Where is the morality? I am 
amazed at it!" 
"I am ready to pay you a hundred roubles for such words," said 
Yezhevikin, with an enthusiastic air. "And you know the bald devil 
will try and get it out of me," he whispered on the sly. "Flatter away, 
flatter away!" 
"H'm, yes . . .  you've put that very well," Obnoskin pronounced. 
"Exactly so, exactly so," cried my uncle, who had been listening with 
the deepest attention and looking at me with triumph. "What a sub­
ject has come up!" he whispered, rubbing his hands. "A topic of many 
aspects, dash it all! Foma Fomitch, here is my nephew," he added, 
in the overflow of his feelings. "He is engaged in literary pursuits 
too, let me introduce him." 
As before, Foma Fomitch paid not the slightest attention to my 
uncle's introduction. 
"For God's sake, don't introduce mᅖ any more! I entreat you in 
earnest," I whispered to my uncle, with a resolute air. 
"Ivan lvanitch!" Foma began, suddenly addressing Mizintchikov 
and looking intently at him, "we have just been talking. What is your 
opinion ?" 

'I he Jrimd of the Jamily 
695 
"Mine? You are asking me?" Mizintchikov responded in surprise, 
looking as though he had only just woken up. 
"Yes, you. I am asking you because I value the opmwn of really 
clever people, and not the problematic wiseacres who are only clever 
because they are being continually introduced as clever people, as 
learned people, and are sometimes sent for expressly to be made a 
show of or something of the sort." 
This thrust was aimed directly at me. And yet there was no doubt 
that though Foma Fomitch took no notice whatever of me, he had 
begun this whole conversation concerning literature entirely for my 
benefit, to dazzle, to annihilate, to crush at the first step the clever 
and learned young man from Petersburg. I at any rate had no doubt 
of it. 
"If you want to know my opinion, I . . .  I agree with your opinion," 
answered Mizintchikov listlessly and reluctantly. 
"You always agree with me! It's positively wearisome," replied 
Foma. "I tell you frankly, Pavel Semyonitch," he went on, after a 
brief silence again addressing Obnoskin, "if I respect the immortal 
Karamzin it is not for his history, not for !IJarfa Posadnitsa, not for 
Old and New Russia, but just for having written Fro/ Silin; it is a 
noble epic! It is a purely national product, and will live for ages and 
ages! a most lofty epic!" 
"Just so, just so! a lofty epoch! Frol Silin, a benevolent man! I 
remember, I have read it. He bought the freedom of two girls, too, 
and then looked towards heaven and wept. A very lofty trait," my 
uncle chimed in, beaming with satisfaction. 
My poor uncle! he never could resist taking part in an intellectual 
conversation. Foma gave a malicious smile, but he remained silent. 
"They write very interestingly, though, even now," Anfisa Petrovna 
intervened discreetly. "The Mysteries of Brussels, for instance." 
"I should not say so," observed Foma, as it were regretfully. "I was 
lately reading one of the poems . . .  not up to much! 'Forget-me-nots.' 
Of contemporary writers, if you will, the one I like best of all is 
'Scribbler,' a light pen!" 
" 'Scribbler!' " cried Anfisa Petrovna. "Is that the man who writes 
letters in the magazine? Ah, how enchanting it is, what playing with 
words!" 
"Precisely, playing with words; he, so to speak, plays with his pen. 
An extraordinary lightness of style." 
"Yes, but he is a pedant!" Obnoskin observed carelessly. 

696 
'!he Short N.otels of VostoetJsky 
"Yes, a pedant he is, I don't dispute it; but a charming pedant, a 
graceful pedant! Of course, not one of his ideas would stand serious 
criticism, but one is carried away by his lightness! A babbler, I agree, 
but a charming babbler, a graceful babbler. Do you remember, for 
instance, in one of his articles, he mentions that he has his own 
estates?" 
"Estates!" my uncle caught up. "That's good! In what province?" 
Foma stopped, looked fixedly at my uncle, and went on in the same 
tone-
"Tell me in the name of common sense, of what interest is it to me, 
the reader, to know that he has his own estates ? If he has-I con­
gratulate him on it! But how charmingly, how jestingly, it is de­
scribed! He sparkles with wit, he splashes with wit, he boils over! 
He is a Narzan of wit! Yes, that is the way to write! I fancy I should 
write just like that, if I were to consent to write for magazines . . . .  " 
"Perhaps you would do even better," Y ezhevikin observed respect­
fully. 
"There is positively something musical in the language," my uncle 
put in. 
Foma Fomitch lost patience at last. 
"Colonel," he said, "is it not possible to ask you-with all conceivable 
delicacy of course-not to interfere with us, but to allow us to finish 
our conversation in peace. You cannot oiTer an opinion in our con­
versation! You cannot. Don't disturb our agreeable literary chat. 
Look after your land, drink your tea, but . . . leave literature alone. 
It will lose nothing by it, I assure you-I assure you!" 
This was surpassing the utmost limit of impudence! I did not know 
what to think. 
"Why, you yourself, Foma, said it was musical," my uncle brought 
out in confusion and distress. 
"Quite so, but I spoke with a knowledge of the subject, I spoke 
appropriately; while you . . .  
" 
"To be sure, but we spoke with intellect," put in Yezhevikin, wrig­
gling round Foma Fomitch. "We have just a little intelligence, though 
we may have to borrow some; just enough to run a couple of govern­
ment departments and we might manage a third, if need be-that's 
all we can boast of!" 
"So it seems I have been talking nonsense again," said my uncle 
in conclusion, and he smiled his good-natured smile. 
"You admit it, anyway," observed Foma. 
"It's all right, it's all right, Foma, I am not angry. I know that you 

7' he Jriend of the Jamily 
69i 
pull me up like a friend, like a relation, like a brother. I have myself 
aliowed you to do it, begged you to, indeed. It's a good thing. It's for 
my benefit. I thank you for it and will profit by it." 
My patience was exhausted. All that I had hitherto heard about 
Foma Fomitch had seemed to me somewhat exaggerated. Now when I 
saw it all for myself, my astonishment was beyond all bounds. I could 
not believe my senses; I could not understand such impudence, such 
insolent domineering on one side and such voluntary slavery, such 
credulous good-nature on the other. Though, indeed, my uncle him­
self was confused by such impudence. That was evident. . . . I was 
burning with desire to come to grips with Foma, to do battle with 
him, to be rude to him in some way, in as startling a fashion as possible 
-and then let come what may! This idea excited me. I looked for 
an opportunity, and completely ruined the brim of my hat while I 
waited for it. But the opportunity did not present itself. Foma abso­
lutely refused to notice me. 
"You are right, perfectly right, Foma," my uncle went on, doing 
his utmost to recover himself, and to smooth over the unpleasantness 
of what had been said before. "\Vhat you say is true, Foma. I thank you 
for it. One must know the subject before one discusses it. I am sorry! 
It is not the first time I have been in the same predicament. Only 
fancy, Sergey, on one occasion I was an examiner . . .  you laugh! But 
there it is! I really was an examiner, and that was all about it. I was 
invited to an institution, to be present at an examination, and they set 
me down together with the examiners, as a sign of respect, there was 
an empty seat. So, I will own to you, I was frightened, I was positively 
alarmed, I do not know a single science. \Vhat was I to do ? I thought 
that in another minute they would drag me myself to the black­
board! Well, what then ? Nothing happened, it went off all right, I even 
asked questions myself; who was Noah ? On the whole they answered 
splendidly; then we had lunch and toasted enlightenment in cham­
pagne. It was a fine school!" 
Foma Fomitch and Obnoskin burst into roars of laughter. 
"Indeed, I laughed myself afterwards," cried my uncle, laughing 
in a most good-natured way and delighted that general cheerfulness 
was restored. "Yes, Foma, here goes! I will amuse you all telling you 
how I put my foot in it once . . . .  Only fancy, Sergey, we were staying 
at Krasnogorsk •
.
.
 
" 
"Allow me to inquire, Colonel, will you be long in telling your 
story ?" Foma interposed. 
"Oh, Fornal Why, it is the most delightful story, enough to make 

698 
The Short N.ovds of 1Jostocvsky 
one split with laughter; you only listen, it is good, it really is good. 
I'll tell you how I put my foot in it." 
"I always listen with pleasure to your stories when they are of that 
sort," Obnoskin pronounced, yawning. 
"There is no help for it, we must listen," Foma decided. 
"But upon my word it is good, Foma, it really is. I want to tell you 
how I put my foot into it on one occasion, Anfisa Petrovna. You listen 
too, Sergey, it is an edifying story indeed. We were staying at Krasno­
gorsk," my uncle began, beaming with pleasure, talking with nervous 
haste, and falling into innumerable parentheses as he always did when 
he was beginning to tell some story for the pleasure of his audience. 
"As soon as we arrived, the same evening we went to the theatre. 
There was a first-rate actress, Kuropatkina; she afterwards ran away 
with the cavalry captain Zvyerkov and did not finish the play she was 
acting: so they let down the curtain . . . .  This Zvyerkov was a beast, 
both for drinking and playing cards, and not that he was a drunkard, 
but simply ready to join his comrades at festive moments. But when 
he did get really drunk then he forgot everything, where he lived, in 
what country, and what his name was. Absolutely everything, in fact­
but he was a very fine fellow really . . . .  Well, I was sitting in the 
theatre. In the interval I got up, and I ran across a comrade called 
Kornouhov . . . .  A unique fellow, I assure you. We had not seen each 
other for six years, it is true. Well, he had stayed in the company and 
was covered with crosses. I have heard lately-he's an actual civil 
councillor; he transferred to the civil service and worked his way up 
to a high grade . . . .  Well, of course, we were delighted. One thing 
and another. In the box next to us were three ladies; the one on the left 
was the ugliest woman in the world . . . .  Afterwards I found out 
that she was a splendid woman, the mother of a family, and the happi­
ness of her husband . . . .  Well, so I like a fool blurt out to Kornou­
hov: 'I say, old man, can you tell me who that scarecrow is?' 'Who do 
you mean? '  'Why, that one.' 'That's my cousin.' Tfoo, the devil! judge 
of my position! To put myself right : 'Not that one,' I said. 'What eyes 
you've got! I mean the one who is sitting there, who is that?' 'That's 
my sister.' Tfoo, plague take it all! And his sister, as luck would have 
it, was a regular rosebud, a sweet little thing; dressed up like anything 
-brooches, gloves, bracelets; in fact, a perfect cherub. Afterwards she 
married a very fine fellow called Pyhtin; she eloped with him, it was 
a runaway match; but now it is all right, and they are very well off; 
their parents are only too delighted! Well, so I cried out, 'Oh, no!' not 
knowing how to get out of it, 'not that one, the one in the middle, 

'I he Jriend of the Jami/y 
699 
who is she?' 'In the middle? Well, my boy, that's my wife.' . . .  And 
she, between ourselves, was a perfect sugarplum. I felt that I could 
have eaten her up at one mouthful, I was w delighted with her . . . .  
'Well,' I said, 'have you ever seen a fool ? Here is one facing you, 
and here's his head; cut it off, ,• ĸ:.'t spare it!' He laughed. Afterwards 
he introduced them to me and must have told them, the rascal. They 
were in fits of laughter over something! And I must say I never spent 
an evening more merrily. So you see, Foma, old man, how one can 
put one's foot in it! Ha-ha-ha-ha!" 
But it was no use my poor uncle laughing; in vain he looked round 
the company with his kind and good-humoured eyes; a dead silence 
was the response that greeted his light-hearted story. Foma Fomitch 
sat in gloomy dumbness and all the others followed his example; 
only Obnoskin gave a faint smile, foreseeing the baiting my uncle 
would get. My uncle was embarrassed and flushed crimson. This was 
what Foma desired. 
"Have you finished?" he asked at last, turning with dignity to the 
embarrassed storyteller. 
"Yes, Foma.'' 
"And are you satisfied ?" 
"How do you mean, satisfied?" asked my poor uncle miserably. 
"Are you happier now? Are you pleased at having broken up the 
pleasant literary conversation of your friends by interrupting them and 
so satisfying your petty vanity? "  
"Oh, come, Foma, I wanted to amuse you all, and you . . .  " 
"Amuse!" cried Foma, suddenly becoming extraordinarily heated; 
"but you are only able to depress us, not amuse us. Amuse! but do 
know that your story was almost immoral. I say nothing of its impro­
priety, that is self-evident . . . .  You informed us just now with rare. 
coarseness of feeling that you laughed at innocence, at an honourable 
lady, simply because she had not the honour to please you, and you 
wanted to make us, us laugh, that is, applaud you, that is, applaud a 
coarse and improper action, and ali because you are the master of this 
house! You can do as you like, Colonel, you can seek out toadies, 
flatterers, sycophants, you can even send for them from distant paru 
and so increase your retinue to the detriment of straightforwardness 
and frank nobility of soul, but never will Foma Opiskin be your toady 
your flatterer, your sycophant! I can assure you of that, if of any. 
thing . . . .  
" 
"Oh, Fornal You misunderstand me, Foma." 
"No, Colonel; I have seen through you for a long time, I know 

700 
'I he Short Novels of VostoevskJ 
you through and through. You are devoured by boundless vanity. 
You have pretensions to an incomparable keenness of wit, and forget 
that wit is blunted by pretension. You 
.
.
•
 " 
"Oh, stop, Foma, for God's sake! Have some shame, if only before 
peoplel" 
"It's s:1d, you know, to see all this, Colonel, and it's impossible to be 
silent when one sees it. I am poor, I am living at the expense of your 
mother. It may be expected, perhaps, that I should flatter you by my 
silence, and I don't care for any milksop to take me for your toady! 
Possibly when I came into this room just now I intentionally accen­
tuated my truthful candour, was forced to be intentionally rude, just 
because you yourself put me into such a position. You are too haughty 
with me, Colonel, I may be taken for your slave, your toady. Your 
pleasure is to humiliate me before strangers, while I am really your 
equal-your equal in every respect. Perhaps I am doing you a favour 
in living with you, and not you doing me one. I am insulted, so I am 
forced to sing my own praises-that's natural! I cannot help speaking, 
I must speak, I am bound at once to protest, and that is why I tell you 
straight out that you are phenomenally envious. You see, for instance, 
some one in a simple friendly conversation unconsciously reveals his 
knowledge, his reading, his taste, and so you are annoyed, you can't 
sit still. 'Let me display my knowledge and my taste,' you think! And 
what taste have you, if you will allow me to ask? You know as much 
about art-if you will excuse my saying so, Colonel-as a bull about 
beef! That's harsh and rude, I admit; anyway it is straightforward and 
just. You won't hear that from your flatterers, Colonel." 
"Oh, Fornal . . .  " 
"It is 'Oh, Foma,' to be sure. The truth is not a feather-bed, it seems. 
Very well, then, we will speak later about this, but now let me enter­
tain the company a little. You can't be the only one to distinguish 
yourself all the time. Pavel Semyonitch, bave you seen this sea monster 
in human form ? I have been observing him for a long time. Lok 
well at him; why, he would like to devour me whole, at one gulp." 
He was speaking of Gavrila. The old servant was standing at the 
door, and certainly was looking on with distress at the scolding of his 
master. 
"I want to entertain you, too, with a performance, Pavel Semyon­
itch. Come here, you scarecrow, come here. Condescend to approach 
us a little nearer, Gavrila Ignatitch! Here you see, Pavel Semyonitch, 
is Gavrila; as a punishment for rudeness he is studying the French 
dialect. Like Orpheus, I soften the manners of these parts not onlY, 

'I he Jriend of the Jamily 
701 
with songs but with the French dialect. Come, Mossoo Frenchy-he 
can't bear to be called Mossoo--do you know your lesson?" 
"I have learnt it," said Gavrila, hanging his head. 
"Well, Parlay-voo-fransay ?" 
"Vee, moossyu, zhe-le-parl-<>n-peu . . . .  " 
I don't know whether it was Gavril's mournful face as he uttered 
the French phrase, or whether they were all aware of Foma's desire 
that they should laugh, but anyway they all burst into a roar of 
laughter as soon as Gavrila opened his lips. Even Madame la Generale 
deigned to be amused. Anfisa Petrovna, sinking back on the sofa, 
shrieked, hiding her face behind her fan. What seemed most ludicrous 
was that Gavrila, seeing what his examination was being turned into, 
could not restrain himself from spitting and commenting reproach­
fully: "To think of having lived to such disgrace in my old age!" 
Foma Fomitch was startled. 
"What ? What did you say? So you think fit to be rude?" 
"No, Foma Fomitch," Gavrila replied with dignity. "My words 
were no rudeness, and it's not for me, a serf, to be rude to you, a gentle­
man born. But every man bears the image of God upon him, His 
image and semblance. I am sixty-three years old. My father remembers 
Pugatchev, the monster, and my grandfather helped his master, Mat­
vey Nikititch-God grant him the kingdom of heaven!-to hang 
Pugatchev on an aspen tree, for which my father was honoured beyond 
all others by our late master, Afanasy Matveyitch : he was his valet, 
and ended his life as butler. As for me, Foma Fomitch, sir, though I 
am my master's bondman, I have never known such a shame done 
me from my birth upward till now." 
And at the last word Gavrila spread out his hands and hung his 
head. My uncle was watching him uneasily. 
"Come, that's enough, Gavrila," he cried. "No need to say more, 
that's enough!" 
"Never mind, never mind," said Foma, turning a little pale and 
giving a forced smile. "Let him speak, these are the fruits of your . . .  " 
"I will tell you everything," said Gavrila with extraordinary fervour, 
"I will conceal nothing! You may bind the hands, but there is no 
binding the tongue. Though I may seem beside you, Foma Fomitch, 
a low man, in fact, a slave, yet I can feel insulted! Service and obedience 
I am always bound to give you, because I am born a slave and must 
do my duty in fear and trembling. You sit writing a book, it's my duty 
not to let you be interrupted-that is my real duty. Any service that 
is needed I am pleased to do. But in my old age to bleat in some out-

i02 
'I he Short Novels of 'DostoevskY 
landish way and be put to shame before folk! Why, I can't go into 
the servants' room now: 'You are a Frenchy!' they say, 'a Frenchy!' 
No. Foma Fomitch, sir, it's not only a fool like me, but all good folks 
have begun to say the same: that you have become now a wicked man 
and that our master is nothing but a little child before you, that 
though you are a gentleman by birth and a general's son, and yourself 
may be near being a general too, yet you are as wicked as a real fury 
must be." 
Gavrila had finished. I was beside myself with delight. Foma 
Fomitch sat pale with rage in the midst of the general discomfiture and 
seemed unable to recover from Gavrila's sudden attack upon him; he 
seemed at that moment to be deliberating how far his wrath should 
carry him. At last the outburst followed. 
"What, he dares be rude to me-me! but this is mutiny!" shrieked 
Foma, and he leapt up from his chair. 
Madame Ia Generale followed his example, clasping her hands. 
There was a general commotion, my uncle rushed to turn the culprit 
out. 
"Put him in fetters, put him in fetters!" cried Madame la Generale. 
"Take him to the town at once and send him for a soldier, Yegor­
ushka, or you shall not have any blessing. Fix the fetters on him at 
once, and send him for a soldier." 
"What!" cried Foma. "Slave! Lout! Hamlet! He dares to be rude 
to me! He, he, a rag to wipe my boots! He dares to call me a fury!" 
I slipped forward with unusual determination. 
"I must confess that in this affair I am completely of Gavrila's 
opinion," I said, looking Foma Fomitch straight in the face and 
trembling with excitement. 
He was so taken aback by this onslaught that for the first minute 
he seemed unable to believe his ears. 
"\Vhat's this, now ?" he cried out at last, pouncing upon me in a 
frenzy, and fixing his little bloodshot eyes upon me. "Why, who are 
you?" 
"Foma Fomitch . . .  " my uncle, utterly distracted, began, "this is 
Seryozha, my nephew . . . .  
" 
"The learned gentleman!" yelled Foma. "So he's the learned gentle­
man! Liberte--egalite-fraternite. Journal des Debats! No, my friend, 
you won't take me in! I am not such a fool. This isn't Petersburg, 
you won't impose upon us. And I spit on your des Debats. You have 
your des Debats, but to us that's all fiddlesticks, young man! Learned 

'I he Jriend of the Jamily 
703 
You know as much as I have forgotten seven times over. So much for 
your learning!" 
If they had not held him back I believe he would have fallen upon 
me with his fists. 
"Why, he is drunk," I said, looking about me in bewilderment. 
"\Vho, I?" cried Foma, in a voice unlike his own. 
"Yes, you!" 
"Drunk ?" 
"Yes, drunk." 
This was more than Foma could endure. He uttered a screech as 
though he were being murdered and rushed out of the room. Madame 
Ia Gencrale seemed desirous of falling into a swoon, but reflected that 
it would be better to run after Foma Fomitch. She was followed by 
all the others, and last of all by my uncle. \Vhen I recovered myself 
and looked round I saw in the room no one but Y ezhevikin. He was 
smiling and rubbing his hands. 
"You promised just now to tell me about the Jesuits," he said in an 
insinuating voice. 
"What?" I asked, not understanding what he was talking about. 
"About the Jesuits, you promised just now to tell me . . .  some 
little anecdote . . . .  " 
I ran out into the verandah and from there into the garden. My head 
was going round . .  
, . 
[ VIII ] 
A DECLARATION OF LOVE 
I WANDERED about the garden for about a quarter of an hour, 
feeling irritated and extremely dissatisfied with myself, and deliberat­
ing what I should do now. The sun was setting. Suddenly at a turning 
into a dark avenue I met ᅗastenka face to face. She had tears in her 
eyes, in her hand a handkerchief with which she was wiping them. 
"I was looking for you," she said. 
"And I for you," I answered. "Tell me, am I in a madhouse?" 
"Certainly not in a madhouse," she answered resentfully, with an 
intent glance at me. 
"Well, if that's so, what's the meaning of it all? For Christ's sake 
give me some advice. Where has my uncle gone now? Can I go to 

704 
r h% Slzort Novels of 7Jostoevsky 
him ? I am very glad that I have met you; perhaps you will be able 
to suggest what I ought to do." 
"No, better not go to him. I have just come away from them." 
"\Vhy, where are they?" 
"Who knows? Perhaps by now they have run into the kitchen 
garden again," she said irritably. 
"Into the kitchen garden!" 
"Why, last week, Foma Fomitch began shouting that he wouldn't 
stay in the house, and all at once he ran into the kitchen garden, 
found a spade in the shed and began digging the beds. \V e were all 
amazed, and wondered whether he hadn't gone out of his mind. 'That 
I may not be reproached for doing nothing for my keep,' said he, 
'here I will dig and pay for the bread I have eaten, and then I will go 
away. That's what you have driYen me to.' And then they all began 
crying and almost falling on their knees before him; they took the 
spade away from him; but he would go on digging; he dug up all 
the turnips, that was all he did. They humoured him once, he may do 
it again. That would be just like him.'' 
"And you . . .  you tell that with such coolness!" I cried out, with 
intense indignation. 
She looked at me with flashing eyes. 
"Forgive me, I really don't know what I am saying! Listen! do you 
know what I've come here for?" 
"N-no," she answered, flushing crimson, and some painful feeling 
was reflected in her charming face. 
"You must excuse me," I went on. "I am upset, I feel that this is 
not how I ought to have begun speaking of this . . .  especially with 
you . . . .  But never mind! To my thinking, openness in mch m;Itters 
is best. I confess . . .  that is, I meant to say . . .  you know my uncle's 
design ? He has told me to ask for your hand . . .  . '' 
"Oh, what nonsense! don't speak of it, please,'' she said hurriedly 
interrupting me and flushing crimson. 
I was disconcerted. 
"How nonsense? But he wrote to me, you see." 
"So he wrote to you ?" she asked eagerly. "Oh, what a man ! How 
he promised that he would not write! What nonsense! Good heavens, 
what nonsense!" 
"Forgive me," I muttered, not knowing what to say. "Perhaps I 
have acted incautiously, crudely . . .  but, you see, it's such a moment! 
Only think, goodness knows what's going on around us . . .  
.'' 
"Oh. for God's sake don't apologize! Believe me that it is painful 

The Jriend of the Jamily 
705 
for me to hear this apart from that, and yet, do you know, I wanted to 
speak to you myself, to find out something . . . .  Oh, how vexatious! 
So he really wrote to you ? That's what I was most afraid of! My 
God, what a man he is! And you believed him and galloped here full 
speed ? Well, that's the last straw!" 
She did not conceal her annoyance. My position was not an attractive 
one. 
"I must confess I did not expect . . .  " I blurted out in the utmost 
confusion, "such a turn . . .  I expected, on the contrary . . .  " 
"Ah, so that's what you expected? . . .  " she brought out with light 
irony, biting her lip. "And do you know, you must show me the 
letter he wrote." 
"Very good." 
"And please don't be angry with me, don't be offended; I have 
trouble enough without that! "  she said in an imploring voice, though 
a mocking smile faintly gleamed on her pretty lips. 
"Oh, please don't take me for a fool," I cried hotly. "But perhaps 
you are prejudiced against me, perhaps some one has spoken against 
me? Perhaps you say this because I put my foot in it just now? But 
that is nothing, I assure you. I know what a fool I must look to you 
now. Don't laugh at me, please! I don't know what I am saying, and 
it is all because I am twenty-two, damn it." 
"Oh, mercy on us, why?" 
"You ask why? Any one who is twenty-two, you know, has it 
written in his face; as I had, for instance, when I bounced out just 
now in the middle of the room, or as when I stand before you now . 
. . . It's a damnable agel" 
"Oh, no, no!" answered Nastenka, hardly able to restrain her 
laughter. "I am sure that you are kind and nice and clever, and I say 
that sincerely, I do really! But . . .  you are only very vain. You may 
get over that in time." 
"I fancy I am only as vain as I ought to be." 
"Oh, no. Think how embarrassed you were just now, and what for ? 
Because you stumbled as you came in! . . .  What right had you to 
turn into ridicule your good generous uncle who has done you so 
much kindness? Why did you try to turn the laugh against him when 
you were laughable yourself? That was horrid, shameful! It does not 
do you credit, and I must own I disliked you very much at that minute, 
so there!" 
"That's true! I was a blockhead! more than that-I did a mean 
thing! You noticed it, and that is my punishment. Abuse me, laugh 

706 
The Short N.ovels of Vostoevsky 
at me, but listen; perhaps you will change your opinion of me in the 
end," I added, carried away by a strange feeling. "You know so little 
of me as yet; afterwards when you know more of me, then 
.
•
.
 
perhaps . . .  
" 
"For God's sake let us stop this conversation!" cried Nastenka, with 
visible impatience. 
"Very well, very well, let us stop! But . . .  where can I see you?" 
"Where can you see me?" 
"Why, you know, this cannot be the last word we have to say to 
each other, Nastasya Yevgrafovna! For God's sake, let me meet you 
again to-day, for instance. But it's already getting dark. So if it is 
anyhow possible let it be to-morrow early; I will ask to be called 
earlier on purpose. You know there's an arbour over there by the pond. 
You see, I remember it, I know the way. I used to stay here when I 
was little." 
"Meet you! What for? Why, we are talking now." 
"But I know nothing yet, Nastasya Yevgrafovna, I will first find 
out everything from my uncle. \Vhy, he is bound to tell me everything 
now. And then, perhaps, I shall have something very important to 
tell you . . . .  " 
"No, no! You mustn't, you mustn't!" cried Nastenka. "Let us end 
it all at once now, so that we may never think of it again. And don't 
go to that arbour for nothing; I assure you I shall not go. And please 
put all this nonsense out of your head-1 beg you in earnest . . . .  " 
"So then uncle has behaved like a madman to me!" I cried, in an 
excess of insufferable vexation. "Why did he send for me? But listen, 
what is that noise?" 
We were close to the house; from the open windows came the 
sounds of shrieking and extraordinary outcries. 
"My God!" she said, turning pale, "again! I foresaw it would be so!" 
"You foresaw it? Nastasya Yevgrafovna, one more question. Of 
course I have not the least right to do so, but I venture to put this last 
question to you for the good of us all. Tell me-and I will keep it 
secret to the grave-tell me frankly: is my uncle in love with you or 
not?" 
"Oh! Please, please put that nonsense out of your head once for all," 
she cried, flushing crimson with anger. "And you, too! If he were 
in love with me, he wouldn't have wanted to have married me to you," 
she added with a bitter smile. "And what put that idea into your 
head ? Don't you know what the trouble's about ? Do you hear those 
shouts?" 

The Jriend of the Jamily 
707 
"But •
•
•
 It's Foma Fomitch . . . .  
" 
"Yes, of course it is Foma Fomitch; but now the trouble is over me 
because they are saying the same thing as you, the same senseless thing; 
they, too, suspect that he is in love with me. And as I am poor and 
of no consequence, and as it costs nothing to throw dirt on me and 
they want to marry him to some one else, they are insisting that he 
should send me home to my father to make things sure. And when 
they talk to him of that he flies into a rage at once; he's ready to tear 
Foma Fomitch to pieces even. They are quarrelling about that now; I 
feel that it is about that." 
"So that's the truth! So he really is going to marry that Tatyana, 
then." 
"Yes, that silly fool!" 
"Not a silly fool at all! She is good; you have no right to talk like 
that! She has a noble heart, nobler than many other people. It's not 
her fault that she is unfortunate." 
"Forgive me. Supposing you are quite right about that, yet aren't you 
mistaken about the chief point ? Tell me, how is it, then, that they 
make your father welcome, as I noticed? Why, if they were so set 
against you as you say and were turning you out, they would be angry 
with him too, and would give him a cold welcome." 
"Why, don't you see what my father is doing for my sake? He is 
playing the fool before them! He is received just because he has suc­
ceeded in ingratiating himself with Foma Fomitch; and as Foma 
Fomitch was a buffoon himself, you see it flatters him to have buffoons 
about him now. For whose sake do you suppose my father does it? 
He does it for me, only for me. He wants nothing; he wouldn't bow 
down to any one for himself. He may be very absurd in some people's 
eyes, but he is a noble man, the noblest of men! He thinks-goodness 
knows why, and certainly not because I get a good salary here, I 
assure you-he thinks that it is best for me to stay here in this house; 
but now I have quite brought him round. I wrote to him firmly. He 
has come on purpose to take me; and if it comes to extremes, to-mor­
row. For things have got beyond everything; they are ready to tear 
me to pieces, and I am certain that they are quarrelling about me now. 
They are at him, on my account, they will be the death of him! And 
he is like a father to me-do you hear? more even than my own 
father. I won't stay to see it. I know more than other people. To-mor­
row, to-morrow I am going! Who knows: perhaps that will make 
them put off, if only for a time, his marriage to Tatyana Ivanovna . 
. . . Here I have told you all about it now. Tell him this, because I 

708 
Tlze Short 'Novels of Vostoevsky 
can't speak to him now; we are watched, especially by that Pere­
pelitsyn woman. Tell him not to worry about me, tell him I would 
rather eat black bread and live in my father's hut than be the cause of 
his sufferings here. I am a poor girl, and I ought to live like a poor 
girl. But, my God, what an uproar! What shouting! What is happen­
ing? Yes, come what may I shall go in! I will tell them all this straight 
to their faces myself, whatever happens! I ought to do it! Good-bye." 
She ran away. I remained standing on the same spot, fully conscious 
of the absurdity of the part it had just been my lot to play, and com­
pletely puzzled to think how it would all be settled. I was sorry for the 
poor girl, and I was afraid for my uncle. All at once I found Gavrila 
at my side; he was still holding the exercise book in his hand. 
"Please come to your uncle," he said in a dejected voice. 
I pulled myself together. 
"To my uncle? Where is he? What's happening to him now?" 
"In the tea-room. Where your honour had tea this afternoon." 
"Who is with him?" 
"His honour's alone. He is waiting." 
"For whom ? For me?" 
"He has sent for Foma Fomitch. Happy days have come for us," 
he added, with a deep sigh. 
"Foma J:omitch ? H'm !  \Vhere are the others? Where's your 
mistress?" 
"In her own apartments. Her honour's fallen into a swoon, and now 
she is lying unconscious and crying." 
Conversing in this way, we reached the verandah. It was almost 
completely dark outside. My uncle really was alone in the very room 
in which my encounter with Foma Fomitch had taken place, and he 
was striding up and down it. There were lighted candles on the 
tables. Seeing me, he rushed up to me and warmly pressed my hands. 
He was pale and breathing hard; his hands were trembling, and from 
time to time a nervous shudder ran over his whole frame. 
[ IX ] 
YOUR EXCELLENCY 
MY DEAR boy, it's all over, it's all settled," he pronounced in 
a tragic half-whisper. 
"Uncle," I said, "I heard shouts and uproar." 

The JrietZd of the Jamily 
709 
"Yes, my boy, shouts there were; shouts of all sorts! Mamma is in a 
swoon, and everything is upside down now. But I have made up my 
mind, and shall insist on my own way. I am afraid of no one now, 
Seryozha. I want to show them that I, too, have a will of my own, 
and I will show them! And so I have sent for you on purpose that you 
may help me show them . . . .  My heart is broken, Seryozha •
.
.
 but 
I ought, I am bound to act with se\'erity. Justice is inexorable." 
"But whatever has happened, uncle?" 
"I am parting with Foma," my uncle pronounced in a resolute voice. 
"Uncle," I cried, delighted, "you could have thought of nothing 
better! And if I can assist in any way to carry out your decision . . .  
make use of me now and always." 
"Thank you, my boy, thank you! But now it is all settled. I am 
waiting for Foma, I have already sent for him. Either he or I! We 
must part. Either Foma leaves this house to-morrow or I swear I'll 
throw up everything and go into the Hussars again. They will take 
me and give me a division. Away with all this bobbery! A fresh start 
in every way now. \Vhat have you got that French exercise book for?" 
he cried furiously, addressing Gavrila. "Away with it! Burn it, stamp 
on it, tear it to pieces! I am your master, and I order you not to learn 
French. You can't disobey me, you dare not, for I am your master, and 
not Foma Fomitch!" 
"I thank Thee, 0 Lord!" Gavrila muttered to himself. 
Evidently things had got beyond a joke. 
"l\·1y dear," my uncle went on, with deep feeling, "they are asking 
me the impossible. You shall decide; you stand between me and them 
now as an impartial judge. You don't know what they have insisted on 
my doing, you don't know, and at last they have formally demanded 
it, they have spoken out. But it's repugnant of humanity, to decent 
feeling, to honour . . . .  I will tell you all about it, but first . . .  " 
"I know about it already, uncle!" I cried, interrupting him. "I can 
guess . . .  I have just been talking to Nastasya Yevgrafovna." 
"My dear, not a word, not a word of that now!" he interrupted me 
hurriedly, as though he were frightened. "I will explain about it 
later on, but meanwhile . . . .  Well?" he cried to Vidoplyas;:,v, who 
walked in. "Where is Foma Fomitch?" 
Vidoplyasov entered with the information "that Foma Fomitch did 
not wish to come, and considered that the insistence on his doing so 
was rude to the point of impertinence, so that his honour, Foma 
Fomitch, was greatly offended by it." 

710 
'The Short 'Novels of Vostoevsk.y 
"Bring him! Drag him! Fetch him here! Drag him here by force!" 
cried my uncle, stamping. 
Vidoplyasov, who had never seen his master in such a rage, retreated 
in alarm. I was surprised. 
"Something very important must have happened," I thought, "if 
a man of his character is capable of being moved to such wrath and 
such determination." 
For some moments my uncle walked up and down the room as 
though struggling with himself. 
"Don't tear up your exercise book though," he said to Gavrila at 
last. "Wait a little and stay here. You may perhaps be wanted. My 
dear," he went on, turning to me, "I think I was too noisy just now. 
Everything must be done with dignity and manliness, but without 
shouting and insulting people. Do you know what, Seryozha; wouldn't 
it be better if you were to go out? It will be just the same to you. 
I will tell you all about it later on--eh? What do you think? Do that 
for my sake, please." 
"Are you frightened, uncle ? Are you repenting?" I said, looking 
at him intently. 
"No, no, my de:.u boy, I am not repenting," cried my uncle, with 
redoubled earnestness. "I am afraid of nothing now. I have taken 
decisive steps, the most decisive! You don't know, you can't imagine 
what they have demanded of me! Ought I to consent? No, I will show 
them. I have made a stand against them and I will show them. I was 
bound to show them sooner or later! But you know, my dear boy, I 
am sorry I sent for you ; it will be very hard, perhaps, for Foma if you 
are here, so to say, the witness of his humiliation. You see, I want 
to turn him out of the house in a gentlemanly way, without humiliating 
him at all. Though, indeed, it is only a form of words to say, without 
humiliation. The position is such, my boy, that however honeyed one's 
speech is it will still be insulting. I am coarse, uneducated perhaps, I 
may do something in my foolishness that I may regret later. Anyway 
he has done a great deal for me . . . .  Go away, my dear . . . .  Here, they 
are bringing him! Seryozha, I entreat you, go away; I will tell you all 
about it afterwards. For Christ's sake go away!" 
And uncle led me out on to the verandah at the very moment when 
Foma walked into the room. But I must confess I did not go away; 
I made up my mind to stay on the verandah where it was very dark, 
and so it was difficult to see me from within. I made up my mind to 
play the eavesdropper! I do not justify my action, but I can boldly sav 

The Jriend of the Jamily 
711 
that I consider I performed an heroic feat in standing that whole half­
hour on the verandah without losing patience. 
From my position I could not only hear well, but could even see 
well; the doors were of glass. I now beg the reader to imagine Foma 
Fomitch after he had been commanded to come, and threatened with 
force if he refused. 
"Can my ears have heard that threat aright, Colonel?" cried Foma, 
entering the room. "Was that your message?" 
"Yes, Foma, yes; calm yourself," my uncle answered valiantly. "Sit 
down; we must have a little serious friendly talk like brothers. Sit 
down, Foma." 
Foma Fomitch majestically sat down on a low chair. My uncle 
walked about the room with rapid and uneven steps, evidently puzzled 
how to begin. 
"Like brothers, precisely," he repeated. "You understand me, Foma; 
you are not a boy, I am not a boy either-in fact, we are both getting 
on . . . .  H'm! You see, Foma, we don't get on together on certain 
points . . .  yes, on certain points precisely, and so, Foma, would it not 
be better to part? I am convinced that you are a generous man, that 
you wish me well, and so . . .  But why prolong the discussion? Foma, 
I am your friend now and always, and I swear that by all the saints! 
Here are fifteen thousand roubles in silver; it's all I have to bless my­
self with. I have scraped together every farthing, I have robbed my own 
children. Take it boldly! I ought-it is my duty-to secure your future. 
It's almost all in banknotes and very little in cash. Take it boldly; you 
owe me nothing, for I shall never be able to repay you for all you have 
done for me. Yes, yes, precisely, I feel that, though now we are in 
disagreement over the most important point. To-morrow or the day 
after, or when you like, let us part. Drive to our little town, Foma, it 
is not eight miles away; there behind the church in the first side street 
there is a little houᅘe with green shutters, a charming little house 
belonging to the widow of a priest, that looks as though it had been 
built for you. She is selling it, and I will buy it for you in addition to 
this money. Settle there near us. Work at literature, study science, you 
will win fame . . . .  The officials there are gentlemanly, agreeable, dis­
interested men; the head priest is learned. You shall come and stay 
with us for the holidays-and we shall all live as in paradise. Will 
you?" 
"So these are the terms on which Foma is to be kicked out!" I 
thought. "Uncle did not say a word to me about money." 
For a long time a profound silence reigned. Foma sat in his easy-

712 
The Short 'Novels of Vostoevsky 
chair as though struck dumb, gazing fixedly at my uncle, who was 
evidently becoming uncomfortable from that silence and that stare. 
"The money!" Foma articulated at last in an affectedly faint voice. 
"Where is it? Where is that money? Give it me, give it here at once!" 
"Here it is, Foma, everything I have to the last farthing, just fifteen 
thousand. Here are notes and securities; you can see for yourself . . .  
here!" 
"Gavrila, take that money," Foma said mildly, "it may be of use to 
you, old man. But no!" he cried all at once, raising his voice to an 
extraordinary squeal and leaping up from his chair; "no, give me that 
money first, Gavrila! Give it me. Give it me. Give me those millions 
that I may trample them under foot ; give them to me that I may tear 
them to pieces, spit on them, fling them away, spurn them, scorn them! 
. . .  They offer money to me-to me! They try to buy me to leave this 
house! Have I heard that? Have I lived to see this last ignominy? Here 
they are, here are your millions! Look! there, there, there, there. That 
is how Foma Opiskin behaves if you did not know it before, Colonel!" 
And Foma threw the whole roll of notes about the room. It was 
noticeable that he did not tear or spit on one of the notes as he had 
boasted of doing; he only crumpled them a little, and even that rather 
carefully. Gavrila flew to pick up the notes from the floor, and later 
on, after Foma's departure, he carefully restored them to his master. 
Foma's action produced an overwhelming impression upon my uncle. 
In his turn, he now stood facing him, immovably, senselessly, open­
mouthed. Foma meanwhile had replaced himself in his arm-chair and 
was panting as though from unutterable agitation. 
"You are a man of lofty feelings, Fornal" my uncle cried out at last, 
recovering himself. "You are the noblest of men!" 
"I know it," Foma answered in a faint voice, but with ineffable 
dignity. 
"Foma, forgive mel I have been a mean wretch to you, Fornal" 
"Yes, to me," Foma assented. 
"Foma, it is not your disinterestedness that I marvel at," my uncle 
went on enthusiastically, "but that I could have been so coarse, blind 
and mean as to offer you money in such circumstances. But, Foma, you 
are mistaken about one thing; I was not bribing you, I was not paying 
you for leaving this house, but just simply I wanted you to have money 
that you might not be in straits when you leave me. I swear that! On 
my knees, on my knees I am ready to beg your forgiveness, Foma; and 
if you like, I am ready to go down on my knees before you this mo­
ment . . .  if you wish me to . . . .  " 

The Jrielld of the Jami/y 
713 
"I don't want your kneeling, Colonel." 
"But, my God! Foma, consider: you know I was carried away, over­
whelmed, I was not myself . . . .  But do tell me, do say in what way I 
can, in what way I may be able to efface this insult! Instruct me, 
admonish me 
•
.
.
.
 
" 
"In no way, in no way, Colonel! And rest assured that to-morrow 
morning I shall shake the dust from off my boots on the threshold of 
this house." 
And Foma began to get up from his chair. My uncle rushed in horror 
to make him sit down again. 
"No, Foma, you will not go away, I assure you!" cried my uncle. 
"It is no use talking about dust and boots, Fornal You are not going 
away, or I will follow you to the utmost ends of the earth, and I will 
follow you till such time as you forgive me . . . .  I swear it, Foma, and 
I will do it!" 
"Forgive you ? You are to blame?" said Foma. "But do you yet 
understand the wrong you have done me? Do you understand that 
even the fact that you have given me a piece of bread here has become 
a wrong to me now? Do you understand that now in one minute you 
have poisoned every morsel I have tasted in your house? You re­
proached me just now with those morsels, with every mouthful of the 
bread I have eaten; you have shown me now that I have been living 
like a slave in your house, like a flunkey, like a rag to wipe your pol­
ished boots! And yet I, in the purity of my heart, imagined up to now 
that I was residing in your house as a friend and a brother! Did you 
not, did you not yourself in your snake-like speeches assure me a 
thousand times of that brotherly relation? Why did you mysteriously 
weave for me the snare, in which I have been caught like a fool? Why 
have you dug in the darkness this wolf-pit into which you have your­
self thrust me now? Why did you not strike me down with one blow 
before? Why did you not wring my neck at the very beginning like a 
cock, because he . . .  well, for instance, simply because he doesn't lay 
eggs? Yes, that's just it! I stick to that comparison, Colonel, though it 
is taken from rustic life and recalls the trivial tone of modern litera­
ture; I stick to it, because one sees in it all the senselessness of your 
accusation; for I am as much in fault as this supposititious cock who 
displeases his frivolous owner by not laying eggs! Upon my word, 
Colonel! Does one pay a friend, a brother, with money-and what for? 
That's the point, what for ? 'Here, my beloved brother, I am indebted 
to you; you have even saved my life; here are a few of Judas's silver 
pieces for you, only get away out of my sight!' How naive! How 

714 
T h% Short 'N.ovds of 7Josto%vsky 
crudely you have behaved to me! You thought that I was thirsting fot 
your gold, while I was cherishing only the heavenly feeling of securing 
your welfare. Oh, how you have broken my heart! You have played 
with my finest feelings like some wretched boy with a ninepin! Long, 
long ago, Colonel, I foresaw all this-that is why I have long choked 
over your bread, I have been suffocated by your bread! That is why 
your feather-beds have stifled me, they have stifled me instead of lulling 
me to slumber! That is why your sugar, your sweetmeats have been 
cayenne pepper to me and not sweetmeats! No, Colonel! live alone, 
prosper alone, and let Foma go his sorrowful way with a wallet on his 
back. So it shall be, Colonel!" 
"No, Foma, no! It shall not be so, it cannot be so!" moaned my 
uncle, utterly crushed. 
"Yes, Colonel, yes! So it shall be, for so it must be. To-morrow I 
shall depart from you. Scatter your millions, strew all my way, all the 
high road to Moscow with your banknotes-and I will walk proudly 
and scornfully over your notes; this very foot, Colonel, will trample 
your notes into the mud and crush them; for Foma Opiskin the 
nobility of his own soul will be enough! I have said it and I have 
lihown it! Farewell, Colonel, fa-re-we-ell!" 
And Foma began again getting up from his chair. 
"Forgive me, forgive me, Foma; forget it! . . .  " repeated my uncle, 
in an imploring voice. 
"Forgive you! Why, what use will my forgiveness be to you ? Why, 
supposing I do forgive you : I am a Christian; I cannot refuse to for­
give; I have almost forgiven you already. But consider yourself: is it 
in the least consistent with common sense and gentlemanly feeling for 
me to stay one minute longer in your house? Why, you have turned 
me out of it!" 
"It is consistent, it is consistent, Foma! I assure you that it is con­
sistent!" 
"It is? But are we equals now ? Don't you understand that I have, 
so to speak, crushed you by my generosity, and you have crushed 
yourself by your degrading action ? You are crushed and I am up­
lifted. Where is the equality ? Is friendship possible without equality? 
I say this, uttering a cry of hmentation from my heart, and not tri­
umphing, not exalting myself over you, as you perhaps imagine." 
"But I am uttering a cry of lamentation from my heart too, Foma, 
I assure you." 
"And this is the man," Foma went on, changing his severe tone for a 
sanctimonious one, "this is the man for whom I so often kept vigil at 

'T h| Jrietzd of the Jami/y 
715 
night! How many times on my sleepless nights have I arisen from my 
bed, have lighted a candle and said to myself, 'Now he is sleeping 
peacefully, trusting in you. Do not you, Foma, sleep, be valiant for him; 
maybe you will think of something more for the welfare of that man.' 
That is what Foma thought on his sleepless nights, Colonel! And this 
is how that colonel has repaid him! But enough, enough . .  .'' 
"But I will deserve your friendship again, Foma; I will deserve it, 
I swear to you." 
"You will deserve it ? Where is the guarantee ? As a Christian I will 
forgive you, and even love you; but as a man and a gentleman I shall 
not be able to help despising you. I must, I am bound to, in the name 
of morality, because-! repeat it-you have disgraced yourself, while 
my action has been most high-minded. Why, who out of your set 
would perform such an action? Would any one of them refuse an 
immense sum of money which poor destitute Foma, despised by all, 
has refused from devotion to true greatness? No, Colonel; to be on a 
level with me you must perform now a regular series of heroic deeds. 
And what are you capable of when you cannot even address me as 
your equal, but call me Foma like a servant . . .  .'' 
"Fornal but I call you so from affection!" wailed my uncle. "I did 
not know you disliked it. My God! if I had only known ! . . .  
" 
"You," Foma pursued, "you who could not, or rather, would not, 
grant the most insignificant, the most trivial request when I asked you 
to address me like a general as 'your Excellency' . .  
.'' 
"But, Foma, you know that is really, so to say, high treason, Foma." 
"High treason! You have learnt some phrase out of a book and 
repeat it like a parrot! But, do you know, you put me to shame, cov­
ered me with ignominy by your refusal to call me 'your Excellency'; 
you covered me with ignominy because without understanding my 
reasons you made me look a capricious fool worthy of a madhouse. 
Why, do you suppose I don't understand that I should have been 
ridiculous if I had wanted to be styled 'Excellency'-! who despise all 
these ranks and earthly grandeurs, insignificant in themselves if they 
are not lighted up by virtue? For a million I would not accept the rank 
of general, without virtue. And meanwhile you looked upon me as a 
madman! It was for your benefit I sacrificed my pride and allowed 
you, you to be able to look upon me as a madman, you and your 
learned gentlemen! It was solely in order to enlighten your mind, to 
develop your morals, and to shed upon you the light of new ideas 
that I made up my mind to demand from you a general's title. I 
wanted you for the future not to regard generals as the highest lumi-

716 
'1 he Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
naries on this earthly sphere; I wanted to show you that rank is 
nothing without greatness of soul, and that there is no need to rejoice 
at the arrival of your general when there are, perhaps, standing at your 
side, people made illustrious by virtue! But you have so constantly 
prided yourself before me on your rank of colonel that it was harJ 
for you to say to me: 'your Excellency.' That was the root of it! That 
was where one must look for the reason, and not in any breach of the 
decrees of Providence! The whole reason is, that you are a colonel 
and I am simply Foma . . . .  " 
"No, Foma; no, I assure you that it is not so. You are a learned man 
. . .  you are not simply Foma . . . .  I respect you . . .  .'' 
"You respect me! Good! Then tell me, since you respect me, what 
is your opinion, am I worthy of the rank of a general or am I not? 
Answer at once and straightforwardly, am I or not ? I want to see your 
ᅙntelligence, your development.'' 
"For honesty, for disinterestedness, for intelligence, for lofty nobility 
of soul you are worthy of it," my uncle brought out with pride. 
"Well, if I am worthy of it, why will you not say 'your Excellency' 
to me?" 
"Foma, I will, perhaps." 
"But, I insist! And I insist now, Colonel, I require it and insist. I 
see how hard it is for you, that is why I insist. That sacrifice on your 
side will be the first step in your moral victory, for-don't forget it­
you will have to gain a series of moral victories to be on a level with 
me; you must conquer yourself, and only then I shall feel certain of 
your sincerity . . .  .'' 
"To-morrow, then, I will call you 'your Excellency,' Foma.'' 
"No, not to-morrow, Colonel, to-morrow can take care of itself. I 
insist that you now at once address me as 'your Excellency.' " 
"Certainly, Foma, I am ready; only what do you mean by 'at once,' 
Foma?" 
"Why not at once, or are you ashamed ? That's an insult to me if 
you are ashamed." 
"Oh, well, if you like, Foma. I am ready .
.
.
 I am proud to do so, 
indeed; only it's queer, Foma, apropos of nothing, 'Good-day, your 
Excellency.' You see, one can't.'' 
"No, not 'Good-day, your Excellency.' That's an offensive tone, it 
is like a joke, a farce. I do not permit such jokes with me. Y CliJ forget 
yourself, Colonel, you forget yourself. Change your tone!" 
"And you are not joking, Foma ?" 

r he Jriend of the Jamily 
717 
"In the first place, I am not Foma, Yegor Ilyitch, and don't you 
forget it. I am Foma Fomitch." 
"Oh, Foma Fomitch, I am delighted, really, I am altogether de­
lighted, only what am I to say?" 
"You are puzzled what to add to the phrase 'your Excellency.' That 
I understand. You should have explained yourself long ago. It is 
excusable indeed, especially if a man is not a lite1·ary character, to put 
it politely. Well, I will help you, since you are not a literary character. 
Repeat after me, 'Your Excellency!' . . .  
" 
"Well, your Excellency . . .  " 
"No, not 'Well, your Excellency,' but simply 'your Excellency!' I tell 
you, Colonel, you must change your tone. I hope, too, that you will 
not be offended if I suggest that you should make a slight bow. And 
at the same time bend forward, expressing in that way respectfulness 
and readiness, so to say, to fly on his errands. I have been in the society 
of generals myself, and I know all that, so then 'your Excellency.' " 
"Your Excellency . .  .'' 
"How inexpressibly delighted I am that I have at last an oppor­
tunity of asking your forgiveness for not having recognized from the 
first moment your Excellency's soul. I make bold to assure you that I 
will not for the future spare my poor efforts for the public welfare . 
. . . Well, that's enough!" 
Poor uncle! He had to repeat all this rigmarole phrase by phrase, 
word by word. I stood and blushed as though I were guilty. I was 
choking with rage. 
"Well, don't you feel now," the torturer went on, "that your heart is 
suddenly lighter, as though an angel had flown into your soul? . .  
Do you feel the presence of that angel? Answer." 
"Yes, Foma, I certainly feel more at ease," answered my uncle. 
"As though after you have conquered yourself your heart were, so 
to say, steeped in hoi y oil?" 
"Yes, Foma; certainly it all seems as it were in butter." 
"As it were in butter? H'm, I wasn't talking of butter, though . . . . 
Well, never mind! You see, Colonel, the value of a duty performed! 
Conquer yourself. You are vain, immensely vain!" 
"I see I am, Foma," my uncle answered, with a sigh. 
"You are an egoist, and indeed a gloomy egoist . . .  .'' 
"An egoist I am, it is true, Foma, and I see it; ever since I have come 
to know you, I have learned to know that too." 
"I am speaking to you now like a father, like a tender mother . . . .  
You repel people and forget that a friendly calf sucks two mothers." 

718 
The Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
"That is true too, Fornal" 
"You are coarse. You jar so coarsely upon the human heart, you so 
egoistically insist upon attention, that a decent man is ready to run 
from you to the utmost ends of the earth." 
My uncle heaved another deep sigh. 
"Be softer, more attentive, more loving to others; forget yourself 
for the sake of others, then they will think of you. Live and let others 
live-that is my rule! Suffer, labour, pray and hope-those are the 
truths which I would like to instil into all mankind at once! Model 
yourself on them and then I shall be the first to open my heart to you, 
I shall weep on your bosom . . .  if need be . . . .  As it is, it is always 'I' 
and 'I' and 'my gracious self' with you. But, you know, one may get 
sick at last of your gracious self, if you will allow me to say so." 
"A sweet-tongued gentleman," Gavrila brought out, awestruck. 
"That's true, Foma, I feel all that," my uncle assented, deeply 
touched. "But I am not altogether to blame, Foma. I've been brought 
up like this, I have lived with soldiers; but I swear, Foma, I have not 
been without feeling. When I said good-bye to the regiment, all the 
hussars, all my division, simply shed tears and said they would never 
get another like me. I thought at the time that I too was not altogether 
a lost soul." 
"Again a piece of egoism! Again I catch you in vanity. You are 
boasting and at the same time reproaching me with the hussars' tears. 
Why don't I boast of any one's tears? And yet there may have been 
grounds, there may have been grounds for doinᅥ; so." 
"I meant nothing, Foma, it was a slip of the tongue. I couldn't help 
remembering those old happy times." 
"Happy times do not fall from heaven, we make them ourselves; it 
lies in our hearts, Yegor Ilyitch. That is why I am always happy and, 
in spite of my sufferings, contented, tranquil in spirit, and am not a 
burden to any one unless it is to fools, upstarts and learned gentlemen, 
on whom I have no mercy and don't care to have. I don't like fools! 
And what are these learned gentlemen ? 'A man of learning'; and his 
learning turns out to be nothing but a hoaxing trick, and not learning. 
Why, what did he say just now? Let him come here! Let all these 
men of learning come here! I can refute them all; I can refute all their 
propositions! I say nothing of greatness of soul .
.
•
 
" 
"Of course, Foma. \Vho doubts it ?" 
"This afternoon, for instance, I showed intelligence, talent, colossal 
erudition, knowledge of the human heart, knowledge of contempo­
rary literature; I showed and displayed in a brilliant fashion how some 

r he Jriend of the Jamily 
719 
wretched Komarinsky may furnish a lofty topic of conversation for a 
man of talent. And did any one of them appreciate me as I deserved? 
No, they turned away! Why, I am certain he has told you already that 
I know nothing, and yet perhaps Macchiavelli himself or some Merca­
dante was sitting before him and only to blame for being poor and 
in obscurity . . . .  That does not penetrate to them! .
•
•
 I hear of 
Korovkin too. What sort of queer fish is he?" 
"He is a clever man, Foma, a man of learning 
.
.
.
. I am expecting 
him. He will certainly be a nice man, Foma." 
"H'm, I doubt it. Most likely some modern ass laden with books; 
there is no soul in them, Colonel, no heart in them! And what is 
learning without virtue?" 
"No, Foma, no. How he talked of family happiness! The heart feels 
it of itself, Foma." 
"H'm! We will have a look at him; we will examine Korovkin too. 
But enough," Foma concluded, getting up from his easy-chair. "I 
cannot altogether forgive you yet, Colonel; the insult was too deadly; 
but I will pray, and perhaps God will shed peace on the wounded 
heart. We will speak further of this to-morrow, but now permit me 
to withdraw. I am tired and exhausted .
.
.
•
 
" 
"Oh, Fornal" cried my uncle in a fluster, "why, of course you are 
tired! I say, won't you have something to support you, a snack of 
something? I will order something at once." 
"A snack! Ha-ha-ha!" answered Foma, with a contemptuous laugh. 
"First they offer you a drink of poison, and then they ask you if you 
won't have a snack of something. They want to heal the wounds of 
the heart with stewed mushrooms or pickled apples! What a pitiful 
materialist you are, Colonel!" 
"Oh, Foma, I spoke in all simplicity . . .  
" 
"Oh, very well. Enough of that. I will withdraw, and you go at 
once to your mother; fall on your knees, sob, weep, but beg for her 
forgiveness, that is your duty, that is a moral obligation." 
"Oh, Foma, I have been thinking of nothing but that all the time; 
even now while I have been talking to you I have been thinking of 
it. I am ready to implore her on my knees till dawn. But only think, 
Foma, what they are expecting of me. Why, you know it's unjust, 
Foma, it's cruel. Be entirely magnanimous, make me completely 
happy, think a little, decide, and then . . .  then .
•
•
 I swear! . . .  
" 
"No, Yegor Ilyitch, no, it's no business of mineᅚ" answered Foma. 
"You know that I do not meddle in the slightest degree in all that; 

720 
Tl1e Slzort Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
you may be persuaded that I am at the bottom of it all, but I assure 
you that from the very beginning I have held entirely aloof from this 
affair. It is solely the desire of your mother, and she, of course, wishes 
for nothing but your good . . . .  Go to her, make haste, fly and rectify 
the position by your obedience . . .  and let not the sun go down upon 
your wrath; while I . . .  I shall be all night long praying for you. I 
have known no sleep for many a night, Y egor Ilyitch. Good-night! I 
forgive you too, old man," he said, turning to Gavrila. "I know you 
did not do it of yourself. You forgive me too if I have offended you . 
. . . Good-night, good-night all, and may the Lord bless you." 
Foma went out. I rushed at once into the room. 
"You've been listening!" cried my uncle. 
"Yes, uncle, I have been listening! And you, you could call him 
'your Excellency'?" 
"What could I do, brother? Indeed, I am proud of it . . . . That was 
(JO great act of sacrifice. But what a noble, what a disinterested, what 
a great man! Sergey, why, you heard yourself . . .  and how I could, 
how I could thrust that money on him, I simply don't understand! 
My dear, I was carried away, I was in a rage. I did not understand 
him; I suspected him, I accused him . . . .  But no, he could not be 
antagonistic to me-l see that now . . .  and do you remember what a 
noble expression there was on his face when he was refusing the 
money?" 
"Very well, uncle, you can be as proud as you like, but I am going; 
my patience is at an end. For the last time I say it, tell me what you 
want of me? Why did you send for me, and what do you expect ? And 
if it is all over and I am of no use to you, then I am going. I can't 
endure such exhibitions! I am going this very day." 
"My dear!" My uncle was in a Huster as usual. "Only wait two 
minutes; I am going now, dear boy, to mamma, to settle there . . .  a 
grave, important, immense question! . . .  And you meanwhile go to 
your room. Here, Gavrila will take you to the summer lodge. You 
know the summer lodge, it is in the garden. I have given orders, and 
your trunk has been taken there; and I am going in to beg forgiveness 
and settle one question-! know now what to do-and then I will be 
with you in a Hash, and then I'll tell you everything, I'll open my 
whole soul to you and . . .  and . . .  happy days will come for us too, 
some time! Two minutes, only two minutes, Sergey!" 
He pressed my hand and hurriedly went out. There was nothing to 
'.>e done, I had to go oiT with Gavrila again. 

T lze Jriend of tlze Jamily 
721 
[ X ] 
MIZINTCHIKOV 
THE lodge to which Gavrila conducted me was called "the new 
lodge" only from old habit, because it was built long ago in the time 
of the former owners. It was a pretty little wooden house, standing in 
the garden a few paces from the old house. It was surrounded on three 
sides by tall old lime-trees which touched the roof with their branches. 
All the four rooms of this little house were kept ready for visitors, and 
were not badly furnished. Going into the room assigned me, to which 
my portmanteau had been already taken, I saw on a little table before 
the bedstead a sheet of notepaper, covered with magnificent hand­
writing in various styles framed in garlands and flourishes. The capi­
tal letters and the garlands were illuminated in various colours. The 
whole made a very pretty specimen of calligraphy. From the first 
words I read I saw that it was a begging letter addressed to me, and 
that in it I was styled "Enlightened benefactor." It was headed "The 
Plaints of Vidoplyasov." Though I tried with strained attention to 
make out something of what was written, my elTorts were all in vain; 
it was the most inflated nonsense, written in a high-flown flunkey 
lingo. I could only surmise that Vidoplyasov was in trouble of some 
sort, was begging for my assistance, was building great hopes upon 
me, "by reason of my enlightenment," and in conclusion begged me 
to interest myself on his behalf with my uncle and to work upon him 
with "my machinery," as he expressed it at the end of this epistle. l 
was still reading it when the door opened and Mizintchikov walked in. 
"I hope you will allow me to make your acquaintance," he said in a 
free and easy way, though with extreme courtesy, offering me his hand. 
"I could not say two words to you this afternoon, and yet from the 
first glance I felt a desire to know you better." 
I answered at once that I was delighted and so on, though I was, in 
fact, in an extremely bad temper. We sat down. 
"What have you got here? "  he said, glancing at the sheet of paper 
which I was still holding in my hand. "Not 'The Plaints of Vidoplya· 
sov'? That's what it is. I was certain that Vidoplyasov was attacking 
you too. He presented me with just such a document with the same 
complaints; and he has been expecting you a long time and most 

722 
T lze Short N.otJds of VostoetJsky 
likely got ready beforehand. You need not be surprised : there's a great 
deal that's queer here, and really there is plenty to laugh at." 
"Only to laugh at?" 
"Oh, well, surely not to cry over. If you like I will give you 
Vidoplyasov's history, and I am certain that you will laugh." 
"I confess I am not interested in Vidoplyasov just now," I answered 
with vexation. 
It was evident to me that Mr. Mizintchikov's friendliness and his 
polite conversation were all assumed by him with some object, and 
that he was simply trying to get something out of me. He had sat 
scowling and serious in the afternoon; now he was good-humoured, 
smiling, and ready to tell me long stories. It was evident from the first 
glance that the man was perfectly self-possessed, and he seemed to 
understand human nature. 
"That cursed Fornal" I said, banging my fist on the table with fury. 
"I am positive that he is at the bottom of every sort of mischief here 
and mixed up in it all! Cursed brute!" 
"I think your anger is excessive," Mizintchikov observed. 
"My anger excessive," I cried, instantly firing up. "I let myself go 
too far this afternoon, of course, and so gave every one a right to 
blame me. I know very well that I plunged in and put my foot in it 
on every point, and I think there is no need to tell me that! . . .  I know, 
too, that that's not the way to behave in decent society; but how could 
I help letting myself go? tell me that. Why, this is a madhouse, if 
you care to know! And . . .  and . . .  in fact . .
. I am simply going 
away, so there." 
"Do you smoke?" Mizintchikov asked calmly. 
"Yes." 
"Then you will probably allow me to smoke? They won't let me 
in there, and I am wretched without it. I agree," he went on, as he 
lighted a cigarette, "that all this is like a madhouse; but believe me, 
I do not venture to criticize you, just because in your plao:e I should 
perhaps be three times as excited and violent as you." 
"And why were you not violent if you really were angry too? I 
remember you very cool, on the contrary, and, I confess, I even thought 
it strange that you did not stand up for my poor uncle, who is 
ready to befriend . . .  all and every one!" 
"You are right: he has befriended many people; but I consider it 
perfectly useless to stand up for him : in the first place it would be 
useless and even derogatory for him in a way; and in the second I 
should be kicked out to-morrow. And I tell you frankly my circum-

The Jriend of the Jamily 
723 
stances are such that to be a guest here is a great advantage for me." 
"But I do not make the slightest claim on your frankness in regard 
to your circumstances . . . .  I should, however, have liked to ask, since 
you have been here a month . . .  " 
"Please, do, ask anything: I am at your service,'' Mizintchikov 
answered, hurriedly moving up a chair. 
"Well, explain this, for instance: Foma Fomitch has just refused 
fifteen thousand roubles which were in his hands-1 saw it with my 
own eyes." 
"What? Impossible!" cried Mizintchikov. "Tell me, please." 
I told him, saying nothing about "your Excellency." Mizintchikov 
listened with greedy curiosity. He positively changed countenance 
when the fifteen thousand were mentioned. 
"That's smart!" he said, when he heard my story. "I really did not 
expect it of Foma." 
"He did refuse the money, though! How do you explain that? 
Surely not by the nobility of his soul?'' 
"He refused fifteen thousand to take thirty later. Though, do you 
know," he added after a moment's thought, "I doubt whether Foma 
had any mercenary design in it. He is not a practical man; he is a sort 
of a poet, too, in his own way. Fifteen thousand . . .  h'm. He would 
have taken the money, do you see, but he couldn't resist the temptation 
to strike an attitude and give himself airs. I tell you he's a sentimental 
mush, and the sloppiest old sniveller and all that, with the most 
unbounded vanity!" 
Mizintchikov was positively roused to anger. It was evident that he 
was very much annoyed and even envious. I looked at him with 
curiosity. 
"H'm! \Ve may expect great changes," he added, musing. "Now 
Yegor Ilyitch is ready to worship Foma. I shouldn't wonder if he does 
get married now that his heart is softened," he muttered through his 
teeth. 
"So you think that this abominable, unnatural marriage with that 
crazy fool really will come off?" 
Mizintchikov looked at me searchingly. 
"The scoundrels!" I cried emphatically. 
"There is a fairly sound idea at the back of it, though. They main­
tain that he ought to do something for his family." 
"As though he hadn't done enough for them," I cried indignantly. 
"And you, you talk of there being a sound idea in marrying a vulgar 
fool!" 

724 
The Short Novels of 'DostoevskY 
"Of course I agree with you that she is a fool. . . .  H'm! It's a good 
thing that you are so fond of your uncle; I sympathize with him 
myself . . .  though he could round off his estate finely with her for­
tune! They have other reasons, though; they are afraid that Yegor 
Ilyitch may marry that governess . . .  do you remember, an attractive 
girl? "  
"But is that likely to be true? . . .  " I asked i n  agitation. "It seems to 
me that it's spiteful gossip. Tell me, for goodness' sake, it interests me 
extremely . . . .  " 
"Oh, he is head over ears in love with her! Only, of course, he 
conceals it." 
"He conceals it? You think that he is concealing it? And she? Does 
she love him ?" 
"It is very likely she does. It is all to her advantage to marry him, 
though ; she is very poor." 
"But what grounds have you for your supposition that they love 
each other?" 
"Oh, you know, you can't help seeing it ; besides, I believe they meet 
in secret. They do say that she has illicit rebtions with him, in fact. 
Only, please, don't repeat that. I tell you as a secret." 
"Is it possible to believe that?" I cried. "And you, you acknowledge 
that you believe it ? "  
"Of course I do not fully believe it, I wasn't there. But it's very 
possible, though." 
"Very possible? Think of my uncle's sense of honour, his noble 
character." 
"I agree; but one may be carried aw:.y, with a conviction that one 
is going to make it right with matrimony afterwards. People often 
are. Uut, I repeat, I don't insist on the absolute certainty of the facts, 
especially as they have blackened her character in all sorts of ways 
here; they even s:.y that she had an intrigue with Vidoplyasov." 
"There, you see," I cried, "with Vidoply:.sov. Why, as though it 
were possible! Isn't it revolting even to listen to such a thing? Surely 
you can't believe it?" 
"I tell you that I do not quite believe it," answered Mizintchikov 
calmly, "but it might happen. Anything may happen in this world. 
I was not there, and besides, I consider it not my business. But as I 
see you take great interest in all this, I feel I ought to add that I really 
don't put much faith in the story about Vidoplyasov. It's all the 
invention of Anna Nilovna, that Miss Perepelitsyn; it's she who has 
set those rumours going here out of envy bec.1use she dreamed in the 

The Jriend of the Jamily 
725 
past of marrying Yegor Ilyitch herself-yes, by Jove, on the ground 
that she is a major's daughter. Now she is disappointed and awfully 
furious. But I believe I have told you all about that business now, and 
I confess I greatly dislike gossip, especially as we are losing precious 
time. I have come to ask you a trifling favour, you see." 
"A favour? Certainly; any way in which I can be of use to you." 
"I understand, and indeed I hope to interest you, for I see you love 
your uncle and take great interest in his fate in the matrimonial line; 
but before I ask you that favour I will ask you another, a preliminary 
" 
one. 
"What is that?" 
''I'll tell you; perhaps you will consent to grant my chief request, 
and perhaps not; but in any case, before telling it you I will humbly 
ask you to grant one great favour, to give me your word of honour 
as a nobleman and a gentleman that all you hear from me shall remain 
a dead secret, and that you will not betray the secret in any case or 
for the sake of any person, and will not take advantage for your own 
benefit of the idea which I now find it necessary to communicate to 
you. Do you agree or not?" 
It was a solemn introduction. I gave my assent. 
"Well ?" . . .  I said. 
"h is really a very simple matter," Mizintchikov began. 
"I want to 
elope with Tatyana lvanovna and to marry her; in short, there is to 
be something in the Gretna Green style, do you understand? "  
I stared Mizintchikov straight in the face, and for some time I could 
not utter a word. 
"I confess I don't understand at all," I brought out at last; "and 
what's more," I went on, "expecting that I had to do with a sensible 
man, I did not in the least expect . . .  
" 
"Expecting you did not expect," interrupted Mizintchikov; "which 
may be translated, that I and my project are stupid-that's so, isn't it?" 
"Oh, not at all . . .  but . . .  
" 
"Oh, please, don't mind speaking plainly! Don't be uneasy; you will 
do me a great pleasure by plain speaking, in fact, for so we shall get 
nearer our object. I agree with you, though, that all this must seem 
somewhat strange at the first glance. But I venture to assure you that 
so far from being foolish, my project is extremely sensible; and if you 
will be so good as to listen to all the circumstances . . .  " 
"Oh, certainly! I am listening eagerly." 
"There is scarcely anything to tell, though. You see, I am in debt 
and haven't a farthing. I have, besides, a sister, a girl of nineteen, 

726 
T h( Short N.ovds of VostO(tiJk.y 
fatherless and motherless, living in a family and entirely without 
means, you know. For that I am partly to blame. We inherited a prop­
erty 0f forty serfs. Just at that time I was promoted to be a cornet. Well, 
:n first, of course, I mortgaged, and then I squandered our money in 
other ways too. I lived like a fool, set the fashion, gave myself airs, 
gambled, drank-it was idiotic, in fact, and I am ashamed to remem­
ber it. Now I have come to my senses and want to change my manner 
of life completely. But to do so it is absolutely essential to have a 
hundred thousand roubles. As I shall never get anything in the service, 
since I am not qualified for anything and have scarcely any education, 
there are, of course, only two resources left me: to steal or to marry a 
rich wife. I came here almost without boots to my feet, I walked, I 
could not drive. My sister gave me her last three roubles when I set 
off from Moscow. Here I saw Tatyana lvanovna, and at once the idea 
dawned upon me. I immediately resolved to sacrifice myself and marry 
her. You will agree that all that is nothing but good sense. Besides, 
I am doing it more for my sister's sake . . .  though, of course, for my 
own too." 
"But allow me to ask, do you mean to make a formal proposal to 
Tatyana Ivanovna ? . . .  
" 
"God forbid, they would kick me out :It once; but if I suggest an 
elopement, a runaway match, she will marry me at once. That's the 
whole point, that there should be something romantic and sensational 
about it. Of course it would all immediately end in legal matrimony. 
If only I can allure her away from here!" 
"But why are you so sure that she will elope with you ?" 
"Oh, don't trouble about that! I am perfectly sure of that. The whole 
plan rests on the idea that Tatyana Ivanovna is ready to carry on an 
intrigue with any one she meets, with any one, in fact, to whom it 
occurs to respond to her. That is why I first asked you to give me your 
word of honour that you would not take advantage of the idea. You 
will understand, of course, that it would be positively wicked of me 
not to take advantage of such an opportunity, especially in my circum­
stances." 
"So then she is quite mad . . . .  Oh, I beg your pardon," I added, 
catching myself up. "Since you now have intentions . . .  
" 
"Please don't mind speaking out, as I have asked you already. You 
ask, is she quite mad ? What shall I tell you ? Of course she is not 
mad, since she is not yet in a madhouse; besides, I really don't see 
anything particularly mad in this mania for love affairs. She is a 
respectable girl in spite of everything. You see, till a year ago she was 

The Jrietzd of the Jamily 
727 
horribly poor, and from her birth up has lived in bondage to the ladies 
who befriended her. Her heart is exceptionally susceptible; no one has 
asked her in marriage. . . . Well, you understand : dreams, desires, 
hopes, the fervour of feelings which she has always had to conceal, 
perpetual agonies at the hands of the ladies who befriended her-all 
that of course might well drive a sensitive character to derangement. 
And all at once she comes in for a fortune; you'll allow that is enough 
to upset any one. \Veil, now of course people make up to her and hang 
about her, and all her hopes have risen up. She told us this afternoon 
about a dandy in a white waistcoat; that's a fact which happened 
literally as she described. From that fact you can judge of the rest. 
With sighs, notes, verses you can inveigle her at once; and if with all 
that you hint at a silken rope ladder, a Spanish serenade and all that 
nonsense, you can do what you like with her. I have put it to the test, 
and at once obtained a secret interview. But meanwhile I have put it 
off till the right moment. But I must carry her oiT within four days. 
The evening before I shall begin to make tender speeches, to sigh : 
I can sing and play the guitar pretty well. At night there will be a 
meeting in the arbour, and at dawn the coach will be in readiness; I 
shall entice her away, we shall get into the coach and drive oiT. You 
understand that there is no risk about it whatever; she is of age, and 
what's more, completely her own mistress. And if once she ran away 
with me she would, of course, be bound to me. I should take her to ;:t 
poor but respectable family, thirty miles away, who would look after 
her, and not let any one come near her till the wedding; and mean­
while I shan't lose time, we'll get married within three days-it can 
be done. Of course, first of all, money is needed ; but I have reckoned 
that I shall not need more than five hundred roubles for the whole 
business, and for that I rely on Yegor Ilyitch. He will give it, of course, 
without knowing what is up. Do you understand now?" 
"I do," I answered, taking it all in fully. "But tell me, .in what way 
can I be of use to you?" 
"Oh, in a great deal, I assure you, or I would not have asked you. 
I told you that I had in view a poor but very respectable family. You 
can help me both here and there, and as a witness. I must own that 
without your help I should be at a loss." 
"Another question, why have you done me the honour to select me 
to receive your confidence, though you know nothing of me, since I 
have only been here a few hours?" 
"Your question," Mizintchikov answered with the most polite smile, 
"your question, I frankly confess, gives me great satisfaction, because 

728 
T lz% Slwrt N.ovds of Vosto%vsky 
it atTords me an opportunity of expressing my special rcga·d for you." 
"Oh, you do me too much honour!" 
"No; you see, I have been studying you a little this afternoon. Ad­
mitting you are both hasty and . . .  and . . .  well, young, I tell you what 
I am thoroughly certain of: when you have given me your word that 
you will tell no one you will certainly keep it. You are not Obnoskin­
that's the first point. Secondly, you are honest and will not take ad­
vantage of my idea-for yourself, of course, I mean-unless you would 
like to enter into a friendly compact with me. In that case I will perhaps 
agree to yield to you my idea-that is, Tatyana Ivanovna-and be 
ready to help you zealously in the elopement, only on condition of 
receiving from you a month after your marriage fifty thousand roubles, 
for which you would of course gi\'e me security beforehand in the 
shape of an I 0 U." 
"\Vhat!"' I cried out. "So now you are offering her to me?" 
"N::lurally, I can give it up to you if on rdlcction you wish it. 
should of course be a loser, but . . .  the idea belongs to me, and you 
know one is paid for one's ideas. Thirdly and lastly I asked you be­
cause I had no choice. And taking into consideration the position here, 
it was impossible to delay long; besides which it will son be the fast of 
the Assumption, and they won't celebrate weddings. I hope you fully 
understand me now?" 
"Perfectly. And once more, I feel bound to keep your secret quite 
sacred ; but I cannot be your accomplice in the business, and I think it 
my duty to tell you so at once." 
"\Vhy so?" 
"You ask, why so?" I cried, giving the rein to my pent-up feelings 
at bst. "\Vhy, surely you must understand that such an act is positively 
dishonourablc. Supposing you were quite correct in your calculations, 
reckoning on the bdy's weakness of mind and unhappy mania, why, 
it's that very thing which ought to restrain you as an honourable man) 
You say yourself that she is worthy of respect in spite of being ridicu­
lous, and you arc taking advantage of her misfortune to rob her of 
a hundred thousand. You will not, of course, he a real husband to her, 
carrying out your obligations: you will certainly leave her . . .  it's so 
dishonourahle that, excuse me, I can't even understand how you could 
bring yourself to ask me to assist you." 
"Ough ! my goodness! how romantic!" cried Mizintchikov, looking 
at me with unfeigned surprise. "Though, indeed, it's not that it's 
romantic, but simply I believe that you don't understand the position. 

'1 h% Jriend of the Jamily 
729 
You say that it's dishonourable, and yet all the advantages are not on 
my side, but hers . . .  only consider . . .  
" 
"Of course, if one looks at it from your point of view I dare say it 
will appear that you will be doing something most magnanimous in 
marrying Tatyana Ivanovna," I answered, with a sarcastic smile. 
"Well, what else ? Just so, it is something most magnanimous," cried 
Mizintchikov, growing hot in his turn. "Only consider : in the first 
place, I am sacrificing myself in consenting to be her husband. Is not 
that some sacrifice? In the second place, although she has certainly a 
hundred thousand in silver roubles I shall only take a hundred thou­
sand in paper, and I have sworn that I won't take another farthing 
from her all my life, though I could ; that's some sacrifice again. Lastly, 
look into it more deeply. Could she anyway lead a peaceful life? For 
her to live in peace one would have to take her money from her and 
put her in a madhouse, for one may expect any minute that some 
worthless fellow, some scheming rogue, some adventurer, will turn up 
with a moustache and an imperial, with a guitar and serenades, some 
one in the style of Obnoskin, who will inveigle her, marry her and 
strip her completely, and then turn her out into the gutter. This, for 
instance, is a most respectable household, and yet they are only keeping 
her here because they are speculating on her fortune. From such risks 
she must be saved, rescued. \Veil, you see, as soon as she marries me 
such risks are over, it will be my duty to see that no trouble comes 
near her. In the first place, I shall settle her at once in Moscow, in a 
poor but honourable family-not the one I have spoken of to you, but 
another; my sister will be constantly with her; they will look after her 
and pay her every attention. She will have two hundred and fifty 
thousand, possibly three hundred, in paper left, one can do well on that, 
you know! Every pleasure will be provided for her, all sorts of enter­
tainment, balls, masquerades and concerts. She may even dream of 
love affairs, only of course I shall look after that. She may dream as 
much as she likes, but not so in reality! Now, for instanc(;, any one 
can ill-treat her, but no one will be able to then ; she will be my wife, 
she will be a Mizintchikov, and I won't allow my name to be insulted! 
That alone is worth something, isn't it ? Naturally I am not going to 
live with her. She will live in Moscow, and I shall live somewhere in 
Petersburg. I admit that, because I am doing things straightforwardly 
with you. But what if we do live apart? Look at her character and 
just consider, is she fit to be a wife and live with a husband? Is it 
possible to go on living with her continually? Why, she is the most 
light-headed creature in the world. She must have incessant change; 

730 
The Short N.otels of 7JostoetJslzy 
she is capable next day of forgetting that she was married yesterday 
and made a lawful wife. Why, I should make her wretched in the end 
if I were to live with her and insist on her strictly performing her 
duties. Naturally I shall go and see her once a year or oftener, and not 
to get money, I assure you. I have told you that I am not going to take 
more than a hundred thousand in paper from her, and I shan't either! 
On the money side I shall treat her in the most honourable way. If I 
come to see her for two or three days, my visit will actually be a 
pleasure to her and not a bore; I shall laugh with her, tell her stories, 
take her to a ball, make love to her, give her little souvenirs, sing songs 
to her, make her a present of a lapdog, have a romantic parting from 
her, and keep up an exchange of love letters. Why, she will be in 
ecstasies over such a romantic, devoted, and amusing husband. To 
my thinking, that is the rational way to proceed ; that's how all hus­
bands ought to behave. Husbands are only precious to their wives 
when they are absent, and following my system, I shall engage Tatyana 
Ivanovna's heart in the most honeyed way for the whole of her life. 
What more can she want? tell me that. Why, it is paradise, not life!" 
I listened in silence and with wonder; I realized that it was impossi­
ble to turn Mr. Mizintchikov from his plan. He was fanatically per­
suaded of the rectitude and even the greatness of his project, and spoke 
of it with the enthusiasm of an inventor. But there was still one rather 
delicate question which was essential to clear up. 
"Have you reflected," I said, "that she is almost betrothed to my 
uncle? It will be a great insult to him if you elope with her; you will 
be carrying her off almost on the eve of her wedding, and what's 
more, will borrow from him to carry out your exploit." 
"That is just where I have you!" Mizintchikov cried out with heat. 
"You needn't trouble, I foresaw your objection. But first and foremost, 
your uncle has not yet made her an offer, consequently there is no need 
for me to know that they are intending her for a match for him; 
moreover, I beg you to note that I thought of this enterprise three 
weeks ago, when I knew nothing of their intentions, so I am perfectly 
justified from the moral point of view as regards them. And in fact, 
strictly speaking, it is rather he who is carrying off my betrothed than 
I his, whom, take note, I have already met in secret at night in the 
arbour. And lastly, allow me to ask, were not you yourself in a perfect 
frenzy at your uncle's being forced to marry Tatyana I vanovna ? And 
now you are all at once standing up for the marriage, and talking of 
honour, of some insult to the family! Why, on the contrary, I am 
doing vour uncle the greatest service, l am saving him-you ought to 

'I he Jriend of the Jamily 
731 
understand that. He looks on the match with aversion, and what's 
more, is in love with another young lady! Why, what sort of wife 
would Tatyana Ivanovna be to him? And she would be wretched with 
him too because, say what you like, she would then have to be re­
strained from throwing roses at young men. And you know if I elope 
with her in the night, then no Madame Ia Generale, no Foma Fomitch, 
will be able to do anything. To bring back a bride who has run away 
from the wedding would be too discreditable. Isn't that a service, isn't 
it a benefit to Yegor Ilyitch ? "  
I must own this last argument had a great effect on me. 
"But what if he makes her an offer to-morrow?" I said. "You see, 
it would be rather too late then; she will be formally betrothed to him." 
"To be sure it will be, but that is just why we must work to prevent 
it. What am I asking you to help me for? It's hard for me alone, but 
the two of us together can arrange things and prevent Y egor Ilyitch 
from making a proposal. We must do everything we can to prevent 
it, even if it comes to thrashing Foma Fomitch and so distracting the 
general attention from all thoughts of the match. Of course that is 
only in the last extremity, I only give that for the sake of example. 
This is what I am relying on you for." 
"One more last question : have you told no one but me of your 
scheme?" 
Mizintchikov scratched the back of his head and made a very wry 
face. 
"I must confess that question is worse than the bitterest pill for me. 
That's just the trouble, that I have given away the idea . . .  in fact, I 
have been the most awful fool! And to whom, do you suppose? To 
Obnoskin! I can scarcely believe it myself. I don't know how it hap­
pened! He is always about the place, I did not know him so well, 
and when this inspiration dawned upon me I was, of course, greatly 
excited; and as I realized even then that I should need some one to 
help me, I appealed to Obnoskin .
•
.
 it was unpardonable, unpardon­
able!" 
"\V ell, and what did Obnoskin say?" 
"He agreed with enthusiasm, but next day early in the morning he 
disappeared. Three days later he turned up again with his mamma. 
He doesn't say a word to me, and in fact avoids me as though he were 
afraid of me. I saw at once what was up. And his mother is a regular 
shark, she's been in tight places before now. I used to know her in the 
past. Of course he has told her all about it. I am waiting and keeping 

732 
The Short Novels of VostoevskJ 
quiet; they are spying on me, and things are in rather a strained 
position . . . that's why I am in a hurry." 
"What is it exactly you fear from them ?" 
"They can't do a great deal, of course, but that they will do some­
thing nasty-that is certain. They will insist on having money for 
keeping quiet and helping, that I expect . . . .  Only I can't give them 
a great deal, and I am not going to. I have made up my mind about 
that. I can't give more than three thousand paper roubles. Judge for 
yourself: three thousand to them, five hundred in silver for the wed­
ding, for I must pay your uncle back in full; then my old debts; then 
at least something for my sister, something at least. There won't be 
much left out of a hundred thousand, will there? Why, it will be 
ruin! . . .  The Obnoskins have gone away, though." 
"Gone away?" I asked with curiosity. 
"Just after tea, damn them ! but they will turn up again to-morrow, 
you will see. Well, how is it to be, then ? Do you agree ?" 
"I must own," I answered, shrugging, "I really don't know what to 
say. It's a delicate matter . . . .  Of course I will keep it all secret, I am 
not Obnoskin ; but . . .  I think it's no use your building hopes on me." 
"I see," said Mizintchikov, getting up from his chair, "that you are 
not yet sick of Foma Fomitch and your grandmother; and though you 
do care for your kind and generous uncle, you have not yet sufficiently 
realized how he is being tormented. You are new to the place . . . .  But 
patience! You will be here to-morrow, look about you, and by evening 
you'll consent. Your uncle is lost if you don't, do you understand ? 
They will certainly force him to marry her. Don't forget that to-mor­
row he may perhaps make her an offer. It will be too late, we must 
settle things to-day." 
"Really, I wish you every success, but as for helping you . . .  I don't 
know in what way." 
"We know! But let us wait till to-morrow," said Mizintchikov, 
smiling ironically. "La 11uit porte cotueil. Good-bye for the present. 
I will come to you early in the morning, and ynu think things 
over . . . .  
" 
He turned and went out whistling. 
I almost followed him out, to get a breath of fresh air. The moon 
had not yet risen; it was a dark night, warm and stifling. The leaves 
on the trees did not stir. In spite of being terribly tired, I wanted to 
walk to distract my mind, collect my thoughts; but I had not gone 
above ten paces when I suddenly heard my uncle's voice. He was 
mounting the steps of the lodge in company with some one, and speak-

'llze J riend of tlze Jamily 
733 
ing with great animation. I turned back and called to him. My uncle 
was with Vidoplyasov. 
[ XI ] 
TilE EXTREME OF PERPLEXI1Y 
UNCLE," I said, "at last I have got you." 
"My dear boy, I was rushing to you myself. Here, I will just finish 
with Vidoplyasov, and then we can talk to our hearts' content. I have 
a great deal to tell you." 
"What, Vidoplyasov now! Oh, get rid of him, uncle." 
"Only another five or ten minutes, Sergey, and I shall be entirely 
at your disposal. You see, it's important." 
"Oh, no doubt, it is his foolishness," I said, with vexation. 
"\Vhat can I say to you, my dear? The man has certainly found a 
time to worry me with his nonsense! Yes, my good Grigory, couldn't 
you find some other time for your complaints ? Why, what can I do 
for you ? You might have compassion even on me, my good boy. Why, 
I am, so to say, worn out by you all, devoured alive, body and soul! 
They are too much for me, Sergey!" And my uncle made a gesture 
of the profoundest misery with both hands. 
"But what business can be so important that you can't leave it? And, 
uncle, I do so want . . . " 
"Oh, my dear boy, as it is they keep crying out that I take no trouble 
over my servants' morals! Very likely he will complain of me to­
morrow that I wouldn't listen to him, and then . . .  " and my uncle 
waved his hand in despair again. 
"Well, then make haste and finish with him !  Perhaps I can help you; 
let us go up the steps. What is it? What does he want?" I said as we 
went into the room. 
"Well, you see, my dear, he doesn't like his own surname, and asks 
leave to change it. What do you think of that?" 
"His surname! \Vhat do you mean? . . .  Well, uncle, before I hear 
what he has to say himself, allow me to remark that it is only in your 
household such queer things can happen," I said, flinging up my hands 
in amazement. 
"Oh, my dear boy, I might fling up my hands like you, but that's no 
good," my uncle said with vexation. "Come, talk to him yourself, you 
have a try. He has been worrying me for two months past 
.
.
.
•
 " 
"It's not a respectable surname,'' Vidoplyasov observed. 

734 
T h% Short N.ov%ls of 'Dosto%vskJ 
"But why is it not respectable?" I asked him in surprise. 
"Oh, because it suggests all sorts of abomination." 
"But why abomination ? And how can you change it? Does any one 
change his surname?" 
"\Veil, really, sir, do other people have such surnames?" 
"I agree that your surname is a somewhat strange one," I went on, 
in complete bewilderment; "but there is no help for it now, you know. 
Your father had the same surname, I suppose, didn't he?" 
"That is precisely so, that through my parent I have in that way had 
to suffer all my life, inasmuch as I am destined by my name to accept 
many jeers and to endure many sorrows," answered Vidoplyasov. 
"I bet, uncle, that Foma Fomitch has a hand in this!" I cried with 
vexation. 
"Oh no, my boy; oh no, you are mistaken. Foma certainly has be­
friended him. He has taken him to be his secretary, that's the whole 
of his duty. Well, of course he has developed him, has filled him 
with noble sentiments, so that he is even in some ways cultivated . . . .  
You see, I will tell you all about it . . . .  " 
"That is true," Vidoplyasov interrupted, "that Foma Fomitch is my 
true benefactor, and being a true benefactor to me, he has brought me 
to understand my insignificance, what a worm I am upon the earth, 
so that through his honour I have for the first time learned to compre­
hend my destiny." 
"There you see, Seryozha, there you see what it all means," my uncle 
went on, growing flustered as he always did. "He lived at first in 
Moscow, almost from childhood, in the ᏿ervice of a teacher of cal­
ligratJhy. You should see how he has learned to write from him, and 
he illuminates in colours and gold with cupids round, you know-in 
fact, he is an artist, you know. Ilyusha has lessons from him; I pay him 
a rouble and a half a lesson. Foma himself fixed on a rouble and a 
half. He goes to three gentlemen's houses in the neighbourhood; they 
pay him too. You see how he is dressed! What's more, he writes 
poetry." 
"Poetry! That's the last straw!" 
"Poetry, my dear boy, poetry. And don't imagine I am joking; real 
poetry, so to say, versifications, and so well composed, you know, on 
all sorts of subjects. He'll describe any subject you like in a poem. It's 
a real talent! On mamma's nameday he concocted such a harangue 
that we listened with our mouths open; there was something from 
mythology in it, and the Muses flying about, so that indeed, you know, 
one could see the . . .  what do you call it ? . . .  polish of form-in fact, 

T h| Jri|nd of th| Jamily 
735 
it was perfectly in rhyme. Foma corrected it. Well, I have nothing 
against that, and indeed I am quite pleased. Let him compose, as long 
as he doesn't get into mischief. You see, Grigory, my boy, I speak to 
you like a father. Foma heard of it, looked at his poetry, encouraged 
him, and chose him as his reader and copyist-in fact, he has educated 
him. It is true, as he says, that Foma has been a benefactor to him. 
Well, and so, you know, he has begun to have gentlemanly and ro­
mantic sentiments, and a feeling of independence-Foma explained it 
all to me, but I have really forgotten; only I must own that I wanted, 
apart from Foma, to give him his freedom. I feel somehow ashamed, 
you know! . . .  but Foma opposes that and says that he finds him 
useful, that he likes him; and what's more he says : 'It's a great honour 
to me, as his master, to have poets among my own servants; that that's 
how some barons somewhere used to live, and that it is living en grand.' 
\Veil, en grand so be it, then! I have begun to respect him, my boy­
you understand . . . .  Only goodness knows how he is behaving! The 
worst of it is that since he has taken to poetry he has become so stuck-up 
with the rest of the servants that he won't speak to them. Don't you 
take offence, Grigory, I am speaking to you like a father. Last winter, 
he promised to marry a serf girl here, Matryona, and a very nice girl 
she is, honest, hard-working and merry. But now it is 'No, I won't.' 
That's all about it, he has given her up. Whether it is that he has 
grown conceited, or has planned first to make a name and then to seek 
a match in some other place." 
"More through the advice of Foma Fomitch," observed Vidoplyasov, 
"seeing that his honour is my true we:ll-wisher." 
"Oh, of course Foma Fomitch has a hand in everything," I could 
not help exclaiming. 
"Ough, my dear boy, that's not it!" my uncle interrupted me hur­
riedly. "Only, you see, now he has no peace. She's a bold, quarrelsome 
girl, she has set them all against him, they mimic him, bait him, even 
the serf boys look upon him as a buffoon . . . .  " 
"It's chiefly owing to Matryona," observed Vidoplyasov; "for Matry­
ona's a real fool, and being a real fool, she's a woman of unbridled 
character. Through her I have come in this manner to endure such 
prolonged sufferings." 
"Ough, Grigory, my boy, I have talked to you already," my uncle 
went on, looking reproachfully at Vidoplyasov. "You see, Sergey, they 
have made up some horrid rhyme on his surname. He comes to me 
:md complains, asks whether he cannot somehow change his surname, 
says that he has long been upset at its ugly sound . . . .  
" 

736 
'I he Short N.otJels of VostoetJsk.y 
"It's an undignified name," Vidoplyasov put in. 
"Come, you be quiet, Grigory! Foma approved of it too . . .  that is, 
he did not approve exactly, but, you see, this was his idea; that in case 
he were to publish his poems-and Foma has a project of his doing 
scr-such a surname perhaps might be a drawback, mightn't it?" 
"So he wants to publish his verses, uncle?" 
"Yes, my boy. It's settled already-at my expense, and on the title­
page will be put, 'the serf of so-and-so,' and in the preface, the author's 
thanks to Foma for his education. It's dedicated to Foma. Foma is 
writing the preface himself. \V ell, so just fancy if on the title-page 
there stands, 'The Poems of Vidoplyasov.' " 
"The Plaints of Vidoplyasov," Vidoplyasov corrected. 
"There, you see, plaints too! \Veil, Vidoplyasov is no use for a 
surname, it positively revolts the delicacy of one's feelings, so Foma 
says. And all these critics, they say, are such fellows for picking holes 
and jeering; Brambeus, for instance . . . .  They don't stick at anything, 
you know! They will make a laughingstock of him for his surname 
alone; they'll tickle your sides for you till you can do nothing but 
scratch them, won't they? \Vhat I say is, put any surname you like on 
your poems-a pseudonym it's called, isn't it ? I don't remember; some 
word ending in nym. 'But no,' he says; 'give the order to the whole 
servants' hall to call me by a new name hereafter, for ever, so that I 
may have a genteel surname to suit my talent.' " 
"I bet that you consented, uncle . . .  
.'' 
"I did, Seryozha, my boy, to avoid quarrelling with them; let them 
do as they like. You see, at that time there was a misunderstanding 
between Foma and me. So since then it has come to a new surname 
every week, and he keeps choosing such dainty ones as Oleandrov, 
Tulipov . . . .  Only think, Grigory, at first you asked to be called 
'Vyerny' (i. e. true, faithful)-'Grigory Vyerny'; afterwards you didn't 
like the name yourself because some simpleton found a rhyme to it, 
'skverny' (i. e. nasty, horrid). You complained, and the fellow was 
punished. You were a fortnight thinking of a new name-what a 
selection you had!-at last you made up your mind and came to be 
asked to be called 'Ulanov.' Come, tell me, my boy, could anything be 
sillier than 'Ula.nov'? I agreed to that too, and gave instructions a 
second time about changing your surname to Ulanov. It was simply 
to get rid of him," added my uncle, turning to me. "You spoilt all the 
walls, all the window-sills in the arbour, scribbling 'Ulanov' in pencil; 
they have had to paint it since. You wasted a whole quire of good 
paper on signing your name 'Ulanov.' At last that was a failure too, 

The Jriend of the Jamily 
737 
they found a rhyme for you : 'Bolvanov' (i. e. fool, blockhead). He 
didn't want to be a blockhead, so the name must be changed again! 
What did you choose next? I have forgotten." 
"Tantsev," answered Vidoplyasov. "If I am destined through my 
surname to be connected with dancing, it would be more dignified 
in the foreign form : 'T antsev .' " 
"Oh, yes; 'Tantsev.' I agreed to that too, Sergey. Only they found a 
rhyme to that which I don't like to repeat. To-day he comes forward 
again, he has thought of something new. I bet he has got some new 
surname. Have you, Grigory? Confess!" 
"I have truly been meaning for a long time to lay at your feet a new 
name, a genteel one.'' 
"What is it? "  
"Essbouq uetov ." 
"Aren't you ashamed, really ashamed, Grigory? A surname off a 
pomatum pot! And you call yourself a clever man. How many days 
he must have been thinking about it! Why, that's what is written on 
scent -bottles.'' 
"Upon my word, uncle," I said in a half-whisper, "why, he is simply 
a fool, a perfect fool.'' 
"It can't be helped," my uncle answered, also in a whisper. "They 
declare all round that he is clever, and that all this is due to the work­
ing of noble qualities . . . . 
" 
"But for goodness' sake, get rid of him!" 
"Listen, Grigory! I have really no time, my boy," my uncle began 
in something of an imploring tone, as though he were afraid even of 
Vidoplyasov. "Come, judge for yourself, how can I attend to your 
complaints now? You say that they have insulted you in some way 
again. Come, I give you my word that to-morrow I will go into it all; 
and now go, and God be with you . . . .  Stay! What is Foma Fomitch 
doing?" 
"He has lain down to rest. He told me that if I was asked about 
him, I was to say, that he is at prayer, that he intends to be praying 
a long time to-night.'' 
"H'm! Well, you can go, you can go, my boy! You see, Seryozha, 
he is always with Foma, so that I arn actually afraid of him. And that's 
why the servants don't like him, because he is always telling tales to 
Foma. Now he has gone away, and very likely to-morrow he will have 
spun some fine yarn about something! I've made it all right, my boy, 
and feel at peace now . . . .  I was in haste to get to you. Now at last 
l am with you again," he brought out with feeling, pressing my hand. 

738 
Tlze Slzort Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
"And you know I thought, my dear, that you were desperately angry 
with me, and would be sure to slip off. I sent them to keep an eye on 
you. But now, thank God! And this afternoon, Gavrila, what a to-do; 
and Falaley, and you, and one thing after another! Well, thank God! 
thank God! At last we can talk to our hearts' content. I will open my 
heart to you. You mustn't go away, Seryozha; you are all I have, you 
and Korovkin . . . .  
" 
"But excuse me, uncle, how have you put things right, and what 
have I to expect here after what has happened? I must own my head's 
going round." 
"And do you suppose that mine isn't ? It has been waltzing round 
for the last six months, my head has, my boy! But, thank God, every­
thing is settled now. In the first place, they have forgiven me, com­
pletely forgiven me, on certain conditions of course; but now I am 
scarcely afraid of anything. Sashcnka has been forgiven too. Ah, Sasha, 
Sasha, this afternoon . . .  a passionate little heart! She went a little too 
far, but she has a heart of gold! I am proud of that girl, Seryozha. 
May the blessing of God be with her for ever. You too have been 
forgiven, and even-Jo you know-you can do just what you like; you 
can go all over the house and into the garden, and even among the 
guests. In fact, you can do just as you like; but only on one condition, 
that you will s:᐀y nothing to-morrow in the presence of mamma or 
Foma-that's an absolute condition, that is, literally not half a word, 
I have promised for you already-but will only listen to what your 
elders . . .  that is, I mean what others may say. They say that you are 
young. Don't you be offended, Seryozha; you know you really are 
young . . . .  That's what Anna Nilovna says . . . .  
" 
Of course I was very young, and showed it at once by boiling over 
with indignation at such insulting conditions. 
"Listen, uncle," I cried, almost breathless. "Tell me one thing and 
set my mind at rest : am I really in a madhouse or not ?" 
"There you arc, my boy, criticizing at once! You can't be patient," 
my uncle answered, in distress. "It's not a madhouse at all, it's nothing 
but over-hastiness on both sides. But you must consider, my boy, how 
you have behaved yourself. You remember what a sousing you gave 
him-a man, so to say, of venerable years?" 
"Such men have no venerable years, uncle." 
"Oh, there, my boy, you go too far! That's really free-thinking. I 
have nothing against rational free-thinking myself, my boy, but really 
that is beyond the mark; you really surprise me, Sergey." 

'1 h% Jn'end of the Jamily 
739 
"Don't be angry, uncle. I beg pardon, but I only beg your pardon, 
As for your Foma Fomitch . .  
," 
"There, now, it is your! Oh, Sergey, my boy, don't judge him too 
harshly; he is a misanthropical man and nothing more, morbid! You 
mustn't judge him too severely. But he is a high-minded man ; in fact, 
he is simply the most high-minded of men! \Vhy, you saw it yourself 
just now; he was simply glorious. And as for the tricks he plays some­
times, it is no use noticing it. \Vhy, it happens to every one." 
"On the contrary, uncle, it happens to nobody." 
"Ough, he keeps on at the same thing! There is not much good 
nature in you, Seryozha; you don't know how to forgive." 
"Oh, all right, uncle, all right! Let us leave that. Tell me, have you 
seen !\' astasya Y evgrafovna ?" 
"Oh, my dear, the whole bother has been about her. I tell you what, 
Seryozha, and first, what is most important : we've all decided to con­
gratulate him to-morrow on his birthday-Foma, I mean-for to­
morrow really is his birthday. Sashenka is a good girl, but she is mis­
taken; so we will go, the whole tribe of us, rather early, before mass. 
Ilyusha will recite some verses to him which will be like oil on his 
heart-in fact, it will flatter him. Oh, if only you, Seryozha, would 
congratulate him with us! He would perhaps forgive you altogether. 
How splendid it would be if you were reconciled! Forget your 
wrongs, Seryozha; you insulted him too, you know . . .  he is a most 
worthy man . . . .  
" 
"Uncle! uncle!" I cried, losing all patience, "I want to talk of what 
is important, and you . . .  Do you know, I say again, what is happen• 
ing to N astasya Y cvgrafovna ?" 
"Why, what is the matter, my boy? Why are you shouting? All the 
trouble has arisen over her, though indeed it arose some time ago. I 
did not want to tell you about it before, so as not to frighten you, for 
they wanted simply to turn her out, and they insisted on my sending 
her away too. You can imagine my position . . . .  Oh, well, thank God, 
all that is set right now. They thought, you see-I will confess it all 
to you-that I was in love with her myself, and wanted to marry her; 
that I was, in short, rushing to ruin, for that really would be rushing 
to my ruin, they have explained it so to me. And so, to save me, they 
meant to turn her 0ut. It was mamma's doing, and most of all Anna 
Nilovna's. Foma says nothing so far. But now I have convinced them 
all that they are wrong; and I must confess I have told them already, 
that you are rr:aking Nastenka a formal proposal and that is what yol.l 

740 
The Slzort Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
have come for. \Veil, that has pacified them to some extent, and now 
she will remain, though not altogether; that is, so far only on proba­
tion. Still, she will remain. And indeed you have risen in general 
esteem since I told them you were courting her. Anyway, mamma seems 
pacified. Only Anna Nilovna goes on grumbling! I really don't know 
what to think of to satisfy her. And what is it she really wants, Anna 
Nilovna ?" 
"Uncle, you are greatly in error! Why, do you know that Nastasya 
Yevgrafovna is going away to-morrow if she has not gone away al­
ready? Do you know that her father came to-day on purpose to take 
her away? That it's all a settled thing, that she told me of it to-day 
herself, and in conclusion asked me to give you her greetings? Do you 
know that or not?" 
My uncle stood blankly facing me with his mouth open. I fancied 
that he shuddered, and a moan broke from his lips. 
Without loss of time I hastened to describe to him all my conversa­
tion with Nastenka ; my attempt to pay her my addresses, her resolute 
refus:tl, her anger with my uncle for having summoned me. I ex­
plained that she was hoping by her departure to save him from marry­
ing Tatyana lvanovna. In fact, I concealed nothing from him; indeed, 
I purposely exaggerated everything that was unpleasant in my story. 
I wanted to impress my uncle so as to wring some resolute step out of 
him, and I really did impress him. He cried out and clutched at hi:: 
head. 
"Where is she, don't you know? Where is she now ?" he brought 
out at last, turning pale with alarm. "And I, like a fool, came here quite 
easy in my mind, I thought everything had been set right," he added 
in despair. 
"I don't know where she is now; only when the uproar was begin­
ning she went to you : she meant to proclaim all this aloud, before them 
all. Most likely they would not let her go in." 
"No, indeed! What might she not have done! Ah, the hot-headed 
proud little thing! And what is she going to? What is she going to? 
And you, you are a pretty fellow. Why, what did she refuse you for ? 
It's nonsense! You ought to have- made her like you. Why doesn't she 
like you ? For God's sake, answer, why are you standing there?" 
"Have mercy on me, uncle! How can you ask such questions?" 
"But you know this is impossible! You must marry her, you must. 
What did I bring you from Petersburg for? You must make her 
happy! Now they will drive her away, but when she is your wife, my 
own niece, they won't drive her away. If not, what has she to go to? 

'I he Jriend of tlze Jamily 
741 
What will become of her? To be a governess. Why, that is simply 
senseless nonsense, being a governess. \Vhile she is looking for a place, 
what is she going to live upon at home? Her old father has got nine 
to keep; they go hungry themselves. She won't take a farthing from 
me, you know, if she goes away through this disgusting gossip; she 
won't, nor will her father. And to go away like this-it is awful! It will 
·:ause a scandal-! know. And her salary has been paid for a long time 
in advance for necessities at home; you know she is their breadwinner. 
\Vhy, supposing I do recommend her as a governess, and find an 
honest and honourable family . . .  But where the devil is one to find 
them, honourable, really honourable people ? Well, granting that there 
are many-indeed it's blasphemy to doubt it, but, my dear boy, you see 
it's risky-<:an one rely on people? Besides, any one poor is suspicious, 
and apt to fancy he is being forced to pay for food and kindness with 
humiliation! They will insult her; she is proud, and then . . .  and 
what then ? And what if some scoundrelly seducer turns up? She 
would spurn him, I know she would, hut yet he would insult her, the 
scoundrel! And some discredit, some slur, some suspicion may be cast 
upon her all the same, and then . . .  My head is going round! Ah, my 
God!" 
"Uncle, forgive me for one question," I said solemnly. "Don't be 
angry with me; undcrstand that your answer to this question may 
decide much. Indeed, I have a right in a way to demand an answer 
from you, uncle!" 
"What, what is it? What question ?" 
"Tell me as in God's presence, openly and directly; don't you feel 
that you are a little in love with N astasya Y evgrafovna yourself and 
would like to marry her? Just think; that is why she is being turned 
away from here." 
My uncle made a vigorous gesture of the most violent impatience. 
"I ? In love? With her? Why, they have all gone off their heads, or 
are in a conspiracy against me. And why did I write to you to come if 
not to prove to them that they were all off their heads? Why am I 
making a match for her with you? I ?  In love? With her? They are all 
crazy, that's all about it!" 
"But if it is so, uncle, do allow me to speak freely. I declare to you 
solemnly that I see absolutely nothing against the suggestion. On the 
contrary, you would make her happy, if only you love her and-and­
God grant it may be so! And God give you love and good counsel!" 
"But upon my word, what are you talking about ?" cried my uncle, 
almost with horror. "I wonder how you can say such a thing coolly 

742 
'I he Short 'N.ovels of 'Dostoevsky 
. . .  and . . .  you are altogether, my boy, in too great a hurry, I notice 
that characteristic in you! Why, aren't you talking nonsense? How, 
pray, am I to marry her when I look upon her as a daughter and noth­
ing else? It would be shameful for me, indeed, to look upon her in any 
other light; it would be a sin, in fact! I am an old man, while she is a 
flower! Indeed, Foma made that clear to me in those very words. My 
heart glows with a father's love for her, and here you talk of marriage! 
Maybe out of gratitude she would not refuse me, but you know she 
would despise me afterwards for taking advantage of her gratitude. I 
should spoil her life, I should lose her affection! And I would give my 
soul for her, she is my beloved child! I love her just as I do Sasha, even 
more, I must own. Sasha is my daughter by right, by law, but this one 
I have made my daughter by love. I took her out of poverty, I have 
brought her up. Katya, my lost angel, loved her; she left her to me as 
a daughter. I have given her a good education : she speaks French 
and plays the piano, she has read books and everything . . . .  Such a 
sweet smile she has! Have you noticed it, Seryozha ? As though she 
were laughing at one, but yet she is not laughing, but on the contrary, 
loving one . . . .  You see I thought that you would come and m:ᐁke her 
an offer; they would be convinced that I lud no intentions in regard 
to her, and would give over spreading these disgusting stories. She 
would rem:ᐁin with us then in peace, in comfort, :nd how h:ᐁppy we 
should be! You are both my children, both almost orph:ns, you have 
both grown up under my guardi:ᐁnship . . .  I should have loved you so! 
I would have devoted my life to you; I would not part from you ; I 
would follow you anywhere! Oh, how happy we might have been! 
And why are these people always so cross, always so angry, why do 
they hate each other? If only I could explain it all to them! If only I 
could make them see the whole truth! Ah, my God!" 
"Yes, uncle, yes, that is all so; but, you see, she has refused me." 
"Refused you! H'm . . . .  Do you know, I had a sort of presentiment 
that she would refuse you," he said, musing. "But no!" he cried. "I 
don't believe it. It's impossible. In that case, all our plans are upset! But 
you must have begun injudiciously somehow, even offended her per­
haps. Perhaps you tried your hand at p:ᐁying compliments . . . .  Tell me 
how it was again, Sergey." 
I repeated the whole story in full detail again. When I came to 
Nastenka's hoping by her departure to save my uncle from Tatyana 
Ivanovna, he gave a bitter smile. 
"Save me!" he said. "Save me till to-morrow morning 
.
.
•
. " 

The Jriend of the Jamily 
743 
"But you don't mean to say that you are going to marry Tatyana 
Ivanovna!" I cried in alarm. 
"How else could I have paid for Nastasya's not being sent away to­
morrow? T a-morrow I make the offer-the formal proposal." 
"And you have made up your mind to it, uncle?" 
"What could I do, my boy, what could I do? It rends my heart, but 
I have made up my mind to it. The proposal will be to-morrow; they 
suggest that the wedding should be a quiet one, at home; it would 
certainly be better at home. You will perhaps be best man. I have 
already dropped a hint about you, so they won't drive you away before 
then. There is no help for it, my boy. They say, 'It's a fortune for your 
children!' Of course one would do anything for one's children. One 
would turn head over heels, especially as really, perhaps, what they 
say is right. You know I really ought to do something for my family. 
One can't sit an idle drone for ever!" 
"But, uncle, she is mad, you know!" I cried, forgetting myself, and 
there was a sickly pang at my heart. 
"Oh, mad, is she now? She is not mad at all; it's only, you know, 
that she has had trouble . . . .  There is no help for it, my boy. Of course 
I should have been glad of one with sense . . . .  Though, after all, some 
who have sense are no better! If only you knew what a kind-hearted 
creature she is, noble-hearted!" 
"But, my God! he is resigning himself to the thought of it already," 
I said in despair. 
"And what else is there to do? You know they are doing their utmost 
for my benefit, and, indeed, I felt beforehand that sooner or later they 
would force me to marry, that there is no getting out of it. So better 
now than make more quarrelling about it. I am telling you everything 
quite openly, Seryozha. In a way I am actually glad. I have made up 
my mind, anyway, and it's a load off my back-! am more at ease, 
somehow. Why, I came here with my mind almost at ease. It seems, 
it's my fate. And the great thing to make up for it was that Nastenka 
would stay on. You know I agreed on that condition. And now she 
wants to run away of herself! But that shall not be!" my uncle cried, 
stamping. "Listen, Sergey," he added with a determined air; "wait for 
me here, don't go away. I will come back to you in an instant." 
"Where are you off to, uncle?" 
"Perhaps I shall see her, Sergey; it will all be cleared up, believe me 
that it will all be cleared up, and .
•
.
 and •
.
.
 you shall marry her I 
give you my word of honour!" 

744 
The Short N.ovcls of 'Dostoevsky 
My uncle went quickly out of the room, and turned not towards the 
house, but into the garden. I watched him from the window. 
[ xu ] 
THE CATASTROPHE 
I WAS left alone. My position was insufferable; I had been rejected, 
and my uncle meant to marry me almost by force. I was perplexed and 
lost in a tangle of ideas. Mizintchikov and his proposition were not 
absent from my mind for an instant. At all costs uncle must be saved! 
I even thought of going to look for Mizintchikov and telling him all 
about it. But where had my uncle gone, though ? He had said himself 
that he was going to look for Nastenka, but had turned in the direction 
of the garden. The thought of secret meetings flashed through my 
mind, and a very unpleasant feeling clutched at my heart. I remem­
bered what Mizintchikov had said of a secret liaison. After a moment's 
thought I rejected my suspicions with indignation. My uncle was in­
capable of deceit: that was obvious. My uneasiness grew greater every 
moment. Unconsciously I went out on to the steps, and walked into 
the garden down the very avenue into which my uncle had disappeared. 
The moon was beginning to rise. I knew that garden through and 
through, and was not afraid of losing myself. As I drew near the old 
arbour which stood in solitude on the bank of the neglected scum­
covered pond, I suddenly stood rooted to the spot; I heard voices in the 
arbour. I cannot describe the strange feeling of annoyance that took 
possession of me. I felt convinced that my uncle and Nastenb were 
there, and went on going nearer, appeasing my conscience by thinking 
that I was walking at the same pace as before and not trying to ap­
proach stealthily. Suddenly there was the distinct sound of a kiss, then 
stifled exclamations, and immediately afterwards a shrill feminine 
shriek. At that instant a woman in a white dress ran out of the arbour 
and flashed by me like a swallow. It even seemed to me that she hid 
her face in her hands that she might not be recognized: probably I 
had been noticed from the arbour. But what was my amazement when 
in the swain who emerged after the flying lady I recognized--Ob­
noskin, Obnoskin, who, according to Mizintchikov's words, had gone 
away some hours before. Obnoskin on his side was greatly confused 
when he saw me; all his impudence vanished instantly. 

'[he Jriend of the Jamily 
745 
"Excuse me, but . . .  I did not in the least expect to meet you," he 
brought out, smiling and hesitating. 
"Nor I you," I answered ironically, "especially as I heard you had 
already gone away." 
"No . . . .  It was just . . .  I went a little on the way with my mother. 
But may I appeal to you as an absolutely honourable man?" 
"What about ?" 
"There are cases-and you will agree yourself that it is so-when a 
truly honourable man is forced to appeal to the highest sense of honour 
of another truly honourable man . . . .  I hope you understand me . . . •  
" 
"Do not hope, I understand absolutely nothing . . . .  " 
"You saw the lady who was here with me in the arbour?" 
"I saw her, but I did not recognize her." 
"Ah, you did not recognize her . . . . That lady I shall shortly call 
my wife." 
"I congratulate you. But in what way can I be of use to you?" 
"Only in one way, by keeping it a dead secret that you have seen 
me with that lady." 
Who can she be? I wondered. Surely not .
.
• 
"I really don't know," I answered Obnoskin. "I hope that you will 
excuse me for not being able to promise." 
"Yes, please, for God's sake," Obnoskin besought me. "Understand 
my position, it's a secret. You may be betrothed too: then I .
.
•
 
" 
"Sh! some one is coming!" 
"Where?" 
We did indeed catch a glimpse thirty paces away of the shadow of 
some one passing. 
"It . . .  it must be Foma Fomitch!" Obnoskin whispered, trembling 
all over. "I know him from his walk. My God! And steps again from 
the other direction! Do you hear? .
.
•
 Good-bye! I thank you . . .  and 
I entreat you . . .  
" 
Obnoskin vanished. A minute later, as though he had sprung out of 
the earth, my uncle was before me. 
"Is it you?" he greeted me. "It is all over, Seryozha, it is all over!" 
I noticed, too, that he was trembling from head to foot. 
"What is all over, uncle?" 
"Come along!" he said, gasping for breath, and clutching my hand 
tightly, he drew me after him. He did not utter a word all the way to 
the lodge, nor did he let me speak. I was expecting something mon 
strous, and my expectations were almost realized. 
When we went indoors he was overcome with giddiness, he was 

746 
The Slzort Novels of Vostoevsk.y 
deathly pale. I promptly sprinkled him with water. "Something very 
awful must have happened," I thought, "for a man like this to faint." 
"Uncle, what is the matter with you ?" I asked him at last. 
"All is over, Seryozha! Foma found me in the garden with Nastenka, 
at the very moment when I was kissing her." 
"Kissing her! In the garden!" I cried, looking at my uncle in amaze­
ment. 
"In the garden, my boy. The Lord confounded mel I went there to 
be sure of seeing her. I wanted to speak openly to her to make her see 
reason-about you, I mean. And she had been waiting for me a whole 
hour, on the broken seat, beyond the pond . . . .  She often goes there 
when she wants to speak to me." 
"Often, uncle?" 
"Yes, often, my boy! Of late we have been meeting almost every 
night. Only they must have watched us-in fact, I know that they 
watched us and that it was Anna Nilovna's doing. \Ve gave it up for 
a time. The last four days we have not met; but to-day it was neces­
sary again. You saw yourself how necessary it was; how else could I 
have said anything to her ? I went in the hope of finding her, and she 
had been sitting there a whole hour, waiting for me: she, too, wanted 
to tell me something . . . .  
" 
"Good heavens, how incautious! \Vhy, you knew that you were 
being watched!" 
"But, you see, it was a critical matter, Seryozha; there was a great 
deal we had to discuss together. I don't dare to look at her in the day­
time. She looks in one corner and I look in another, as though she did 
not exist. But towards night we meet and have a talk . . . •  
" 
"Well, what l1:1ppened, uncle?" 
"Before I could utter a couple of words, you know, my heart began 
throbbing and the tears gushed from my eyes. I began trying to per­
suade her to marry you, and she answered me: 'You certainly don't 
love me-you must be blind.' And all of a sudden she flings herself on 
my neck, throws her arms round me, and begins crying and sobbing! 
'I love no one but you,' she said, 'and won't marry any one. I have 
loved you for ever so long, but I will ne\·er marry you. And to-morrow 
I am going away and going into a nunnery.' " 
"My goodness! Did she really say that? Well, what then, uncle, what 
then ?" 
"I looked up and there was Foma facing us! And where had he 
sprung from ? Could he have been sitting behind a bush, and waiting 
for some such lapse?" 

The Jriend of the Jamily 
747 
"The scoundrel!" 
"I was petrified, Nastenka ran away, while Foma Fomitch passed 
by without a word and held up his finger at me. Sergey, do you under­
stand what a hubbub there will be to-morrow?" 
"I should think I do!" 
"Do you understand?" he cried in despair, leaping up from his seat. 
"Do you understand that they will try to ruin her, to disgrace her, to 
dishonour her; they are looking for a pretext to accuse her of some­
thing disgraceful, and now the pretext is found. You know they will 
say that she is carrying on an abominable intrigue with me! You know, 
the scoundrels made out that she had an intrigue with Vidoplyasov! 
It's all Anna Nilovna's tales. What will happen now? What will 
happen to-morrow? Will Foma re:lly tell them ?" 
"He'll cert:inly tell them, uncle." 
"If he does, if he really does tell . . .  " he brought out, biting his lips 
Jnd clenching his fists. "But no, I don't believe it! He won't tell, he 
will underst:nd . . .  he is a man of the loftiest character! He will spare 
her . . . .  " 
"\Vhether he spares her or whether he doesn't," I answered reso­
lutely, "it is your duty in any case to make Nastasya Yevgrafovna an 
offer to-morrow." 
My uncle looked fixedly at me. 
"Do you understJnJ, uncle, that you have ruined the girl's reputa­
tion if this story gets about? Do you understand that you ought to 
prevent that calamity JS quickly as possible; that you ought to look 
them all in the face boldly and proudly, ought to offer her your hand 
publicly, to spurn their arguments and pound Foma to a jelly if he 
hints a word ag:inst her?" 
"My dear boy," cried my uncle, "I thought of that as I came along 
here!" 
"And did you make up your mind?" 
"Yes, and finally! I had made up my mind before I began speaking 
to you." 
"Bravo, uncle!" 
And I rushed to embrace him. 
We talked for a long time. I put before him all the arguments, all 
the absolute necessity for marrying Nastenka, which, indeed, he 
understood far better than I did. But my eloquence was aroused. I 
was delighted on my uncle's account. He was impelled by a sense 
of duty or he would never have taken a stand. He had the deepest 
reverence for duty, for obligation. But in spite of that I was quite 

748 
The Short N.ovds of Vostoevsky 
unable to imagine how things would be settled. I knew and blindly 
believed that nothing would induce my uncle to fall short of what 
he had once recognized as his duty; but yet I could not belie,·e that 
he would have the strength to stand out against his household. And so 
I did my utmost to incite him and urge him on, and set to work with 
all the fervour of youth. 
"The more so," I said, "as now everything is settled and your last 
doubts have vanished! What you did not expect, though in reality 
every one else saw it, and every one noticed it before you did, has 
happened ; Nastasya Y evgrafovna loves you! Surely," I cried, "you 
will not let that pure love be turned into shame and disgrace for her?" 
"Never! But, my dear boy, can I really be going to be so happy?" 
cried my uncle, throwing himself on my neck. "And how is it she 
loves me, and what for? What for? It seems to me there is nothing 
in me likely to . . .  I am an old man compared to her; I certainly 
did not expect it! My angel, my angel! . .  Listen, Seryozha! you asked 
me this evening whether I were not in love with her: had you any 
idea?" 
"All I sa.w, uncle, was that you love her as much as any one c:m 
love : you love her and at the same time you don't know it yourself. 
Upon my word! You invite me, you want to marry me to her solely 
in order that she may become your niece, and so you m:ty have her 
always with you . . . .  
" 
"But you . . .  you do forgive me, Sergey?" 
"Oh, uncle . . . .  " 
And he embraced me :tgain. 
"Mind, uncle, they will all be against you : you must stand up for 
yourself and resist them, and no l:tter than to-morrow!" 
"Yes . . .  yes, to-morrow . . .  " he repeated somewhat pensively. 
"And you know we must :tttack the business with manliness, with 
true nobility of soul, with strength of will 
.
.
.
•
 Yes, with strength of 
will!" 
"Don't be frightened, uncle." 
"I am not frightened, Seryozha! There's one thing, I don't know 
how to begin, how to proceed." 
"Don't think about it, uncle. To-morrow will settle everything. 
Set your mind at rest for to-day. The more you think the worse it 
will be. And if Foma begins-kick him out of the house at once and 
pound him to a jelly." 
"And can't we avoid kicking him out? What I have decided, my 
boy, is this. To-morrow I shall go to him early, at dawn, I shall tdl 

'[he Jrimd of the Jamily 
749 
him all about it, just as I have told you here. Surely he cannot hut 
understand me, he is a high-minded man, the most high-minded of 
men. But I tell you what does worry me : what if mamma speaks to 
Tatyana I vanovna to-day of the offer to be made to her to-morrow? 
That would be unlucky, won't it?" 
"Don't worry yourself about Tatyana Ivanovna, uncle." 
And I told him about the scene in the arbour with Obnoskin. My 
uncle was extremely surprised. I did not say a word about Mizin­
tchikov. 
"A fantastical person. A really fantastical person!" he cried. "Poor 
thing! They ingratiate themselves with her and try to take advantage 
of her simplicity. Was it really Obnoskin ? But you know he has gone 
away . . . .  Strange, awfully strange! I am astonished, Seryozha . . . .  
We must look into it to-morrow and take steps . . . .  But are you 
perfectly certain that it was Tatyana Ivanovna?" 
I answered that I had not seen her face, but for certain reasons I was 
positive that it was Tatyana Ivanovna. 
"H'm. Wasn't it a little intrigue with one of the servant girls and 
you fancied it was Tatyana Ivanovna ? \Vasn't it Dasha, the gardener's 
daughter? A sly hussy! She has been remarked upon, that's why I 
say so. Anna Nilovna caught her! . . .  But it wasn't she, though! 
He said he meant to marry her. Strange, strange!" 
At last we parted. I embraced my uncle and gave him my blessing. 
"To-morrow, to-morrow," he repeated, "it will all be settled; before 
you are up it will be settled. I shall go to Foma and take a chivalrous 
line, I will speak frankly as I would to my own brother, I will lay 
bare the inmost recesses of my heart. Good-bye, Seryozha. You go to 
bed, you are tired; but I am sure I shan't shut my eyes all night." 
He went away. I went to bed at once, tired out and utterly exhausted. 
It had been a hard day. My nerves were overwrought, and before I 
fell really asleep, I kept starting and waking up again. But strange 
as my impressions were on going oiT to sleep, the strangeness of them 
was as nothing beside the queerness of my awakening next morning. 

750 
The Short Novels of Vostocvsky 
Part 2 
[ I ] 
THE PURSUIT 
J SLEPT soundly without dreaming. Suddenly I felt as though 
a load of some hundredweights was lying on my feet. I cried out and 
woke up. It was daylight; the sun was peeping brightly into the room. 
On my bed, or rather on my feet, was sitting Mr. Bahtcheyev. 
It was impossible to doubt that it was he. Managing somehow to 
release my legs, I sat up in bed and looked at him with the blank 
amazement of a man just awake. 
"And now he is looking about him," cried the fat man. "\Vhy are 
you staring at me? Get up, sir, get up. I have been waking you for the 
last half-hour; rub away at your eyes!" 
"Why, what has happened ? What's the time?" 
"It's still early by the clock, but our Fevronya did not wait for 
dawn, but has given us the slip. Get up, we are going in pursuit!" 
"\Vhat Fevronya?" 
"Why, our young lady, the crazy one! She has given us the slip! 
She was off before dawn. I came to you, sir, only for a minute, to 
wake you, and here I have been busy with you a couple of hours. 
Get up, your uncle's waiting for you. They waited for the festive 
day!" he added, with a malignant quiver in his voice. 
"But whom and what are you talking about?" I asked impatiently, 
though I was beginning to guess. "Surely not Tatyana Ivanovna ?" 
"To be sure. She it is. I said so, I foretold it; they wouldn't listen to 
me. A nice treat she has given us for the festive day now! She is mad 
on amour, and has amour on the brain. Tfoo! And that fellow, what 
do you say to that fellow? With his little beard, eh ?" 
"Can you mean Mizintchikov ?" 
"Tfoo, plague take it! \Vhy, my dear sir, you had better rub your 
eyes and pull yourself together-if only for the great holy festive day. 
You must have had a great deal too much at supper last night, if you 
are still hazy this morning! With Mizintchikov! It's with Obnoskin, 
not Mizintchikov. Ivan Ivanovitch Mizintchikov is a moral young man 
and he is coming with us in pursuit." 

The Jrielld of the Jamily 
751 
"What are you saying?" I cried, jumping up in bed. "Is it really 
with Obnoskin?" 
"Tfoo, you annoying person!" answered the fat man, leaping up 
from his seat. "I come to him as to a man ol: culture to inform him 
of what has happened, and he still doubts it. Well, sir, if you want 
to come with us, get up, shoot into your breeches. It's no good my 
spending more words on you; I've wasted golden time on you as it is." 
And he went out in extreme indignation. 
Amazed by the news, I jumped out of bed, hurriedly dressed, and 
ran downstairs. Thinking to find my uncle in the house, where every 
one still seemed asleep and knowing nothing of what had happened, 
I cautiously mounted the front steps, and in the hall I met Nastenka. 
She seemed to have dressed hurriedly in some sort of peignoir or 
schlafrock. Her hair was in disorder; it was evident that she had only 
just jumped out of bed, and she seemed to be waiting for some one 
in the hall. 
"Tell me, is it true that Tatyana Ivanovna has run away with 
Obnoskin ?" she asked hurriedly in a breaking voice, looking pale and 
frightened. 
"I am told it is true. I am looking for my uncle, we want to go after 
them." 
"Oh, bring her back, make haste and bring her back. She will be 
ruined if you don't fetch her back." 
"But where is uncle?" 
"Most likely in the stable; they are getting the carriage out. I have 
been waiting for him here. Listen : tell him from me that I must go 
home to-day; I have quite made up my mind. My father will take 
me; I shall go at once if I can. Everything is hopeless now. All is lost!" 
Saying this, she looked at me as though she were utterly lost, and 
suddenly dissolved into tears. I think she began to be hysterical. 
"Calm yourself," I besought her. "Why, it's all for the best-you 
will see. What is the matter with you, N astasya Y evgrafovna?" 
"I . . .  I don't know . . .  what is the matter with me," she said, 
sighing and unconsciously squeezing my hands. "Tell him . . .  
" 
At that instant there was a sound from the other side of the door 
on the right. 
She let go of my hand and, panic-stricken, ran away upstairs without 
finishing her sentence. 
I found the whole party-that !s, my uncle, Bahtcheyev, and Mizin­
tchikov-in the back yard by the stable. Fresh horses had been har· 

752 
'I !tc S!tort Novels of Vostocvsky 
ne.ssed in Bahtcheyev's carriage. Everything was ready for setting off; 
they were only waiting for me. 
"Here he is!" cried my uncle on my appearance. "Have you heard, 
my boy?" he asked, with a peculiar expression on his face. 
Alarm, perplexity, and at the same time, hope were expressed in his 
looks, in his voice and in his movements. He was conscious that a 
momentous crisis had come in his life. 
I was immediately initiated into all the details of the case. Mr. 
Bahtcheyev, who had spent a very bad night, left his house at dawn 
to reach the monastery five miles away in time for early mass. Just at 
the turning from the high road to the monastery he suddenly saw a 
chaise dashing along at full trot, and in the chaise Tatyana Ivanovna 
and Obnoskin. Tatyana Ivanovna with a tear-stained, and as it seemed 
frightened face, uttered a shriek and stretched out her hands to Mr. 
Bahtcheycv as though imploring his protection-so at least it appeared 
from his story ; "while he, the scoundrel, with the little beard," he went 
on, "sits more dead than alive and tries to hide himself. But you are 
wrong there, my fine fellow, you can't hide yourself." Without stop­
ping, Stepan Alexyevitch turned back to the road and galloped to 
Stepantchikovo and woke my uncle, Mizintchikov, and finally me. 
They decided to set off at once in pursuit. 
"Obnoskin, Obnoskin," said my uncle, looking intently at me, 
looking at me as though he would like to say som'=thing else as well. 
"Who would have thought it!" 
"Any dirty trick might have been expected of that low fellow!" 
cried Mizintchikov with the most vigorous indignation, and at once 
turned away to avoid my eye. 
"What arc we going to do, go or not ? Or are we going to stand 
here till night babbling!" interposed Mr. Bahtcheyev as he clambered 
into the carriage. 
"Vo/e are going, we are going," cried my uncle. 
"It's all for the best, uncle," I whispered to him. "You see how 
splendidly it has all turned out ?" 
"Hush, my boy, don't be sinful. . . .  Ah, my dear! They will simply 
drive her away now, to punish her for their failure, you understand. 
It's fearful, the prospect I see before mel" 
"Well, Yegor Ilyitch, are you going on whispering or starting?" Mr. 
Bahtcheyev cried out a second time. "Or shall we unharness the horses 
and have a snack of something? \Vhat do you say; shall we have a 
drink of vodka?" 
these words were uttered with such furious sarcasm that it wa.s 

The Jriend of the Jamily 
753 
impossible not to satisfy Bahtcheyev at once. We all promptly got into 
the carriage, and the horses set off at a gallop. 
For some time we were all silent. My uncle kept looking at me 
significantly, but did not care to speak to me before the others. He 
often sank into thought; then as though waking up, started and looked 
about him in agitation, 1\Iizintchikov was apparently calm, he smoked 
a cigar, and his looks expressed the indignation of an unjustly 
treated man. But Bahtcheyev had excitement enough for all of us. 
He grumbled to himself, looked at every one and everything with 
absolute indignation, flushed crimson, fumed, continually spat aside, 
and could not recover himself. 
"Are you sure, Stepan Alexyevitch, that they have gone to Mishina?" 
my uncle asked suddenly. "It's fifteen miles from here, my boy," he 
added, addressing me. "It's a little village of thirty souls, lately pur4 
chased from the former owners by a provincial official. The most 
pettifogging fellow in the world. So at least they say about him, 
perhaps, mistakenly. Stepan Alexyevitch declares that that is where 
Obnoskin has gone, and that that official will be helping him now." 
"To be sure," cried Bahtcheyev, starting. "I tell you, it is Mishina. 
Only by now m.:ybe there is no trace of him left at Mishina. I should 
think not, we ha\'e wasted three hours chattering in the yard!" 
"Don't be une.:sy," observed Mizintchikov. "We shall find them." 
"Find them, indeed! I dare say he will wait for you. The treasure 
is in his hands. You may be sure we have seen the last of him!" 
"Calm yourself, Step.1n Alexyevitch, calm yourself, we shall over­
t.:ke them," said my uncle. "They have not had time to take any 
steps yet, you will see that is so." 
"Not had time!" Mr. Bahtcheyev brought out angrily. "She's had 
time for any mischief, for all she's such a quiet one! 'She's a quiet one,' 
they say, 'a quiet one,' he added in a mincing voice, as though he were 
mimicking some one. 'She has had troubles.' Well, now, she has 
shown us her heels, for all her troubles. Now you have to chase after 
her along the high roads with your tongue out before you can see 
where you are going! They won't let a man go to church for the holy 
saint's day. Tfoo!" 
"But she is not under age," I observed; "she is not under guardian­
ship. \Ve can't bring her back if she doesn't want to come. What are 
we going to do?" 
"Of course," answered my uncle; "but she will want to-1 assure 
you. What she is doing now means nothing. As soon as she sees us she 
will want to come back-I'll answer for it. We can't leave her like 

754 
7' lze Slzort Novels of Vostoevsky 
this, my boy, at the mercy of fate, to be sacrificed; it's a duty, so to 
say . . . .  " 
"She's not under guardianship!" cried Bahtcheyev, pouncing on 
me at once. "She is a fool, my dear sir, a perfect fool-it's not a case of 
her being under guardianship. I didn't care to talk to you about her 
yesterday, but the other day I went by mistake into her room and 
what did I see, there she was before the looking-glass with her arms 
akimbo dancing a schottische! And dressed up to the nines: a fashion­
plate, a regular fashion-plate! I simply spat in disgust and walked 
away. Then I foresaw all this, as clear as though it were written in 
a book!" 
"Why abuse her so?" I observed with some timidity. "We know that 
Tatyana lvanovna . . .  is not in perfect health . . .  or rather she has 
a mania . . . .  It seems to me that Obnoskin is the one to blame, not 
she." 
"Not in perfect health! Come, you get along," put in the fat man, 
turning crimson with wrath. "Why, he has taken an oath to drive 
a man to fury! Since yesterday he has taken an oath to! She is a 
fool, my dear sir, I tell you, an absolute fool. h's not that she's not in 
perfect heahh; from early youth she has been mad on Cupid. And 
now Cupid has brought her to this pass. As for that fellow with the 
beard, it's no use talking about him. I dare say by now he is racing off 
double quick with the money in his pocket and a grin on his face." 
"Do you really think, then, that he'll cast her oiT at once?" 
"What else should he do? Is he going to drag such a treasure about 
with him ?  And what good is she to him ? He'll lleece her of every­
thing and then sit her down somewhere under a bush on the high­
road-and make otl. While she can sit there under the bush and sniff 
the flowers." 
"\Vell, you are too hasty there, Stepan, it won't be like thad" cried 
my uncle. "But why are you so cross? I wonder at you, Stepan. What's 
the matter with you?" 
"Why, am I a man or nm ? It does make one cross, though it's no 
business of mine. Why, I am saying it perhaps in kindness to her . 
. . . Ech, damnation take it all! \Vhy, what have I come here for ? 
Why, what did I turn back for? What is it to do with me? What is it 
to do with me?'' 
So grumbled Mr. Bahtcheyev, but I left off listening to him and 
mused on the woman whom we were now in pursuit of-Tatyana 
lvanoma. Here is a brief biography of her which I gathered later on 

The Jriend of the Jami/y 
755 
from the most trustworthy sources, and which is essential to the 
explanation of her adventures. 
A poor orphan child who grew up in a strange unfriendly house, 
then a poor girl, then a poor young woman, and at last a poor old 
maid, Tatyana Ivanovna in the course of her poor life had drained the 
overfull cup of sorrow, friendlessness, humiliation and reproach, and 
had tasted to the full the bitterness of the bread of others. Naturally 
of a gay, highly susceptible and frivolous temperament, she had at 
first endured her bitter lot in one way or another and had even 
been capable at times of the gayest careless laughter; but with years 
destiny at last got the upper hand of her. Little by little Tatyana 
Ivanovna grew thin and sallow, became irritable and morbidly sus­
ceptible, and sank into the most unrestrained, unbounded dreaminess, 
often interrupted by hysterical tears and convulsive sobbing. The 
fewer earthly blessings real life left to her lot, the more she comforted 
and deluded herself in imagination. The more certainly, the more 
irretrievably her last hopes in real life were passing and at last were 
lost, the more seductive grew her dreams, never to be realized. Fabu­
lous wealth, unheard-of beauty, rich, elegant, distinguished suitors, 
always princes and sons of generals, who for her sake had kept their 
hearts in virginal purity and were dying at her feet from infinite 
love; and finally, he-he, the ideal of beauty combining in himself 
every possible perfection, passionate and loving, an artist, a poet, the 
son of a general-all at once or a!: by turns-began to appear to her 
not only in her dre:ᐂms but almost in reality. Her reason was already 
beginning to fail, unable to stand the strain of this opiate of secret 
incessant dreaming . . . .  And all at once destiny played a last fatal 
jest at her expense. Living in the last extreme of humiliation, in melan­
choly surroundings that crushed the heart, a companion to a toothless 
old lady, the most peevish in the world, scolded for everything, re­
proached for every crust she ate, for every threadbare rag she wore, 
insulted with impunity by any one, protected by no one, worn out by 
her miserable existence and secretly plunged in the luxury of the 
maddest and most fervid dreams-she suddenly heard the news of the 
death of a distant relation, all of whose family had died long before 
(though she in her frivolous way had never taken the trouble to ascer­
tain the fact) ; he was a strange man, a phrenologist and a money­
lender, who led a solitary, morose, unnoticed life, in seclusion 
somewhere very remote in the wilds. And now all at once immense 
wealth fell as though by miracle from heaven and scattered gold 

756 
The Short Novels of Vostoevsky 
at Tatyana lvanovna's feet ; she turned out to be the sole legitimate 
heiress of the dead money-lender. A hundred thousand silver roubles 
came to her at once. This jest of destiny was the last straw. Indeed, 
how could a mind already tottering doubt the truth of dreams when 
they were actually beginning to come true? And so the poor thing 
took lea\'e of her last remaining grain of common-sense. Swooning 
with bliss, she soared away beyond recall into her enchanted world of 
impossible imagination and seductive fancies. Away with all reflec­
tion, all doubt, all the checks of real life, all its laws clear and inevitable 
as twice two make four. Thirty-five years and dreams of dazzling 
beauty, the sad chill of autumn and the luxuriance of the infinite bliss 
of Iove-all blended in her without discord. Her dreams had once 
already been realized in life; why should not all the rest come true? 
Why should not lle appear ? Tatyana lvanovna did not reason, but she 
had faith. But while waiting for him, the ideal-suitors and knights 
of various orders and simple gentlemen, officers and civilians, infantry 
men and cavalry men, grand noblemen and simply poets who had 
been in Paris or had been only in Moscow, with beards and without 
beards, w}th imperials and without imperials, Spaniards and not 
Spaniards (but Spaniards, by preference), began appearing before her 
day and night in horrifying numbers that awakened gra\'e apprehen­
sions in onlookers; she was but a step from the madhouse. All these 
lovely phantoms thronged about her in a dazzling, infatuated pro­
cession. In reality, in actual life, everything went the same fantastic 
way : any one she looked at was in love with her; any one who passed 
by was a Spaniard; if any one died it must be for love of her. As 
ill-luck would have it, all this was confirmed in her eyes by the fact 
that men such as Obnoskin, Mizintchikov, and dozens of others with 
the same motives began running after her. Every one began suddenly 
trying to please her, spoiling her, flattering her. Poor Tatyana lvanovna 
refused to suspect that all this was for the sake of her money. She 
was fully convinced that, as though at some signal, people had sud­
denly reformed, and all, every one of them, grown gay and kind, 
friendly and good. He had not appeared himself in person; but though 
there could be no doubt that !Je would appear, her daily life as it 
was was so agreeable, so alluring, so full of all sorts of distractions and 
diversions, that she could wait. Tatyana lvanovna ate sweetmeats, 
culled the flowers of pleasure, and read novels. The novels heated her 
imagination and were usually flung aside at the second page; she could 
not read longer, but was carried to dreamland by the very first 
lines, by the most trivial hint at love, sometimes simply by the descrip-

T lze Jriend of tlze Jami/y 
757 
tion of scenery, of a room, of a toilette. New finery, lace, hats, hair 
ornaments, ribbons, samples, paper patterns, designs, sweetmeats, 
flowers, lapdogs were being continually sent her. Three girls spent 
whole days sewing for her in the maid's room, while their lady was 
trying on bodices and flounces, and twisting and turning before the 
looking-glass from morning to night, and even in the night. She 
actually seemed younger and prettier on coming into her fortune. To 
this day I don't know what was her relationship to the late General 
Krahotkin. I have always been persuaded that it was the invention 
of Madame Ia Generale, who wanted to get possession of T atyana 
Ivanovna and at all costs to marry her to my uncle for her money. 
Mr. Bahtcheyev was right when he spoke of its being Cupid that had 
brought Tatyana Ivanovna to the last point; and my uncle's idea on 
hearing of her elopement with Obnoskin-to run after her and bring 
her back even by force-was the most rational one. The poor creature 
was not fit to live without a guardian, and would have come to grief 
at once if she had fallen into evil hands. 
It was past nine when we reached Mishino. It was a poor little 
village, lying in a hole two miles from the high road. Six or seven 
peasants' huts, begrimed with smoke, slanting on one side and barely 
covered with blackened thatch, looked dejectedly and inhospitably at 
the traveller. There was not a garden, not a bush, to be seen for a 
quarter of a mile round. Only an old willow hung drowsily over the 
greenish pool that passed for a pond. Such a new abode could hardly 
make a cheering impression on Tatyana Ivanovna. The manor house 
consisted of a new long, narrow, wooden building with six windows 
in a row, and had been roughly thatched. The owner, the official, had 
only lately taken possession. The yard was not even fenced, and only 
on one side a new hurdle had been begun from which the dry leaves 
of the nut branches had not yet dropped. Obnoskin's chaise was 
standing by the hurdle. We had fallen on the fugitives like snow on the 
head. From an open window came the sound of cries and weeping. 
The barefoot boy who met us dashed away at breakneck speed. In 
the first room Tatyana Ivanovna with a tear-stained face was seated 
on a long chintz-covered sofa without a back. On seeing us she uttered 
a shriek and hid her face in her hands. Beside her stood Obnoskin, 
frightened and pitifully confused. He was so distraught that he flew 
to shake hands with us, as though overjoyed at our arrival. From the 
door that opened into the other room we had a peep of some lady's 
dress; some one was listening and looking through a crack imper­
ceptible to us. The people of the house did not put in an appearance; 

758 
T /z( Short 'N.ovds of 7JostO(VJky 
it seemed as though they were not in the house; they were all in 
hiding somewhere. 
"Here she is, the traveller! Hiding her face in her hands too!" 
cried Mr. Bahtcheyev, lumbering after us into rhe room. 
"Restrain your transports, Stepan Alexyevitch! They are quite 
unseemly. No one has a right to speak now but Yegor Ilyi-tch ; we have 
nothing to do here!" Mizintchikov observed sharply. 
My uncle, casting a stem glance at Mr. Bahtcheyev, and seeming 
not to observe the existence of Obnoskin, who had rushed to shake 
hands with him, went up to Tatyana Ivanovna, whose face was still 
hidden in her hands, and in the softest voice, with me most unaffected 
sympathy, said to her-
"Tatyana Ivanovna, we all so love and respect you, that we have 
come ourselves to learn your intentions. Would you care to drive back 
with us to Stepantchikovo? It is Ilyusha's nameday, mamma is expect­
ing you impatiently, while Sasha and Nastenka have no doubt been 
crying over you all the morning . . . .  
" 
Tatyana Iv:movna raised her head timidly, looked at him through 
her fingers, and suddenly bursting into tears, flung herself on his neck. 
"Oh, take me away, make haste and take me away from here!" she 
said, sobbing. "Make haste, as much haste as you can!" 
"She's gone off on the spree and made a n  ass of herself!" hissed 
Mr. Bahtcheyev, nudging my arm. 
"Everything is at an end, then," said my uncle, turning drily to 
Obnoskin and scarcely looking :Jt him. "Tatyana Ivanovna, please give 
me your arm. Let us go!" 
There was a rustle the other side of the door; the door creaked and 
opened wider. 
"If you look at it from another point of view though," Obnoskin 
observed uneasily, looking at the open door, "you will see yourself, 
Yegor Ilvitch . . .  your action in my house . . .  and in fact I was 
bo\\;ng to you, and you would not even bow to me, Yegor Ilyitch . . . .  " 
"Your action in my house, sir, was a low action," said my uncle, 
looking sternly at Obnoskin, "and this house is not yours. You have 
he:rd : Tatpn: Ivanovna does not wish to remain here a minute. 
\Vhat more do you want ? Not a wordᅝo you hear? not another 
word, I beg! I am extremely desirous of avoiding further explanations, 
and indeed it would be more to your interest to do so." 
But at this point Obnoskin was so utterly crestfallen that he began 
uttering the most unexpected drivel. 
"Don't despise me, Yegor Ilyitch," he began in a half-whisper, 

7' !te Jriend of t!te Jamily 
759 
almost crying with shame and continually glancing towards the door. 
probably from fear of being overheard. "It's not my doing, but my 
mother's. I didn't do it from mercenary motives, Yegor Ilyitch; I 
didn't mean anything; I did, of course, do it from interested motives, 
Yegor Ilyitch . . .  but I did it with a noble object, Yegor Ilyitch. I 
should have used the money usefully . . .  I should have helped the 
por. I wanted to support the movement for enlightenment, too, and 
even dreamed of endowing a university scholarship . . . .  That was 
what I wanted to turn my we.1lth to, Yegor Ilyitch; and not to use 
it just for anything, Yegor Ilyitch." 
We all felt horribly ashamed. Evᐃn Mizintchikov reddened and 
turned away, and my uncle was so confused that he did not know 
what to say. 
"Come, come, that's enough," he said at last. "Calm yourself, Pavel 
Semyonitch. It can't be helped! It might happen to any one . .
.
.
 If 
you like, come to dinner . . .  and I shall be delighted." 
But Mr. Bahtcheyev behaved quite diiTerently. 
"Endow a scholarship!" he bawled furiously. "You are not the sort 
to endow a scholarship! I bet you'd be ready to fleece any one you 
come across . . . .  Not a pair of breeches of his own, and here he is 
bragging of scholarships! Oh, you rag-and-bone man! So you've made 
a conquest of a soft heart, have you? And where is she, the parent? 
Hiding, is she? I bet she is sitting somewhere behind a screen, or has 
crept under the bed in a fright . . . .  
" 
"Stepan, Stepan!" cried my uncle. 
Obnoskin flushed and was on the point of protesting; but before 
he had time to open his mouth the door was flung open and Anfisa 
Petrovna herself, violently irritated, with flashing eyes, crimson with 
wrath, flew into the room. 
"What's this?" she shouted. "What's this going on here? You 
break into a respectable house with your rabble, Y egor Ilyitch, frighten 
ladies, give orders! . . .  What's the meaning of it? I have not taken 
leave of my senses yet, Yegor Ilyitch! And you, you booby," she went 
on yelling, pouncing upon her son, "you are snivelling before them 
already. Your mother is insulted in her own house, and you stand 
gaping. Do you call yourself a gentlemanly young man after that? 
You are a rag, and not a young man, after that." 
Not a trace of the mincing airs and fashionable graces of the day 
before, not a trace of the lorgnette even was to be seen about Anfisa 
Petrovna now. She was a regular fury, a fury without a mask. 
As soon as my uncle saw her he made haste to take Tatyana 

7(1.) 
The Short Novels of 1Jostoevsky 
Ivanovna on his arm, and would have rushed out of the room, but 
Anfisa Petrovna at once barred the way. 
"You are not going away like that, Yegor Ilyitch," she clamoured 
again. "By what right are you taking Tatyana Ivanovna away by force? 
You are annoyed that she has escaped the abominable snares you had 
caught her in, you and your mamma and your imbecile Foma Fomitch; 
you would have liked to marry her yourself for the sake of filthy lucre. 
I beg your pardon, but our ideas here are not so low! Tatyana Iva­
novna, seeing that you were plotting against her, that you were bring­
ing her to ruin, confided in Pavlusha of herself. She herself begged 
him to save her from your snares, so to say; she was forced to run 
away from you by night-that's a pretty thing! That's what you have 
driven her to, isn't it, Tatyana Ivanovna ? And since that's so, how dare 
you burst, a whole gang of you, into a respectable gentleman's house 
and carry off a young lady by force in spite of her tears and protests? 
I will not permit it! I will not permit it! 1 have not taken leave of my 
senses! Tatyana Ivanovna will remain because she wishes it! Come, 
Tatyana Ivanovna, it is useless to listen to them, they are your enemies, 
not your friends! Come along, don't be frightened! I'll see them all out 
directly! . . .  
" 
"No, no!" cried Tatyana Ivanovna, terrified. "I don't want to, I 
don't want to! He is no husband for me. I don't want to marry your 
son! He's no husband for me!" 
"You don't want to!" shouted Anfisa Petrovna, breathless with 
rage. "You don't want to! You have come and you don't want to! 
Then how dared you deceive us like this? Then how dared you give 
him your promise? You ran away with him by night, you forced 
yourself upon him, and have led us into embarrassment and expense. 
My son has perhaps lost an excellent match through you! He may 
have lost a dowry of ten thousand through you! . . .  No! you must 
pay for it, you ought to pay for it; we have proofs; you ran away at 
night . . . .  
" 
But we did not hear this tirade to the end. All at once, grouping 
ourselves round my uncle, we moved forward straight upon Anfisa 
Petrovna and went out on to the steps. The carriage was at hand at 
once. 
"None but dishonourable people, none but scoundrels, behave like 
that," cried Anfisa Petrovna from the steps, in an absolute frenzy. 
"I will lodge a petition, you shall pay for it . . .  you are going to a 
disreputable house, T atyana I \'anovna. You can not marry Y egor 

The Jriend of the Jamily 
761 
Ilyitch; under your very nose he is keeping his governess as his 
mistress." 
My uncle shuddered, turned pale, bit his lip and rushed to assist 
Tatyana lvanovna into the carriage. I went round to the other side 
of the carriage, and was waiting for my turn to get in, when I sud­
denly found Obnoskin by my side, clutching at my hand. 
"Allow me at least to seek your friendship!" he said warmly, squeez­
ing my hand, with an expression of despair on his face. 
"What's that, friendship?" I said, lifting my foot to the carriage step. 
"Yes! I recognized in you yesterday a man of culture; do not con­
demn me . . . .  My mother led me on, I had nothing to do with it. 
My inclinations are rather for literature-! assure you; this was all my 
mother . . . .  
" 
"I believe you, I believe you," I said. "Good-bye!" 
We got in and the horses set off at a gallop. The shouts and curser 
of Anfisa Petrovna resounded for a long way after us, and unknown 
faces suddenly poked out of all the windows of the house and stared 
after us with wild curiosity. 
There were five of us now in the carriage, but Mizintchikov got on 
to the box, giving up his former seat to Mr. Bahtcheyev, who had now 
to sit directly facing Tatyana Ivanovna. The latter was greatly relieved 
that we had taken her away, but she was still crying. My uncle con­
soled her as best he could. He was himself sad and brooding; it was 
evident that Anfisa Petrovna's frantic words about Nastenka were 
echoing painfully and bitterly in his heart. Our return journey would, 
however, have ended without any disturbance if only Mr. Bahtcheyev 
had not been with us. 
Sitting opposite Tatyana Ivanovna, he seemed not himself, he could 
not look indifferent, he shifted in his seat, turned as red as a crab, 
and rolled his eyes fearfully, particularly when my uncle began trying 
to console Tatyana Ivanovna. The fat man was absolutely beside 
himself, and grumbled like a bulldog when it is teased. My uncle 
looked at him apprehensively. At last Tatyana lvanovna, noticing the 
extraordinary state of mind of her vis.J-vis, began watching him in­
tently; then she looked at us, smiled, and all at once picking up her 
parasol, gracefully gave Mr. Bahtcheyev a light tap on the shoulder. 
"Crazy fellow!" she said with a most enchanting playfulness, and at 
once hid her face in her fan. 
This sally was the last straw. 
"Wha-a-at?" roared the fat man. "What's that, madame? So you are 
after me now I" 

i62 
'!he Short 'Novels of Vostocvsky 
"Crazy fellow! crazy fellow!" repeated Tatyana Ivanovna, and she 
suddenly burst out laughing and clapped her hands. 
"Stop! " cried Uahtcheyev to the coachman, "stop!" 
We stopped. Uahtcheyev opened the door, and hurriedly began 
clambering out of the carriage. 
"Why, what is the matter, Stepan Alcxyevitch ? Where arc you ofT 
to? "  cried my uncle in astonishment . 
"No, I have had enough of it," answered the fat man , trembling 
with indignation. "Deuce take it all ! I am too old, madame, to be 
besieged with amours. I would rather die on the highroad! Good-bye, 
madame. Commưnt votts portư:-vous?" 
And he actually began walking on fwt. The carriage followed him 
at a walking pace. 
"Stepan Alexyevitch!" cried my uncle, losing all patience at last. 
"Don't play the fool, come, get i n !  \'.-'by, it's time we were home." 
"Bother you !" Stepan Alexycvitch brought out, brc;uhlcss with 
walking, for owing to his corpulence he had quite lost the habit of 
exerCise. 
"Drive on full speed ," Mizintchikov shouted to the coachman. 
"What arc you doing ? Stop! " my uncle cried out as the c;1rriage 
dashed on. 
Mizimchikov was not out in his reckoning, the desired result 
followed at once. 
"Stop! Stop!'' we hc.:ml a despairing wail behind us. "Stop, you 
ruffian ! Stop, you cut -throat . . . , "  
The Ln rnan came into sight at bst, half-<lcad ,,,.-ith exhaustion. with 
drops of sweat on his brow, untying his cravat .:md taking off his cap. 
Silently and gloomily he got into the c;uriage, and this time I gave 
him my scat ; he was not .:myway sitting directly opposite Tatyana 
Ivanovna, who all through this scene lud been gu ... hing with laughter 
and clapping her h;mds. She could not )CKlk gr;n·cly at Stl"p;m :\lexy­
evitch all the rest of the journey. He for his part ᐄat without uttering a 
single word all the way home, st;1ring int ently at the hind wheel of the 
carriage. 
It \vas midday when we got back to Stepantchikovo. I went straight 
to my lodge, where Gavrib immediatc:ly made his appearance with 
tea. I flew to question the old man. but my uncle WJiked in almost 
on his heels and promptly sent him away. 

7' lze Jriend of tlze Jamily 
763 
[ I I  ) 
NEW DEVELOPMENTS 
I HAVE come to you for :1. minute, de:1.r boy," he began, "I was 
in haste to tell you . . . .  I have he:1.rd all about everything. None of 
them have even been to mass to-day, except Ilyusha, Sasha and 
Nastenka. They tell me mamm:1. has been in convulsions. They have 
been rubbing her, it was all they could do to bring her to by rubbing. 
Now it has been settled for us all to go together to Foma, and I have 
been summoned. Only I don't know whether to congr:J.tulate Fom:J. 
on the nameday or not-it's an important point! And in fact how 
are they going to take this whole episode? It's awful, Seryozha, I 
foresee it . . . .  
" 
"On the contrary, uncle," I hastened in my return to reply, "every­
thing is settling itself splendidly. You see you can't marry T:1.tyan:1. 
Ivanovna now-th:J.t's a great deal in itself. I wanted to m:1.ke th:J.t 
clear to you on our way." 
"Oh, yes, my dear boy. But that's not the point; there is the hand 
of Providence in it no doubt, as you say, but I w:J.sn't thinking of 
th:J.t. . . .  Poor T:1.ty:J.n:1. Iv:1.novn:1.! Wh:1.t :1.dventures happen to her, 
though! . . .  Obnoskin's :1. scoundrel, a scoundrel! Though why do 
I call him 'a scoundrel'? Shouldn't I have been doing the same if I 
married her? . . .  But that, again, is not what I have come about . 
. . . Did you hear what that wretch Anfisa Petrovna shouted about 
Nastenka this morning?" 
"Yes, uncle. Haven't you realized now that you must make haste?" 
"Certainly, at all costs!" answered my uncle. "It is a solemn moment. 
Only there is one thing, dear boy, which we did not think of, but I 
was thinking of it afterwards all night. Will she marry me, that's the 
point?" 
"Mercy on us, uncle! After she told you herself that she loves 
you . . .  
" 
"But, my dear boy, you know she also said at once that nothing 
would induce her to marry me." 
"Oh, uncle, that's only words; besides, circumstances are different 
to-day." 
"Do you think so? No, Sergey, my boy, it's a delicate business, 
dreadfully delicate! H'm . . . .  But do you know, though I was 

764 
7' lze Slzort Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
worrying, yet my heart was somehow aching with happiness all night. 
Well, good-bye, I must fly. They are waiting for me; I am late as it 
is. I only ran in to have a word with you. Oh, my God!" he cried, 
coming back, "I have forgotten what is most important! Do you 
know what ? I have written to him, to Fornal" 
"When ?" 
"In the night, and in the morning, at daybreak, I sent the letter 
by Vidoplyasov. I put it all before him on two sheets of paper, I told 
him everything truthfully and frankly, in short that I ought, that is, 
absolutely must-do you understand ?-make Nastenka an offer. I be­
sought him not to say a word about our meeting in the garden, and 
I have appealed to all the generosity of his hean to help me with 
mamma. I wrote a poor letter, of course, my boy, but I wrote it from 
my heart, and so to say, watered it with my tears . . . .  " 
"Well ? No answer?" 
"So far no; only this morning when we were getting ready to set off, 
met him in the hall in night attire, in slippers and nightcap-he 
sleeps in a nightcap-he had come out of his room. He didn't say a 
word, he didn't even glance at me. I peeped up into his face, not a 
sign." 
"Uncle, don't rely on him; he'll play you some dirty trick." 
"No, no, my boy, don't say so!" cried my uncle, gesticulating. "I 
am sure of him. Besides, you know, it's my last hope. He will under­
stand, he'll appreciate it. He's peevish, he's capricious, I don't deny 
it; but when it comes to a question of true nobility, then he shines 
out like a pearl. . . .  Yes, like a pearl. You think all that, Scrgey, 
because you ha\'e never seen him yet, when he is most noble . . .  but 
my God! if he really docs spread abroad my secret of yesterday, then 
. . .  I don't know what will happen then, Sergey! What will be left 
me in the world that I can believe in? But no, he cannot be such a 
scoundrel. I am not worth the sole of his shoe. Don't shake your head, 
my boy; it"s true-I am not." 
"Yegor Ilyitch! Your mamma is anxious about you." We hear 
from below the unpleasant voice of Miss Perepelitsyn, who had prob­
ably succeeded in hearing the whole of our conversation from the 
open window. "They are looking for you all over the house, and 
cannot find you." 
"Oh, dear, I am late! How dreadful," cried my uncle in a fluster. 
"My dear boy, for goodness' sake dress and come too. Why, it was 
just for that I ran in, so that we might go together . . . .  I fly, I fly! 
Anna Niloma, I fly!" 

'I he Jriend of the Jamily 
765 
When I was left alone, I recalled my meeting with Nastenka that 
morning and was very glad I had not told my uncle of it; I should 
have upset him even more. I foresaw a great storm, and could not 
imagine how my uncle would arrange his plans and make an offer 
to Nastenka. I repeat: in spite of my faith in his honour, I could not 
help feeling doubtful of his success. 
However, I had to make haste. I considered myself bound to assist 
him, and at once began dressing; but as I wanted to be as well dressed 
as possible, I was not very quick in spite of my haste. Mizintchikov 
walked in. 
"I ha,·e come for you," he said. "Yegor Ilyitch begs you to come 
at once."' 
"Let us go!" 
I was quite ready, we set off. 
"\Vhat news there?" I asked on the way. 
"They are all in Foma's room, the whole party," answered Mizin­
tchikov. "Foma is not in bad humour, but he is somewhat pensive and 
doesn't say much, just mutters through his teeth. He even kissed 
Ilyusha, which of course delighted Y egor Ilyitch. He announced 
beforehand through Miss Perepelitsyn that they were not to con­
gratulate him on the nameday, and that he had only wanted to test 
them . . . .  Though the old lady keeps sniffing her smelling-salts, she 
is calm because Foma is calm. Of our adventure no one drops a hint, 
it is as though it had never happened; they hold their tongues because 
Foma holds his. He hasn't let any one in all the morning, though. 
While we were away the old lady implored him by all the saints 
to come that she might consult him, and indeed she hobbled down to 
the door herself; but he locked himself in and answered that he was 
praying for the human race, or something of the sort. He has got 
something up his sleeve, one can see that from his face. But as Y egor 
Ilyitch is incapable of seeing anything from any one's face, he is 
highly delighted now with Foma's mildness; he is a regular baby! 
Ilyusha has prepared some verses, and they have sent me to fetch you." 
"And Tatyana lvanovna?" 
"\Vhat about Tatyana lvanovna?" 
"Is she there? With them?" 
"No; she is in her own room," Mizintchikov answered drily. "She 
is resting and crying. Perhaps she is ashamed too. I believe that . . .  
governess is with her now. I say! surely it is not a storm coming on? 
Look at the sky!" 

766 
The Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
"I believe it is a storm," I answered, glancing at a storm-cloud that 
looked black on the horizon. 
At that moment we went up to the terrace. 
"Tell me, what do you think of Obnoskin, eh ?" I went on, not 
able to refrain from probing Mizintchikov on that point. 
"Don't speak to me of him ! Don't remind me of that blackguard," 
he cried, suddenly stopping, flushing red and stamping. "The fool! the 
fool! to ruin such a splendid plan, such a brilliant idea! Listen: I am 
an ass, of course, for not having detected what a rogue he is!-I admit 
that solemnly, and perhaps that admission is just what you want. But 
I swear if he had known how to carry it through properly, I should 
perhaps have forgiven him. The fool! the fool! And how can such 
people be allowed in society, how can they be endured! How is it 
they are not sent to Siberia, into exile, into prison! But that's all 
nonsense, they won't get over me! Now I have experience anyway, and 
we shall see who gets the best of it. I am thinking over a new idea 
now . . . .  You must admit one can't lose one's object simply because 
some outside fool has stolen one's idea and not known how to set 
about it. Why, it's unjust! And, in fact, this Tatyana will inevitably 
be married, that's her predestined fate. And if no one has put her 
into a madhouse up to now, it was just because it is still possible to 
marry her. I will tell you my new idea . . . .  " 
"But afterwards, I suppose," I interrupted him, "for here we arc." 
"Very well, very well, afterwards," Mizintchikov answered, twisting 
his lips into a spasmodic smile. "And now . . .  But where arc you 
going? I tell you, straight to Foma Fomitch's room! Follow me; you 
have not been there yet. You will sec another farce . . . .  For it has 
really come to a farce." 
[ Ill ] 
ILYUSHA'S NAMEDAY 
F OMA occupied two large and excellent rooms; they were even 
better decorated than any other of the rooms in the house. The great 
man was surrounded by perfect comfort. The fresh and handsome 
wall-paper, the particoloured silk curtains on the windows, the rugs, 
the pier-glass, the fireplace, the softly upholstered elegant furniture­
all testified to the tender solicitude of the family for Foma's comfort. 
Pots of flowers stood in the windows and on little marble tables in 

The Jriend of the Jamily 
767 
front of the windows. In the middle of the study stood 1 large table 
covered with a red cloth and littered with books and manuscripts. A 
handsome bronze inkstand and a bunch of pens which Vidoplyasov 
had to look after-all this was to testify to the severe intellectual 
labours of Foma Fomitch. I will mention here by the way that though 
Foma had sat at that table for nearly eight years, he had composed 
absolutely nothing that was any good. Later on, when he had departed 
to a better world, we went through his manuscripts; they all turned 
out to be extraordinary trash. \Ve found, for instance, the beginning 
of an historical novel, the scene of which was laid in Novgorod, in 
the seventh century; then a monstrous poem, "An Anchorite in the 
Churchyard," written in blank verse; then a meaningless meditation 
on the significance and characteristics of the Russian peasant, and how 
he should be treated; and finally "The Countess Vlonsky," a novel of 
aristocratic life, also unfinished. There was nothing else. And yet 
Foma Fomitch had made my uncle spend large sums every year on 
books and journals. But many of them were actually found uncut. 
Later on, I caught Foma Fomitch more than once reading Paul de 
Kock, but he always slipped the book out of sight when people came 
in. In the further wall of the study there was a glass door which led to 
the courtyard of the house. 
They were waiting for us. Foma Fomitch was sitting in a com­
fortable arm-chair, wearing some sort of long coat that reached to his 
heels, but yet he wore no cravat. He certainly was silent and thought­
ful. When we went in he raised his eyebrows slightly and bent a 
searching glance on me. I bowed; he responded with a slight bow, a 
fairly polite one, however. Grandmother, seeing that Foma Fomitch 
was behaving graciously to me, gave me a nod and a smile. The poor 
woman had not expected in the morning that her paragon would take 
the news of Tatyana Ivanovna's "escapade" so calmly, and so she was 
now in the best of spirits, though she really had been in convulsions 
and fainting fits earlier in the day. Behind her chair, as usual, stood 
Miss Perepelitsyn, compressing her lips till they looked like a thread, 
smiling sourly and spitefully and rubbing her bony hands one against 
the other. Two always mute lady companions were installed beside 
Madame Ia Generate. There was also a nun of sorts who had strayed 
in that morning, and an elderly lady, a neighbour who had come in 
after mass to congratulate Madame Ia Generate on the nameday and 
who also sat mute. Aunt Praskovya Ilyinitchna was keeping in the 
background somewhere in a corner, and was looking with anxiety at 
Foma Fomitch and her mother. My uncle was sitting in an easy-chair, 

768 
The Short 'Novels of 7Jostoevsky 
and his face was beaming with a look of exceptional joy. Facing him 
stood Ilyusha in his red holiday shirt, with his hair in curls, looking 
like a little angel. Sasha and Nastenka had in secret from every one 
taught him some verses to rejoice his father on this auspicious day 
by his progress in learning. My uncle was almost weeping with 
delight. Foma's unexpected mildness, Madame la Generale's good 
humour, Ilyusha's nameday, the verses, all moved him to real enthu­
siasm, and with a solemnity worthy of the occasion he had asked 
them to send for me that I might hasten to share the general happines 
and listen to the verses. Sasha and Nastenka, who had come in just 
after us, were standing near Ilyusha. Sasha was continually laughing, 
and at that moment was as happy as a little child. Nastenka, looking 
at her, also began smiling, though she had come into the room a 
moment before pale and depressed. She alone had welcomed Tatyana 
Ivanovna on her return from her excursion, and until then had been 
sitting upstairs with her. The rogue Ilyusha seemed, too, as though he 
could not keep from laughing as he looked at his instructresses. It 
seemed as though the three of them had prepared a very amusing joke 
which they meant to play now . . . .  I had forgotten Bahtcheyev. He 
was sitting on a chair at a little distance, still cross and red in the face; 
holding his tongue, sulking, blowing his nose and altogether playing 
a very gloomy part at the family festivity. Near him Yezhevikin was 
fidgeting about; he was fidgeting about everywhere, however, kissing 
the hands of Madame la Generale and of the visitors, whispering some­
thing to Miss Perepelitsyn, showing attention to Foma Fomitch, in fact 
he was all over the place. He, too, was awaiting Ilyusha's verses with 
great interest, and at my entrance flew to greet me with bows as a 
mark of the deepest respect and devotion. Altogether there was noth­
ing to show that he had come to protect his daughter, and to take her 
from Stepantchikovo for ever. 
"Here he is!" cried my uncle gleefully on seeing me. "Ilyusha has 
got a poem for us, that's something unexpected, a real surprise! I am 
overpowered, my boy, and sent for you on purpose, and have put off 
the verses till you came . . . .  Sit down beside me! Let us listen. Foma 
Fomitch, confess now, it must have been you who put them all up 
to it to please an old fellow like me. I'll wager that is how it is!" 
Since my uncle was talking in such a tone and yoice in Foma's room 
one would have thought that all must be well. But unluckily my 
uncle was, as Mizintchikov expressed it, incapable of reading any 
man's face. Glancing at Foma's face, I could not help admitting that 

The Jriend of the Jamily 
769 
Mizintchikov was right and that something was certainly going to 
happen . . . .  
"Don't trouble about me, Colonel," Foma answered in a faint voice, 
the voice of a man forgiving his enemies. "I approve of the surprise, 
of course; it shows the sensibility and good principles of your children . 
• . . Poetry is of use, too, even for the pronunciation . . . .  But I have 
not been busy over verses this morning, Yegor Ilyitch; I have been 
praying . . .  you know that . . . .  I am ready to listen to the verses, 
however." 
Meanwhile I had congratulated Ilyusha and kissed him. 
"Quite so, Foma, I beg your pardon. I had forgotten . . .  though I 
am sure of your affection, Fornal Kiss him once more, Seryozha! 
Look what a fine big boy! Come, begin, Ilyusha! What is it about? 
I suppose it is something solemn from Lomonosov?" 
And my uncle drew himself up with a dignified air. He could 
scarcely sit still in his seat for impatience and delight. 
"No, papa, not from Lomonosov," said Sashenka, hardly able to 
suppress her laughter; "but as you have been a soldier and fought the 
enemy, Ilyusha has learnt a poem about warfare. , , . The siege of 
Pamba, papa!" 
"The siege of Pamba! I don't remember it . . . .  What is this 
Pamba, do you know, Ilyusha ? Something heroic, I suppose." 
And my uncle drew himself up again. 
"Begin, Ilyusha!" Sasha gave the word of command. 
Ilyusha began in a little, clear, even voice, without stops or commas, 
as small children generally recite verses they have learned by heart-
"Nine long years Don Pedro Gomez 
Has besieged the fort of Pamba, 
On a diet of milk supported. 
And Don Pedro's gallant warriors, 
Brave Castilians, full nine thousand, 
All to keep the vow they've taken 
Taste no bread nor other victuals, 
Milk they drink and milk alone." 
"What? What's that about milk?" cried my uncle, looking at me in 
perplexity. 
"Go on reciting, Ilyusha!" cried Sashenka. 
"Every day Don Pedro Gomez, 
In his Spanish cloak enveloped, 
Bitterly his lot bewails. 
Lo, the tenth year is approaching; 

770 
'1 he Short N.otels of VostoetJsky 
Still the fierce Moors are triumphant; 
Ami of all Don Pedro's army 
Only nineteen men are left . . . .  
" 
"\Vhy, it's a regular string of nonsense!" cried my uncle uneasily. 
"Come, that's impossible. Only nineteen men left out of a whole 
army, when there was a very considerable corps before? \Vhat is the 
meaning of it, my boy?" 
llut at that point Sasha could not contain herself, and went oiT into 
the most open and childish laughter ; and though there was nothing 
very funny, it was impossible not to laugh too as one looked at her. 
"They are funny verses, papa," she cried, highly delighted with 
her childish prank. "The author made them like that on purpose to 
amuse everybody." 
"Oh! Funny!" cried my uncle, with a beaming face. "Comic, you 
mean! That's just what I thought . . . .  Just so, just so, funny! And 
very amusing, extremely amusing: he starved all his army on milk 
owing to some vow. What possessed them to take such a vow? Very 
witty, isn't it, Foma? You see, mamma, these are jesting verses, such 
as authors sometimes do write, don't they, Sergey? Extremely amus­
ing. Well, well, Ilyusha, what next?" 
"Only nineteen men are left! 
Them Don PeJro <.loth assemble 
And says to them: 'Noble Nineteen! 
Let us raise aloft our stanJarJs! 
Let us hlow on our lout! trumpets! 
And with clashing of our cymbals 
Let us from Pamba retreat ! 
Through the fort we have not taken, 
Yet with honour still untarnisheJ 
Vl/e can swear on faith ant! conscience 
That our vow we have not broken; 
Nine long years we have not eaten, 
Not a morsel have we eaten, 
Milk we've drunk and milk alone!' " 
"What a noodle! What comfort was it for him that he had drunk 
milk for nine years?" my uncle broke in again. "What is there virtuous 
in it? He would have done better to have eaten a whole sheep, and not 
have been the death of people! Excellent! capital! I see, I see now: it is 
a satire on . . .  what do they call it? an allegory, isn't it ? And perhaps 
aimed at some foreign general," my uncle added, addressing me, knit­
ting his hrows significantly, and screwing up his eyes, "eh? What do 
you think ? But of course a harmless, good, refined satire that injures 

The Jriend of tlze Jamily 
771 
nobody! Excellent! excellent! and what matters most, It 1s refined. 
Well, Ilyusha, go on. Ah, you rogues, you rogues!" he added with feel­
ing, looking at Sasha and stealthily also at Nastenka, who blushed 
and smiled. 
"And emboldened by that saying, 
Those nineteen Castilian warriors, 
Each one swaying in his saddle, 
Feebly shouted all together: 
'Sant' Iago Compostello! 
Fame and glory to Don Pedro! 
Glory to the Lion of Castile!' 
And his chaplain, one Diego, 
Through his teeth was heard to mutter: 
'But if I had been commander, 
I'd have vowed to eat meat only, 
Drinking good red wine alone.' " 
"There! Didn't I tell you so?" cried my uncle, extremely delighted. 
"Only one sensible man was found in the whole army, and he was 
some sort of a chaplain. And what is that, Sergey: a captain among 
them, or what?" 
"A monk, an ecclesiastical person, uncle." 
"Oh, yes, yes. Chaplain? I know, I remember. I have read of it in 
Radcliffe's novels. They have all sorts of orders, don't they . . . .  Bene­
dictines, I believe? . . .  There are Benedictines, aren't there?" 
"Yes, uncle." 
"H'm! 
capital! "  
I thought so. Well, Ilyusha, what next? Excellent! 
"And Don Pedro overhearing, 
With loud laughter gave the order: 
'Fetch a sheep and give it to him! 
He has jested gallantly!' " 
"What a time to laugh! What a fool! Even he saw it was funny at 
last! A sheep! So they had sheep; why did he not eat some himself! 
Well, Ilyusha, go on. Excellent! capital! Extraordinarily cutting!" 
"But that's the end, papa!" 
"Oh, the end. Indeed there wasn't much left to be done-was there, 
Sergey? Capital, Ilyusha! Wonderfully nice. Kiss me, darling. Ah, my 
precious! Who was it thought of it: you, Sasha?" 
"No, it was Nastenka. We read it the other day. She read it and 
said: 'What ridiculous verses! It will soon be Ilyusha's nameday, let us 
make him learn them and recite them. It will make them laugh!' " 
"Oh, it was Nastenka? Well, thank you, thank you," my uncle 

772 
The Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
muttered, suddenly flushing like a child. "Kiss me again, Ilyusha. You 
kiss me too, you rogue," he said, embracing Sashenka and looking into 
her face with feeling. "You wait a bit, Sashenka, it will be your name­
day soon," he added, as though he did not know what to say to express 
his pleasure. 
I turned to Nastenka and asked whose verses they were. 
"Yes, yes, whose are the verses?" my uncle hurriedly chimed in. "It 
must have been a clever poet who wrote them, mustn't it, Foma?" 
"H'm . . .  " Foma grunted to himself. 
A biting sarcastic smile had not left his face during the whole time 
of the recitation of the verses. 
"I have really forgotten," said Nastenka, looking timidly at Foma 
Fomitch. 
"It's Mr. Kuzma Prutkov wrote it, papa; it was published in the 
Contemporary," Sashenka broke in. 
"Kuzma Prutkov! I don't know his name," said my uncle. "Pushkin 
I know! . . .  But one can see he is a gifted poet-isn't he, Sergey? And 
what's more, a man of refined qualities, that's as clear as twice two! 
Perhaps, indeed, he is an officer . . . .  I approve of him. And the Con­
temporary is a first-rate magazine. \Ve certainly must take it in if 
poets like that are among the contributors . . . .  I like poets! They are 
fine fellows! They picture everything in verse. Do you know, Sergey, 
I met a literary man at your rooms in Petersburg. He had rather a 
peculiar nose, too . . .  really! . . .  What did you sJy, Foma ?" 
Foma Fomitch, who was getting more and more worked up, gave 
a loud snigger. 
"No, I said nothing . . .  " he said, as though hardly able to suppress 
his laughter. "Go on, Yegor Ilyitch, go on! I will say my word later. 
. . . Stepan Alexyevitch is delighted to hear how you made the ac­
quaintance of literary men in Petersburg." 
Stepan Alexyevitch, who had been sitting apart all the time lost in 
thought, suddenly raised his head, reddened, and turned in his chair 
with exasperation. 
"Don't you provoke me, Foma, but leave me in peace," he said, look­
ing wrathfully at Foma with his little bloodshot eyes. "What is your 
literature to me? May God only give me good health," he muttered 
to himself, "and plague take them all . . .  and their authors too . . . .  
Voltairians, that's what they are!" 
"Authors are Voltairians?" said Yezhevikin immediately at his side. 
"Perfectly true what you have been plea-sed to remark, Stepan Alexyev· 
itch. Valentin lgnatyitch was pleased to express the same sentiments 

'I he Jriend of tlze Jamily 
773 
the other day. He actually called me a Voltairian, upon my soul he did! 
And yet, as you all know, I have written very little so far. . . .  If a bowl 
of milk goes sour-it's al Voltaire's fault! That's how it is with every­
thing here." 
"\Veil, no," observed my uncle with dignity, "that's an error, you 
know! Voltaire was nothing but a witty writer; he laughed at super­
stitions; and he never was a Voltairian! It was his enemies spread 
that rumour about him. Why were they all against him, really, poor 
fellow ? . . .  
" 
Again the malignant snigger of Foma Fomitch was audible. My 
uncle looked at him uneasily and was perceptibly embarrassed. 
"Yes, Foma, I am thinking about the magazine, you see," he said 
in confusion, trying to put himself right somehow. "You were perfectly 
right, my dear Foma, when you said the other day that we ought to 
subscribe to one. I think we ought to, myself. H'm . . .  after all, they 
do assist in the diffusion of enlightenment; one would be a very poor 
patriot if one did not support them. Wouldn't one, Sergey? H'm . . . .  
Yes . . . .  The Contemporary, for instance. But, do you know, Seryozha, 
the most instruction, to my thinking, is to be found in that thick maga­
zine-what's its name?-in a yellow cover . . .  " 
"Notes of the Fat!Jerland, papa." 
"Oh, yes, Notes of tile Fat!Jerland, and a capital title, Sergey, isn't it? 
It is, so to say, the whole Fatherland sitting writing notes . . . .  A very 
fine object. A most edifying magazine. And what a thick one! What 
a job to publish such an omnibus! And the information in it almost 
makes one's eyes start out of one's head. I came in the other day, the 
volume was lying here, I took it up and from curiosity opened it and 
reeled off three pages at a go. It made me simply gape, my dear! And, 
you know, there is information about everything; what is meant, for 
instance, by a broom, a spade, a ladle, an ovenrake. To my thinking, a 
broom is a broom and an ovenrake an ovenrake! No, my boy, wait a 
bit. According to the learned, an ovenrake turns out not an ovenrake, 
but an emblem or something mythological; I don't remember exactly, 
but ·something of the sort 
.
•
.
.
 So that's how it is! They have gone 
into everything!" 
I don't know what precisely Foma was preparing to do after this 
fresh outburst from my uncle, but at that moment Gavrila appeared 
and stood with bowed head in the doorway. 
Foma Fomitch glanced at him significantly. 
"Ready, Gavrila ?" he asked in a faint but resolute voice. 
"Ye-s, sir," Gavrila answered mournfully. and heaved a sigh. 

774 
The Short 'Novels of Vostocvsky 
"And have you put my bundle on the cart?" 
"Yes, sir." 
"Well, then, I am ready too!" said Foma, and he deliberately got up 
from his easy-chair. My uncle looked at him in amazement. Madame 
Ia Generale jumped up from her seat and looked about her uneasily. 
"Allow me, Colonel," Foma began with dignity, "to ask you to leave 
for a moment the interesting subject of literary ovenrakes; you can 
continue it after I am gone. As I am taking leave of you for ever, I 
should like to say a few last words to you . . . .  
" 
Every listener was spellbound with alarm and amazement. 
"Fornal Fornal but what is the matter with you ? Where are you 
going?" my uncle cried at last. 
"I am about to leave your house, Colonel," Foma brought out in a 
perfectly composed voice. "I have made up my mind to go where 
fortune takes me, and so I have hired at my own expense a humble 
peasant's cart. My bundle is lying in it already, it is of no great dimen­
sions: a few favourite books, two changes of linen-that is all! I am 
a poor man, Yegor Ilyitch, but nothing in the world would induce me 
now to take your gold, which I refused even yesterday!" 
"But for God's sake, Foma, what is the meaning of it?" cried my 
uncle, turning as white as a sheet. 
Madame Ia Generale uttered a shriek and looked in despair at Foma 
Fomitch, stretching out her hands to him. Miss Perepelitsyn flew to 
support her. The lady companions sat petrified in their chairs. Mr. 
Bahtcheyev got up heavily from his seat. 
"Well, here's a pretty to-do!" Mizintchikov whispered beside me. 
At that moment a distant rumble of thunder was heard; a storm was 
coming on. 
[ IV ] 
THE EXPULSION 
You ask me, I believe, Colonel, what is the meaning of this?" Foma 
brought out with solemn dignity, as though enjoying the general con­
sternation. "I am surprised at the question! Will you on your side 
explain how it is you can bring yourself to look me in the face now? 
Explain to me this last psychological problem in human shamelessness, 
and then I shall depart, the richer for new knowledge of the depravity 
of the human race." 

The Jriend of the Jamily 
775 
But my uncle was not equal to answering him. With open mouth 
and staring eyes he gazed at Foma, alarmed and annihilated. 
"Merciful heavens! What passions!" hissed Miss Perepelitsyn. 
"Do you understand, Colonel," Foma went on, "that you had bettet 
let me go now, simply without asking questions? In your house even I, 
a man of years and understanding, begin to feel the purity of my 
morals gravely endangered. Believe me, that your questions can lead 
to nothing but putting you to shame." 
"Fornal Fornal" cried m" uncle, and a cold perspiration came out 
on his forehead. 
"And so allow me without further explanation to say a few farewell 
words at parting, my last words in your house, Yegor Ilyitch. The 
thing is done and there is no undoing it! I hope that you understand 
to what I am referring. But I implore you on my knees: if one spark 
of moral feeling is left in your heart, curb your unbridled passions! 
And if the noxious poison has not yet caught the whole edifice, then, 
as far as possible, extinguish the fire!" 
"Foma, I assure you that you are in error!" cried my uncle, recover­
ing himself little by little and foreseeing with horror the climax. 
"Moderate your passions," Foma continued in the same solemn voice, 
as though he had not heard my uncle's exclamation, "conquer your­
self. 'If thou would'st conquer all the world-conquer thyself.' That 
is my invariable rule. You are a landowner; you ought to shine like 
a diamond in your estate, and what a vile example of unbridled pas­
sion you set your inferiors! I have been praying for you the whole 
night, and trembled as I sought for your happiness. I did not find it, 
for happiness lies in virtue . . .  .'' 
"But this is impossible, Fornal" my uncle interrupted him again. 
"You have misunderstood and what you say is quite wrong." 
"And so remember you are a landowner," Foma went on, still re­
gardless of my uncle's exclamations. "Do not imagine that repose and 
sensuality are the destined vocation of the landowning class. Fatal 
thought! Not repose, but zealous work, zealous !.:awards God, towards 
your sovereign, and towards your country! Hard work, hard work is 
the duty of the landowner, he should work as hard as the poorest of 
his peasants!" 
"What, am I to plough for the peasant, or what?" growled 
Bahtcheyev. "Why, I am a landowner, too . . .  
.'' 
"I turn to you now, servants of the house," Foma went on, address­
ing Gavrila and Falaley, who had appeared in the doorway. "Lovᅛ 
your master and his family, and obey t!1em humbly and meekly, ana 

776 
Tlze Slzort Novels of Vostoevsky 
they will reward you with their love. And you, Colonel, be j ust and 
compassionate to them. A fellow-man-the image of God-like a child 
of tender years, so to say, is entrusted to you by your sovereign and 
your country. Great is the duty, but great also is the merit." 
"Foma Fomitch, my dear man, what notion is this ?" cried Madame 
Ia Gcnerale in despair, almost swooning with horror. 
"Well, that is enough, I think," Foma concluded, paying no atten­
tion even to Madame Ia Gencrale. "Now to lesser things; they may be 
small, but they are essential, Yegor Ilyitch. Your hay on the Harinsky 
waste has not been cut yet. Do not be too late with it : mow it and 
mow it quickly. That is my advice . . . .  
" 
"But, Foma . . .  
" 
"You meant to cut down the ZyryanO\·sky copse, I know; don't cut 
it-that's a second piece of advice. Preserve forest land, for trees retain 
humidity on the surface of the e.1rth. It is a pity that you have sown 
the spring corn so late; it's amazing how late you have been in sowing 
the spring corn! . . .  " 
"But, Foma . . .  
" 
"But enough! One cannot convey everything, and indeed there is 
not time. I wiU •send you written instructions in a special book. Well, 
good-bye, good-bye all, God be with you, and the Lord bless you. I 
bless you too, my child," he went on, turning to Ilyusha; "and may 
God keep you from the noxious poison of your passions. I bless you 
too, Falaley; forget the Komarinsky! . . .  And all of you . . . .  Remem­
ber Foma . . . .  Well, let us go, Gavrila! Come and help me in, old man." 
And Foma turned towards the door. Madame Ia Gcnerale gave a 
piercing shriek and flew after him. 
"No, Foma, I will not let you go like this," cried my uncle, and 
overtaking him, he seized him by the hand. 
"So you mean to have resort to force?" Foma asked haughtily. 
"Yes, Foma . . .  even to force," answered my uncle, quivering with 
emotion. "You have said too much, and must explain your words! You 
have misunderstood my letter, Fornal . .  ," 
"Your letter! "  squealed Foma, instantly flaring up as though he had 
been awaiting that minute for an explosion ; "your letter! Here it is, 
your letter! Here it is. I tear this letter, I spit upon it! I trample your 
letter under my foot, and in doing so fulfil the most sacred duty of 
humanity. That is what I will do if you compel me by force to an 
explanation! Look! Look! Look! . . .  " 
And scraps of paper flew about the room. 
"I repeat, Foma, you have misunderstood it," cried my uncle, turn-

'llze Jriend of tlze Jamily 
777 
ing paler and paler. "I am making an offer of marriage, Foma, I am 
seeking my happiness." 
"Marriage! You have seduced this young girl, and are trying to 
deceive me by offering her marriage, for I saw you with her last night 
in the garden, under the bushes." 
Madame la Generale uttered a scream and fell fainting into an arm­
chair. A fearful hubbub arose. Poor Nastenka sat deathly pale. Sasha, 
frightened, clutched Ilyusha and trembled as though she were in a 
fever. 
"Foma!" cried my uncle in a frenzy, "if you divulge that secret you 
are guilty of the meanest action on earth!" 
"I do divulge that secret," squealed Foma, "and I am performing 
the most honourable action! I am sent by God Himself to unmask 
your villainies to all the world. I am ready to clamber on some peas­
ant's thatched roof and from there to proclaim your vile conduct to all 
the gentlemen of the neighbourhood and all the passers-by . . . .  Yes, 
let me tell you alᐅ all of you, that yesterday in the night I found him 
in the garden, under the bushes with this young girl whose appearance 
is so innocent . . . .  
" 
"Oh, what a disgrace!" piped Mi·ss Perepelitsyn. 
"Fornal Don't be your own destruction!" cried my uncle, with 
clenched fists and flashing eyes. 
"He,'' squealed Foma, "he, alarmed at my having seen him, had the 
audacity to try with a lying letter to persuade me into conniving at 
his crime-yes, crime! 
.
•
•
 for you have turned a hitherto innocent 
young girl into a . . .  " 
"Another word insulting to her and I will kill you, Foma, I 
swear! . . .  " 
"I say that word, since you have succeeded in turning the most 
innocent young girl into a most depraved girl." 
Foma had hardly uttered this last word when my uncle seized him 
by the shoulder, turned him round like a straw, and flung him vio­
lently at the glass door, which led from the study into the courtyard. 
The shock was so violent that the closed door burst open, and Foma, 
flying head over heels down the stone steps, fell full length in the 
yard. Bits of broken glass were scattered tinkling about the steps. 
"Gavrila, pick him up!" cried my uncle, as pale as a corpse. "Put 
him in the cart, and within two minutes let there be no trace of him 
in Stepantchikovo!" 
\Vhatever Foma's design may have been, he certainly had not ex­
pected such a climax. 

778 
The Short Novels of 1Jostoevsky 
I will not undertake to describe what happened for the first minutes 
after this episode. The heart-rending wail of Madame Ia Gencrale as 
she rolled from side to side in an arm-chair; the stupefaction of Miss 
Perepelitsyn at this unexpected behaviour of my hitherto submissive 
uncle; the sighs and groans of the lady companions; Nastenka almost 
fainting with fright while her father hovered over her; Sashenka 
terror-stricken; my uncle in indescribable excitement pacing up and 
down the room waiting for his mother to come to herself; and lastly, 
the loud weeping of Falaley in lamentation over the troubles of his 
betters-all this made up an indescribable picture. I must add, too, 
that at this moment a violent storm broke over us; peals of thunder 
were more and more frequent, and big drops of rain began pattering 
on the window. 
"Here's a nice holiday!" muttered :Mr. Bahtcheyev, bowing his head 
and flinging wide his arms. 
"It's a bad business," I whispered to him, beside myself with excite­
ment too. "But anyway they have turned Foma out, and he won't 
come back again." 
"Mamma! Are you conscious ? Are you better? Can you listen to 
me at last?" asked my uncle, stopping before the old lady's arm-chair. 
She raised her head, clasped her hands, and looked with imploring 
eyes at her son, whom she had never in her life before seen moved to 
such wrath. 
"Mamma," he went on, "it was the last straw, you have seen for 
yourself. It was not like this that I meant to approach this subject, but 
the hour has come, and it is useless to put it oil You have heard the 
calumny, hear my defence. Mamma, I love this noble and high-minded 
girl, I have loved her a long while, and I shall never cease to lo\'e her. 
She will make the happiness of my children, and will be a dutiful 
daughter to you. And so now, before you, and in the presence of my 
friends and my family, I solemnly plead at her feet, and beseech her 
to do me infinite honour by consenting to be my wife." 
Nastenka started, then Rushed crimson all over and got up from 
her seat. Madame Ia Generale stared some time at her son as though 
she did not understand what he was saying to her, and all at once with 
a piercing wail Rung herself on her knees. 
"Yegorushka, my darling, bring Foma Fomitch back," she cried. 
"Bring him back at once, or without him I shall die before night." 
My uncle was petrified at the sight of his self-willed and capricious 
old mother kneeling before him. His painful distress was reflected in 

The Jriend of the Jamily 
779 
his face. At last, recovering himself, he flew to raise her up and put 
her back in her chair. 
"Bring Foma Fomitch back, Yegorushka," the old lady went on 
wailing. "Bring him back, darling! I cannot live without him!" 
"Mamma," my uncle cried sorrowfully, "have you heard nothing of 
what I have just said to you ? I cannot bring Foma back-understand 
that. I cannot and I have not the right to after his low and scoundrelly 
slander on this angel of honour and virtue. Do you understand, 
numrna, that it is my duty, that my honour compels me now to defend 
virtue? You have heard: I am asking this young lady to be my wife, 
and I beg you to bless our union." 
Madame Ia Generale got up from her seat again and fell on her knees 
before Nastenka. 
"My dear girl!" she wailed, "do not marry him. Do not marry him, 
but entreat him, my dear, to fetch back Foma Fomitch. Nastasya 
Yevgrafovna, darling! I will give up everything, I will sacrifice every­
thing if only you will not marry him. Old as I am, I have not spent 
everything, I had a linle left me when my poor husband died. It's all 
yours, my dear, I will give you everything, and Yegorushka will give 
you something too, but do not lay me living in my grave, beg him 
to bring back Foma Fomitch." 
And the old woman would have gone on wailing and drivelling if 
Miss Perepelitsyn and all the lady companions had not, with shrieks 
and moans, rushed to lift her up, indignant that she should be on her 
knees before a hired governess. Nastenka was so frightened that she 
could hardly stand, while Miss Perepelitsyn positively shed tears of 
fury. 
"You will be the death of your mamma," she screamed at my uncle. 
"You will be the death of her. And you, Nastasya Yevgrafovna, ought 
not to make dissension between mother and son ; the Lord has for­
bidden it . . . .  " 
"Anna Nilovna, hold your tongue!" cried my uncle. "I have put up 
with enough! "  
"Yes, and I have had enough to put up with from you too. Why 
do you reproach me with my friendless position ? It is easy to insult 
the friendless. I am not your slave yet. I am the daughter of a major 
myself. You won't see me long in your house, this very day . . .  I shall 
be gone . . . .  
" 
But my uncle did not hear; he went up to Nastenka and with rev­
erence took her by the hand. 

780 
The Short Novels of Vostoevsky 
"Nastasya Yevgrafovna! You have heard my offer?" he said, looking 
at her with anguish, almost with despair. 
"No, Yegor Ilyitch, no! We had better give it up," said Nastenka, 
utterly dejected too. "It is all nonsense," she said, pressing his hand 
and bursting into tears. "You only say this because of yesterday . . .  
but it cannot be. You see that yourself. We have made a mistake, 
Yegor Ilyitch . . . .  But I shall always think of you as my benefactor 
and . . .  I shall pray for you, always, always! . . .  " 
At this point tears choked her. My poor uncle had evidently foreseen 
this answer; he did not even think of protesting, of insisting. He 
listened, bending down to her, still holding her hand, crushed and 
speechless. There were tears in his eyes. 
"I told you yesterday," Nastya went on, "that I could not be your 
wife. You see that I am not wanted here . . .  and I foresaw all this 
long ago; your mamma will not give you her blessing . . .  others too. 
Though you would not regret it afterwards, because you are the most 
generous of men, yet you would be made miserable through me . . .  
with your soft-heartedness . . .  
" 
"Just because of your soft-heartedness! Just because you are so soft­
lzearted! That's it, Nastenka, that's it!" chimed in her old father, who 
was standing on the other side of her chair. "That's just it, that's just 
the right word." 
"I don't want to bring dissension into your house on my account," 
Nastenka went on. "And don't be uneasy about me, Yegor Ilyitch; no 
one will interfere with me, no one will insult me . . .  I am going to my 
father's . . .  this very day .
.
•
.
 We had better say good-bye, Yegor 
Ilyitch . . . .  " 
And poor Nastenka dissolved into tears again. 
"N astosya Y evgrafovna! Surely this is not your final answer?" said 
my uncle, looking at her in unutterable despair. "Say only one word 
and I will sacrifice everything for you! . . .  
" 
"It is final, it is final, Yegor Ilyitch . . .  " Yezhc:vikin put in abr.:1in, 
"and she has explained it all very well to you, as I must own I did not 
expect her to. You are a very soft-hearted man, Y egor Ilyitch, yes, very 
soft-hearted, and you have graciously done us a great honour! A great 
honour, a great honour! . . .  But aU the same we are not a match for 
you, Yegor Ilyitch. You ought to have a bride, Y egor Ilyitch, who 
would be wealthy and of high rank, and a great beauty and with a 
voice too, who would walk about your rooms all in diamonds and 
ostrich feathers . . . .  Then perhaps Foma Fomitch would make a little 
concession and give his blessing! And you will bring Foma Fomitch 

The Jriend of the Jamily 
781 
back! It was no use, no use your insulting him. It was from virtue, you 
know, from excess of fervour that he said too much, you know. You 
will say yourself that it was through his virtue-you will see! A most 
worthy man. And here he is getting wet through now. It would be 
better to fetch him back now . . . .  For you will have to fetch him back, 
you know . . . .  
" 
"Fetch him back, fetch him back!" shrieked Madame la Generale. 
"What he says is right, my dear! . . .  " 
"Yes," Y ezhevikin went on. "Here your illustrious parent has upset 
herself about nothing . . . .  Fetch him back! And Nastya and I mean­
while will be on the march . . . .  
" 
"Wait a minute, Yevgraf Larionitch!" cried my uncle, "I entreat you. 
There is one thing more must be said, Yevgraf, one thing only . . . .  " 
Saying this, he walked away, sat down in an arm-chair in the corner, 
bowed his head, and put his hands over his eyes as though he were 
thinking over something. 
At that moment a violent clap of thunder sounded almost directly 
over the house. The whole building shook. Madame Ia Generale gave 
a scream, Miss Perepelitsyn did the same, the lady companions, and 
with them Mr. Bahtcheyev, all stupefied with terror, crossed themselves. 
"Holy saint, Elijah the prophet!" five or six voices murmured at once. 
The thunder was followed by such a downpour that it seemed as 
though a whole lake were suddenly being emptied upon Stepan­
tchikovo. 
"And Foma Fomitch, what will become of him now out in the 
fields?" piped Miss Perepelitsyn. 
"Yegorushb, fetch him back!" Madame Ia Generale cried in a voice 
of despair, and she rushed to the door as though crazy. Her attendant 
ladies held her back ; they surrounded her, comforted her, whimpered, 
squealed. It was a perfect Bedlam! 
"He went off with nothing over his coat. If he had only taken an 
overcoat with him!" Miss Perepelitsyn went on. "He did not take an 
umbrella either. He will be struck by lightning! . . .  " 
"He will certainly be struck!" Bahtcheyev chimed in. "And he will 
be soaked with rain afterwards, too." 
"You might hold your tongue!" I whispered to him. 
"Why, he is a man, I suppose, or isn't he?" Bahtcheyev answered 
wrathfully. "He is not a dog. I bet you wouldn't go out of doors 
yourself. Come, go and have a bath for your plaisir." 
Foreseeing how it might end and dreading the possibility1 I went 
up to my uncle, who sat as though chained to his chair. 

782 
'1 he Short Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
"Uncle," I said, bending down to his ear, "surely you won't consent 
to bring Foma Fomitch back? Do understand that that would be the 
height of unseemliness, at any rate as long as Nastasya Yevgrafovna 
is here." 
"My dear," answered my uncle, raising his head and looking at me 
resolutely, "I have been judging myself at this moment and I know 
what I ought to do. Don't be uneasy, there shall be no offence to 
Nastenka, I will see to that . . . .  " 
He got up from his seat and went to his mother. 
"Mamma," he said, "don't worry yourself, I will bring Foma Fomitch 
back, I will overtake him; he cannot have gone far yet. But I swear 
he shall come back only on one condition, that here publicly in the 
presence of all who were witnesses of the insult he should acknowledge 
how wrong he has been, and solemnly beg the forgiveness of this noble 
young lady. I will secure that, I will make him do it! He shall not 
cross the threshold of this house without it! I swear, too, mamma, 
solemnly, that if he consents to this of his own free will, I shall be 
ready to fall at his feet, and will give him anything, anything I can, 
without injustice to my children. I myself will renounce everything 
from this very day. The star of my happiness has set. I shall leave 
Stepantchikovo. You must all live here calmly and happily. I am going 
back to my regiment, and in the turmoil of war, on the field of battle, 
I will end my despairing days . . . .  Enough! I am going!" 
At that moment the door opened, and Gavrila, soaked through and 
incredibly muddy, stood facing the agitated company. 
"What's the matter ? Where have you come from ? Where is Foma?" 
cried my uncle, rushing up to Gavrila. 
Every one followed him, and with eager curiosity crowded round 
the old man, from whom dirty water was literally trickling in streams. 
Shrieks, sighs, exclamations accompanied every word Gavrila uttered. 
"I left him at the birch copse, a mile away," he began in a tearful 
voice. "The horse took fright at the lightning and bolted into the ditch." 
"Well? . . .  " cried my uncle. 
"The cart was upset 
.
.
.
•
 " 
"Well? . . .  and Foma?" 
"He fell into the ditch." 
"And then ? Tell us, you tantalizing old man!" 
"He bruised his side and began crying. I unharnessed the horse, got 
on him and rode here to tell you." 
"And Foma remained there?" 

The Jriend of the Jamily 
783 
"He got up and went on with his stick," Gavrila concluded; then 
he heaved a sigh and bowed his head. 
The tears and sobs of the tender sex were indescribable. 
"Polkan!" cried my uncle, and he flew out of the room. Polkan was 
brought, my uncle leapt on him barebacked, and a minute later the 
thud of the horse's hoofs told us that the pursuit of Foma Fomitch had 
begun. My uncle had actually galloped off without his cap. 
The ladies ran to the windows. Among the sighs and groans were 
heard words of advice. There was talk of a hot bath, of Foma Fomitch 
being rubbed with spirits, of some soothing drink, of the fact that 
Foma Fomitch "had not had a crumb of bread between his lips all day 
and that he is wet through on an empty stomach." Miss Perepelitsyn 
found his forgotten spectacles in their case, and the find produced an 
extraordinary effect : Madame la Generale pounced on them with tears 
and lamentations, and still keeping them in her hand, pressed up to 
the window again to watch the road. The suspense reached the utmost 
pitch of intensity at last. In another corner Sashenka was trying to 
comfort Nastya; they were weeping in each other's arms. Nastenka 
was holding Ilyusha's hand and kissing him from time to time. Ilyusha 
was in Roods of tears, though he did not yet know why. Yezhevikin 
and Mizintchikov were talking of something aside. I fancied that 
Bahtcheyev was looking at the girls as though he were ready to blubber 
himself. I went up to him. 
"No, my good sir," he said to me, "Foma Fomitch may leave here 
one day perhaps, but the time for that has not yet come; they haven't 
got gold-horned bulls for his chariot yet. Don't worry yourself, sir, 
he'll drive the owners out of the house and stay there himself!" 
The storm was over, and Mr. Bahtcheyev had evidently changed his 
VIews. 
All at once there was an outcry: "They are bringing him, they are 
bringing him," and the ladies ran shrieking to the door. Hardly ten 
minutes had passed since my uncle set off; one would have thought 
it would have been impossible to bring Foma Fomitch back so quickly; 
but the enigma was very simply explained later on. When Foma Porn­
itch had let Gavrila go he really had "set off walking wiLh his stick," 
but finding himself in complete solitude in the midst of the storm, the 
thunder, and the pouring rain, he was ignominiously panic-stricken, 
turned back towards Stepantchikovo and ran after Gavrila. He was 
already in the village when my uncle came upon him. A passing cart 
was stopped at once; some peasants ran up and put the unresisting 
Foma Fomitch into it. So they conveyed him straight to the open arms 

784 
The Short N.ot1ds of 7Jostoetls/(y 
of Madame Ia Generale, who was almost beside herself with horror 
when she saw the condition he was in. He was even muddier and 
wetter than Gavrila. There was a terrific flurry and bustle, they wanted 
at once to drag him upstairs to change his linen; there was an outcry 
for elder-flower tea and other invigorating beverages, they scurried in 
all directions without doing anything sensible; they all talked at once . 
. . . But Foma seemed to notice nobody and nothing. He was led 
in, supported under the arms. On reaching his easy<hair, he sank 
heavily into it and closed his eyes. Some one cried out that he was 
dying; a terrible howl was raised, and Falaley was the loudest of al, 
trying to squeeze through the crowd of ladies up to Foma Fomitch to 
kiss his hand at once . . . .  
[ v ] 
FOMA FO}.fiTCH ;\lAKES EVERY ONE HAPPY 
WHERE have they brought me?" Foma articulated at last, in 
the voice of a man dying in a righteous cause. 
"Damnable humbug!" Mizimchikov whispered beside me. "As 
though he didn't see where he had been brought! Now he will give us 
a Ene exhibition!" 
"You are among us, Foma, you are in your own circle!" cried my 
uncle. "Don't give way, calm yourself! And really, Foma, you had 
better change your things, or you wiU be ill . . . .  And won't you take 
something to restore you, eh ? Just something . . .  a little glass of some-
thing to warm you . . . .  " 
"I could drink a little Malaga," Foma moaned, closing his eyes again. 
".Malaga? I am not sure there is any," my uncle said, anxiously 
looking towards Praskovya Ilyinitchna. 
"To be sure there is!" the latter answered. "There are four whole 
bottles left." And jingling her keys she ran to fetch the Malaga, 
fonowed by exclamations of the ladies, who were clinging to Foma 
like flies round jam. On the other hand, Mr. Bahtcheyev was indignant 
in the extreme. 
"He wants Malaga!" he grumbled almost aloud. "And asks for a 
wine that no one drinks. Who drinks Malaga nowadays but rascals 
like him? Tfoo, you confounded fellow! What am I standing here 
for? What am I waiting for?" 
"Foma," my uncle began, stumbling over every word, "you see now 

7' h| Jri%nd of the Jamily 
i85 
•
.
.
 when you are rested and are with us again . . .  that is, I meant to 
say, Foma, that I understand how accusing, so to say, the most inno­
cent of beings . . .  
" 
"Where is it, my innocence, where?" Foma interrupted, as though 
he were feverish and in delirium. "\Vhere are my golden days? Where 
art thou, my golden childhood, when innocent and lovely I ran about 
the fields chasing the spring butterflies? Where are those days? Give 
me back my innocence, give it me back! . . .  " 
And Foma, Ringing wide his arms, turned to each one of us in 
succession as though his innocence were in somebody's pocket. 
Bahtcheyev was ready to explode with wrath. 
"Ech, so that's what he wants!" he muttered in a fury. "Give him 
his innocence! Does he want to kiss it, or what? Most likely he was 
as great a villain when he was a boy as he is now! I'll take my oath 
he was." 
"Fornal" . . .  my uncle was beginning again. 
"Where, where are they, those days when I still had faith in love 
and loved mankind?" cried Foma; "when I embraced man and wept 
upon his bosom ? But now where am I ?  Where am I ?" 
"You are with us, Foma, calm yourself," cried my uncle. "This is 
what I wanted to say to you, Foma . . . .  " 
"You might at least keep silent now," hissed Miss Perepelitsyn, with 
a spiteful gleam in her viperish eyes. 
"Where am I?" Foma went on. "Who are about me? They are bulls 
and buffaloes turning their horns against me. Life, what art thou? If 
one lives one is dishonoured, disgraced, humbled, crushed; and when 
the earth is scattered on one's coffin, only then men will remember 
one and pile a monument on one's por bones!" 
"Holy saints, he is talking about monuments!" whispered Yezhevi­
kin, clasping his hands. 
"Oh, do not put up a monument to me," cried Foma, "do not! I 
don't need monuments. Raise up a monument to me in your hearts, 
I want nothing more, nothing, nothing more!" 
"Foma," my uncle interposed, "enough, calm yourself! There is no 
need to talk about monuments. Only listen. You see, Foma, I under­
stand that you were perhaps, so to say, inspired with righteous fervour 
when you reproached me, but you were carried away, Foma, beyond 
the limit of righteousness-! assure you you were mistaken, Foma . • • •  
" 
"Oh, will you give over?" hissed Miss Perepelitsyn again. "Do you 
want to murder the poor man because he is in your hands? . . . " 
After Miss Perepelitsyn, Madame Ia Generale made a stir, and all 

786 
'file Short Novels of Vostoevsky 
her suite followed her example; they all waved their hands at my 
uncle to stop him. 
"Anna Nilovna, be silent yourself, I know what I am saying!" my 
uncle answered firmly. "This is a sacred matter! A question of honour 
and justice. Fornal you are a sensible man, you must at once ask the 
forgiveness of the virtuous young lady whom you have insulted." 
"What young lady? What young lady have I insulted ?" Foma ar­
ticulated in amazement, staring round at every one as though he had 
entirely forgotten everything that had happened, and did not know 
what was the matter. 
"Yes, Foma; and if now of your own accord you frankly acknowledge 
you have done wrong, I swear, Foma, I will fall at your feet and 
then .
.
.
 " 
"Whom have I insulted?" wailed Foma. "What young lady? Where 
is she? Where is the young lady? Recall to me something about the 
young lady! . . .  
" 
At that instant, Nastenka, confused and frightened, went up to 
Y egor Ilyitch and pulled him by his sleeve. 
"No. Yegor Ilyitch, leave him alone, there is no need of an apology. 
What is the object of it all?" she said in an imploring voice. "Give 
it up!" 
"Ah, now I begin to remember," cried Foma. "My God, I under­
stand. Oh, help me, help me to remember!" he implored, apparently 
in great excitement. "Tell me, is it true that I was turned out of this 
house, like the mangiest of curs? Is it true that I was struck by light­
ning? Is it true that I was kicked down the steps? Is it true? Is it true?" 
The weeping and wailing of the fair sex were the most eloquent reply 
to Foma Fomitch. 
"Yes, yes," he repeated, "I remember . . .  I remember now that after 
the lightning and my fall I was running here, pursued by the thunder, 
to do my duty and then vanish for ever! Raise me up! Weak as I may 
be now, I must do my duty." 
He was at once helped up from his chair. Foma stood in the attitude 
of an orator and stretched out his hands. 
"Colonel," he cried, "now I have quite recovered. The thunder has 
not extinguished my intf'llectual capacities; it has left, it is true, a 
deafness in my right ear, due perhaps not so much to the thunder as 
to my fall down the steps, but what of that? And what does any one 
care about Foma's right ear!" 
Foma threw such a wealth of mournful irony into these last words, 
and accompanied them with such a pathetic smile, that the groans of 

r he Jriend of the Jamily 
787 
the deeply moved ladies resounded again. They all looked with re­
proach, and some also with fury, at my uncle, who was beginning to 
be crushed by so unanimous an expression of public opinion. Mizin­
tchikov, with a curse, walked away to the window. Bahtcheyev kept 
prodding me more and more violently with his elbow; he could hardly 
stand still. 
"Now listen to my whole confession!" yelled Foma, turning upon 
all a proud and determined gaze, "and at the same time decide the 
fate of poor Opiskin! Yegor Ilyitch, for a long time past I have been 
watching over you, watching over you with a tremor at my heart, and 
I have seen everything, everything, while you were not suspecting that 
I was watching over you. Colonel! Perhaps I was mistaken, but I 
knew your egoism, your boundless vanity, your phenomenal sensuality, 
and who would blame me for trembling for the honour of an innocent 
young person?" 
"Foma, Fornal . . .  you need not enlarge on it, Foma," cried my 
uncle, looking uneasily at Nastenka's suffering face. 
"\Vhat troubled me was not so much the innocence and trustfulness 
of the person in question as her inexperience," Foma went on, as 
though he had not heard my uncle's warning. "I saw that a tender 
feeling was blossoming in her heart, like a rose in spring and I could 
not help recalling Petrarch's saying, 'Innocence is often but a hair's 
breadth from ruin.' I sighed, I groaned, and though I was ready to 
shed the last drop of my blood to safeguard that pure pearl of maiden­
hood, who could answer to me for you, Yegor Ilyitch? I know the 
unbridled violence of your passions, and knowing that you are ready 
to sacrifice everything for their momentary gratification, I was plunged 
in the depths of alarm and apprehension for the fate of the noblest 
of girls . . . .  
" 
"Fornal Could you really imagine such a thing?" cried my uncle. 
"With a shudder at my heart I watched over you. And if you want 
to know what I have been suffering, go to Shakespeare: in his 
Haml΃t he describes the state of my soul. I became suspicious and ter­
rible. In my anxiety, in indignation, I saw everything in the blackest 
colour and that not the 'black colour' sung of in the well-known song­
I can assure you. That was the cause of the desire you saw in me to 
remove her far away from this house: I wanted to save her; that was 
why you have seen me of late irritable and bitter against the whole 
human race. Oh! who will reconcile me with humanity? I feel that 
I was perhaps over-exacting and unjust to your guests, to your nephew, 
to Mr. Bahtcheyev, when I expected from him a knowledge of astron-

788 
'f he Short Novels of 'DostoevskY 
omy; but who will blame me for my state of mind at the time? Going 
to Shakespeare again, I may say that the future looked to my imagina­
tion like a gloomy gulf of unfathomed depth with a crocodile lying 
at the bottom. I felt that it was my duty to prevent disaster, that I 
was destined, appointed for that purpose-and what happened? You 
did not understand the generous impulse of my heart, and have been 
repaying me all this time with anger, with ingratitude, with jeers, 
with slights . . .  " 
"Foma! If that is so .
•
•
 of course I feel . . .  " cried my uncle, in 
extreme agitation. 
"If you really do fed it, Colonel, be so kind as to listen and not 
interrupt me. I will continue. My whole fault lay in the fact, therefore, 
that I was too much troubled over the fate and the happiness of this 
child; for compared with you she is a child. It was the truest love for 
humanity that turned me all this time into a fiend of wrath and sus­
picion. I was ready to f;ᐇll on people and tear them to pieces. And 
you know, Yegor Ilyitch, all your actions as though of design, made 
me more suspicious every hour, and confirmed my fears. You know, 
Yegor Ilyitch, when you showered your gold upon me yesterday to 
drive me from you, I thought :  'He is driving away in my person his 
conscience, so as more e:l.ily to perpetrate this wickedness . . .  .' " 
"Foma, Foma, can you have thought that yesterday?" my uncle cried 
ᐆut with horror. "Merciful heavens! and I hadn't the faintest suspi­
:ion . .  .'' 
"Heaven itself inspired those suspicions, .. Foma went on. "And judge 
for yourself: what could I suppose when chance led me that very 
evening to that fatal sc:H in the garden ? What were my feelings at 
that moment-oh, my God!-when I saw with my own eyes that all 
my suspicions \\'ere justified in the most lhgrant manner? But I had 
still one hope left, a faint one indeed, but still it WJS a hope, and--{his 
morning you shattered it into du!:t and ashes! You sent me your letter, 
you alleged your intention to marry; you besought me not to make it 
public . . . .  'But why?' I wondered. 'Why did he write now after I 
have found him out and not before? Why did h:: not run to me before, 
happy and comely-for love adorns the countenancc-\·,hy did he not 
fly to my embrace, why did he not weep upon my bosom tears of 
infinite bliss and tell me all about it, all Jbout it?' Or am I a crocodile 
who would have devoured you instead of giving you good advice? 
Or am I some loathsome beetle who would only have bitten you and 
not assisted your happiness? 'Am I his friend or the most repulsive 
of insects?' that was the question I asked myself this morning. 'With 

T lze Jriend of tlze Jamily 
789 
what object,' I asked myself, 'with what object did he invite his nephew 
from Petersburg and try to betroth him to this girl, if not to deceive 
us and his frivolous nephew, and meanwhile in secret to persist in his 
criminal designs?' Yes, Colonel, if any one confirmed in me the 
thought that your mutual love was criminal, it was you yourself and 
you only! What is more, you have behaved like a criminal to this young 
girl; for through your tactlessness and selfish mistrustfulness you have 
exposed her, a modest and high-principled girl, to slander and odious 
suspicions." 
My uncle stood silent with bowed head, Foma's eloquence was evi­
dently getting the better of his convictions, and he was beginning to 
regard himself as a complete criminal. Madame Ia Generale and her 
followers were listening to Foma in awestruck silence, while Miss 
Perepelitsyn looked with spiteful triumph at poor Nastenka. 
"Overwhelmed, nervously exhausted and shattered,'' Foma went on, 
"I locked myself in this morning and prayed, and the Lord showed 
me the right path. At last I decided: for the last time and publicly to 
put you to the test. I may have gone about it with too much fervour, 
I may have given way too much to my indignation; but for my well­
meaning effort, you Aung me out of the window! As I fell out of the 
window I thought to myself: 'This is how virtue is rewarded all the 
world over.' Then I struck the earth, and I scarcely remember what 
happened to me afterwards." 
Shrieks and groans interrupted Foma Fomitch at this tragic recol­
kction. Madame Ia Generale made a dash at him with a bottle of 
Malaga in her hand, which she had just snatched from Praskovya 
Ilyinitchna, but Foma majestically waved aside the hand and the 
Malaga and Madame Ia Generale herself. 
"Let me alone,'' he shouted; "I must finish. What happened after 
my fall-I don't know. I know one thing only, that now, wet through 
and on the verge of fever, I am standing here to secure your mutual 
happiness. Colonel! From many signs which I do not wish now to 
particularize, I am convinced at last that your love was pure and even 
exalted, though at the same time criminally distrustful. Beaten, humili­
ated, suspected of insulting a young lady in defence of whose honour 
I am ready like a mediaeval knight to shed the last drop of my blood 
I have made up my mind to show you how Foma Opiskin revenges 
an injury. Give me your hand, Colonel!" 
"With pleasure, Fornal" cried my uncle. "And since you have now 
fully cleared the honour of this young lady from every aspersion, why 
. . .  of course . . .  here is my hand, Foma, together with my regrets . . .  
.'' 

790 
7' he Slzort Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
And my uncle gave him his hand warmly, not yet suspecting what 
was to come of it. 
"Give me your hand too," went on Foma in a faint voice, parting 
the crowd of ladies who were pressing round him and appealing to 
Nastenka. 
Nastenka was taken aback and confused, she looked timidly at Foma. 
"Approach, approach, my sweet child! It is essential for your happi­
ness," Foma added caressingly, still holding my uncle's hand in his. 
"What's he up to now? "  said Mizintchikov. 
Nastenka, frightened and trembling, went slowly up to Foma and 
timidly held out her hand. 
Foma took her hand and put it in my uncle's. 
"I join your hands and bless you," he pronounced in the most solemn 
voice. "And if the blessing of a poor sorrow-stricken sufferer may 
avail you, be happy. This is how Foma Opiskin takes his revenge! 
Hurrah!" 
The amazement of every one was immense. The conclusion was so 
unexpected that every one was struck dumb. Madame Ia Generale 
stood rooted to the spot, with her mouth open Jnd the bottle of Malaga 
in her hand. Miss Percpclitsyn turned pale Jnd trembled with fury. 
The lady compJnions clasped their hands and SJt petrified in their 
seats. My uncle trembled and tried to say something, but could not. 
NJstya turned deathly pale :md timidly murmured that "it could not 
be" . . .  but it was too late. Bahtcheyev was the first-we must do him 
that credit-to second Foma's hurrah. I followed suit, and after me 
Sashenka shouted at the top of her ringing voice as she flew to em­
brace her father; then Ilyusha joined in, then Yezhevikin, and last of 
all Mizintchikov. 
"Hurrah!" Foma cried once more; "hurrah ! And on your knees, 
children of my heart, on your knees before the tenderest of mothers! 
Ask her blessing, and if need be I will kneel before her by your 
side . . . .  " 
My uncle and Nastya, not looking at each other, and seeming not 
to understand what was being done to them, fell on their knees before 
Madame Ia Generale, the whole company flocked round them; but the 
old lady seemed to be stupefied, not knowing what to do. Foma came 
to the rescue at this j uncture too; he plumped down himself before his 
patroness. This at once dispelled all her hesitation. Dissolvmg into 
tears. she said at last that she consented. My uncle jumped up and 
clasped FomJ in his arms. 

'The Jriend of the ]amily 
791 
"Foma, Foma! . . .  " he began, but his voice broke and he could not 
go on. 
"Champagne!" bawled Mr. Bahtcheyev. "Hurrah!" 
"No, sir, not champagne," Miss Perepelitsyn caught him up. She 
had by now recovered herself, and realized the position and at the 
same time its consequences. "Put up a candle to God, pray to the holy 
image and bless with the holy image, as is done by all godly people . . • .  " 
At once all flew to carry out the sage suggestion; a fearful bustlf.J 
followed. They had to light the candle. Mr. Bahtcheyev drew up a 
chair and got up on it to put the candle before the holy image, but; 
immediately broke the chair and came down heavily on the floor­
still on his feet, however. Not in the least irritated by this, he at oneᐈ 
respectfully made way for Miss Perepelitsyn. The slender Miss Pere 
pelitsyn had clone the job in a flash : the candle was lighted. The nun 
and the lady companions began crossing themselves and bowing dowr. 
to the ground. They took down the image of the Saviour and carried 
it to Madame Ia Gcncrale. My uncle and Nastya went down on theiv 
knees again and the ceremony was carried out under the pious instruc. 
tions of Miss Perepelitsyn, who was saying every minute: "Bow down 
to her feet, kiss the image, kiss your mamma's hand." Mr. Bahtcheyev 
thought himself hound to kiss the image after the betrothed couple, 
and at the same time he kissed the hand of Madame Ia Generale. 
"Hurrah!" he shouted again. "Come, now, we will have some cham­
pagne." 
Every one, however, was delighted. Madame Ia Generale was weep­
ing, but it was now with tears of joy. Foma's blessing had at once 
made the union sanctified and suitable, and what mattered most to her 
was that Foma Fomitch had distinguished himself and that now he 
would remain with her for ever. All the lady companions, in appear­
ance at least, shared the general satisfaction. My uncle at one moment 
was on his knees kissing his mother's hands, at the next was flying to 
embrace me, Bahtcheyev, Mizintchikov and Yezhevikin. Ilyusha he 
almost smothered in his embraces. Sasha ran to hug and kiss Nastenka. 
Praskovya Ilyinitchna dissolved into tears. Bahtcheyev, noticing this, 
went up to kiss her hand. Poor old Yezhevikin was completely over­
come, he was weeping in a corner and was wiping his eyes with the 
same check handkerchief. In another corner Gavrila was whimpering 
and gazing reverently at Foma Fomitch, and Falaley was sobbing 
loudly and going up to each of the company in turn, kissing his hand. 
All were overwhelmed with feeling; no one yet had begun to talk, 
or explain things; it seemed as though everything had been said; notb-

792 
'The Short N.ovds of 7Josto(vskJ 
ing was heard but joyful exclamations. No one understood yet how all 
this had been so quickly arranged. They knew one thing only, that 
it had all been arranged by Foma Fomitch, and that this was a solid 
fact which could not be changed. 
But not five minutes had passed after the general rejoicing when 
suddenly Tatyana Ivanovna made her appearance among us. In what 
way, by what intuition, could she, sitting in her own room upstairs, 
have so quickly divined love and marriage below ? She fluttered in 
with a radiant face, with tears of joy in her eyes, in a fascinating and 
elegant get-up (she had had time to change her dress before coming 
down), and flew straight to embrace Nastenka with loud exclamations. 
"Nastenka, Nastenka! You loved him and I did not know!" she 
cried. "Goodness! They loved each other, they suffered in silence! 
They have been persecuted. What a romance! Nastya, darling, tell me 
the whole truth : do you really love this crazy fellow?" 
By way of reply Nastya hugged and kissed her. 
"My goodness, what a fascinating romance!" And Tatyana Ivanovna 
clapped her hands in delight. "Nastya, listen, my angel: all these men, 
all, every one, are ungrateful wretches, monsters, and not worthy of 
our love. But perhaps he is the best of them. Come to me, you crazy 
fellow!" she cried, addressing my uncle and clutching him by the 
arm. "Are you really in love? Are you really capable of loving? Lok 
at me, I want to look into your eyes, I want to see whether those eyes 
are lying or not? No, no, they are not lying; there is the light of love 
in them. Oh, how happy I am! Nastenka, my dear, you are not rich­
I shall mJke you a present of thirty thousand roubles. Take it, for 
God"s sake. I don't want it, I don't want it; I shall have plenty left. 
No, no, no," she cried, waving her hand as she saw Nastenka was 
meaning to refuse. "Don't you speak, Yegor Ilyitch, it is not your 
afhir. No, Nastya, I had made up my mind already to give you the 
money; I have been wanting to make you a present for a long time, 
and was only waiting for you to be in love . . . .  I shall see your happi­
ness. You will wound me if you don't take it; I shall cry, Nastya. No, 
no, no and nol" 
Tatyana Ivanovna was so overjoyed that for the moment at least i: 
was impossible, it would have been a pity indeed, to cross her. They 
could not bring themselves to do it, but put it off. She flew to kiss 
Madame Ia Crt:nerale, Miss Perepditsyn and all of us. Mr. Bahtcheyev 
squeezed his way up to her very respectfully and asked to kiss her 
hand. 

'1 he Jriend of the Jamily 
793 
"My dear, good girl! Forgive an old fool like me for what happened 
this morning. I didn't know what a heart of gold you had." 
"Crazy fellow! I know you," Tatyana lvanovna lisped with gleeful 
playfulness. She gave Mr. Bahtcheyev a flick on the nose with her 
glove, and swishing against him with her gorgeous skirts, fluttered 
away like a zephyr. 
The fat man stepped aside respectfully. 
"A very worthy young lady!" he said with feeling. "They have 
stuck a nose on to the German! You know!" he whispered to me 
confidentially, looking at me joyfully. 
"What nose? What German ?" I asked in surprise. 
"Why, the one I ordered, the German kissing his lady's hand while 
she is wiping away a tear with her handkerchief. Only yesterday my 
Yevdokem mended it; and when we came back from our expedition 
this morning I sent a man on horseback to fetch it . . . .  They will soon 
be bringing it. A superb thing." 
"Fornal" cried my uncle in a frenzy of delight. "It is you who have 
made our happiness. How can I reward you?" 
"Nohow, Colonel," replied Foma, with a sanctimonious air. "Con­
tinue to pay no attention to me and be happy without Foma." 
He was evidently piqued; in the general rejoicing he seemed, as it 
were, forgotten. 
"It is all due to our joy, Foma," cried my uncle. "I don't know 
whether I am on my head or my feet. Listen, Foma, I have insulted 
you. My whole blood is not enough to atone for my wrong to you, 
and that is why I say nothing and do not even beg your pardon. But 
if ever you have need of my head, my life, if you ever want some one 
to throw himself over a precipice for your sake, call upon me, and you 
shall see . . . .  I will say nothing more, Foma." 
And my uncle waved his hand, fully recognizing the impossibility 
of adding anything that could more strongly express his fᐉeling. He 
only gazed at Foma with grateful eyes full of tears. 
"See what an angel he is!" Miss Perepelitsyn piped in her turn in 
adulation of Foma. 
"Yes, yes," Sashenka put in. "I did not know you were such a good 
man, Foma Fomitch, and I was disrespectful to you. But forgive me, 
Foma Fomitch, and you may be sure I will love you with all my heart. 
If you knew how much I respect you now!" 
"Yes, Foma," Bahtcheyev chimed in. "Forgive an old fool like me 
too. I didn't know you, I didn't know you. You are not merely a 
learned man, Foma, but also-simply a hero. My whole house is at 

794 
T lzc Short N.ovc/s of 'Dostoevsky 
your service. But there, the best of all would be, if you would come to 
me the day after to-morrow, old man, with Madame la Generale too, 
and the betrothed couple-the whole company, in fact. And we will 
have a dinner, I tell you. I won't praise it beforehand, but one thing 
I can say, you will find everything you want unless it is bird's milk. 
I give you my word of honour." 
In the midst of these demonstrations, Nastenka, too, went up to 
Foma Fomitch and without further words warmly embraced him and 
kissed him. 
"Foma Fomitch," she said, "you have been a true friend to us, you 
have done so much for us, that I don't know how to repay you for it 
all; but I only know that I will be for you a most tender and respectful 
sister . . . .  
" 
She could say no more, she was choked by tears. Foma kissed her 
on the head and grew tearful. 
"My children, the children of my heart," he said. "Live and prosper, 
and in moments of happiness think sometimes of the poor exile. For 
myself, I will only say that misfortune is perhaps the mother of virtue. 
That, I believe, is said by Gogo!, a frivolous writer; but from whom 
one may sometimes glean fruitful thoughts. Exile is a misfortune. I 
shall wander like a pilgrim with my stafT over the face of the earth, 
and who knows?-perchance my troubles will make me more righteous 
yet! That thought is the one consobtion left me!" 
"But . . .  where are you going, Foma?" my uncle asked in alarm. 
All were startled, and pressed round Foma. 
"\Vhy, do you suppose I can remain in your house after your be­
haviour this morning?" Foma inquired with extraordinary dignity. 
But he was not allowed to finish, outcries from all the company 
smothered his voice. They made him sit down in an easy<hair, they 
besought him, they shed tears over him, and I don't know what they 
didn't do. Of course he hadn't the faintest intention of leaving "this 
house," just as he had not earlier that morning, nor the day before, nor 
on the occasion when he had taken to digging in the garden. He 
knew now that they would reverently detain him, would clutch at 
him, especially since he had made them all happy, since they all had 
faith in him again and were ready to carry him on their shoulders and 
to consider it an honour and a happiness to do so. But most likely his 
cowardly return, when he was frightened by the storm, was rankling 
in his mind and egging him on to play the hero in some way. And 
above all, there was such a temptation to give himself airs; the oppor­
tunity of talking, of using fine phrases and laying it on thick, of blow-

'I lze Jriend of the Jamily 
795 
ing his own trumpet, was too good for any possibility of resisting the 
temptation. He did not resist it; he tore himself out of the grasp of 
those who held him. He asked for his staff, besought them to let him 
have his freedom, to let him wander out into the wide, wide world, 
declared that in tl1at house he had been dishonoured, beaten, that he 
had only come back to make every one happy, and, he asked, could he 
remain in this "house of ingratitude and eat soup, sustaining, perhaps, 
but seasoned with blows"? At last he left off struggling. He was 
reseated in his chair, but his eloquence was not arrested. 
"Have I not been insulted here?" he cried. "Have I not been taunted? 
Haven't you, you yourself, Colonel, have you not every hour pointed 
the finger of scorn and made the long nose of derision at me, like the 
ignorant children of the working-class in the streets of the town ? Yes, 
Colonel, I insist on that comparison, because if you have not clone so 
physically it has yet been a moral long nose, and in some cases a moral 
long nose is more insulting than a physical one. I say nothing of 
blows . . . .  " 
"Foma, Foma," cried my uncle, "do not crush me with these recol­
lections. I have told you already that all my blood is not enough to 
wash out the insults. Be magnanimous! Forgive, forget, and remain to 
contemplate our happiness! Your work, Foma . . .  " 
"I want to love my fellow-man, to love him," cried Foma, "and they 
won't give me him, they forbid me to love him, they take him from 
me. Give me, give me my fellow-man that I may love him! Where is 
that fellow-man? Where is he hidden? Like Diogenes with his candle, 
I have been looking for him all my life and cannot find him ; and I can 
love no one, to this day I cannot find the man. \Voe to him who has 
made me a hater of mankind! I cry: Give me my fellow-man that I 
may love him, and they thrust Falaley upon me! Am I to love Falaley? 
Do I want to love Falaley? Could I love Falaley, even if I wanted to? 
No. Why not ? Because he is Falaley. Why do I not love humanity? 
Because all on earth are Falaleys or like Falaley. I don't want Falaley, 
I hate Falaley, I spit on Falaley, I trample Falaley under my feet. And 
if I had to choose I would rather love Asmodeus than Falaley. Come 
here, come here, my everlasting torment, come here," he cried, sud­
denly addressing Falaley, who was in the most innocent way standing 
on tiptoe, looking over the crowd that was surrounding Foma Fomitch. 
"Come here. I will show you, Colonel," cried Foma, drawing towards 
him Falaley, who was almost unconscious with terror, "I will show 
you the truth of my words about the everlasting long nose and finger 
of scorn! Tell me, Falaley, and tell the truth: what did you dream 

796 
'I he Short Novels of 'DostoevskY 
about last night? Come, Colonel, you will see your handiwork! Come, 
Fa);·tley, tell us!" 
The poor boy, shaking with terror, turned despairing eyes about 
him, looking for some one to rescue him; but every one was in a 
tremor waiting for his answer. 
"Come, Falaley, I am waiting." 
Inste:.d of :.nswcring, Falaley screwed up his face, opened his mouth 
wide, and began bellowing like a calf. 
"Colonel! Do you see this stubbornness? Do you mean to tell me 
it's natural ? For the last time I ask you, Falaley, tell me: what dia you 
dream of last night ?" 
"0-of . . .  " 
"Say you dreamed of me," said Bahtcheyev. 
"Of your virtue, sir," Yezhevikin prompted in his other ear. 
Falaley merely looked about him. 
"0-of . . .  of your vir . . .  of a white bu-ull," he roared at last, and 
burst into scalding tears. 
Every one groaned. But Foma Fomitch was in a paroxysm of ex­
traordin:.ry magn:.nimity. 
"Anyway, I see your sincerity, Falaley," he said. "A sincerity I do 
not observe in others. God bless you! If you :.re purposely mocking at 
me with that dre:.m at the instigation of others, God will repay you 
and those others. If not, I respect your truthfulness; for even in the 
lowest of cre:.turcs like you it is my habit to discern the image and 
sembbnce of God . . . .  I forgive you, F:.lalcy. Embrace me, my children. 
I will rem:.in with you." 
"He will rem:.in!" they all cried in delight. 
"I will rem:.in :.nd I will forgive. Colonel, rew:.rd Falaley with some 
sugar, do not let him cry on such a day of happiness for :.11." 
I need h:.rdly say th:.t such magn:.nimity was thought :.stounding. 
To take so muc!J thought at such a moment and for whom ? For 
Falaley. My uncle flew to carry out his instruction in regard to the 
sugar. Immediately a silver sugar-basin-I don't know where it came 
from-appe:.red in the hands of Praskovya Ilyinitchna. My uncle was 
about to take out two pieces with a trembling hand, then three, then 
he dropped them, at last, seeing he was incapable of doing anything 
from excitement. 
"Ah!" he cried, "for a day like this! Hold out your coat, Falaley," 
and he poured into his coat all the contents of the sugar-basin. "That's 
for your truthfulness," he said, by way of edification. 

The Jriend of the Jamily 
797 
"Mr. Korovkin!" Vidoplyasov announced, suddenly appearing in 
the doorway. 
A slight flutter of consternation followed-Korovkin's visit was obvi­
ously ill-timed. They all looked inquiringly at my uncle. 
"Korovkin!" cried my uncle, in some embarrassment. "Of course I 
am delighted . . .  " he added, glancing timidly towards Foma; "but 
really I don't know whether to ask him in at such a moment. \Vhat 
do you think, Foma ?" 
"Oh, yes, why not," said Foma amicably. "Invite Korovkin too; let 
him, too, share in the general rejoicing." 
In short, Foma Fomitch was in an angelic frame of mind. 
"I most respectfully make bold to inform you," observed Vidoplyasov, 
"that the gentleman is not quite himself." 
"Not quite himself? How? What nonsense are you talking?" cried 
my uncle. 
"It is so, indeed; he is not quite in a sober condition." 
But before my uncle had time to open his mouth, flush red, and 
show his alarm and extreme embarrassment, the mystery was ex­
plained. Korovkin appeared in the doorway, pushed Vidoplyasov aside 
and confronted the astonished company. He was a short, thickset gen­
tleman of forty, with dark hair touched with grey and closely cropped, 
with a round purple face and little bloodshot eyes, wearing a high 
horsehair cravat, fastened at the back with a buckle, an extraordinarily 
threadbare swallow-tail coat covered with fluff and hay and disclosing 
a bad rent under the arm, and unspeakable trousers, and carrying an 
incredibly greasy cap which he was holding out at arm's length. This 
gentleman was completely drunk. Advancing into the middle of the 
room, he stood still, staggering, nodding his head as though he were 
pecking at something with his nose in drunken hesitation; then he 
slowly grinned from ear to ear. 
"Excuse me, ladies and gentlemen," he began, "I .
.
•
 er •
•
• " (here 
he gave a tug at his collar) "got 'em!" 
Madame Ia Generale immediately assumed an air of offended dig­
nity. Foma, sitting in his easy-chair, ironically looked the eccentric 
visitor up and down. Bahtcheyev stared at him in perplexity, through 
which some sympathy was, however, apparent. My uncle's embarrass­
ment was incredible; he was deeply distressed on Korovkin's account. 
"Korovkin," he began. "Listen." 
"Attendez!" Korovkin interrupted him. "Let me introduce myself: 
a child of nature 
.
•
.
.
 But what do I see? There are ladies here . . . .  
Why didn't you tell me, you rascal, that you had ladies here?" he 

798 
The Short N.otels of VostoetskJ 
added with a roguish smile. "Never mind! Don't be shy. Let us be 
presented to the fair sex. Charming ladies," he began, articulating with 
difficulty ;nd stumbling over every word, "you see a luckless mortal 
. . .  who . . .  and so on . . . .  The rest must remain unsaid . . . .  Musicians! 
A polka!" 
"Wouldn't you like a nap?" asked Mizintchikov, quietly going up 
to Korovkin. 
"A nap? You say that to insult me?" 
"Not at all. You know a little sleep is a good thing after a journey . . . .  " 
"Never!" Korovkin answered with indignation. "Do you think I am 
drunk ?-not a bit. But where do they sleep here?" 
"Come along, I'll take you at once." 
"\Vhere? In the coach-house? No, my lad, you won't take me in I 
I have spent a night there already . . . .  Lead the way, though. Why 
not go along with a good fellow . . . . I don't want a pillow. A military 
man does not want a pillow . . . .  But you produce a sofa for me, old 
man . . .  a sofa. And, I say," he added, stopping, "I see you are a jolly 
fellow; produce something else for me . . .  you know? A bit of the 
rummy, enough to drown a fly in, only enough for that, only one little 
glass, I mean." 
"Very well, very well!" answered Mizintchikov. 
"Very well. But you wait a bit, I must say good-bye. AdiJu. mJs­
dames and m®sd®mois®ll®s. You have, so to speak, smitten . . .  But 
there, never mind! We will talk about that afterwards . . .  only do 
wake me when it begins . . .  or even five minutes before it begins 
.
.
•
 
don't begin without me! Do you hear. Don't begin! . . .  " 
And the merry gentleman vanished behind Mizint.chikov. 
Every one was silent. The company had not got over their astonish­
ment. At last Foma without a word began noiselessly chuckling, his 
laughter grew into a guffaw. Seeing that, Madame Ia Generale, too, 
was amused, though the expression of insulted dignity still remained 
on her face. Irrepressible laughter arose on all sides. My uncle stood as 
though paralyzed, flushing almost to tears, and was for some time 
incapable of uttering a word. 
"Merciful heavens!" he brought out at last. "Who could have known 
this? But you know . . .  you know it might happen to any one. Foma, 
I assure you that he is a most straightforward, honourable man, and 
an extremely well-read man too, Foma . . .  you will see! . . .  
" 
"I do see, I do see," cried Foma, shaking with laughter; "extraordi­
narily well-read. Well-read is just the word." 

'I he Jri(nd of the Jamily 
799 
"How he can talk about railways!" Y ezhevikin observed in an 
undertone. 
"Foma," my ·uncle was beginning, but the laughter of all the com­
pany drowned his words. Foma Fomitch was simply in fits, and 
looking at him, my uncle began laughing too. 
"Well, what does it matter?" he said enthusiastically. "You are 
magnanimous, Foma, you have a great heart; you have made me 
happy . . .  you forgive Korovkin too." 
Nastenka was the only one who did not laugh. She looked with 
eyes full of love at her future husband, and looked as though she 
would say-
"How splendid, how kind you are, the most generous of men. and 
how I love you!" 
[ V l  ) 
CONCLUSION 
F OMA'S triumph was complete and beyond attack. Certainly 
without him nothing would have been settled, and the accomplished 
fact stifled all doubts and objections. The gratitude of those he had 
made happy was beyond all bounds. My uncle and Nastya waved me 
off when I attempted to drop a faint hint at the process by which 
Foma's consent to their marriage had been obtained. Sashenka cried: 
"Good, kind Foma Fomitch; I will embroider him a cushion in wool­
work!" and even reproached me for my hard-heartedness. I believe that 
Bahtcheyev in the fervour of his conversion would have strangled 
me if I had ventured to say anything disrespectful about Foma Fomitch. 
He followed Foma about like a little dog, gazed at him with devout 
reverence, and at every word the latter uttered he would exclaim : 
"You are a noble man, Foma. You are a learned man, Foma." As for 
Yezhevikin, he was highly delighted. The old man had for a long 
time past seen that Nastenka had turned Yegor Ilyitch's head, and 
from that time forward his one dream, waking and sleeping, was to 
bring about this marriage. He had clung to the idea to the last, and 
had only given it up when it had been impossible not to do so. Foma 
had changed the aspect of the affair. I need hardly say that in spite of 
his delight the old man saw through Foma; in short, it was clear that 
Foma Fomitch would be supreme in that household for ever, and that 
there would be no limit to his despotism. We all know that even the 

800 
7' he Short Novels of VostoeuskJ 
most unpleasant and ill-humoured people are softened, if only for a 
time, when their desires are gratified. Foma Fomitch, on the contrary, 
seemed to grow stupider when he was successful, and held his nose 
higher in the air than ever. Just before dinner, having changed all his 
clothes, he settled down in an arm<hair, summoned my uncle, and 
in the presence of the whole family began giving him another lecture. 
"Colonel," he began, "you are about to enter UfKm holy matrimony. 
Do you realize the obligation . . .  
" 
And so on and so on. Imagine ten pages of the size of the Journal 
des Debats, of the smallest print, filled with the wildest nonsense, in 
which there was absolutely nothing dealing with the duties of mar­
riage, but only the most shameful eulogies of the intellect, mildness, 
magnanimity, manliness and disinterestedness of himself, Foma Porn­
itch. Every one was hungry, they all wanted their dinners; but in spite 
of that no one dared to protest, and every one heard the twaddle 
reverently to the end. Even Bahtcheyev, in spite of his ravenous appe­
tite, sat without stirring, absolutely respectful. Gratified by his own 
eloquence, Foma Fomitch grew livelier, and even drank rather heavily 
at dinner, proposing the most extraordinary toasts. He proceeded to 
display his wit by being jocose, at the expense of the happy pair, of 
course. Everybody laughed and applauded. But some of the jokes 
were so gross and suggestive that even Bahtcheyev was embarrassed 
by them. At last Nastenka jumped up from the table and ran away, to 
the indescribable delight of Foma Fomitch, but he immediately pulled 
himself up. Briefly but in strong terms he dwelt upon Nastenka's 
virtues, and proposed a toast to the health of the absent one. My uncle, 
who a minute before had been embarrassed and unhappy, was ready 
to hug Foma Fomitch again. Altogether the betrothed pair seemed 
somewhat ashamed of each other and their happiness-and I noticed 
that they had not said one word to each other from the time of the 
blessing, they even seemed to avoid looking at one another. When 
they got up from dinner, my uncle vanished, I don't know where. 
I strolled out on to the terrace to look for him. There I found Foma 
sitting in an easy<hair, drinking coffee and holding forth, extremely 
exhilarated. Only Yezhevikin, Bahtcheyev and Mizintchikov were by 
him. I stopped to listen. 
"Why," asked Foma, "am I ready at this moment to go through fire 
for my convictions? And why is it that none of you are capable of 
going through fire? Why is it? Why is it?" 
"Well, but it's unnecessary, Foma Fomitch, to go through fire," 
Yezhevikin said banteringly. "Why, what's the sense of it? In the 

'I he Jriend of the Jamily 
801 
first place it would hurt, and in the second it would burn-what would 
be left?" 
"What would be left? Noble ashes would be left. But how should 
you understand, how should you appreciate me? To you, no great men 
exist but perhaps some Caesar or Alexander of Macedon. And what 
did your Caesars do? Whom did they make happy? What did your 
vaunted Alexander of Macedon do? He conquered the whole earth? 
But give me such a phalanx and I could be a conqueror too, and so 
could you, and so could he. . . . On the other hand, he killed the 
virtuous Clitus, but I have not killed the virtuous Clitus . . . .  A puppy, 
a scoundrel! He ought to have had a thrashing, and not to have been 
glorified in universal history . . .  and Caesar with him!" 
"You might spare Caesar, anyway, Foma Fomitch!" 
"I won't spare the fool!" cried Foma. 
"No, don't spare him!" Bahtcheyev, who had also been drinking, 
backed him up. "There is no need to spare them, they are all flighty 
fellows, they care for nothing but pirouetting on one leg! Sausage­
eaters! Here, one of them was wanting to found a scholarship just now 
-and what is a scholarship? The devil only knows what it means! 
I bet it's some new villainy! And here is another who in honourable 
society is staggering about and asking for rum. I have no objection to 
drinking. But one should drink and drink and then take a rest, and 
afterwards, maybe, drink again. It's no good sparing them! They are 
all scoundrels. You are the only enlightened one among them, Fornal" 
If Bahtcheyev surrendered to any one he surrendered uncondition­
ally and absolutely without criticism. 
I looked for my uncle in the garden, by the pond in the most secluded 
spot. He was with Nastenka. Seeing me, Nastenka shot into the bushes 
as though she were in fault. My uncle came to meet me with a beam­
ing face; there were tears of happiness in his eyes. He took both my 
hands and warmly pressed them. 
"My dear," he said, "I still cannot believe in my happiness .
.
.
•
 
Nastya feels the same. We only marvel and glorify the Almighty. She 
was crying just now. Would you believe it, I hardly know what I am 
doing yet, I am still utterly beside myself, and don't know whether 
to believe it or not! And why has this come to me? Why? What have 
I done? How have I deserved it?" 
"If any one deserves anything, it is you, uncle," I said with convic­
tion. "I have never seen such an honest, such a fine, such a kind­
hearted man as you." 
"No, Seryozha, no, it is too much," he answered, as it were with 

802 
T h( Short N.ovds of 'Dosto(vslzy 
regret. "What is bad, is that we are kind (I am talking only about 
myself really) when we are happy; but when we are unhappy it is 
best not to come near us! Nastenka and I were only just talking of 
that. Though I was dazzled by Foma, up to this very day perhaps, 
would you believe it, I did not quite believe in him, though I did 
assure you of his perfection; even yesterday I did not believe in him 
when he refused such a present! To my shame I say it. My heart 
shudders at the memory of this morning, but I could not control my­
self. . . .  When he spoke of Nastya something seemed to stab me to 
the very heart. I did not understand and behaved like a tiger . . . .  
" 
"\Veil, uncle, perhaps that was only natural." 
My uncle waved away the idea. 
"No, no, my boy, don't say so. The fact of it is, all this comeᐊ from 
the depravity of my nature, from my being a gloomy and sensual 
egoist and abandoning myself to my passions without restraint. Th:lt's 
what Foma says." (What could one answer to that ?) "You don't know, 
Seryozha," he went on with deep feeling, "how often I lu\'c: been 
irritable, unfeeling, unjust, haughty, and not only to Foma. Now it 
has all come back to my mind, and I feel ashamed that I ha,·e done 
nothing hitherto to deserve such happiness. Nastya has just said the 
same thing, though I really don't know wh:.t sins she has, as she is an 
angel, not a human being! She h:1s just been saying that we owe a 
terrible debt of gratitude to God ; that we must try now to be better 
and always be doing good deeds . . . .  And if only you had heard how 
fervently, how beautifully she said all th:1t! My God, what a won­
derful girll" 
He stopped in agitation. A minute later he went on. 
"We resolved, my dear boy, to cherish Foma in particular, mamma 
and Tatyana Ivanovna. Tatyana lvanovna! \Vhat a generous-hearted 
creature! Oh, how much I have been to blame towards all of them! 
I have behaved badly to you too . . . .  But if any one should dare to 
insult Tatyana Ivanovna now, oh! then . . .  Oh, well, never mind! 
. . .  We must do something for Mizintchikov too." 
"Yes, uncle, I have changed my opinion of Tatyana lvanm•na now. 
One cannot help respecting her and feeling for her." 
"Just so, just so," my uncle assented warmly. "One can't help re­
specting herl Now Korovkin, for instance, no doubt you laugh at him," 
he added, glancing at me timidly, "and we all laughed at him this 
afternoon. And yet, you know, that was perhaps unpardonable 
•
•
.
•
 
You know, he may be an excellent, good-hearted man, but fate . . . he 

The Jriend of the Jamily 
803 
has had misfortunes . . . .  You don't believe it, but perhaps it really 
. 
, 
IS SO. 
"No, uncle, why shouldn't I believe it?" 
And I began fervently declaring that even in the creature who has 
fallen lowest there may still survive the finest human feelings; that the 
depths of the human soul are unfathomable; that we mu:t not despise 
the fallen, but on the contrary ought to seek them out and raise them 
up; that the commonly accepted standard of goodness and morality 
was not infallible, and so on, and so on; in fact, I warmed up to the 
subject, and even began talking about the realist school. In conclusion 
I even repeated the verses: '\Vhen from dark error's subjugation.' .
•
 .'' 
My uncle was extraordinarily delighted. 
"My dear, my dear," he said, much touched, "you understand me 
fully, and have said much better than I could what I wanted to express. 
Yes, yes! Good heavens! Why is it man is wicked ? Why is it I am 
so often wicked when it is so splendid, so fine to be good ? Nastya was 
saying the same thing just now . . . .  llut look, though, what a glorious 
pbce this is," he added, looking round him. "What scenery! What 
a picture! \Vhat a tree! Look: you could hardly get your arms round 
it. Wh:n sap! What foliage! What sunshine! How gay everything is, 
washed clean after the storm! . . .  One would think that even the trees 
understand something, have feeling and enjoyment of life . . . .  Is that 
out of the question-eh? What do you think?" 
"It's very likely they do, uncle, in their own way, of course . . . . " 
"Oh, yes, in their own way, of course . . . .  Marvellous, marvellous 
is the Creator! You must remember all this garden very well, Seryozha; 
how you used to race about and play in it when you were little! I 
remember, you know, when you were little," he added, looking at me 
with an indescribable expression of love and happiness. "You were 
not allowed to go to the pond alone. llut do you remember one eve­
ning dear Katya called you to her and began fondling you . . . .  You 
had been running in the garden just before, and were flushed; your 
hair was so fair and curly . . . .  She kept playing with it, and said : 'It 
is a good thing that you have taken the little orphan to live with us!' 
Do you remember?" 
"Faintly, uncle.'' 
"It was evening, and you were both bathed in the glow of sunset, 
I was sitting in a corner smoking a pipe and watching you . . . .  I drive 
in to the town every month to her grave . .  .'' he added, dropping his 
voice, which quivered with suppressed tears. "I was just speaking to 
Na.stya about it; she said we would go together . . . .  " 

804 
The Sltort Novels of 7Jostoevsky 
My uncle paused, trying to control his emotion. At that instant 
Vidoplyasov came up to us. 
"Vidoplyasov ! "  said my uncle, starting. "Have you come from Foma 
Fomitch ? "  
"No, I have come more on m y  own affairs." 
"Oh, well, that's capital. Now we shall hear about Korovkin. I 
wanted to inquire . . .
. I told him to look after him-Korovkin, I mean. 
\Vhat's the matter, Vidoplyasov ?" 
"I make bold to remind you," said Vidoplyasov, "that yesterday you 
were graciously pleased to refer to my petition and to promise me 
your noble protection from the daily insults I receive." 
"Surely you arc not harping on your surname again ?" cried my 
uncle in alarm. 
"What can I do? Hourly insults . . .  
" 
"Oh, Vidoplyasov, Vidoplyasov ! What am I to do with you ? "  said 
my uncle in distress. "\Vhy, what insults can you have to put up with ? 
You will simply go out of your mind. You will end your days in a 
madhouse! "  
"I believe I a m  in m y  right mind . . .  " Vidoplyasov was beginning. 
"Oh, of course, of course," my uncle i nterposed. "I did not say that 
to oiTcnd you, my boy, but for your good. Why, what sort of insults 
do you complain of? I am ready to bet that it is only some nonsense." 
"They won't let me pass." 
"Who int erferes with you ? "  
"They all do, and chiefly owing to Matryona. M y  life is a misery 
through her. It is well known that all discriminating people who have 
seen me from my childhcx>d up have s:id that I am exactly like a 
foreigner, especially in the features of the face. Well, sir, now they 
won't let me pass on account of it. As soon as I go by, they all shout 
all sorts of bad words after me: even the little children, who ought to 
be whipped, shout after me . . . .  As I came along here now they 
shouted . . . .  I can't stand it. Defend me, sir, with your protection !" 
"Oh, Vidoplyasov ! Well, what did they shout ? No doubt it was 
some foolishness, that you ought not to notice." 
"It would not be proper to repeat." 
"Why, what was it ?" 
"It's a disgusting thing to say." 
"Well, say it!" 
"Grishka the dandy has eaten the candy." 
"Tfoo, what a man !  I thought it was something serious! You should 
spit, and pass by." 

The Jrielld of the Jamily 
805 
"I did spit, they shouted all the more." 
"But listen, uncle," I said. "You see he complains that he can't get 
on in this house, send him to Moscow for a time, to that calligrapher. 
You told me that he was trained by a calligrapher." 
"\Veil, my dear, that man, too, came to a tragic end." 
"Why, what happened to him?" 
"He had the misfortune," Vidoplyasov replied, "to appropriate the 
property of another, for which in spite of his talent he was put in 
prison, where he is ruined irrevocably." 
"Very well, Vidoplyasov, calm yourself now, and I will go into 
it all and set it right," said my uncle, "I promise! Well, what news of 
Korovkin? Is he asleep?" 
"No, sir, his honour has just gone away. I came to tell you." 
"What? Gone away! What do you mean? How could you let him 
go?" cried my uncle. 
"Through the kindness of my heart, sir, it was pitiful to see him, 
sir. When he came to himself and remembered all the proceedings, 
he struck himself on the forehead and shouted at the top of his 
voice . . . .  
" 
"At the top of his voice! . . .  " 
"It would be more respectful to express it, he gave utterance to many 
varied lamentations. He cried out: how could he present himself now 
to the fair sex ? And then added : 'I am unworthy to be a man!' 
and he kept talking so pitifully in choice language." 
"A man of refined feeling! I told you, Sergey . . . .  But how could 
you let him go, Vidoplyasov, when I told you particularly to look after 
him ? Oh, dear! oh, dear!" 
"It was through the pity of my heart. He begged me not to tell you. 
His cabman fed the horses and harnessed them. And for the sum lent 
him three days ago, he begged me to thank you most respectfully and 
say that he would send the money by one of the first posts." 
"What money is that, uncle?" 
"He mentioned twenty-five silver roubles," answered Vidoplyasov. 
"I lent it him at the station, my dear; he hadn't enough with him. 
Of course he will send it by the first post . . . .  Oh, dear, how sorry I 
ami Shouldn't we send some one to overtake him, Seryozha?" 
"No, uncle, better not send." 
"I think so too. You see, Seryozha, I am not a philosopher of course, 
but I believe there is much more good in every man than appears on 
the surface. Korovkin now: he couldn't face the shame of it . . . .  But 
let us go to Fornal We have lingered here a long time; he may be 

806 
The Slzort Novels of 'Dostoevsky 
wounded by our ingratitude, and neglect . . . .  Let us go. Oh, Korovkin, 
Korovkin!" 
My story is ended. The lovers were united, and their good genius 
in the form of Foma Fomitch held undisputed sway. I might at this 
point make very many befitting observations; but in reality all such 
observations are now completely superfluous. Such, anyway, is my 
opinion. I will instead say a few words about the subsequent fortunes 
of all the heroes of my tale. As is well known, no story is finished 
without this, and indeed it is prescribed by the rules. 
The wedding of the couple who had been so graciously "made 
happy" took place six weeks after the events I have described. It was 
a quiet farruly affair, without much display or superfluous guests. I 
was Nastenka's best man, Mizintchikov was my uncle's. There were 
some visitors, however. But the foremost:, the leading figure, was of 
course Foma Fomitch. He was made much of; he was carried on their 
shoulders. But it somehow happened that on this one occasion he was 
overcome hy champagne. A scene followed, with all the accompani­
ment of reproaches, lamentations and outcries. Foma ran oil to his 
room, locked himself in, cried that he was held in contempt, that now 
"new people had come into the family and that he was therefore 
nothing, not more than a bit of rubbish that must be thrown away." 
My uncle was in despair; Nastenka wept ; Madame Ia Gcncrale, as 
usual, had an attack of hysterics . . . .  The wedding festival \\-·as like 
a funeral. And seven years of living like that with their benefactor, 
Forna Fomitch, fell to the lot of my poor uncle and por Nastcnka. 
Up to the time of his death (Foma Fomitch died a year ago), he was 
sulky, gave himself airs, was ill-humoured and quarrelsome; but the 
reverence for him of the couple he had "made happy," far fro৛ 
diminishing, actually increased every day with his caprices. Y egor 
Ilyitch and Nastenka were so happy with each other that they were 
actually afraid of their happiness, and thought that God had given 
them too much; that they were not worthy of such blessings and were 
inclined to expect that their latter days would be spent in hardship and 
suffering to atone for them. It will be readily understood that in this 
meek household, Foma Fomitch could do anything that took his fancy. 
And what did he not do in those seven years! One could never imagine 
to what unbridled absurdities his pampered, idle soul led him in 
inventing the most perverse, morally Sybaritic caprices. My grand­
mother died three years after my uncle's marriage. Foma was stricken 
with despair at his bereavement. His condition at the time is described 

'1 he Jricnd of tlzc Jamily 
807 
with hon·or in my uncle's household to this day. \Vhen they were 
throwing earth into the grave, he leapt into it, shouting that he would 
be buried in it too. For a whole month they would not give him a 
knife or fork ; and on one occasion four of them forced open his mouth 
and took out of it a pin which he was trying to swallow. An outsider 
who wimessed the conflict, observed that Foma Fomitch might have 
swallowed the pin a thousand times over during the struggle, but did 
not, however, do so. But every one heard this criticism with positive 
indignation, and at once charged the critic with hard-heartedness and 
bad manners. Only Nastenka held her peace and gave a faint smile, 
while my uncle looked at her with some uneasiness. It must be ob­
served that though Foma gave himself airs, and indulged his whims 
in my uncle's house as before, yet the insolent and despotic presumption 
with which he used to rail at my uncle was now a thing of the past. 
Foma complained, wept, blamed, reproached, cried shame, but did not 
scold as he had done-there was never another scene like the one 
concerned with "your Excellency," and this, I think, was due to 
Nastenka. Almost imperceptibly she compelled Foma to yield some 
points and to recognize some limits. She would not see her husband 
humiliated, and iusisted on her wishes being respected. Foma per­
ceived clearly that she almost understood him. I say almost, for 
Nastenk::t, too, humoured Foma and even seconded her husband when­
ever he sang the praises of his mentor. She tried to make other people, 
too, respect e\·erything in her husband, and so publicly justified his 
devotion to Foma Fomitch. But I am sure that Nastenka's pure heart 
had forgiven all the insults of the past; she forgave Foma everything­
when he brought about her marriage. And what is more, I believe she 
seriously with all her heart entered into my uncle's idea that too much 
must not be expected from a "victim" who had once been a buffoon, 
but on the contrary, balm must be poured on his wounded heart. Poor 
Nastenka had herself been one of the humiliated, she had suffered and 
she remembered it. A month after the death of his old patroness, Foma 
became quieter, even mild and friendly; but on the other hand, he 
began to have quite sudden attacks of a different sort-he would fall 
into a sort of magnetic trance, which alarmed every one extremely. 
Suddenly, for instance, the sufferer, while saying something, or even 
laughing, would in one instant become unconscious and rigid, and 
rigid in the very position he happened to be in a moment before the 
attack. If, for instance, he was laughing, he would remain with a 
smile on his lips; if he were holding something, a fork for instance, 
the fork would remain in his raised hand. Later on, of course, the hand 

808 
would drop, but Foma Fomitch felt nothing and knew nothing of its 
dropping. He would sit, stare, even blink, but would say nothing, hear 
nothing, and understand nothing. This would last sometimes for a 
whole hour. Of course every one in the house nearly died of fright, 
held their breath, walked about on tiptoe and shed tears. At last Foma 
would wake up feeling terribly exhausted, and would declare that he 
had seen and heard absolutely nothing all that time. The man must 
have been so perverse, so eager to show off, that he endured whole 
hours of voluntary agony, solely in order to say afterwards: "Lok at 
me, I even feel more intensely than you." Finally Foma cursed my 
uncle for the "hourly slights and insults" he received from him, and 
went to stay with Mr. Bahtcheyev. The latter, who had quarrelled 
with Foma Fomitch many times since my uncle's marriage, but always 
ended by begging his pardon, on this occasion took the matter up with 
extraordinary warmth; he welcomed Foma with enthusiasm, stuffed 
him with good things, and at once resolved on a formal breach with 
my uncle, and even on lodging a complaint against him. There was 
a bit of land in dispute between them, though they never disputed 
about it, for my uncle had yielded all claim to it and had freely given 
it to Mr. Bahtchcyev. Without saying a word to any one, Mr. Bah­
tcheyev ordered out his carriage, drove off to the town, there scribbled 
off a petition and handed it in, appealing to the court to adjudge him 
the land formally with compensation for loss and damage and so to 
punish contumacy and robbery. Meanwhile next day Foma Fomitch, 
getting bored at Mr. llahtchcyev's, forgave my uncle, who came to 
apologize, and went back to Stcpantchikovo. The wrath of Mr. 
Bahtcheyev when he returned from the town and did not find Foma 
was terrible; but three days later, he turned up at Stepnntchikovo to 
apoloү,'-ize, begged my uncle's pardon with tears in his eyes, and 
quashed his petition. My uncle made the peace between him and Foma 
Fomitch the same day, :md Bahtcheyev followed Foma Fomitch about 
like a little dog, and again said at every word : "You are a clever fellow, 
Fornal You arc a learned man, Fornal" 
Foma Fomitch is now lying in his grave near his old patroness; over 
him stands an expensive monument of white marble covered with 
lamentations and eulogistic inscript-ions. Yegor Ilyitch and Nastenka 
sometimes go for a walk to the cemetery to pay reverent homage to 
his memory. They cannot even now speak of him without great 
feeling; they recall all his sayings, what he ate, what he liked. His 
things have heen preserved as priceless treasures. Feeling so bereaved, 
my uncle and Nastya grew even more attached to each other. God 

The Jriend of the Jamily 
809 
has not granted them children; they grieve over this, but da:e not 
repine. Sashenka has long been married to an excellent young man. 
Ilyusha is studying in Moscow. And so my uncle and Nastya are alone 
together, and are devoted to each other. Their anxiety over each other 
is almost morbid. Nastya prays unceasingly. If one of them dies first, 
I think the other will not survive a week. But God grant them long 
life. They receive every one with a most cordial welcome, and are 
ready to share all they have with any one who is unfortunate. Nastenka 
is fond of reading the lives of the saints, and says with compunction 
that to do ordinary good work is not enough, that one ought to give 
everything to the por and be happy in poverty. But for his concern 
for Ilyusha and Sashenka, my uncle would have done this long ago, 
for he always agrees with his wife in everything. Praskovya Ilyinitchna 
lives with them, and enjoys looking after their comfort; she super­
intends the management of the place. M.r. Bahtcheyev made her an 
offer of marriage very soon after my uncle's wedding, but she refused 
him point-blank. It was concluded from that that she would go into 
a nunnery, but that did not come off either. There is one striking 
peculiarity about Praskovya Ilyinitchna's character: the craving to 
obliterate herself completely for the sake of those she loves, to efface 
herself continually for them, to watch for their every inclination, to 
humour all their caprices, to wait upon them and serve them. Now, on 
the de3th of her mother, she considers it her duty not to leave her 
brother, and to take care of Nastenka in every way. Old Yezhevikin 
is still living, and has taken to visiting his daughter more and more 
frequently of late. At first he drove my uncle to despair by absenting 
himself from Stepantchikovo almost entirely and also keeping away 
his "small fry" (as he called his children). All my uncle's invitations 
were in vain; he was not so much proud as sensitive and touchy. His 
over-sensitive amour-propre sometimes approached morbidity. The idea 
that he, a por man, should be entertained in a wealthy house from 
kindness, that he might be regarded as an intrusive and unwelcome 
guest, was too much for him; he sometimes even declined Nastenka's 
help, and only accepted what was absolutely essential. From my uncle 
he would take absolutely nothing. Nastenka was quite mistaken when 
she told me that time in the garden that her father played the fool for 
her sake. It was true that he was extremely eager at that time to marry 
Nastenka to Yegor Ilyitch; but he acted as he did simply through an 
inner craving to give vent to his accumulated malice. The impulse to 
jeer and mock was in his blood. He posed as the most abject, grovelling 
flatterer, but at the same time made it perfectly clear that he was only 

810 
T h% Slzort N.ovds of Vosto%vskJ 
doing this for show ; and the more cringing his flattery, the more 
malignantly and openly apparent was the mockery behind it. It was 
his way. All his children were successfully placed in the best scholastic 
establishments i n  Moscow and Petersburg. But this was only after 
Nastenb had made it perfectly clear to him that it was being paid 
for out of her own pocket, that is, out of the thirty thousand given her 
by Tatyana lvanovna. That thirty thousand she had actually never 
taken from Tatyana lvanovna ; but not to grieve and mortify her, they 
appeased her by promising to appeal to her at any sudden emergency. 
What they did was this :  to satisfy her, considerable sums were bor­
roweJ from her on two occasions. But Tatyana lvanovna died three 
years ago, and Nastya received her thirty thousand all the same. The 
death of poor Tatyana lvanovna was sudden. The whole family were 
getting ready for a ball given by a neighbour, and she had hardly 
decked herself out in her ball-dress and put on a fascinating wreath 
of white roses, when she suddenly felt giddy, sat down in an easy<hair 
ɢnd died. They buried her in the wreath. Nastya was in despair. 
1"atyana lvanovna had been cherished and looked after like a little 
child in the house. She astonished every one by the good sense of her 
will. Apart from Nastenka's thirty thousand, her whole fortune of 
three hundreJ thousand was devoted to the education of poor orphan 
girls and the provision of a sum of money for each on leaving the 
institution. In the year that she died Miss Perepelitsyn was married ; 
"ln the death of Madame Ia Gcncralc she had remained in the family 
:n the hope of ingratiating herself with Tatyana lvanovna. Meanwhile 
the petty official who had bought Mishina, the little village in which 
our scene with Obnoskin and his mother over Tatyana lvanovna took 
place, was left a widower. This i ndividual was terribly fond of going 
to law, and had six children. Supposing that Miss Perepelitsyn had 
money, he began making proposals to her through a third person and 
she promptly accepted them. But Miss Pcrcpclitsyn w:s as por as a 
hen, her whole fortune was three hundred silver roubles, and th:t was 
given her by Nastcnka on her wedding day. Now the husband and 
wife are quarrelling from morning till night. She pulls his children's 
hair, and boxes their cars: as for him, she scratches his face (so people 
say), and is constantly throwing her superior station as a major's 
daughter in his face. Mizintchikov has also established himself. He 
very sensibly gave up all his hopes of Tatyana lvanovna, and began 
little by little to learn farming. My uncle recommended him to a 
wealthy count, who had an estate of three thousand serfs, sixty miles 
from SteDantchikovo, and who occasionally visited his property. Ob-

Tlze Jriend of tlze Jamily 
811 
serving Mizintchikov's abilities, and influenced by my uncle's recom­
mendation of him, the count offered him the post of steward on his 
estate, dismissed his former German steward, who in spite of the 
vaunted German honesty stripped his master like a lime-tree. Five 
years later the estate was unrecognizable: the peasants were prosperous; 
the farming was developed in ways previously impossible; the returns 
were almost doubled; in fact, the new steward distinguished himself, 
and was talked of for his abilities as a farmer all over the province. 
Great was the amazement and chagrin of the count when at the end of 
the five years Mizintchikov insisted on giving up his situation in 
spite of all protests and offers of increased salary! The count imagined 
that he had been lured away by a rival landowner in his own neigh­
bourhood or in another province. And every one was astonished when, 
two months after giving up his post, Mizintchikov acquired an excel­
lent estate of a hundred serfs, about thirty miles from the count's, 
purchased from a huss;u, a friend of his who had squandered all his 
fortune! The hundred serfs he promptly mortgaged, and a year later 
he had acquired another property of sixty serfs in the neighbourhood. 
Now he is a landowner, and the management of his estate is un· 
equalled. Every one wonders how he came by the money all at once. 
Some people shake their heJ.ds. But Mizintchikov is perfectly self­
possessed, and feels that he is absolutely right. He has sent for his 
sister from Moscow, the sister who gave him her last three roubles to 
buy boots when he was setting otT for Stepantchikov<r-a very sweet 
girl, no longer in her first youth, gentle and loving, well educated, but 
extremely timid. She had been all the time dragging out a miserable 
existence somewhere in Moscow as a companion to some charitable 
lady. Now she worships her brother, and keeps house for him ;  she 
regards his will as law and thinks herself happy. Her brother does not 
spoil her, he makes her work rather hard, but she does not notice it. 
She has become a great favourite at Stepantchikovo, and I am told that 
.M. Bahtcheyev is not indifferent to her. He would make her an offer, 
but is afraid of being refused. We hope, however, to give a fuller 
account of Mr. Bahtcheyev's doings in another story. 
Well, I think I have dealt with all the characters of Stepantchikovo 
. . .  Oh! I had forgotten : Gavrila has greatly aged and completely 
forgotten his French ; Falaley has made a very decent coachman; while 
poor Yidoplyasov was for many years in a madhouse and, I believe, 
died there. In a few days I am going to Stepantchikovo, and will 
certainly inquire about him from my uncle. 


