
THE PENGUIN CLASSICS 
FOUNDER EDITOR (I944-64): E. V. RIEU 
PRESENT EDITORS 
Betty Radice and Robert Baldick 
FYODOR MIKHAIL 00STOYEVSKY was born in Moscow in I821, the 
second of a physician's seven children. His mother died in I837 and his 
father was murdered a year later. When he left his private boarding school 
in Moscow he studied from I838 to I843 at the Military Engineering 
College in St Petersburg, graduating with officer's rank. His fust story to 
be published, 'Poor Folk' (I846), had a great success. In I849 he was 
arrested and sentenced to death for participating in the 'Petrashevsky 
circle'; he was reprieved at the last moment but sentenced to penal servi­
tude, and until I854 he lived in a convict prison at Omsk, Siberia. Out of 
this experience he wrote Memoirs from the House of the Dead (I86I). In I86I 
he began the review Vremya with his brother; in I862 and I863 he went 
abroad where he strengthened his anti-European outlook, met Mle Suslova 
who was the model for many of his heroines, and gave way to his passion 
for gambling. In the following years he fell deeply into debt, but from I867, 
when he married Anna Grigoryevna Snitkina, his second wife helped to 
rescue him from his financial morass. They lived abroad for four years, 
then in I873 he was invited to edit Grazhdanin, to which he contributed 
his Author's Diary. From I 876 the latter was issued separately and had 
a great circulation. In I88o he delivered his famous address at the unveiling 
ofPushkin's memorial in Moscow; he died six months later in I88I. Most 
of his important works were written after I 864: Notes from tfte Under­
ground (I864), Crime and Punishment (I865-66), The Gambler (I866), The 
Idiot (I869), The Devils (I87I), and The Brothers Karamazov (I88o). 
DAVID MAGARSHACK was born in Riga, Russia, and educated at a 
Russian secondary school. He came to England in I920 and was naturalized 
in I93I. After graduating in English literature and language at University 
College, London, he worked in Fleet Street and published a number of 
novels. Since I948 he has mainly been working on translations of the 
Russian classics. For the Penguin Classics he has translated Dostoyevsky's 
Crime and Punishment, The Idiot, The Devils, and The Brothers Karamazov; 
DeadSouls by Gogo!; Oblomov by Goncharov; and Lady with Lapdog and 
Other Tales by Chekhov. He has also written biographies of Chekhov, 
Dostoyevsky, Gogo!, Pushkin, Turgenev and Stanislavsky; and he is the 
author of Chekhov the Dramatist, a critical study of Chekhov's plays, and a 
study of Stanislavsky's system of acting. 


+ 
I 
! 
I 
+ 
THE DEVILS 
( THE POSSESSED) 
+ 
FYODOR 
DOSTOYEVSKY 
+ 
TRANSLATED 
WITH AN INTUODUCTION BY 
DAVID MAGARSHACK 
+ 
PENGUIN BOOKS 

Penguin Books Ltd, Hannondsworth, Middlesex, England 
Penguin Books Inc., 7uo Ambassador Road, Baltimore, Maryland 21207, U.S.A. 
Penguin Books Australia Ltd, Ringwood, Victoria, Australia 
This translation fi.rst published 1953 
Reprinted 1957, 1960, 1962, 1965, 1967, 1968, 1969 
Reprinted with Appendix ('Stavrogin's Confession') 1971 
Reprinted 1972 
Copyright © David Magarshack, 1953, 1971 
Made and printed in Great Britain 
by Richard Clay (The Chaucer Press) Ltd, 
Bungay, Suffolk 
Set in Monotype Bembo 
This book is sold subject of the condition 
that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, 
be lent, re-sold, hired out, or otherwise circulated 
without the publisher's prior consent in any form of 
binding or cover other than that in which it is 
published and without a similar condition 
including this condition being imposed 
on the subsequent purchaser 

List of Coments 
Translator's Introduction 
Vll 
PART O N E  
I By way of an Introduction: a few details from the biography 
of the greatly esteemed Stepan Trofimovich Verkhovensky 
21 
2 Prince Harry. A Marriage Proposal 
53 
3 Another Man's Sins 
92 
4 The Cripple 
1 3 5 
5 The Wise Serpent 
I67 
I Night 
2 Night (continued) 
3 The Duel 
4 All Agog 
5 Before the Fete 
P A R T  T W O  
6 Peter Verkhovensky iï Busy 
7 At Virginsky's 
8 Ivan the Crown-Prince 
9 Stepan Verkhovensky is Raided 
IO Filibusters. A Fatal Morning 
I The Fete. Part One 
2 The End of the Fete 
P A R T  THR EB 

VI 
CONTENTS 
The End of a Love Affair 
4 The Last Decision 
5 The Globe Trotter 
6 A Very Busy Night 
7 Stepan Verkhovensky's Last Pilgrimage 
8 Conclusion 
Appendix: Stavrogin's Confession 
516 
537 
561 
592 
625 
657 

Translator's Introduction 
DosTOYEV SKY began The Devils, or The Possessed, as the most con­
troversial of his novels is often called ir1 Euglish, towards the end of 1869. He 
had been living abroad with his second wife Anna, the eighteen-year-old 
girl he had married at the age of forty-five in February 1867,jor about two 
years, during which time he had written The Idiot and The Eternal Hus­
band. He had left Russia in a hurry on 14 April1867, because his creditors 
had threatened to put him in jail for defaulting or1 the payments of his debts. 
He would not have minded going to Jail, he wrote to one of his correspoudents, 
as it would have provided him with enough material for another House of 
the Dead and brought him in between 4,000 and 5,000 roubles, but he had 
a young wife to think of, and he could not expose her to such humiliation and 
worry. It was more probable that he preferred to try his luck at the roulette 
tables as an easier way of restoring his fortune. To his great surprise, how­
ever, Anna stubbornly refused to pander to his passion for gambling. 
This he found more than annoying and, besides, so d(fferent from his ex­
perience with Polina Suslova, the young girl student who had accom­
panied him to Germany in july 1865. He wrote to Suslova on 23 April, 
soon after his arrival in Dresden with Anna, addressing her as his 'etemal 
friend' and discussing his literary plans with her, which he could not very 
well do with his young and rather simple wife. Indeed, his life with Anna in 
Dresden soon began to pall on him, and on 4 May he left her there and 
went o.fi" to Homburg, where he spent twelve days at the casino, lost all his 
money, pawned his watch, and had to get his fares for the return journey 
from Anna. He returned to Dresden in a state of moral collapse, and on 22 
june left with Anna for Baden-Baden, where he began gambling again and 
had to go through the humiliatiotl of crawling on his knees before his young 
wife before she would let him have a few gold sovereigns. He lost heavily 
again, went to see Turgenev, whom he still owed fifty thalers he had bor­
rowed after his losses at the roulette tables irt Wiesbaden two years before, 
quarrelled with the famous novelist, and then went to live in Geneva, where 

Vlll 
TRAN S L A T O R'S INTRO DUCTION 
tl1cre was no casino and where he began writing The Idiot (in September 
1867). There his first child, his daughter Sophia, was born in February 1868, 
and died three months later. For almost a year -from September 1868 to 
August 1869 - he lived in Italy, mostly in Florence, and then returned to 
Dresden, where his second daughter, Lyubov, was bom on 14 September. 
It was in Florence that he first thought of a great novel in which he would 
challenge the progressive movements in Russia and proclaim his faith in the 
regeneration of his native land (and afterwards the whole of the world) 
through a return to the tenets of Christianity as held by the Greek Orthodox 
Church. 'I am thinking of writing a huge novel, to be called The Atheist,' 
he wrote from Florence to his friend the poet Maykov on z 3 December 1868, 
'but before I sit down to write it I shall have to read almost a whole library 
of atheists, catholics, and Greek Orthodox theologians . ... I have the chief 
character. A Russian of our set, and middle-aged, not very educated, but 
not uneducated, either, a man of a quite good social position, who suddenly,at 
his age, loses faith in God. He has spent all his life in the Civil Service, ne11er 
leaving the beaten track, and without gaining any distinction, though he was 
already forty-five years old . . . .  His loss of faith in God makes a tremendous 
impression on him . . . .  He pokes his nose among the younger generation, the 
atheists, the pan-Slavs, the Russian fanatical sects, hermits, and priests; 
falls, incidentally, under the influence of a Jesuit propagandist, a Pole, and 
descends to the very depths by joining the sect of the flagellants - and at last 
comes to Christ and the Russian soil - the Russian Christ and the Russian 
God. (For goodness sake, don't breathe a word about it to anyone: I shall 
write this last novel of mine and I shall say everything to the last word, even 
if it is the last thing I do.)' 
The final sentence about his saying everything to the last word that he 
thought about the destiny of Russia and the world occurs twice in his letters 
to Maykov and Strakhov, his journalist friend, in connexion with the first 
outline cifThe Devils, which, beginning with February 1870, was being 
serialized in the Moscow conservative monthly The Russian Messenger. 
'I am working for The Russian Messenger now,' he wrote to Maykov from 
Dresden on 6 April 1870, 'because I owe them money and have put myself 
in an ambiguous position there . . . .  What I am writing now is a tendentious 
thing. I feel like saying everything as passionately as possible. (Let the 
nihilists and the Westerners scream that lam a reactionary!) To hell with 
them. I shall say everything to the last word.' And a day earlier he wrote to 
Strakhov: 'I am relying a great deal on what I am writing for The Russian 

T R A N S LA T O R ' S I N TR O D U CT I O N  
IX 
Messenger now, but from the tendentious rather than the artistic poim of 
view. I am anxious to express certairt ideas, even if it ruins my novel as a 
work of art, for I am entirely carried away by the things that have acwmu­
lated in my heart and mind. Let it tum out to be only a pamp.hlet, but I shall 
say everything to the last word.' 
From the notes Dostoyevsky had jotted down in January 1870, it would 
appear that his first idea was to incorporate the main theme of his proposed 
novel, The Atheist, in The Devils, whose chief character, however, was not 
to be an ordinary civil servant but a wealthy prince, 'a most dissipated man 
and a supercilious aristocrat', whose life was ' storm and disorder', but who in 
the end 'comes to Christ'. He was to be 'a man with an idea', which absorbs 
him completely, though not so much intellectually as ' by becoming embodied 
in him and merging with his own nature, always accompanied by suffering 
and unrest, and having fused with his nature, it demands to be instantly put 
into action'. The prince is greatly influenced by a well-known Russian reli­
gious writer, who greatly influenced Dostoyevsky himself and who was to 
have figured in the novel. This writer's main idea Dostoyevsky defined as 
'humility and self-possession, and that God and the Kingdom of Heaven are 
in us, and freedom, too '. But two things made Dostoyevsky giJJe up his ori­
ginal idea of Nicholas Stavrogin, the main character of The Devils, who in 
the final draft of the novel no longer appears as a prince, though he is referred 
to as such in one chapter. 
To begin with, his desperate financial position ('I am in a simply frightful 
position now,' he wrote to Maykov in his letter of 6 April, 'a real Mr Mi­
cawber. I haven't got a penny, and yet I must somehow carry on till the 
autumn') forced him to postpone the writing of his xreat novel and try to get 
some money by writing a merely 'tendentious' one. 'What I am writing for 
The Russian Messenger now,' he told Maykov in the same letter, 'I shall 
finish in about three months, and then, after a month's holiday, I shall sit 
down to my other novel. It is the same idea I wrote to you about before. It 
will be my last novel.' And he went on to outline the plot of what was eight 
years later to become known as The Brothers Karamazov. 
While engaged in writing The Devils, Dostoyevsky returned again and 
again in his correspondence to the theme of The Brothers Karamazov, which 
at one stage he called The Life of a Great Sinner; and he made it quite clear 
that his great idea was to be left to this last novel. What was this ·.πreal 
idea'? Roughly, it was the idea of the reconciliation of good and evil according 
to his own peculiar political and religious recipe of a State based on a docile 

X 
TRA N S L A T OR' S I NTRODUCTI O N  
peasaflt population and run by an autocratic Tsar, who was no longer sup­
ported by a landed aristocracy (which Dostoyevsky abominated), but who 
relied entirely on the Greek Orthodox Church. Dostoyevsky, like Gogol be­
fore him, found the solution of the problem of the reconciliation of good and 
c11il, based on so fantastically unrealistic an idea, beyond his strength. In The 
Devils, however, he was no longer concerned with so grand a design. All he 
wanted to do was to settle his own personal accounts with the so-called 
Westerners, that is, the Russian liberals who dreamt of converting Russia 
into a constitutional monarchy on the model of a Western E14ropean country, 
and the more revolutionary elements in Russia, who, like himself, refused to 
have anything to do with the aristocracy or the new class of capitalists, and, 
unlike himself, with the Tsar or the Church. It was here that quite an un­
expected event came to his help. For it was just at this time that,following the 
murder of a young student in Moscow, a revolutionary conspiracy was 
discovered, which seemed to fit in with the ideas Dostoyevsky wished to 
express in The Devils. The conspiracy was organized by a certain Sergey 
Nechayev, who was at the time a disciple of Michael Bakunin, the author 
of The Catechism of a Revolutionary and the founder of the anarchist 
movement. 
Nechayev was a Scripture master in one of the Petersburg elementary 
schools (a seminariste, that is, a divinity student, as the contemporary left­
wing propagandists were nicknamed by aristocratic writers like Turgenev, 
because most of them did not belong to the aristocracy and some of the more 
eminent of them, like the critic Dobrolyubov, came from the priesthood class). 
Since the autumn of 1868 he had also been an external student of Petersburg 
University, and took a leading part in organizing the student disturbances in 
1868 and 1869. In March 1869 he went abroad with a false passport to 
Geneva, where he joined Bakunin and the poet Ogaryov, a close friend of 
Herzen' s, and from there they posted revolutionary leaflets to their friends in 
Russia. He returned to Russia in August of the same year as the self-styled 
representative of the World Revolutionary Movement at Geneva and organ­
ized a 'Society of National Retribution' in Moscow. Dostoyevsky embodied 
all the facts relating to the organization of this society (the groups of five, etc.) 
in his novel. On 21 November Nechayev (who was only twenty-two at the 
time) and four members of the Moscow 'group of five' murdered the fifih 
member of the group, a young student of the Moscow Agricultural College 
called Ivanov,for allegedly refusing to carry out the instructions of the Geneva 
committee. 'Ivanov,' the official act of indiament of Ivanov's murderers stated, 

TRANSLATOR'S INTROD UCTION 
xi 
'was enticed to the grotto in the grounds of the Moscow Agricultural College on 
the pretext of handing over an illegal printing press. There they at first tried 
to strangle him, but afterwards Nechayev seized the pistol brought by Nico­
layev' (another young accomplice) 'and shot Ivanov in the head, after which 
Ivanov's body was weighted with stones and thrown into the pond.' Dosto­
yevsky's description of Shatov's murder follows closely the description of 
Ivanov's murder. After the murder, Nechayev, like Peter Verkhovensky in 
the novel, escaped first to Petersburg and then abroad. He went back to 
Geneva, where he rejoined Bakunin and Ogaryov mtd assisted them in their 
abortive attempt to revive Herzen' s London journal The Bell. His ruthless­
ness in carrying out Bakunin' s own principle that the end justifies the means 
appalled even Bakunin, who soon broke with him. Nechayev then went to 
London, where he began publishing his terrorist journal Vilage Commune, 
which was sharply condemned by Engels, the friend and collaborator of Karl 
Marx. He later returned to Switzerland, where he was arrested by the Swiss 
police on an extradition order as a criminal and not a political offender and 
handed over to the Russian police. On 8 January 1873 he was tried for murder 
by the Moscow District Court and sentenced to twenty years penal servitude. 
He was not sent to Siberia, however, but incarcerated in the Peter and Paul 
fortress in Petersburg, where he died one year and ten months after Dosto­
yevsky, in November 1882. 
While Dostoyevsky was writing The Devils, Nechayev was still at large, 
and Dostoyevsky, who returned to Petersburg in july 1871, no doubt knew 
all about his revolutionary activities abroad. The sensational trial of the 
Nechayev followers in Russia (the police had arrested altogether 152 persons, 
mostly young boys and girls, of whom seventy-nine were put on trial in 
Petersburg in july 1871, the rest being released for lack of evidence) fur­
nished Dostoyevsky with more material for his novel, such as, for instance, 
the political leaflet with the drawing of an axe and the poem 'A Noble Char­
acter' found among the leaflets confiscated by the police. An interesting fact 
that has only recently come to light is that Dostoyevsky even found the 
prototype of Kirilov in a certain Smirnov, one of the accused in the trial o} 
the Nechayev followers. The following statement was taken by the police 
from Smirnov and subsequently published in the Russian Press (Smirnov had 
been banished to the town of Vladimir for his part in the student disturb­
ances ): 'In Vladimir I began to suffer from fits ´f depression and to be more 
and more obsessed with the idea of suicide; even now I doubt whether I shall 
be able to get rid of it; as I expect to remain in Vladimir till the end of my 

XII 
TRA N S L A T O R ' s I N T R O D U CT I O N  
term of exile, I decided to kill myself in the Spri11g. This decision is connected 
with the kiud of death I have chosen.' 
The discovery of the Nechayev conspiracy, the murder of Ivanov, and the 
series of sensational developmettts which finally led to the trial of Nechayev' s 
alleged followers in Petersburg just when Dostoyevsky himself had returned 
there, forced Dostoyevsky to introduce a great number of vital changes in his 
novel, although the first part of it had already been published in The Russian 
Messenger, and he only finished it in Noveml1er 1871. This slipshod 
method of writing his 'tendentious' novel has made it into one of the most 
structurally untidy of Dostoyevsky' s great novels. Its two chief characters -
Nicholas Stavrogin and Peter Verkhovensky - are only pegs on which Dos­
toyevsky hung his two most viole/11 dislikes: his dislike of the Russian aristo­
cracy and his dislike of the revolutionaries, whom he lumped together in the 
person of Verkhovensky-Nechayev. Stavrogin himself remains an obscure 
and enigmatic figure, the mystery surrounding him being mainly due to Dos­
toyevsky' s decision to leave him hanging in the air, as it were, rather than 
waste ' the great idea' he had decided to keep for his last novel on him. 
The 
fact that the editor of The Russian Messenger refused to publish a long 
chapter dealing with Stavrogin' s disreputable past must also to a certain ex­
tent be held responsible for the obscurity of Stavrogin' s characterization. 
So far as Peter Verkhovensky is concerned, it is only fair to point out that 
Dostoyevsky himself went out of his way to emphasize the fact that he was 
not a Socialist, but just a 'rogue'. The other conspirators ill the novel, with 
the exception of Kirilov - the most metaphysical character Dostoyevsky 
created - are quite terrifyingly alive as people, but only caricatures as 'revo­
lutionaries'. The fact is that Dostoyevsky had only a vague idea of the revo­
lutionary movements in Europe and was too apt to distort the ideas behind 
them. Indeed, his own violent political views precluded a fair and thorough 
appreciation of any progressive movement. To him even a mild liberal like 
Stepan Verkhovensky was 'a devil' who could just be 'saved' on his death­
bed by a none-too-sincere recantation of his former opinions. It was only in 
people like Shatov - that is to say, people, who, like Dostoyevsky himself, 
had turned their back on their liberal past and wholeheartedly embraced a 
philosophy of life based on autocracy and the Church - that he saw the gleam 
of salvation for a tortured world. And the tragedy of Shatov was also Dosto­
yevsky's tragedy: both believed in Christ and both were tormented by their 
disbelief in God. Both were fanatical adherents of their own new creed be­
cause both were at heart uncertain whether it was the right way to the mil-

TRANSLATOR's INTROD UCTION 
Xlll 
lennium. Shatov toyed with the idea of denouncing his former associates to 
the police in the same way as Dostoyevsky himself had actually taken steps to 
denounce Turgenev, the hated aristocrat arzd atheist, to ' posterity' long before 
he lampooned him as Karmazinov in The Devils. 
In his letter to Maykov after his meeting with Turgenev in Baden-Baden 
on z8 June 1867, Dostoyevsky admitted that he never really liked the great 
novelist, who, he declared exultantly, had written himself out completely. 
But when he first met Turgenev in November 184 5 he rzearly 'Jell in love 
with him', as he wrote to his elder brother .Michael. No words were too extra­
vagant to describe his admiration for the twenty-jive-year-old 'poet, aristo­
crat, and wealthy man' who was so extraordinarily intelligent and well edu­
cated. Turgenev had just returned from Paris 'and', Dostoyevsky wrote, 
'from the first moment he became so greatly attached to me that Belinsky ex­
plains it by the fact that Turgenev has fallen in love with me . . . . l doubt if 
there is anything nature has not bestowed on him,' Dostoyevsky went on. 
'And, last but not least, his character is so straightforward and has been 
trained in so admirable a school.' Their friendship, it is true, was not un­
clouded, for Turgenev liked to pull his friend's leg occasionally, and that 
Dostoyetρsky could not stand. There was, however, 110 violent quarrel be­
tween them, and when, almost twenty years later, Dostoyevsky returned from 
Siberia and embarked with his elder brother on the publication of the political 
and literary periodical Time, the two resumed their interrupted relationship 
and seemed to be on the best of terms with one another. 
Turgenev had by then become one of the leading novelists in Russia, and 
it was only natural that Dostoyevsky should be anxious to obtain a story 
from him for Time. They conducted a long correspondence, and Turgenev 
was very grateful to Dostoyevsky for being one of the very Jew men of letters 
who really appreciated his great novel Fathers and Sons, which raised a 
veritable storm of vituperation against its author, particularly among the 
younger progressive writers, who seemed to see in Bazarov, the hero of 
the novel, a libel on themselves. Dostoyevsky at last got Turgenev to pro­
mise to write a story for his Journal. Indeed, Turgenev went further: he 
promised not to publish anything in any other Russian periodical before his 
story was published in Time, so as to help the circulation of the new Journal 
on which Dostoyevsky' s livelihood depended. Meanwhile, however, Time 
was suppressed by the authorities for an article by Strakhov on the Polish 
rebellion which they quite wrongly considered to be favourable to the Poles. 
Turgenev did not withdraw his promise, but waited for Dostoyevsky to start 

XIV 
• 
TRA N SLATOR S IN TROD UCTION 
his periodical Epoch before contributing to another journal. The promised 
story was Phantoms, one of Turgenev' s less successful attempts in the 
fantastic genre. Turgenev himself was not certain that this story was good 
mough to be published, but Dostoyevsky made him change his mind by writ­
ing a long letter to him in praise of it, though later on he expressed a much 
less favourable opinion of it in a letter to his brother. Then came Dostoyev­
sky' s journey abroad with Suslova after the death of his brother and the finan­
cial failure of Epoch. He arrived in Wiesbaden in July 1865, succumbed to 
the lure of the roulette table, lost all his money, and, in desperation, wrote to 
Turgenev to ask for a loan of 100 thalers. Turgenev sent him fifty, which 
he repaid only eleven years later (in March 1876). It is interesting that at the 
time Dostoyevsky was still on very good terms with Herzen, who was in 
Switzerland and to whom, indeed, he had turned for help as 'one of his best 
friends', as he wrote to Suslova after she had left him stranded in the Wies­
baden hotel. But his break with his liberal friends was now imminent. When 
he left for Germany with his wife two years later, having in the meantime 
written Crime and Punishment and The Gambler, he had already become 
a bitter enemy of every progressive movement in Russia. Turgenev' s novel 
Smoke, which had just been published and had roused another storm of abuse 
against its author, added fuel to the flames of Dostoyevsky' s dislike of Tur­
genev and all he stood for. His dislike turned to hatred when he thought of 
that 'Baden-Baden bourgeois' (as Turgenev banteringly and rather unwisely 
described himself in a letter to Dostoyevsky) living a life of ease and comfort, 
while he was sitting penniless in an hotel with his youn.σt wife and had to beg 
her on his knees for some money to satisfy his passion for gambling. Anna 
left this account in her diary of the few hectic days in Baden-Baden before the 
meeting of the two novelists: 
'June 25th. On our way home' (from the Kursaal where Dostoyevsky 
lost again) 'Fedya met Goncharov and introduced him to me. Goncharov told 
me that Turgenev had seen Fedya but had not gone up to him because he 
knew that players do not like to be disturbed. As Fedya still owes Turgenev 
fifty chafers, he simply has to pay a call on him, otherwise Turgenev may 
think that Fedya does not want to visit him because he is afraid that he would 
ask him for his money. That is why Fedya wants to go and see Turgenev 
tomorrow. 
'June z6th. Fedya took fifteen thalers and went to the gaming-tables. At 
first he went to see Turgenev, but he was out: he is only at home till twelve 
o'clock. Fedya lost his fifteen thalers and returned home. 

TRANSLATOR's INT R O D UCTION 
XV 
'Jutςe 27th. This morning Fedya wanted to go and see Turgenev, but he 
got up so late that he put ξffhis visit. We again had twelve gold sovereigns. 
Fedya took five and went to the roulette tables. When he was gone I felt 
awfully sad because I knew that he would be quite certain to lose again and 
would be terribly worried. I burst into tears and sobbed bitterly. My fears 
were justified: Fedya returned home in a state of terrible despair. He said that 
he had lost everything and began begging me to give him another two goiJ 
sovereigns, pleading that he simply had to win some money back as otherwise 
he could not carry on. He went down on his knees before me and implored 
me to give him two more gold sovereigns.' 
It was in this state of despair and complete nervous exhaustion that Dos­
toyevsky went to see Turgenev on 28 June with the intention of taking it all 
out of the man whom he hated as the calumniator of his country (practically 
all the Russian critics interpreted the strictures upon Russia by Potugin, one 
of the characters of Smoke, as an unpardonable libel on their country). The 
scene that took place at this meeting of two of the greatest Russian writers is 
almost unbelievable. According to Dostoyevsky, who described it in a long 
letter toMaykov from Geneva, he found Turgenev having an early lunch.* 
Turgenev, Dostoyevsky declared, told him that he was an atheist and that 
he was teribly incensed by the hostile reception of his last novel. He then 
abused Russia and the Russians 'horribly' and said that the Russians 
'ought to crawl before the civilized Germans'. Dostoyevsky remarked ' imw­
cently' that Turgetοev ought to buy himself a telescope, and in reply to Tur­
genev' s bewildered look, explained that he could then direct it towards Russia 
and see what was going on there, as otherwise he must really find it very hard 
to know anything about Russia. This transparent hint at Turgenev' s prefer­
ence for living abroad, with the implied suggestion that his last novel gave a 
distorted picture of Russia and the Russians, made Turgenev, according to 
Dostoyevsky, 'terribly angry'. Dostoyevsky then went on to add insult to 
injury by declaring that all Germans were thieves and scoundrels and that 
civilizatian had done nothing for them. Turgenev, who had built himself a 
beautiful house in Baden-Baden, took this remark as a personal insult and 
exclaimed that 'he was more 'a German than a Russian himself '. Dostoyev­
sky replied that although he had read Smoke, he never expected Turgenev 
to say a thing like that, and that he was therefore sorry that he had insulted 
* It can be assumed that Dostoyevsky' s description of Karmazinov in the scene with 
Peter Verkhovensky in Part II, Chapter VI, is a more or less accurate account of his 
own meeting with Turgenev, including tire cutlet and the red wine and Turgenev' < 
'aristocratic' habit of running to kiss his visitor, though only offering him his cheek. 

XV1 
T R A N S L A T O R's I N TR O D U C T I O N  
him. Still, again according to Dostoyevsky, they parted very courteously. At 
ten o'clock next morning, when Dostoyevsky was still in bed at his hotel, a 
maid brought him Turgenev's visiting-card. As Dostoyevsky had told him 
that he never got up before eleven, he took it to mean that Turgenev did not 
want to see him again, but merely returned his visit as 'a gentleman'. They 
did see each other again, on 13 August, at the railway station, when Dos­
toyevsky was leaving Baden-Baden for Switzerland, but this time they did 
not even exchange bows. 
After giving this version of his meeting with Turgenev to Maykov, Dos­
toyevsky went on to deliver himself of the following characteristic remarks: 
'Perhaps the spitefulness with which I described Turgenev, as well as the 
way in which we insulted each other, might make an unpleasant impression 
on you, my dear Apollon Nikolayevich. But, really, I can't help it: he has 
insulted me too much by his opinions. Personally, I don't care, though he is 
not very attractive with those aristocratic airs ǭf his, but it is impossible to 
listen to such abuse of Russia from a Russian traitor.' 
Turgenev was a 'traitor' because his opinions of Russia differed from 
those of Dostoyevsky. The frantic jilry with which Dostoyevsky hated his 
opponents could not be better illustrated. But that was not all. A few months 
later Dostoyevsky, whose 'spite' was not satisfied, had the part of his letter 
to Maykov attacking Turgenev and calling him a traitor to his country copied 
out and sent to P. Bartenev, editor of Russian Archives, with an anony­
mous letter in which he explained that he would like it to be published 
in 1890 for 'posterity'. Turgenev was informed of this by a close .friend 
of his and, quite naturally, iumped to the conclusion that Dostoyevsky 
wanted to gee him into trouble with the Russian authorities as a fol­
lower of Nechayev. ( Turgenev had already been once summoned to Peters­
burg to account for his association with Herzen to a special committee of the 
Senate.) He wrote immediately to Bartenev, declaring that Dostoyevsky's 
account of their meeting was a sheer travesty of the facts, and that it would 
never have occurred to him to express his private views to a man he con­
sidered ' non compos mentis because ǭf his nervous fits and for other rea­
sons. Dostoyevsky', Turgenev went on, 'spent less than an hour at my 
house and, after relieving his mind by fierce abuse of the Germans, of myself, 
and of my last book, went away; I scarcely had any time or any wish to argue 
with him; I repeat, I treated him like a sick man. Very likely he imagined 
the arguments he claims to have heard me use in his own disordered mind and 
wrote- his denunciation of me.' 

TRANSLATOR's INTROD UCTI O N  
xvii 
When in 1871 Turgenev learned of Dostoyevsky' s satire of him in The 
Devils, he wrote to a co"espondent: 'I am told Dostoyevsky has "shown me 
up" - well, let him have his fun. He came to see me about five years ago in 
Baden, not to pay me back the money he had bo"owed from me, but to abuse 
me for all I was worth -for Smoke, which, according to his ideas, should 
have been burnt by the public hangman. I listened in silence to his tirade, and 
what do I find? That I expressed all sorts of subversive opinions to him, 
which he hastened to retail to Bartenev. That would really have been a libel, 
if Dostoyevsky had not been a madman- which I do not doubt he is. Perhaps 
he dreamt it all.' 
In Merci, Dostoyevsky' s skit on Turgenev' s writings in The Devils, two 
of Turgenev' s less well known works are satirized: Phantoms, which, as 
Turgenev himself pointed out, Dostoyevsky had gone out of his way to 
praise, and Enough, a semi-philosophic essay on the destiny of man of a 
highly pessimistic character. 
Dostoyevsky' s spite and hatred not only of his opponents, but also of all 
imaginary 'enemies' of Russia, was perhaps entirely in harmony with his 
religious obsessions. In The Devils he was not able to overcome them, and 
this is a serious blot on a novel which, in spite of its structural and artistic 
blemishes, possesses a tremendous vitality, as well as moments of great tender­
ness. The novel is best regarded as a political melodrama (the stage at the end 
of it is literally strewn with corpses). It would be absurd to take Dostoyev­
sky' s political views seriously; but it would be no less absurd to overlook his 
moments of great inspiration, his amazing insight into the human heart, and 
his shattering criticism of those aspects of man's character which profoundly 
affect human thought and behaviour. 
D.M. 


THE DEVILS 

And there was there an herd of many swine feeding on 
the mountain: and they besought him that he would 
suffer them to enter into them. And he suffered them. 
Then went the devils out of the man, and entered into 
the swine: and the herd ran violently down a steep 
place into the lake, and were choked. When they that 
fed them saw what was done, they fled, and went and 
told it in the city and in the country. Then they went 
out to see what was done; and came to Jesus, and 
found the man out of whom the devils were departed, 
sittinn at the feet of Jesus, clothed, and in his right 
mind: ar1d they tvere afraid. They also which saw it 
told :hem by what means he that was possessed o_f the 
devils was healed. 
Luke vii. 32-36 

1 
By way of an Introduction: 
A few details from the biography of the greatly esteemed 
Stepan Trofimovich Verkhovensky 
BEFORE DESCRIBING THE EXTRAORDINARY EVENTS WHICH 
took place so recently in our town, hitherto not remarkable for any­
thing in particular, I find it necessary, since I am not a skilled writer, to 
go back a little and begin with certain biographical details concerning 
our talented and greatly esteemed Stepan Trofimovich Verkhoven­
sky. I hope tl1ese details wil serve as an introduction to the social and 
political chronicle of our town, while the story I have in mind to relate 
will come later. 
Let me say at once that Mr Verkhovensky had always played a 
rather special and, as it were, civic role amongst us and that he loved 
that role passionately - so much so that I canot help feeling that he 
would not have been able to exist without it. Not that I have any in­
tention of comparing him to an actor on the stage - God forbid - par­
ticularly as I have the utmost respect for him. Perhaps it was all just a 
matter ofhabit, or, better stil, it may have been the result of a constant 
and generous desire from his earliest years of indulging in the agreeable 
fancy of being a famous public figure. For instance, he was very fond 
of his position as a 'marked' man or, as it were, an ' exile'. There is 
a sort of classical splendour about those two words that fascinated 
him and, raising him gradually in his own estimation in the course of 
years, finally led him to imagine himself as standing on a high pedestal, 
a position that was very gratifying to his vanity. In an English satirical 

22 
T H E  D E V I L S · P A RT O N E  
novel o f  the last century a certain Gulliver, on his return from the 
country of the Lilliputians, where all the people were only three or 
four inches tall, had grown so accustomed to look upon himself as a 
giant that even as he walked in the streets of London he could not help 
shouting at the carriages and the passers-by to get out of his way and 
take heed he did not crush them, imagining that they were little and 
that he was still a giant. But that merely made everybody laugh at 
him and abuse him, and the uncouth coachmen even belaboured the 
giant with their whips. But was that fair ? What does habit not do to 
a man ! Habit had brought Mr Verkhovensky almost to the same posi­
tion, though in a more innocent and inolfensive form, if one may put 
it that way, for he was a most excellent man. 
As a matter of fact, I cannot help thinking that towards the end of 
his life he was completely forgotten by everybody ; but, on the other 
hand, it would be absurd to say that he was entirely unknown. Indeed, 
there cannot be any doubt at all that for some time he, too, belonged 
to the famous galaxy of illustrious men of the last generation and that 
at one time - though only for the briefest moment - his name was 
uttered by many enthusiastic people of that day almost in the same 
breath as Chaadayev, Belinsky, Granovsky, and Herzen (who had 
only just begun his activities abroad). But Mr Verkhovensky's activi­
ties came to an end almost as soon as they began as a result of, so to 
speak, ' a  whirlwind of concurrent events '. And what do you think ? 
It turned out afterwards that there had been no ' whirlwind' and even 
no 'events ', at any rate at that particular instant. It was only the other 
day that I discovered, to my great astonishment, from a highly reli­
able source, that Mr Verkhovensky had never lived in our province 
amongst us as an exile, as we were all led to suppose, and that he had 
never even been placed under police supervision. Which only goes to 
show how vivid one's imagination can be! For all his life he sincerely 
believed that he was regarded with apprehension in certain quarters, 
that every step of his was known and watched, and that each of our 
three governors, who succeeded one another during the last twenty 
years, brought with him, as he arrived to rule over our province, a cer­
tain preconceived idea about him that had been suggested from above 
and most certainly on his appointment as governor. Had anyone tried 
to convince our most fair-minded Mr Verkhovensky by irrefutable 
evidence that there was nothing he need be afraid of, he would most 

BY WAY Of AN INTRO D UCTION 
2] 
certainly have been deeply offended. And yet he was undoubtedly a 
highly intelligent and talented man, a man who was, as it were, even 
a scholar, though so far as his scholarship was concerned ... well, he 
did not really make any important contribution to scholarship, indeed 
none at all, I believe. But, then, that happens again and again in Russia 
with men of learning. 
On his return from abroad he distinguished himself as a university 
lecturer towards the very end of the forties. But he had only time to 
deliver a few lectures - about the Arabs, I think. He had time, too, to 
defend a brilliant thesis on the civic and Hanseatic importance of the 
little German town of Hanau during the period between 1413 and 
1428 and, simultaneously, on the special and rather obscure reasons 
why that promise was never fulfiled. This thesis was a shrewd and 
painful blow at the Slavophils of the day and at once made him in­
numerable and bitter enemies among them. Later on - that was after 
he had lost his position at the university - he managed to publish (by 
way of revenge and just to show them what a man they had lost) in a 
monthly progressive periodical, which translated Dickens and propa­
gated the ideas of George Sand, the beginning of a most profound 
work of research into the causes, I believe, of the extraordinary moral 
nobility of certain knights of a certain epoch, or something of the 
kind. Anyway, it expounded some exceedingly lofty and extraordin­
arily noble idea. It was rumoured afterwards that he was hastily for­
bidden to carry on with his research and that the progresive periodi­
cal even came to grief for having published the first part. That may 
well have been so, for what did not happen in those days? But in this 
particular case it is much more likely that nothing of the sort hap­
pened and that the author himself was too lazy to finish his esay. He 
stopped his lectures on the Arabs because someone (probably one of 
his reactionary enemies) had somehow or other intercepted a letter to 
someone giving an account of certain ·circumstances' as a result of 
which someone else had demanded some kind of explanation from 
him. I don't know whether it is true, but it was also asserted that just 
then there was discovered in Petersburg a certain vast subversive anti­
government society of thirteen members which very nearly under­
mined the foundations of the State. It was whispered that they in­
tended to translate the works of Fourier himself. It so happened 
that at that very moment the authorities in Moscow seized Mr 

24 
THE D E V I L S  • P A R T  O N E  
Verkhovensky's poetic play, written six years before in Berlin when he 
was still very young, and circulated in manuscript among two literary 
dilettanti and one student. That play is lying now on my table. I re­
ceived it about a year ago from Mr Verkhovensky, who had only re­
cently copied it out in his own hand. It bears his own autograph and 
is bound in magnificent red morocco. I must admit that it is not with­
out poetic merit and even some talent; it is strange, but in those days 
(that is, in the thirties) people often wrote that kind of poetic drama. 
I am rather at a loss to tell you what it is all about because, to be frank, 
I can't make head or tail of it. It is some sort of allegory in lyrical and 
dramatic form, recalling the second act of Faust. It opens with a chorus 
of women, followed by a chorus of men, then a chorus of some spirits, 
and, lastly, a chorus of souls which have never lived but which are 
very anxious to live. All these choruses sing about something very in­
definite, mostly about somebody's curse, but with a suggestion of the 
loftiest humour. Then the scene suddenly changes and a sort of' Festi­
val of Life' IY:gins in which even insects join in the singing, a tortoise 
appears with certain sacramental Latin words, and, if I remember 
rightly, even some mineral - that is, quite an inanimate object - also 
bursts into song about something or other. In fact, they all sing inces­
santly, and when they speak they seem to abuse each other vaguely, 
but again with a suggestion of some higher meaning. At last the scene 
changes again into a blasted heath, and a cultured young man wanders 
among the rocks, picking and sucking certain herbs; asked by a f.1iry 
why he sucks those herbs, he replies that, feeling a superabundance of 
life in himself, he seeks forgetfulness and finds it in the juice of those 
herbs, but that his dearest wish is to lose his reason as soon as possible 
(a wish that seems to be quite superfluous). Then a young man of in­
describable beauty suddenly comes riding in on a black horse, fol­
lowed by a vast concourse of all the nations. The young man sym­
bolizes Death, and all the nations yearn for it. And, finally, in the last 
scene of al, the Tower of Babel appears and some athletes at last 
fmish building it with a song of new hope, and when they reach the 
top, the lord (of Olympus, I suppose) runs off in a comic fashion, and 
mankind, realizing the position and seizing his place, at once begin a 
new life with a new insight into things. It was that sort of poetic play 
that was considered dangerous in those days. Last year I proposed to 
Mr Verkhovensky to publish it, since it would be regarded as utterly 

BY WAY O F  AN INT R O D U CTION 
25 
innocuous nowadays, but he declined my suggestion with uncon­
cealed displeasure. My view of its utter inocuousness did not please 
him, and I even ascribe to it a certain coldness in our relations which 
lasted two whole months. And what do you think ? All of a sudden, 
and almost at the same time as I had proposed publishing it here, the 
play was published there - that is to say, abroad in one of the revolu­
tionary miscellanies - and entirely without Mr Verkhovensky's know­
ledge. At first he was alarmed, rushed off to see the governor, and 
wrote a most loyal letter in his self-defence to Petersburg, which he 
read to me twice but never posted, not knowing to whom to address 
it. In short, he was very agitated for a whole month, but I am con­
vinced that deep down in his heart he was greatly flattered. He almost 
went to bed with the copy of the journal which someone had obtained 
for him, and in the day-time he kept it hidden under the mattress ; he 
would not even permit his maidservant to make his bed, and though 
he daily expected the arrival of a telegram, he viewed the world at 
large with a scornful eye. It was just then that he made friends with 
me again, which is merely another proof of the extreme kindliness of 
l-..is gentle and unresentful heart. 
2 
I don't claim for a moment that he had never suffered for his con­
victions, but I am fully convinced now that he could have gone on 
lecturing on his Arabs as much as he liked if he had only given the 
necessary explanations. But at that time he allowed himself to be car­
ried away by his ambition and was much too hasty in assuming once 
for all that his career had been completely ruined by the ' whirlwind 
of events'. And if the whole truth is to be told, the real cause of the 
change in his career was the highly delicate proposal that had been 
made before and renewed again by Varvara Petrovna Stavrogin, the 
wife of a lieutenant-general and a woman of considerable means, to 
undertake the education and the whole intellectual development of 
her only son in the capacity of a superior tutor and friend, to say noth­
ing of a magnificent salary. The proposal had been made to him for 
the fmt time in Berlin, and, as a matter of fact, just at the time of the 
death of his first wife. His first wife was a frivolous girl from our pro­
vince whom he married when he was still a rather thoughtless young 

THE DEVILS· PART O NB 
man. I believe he had had a great deal of trouble with that young 
woman -who, by the way, was very attractive- owing to his in­
ability to support her, and for other, partly delicate, reasons, too. She 
died in Paris, having been separated from him for three years before, 
leaving him a five-year-old son, 'the fruit of our first, joyous, and stil 
unclouded love', as the grief-stricken Mr Verkhovensky once put it 
in my presence. The boy had been sent to Rusia, where he was 
brought up by some distant aunts in some remote province. Mr 
Verkhovensky had declined Mrs Stavrogin's proposal on that oc­
casion and had quickly married again before the year was out a 
taciturn Berlin girl, and that, too, without any particular necessity 
for him to do so. But apart from his marriage there were other 
reasons why he refused to accept the post of a tutor: he was tempted 
by the resounding fame of a professor who enjoyed great popularity 
at the time, and he, too, was eager to accept the offer of a university 
lectureship, for which he had been preparing himself, to try his eagle 
wings. And now, with singed wings, he naturally remembered the 
offer which even before had made him wonder whether he had been 
right in refusing it. The sudden death of his second wife, who did not 
live a year with him, settled the matter definitely. Let me be quite 
frank: everything was settled by the passionate sympatl1y, the price­
less and classical friendship of Mrs Stavrogin, if indeed one may use 
such an expression about friendship. He flung himself into the arms of 
that friendship, and the whole thing was settled for twenty years. I 
used the expression 'flung himself into the arms', but don't let anyone 
jump to any rash and improper conclusions; those arms have to be 
understood only in the highest possible moral sense. These two re­
markable beings were joined for ever in a union that was most refined 
and delicate. 
Mr Verkhovensky also accepted the post of tutor because the pro­
perty he had iniierited from his first wife - a very small one - was 
close to Skvoreslmiki, the magnificent estate of the Stavrogins within 
a few miles of our town. Besides, it was always possible for him to 
devote himself to the cause of learning and enrich Russian literature 
by the most profound researches in the seclusion of his study and with­
out any interference from the enormous amount of university work. 
These researches did not appear; but, on the other hand, he found it 
possible to spend the rest of his life, more than twenty years, 'a living 

BY W A Y  O F  AN I N T R O D U C T I O N  
27 
monument of reproach ', as it were, to his country, in the words of a 
popular poet: 
A living monument of reproach 
Thou stoodst before thy country, 
0 liberal idealist. 
Perhaps the person the poet had in mind had a right to pose hke 
that all his life, if he wanted to, however boring he may have fotmd 
it. But our Mr Verkhovensky; to tell the truth, was only an imitator 
compared with such people, and, besides, he got very quickly tired of 
standing and very often preferred to lie down. But, to do him justice, 
even in his recumbent position he preserved the living monument of 
reproach - particularly as that alone was quite sufficient for our pro­
vincial public. You ought to have seen him at our club when he sat 
down to cards. His whole attitude seemed to say : ' Cards ! Me sit down 
to whist with you ! Is it in keeping with my position ? But who is 
responsible for that? Who ruined my career and turned it into 
whist ? Oh, perish Russia! ' and he would majestically trump with a 
heart. 
And to tell the truth he was very fond of a game of cards, which, 
especially in later years, led to frequent and unpleasant squabbles with 
Mrs Stavrogin, particularly as he was always losing. But of that later. 
I wish merely to point out that he was a man of a tender conscience 
(sometimes, that is), and that was why he was so often depressed. In 
the course of his twenty years' friendship with Mrs Stavrogin he regu­
larly three or four times a year fell into what is known among us as a 
state of' civic grief ' - that is to say, into a fit of the blackest depression 
- but our highly esteemed Mrs Stavrogin liked that particular expres­
sion. Later on he succumbed not only to civic grief, but also to cham­
pagne; but the tactful Mrs Stavrogm protected him all his life from 
his trivial inclinations. And, as a matter of fact, he was in need of a 
nurse, for sometimes he behaved very queerly: in the midst of the 
most exalted grief, he would suddenly burst out laughing in a most 
common manner. There were moments when he would even start 
talking to himself in a humorous vein. And Mrs Stavrogin feared 
nothing so much as his humorous vein. She was a woman of the classi­
cal type, a female Maecenas, who always acted from the highest pos­
sible motives. The influence of this great lady on her poor friend for 

z8 
THH DEVILS • PART O NH 
twenty years was of a most fundamental kind. I ought really to speak 
of her separately, which I now propose to do. 
3 
There are strange friendships: two friends are almost ready to kill 
each other, they go on like that all their lives, and yet they cannot 
bring themselves to part : the one who has been the first to quarrel and 
break up their close friendship may fall il and even die if that should 
happen. I know for a fact that Mr Verkhovensky has several times 
jumped up from the sofa and begun beating the wall with his fists 
after Mrs Stavrogin's departure and even after an exchange of the 
most intimate confidences with her. 
It all happened in good earnest. Indeed, one day he even knocked 
some plaster off the wall. It may be asked how I could possibly come 
to know so delicate a detail. Well, what if I witnessed it myself ? 
What if Mr Verkhovensky himself has on more than one occasion 
sobbed on my shoulder, while describing to me in lurid colours the 
smallest detail of his talk with Mrs Stavrogin ? (The things he told me 
on such occasions!) But what invariably happened after those sobs 
was that the very next morning he was ready to crucify himself for 
his ingratitude; he would send for me in a hurry or run over to see me 
himself just to tell me that Mrs Stavrogin was 'an angel of honour and 
delicacy', while he was the exact opposite. He not only came running 
to me, but very often described it all to her himself in the most elo­
quent letters and confessed to her over his full signature that no longer 
ago than the day before, for instance, he bad told a stranger that she 
kept him out of vanity, that she envied him his learning and his talents, 
that she hated him, and was only afraid to show her hatred openly tor 
fear that he should leave her and so damage her literary reputation; 
that as a consequence of that he despised himself and had made up his 
mind to die a violent death ; and that he was waiting for her final word 
which would decide his fate, etc., etc., all in that vein. You can imag­
ine after this to what a pitch of hysteria the nervous outbreaks of this 
most innocent of all fifty-year-old babes sometimes rose! One day I 
read one of these letters of his, written after some quarrel between 
them arising from a trivial matter, though growing venomous as it 
went on. I was horrified, and begged him not to send it. 

BY WAY OF AN I N T RO D U CT I O N  
29 
'That's impossible,' he replied, almost in a fever. 'It's more honest 
like that. It's my duty. I'd die if l did not confess everything to her, 
everything ! ' And he did send the letter. 
Mrs Stavrogin - and that was where they differed - would never 
have sent such a letter. It is true that he was passionately fond of writ­
ing, that he wrote to her even when they lived in the same house, and 
during his hysterical outbursts he would write two letters a day. I 
know for a fact that she always read his letters with the greatest atten­
tion, even when she received two a day, and that, having read them, 
she put them away in a special casket, dated and arranged in order; 
moreover, she treasured them in her heart. After which, keeping her 
friend waiting a whole day for an answer, she would meet him as if 
nothing were the matter, just as if nothing special had transpired the 
day before. Little by little she trained him so well that he did not him­
self dare to remind her of what had happened the day before, but 
merely looked hard for some time into her eyes. But she never forgot 
anything, while he sometimes forgot al too soon, and, encouraged by 
her composure, he would quite often, if friends came in, laugh and 
intlulge in all sorts of boyish pranks over the champagne the very same 
day. With what venomous hatred she must have looked at him at 
such moments, but he did not notice anything ! After a week, perhaps, 
or a month, or even six months, recalling by chance at some particular 
moment some expression in such a letter without its attendant cir­
cumstance, he would suddenly be overwhelmed with shame and be 
so upset that he would fall il with one of his attacks of acute gastric 
catarrh. These special attacks of his were in some cases the usual result 
of his nervous shocks and were to a certain extent an interesting pecu­
liarity of his physical condition. 
Mrs Stavrogin, no doubt, did very often hate him; but one thing 
he failed to notice to the very end, namely that he had at last become 
her son, her creation, one might almost say her invention. He had be­
come flesh of her flesh, and she kept and supported him not merely 
from ' envy of his talents'. And how offended she must have been by 
such a suggestion! An unbearable sort oflove for him must have lain 
concealed in her heart in the midst of continual hatred, jealousy, and 
contempt. She protected him from every speck of dust, she fussed 
over him for twenty-two years, she would have spent sleepless nights 
if his reputation as a poet, a scholar, or a public man had been in 

30 
THE D E V I L S  • PART O N E  
danger. She had invented him, and she had been the first to believe in 
her own invention. He waǤ, in a way, a sort of dream ofhers . . . .  But in 
return she really demanded a great deal from him, sometimes even the 
obedience of a slave. And it was incredible how unforgiving she was! 
I may as well tell you two stories about that. 
4 
One day, just at the time of the firSt rumours about the emancipation 
of the serfs, when the whole of Russia suddenly rejoiced and was 
making preparations to be completely regenerated, a Petersburg 
baron, a man of the highest connexions who was closely associated 
with the reform, paid a call on Mrs Stavrogin while passing through 
our town. Mrs Stavrogin valued such visits greatly because her con­
nexions with high society were growing weaker and weaker since the 
death of her husband, and in the end ceased altogether. The Baron 
spent an hour with her and took tea. There was no one else there, but 
Mrs Stavrogin did invite Stepan Verkhovensky and exhibited him. 
The Baron had heard something about him before, or pretended to, 
but he spoke very little to him at tea. Mr Verkhovensky was, natur­
ally, anxious to make a good impression, and, besides, his manners 
were most exquisite. Though he was not apparently very high born, 
yet it happened that since his earliest childhood he had been brought 
up in an aristocratic house in Moscow and, consequently, decently ; 
he spoke French like a Parisian. The Baron ought therefore to have 
realized at the fmt glance the sort of people with whom Mrs Stavro­
gin surrounded herself, even if she did live in the seclusion of a pro­
vincial town. But things did not turn out like that. When the Baron 
positively confmned the absolute authenticity of the first rumours of 
the great reform which had just then been spread abroad, Mr Verk­
hovensky was unable to control his enthusiasm and cried ' Hurrah! ', 
accompanying his exclamation with a gesture of the hand expressing 
his great delight at the news. His exclamation was not too loud and 
rather elegant; indeed, his enthusiasm, too, was not entirely spontane­
ous, and he had carefully rehearsed his gesture in front of a mirror half 
an hour before the tea-party; but something had apparently gone 
amiss, for the llaron permitted himself a faint smile, though he at once 
put in a polite phrase about the universal and proper way in which all 

BY W A Y  O F  A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  
3 I  
Russian hearts had been touched by the great event. He soon left, and, 
before leaving, did not forget to offer two fingers to Mr Verkhoven­
sky. When she returned to the drawing-room, Mrs Stavrogin at first 
said nothing for three minutes, pretending to be looking for some­
thing on the table; but suddenly she turned to Mr Verkhovensky and 
with a pale face and flashing eyes hissed in a whisper: 
'I shall never forgive you for this ! '  
Next day shǥ met her friend as though nothing had happened ; she 
never referred to the incident again. But thirteen years later, at a tragic 
moment, she remembered it and reproached him with it, and she 
turned pale, just as she had done thirteen years before when she had 
reproached him for the first time. Only twice in her life had she said 
to him: ' I  shall never forgive you for tlus ! '  The incident with the 
Baron was the second time; but the first incident also was so charac­
teristic and, apparently, played so great a part in shaping Mr Verk­
hovensky's future, that I must refer to it too. 
It took place in 1 855, in springtime, in the month of May, just after 
the news had reached Skvoreslmiki that Lieutenant-General Stavro­
gin, a foolish old gentleman, had died of acute indigestion on the way 
to the Crimea, where he was hastening to join the army on active ser­
vice. Mrs Stavrogin, having been left a widow, went into mourning. 
It is true there was no reason why she should mourn a great deal, for 
she had spent the last four years in complete separation from her hus­
band owing to the incompatibility of their characters, and she was 
giving him an allowance. (The Lieutenant-General himself only had 
1 50 peasants and his army pay in addition to his position and his con­
nexions ; al the money and Skvoreshniki belonged to Mrs Stavrogin, 
the only daughter of a very rich- Government contractor.) She was 
nevertheless shocked by the suddenness of the news and retired into 
complete seclusion. Mr Verkhovensky, needless to say, was always at 
her side. 
It was the height of May. The evenings were extraordinarily fine. 
The wild cherry was in flower. The two friends met each evening in 
the garden and sat till nightfall in the summer-house, pourmg out 
their hearts to one another. There were romantic moments. Under the 
influence of the change in her position, Mrs Stavrogin talked more 
than usual. She seemed to cling to her friend, and so it went on 
for several evenings. A strange idea suddenly occurred to Mr 

THE DEVILS • P A R T  ONE 
V crkhovensky: 'Was the inconsolable widow counting on him by 
any chance to make her a proposal of marriage at the end of the year of 
mourning ?' It was a cynical idea; but, then, the very fact that a man 
dwells among the stars sometimes increases his disposition to cynical 
thoughts, if only because his spiritual development is so many-sided. 
He began to consider it carefully, and came to the conclusion that it 
looked very much like it. He thought it over: 'It is true she has an 
enormous fortune, but -' And, to be sure, Mrs Stavrogin was not 
exactly a beauty: she was a tal, bony woman with a yellow com­
plexion and an exceedingly long, horsy face. Mr Verkhovensky hesi­
tated more and more; he was tortured by doubts, and even cried a few 
times from indecision (he wept rather frequently). In the evenings -
that is to say, in the summer-house - his face involuntarily began to 
assume a capricious and ironical expression, a cross between some­
thing coquettish and supercilious. This happens somehow of itself and 
involuntarily, and indeed the more honourable the man the more 
noticeable it is. Goodness only knows what the truth of the matter 
was, but it is most likely that there was nothing stirring in Mrs Stav­
rogin's heart that could have fully justified Mr Verkhovensky's sus­
picions. And, besides, she would never have agreed to change her 
name of Stavrogin for his name, even if it were as renowned as hers. 
Quite possibly it was just a womanly desire on her part to make her­
self agreeable to a man, a manifestation of an unconscious feminine 
yearning which is so natural in certain extremely feminine circum­
stances. However, I won't vouch for it : the depths of a woman's heart 
have remained unexplored to this day! But, to continue. 
I daresay she soon guessed the meaning of the strange expression on 
her friend's face; she was very sensitive and observant, while he was a 
little too innocent at times. But the evenings went on as before and 
their conversations were as poetic and interesting as ever. Then one 
day, at night-fall, they parted very amicably after a highly animated 
and poetical conversation, pressing each other's hands warmly at the 
steps of the cottage which Mr Verkhovensky occupied. Every sum­
mer he moved from the huge Skvoreshniki mansion into the little 
cottage which stood almost in the garden. He had only just gone in 
and, sunk into unhappy meditation, taken a cigar and without lighting 
it stopped, weary and motionless, before the open window, gazing at 
\he little white douds, light as fluff, gliding round the bright moon. 

BY WAY O F  AN I NT R O D U C T I O N  
3 3  
when suddenly a faint rustle made him start and turn round. Mrs Stav­
rogin, whom he had left only four minutes earlier, was again standing 
before him. Her yellow face was almost blue, her lips were pressed 
tightly together and twitching at the corners. For ten full seconds she 
looked into his eyes in silence with a firm, implacable gaze, and then 
she whispered rapidly: 
' I  shall never forgive you for this ! '  
When ten years later Mr Verkhovensky told me tlll.s sad tale in a 
whisper, having previously locked the door, he vowed that he had 
been so stunned .tt the time that he had not heard or seen Mrs Stavrogin 
go. As she never once alluded to that incident again, and as everything 
went on as though nothing had happened, he was all his life inclined 
to think that it was just a hallucination before an illness, particularly as 
he had in fact fallen ill that night and was ill for a fortnight, which, 
incidentally, put an end to their meetings in the summer-house. 
But in spite oflll.s notion that it was only a hallucination, he appar­
ently waited every day, all his life, for the continuation and, as it were, 
the denouemeni of that incident. He could not believe that that was the 
er.d of it! And if so, he must have looked strangely sometimes at his 
friend. 
She even designed the clothes he wore all his life herself. They were 
elegant and characteristic: a long, black frock-coat, buttoned almost 
to the top, but which fitted him beautifully; a soft hat (in sum­
mer a straw one) with a wide brim; a wlll.te cambric cravat with a 
large bow and hanging ends ; a cane with a silver knob, and long hair 
to his shoulders. His hair was dark brown and it was only quite re­
cently that it had begun to go a little grey. He was clean shaven. I am 
told that he was exceedingly handsome as a young man. But, in my 
opinion, he was unusually impressive also in his old age. And, besides, 
he could hardly be called old at the age of fifty-three. But because of 
his affected pose of a patriot he did not even try to look younger, but 
seemed to flaunt the solidity of his age, and in his suit, tall, spare, with 
his hair hanging down to his shoulders, he looked almost like a patri­
arch or, to be more exact, like the portrait of the playwright Kukol­
nik, engraved in an edition of his works published in the thirties, 
especially when he sat in the garden in summer, on a seat, beneath a 

34 
THE DEVILS • PART ONE 
bush of flowering lilac, leaning with both hands on his cane, an open 
book beside him, and sunk into a poetical reverie over the setting sun. 
So far as books are concerned, I should point out that in later years he 
seemed to avoid reading. That, however, was towards the very end of 
his life. The newspapers and journals, which Mrs Stavrogin ordered in 
great numbers, he read continually. He was always interested in the 
successes of Russian literature, though without losing the sense of his 
own dignity. At one time he was rather interested in home and for­
eign affairs, but soon gave it up. It also frequently happened that he 
would take De Tocqueville with him into the garden, while he secretly 
carried a Paul de Kock in his pocket. Still, this is not important. 
Let me say something, too, in parenthesis about Kukolnik's por­
trait. Mrs Stavrogin first came across that picture as a young girl when 
she was still at her exclusive boarding-school in Moscow. She imme­
diately fell in love with the portrait, as is the custom of all young girls 
in boarding-schools, who fall in love with anything you like and 
mostly with their calligraphy and drawing-masters as well. But the 
interesting thing is not what Mrs Stavrogin did as a little girl, but that 
even at the age of fifty she kept that picture among her most intimate 
treasures, so that it is quite likely that she designed Mr Verkhovensky's 
clothes in such a style that they somewhat resembled the clothes worn 
by the playwright in the picture. But that, too, is of course a trivial 
point. 
During the first years or, to be more precise, the first half of the 
time he spent with Mrs Stavrogin, Mr Verkhovensky was still think­
ing of writing some book and seriously intended to start writing it 
every day. But during the second half he seemed to have forgotten 
everything he had ever known. More and more frequently he used to 
say to us: 'I seem to be ready to start work, I have collected all the 
materials, but somehow or other I cannot sit down to it ! I just can't do 
anything!' And he would drop his head dejectedly. No doubt this 
was meant to increase his prestige in our eyes as a martyr to learning, 
but he himself was after something else. 'I've been forgotten ! I'm no 
use to anyone!' he would exclaim more than once. This intensified 
despondency took hold of him especially towards the end of the fifties. 
Mrs Stavrogin realized at last that it was a serious matter. Besides, she 
could not bear the thought that her friend had been forgotten and was 
of no use to anyone. To distract him and at the same time to renew 

B Y  WAY OP AN I N T R O D U C T I O N  
35 
his fame she took him to Moscow, where she had a number offashion­
able acquaintances in the world of literature and learning ; but it 
seemed that Moscow, too, was unsatisfactory. 
It was a peculiar time ; something new was astir, something that 
was quite unlike the tranquillity of the past, something that was very 
strange indeed, but was felt everywhere, even in Skvoreshniki. Al 
sorts of rumours reached our town. The facts were generally more or 
less known, but it was dear that in addition to the facts there were cer­
tain ideas that came with them, and, moreover, in great numbers. And 
it was that that was so bewildering : it was quite impossible to accom­
modate oneself to these ideas or to fmd out exactly what they meant. 
Mrs Stavrogin, being a woman, could not help suspecting some sort 
of hidden meaning in them. She even started reading the papers and 
magazines, the prohibited publications which were published abroad, 
and even the revolutionary pamphlets which were just begining to 
appear at the time (she was able to obtain them all); but it merely 
made her head swim. She started writing letters ; but she received few 
replies, and the longer it went on, the more incomprehensible it all be­
ca:ne. Mr Verkhovensky was solemnly summoned to explain 'all 
these ideas ' to her once for all ; but she remained decidedly dissatisfied 
with his explanations. 
Mr Verkhovensky's views on the general situation were extremely 
supercilious; he reduced everything to the fact that he had been for­
gotten and was of no use to anyone. At last he, too, was mentioned, 
first in the periodicals published abroad, as an exiled martyr, and im­
mediately afterwards in Petersburg, as a former star of a famous 
galaxy; he was even, for some reason, compared to Radishchev. Then 
someone published a report that he was dead and promised to write 
his obituary. Mr Verkhovensky immediately came to life and assumed 
an air of great importance. Al his disdainful views of his contempora­
ries immediately disappeared and he was overcome by a burning desire 
to join the movement and show his powers. Mrs Stavrogin at once re­
gained her old faith in everything and got terribly busy. They decided 
to leave for Petersburg without delay, to find everything out on the 
spot, to look into everything personally, and, if possible, to throw 
themselves heart and soul into the new work. She announced, by the 
way, that she was prepared to found a periodical of her own and de­
vote her whole life to it from that very day. Seeing that it had gone so 

T H E  D E V I L S  • PART O NE 
far, Mr Verkhovensky became even more overbearing, and on the 
journey to Petersburg began to treat Mrs Stavrogin almost patroniz­
ingly - which she immediately noticed and vowed to remember. She 
had, as a matter of fact, another very important reason for the journey, 
namely the renewal of her former connexions. She felt that she must 
as far as possible remind society of her existence, or at any rate have a 
good try. The official reason for the journey was to see her only son, 
who was just then fmishing his course of studies at the Petersburg 
lycee. 
6 
They spent almost the whole winter season in Petersburg. By Lent, 
however, everything burst like a rainbow-coloured soap bubble. 
Their dreams vanished into thin air, and the confusion, far from being 
cleared up, became worse confounded. To begin with, the connexions 
with the higher circles failed to materialize, except on a very micro­
scopic scale and at the cost of humiliating efforts. Deeply mortified, 
Mrs Stavrogin at first showed a violent interest in the ' new ideas ' and 
began giving evening parties. She sent out invitations to literary 
people, and hundreds of them immediately turned up at her house. 
Afterwards they came without being invited ; and they brought their 
friends with them. Never in her life had she seen such literary men. 
They were incredibly vain, but made no secret of it, as though they 
were so on principle. Some (though by no means all) turned up drunk, 
but they seemed to regard it as some new manifestation of grace they 
had discovered only the day before. They all appeared to be quite 
extraordinarily proud of something. On all faces was written that they 
had only just discovered some highly important secret. They abused 
each other and were proud of it. It was not easy to fmd out exactly 
what they had written, but there were critics, novelists, dramatists, sati­
rists, and exposers of abuses among them. Mr Verkhovensky wormed 
his way into their highest circle, from which the movement was 
directed. It was a stiff climb, but they welcomed him with open arms, 
though, of course, none of them knew or had heard anything about him 
except that he represented an idea. He manoeuvred so skilfully among 
them that he prevailed upon them, too, to go twice to Mrs Stavrogin's 
salon, in spite of their Olympian grandeur. These people were very 
serious and exceedingly polite ; they behaved with decorum ; the others 

B Y  W A Y  O F  A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  
3 7  
were evidently afraid o f  them; but i t  was clear that they had no time to 
waste. Two or three former literary celebrities also put in an appear­
ance. They happened to be in Petersburg at the time, and Mrs Stavro­
gin had long been maintaining a most refined relationship with them. 
But, to her surprise, these real and quite indubitable celebrities were as 
quiet as mice, and some of them simply hung on to this new rabble 
and curried favour with them shamelessly. At first Mr Verkhovensky 
was in luck : he was seized and exhibited at literary meetings. When 
he appeared for the first time on the platform at one of these public 
readings, he was ֑iven a great ovation which lasted for five minutes. 
He recalled it with tears nine years later, though more because of his 
artistic nature than out of gratitude. ' I  swear to you, and I'm ready to 
have a bet on it,' he told me himself (but only to me, and in secret), 
'that not a man in the audience knew anything about me - not a 
thing! '  It was a remarkable confession : for it meant that he possessed 
an acute intelligence, if he could realize his position so clearly on the 
platform in spite of his tremendous excitement at the time ; but, on 
the other hand, it meant, too, that he did not possess an acute intelli­
gence if even nine years later he could not recall it without a feeling of 
resentment. He was made to sign two or three collective protests (he 
did not know himself against what) ; he signed them. Mrs Stavrogin, 
too, was made to sign a protest against some ' revolting action', and 
she, too, signed. However, though the majority of these ' new' men 
were present at Mrs Stavrogin's parties, they thought it for some 
reason their duty to regard her with contempt and unconcealed deri­
sion. Mr Verkhovensky used to hint to me afterwards, in his moments 
of bitterness, that it was from that time that she began envying him. 
She realized, of course, that it was not her business to associate with 
these people, but she received them eagerly for all that, with the hys­
terical impatience so characteristic of a woman and, above all, she al­
ways expected something to happen. At her evening parties she talked 
little, though she could talk if she wanted to, but mostly she preferred 
to listen. They talked about the abolition of the censorship and spelling 
reform, of the substitution of the Roman alphabet for the Russian one, 
of the exile of someone the day before, of some public disturbance in 
the shopping arcade, of the advisability of a federal constitution for 
the different nationalities in Russia, of the abolition of the army and 
the navy, of the restoration of Poland as far as the Dnieper, of the 

THE D E V I L S  • PART O N E  
agrarian reform and o f  the political pamphlets, of the abolition o f  in­
heritance, the family, children, and the priesthood, of the rights of 
women, of Krayevsky' s splendid house, for which no one seemed able 
to forgive Mr Krayevsky, and so on and so forth. It was obvious that 
among that rabble of 'new' men there were many impostors, but it 
was no less obvious that there were also a great many good, honest 
people among them, in spite of certain rather striking dissimilarities of 
character. The honest ones were much more incomprehensible than 
the coarse and dishonest ones ; but it was impossible to tell which was 
the tool of which. When Mrs Stavrogin announced her intention of 
publishing a periodical, many more people flocked to her receptions, 
but almost at once accusations that she was a capitalist and an exploiter 
of labour were hurled against her. The familiarity of these accusations 
was equalled only by their unexpectedness. The aged General Ivan 
Drozdov, a former friend and fellow-officer of the late General Stav­
rogin, a most worthy man (in his own way, of course), a man we al 
know to be extremely stubborn and irritable, who ate a lot and who 
was terribly afraid of atheism, had an argwnent at one of Mrs Stavro­
gin's parties with a certain famous young man, who immediately said 
to him: 'You must be a general, to talk like that,' meaning that he 
could find no word of abuse worse than ' a  general '. General Drozdov 
flew into a great rage. 'Yes, sir,' he said, 'I am a general, and a lieuten­
ant-general, and I've served my sovereign; and you, sir, are a puppy 
and an atheist! '  A most unfortunate scene followed. Next day the in­
cident was adversely commented on in the Press, and signatures were 
immediately collected for a protest against 'the outrageous conduct' 
of Mrs Stavrogin for refusing to turn the General out of her house at 
once. A cartoon was published in an illustrated magazine in which 
Mrs Stavrogin, the General, and Mr Verkhovensky were al most 
venomously caricatured as three reactionary friends; there were even 
verses underneath the cartoon written by a popular poet specially for 
the occasion. I may add for my part that it is quite true that many 
army officers of the rank of general have an absurd habit of saying, 'I 
have served my sovereign ... ' as though wishing to imply that their 
sovereign is not the same as the sovereign of ordinary subjects, but a 
special one, one that belongs only to them. 
It was impossible, of course, to remain any longer in Petersburg, 
particularly as Mr Verkhovensky suffered a complete fiasco. He could 

BY WAY O F  AN INTRODUCTION 
39 
not restrain himself, and began talking about the prerogatives of art, 
which made people laugh at him louder than ever. At his last public 
reading he thought it expedient to attempt to impress his audience by 
patriotic eloquence, imagining that he would touch their hearts, and 
counting on their respect for his ' exile'. He was quite wiling to admit 
the uselesnes and absurdity of the word ' mother country' ; he even 
declared his readiness to accept the idea of the harmfulness of religion, 
but firmly and loudly declared that boots were less important than 
Pushkin, and very much so. He was booed so mercilessly that he burst 
into tears there and then, on the platform, in full view of the audience. 
Mrs Stavrogin took him home more dead than alive. 'On m' a traite 
com me un vieux bonnet de co ton!' he babbled senselessly. She looked 
after him all night, gave him laurel and cherry drops, repeating to him 
til daybreak: 'You're still usefUl; you'll still make a public appear­
ance; you'll be appreciated - in another place.' 
Early next morning five literary gentlemen, three of whom were 
complete strangers, came to see Mrs Stavrogin. They told her sternly 
that they had looked into the question of her periodical and had come 
to a decision in that matter. Mrs Stavrogin had certainly never asked 
anybody to look into the question of her magazine or take any deci­
sion about it. Their decision was that, having founded her magazine, 
she should immediately hand it over to them with the capital to run 
it on the basis of a free co-operative association; she herself was to go 
back to Skvoreshniki, not forgetting to take with her Mr Verkhoven­
sky, who was 'out of date'. Anxious to play fair, they agreed to re­
cognize the rights of property in her case and to send her every year a 
sixth part of the net profits. The really touching thing about the whole 
proposal was that certainly four out of the five gentlemen had no self­
ish motives in making it, but were simply acting in the name of ' the 
cause '. 
'We left Petersburg completely dazed,' Mr Verkhovensky used to 
say. 'I was completely at a loss what to make of it all and, I remember, 
I kept muttering some nonsense verse to the rumble of the tram, 
goodnes only knows what, all the way to Moscow. It was only in 
Moscow that I recovered my senses, just as though I really could find 
something very different there. Oh, my friends,' he sometimes cried 
in a moment of inspiration, 'you can't imagine the sadness and resent­
ment that £il your soul to overflowing every time a great idea you 

40 
THE D EV I L S  • PART O N E  
have long revered as sacred is taken up by some bunglers who drag it 
out into the street to fools like themselves, and you suddenly come 
across it in the flea-market, wuecognizable, bespattered with mud, set 
up in a ridiculous fashion, at an absurd angle, without proportion, 
without harmony, the plaything of stupid children ! No ! It was differ­
ent in our time, and it wasn't that we strove for. No, no, not that at 
all. I don't recognize anything any more. . 
But our day will dawn 
again, and again we shall put on the right path everything that is now 
tottering and unsteady. Otherwise what is going to happen ?' 
7 
Immediately on their return from Petersburg, Mrs Stavrogin sent 
her friend abroad ' for a rest' ;  besides, it was necessary for them to part 
for a time - she felt that. Mr Verkhovensky set out on his journey full 
of enthusiasm. ' I  shall come to life there,' he kept repeating. 'There at 
last I shall set to work ! '  But already in his first letters from Berlin he 
struck his usual note. ' My heart is broken,' he wrote to Mrs Stavrogin. 
' I  can't forget anything. Here in Berlin everything reminds me of my 
past, my first innocent raptures, and my first agonies. Where is she? 
Where are they both ? Where are you, my two angels, of whom I was 
never worthy ? Where is my son, my beloved son ? And, lastly, where 
am I, my own self, my former self, strong as steel and firm as a rock 
when to-day some fellow like Andrϊie.J, un Greek Orthodox clown 
with a beard, peut !>riser mon existence en deux', etc., etc. As for his son, 
Mr Verkhovensky had only seen him twice in his life, the first time 
when he was born, and the second time quite recently in Petersburg, 
where the young man was about to enter the university. All his life 
the boy, as I have already mentioned, had been brought up by his aunts 
(at Mrs Stavrogin's expense) in the Orenburg province about 500 
miles from Skvoreshniki. As for Andrejef- that is, Andreyev - he was 
simply one of our local merchants, a shopkeeper, a great eccentric, a 
self-taught archaeologist and a passionate collector of Russian anti­
quities, who sometimes engaged in a battle of wits with Mr Verkho­
vensky on some erudite subject and, particularly, on some 'progres­
sive' idea. This worthy shopkeeper, with a grey beard and large silver 
spectacles, still owed Mr Verkhovensky 400 roubles for a few acres of 
timber he had bought on the latter's little estate (near Skvoreshniki). 

I 
BY W A Y  OP A N  I N T R O D UCTION 
41 
' Though Mrs Stavrogin had provided her friend liberally with funds 
: when she sent him to Berlin, Mr Verkhovensky had specially counted 
on getting the 400 roubles before he left for abroad, probably for 
some secret purpose of his own, and he nearly burst into tears when 
Andrejejf asked him to wait another month, being, by the way, fully 
entitled to ask for such a postponement, for he had paid the first instal­
ments almost six months in advance because Mr V erkhovensky was 
greatly in need of money at the time. Mrs Stavrogin eagerly read 
through this first letter and, underlining in pencil the exclamation : 
'Where are you both?' put the date on it and locked it up in her 
casket. He was, of course, thinking of his two deceased wives. The 
theme of the second letter she received from Berlin was different. 'I'm 
working twelve hours a day ['If only he'd said seven,' muttered Mrs 
Stavrogin], I'm rummaging in the libraries, collating, copying, rush­
ing about; been to see the professors. I have renewed my acquaintance 
with the excellent Dundasov family. What a fascinating woman Mrs 
Dundasov is even now! She sends you her regards. Her young hus­
band and her three nephews are all in Berlin. I sit up talking till day­
break with the young people, and we have almost Athenian parties, 
but only in respect of their intellectual finesse and exquisite taste; 
everything is very noble: plenty of music, Spanish airs, dreams of 
human regeneration, ideas of eternal beauty, the Sistine Madonna, 
light alternating with darkness, but there are spots even on the sun! 
Oh, my friend, my noble and loyal friend, in my heart I am with you 
and I am yours; with you alone always, en tout pays, even dans le pays 
de Makar et de ses veaux, of whom, you remember, we so often spoke 
in fear and trembling, in Petersburg before our departure. I recall it 
with a smile. Having crossed the frontier, I felt safe at last, a strange 
and new sensation, for the first time after so many years ' . 0 • etc., etc. 
' Well, that's all nonsense,' Mrs Stavrogin decided, folding up that 
letter too. 'If he has his Athenian parties til daybreak, he can't be 
spending twelve hours over his books. Was he drunk when he wrote 
it, I wonder? How dare that Dundasov woman send me her regards? 
However, let him have his Bing. 0 0 .' 
The phrase 'dans le pays de Makar et de ses veaux' meant 'where 
Makar never drove his sheep' (i.e. Siberia). Mr Verkhovensky some­
times purposely translated Russian proverbs and idiomatic expressions 
into French in a most absurd way, no doubt being fully able to 

42 
THE D E V I L S  • P A R T  O N E  
understand and translate them better; but he used to d o  it just for the 
sake of showing off, and he thought it very witty. 
But his fling did not last long. He could not hold out for four 
months, and hurried back to Skvoreshniki. His last letters were en­
tirely filled with outpourings of the most sentimental love for his ab­
sent friend and were literally bedewed with tears of separation. There 
are natures who, like lapdogs, become extremely attached to a home. 
The meeting of the two friends was rapturous. Two days later every­
thing was as before and even more boring than before. ' My friend,' 
Mr Verkhovensky said to me a fortnight later in dead secret, ' my 
friend, I've discovered something that is too awful for words : Je suis 
un ordinary hanger-on et rien de plus! Mais r-r-rien de plus!' 
8 
There followed a period of dead calm which went on for almost the 
whole of the next nine years. Hysterical outbursts and sobbings on my 
shoulders, which occurred at regular intervals, did not in the least 
interfere with our felicity. The surprising thing is that Mr Verkhoven­
sky did not grow fat during that time. All that happened was that his 
nose turned slightly red and he grew more benign. Gradually a circle 
of friends began to gather round him, though never a large one. Al­
though Mrs Stavrogin had little to do with our circle, we all looked 
upon her as our patroness. After the lesson she had received in Peters­
burg, she settled down in our town for good ; the winters she spent in 
her town residence and tl1e summers in her country mansion in the 
neighbourhood. She had never before enjoyed so much influence and 
authority as during the last seven years in our provincial society - that 
is to say, up to the very time of the appointment of our present 
Governor. Our former Governor, the never-to-be-forgotten, good­
natured Ivan Osipovich, was a near relation of hers upon whom she 
had at one time conferred great favours. His wife trembled at the very 
thought of displeasing Mrs Stavrogin, while the adulation of our pro­
vincial society almost bordered on idolatry. So Mr Verkhovensky, 
too, was in clover. He was a member of the club, lost grandly at cards, 
and was treated with respect, though many people regarded him 
merely as a 'scholar'. Later on, when Mrs Stavrogin permitted him to 
live in a separate house, we enjoyed greater freedom than ever. We 

B Y  W A Y  O F  AN I N T R O D U C T I ON 
43 
met at his place twice a week; we were a very convivial gathering, es­
pecially when he was liberal with the champagne. The wine came 
from the shop of the same Andreyev. Every six months Mrs Stavrogin 
paid the bill, and on the day it was paid Mr Verkhovensky almost 
invariably suffered from one of his gastric upsets. 
The oldest member of our circle was Liputin, a middle-aged pro­
vincial official, a great liberal who was reputed in the town to be an 
atheist. He had married for the second time a young and pretty girl, 
for whom he got a dowry, and he had, besides, three grown-up 
daughters. He kept his family in the fear of God and behind locked 
doors. He was extremely stingy, and had saved up enough from his 
salary to buy himself a house and put away a tidy sum, too. He was a 
restless sort of a person, who had not risen very high in the service. 
He was not greatly respected in our town and was not received in the 
better circles. He was, besides, a notorious scandal-monger who had 
been severely punished several times, once by an army officer and an­
other time by a country gentleman, a widely respected head of a 
family. But we liked his keen intelligence, his inquiring mind, and his 
peculiar malicious cheerfulness. Mrs Stavrogin did not really like him, 
but, somehow, he always knew how to ingratiate himself with her. 
Nor was she fond of Shatov, who only became a member of our 
circle during the last year. Shatov used to be a student, but he was sent 
down from the university after some disturbance; as a boy he was a 
pupil of Mr Verkhovensky's, and was born a serf of Mrs Stavrogin's, 
the son of her late personal valet Pavel Fedorov, and he had greatly 
benefited from her kindness. She disliked him for his pride and in­
gratitude, and she could never forgive him for not coming to her im­
mediately after his expulsion from the university ; on the contrary, he 
did not even reply to the urgent letter she had sent him at the time, 
preferring the humble position of a tutor of the children of some en­
lightened merchant. He went abroad with the merchant's family, 
more in the capacity of a nurse than a tutor; but he was very anxious 
to go abroad at the time. The children also had a governess, a sprightly 
Russian miss, who had also been engaged shortly before the family's 
departure abroad and who was given the job chiefly because she ac­
cepted a very small salary. Two months later the merchant turned her 
out for ' free thinking'. Shatov went after her, and they soon got mar­
ried in Geneva. They lived together about three weeks, and then 

44 
THE D EV I L S · P A R T  O N E  
parted as free people who recognize no obligations towards one an­
other do, but, of course, also because of their poverty. He wandered 
about Europe alone for a long time after that, eking out a precarious 
existence as a bootblack in the streets and a stevedore in some port. At 
last, about a year ago, he returned to his native town and went to live 
with an old aunt of his, whom he buried a month later. His sister 
Dasha, who had also been brought up by Mrs Stavrogin and who was 
a favourite of hers whom she treated as an equal, he saw very rarely 
and had little to do with her. In our company he was always sullen and 
uncommunicative ; but now and again when his convictions were at­
tacked he became morbidly irritable and very unrestrained in his lan­
guage. ' Shatov must be tied up before you can argue with him,' Mr 
Verkhovensky sometimes joked; but he liked him. Abroad Shatov 
had radically changed some of his former socialistic convictions and 
gone right over to the other extreme. He was one of those idealistic 
Russians who, struck by some compelling idea, immediately become 
entirely obsessed by it for ever. They are quite incapable of mastering 
it, but believe in it passionately, and so their whole life passes after­
wards, as it were, in the last agonies under the weight of a heavy stone 
which has fallen upon them and half crushed them. In appearance 
Shatov entirely conformed to his convictions: he was clumsy, fair­
headed, dishevelled, short, broad-shouldered, thick-lipped, with thick, 
beetling white eyebrows, a wrinkled brow, and a pair of unfriendly, 
obstinately lowered eyes which seemed to be always ashamed of some­
thing. There was always a shock of hair on his head which refused to 
be smoothed and stood upright. He was twenry-seven or twenry-eight 
years old. 'I'm not surprised that his wife ran away from him,' Mrs 
Stavrogin once said apropos of Shatov, after looking hard at him. He 
did his best to dress neatly notwithstanding his abject poverty. Again, 
he did not tum to Mrs Stavrogin for help, but carried on as best he 
could. He did al sorts of jobs for shopkeepers, too. At one time he got 
a job as a shop-assistant, at another he nearly went off on a river­
steamer with some goods as an assistant to a commercial traveller, but 
fell il before he was due to sail. It is hard to imagine the kind of pov­
erty he endured without even thinking about it. After his illness Mrs 
Stavrogin sent him 100 roubles anonymously and in secret. But he 
found out tbe secret, thought it over, accepted the money, and went 
to Mrs Stavrogin to thank her. She received him warmly, but there, 

BY WAY O F  A N  INTRODUCTION 
4.5 
too, he shamefUlly disappointed her. He stayed only five minutes, 
without uttering a word, staring dully at the floor and smiling stupid­
ly, and suddenly, without bothering to wait for her to finish what she 
had to say and at the most interesting point of her speech, he got up, 
made an awkward, sideways bow, was covered with confusion, and, 
brushing against her expensive inlaid work-table, upsetting it and 
smashing it to pieces, walked out nearly dead with shame. Liputin 
afterwards reproached him severely for not having returned with con­
tempt the 100 roubles as coming from his former despotic mistress : he 
had not only accepted them, but had dragged himself off to thank her. 
He lived by himself on the outskirts of the town, and he did not like 
even one of us to go and see him. He used to come regularly to Mr 
Verkhovensky's parties, and borrowed newspapers and books from 
him. 
There was another young man, a certain Virginsky, one of our local 
officials, who used to frequent Mr Verkhovensky's parties. He bore 
ÿome resemblance to Shatov, though he was also apparently his com­
plete opposite in every respect. But he, too, was ' a  family man '. He 
W'lS a pathetic and exceedingly quiet young man, and as a matter of 
fact in his early thirties, well educated, but chiefly self-taught. He was 
poor, married, had a job in the civil service, and supported an aunt 
and a sister-in-law. His wife, and indeed all the ladies of his family, 
held the most advanced views, but with them it al assumed a rather 
crude form; it was the case of ' an idea dragged out into the street ', as 
Mr Verkhovensky had expressed it in a different cormexion. They got 
everything out of books, and at the very first rumour from some of 
our progressive little groups in Petersburg or Moscow they were 
ready to throw everything overboard, if they were told to do so. Mrs 
Virginsky was a professional midwife in our town ; as a girl she had 
lived a long time in Petersburg. Virginsky himself was a man of quite 
remarkable purity of heart, and, indeed, I rarely met a man of such 
honesty and passionate convictions. ' Never, never wil I abandon these 
bright hopes,' he used to say to me, with shining eyes. Of those 
'bright hopes' he always spoke quietly, with deep feeling, in half a 
whisper, as though in secret. He was rather tal, but extremely thin, 
and with narrow shoulders and extraordinarily knk hair of a reddish 
tint. Al Mr Verkhovensky's superior gibes at some of his opinions he 
accepted meekly, but sometimes he answered him very seriously, and 

THE D EV I L S · P A R T  O N E  
often nonplussed him. Mr Verkhovensky treated him kindly and, in­
deed, he treated us all like a father. 
' You're all " half-baked " ! '  he used to remark jestingly to Virgin­
sky, ' all who are like you ;  though I must say, Virginsky, that I never 
noticed in you that narrow-mindedness I found in Petersburg chez ces 
seminaristes, but you're "half-baked" all the same. Shatov would have 
dearly loved to be fully baked, but I'm afraid he, too, is only half-baked.' 
'And what about me ? '  Liputin asked. 
'You're simply the golden mean which will get on everywhere ­
in your own way.' 
Liputin was offended. 
It was said about Virginsky, and, unhappily, it was quite true, that 
his wife, having lived with him not even one year in lawful wedlock, 
suddenly informed him that he was cast off and that she preferred 
Lebyatkin. That Lebyatkin, who was a stranger in our town, turned 
out afterwards to be a highly suspicious character and not at all an 
army captain, as he himself claimed to be. He could only twirl his 
moustache, drink, and talk the most absurd nonsense that can be 
imagined. This man at once moved into his house in a most indecor­
ous manner, glad to live at another man's expense, ate and slept there, 
and fmally came to treat the master of the house with the utmost con­
descension. I am told that when his wife gave him his notice of dis­
missal, Virginsky said to her : 'My friend, till now I only loved you, 
but now I respect you.' But I doubt if this ancient Roman saying was 
ever actually uttered ; on the contrary, it is said that he burst into loud 
sobs. One day, about a fortnight after his dismissal, all of them, the 
entire family, went for a picnic in the woods outside our town to have 
tea with their friends. Virginsky seems to have been in an excited and 
gay mood and took part in the dances ; but suddenly and without any 
preliminary quarrel he seized the giant Lebyatkin, who was perform­
ing a solo can-can, by the hair, pulled him down, and began dragging 
him on the ground with shrieks, screams, and tears. The giant was so 
frightened that he did not even attempt to defend himself and he 
hardly uttered a word while he was being dragged along ; but after­
wards he resented it with all the ardour of a man of honour. Virginsky 
spent the whole night begging his wife on his knees to forgive him ; 
but he obtained no forgiveness because he refused, in spite of every­
thing, to apologize to Lebyatkin. He was, besides, taunted with having 

BY WAY O P  AN INTRODUCTION 
47 
no convictions and with foolislmess, the latter charge being brought 
against him for going down on his knees while trying to clear up some 
misunderstanding with a woman. The Captain soon disappeared, but 
he came back recently, arriving with his sister and entirely new plans; 
but of him later. It is not surprising that the poor 'family man' used 
to pour out his heart to us and was in need of our company. I don't 
think that he ever discussed his domestic troubles with us, tl1ough. 
Only once, coming back with me from Mr Verkhovensky's, did he 
speak of his position in a remote sort of way, but seizing me by the 
arm almost immediately, he cried ardently: 'That's nothing. It's only 
one particular case. It won't interfere with our " cause " in the least, 
not in the least ! · 
Occasional visitors used to come to our circle. A Jew, called Lyam­
shin, used to tum up from time to time, as well as a certain Captain 
Kartuzov. An old gentleman of an inquiring mind used to come, but 
he died. Liputin brought an exiled Polish priest, Sloczewski, along one 
day, and we received him on principle for a time, but later we would 
have nothing to do with him. 
9 
At one time they used to say in the town about our circle that it was a 
hotbed of free-thinking, vice, and atheism; tl1is rumour, by the way, 
always persisted. And yet all we did in our circle was to indulge in the 
most innocent, amiable, jolly typicaly Russian liberal chatter. 'The 
higher liberalism' and 'the higher liberal ' - that is to say, a liberal 
without any aim whatever - are possible only in Russia. Mr Verkho­
vensky, like any other witty person, had to have a listener, and, in 
addition, he had to possess the consciousness that he was fulfilling the 
high duty of propagating ideas. And, fmally, he had to have someone 
to drink champagne with and exchange over a bottle of wine the well­
known cheery generalities about Russia and the 'Russian spirit', about 
God in general and the 'Russian God' in particular ; to repeat for the 
hundredth time the scandalous Russian anecdotes that everyone knew 
and everyone had been repeating over and over again. We were 
not averse from retailing the scandalous stories that went round our 
town, occasionally arriving at most severe and highly moral verdicts. 
We also discused problems of general concern to mankind, talked 

THE D E V I L S · P A R T  O N E  
severely of the future fate o f  Europe and the human race; foretold 
in a doctrinaire fashion that after the fall of the monarchy in France 
that country would at once be reduced to the position of a secondary 
power, and we were firmly convinced that that would happen very 
easily and quite soon. We had long ago prophesied that the Pope 
would assume the role of a simple archbishop in a united Italy, and 
had no doubts whatever that this thousand-year-old problem was a 
trifling matter in our age of humanitarian ideas, industry, and rail­
ways. But, then, ' Russian higher liberalism ' always dismissed every­
thing as airily as that. Mr Verkhovensky sometimes talked of art, and 
very well, though a little abstractly. Occasionally he would recall the 
friends of his youth - all names who had made their mark on the his­
tory of Russian progress - he recalled them with emotion and rever­
ence, though not without envy either. If things got too boring, the 
little Jew Lyamshin (a post-office clerk), who played the piano excel­
lently, sat down to play, and in the intervals wonld give imitations 
of a pig, a thunder-storm, a confmement, with the first cry of the 
baby, etc., etc. ; that was what he was invited for. Whenever we 
over-indulged ourselves in drink - and that did happen sometimes 
though not frequently - we grew excited, and on one occasion we 
even sang the ' Marseillaise' in chorus to the accompaniment of 
Lyamshin, though I don't know whether it went off all right. The 
great day of the emancipation of the serfs on 19 February we met rap­
turously, and long before its arrival we began drinking toasts in its 
honour. That was long ago, long before the arrival ofShatov and Vir­
ginsky, when Mr Verkhovensky was still living in Mrs Stavrogin's 
house. Some time before the great day Mr Verkhovensky fell into the 
regrettable habit of muttering the well-known, though somewhat 
unrealistic verses, probably written by some liberal landed gentleman 
of the past : 
The peasants are coming, carrying axes, 
A dreadful thing is about to occur. 
Something of that kind, anyway - I don't remember the exact words. 
Mrs Stavrogin overheard him muttering them one day and crying, 
' Nonsense ! nonsense ! '  left the room angrily. Liputin, who happened 
to be present, observed sarcastically to Mr Verkhovensky :  
' It would be a great pity if their former serfs should really do 

B Y  W A Y  O F  AN I N T R O D U C T I O N  
49 
something unpleasant to our country squires in their moment of 
triumph.' 
And he drew his forefmger round his neck. 
1Cher ami,' Mr Verkhovensky remarked good-humouredly, 
1 be­
lieve me, that [he repeated the gesture] will be of no use whatever, 
either to the country squires or to any of us in general. We shan't do 
anything even without our heads, in spite of the fact that it is our 
heads that mostly interfere with our understanding.' 
Let me add that many people in our town expected something 
extraordinary to happen on the day of the publication of the mani­
festo, something of the kind forecast by Liputin, all of them, by the 
way, so-called authorities on the peasants and the State. I believe Mr 
Verkhovensky, too, shared this opinion, so much so, indeed, that al­
most on the eve of the great day he started begging Mrs Stavrogin to 
let him go abroad ; in short, he began to he worried. But the great day 
passed, and the supercilious smile reappeared on Mr Verkhovensky's 
face. He ventured to express a few remarkable thoughts to us about 
the character of the Russian in general and the Russian peasant in 
particular. 
' Like al people in a hurry,' he concluded his series of remarkable 
utterances, 1 we have been in too great a hurry with our dear peasants. 
We've made them the fashion, and a whole branch of our literature 
has for several years made a fuss of them, as though they were some 
newly cliscovered treasure. We crowned their lousy heads with laurel 
wreaths. The Russian village has for the past thousand years given us 
nothing but the Kamarinsky dance. A remarkable Russian poet, who 
was not without a sense ofhumour, seeing the great Rachel for the firSt 
time on the stage, cried rapturously : " I  wouldn't exchange Rachel for 
the Russian peasant ! "  I'm prepared to go farther : I'd gladly give all the 
peasants in Russia for one Rachel. It's time we took a more sober view 
of things and didn't mistake our native pitch for houquet de l'impera­
trice.' 
Liputin agreed at once, but pointed out that at the time it was abso­
lutely necessary to act against one's conscience and praise the peasants 
for the sake of the movement ; that even high society ladies shed tears 
over Grigorovich's novel Anton the Poor Wretch, and that some of 
them even wrote from Paris to their estate managers in Russia that 
they were to treat their serfs in future as humanely as possible. 

so 
T HE DEVILS • PART O NE 
As ill-luck would have it, it happened just after the rumours about 
the Anton Petrov affair that a disturbance occurred in our province, 
too, and within only ten miles of Skvoreshniki, so that in the heat of 
the moment a platoon of soldiers was dispatched there. This time Mr 
Verkhovensky became so excited that he even frightened us. He 
shouted in the club that more troops should have been sent and that 
they ought to have been summoned by telegraph from another dis­
trict; he rushed off to the Governor and assured him that he had noth­
ing to do with it; he begged him not to involve him in the affair in 
any way because of his old associations, and demanded that a report 
of his statement should be sent at once to the proper quarters in Peters­
burg. It was a good thing that the whole affair soon blew over without 
any dire consequences, but I could not help being surprised at · Mr 
V erkhovensky at the time. 
Three years later, as is well known, people began talking of nation­
alism, and 'public opinion ' came mto being. Mr Verkhovensky had a 
good laugh. 
' My friends,' he instructed us, 'if our nationalism has in truth been 
"born ", as they assure us now in the papers, it is still at school, at 
some German Peterschule, sitting over a German book and repeating 
its everlasting German lesson, and the German master makes it go 
down on its knees whenever he likes. I've nothing but praise for the 
German teacher; but it's more likely that nothing has happened and 
that nothing of the kind has been born, but that everything is going 
on as before - that is, as God has ordered it. In my view that should 
be quite enough for Russia, pour notre saittte Russie. Besides, all these 
Slav movements and nationalities - al that's too old to be new. If you 
like, nationalism has never really existed in our country, except a.ʳ 
some idle invention by some gentlemen at a club, a Moscow club at 
that. I'm not talking of the days of Prince Igor, of course. The whole 
thing, in fact, is the result of idleness. Everything is the result of the 
charming, cultured, whimsical idleness of our gentry. I've been re­
peating it for the last thirty thousand years. We don't know how to 
live by our own labour. And as for the fuss they're now making over 
the " birth" of some public opinion, has it al of a sudden just dropped 
out of the sky ? Don't they realize that before we can have an opinion 
of our own we must first of all have work - our own work, our own 
initiative, our own experience ! You will never get something for 

B Y  W A Y  O F  AN I N T R O D U C T I O N  
5 1  
nothing. I f  we work, we shall also have an opinion o f  our own. And 
as we shall never do a stroke of work, those who have been doing our 
work for us, will be forming an opinion for us that is to say, the same 
old Europe, the same old Germans - our teachers for the last two hun­
dred years. Besides, Russia is too big a problem for us to solve it alone, 
without the Germans and without work. For the last twenty years 
I've been sounding the tocsin and calling ro work. I've given my life 
to that appeal, and, madman that I am, believed in it. Now I no 
longer believe, but I go on ringing the bell, and I shall be ringing it 
to the very end, to my last breath ; I shall hold on to the bell-rope till 
they start tolling for my own requiem ! '  
Alas, we jmt nodded in agreement. We applauded our teacher, and 
with what ardour, too 1 
But, gentlemen, don't we still hear to-day, 
and very often, too, sometimes, the same sort of ' charming ', ' clever ', 
liberal Russian nonsense ? 
Our teacher believed in God ; ' I  don't understand,' he used to say 
sometimes, ' why everybody here thinks I'm an atheist. I believe in 
God, mais distinf?uons, I believe in him as a Being who is conscious of 
himself in me only. You can't possibly expect me to believe as my 
Nastasya [his maidservant] believes, or like some gentleman who be­
lieves "just in case", or like our dear Shatov - but no. Shatov doesn't 
count, for Shatov believes in spite of himself, like a Moscow Slavophil. 
As for Christianity, however much I respect it, I'm not a Christian. 
I'm rather an ancient pagan, like the great Goethe, or like an ancient 
Greek. Indeed, the very fact that Christianity has failed to understand 
woman, which George Sand has so beautifully proved in one of her 
remarkable novels - is quite enough. As for the genuflexions, fastings, 
and the rest, I can't understand whose business it is whether I observe 
them or not. However busy our local informers are, I don't want to 
become a .Jesuit. In 1 847 Belinsky, who was abroad, sent his famous 
letter to Gogol in which he warmly reproached him for believing " in 
some kind of God ". Entre nous soit dit, I can't imagine anything more 
comic than the moment that Gogo I (the Gogo I of thai time !) read that 
sentence and - the whole letter ! But disregarding the funny part of it, 
and since, as a matter of fact, [ am fundamentally in agreement, I will 
merely point to them and say : those were men ! They knew how to 
love their people, they knew how to suffer for them, they knew how 
to sacrifice everything for them, and, at the same time, they knew 

52 
THE DEVILS · PART ONE 
how to remain aloof from them and not curry favour with them in 
certain matters. How could you really expect a man like Belinsky to 
seck salvation in Lenten oil or turnips with peas ! '  
But at this point Shatov intervened. 
' Never did those men of yours love the people ; they never suffered 
for them, and they never sacrificed anything for them, however much 
they imagined it for their own comfort,' he growled sullenly, staring 
at the floor and turning impatiently in his chair. 
'They didn't love the people ?' Mr V crkhovcnsky cried in an out­
raged voice. ' Oh, how they loved Russia ! '  
' Neither Russia nor the people,' Shatov, too, cried, with flashing 
eyes. ' You can't love something you don't know, and they had no 
idea of the Russian people! All of them, and you among them, over­
looked the Russian people, Belinsky especially; that becomes evi­
dent from that very letter of his to Gogol. Belinsky, exactly like the 
Inquisitive Man in Krylov's fable, did not notice the elephant in the 
museum of curiosities, but concentrated all his attention on the French 
socialist beetles ; he never got beyond them. And yet he was, I sup­
pose, cleverer than any of you ! You've not only overlooked the 
people, you've treated them with horrible contcm;>t, and that be­
cause you could not imagine any people except the French people, 
and even then only the people of Paris, and you were ashamed that 
the Russian people were not like them. And that is the naked truth ! 
And he who has no people, has no God. You may be sure that those 
who cease to understand the people and lose all contact with them, at 
once and to that cxtcm lose the faith of their fathers and become 
atheists or are indifferent. I'm speaking the truth ! It is a fact that it is 
invariably proved to be true. That is why all of you, and all of us for 
that matter, arc either disgusting atheists or just indifferent, dissolute 
trash and nothin[?; more ! You, too, Mr Vcrkhovcnsky. I'm not ex­
cluding you. In fact, it is you I had in mind when I spoke. I'd like you 
to know that. ' 
As usual, having delivered himself of such a monologue (and this 
happened frequently with him), Shatov grabbed his cap and made for 
the door, fully convinced that it was all over now and that he had 
broken off his friendly relations with Mr Verkhovcnsky for good. 
But the latter always managed to stop him in time. 
' Hadn't we better make it up, Shatov, after this exchange of 

P R I N C E  HARRY • A M A R R I A G E  P R O P O S A L  
5 3  
civilities ?' he used to say, holding out a hand to him good-naturedly 
from his arm-chair. 
Shatov, clumsy and bashful, disliked sentimental effusions. Out­
wardly he was a coarse fellow, but inwardly he was apparently a man 
of the most delicate feelings. Though he often went too far, he was 
the first to suffer for it. Muttering something under his breath in re­
sponse to Mr Verkhovensky's words, and shuffling about like a bear, 
he would suddenly grin, put down his cap, and sit down in his old 
place. Wine was of course fetched, and Mr Verkhovensky proposed 
some suitable toast, such as the memory of some famous man of the 
pal.t. 
Prince Harry. A Marriage Proposal 
THE RE was one other person in the world to whom Mrs Stavrogin 
was no less attached than to Mr Verkhovensky - her only son, 
Nicholas Stavrogin. It was to him that Mr Verkhovensky had 
been invited to act as tutor. The boy was eight years old at the time, and 
the lackadaisical General Stavrogin, his father, was already living apart 
from his mother, the boy growing up entirely nnder her supervision. 
It must be said in al fairness that Mr Verkhovensky knew how to gain 
the devotion ofhis pupil. His whole secret lay in the fact that he was 
a child himself. I was not there at the time, and he had always been in 
need of a real friend. He never hesitated to make a friend of the little 
fellow, as soon as the child had grown older. It somehow happened 
naturally that there was not the slightest difference between them. 
He used often to wake his ten- or eleven-year-old friend at night 
for the sole purpose of pouring out his wonnded feelings to him, or 
to tell him some family secret, without realizing that that was some­
thing he should not do. They flung themselves into each other's arms 
and cried. The boy knew that his mother was very fond of him, 
but he was hardly very fond of her. She did not talk to him a lot, 
rarely interfered with him, but, somehow, he was always morbidly 
aware that she was watching him. However, she had complete faith in 
Mr Verkhovensky so far as the education and the moral development 
of her son were concerned. ln those days she believed in him implicitly. 

54 
THE D E V I L S  • P A R T  ONE 
I think it is true to say that the teacher was responsible for upsetting 
his pupil's nerves to some extent. When at the age of sixteen Nicholas 
was taken to the lycee, he looked sickly and pale and was strangely 
quiet and wistful. (Later on he was distinguished by his great physical 
strength.) One must also assume that if the two friends had wept and 
flung themselves into each other's arms, it was not always because of 
some domestic misunderstandings. Mr Verkhovensky succeeded in 
touching some of the deepest chords in his little friend's heart and in 
evoking in him the first and still vague sensation of that eternal and 
sacred longing which many a chosen spirit, having once tasted and 
experienced it, will never afterwards exchange for some cheap feeling 
of satisfaction. (There are even such lovers of sensations to whom this 
longing is dearer than the most complete satisfaction, if such a thing 
were at all possible.) lle that as it may, it was certainly a good thing 
that the tutor and his pupil were at last separated, though perhaps a 
little late. 
During his first two years at the lycce the young man used to come 
home in the holidays. When Mrs Stavrogin and Mr Verkhovensky 
were in Petersburg, he was present at some of the literary parties at his 
mother's house, watching and listening. He spoke little and was as 
quiet and shy as before. He still treated Mr Verkhovensky with the 
same tender affection, but he was somehow more reserved ; he was 
apparently not anxious to discuss higher things or memories of his 
past with him. Having finished his course of studies, he applied, at his 
mother's wish, for a commission in the army and soon joined one of 
the most famous cavalry regiments of the Horse Guards. He did not 
come to show himself to his mother in his army uniform and wrote 
only rarely to her from Petersburg. Mrs Stavrogin sent him money 
without stint, in spite of the fact that after the agrarian reform the in­
come from her estate had fallen so low that at first it was less than half 
of what it had been before. She had, however, managed to save up a 
considerable sum by long years of economy. She was very interested 
in her son's success in the highest Petersburg society. What she could 
never achieve, was achieved by the wealthy young officer with ex­
pectations. He renewed acquaintances she hardly dared to dream of 
and was received everywhere with great pleasure. But very soon 
strange rumours began to reach Mrs Stavrogin : the young man sud­
Jenly gave himself up to a life of mad dissipation. Not that he gambled 

P R I N C E  H A R R Y  • A M A R R I A G E  P R O P O S A L  
5 5  
o r  drank too much ; but stories were told about his life o f  wild rioting, 
about people being run over by his horses, of his brutal conduct to a 
lady of good society with whom he had had an affair and whom he 
afterwards publicly insulted. There seems to have been something 
very nasty about that business. It was added, besides, that he had be­
come a regular bully, who picked quarrels with people and insulted 
them for the mere pleasure of insulting them. Mrs Stavrogin was up­
set and worried. Mr Verkhovensky assured her that those were only 
the first violent outbursts of a too richly endowed nature, that the 
storm would abate, and that all tllis was just like young Prince 
Harry, who made merry with Falstaff, Poins, and Mistress Quickly, as 
described by Shakespeare. This time Mrs Stavrogin did not cry, 
' Nonsense, nonsense ! '  as she was lately all too ready to shout at Mr 
Verkhovensky, but, on the contrary, lent a willing ear to !lim, asked 
him to explain his words to her more precisely, took down Shake­
speare's works herself, and read the immortal chronicle play with 
great attention. But the play did not set her nlind at rest, and, besides, 
she did not think the resemblance very striking. She was waiting 
feverishly for a reply to several ofher letters, and she did not have long 
to wait. Soon the fatal news was received that Prince Harry had fought 
two duels almost at the same time, that he had killed one of his oppo­
nents outright and maimed the other, and that as a consequence he 
was to be court-martialled. It all ended with Ius being reduced to the 
ranks with the loss of civil rights and transferred to one of the infantry 
line regiments, and he only escaped a heavier sentence by special 
favour. 
In 1 863 he somehow managed to distinguish himself; he was 
awarded a cross, raised to non-commissioned rank, and then, rather 
quickly, given back his commission. During that time Mrs Stavrogin 
despatched almost a hundred letters to Petersburg with prayers and 
supplications. She did not even nlind humiliating herself a little in so 
exceptional a case. After his promotion the young man sent in his re­
signation, but he did not come back to Skvoreshniki again, and stopped 
writing to his mother altogether. They found out at last by all sorts of 
roundabout ways that he was back in Petersburg, but that he was no 
longer to be seen in society ; he seemed to have gone into hiding. 
After some time they discovered that he was living in strange com­
pany, associating with the dregs of the Petersburg population, with 

THE DEVILS · PART O NE 
some down-at-heel Civil Servants, retired army officers who had to 
beg for a living, and drunkards, that he visited their families, spending 
days and nights in slums and goodness only knows what other dis­
reputable places, that he had sunk very low, walked about in rags, and 
that apparently this life was to his taste. He did not ask his mother 
for money ; he had his own little estate, a property that once belonged 
to General Stavrogin, which brought him in some sort of income and 
which, according to rumours, he had let to a German from Saxony. 
At last his mother succeeded in persuading him to go back to her, 
and Prince Harry made his appearance in our town. It was then that 
I got my first opportunity of studying him closely, having never set 
eyes on him before. 
He was a very handsome young man of about twenty-five, and I 
must admit I was greatly impressed by him. I expected to meet some 
futhy tramp enfeebled by debaucheries and reeking of vodka. He was, 
on the contrary, the most elegant gentleman of all those I had ever 
met, excellently dressed, and with the manners that only a man accus­
tomed to the most refined society could possess. I was not the only 
one to be surprised : our whole town was surprised, and our town, 
of course, knew Mr Stavrogin's biography, and in such detail that 
one could hardly imagine where they could have got it from and, 
what was even more surprising, half of the stories about him were 
quite true. All our ladies were in raptures over our new visitor. They 
were sharply divided into two camps - in one he was adored, and in 
the other he was hated with a deep, abiding hatred; but both were 
crazy about him. Some of them were particularly fascinated because 
they thought that some fatal secret was probably hidden in his heart ; 
others were most thrilled that he was a murderer. It appeared, too, 
that he was well educated and, indeed, that he was a man of consider­
able knowledge. Not much knowledge, of course, was necessary to 
impress us; but he could pass an opinion on highly interesting topics 
of the day and, what was so important, with remarkable good sense. 
Let me mention this as a rather strange thing: almost from the very 
first day we all found him to be an extremely sensible fellow. He was 
not very talkative, he was elegant without being over-refined, re­
markably modest, and, at the same time, brave and self-confident as 
no one else in our town. Our dandies regarded him with envy, and 
were completely eclipsed in his presence I was also struck by his face : 

P R I N C E  HARRY · A M A R R I A G E  P R O P O S A L  
57 
his hair was just a little too black, his light-coloured eyes a little too 
calm and clear, his complexion a little too tender and white, his colour 
a little too dazzling and pure, his teeth like pearls, his lips like coral - he 
would seem to be a paragon of beauty, yet at the same time there 
was something hideous about him. People said that his face reminded 
them of a mask ; there was, by the way, a great deal of talk about his 
amazing physical strength. He was rather tall. Mrs Stavrogin looked at 
him with pride, but never for a moment without worry. He spent 
about six months with us - quiet, listless, and rather morose ; he m 1clc 
his appearance in society and carried out all the rules of our provincial 
etiquette rigidly. He was related to our Governor on his father's side 
and was received at his house like a ncar relative. But a few months 
passed and the wild beast suddenly showed its claws. 
Let me, incidentally, add parenthetically that our dear and gentle 
ex-Governor, Ivan Osipovich, was a bit of an old woman, but of 
good family and well connected - which indeed explains the fact tim 
he had been so many years with us without ever taking any active 
part in the affairs of the province. From his hospitality and general 
amiability he should really have been a marshal of the nobility of the 
good old days, and not a governor in such troublous times as ours. It 
was always said in our town that it was not he but Mrs Stavrogin who 
governed our province. Of course, it was a sarcastic saying, but I'm 
afraid there is not a word of truth in it. And the jokes they used to 
crack on this subject in our town ! As a matter of fact, Mrs Stavrogin 
quite deliberately withdrew from all public affairs during the last few 
years, in spite of the great respect in which she was held by everybody 
who was of any consequence in our province, and voluntarily con­
fined herself within the strict limits which she set up for herself. In­
stead of public affairs she suddenly turned to the management of her 
estate, and in two or three years raised the revenue from her pro­
perty almost to what it had been in the past. Instead of her former 
romantic interests (her trips to Petersburg, her intentions to publish a 
journal, etc.), she began cutting down expenses and saving up. She 
kept even Mr Verkhovensky at arm's length, allowing him to take a 
flat in another house (which he had long been pestering her to let him 
do under all sorts of pretexts). Little by little Mr Verkhovensky began 
to refer to her as a prosaic woman or more jestingly as ' my prosaic 
friend'. It goes without saying that he only allowed himself to jest 

THl! D E V I L S  • PART O N l!  
like that in a highly respectful manner and after carefully choosing the 
right occasion. 
All of us who belonged to the narrow circle of Mrs Stavrogin's 
friends - and Mr Verkhovensky more than anyone else - saw that she 
regarded her son as almost a new hope, and even as a sort of new 
dream. Her passion for her son derived from the time of his successes 
in Petersburg society, and grew particularly intense from the moment 
she received the news that he had been reduced to the ranks. And yet 
she was quite plainly afraid of him, and behaved in his presence as 
though she were his slave. I could see that she was afraid of something 
vague and mysterious, something she could not put into words her­
self, and many times when no one was looking she would watch 
Nicholas intently, wondering and thinking of something - and then 
the wild beast showed its claws. 
2 
Our Prince, suddenly and for no reason at all, committed two or three 
shocking outrages on various persons. The striking thing about them 
was that they were so utterly shocking, so unlike anything anyone 
could have expected, not at al what usualy happens, absolutely 
idiotic and puerile, committed goodness only knows why, without 
rhyme or reason. One of the most respected committee members of 
our club, Peter Gaganov, an elderly gentleman who was held in high 
esteem by everybody, had the inocent habit of adding in a passionate 
tone of voice to every word he uttered, ' No, sir, they won't lead me 
by the nose! '  Well, there was no harm in tl1at. But one day at the club 
when he uttered this aphorism during some heated discussion to a 
small number of club members who had gathered round him (all of 
them persons of some consequence), Nicholas Stavrogin, who was 
taking no part in the discussion and standing a little distance away 
from the group, suddenly went up to Mr Gaganov and, seizing him 
unexpectedly but firmly with two fmgers by the nose, managed to 
drag him a few steps across the room. He could have no possible 
grudge against Mr Gaganov. One might have thought that it was 
merely a school boyish prank, however unpardonable, of course; yet it 
was said later that during the brief operation he looked abstracted, 'as 
though he were not in his right mind', but that was recalled and taken 

PRINCE H ARRY • A M A R R I A G E  P R O P O S AL 
59 
into account long afterwards. In the heat of the moment everybody 
was struck by something that happened a second later, when there 
could be no doubt that he knew perfectly well what he was doing and 
why, and far from looking embarrassed, smiled gaily and maliciously, 
'without the slightest regret'. There was a terrific uproar; he was sur­
rounded. Nicholas turned round,and round, gazing about him, with­
out replying to anyone and regarding the shouting people with curi­
osity. At last he seemed to fall into thought again, so, at any rate, I 
was told, frowned, went firmly up to the affronted Peter Gaganov, 
and, speaking very fast, muttered with visible annoyance: 
'Frightfully sorry, sir - I honestly don't know why I should sud­
denly have wanted to - such a silly thing . . . . ' 
The perfunctory manner of his apology was almost equivalent to a 
fresh insult. The shouting became louder, but Nicholas just shrugged 
his shoulders and went out. 
All this was very silly, not to mention the gross unseemliness of the 
incident, a calculated and deliberate unseemliness, as it looked at the 
first glance, and therefore a deliberate and utterly impudent insult to 
our entire society. That was how everybody understood it. Mr Stav­
rogin was immediately and unanimously expelled from the dub; then 
it was decided to approach the Governor in the name of all the mem­
bers of the dub with a written request to use ' the administrative 
powers entrusted to him' immediately (without waiting for any for­
mal court action) to restrain the mischievous ruffian, the ' society bully, 
and thus protect all the decent and law-abiding citizens of our town 
from humiliating attacks '. It was added with a show of innocent malice 
that ' a  law might perhaps be found to keep even Mr Stavrogin in his 
place'. This sentence was inserted after careful consideration because 
it was thought that it would annoy the Governor on account of Mrs 
Stavrogin. They amplified it with relish. As it happened, the Gover­
nor was not in town at the time; he had gone to a nearby town to 
stand godfather to the child of a very charming lady whose husband 
had died during her pregnancy. But he was expected to return soon. 
Meanwhile they gave the highly esteemed and insulted Mr Gaganov a 
regular ovation; people exchanged embraces and kisses with him; the 
whole town called on him. It was even planned to give a subscription 
diner in his honour, and it was only at his earnest request that they 
abandoned the idea - perhaps because it had dawned on them at last 

6o 
THE D E V I L S · PART ONE 
that the man had, after all, been pulled by the nose, and that there 
was therefore no particular reason for any celebration. 
And yet how had it happened ? How wuld it have happened ? The 
remarkable thing is that it never occurred to anyone in our town to 
ascribe that wild action to madness. Which of course meant that they 
were inclined to expect sttch actions even from a sane Mr Stavrogin. 
For my part, I don't know to this day how to explain it, in spite of the 
incident which occurred soon afterwards and which apparently ex­
plained everything and, it would seem, set everybody's mind at 
rest. Let me also add that four years later, in answer to a discreet 
question from me about that incident at the club, Stavrogin said, 
frowning, ' Yes, I was not quite myself at the time.' But I ought not 
to anticipate. 
The general outburst of hatred with which everyone fell upon ' the 
ruffian and society bully ' also struck me as curious. They seemed 
all to be absolutely convinced that there was a premeditated desire 
and a calculated intention to insult our whole society by that one act. 
There could be no doubt that the young man had displeased every­
body and, indeed, set the whole world against him - but how on 
earth did he manage to do it ? Till the last incident he never quarrelled 
with anyone nor insulted anyone, but had been as courteous as a 
gentleman in a fashions magazine, if the latter were only able to 
speak. I expect he was hated for his pride. Even our ladies, who began 
by adoring him, were now clamouring against him more loudly 
than the men. 
Mrs Stavrogin was terribly upset. She confessed afterwards to Mr 
Verkhovensky that she had been expecting it to happen long ago, 
every day during the last six months, and something 'of the kind ', 
too - a most extraordinary admission from a mother. ' It's started ! '  
she thought with a shudder. The morning after the incident at the 
club, she set about, carefully but firmly, obtaining an explanation from 
her son, but the poor woman trembled all over in spite of her firm­
ness. She had not slept all night, and even went om early in the morn­
ing to ask Mr Verkhovensky's advice, bursting into tears in his study ­
a thing which had never happened to her before in front of people. 
All she wanted was that Nicholas should at least say something to her, 
that he should deign to explain himself. Nicholas, who was always ex­
tremely courteous and respectful to his mother, listened to her for 

PRINC E  H A R R Y  • A M A R R I A G E  P R O P O S A L  
6 1  
some time, frowning but serious ; suddenly h e  got up without saying 
a word, kissed her hand, and went out. That evening, as though on 
purpose, another incident occurred. Though less violent and more or­
dinary than the first, it increased the clamour in the town, owing to 
the general state of public opinion. 
It was just then that our friend Liputin turned up. He came to see 
Stavrogin immediately after his interview with his mother, and 
begged him earnestly to do him the honour of coming to a party he 
was giving for his wife's birthday that evening. Mrs Stavrogin had 
long regarded with horror her son's partiality for such low company, 
but she dared not say anything to him about it. He had made several 
acquaintances beside Liputin in the third rank of our society and even 
among people of lower rank, but he seemed to like such friends. He 
had never been in Liputin's house before, though he had met him 
several times. He realized that Liputin had invited him because of the 
scandal in the club on the previous day and that as a local liberal he 
was very glad of it, being sincerely of the opinion that that was the 
way in which one had to treat members of club committees and that 
it was very well done. Nicholas laughed and promised to come. 
There was a great number of people at the party - not much to look 
at, but able to stand up for themselves. Liputin, vain and envious, 
gave a party only twice a year, but on those occasions he spared no 
expense. Mr Verkhovensky, the most honoured of the guests, did not 
tum up because of illness. There was tea, lots of refreshments and 
drinks ; they played cards at three tables, and the young people, while 
waiting for supper, danced to a piano accompaniment. Stavrogin led 
out Mrs Liputin - a very pretty young woman, who was terribly shy 
of him - took two turns round the room with her, then sat down be­
side her, talked to her, and made her laugh. Noticing at last how pretty 
she was when she laughed, he suddenly, in the presence of all, put his 
arm round her waist, and kissed her on the lips three times with great 
relish. The poor frightened woman fainted. Stavrogin took his hat and 
went up to the husband, who was struck dumb amid the general con­
fusion. Looking at him, he became embarrassed himself and, mutter­
ing hurriedly, ' Don't be angry,' went out of the room. Liputin ran 
after him, helped him on with his fur coat, ·and, bowing, saw him 
down the stairs. But next day there followed an amusing sequel to 
this, comparatively speaking, innocent incident, a sequel which raised 

62 
THE D E V I L S · PART O N B  
Liputin in the general estimation ever after, and which he knew how 
to use to his fullest possible advantage. 
About ten o'clock in the morning Liputin's maid, Agafya, a pert, 
cheerful, red-cheeked woman of thirty, presented herself at Stavro­
gin's house with a message from her master. She insisted on seeing 
'the young gentleman himself'. Stavrogin had a bad headache, but he 
went out. Mrs Stavrogin happened to be present at the delivery of the 
message. 
' Mr Liputin, sir,' Agafya began glibly, speaking very fast, ' told me 
fust of all to give his best regards to you and to ask you how you were, 
whether you had a good night after the party, and how you felt this 
morning after what happened last night?' 
Stavrogin grinned. 
' Give my regards to your master anJ thank him,' he said. 'Tell him 
from me, Agafya, that he is the most sensible man in town.' 
'And Mr Liputin, sir,' replied Agafya even more glibly, ' has asked 
me to say that he knows that without you telling him, and that he 
wished he could say as much for you.' 
'Oh ? But how did he know what I was going to say to you ?' 
' I'm sure I don't know how he knew that, sir, but after I'd left the 
house he came running after me, and without his cap, too. "Don't 
forget, Agafya, dear," he says to me, " if by any chance he should look 
upset and say to you, 'Tell your master that he is the most sensible fel­
low in town,' to say to him at once, 'The master knows that very well 
himself and wished he could say as much for you.'"' 
At last the interview with the Governor took place too. Our dear, 
gentle Ivan Osipovich had only just returned and only just had time to 
hear the passionate complaint from the club. There was no doubt that 
something had to be done, but he felt embarrassed. Our hospitable 
old man seemed also to be a little afraid of his young relative. He de­
cided, however, to persuade him to apologize to the club and to the 
man he had insulted, but in a satisfactory manner and, if necessary, in 
writing, too; then to ask him gently to leave our town and go to 
Italy, for example, to improve his mind or, indeed, anywhere else 
abroad. In the drawing-room in which this time he received Stavrogin 

P R I N CE H A R R Y · A M A R R I A G E  P R O P O S A L  
63 
(at other times the young man was allowed, as a relative, to wander 
freely al over the house), Alyosha Telyatnikov, a well-bred Civil 
Servant who was also a friend of the Governor's family, was opening 
postal packets on a table in a comer ; in the next room, at the window 
nearest to the drawing-room door, a visitor, a stout, robust-looking 
colonel, a former fellow-officer of the Governor, was sitting reading 
the Voice, without of course paying any attention to what was taking 
place in the drawing-room; he sat with his back to the door, in fact. 
Ivan Osipovich began in a roundabout way, almost in a whisper, but 
seemed to be a little confused. Nicholas looked very unfriendly, not 
at all as a relative should. He was pale, sat with his eyes fixed on the 
floor, and listened knitting his brow as though trying to control acute 
pain. 
'You've a kind and noble heart, Nicholas,' the dear old fellow said 
among other things. 'You're a man of culture, you've mixed in high 
society, and here, too, you've been till now a model of good be­
haviour, which was a great comfort to your mother, who is dear to 
us al. And now everything has again taken such a strange turn, which 
is so unfortunate for us all. I speak as a friend of your family, as an old 
man who loves you sincerely, and as a relative of yours whose words 
you cannot possibly take amiss. Tell me what makes you do such des­
perate things, things which are so contrary to all the accepted rules of 
behaviour? What is the meaning of such acts, which look as though 
they were committed in a state of delirium ? '  
Nicholas listened with impatience and annoyance. All o f  a sudden 
a cunning and mocking expression appeared for a moment in his 
eyes. 
'I may as well tell you what made me do it,' he said morosely, and, 
looking round, he bent down to Ivan Osipovich's ear. 
The well-bred Alyosha Telyatnikov moved away another three steps 
towards the window, and the Colonel cleared his throat behind the 
Voice. Poor Ivan Osipovich hastily and trustfully inclined his ear; he 
was exceedingly curious. And it was then that something utterly un­
heard of, though, on the other hand, something that in a certain sense 
was only to be expected, took place. The old man suddenly felt that 
instead of whispering some interesting secret to him, Nicholas all of a 
sudden seized the upper part of his ear between his teeth and bit it 
hard. He trembled al over, and his breath failed him. 

THE D EV I L S · PART ONE 
' Nicholas, what sort ofjoke is this ?' he moaned mechanically in a 
strangled voice. 
Alyosha and the Colonel had scarcely time to realize what was 
happening; besides, they could not see what Nicholas was doing, and 
to the very end they thought that the Governor and the young man 
were whispering to each other ; and yet the desperate look on the old 
man's face alarmed them. They stared at each other, not knowing 
whether to rush to his assistance as arranged, or to wait a little longer. 
Nicholas must have noticed that and bit the ear harder. 
' Nicholas, Nicholas,' his victim moaned again. 'All right, you've 
had your joke - let me go now.' 
Another moment and the poor man would, of course, have died of 
fright ; but the monster spared him and let go his ear. The old man's 
mortal panic lasted for a full minllte, and after that he had a sort of fit. 
But half an hour later Nicholas was arrested and taken for the time 
being to the guardroom, where he was locked up in a special cell with 
a special sentry at the door. It was a harsh decision, but our gentle 
Governor was so angry that he made up his mind to take the responsi­
bility, even if he had to face Mrs Stavrogin herself To everybody's 
amazement, this lady, who had hastily arrived in a state of great irrita­
tion to demand an immediate explanation from the Governor, was 
refused admission to the Governor's residence - thereupon she drove 
back home, without getting out of her carriage, hardly able to believe 
her senses. 
And at last everything was explained ! At two o'clock in the morn­
ing, the prisoner, who bad hitherto been remarkably calm and even 
slept, suddenly raised a din, began hammering violently on the door 
with his fists, with unnatural strength wrenched the iron grating off 
the door, and broke the window, cutting his hands badly. When the 
officer on guard came running with a detachment of men and the keys 
and ordered the cell to be opened so that they might overpower and 
tie up the maniac, it was discovered that he was suffering from an 
acute form of brain-fever. He was taken home to his mother. Every­
thing was explained immediately. All our three doctors gave it as their 
opinion that three days before the last incident the patient was prob­
ably in a state of delirium, though he was apparently fully conscious 
and possessed an extraordinary amount of cunning, that he was not in 
the full possession of his senses or his will, which was indeed con-

PRINCE HARRY · A MARRIAGE PROPOSAL 
65 
firmed by the facts. It would therefore seem that Liputin had guessed 
the truth before anyone else. Ivan Osipovich, a man of delicate and 
sensitive feelings, was overcome with confusion ; but the interesting 
fact is that he, too, must have thought Nicholas capable of any mad 
action even when in the full possession of his senses. At the club the 
members were ashamed, and wondered how they could have failed 
to notice the most obvious thing and overlooked the only plaus­
ible explanation of al these extraordinary happenings. There were, of 
course, some sceptics, but they could not maintain their position very 
long. 
Nicholas was in bed for over two months. A well-known specialist 
was summoned from Petersburg for a consultation ; the whole town 
called on Mrs Stavrogin. She forgave them. When, in the spring, 
Nicholas had completely recovered, and accepted without demur his 
mother's proposal to go to Italy, she made him pay us al farewell 
visits and as far as possible apologize where necessary. Nicholas readily 
agreed to do so. It was known at the club that he had had a most deli­
cate interview with Mr Gaganov at the latter's house, and that Mr 
Gaganov was fully satisfied with the apology he had received. While 
paying his visits, Nicholas looked very serious and even gloomy. 
Everybody received him with apparent sympathy, but everybody 
seemed for some reason to be embarrassed, and they were all glad that 
he was going to Italy. Ivan Osipovich even shed tears, but did not ap­
pear anxious to embrace Nicholas even at their last meeting. As a mat­
ter of fact, there were people in our town who remained convinced 
that the blackguard was merely having a good laugh at us al and that 
his illness had had nothing to do with it. He also called on Liputin. 
'Tell me,' he asked him, 'how could you have guessed beforehand 
what I was going to say about your being a sensible chap and supply 
Agafya with an answer ?' 
' Why,' laughed Liputin, ' simply because I, too, regard you as a 
sensible fellow, and that was how I foresaw what your answer would 
be.' 
'All the same, it's a remarkable coincidence. However, tell me this : 
you must then have thought me a sensible man, and not a madman, 
when you sent Agafya?' 
'A most sensible and most rational man. I merely pretended to be­
lieve that you were not in your right mind. Why, you yourself guessed 

66 
THE D E V I L S · PART ONE 
at once what I was thinking at the time and sent me a testimonial 
to my wit through Agafya.' 
' I'm afraid there you're a little mistaken ; I really was - indisposed,' 
murmured Nicholas, frowning. ' Good Lord,' he cried, 'do you really 
think that I'm capable of attacking people while in the full possession 
of my senses ? Why should I do that ? '  
Liputin looked put out and did not know what to say. Nicholas 
grew a little pale, or so it seemed to Liputin. 
'At any rate, your train of thought is certainly very amusing,' 
Nicholas went on. 'As for Agafya, I realize of course that you sent her 
to abuse me.' 
' You didn't expect me to challenge you to a duel, did you ?' 
' Why, no ! I seem to have heard that you dislike duels . . . .' 
' Why translate from the French ?' said Liputin, again looking put 
out. 
' You're all for keeping to your own national customs, aren't you ?' 
Liputin looked even more put out. 
' Dear me, what's this ?' cried Nicholas, noticing a volume by Con­
siderant lying very conspicuously on the table. ' You're not a Fourier­
ist by any chance, are you ? I shouldn't be surprised if you were ! Isn't 
that a translation from the French ?' he laughed, tapping the book 
with his fingers. 
' No, that's not a translation from the French ! '  Liputin cried spite­
fully, jumping up from his chair. ' That's a translation from the uni­
versal language of mankind, and not only from the French ! From the 
language of the universal social republic and universal harmony -
that's what it is, sir !  And not only from the French ! '  
'Dear me,' Nicholas went on, laughing ; ' but there isn't such a 
language, is there ? '  
Sometimes even a trifle attracts one's attention for a long time and 
to the exclusion of everything else I shall have a great deal to say 
about Mr Stavrogin later on ; but just now I should like to record, just 
as a matter of curiosity, that of all the impressions he received during 
the whole time he spent in our town, what stuck in his memory most 
was the insignificant and almost abject figure of the litde provincial 
official, a jealous husband and coarse family tyrant, a miser and a 
moneylender, who locked up the remnants of meals and the candle­
ends, and who at the same time was a fierce believer in goodness only 

P R I N C E  HARRY · A M A R R I A G E  P R O P O S A L  
67 
knows what future ' social harmony ', who at night gloated ecstatically 
over the fantastic visions of a future phalanstery, in the immediate 
realization of which in Russia and in our province he believed as 
f1rmly as in his own existence. And that in the very place where he 
himself had saved up enough money to buy a jerry-built little house, 
where he had married for the second time and taken a few hundred 
roubles for his wife, where perhaps for 100 miles there was not a single 
man, himself included, who bore any resemblance to a future member 
of ' the universal social republic and harmony '. 
'Goodness knows where such people spring from,' wondered 
Nicholas, as he sometimes recalled the unlooked-for Fourierist. 
4 
Our Prince travelled for over three years, so that he was almost for­
gotten in our town. Through Mr Verkhovensky, however, we learnt 
that he had been all over Europe, that he had even visited Egypt, and 
spent some time in Jerusalem, then joined a scientific expedition to 
Iceland and actually visited Iceland. It was also said that he had taken 
a course of lectures at a German university one winter. He did not 
write often to his mother - once in six months or even less - but Mrs 
Stavrogin was neither angry nor offended. She accepted submissively 
and without protest the relationship which had been established once 
and for all between her son and herself, and incessantly pined for 
her Nicholas and dreamt about him. She did not communicate her 
dreams or complaints to anybody. She seemed even to have become 
less friendly with Mr Verkhovensky. She was making some plans and, it 
appears, became more miserly than ever, and began to economize more 
than ever, and was angry with Mr Verkhovensky for his losses at cards. 
At last, in April of this year, she received a letter from Paris from 
Praskovya Drozdov, a general's widow and a friend of her childhood 
days. In her letter Mrs Drozdov - whom she had not seen or corre­
sponded with for the last eight years - told her that Nicholas had be­
come a close friend of her family and, particularly, of Lisa, her only 
daughter, and that he intended to accompany them to Switzerland in 
the summer, to Verney-Montreux, in spite of the fact that he was 
received like a son in the family of Count K. (a highly influential 
Petersburg personage), who was at present living in Paris, and spent 

68 
THE D E V I L S  • P A R T  O N E  
practically all his time at his house. The letter was short and its purpose 
was perfectly clear, though besides the above-mentioned facts no other 
inferences were drawn. Mrs Stavrogin wasted no time, made up her 
mind at once, packed her things, and, taking her protegee Dasha 
(Shatov's sister) with her, went to Paris in the middle of April and 
afterwards to Switzerland. She came back in July alone, having left 
Dasha with the Drozdovs ; the Drozdovs themselves, according to the 
news she had brought, hoped to arrive in our town at the end of 
August. 
The Drozdovs, too, were landowners of our province, but General 
Drozdov's duties - he was a friend of Mrs Stavrogin's and a fellow­
officer of her husband - always prevented them from visiting their 
magnificent estate. After the General's death, which had taken place 
the year before, the disconsolate widow had gone abroad with her 
daughter, intending, incidentally, to try out the grape cure at Verney-:­
Montreux during the latter half of the summer. On her return to her 
native land, she intended to settle in our province for good. She had a 
large house in our town, which had stood empty and shuttered for 
many years. They were rich. Mrs Drozdov, known as Mrs Tushin 
during her first marriage, was, like her school-friend Mrs Stavrogin, 
the daughter of a government contractor of the old days, and she, too, 
received a fortune from her father for her dowry. Tushin, a retired 
cavalry captain, was himself a man of means as well as a man of some 
ability. At his death he left a considerable fortune to his only daughter, 
Lisa, who was then only seven years old. Now that Lisa was about 
twenty-two, she had at least 2oo,ooo roubles of her own, not to men­
tion the great fortune which she would inherit on the death of her 
mother, who had no children by her second marriage. Mrs Stavrogin 
was evidently well satisfied with her journey. In her opinion, she had 
come to a satisfactory arrangement with Mrs Drozdov, and she told 
Mr Verkhovensky al about it immediately on her return ; indeed, she 
was extremely frank with him, which had not happened for a long 
time. 
' Hurrah ! '  cried Mr Verkhovensky, snapping his fmgers. 
He was beside himself with joy, particularly as he had spent the 
whole time of his separation from his friend in a state of utter dejec­
tion. She had not even taken leave of him properly when she went 
abroad, and had not told anything of her plans to ' the old woman', 

P R I N C E  HARRY • A M A R R I A G E  P R O P O S A L  
69 
fearing, perhaps, that he might not keep their secret. She was angry 
with him at the time for the considerable sum of money he had lost at 
cards, and which she suddenly foWld out. But already in Switzerland 
she felt that on her return she must do something for her forsaken 
friend, particularly as she had treated him severely for a long time past. 
The quick and mysterious parting from his friend had struck a chill 
into the timid heart of Mr Verkhovensky, and, on top of it, he was 
suddenly beset with other troubles. He was worried by a very serious 
fmancial liability he had incurred a long time before and which could 
not be settled without Mrs Stavrogin's help. MƲreover, the term of 
office of our good and gentle Ivan Osipovich came to an end at last in 
May of this year; he was replaced, and his dismissal was accompanied by 
some Wlpleasantness, too. Then, during the absence of Mrs Stavrogin, 
the arrival of our new Governor, Andrey von Lembke, took place; 
simultaneously a noticeable change occurred in the attitude of our 
provincial society towards Mrs Stavrogin and hence also towards Mr 
Verkhovensky. At least, he had already made a few unpleasant though 
valuable observations and, I believe, felt rather apprehensive without 
Mrs Stavrogin. He was worried by the suspicion that the new Gover­
nor had already been told about him as a highly dangerous man. He 
knew positively that some of our society ladies intended to give up 
calling on Mrs Stavrogin. It was said about our Governor's wife (who 
was not expected to arrive before the autumn) that though she was 
rumoured to be a proud woman, she was a real aristocrat and not like 
'poor old Mrs Stavrogin '. For some reason or other, everybody in our 
town seemed to know for a fact and in detail that our new Governor's 
wife and Mrs Stavrogin had once met in society and had parted ene­
mies, so that even the mention of Mrs von Lembke was supposed to 
create a painful impression on Mrs Stavrogin. The jatmty and triumph­
ant air of Mrs Stavrogin and the disdainful indifference with which 
she heard of the opinions of our ladies and of the excitement of our 
society, revived the drooping spirits of Mr Verkhovensky and cheered 
him up at once. He began to describe our new Governor's arrival 
with a kind of peculiar gloatingly obsequious humour. 
'You probably know, excellente amie,' he said in a coquettish and 
affected drawl, ' what a Russian administrator means, speaking gener­
ally, and what a new Russian administrator - that is to say, a newly 
baked, a newly appointed one - means. . . . Ces inrerminables mots 

70 
THE D E V I L S ·  P A R T  O N E  
russes! . . . I doubt whether you know what administrative enthusiasm 
means in practice and what sort of thing it is.' 
'Administrative enthusiasm ? I have no idea.' 
'I mean - vous savez chez nous - en un mot - appoint some miserable 
nonentity to sell some absurd railway tickets, and this nonentity will 
immediately imagine that he has the right to look down upon you as 
if he were a Jupiter himself, when you go to take a ticket, pour vo11s 
montrer sort pou11oir. " You wait," he says to himself. " I'll show you 
my power," and in them this sort of thing reaches the point of ad­
ministrative enthusiasm. En rm mot, I've just read that some stupid 
verger in one of our churches abroad - mais c' est tres wrieux - drove - I 
mean literally drove - a highly distinguished English family, les 
dames charm antes, out of the church before the beginning of the Lenten 
service - vous saflcz ces chants et le livre de Job - simply on the pretext 
that " foreigners are not allowed to loaf about a Russian church and 
that they must come at the fixed times " - and he sent them into faint­
ing fits. That verger was suffering from an attack of administrative 
enthusiasm et il a mo11tre son pouvoir . . . .' 
' Cut it short, if you can, Mr Verkhovensky.' 
' Mr von Lembke is making a tour of the province now. En rm mot, 
this Andrey Antonovich, though he is a Russian German of the Greek 
Orthodox faith, and even - I'll concede him that - a remarkably hand­
some man in his forties -' 
' What makes you think he is a handsome man ? He has the eyes of 
a sheep.' 
' Eminently. But I don't mind yielding to the opinion of our 
ladies -' 
' Let's keep to the point, please. By the way, I see you're wearing a 
red tie - since when ?' 
'I - I've just put it on to-day -' 
'And do you take your constitutional ? Do you go for a five-mile 
walk every day, as prescribed by your doctor ?' 
' N-no - not always.' 
' I  knew it ! Already in Switzerland I felt sure you didn't ! '  she cried 
irritably. ' Now you'll walk not five but eight miles a day! You've let 
yourself go terribly - terribly, terribly ! You've not aged so much as 
gone to pieces - you - you gave me a shock when I saw you a few 
moments ago, in spite of your red tie - quelle idee rouge! Go on with 

PRINCE HARRY · A MARRIAGE PROPOSAL 
71 
your story about von Lembke if you've really anything to tell me 
about him, and please do finish it some time, I beg you. I'm tired.' 
'En un mot, I only wanted to say that he's one of those administra­
tors who start at forty and who before that lead obscure lives, and then 
suddenly become important personages by unexpectedly acquiring a 
wife or by some other equally desperate means. I mean, he's not in 
town at the moment - I mean to say that people have already dinned 
into his ears that I'm a corrupter of youth and a disseminator of 
atheism in our province. He began making inquiries at once -' 
'Are you sure it's true ?' 
'Why, I've already taken the necessary steps, as a matter of fact. 
When it was reported to him that you " ruled the province", vous 
savez, he was good enough to say that "nothing of the sort is going 
to happen from now on".' 
'He said that?' 
'That "nothing of the sort is going to happen from now on ", and 
avec cette morgue . . . .  His wife we shall have the pleasure of beholding 
at the end of August; she's coming straight from Petersburg.' 
' From abroad. We met there.' 
'Vraiment?' 
'In Paris and in Switzerland. She's related to the Drozdovs.' 
'Related? What a remarkable coincidence! I' rn told she's ambitious 
and - and she is said to have important connexions. Is it true ?' 
' Nonsense ! Her connexions are of no importance whatever! She 
was an old maid without a penny till she was forry-five, and now 
she's hooked that von Lembke ofhers and, of course, her whole object 
iŖ to make an important man of him. They're both intriguers.' 
'I'm told she's two years older than he.' 
'Five. Her mother wore out her skirts on my doorstep in Moscow; 
she used to cadge for invitations to our balls as a favour when my hus­
band was living. And Julia used to sit all night in a comer without a 
dancing partner, with that turquoise butterfly on her forehead. I felt so 
sorry for her that I used to send her her first partner after two o'clock 
in the morning. She was already five-and-twenry then, and they used 
to take her out in short skirts like a little girl. In the end I was ashamed 
to invite them to my house.' 
' I  can see that butterfly of hers.' 
'I tell you the moment I arrived I stumbled straight on an intrigue. 

72 
THE D E V I L S  • P A R T  O N E  
You read Mrs Drozdov' s letter - what could be plainer ? But what did 
I find ?  That fool Mrs Drozdov herself - she always was a fool - sud­
denly glared at me as though wondering what I came for. You can 
imagine how surprised I was. I looked round, and what do you think 
I saw ? There was that von Lembke woman playing the hypocrite and 
with her that relation of theirs - a nephew of the late Mr Drozdov -
the whole thing was as plain as a pikestaff! Of course, I put an end to 
all that immediately, and Praskovya is on my side again ; but the 
intrigue, the intrigue ! '  
' Which you've successfully quashed. Oh, you're a Bismarck ! '  
'I am no Bismarck, but I am capable of seeing through hypocrisy 
and stupidity when I meet them. Mrs Lembke is hypocrisy and Pras­
kovya - stupidity. I don't think I have ever met such a flabby woman 
in my life, and her legs are swollen, and she's good-natured. What can 
be more foolish than a good-natured fool ? '  
'An ill-natured fool, ma bonne amie, an ill-natured fool is still more 
foolish,' Mr Verkhovensky retorted nobly. 
' I  daresay you're right. You remember Lisa, don't you ? '  
'Charmante enfant!' 
' But she's no longer an enfant, but a grown-up woman and a 
woman of character. Generous and passionate, and what I like about 
her so much is that she stands up to her mother, the credulous fool. 
We nearly had a row over that relation of theirs.' 
' But, good gracious, he isn't a relation ofLisa's at all ! He hasn't any 
designs on her, has he ? '  
' You see, he's a young army officer, not very talkative, and quite 
modest, as a matter of fact. I always want to be fair. I think he is 
against the intrigue himself and isn't after anything, and that it was 
that Lembke woman who was the chief schemer. He has a great re­
spect for Nicholas. You see, everything depends on Lisa, but I left her 
on excellent terms with Nicholas, and he promised me faithfully to be 
back home in November. So that it's only that Lembke who is in­
triguing, and Praskovya is just a blind woman. Fancy her telling me 
suddenly that all my suspicions were tmjustified ; I told her to her face 
that she was a fool. I'm ready to endorse it on the day of judgement. 
And but for the fact that Nicholas had begged me to leave well alone 
for the time being, I wouldn't have left without exposing that hypo­
critical woman. She was trying to get into the good books of Count 

P R I N CE H A R R Y · A M A R R I A GE P R O P O S A L  
73 
K. through Nicholas. She was out to set a son against his mother. But 
Lisa, I'm glad to say, is on our side, and I came to an understanding 
with Praskovya. Do you know that Karmazinov is a relative of hers ?' 
'What ? A relative of von Lembke ? '  
'Yes, o f  course. A distant one.' 
' Karmazinov, the novelist ? '  
'Why, yes, the writer. Why arc you so surprised ? O f  course, he 
thinks he is a great man. The conceited creature ! She's coming with 
him. Now she's making an awful fuss of him over there. She intends 
to organize something here, some kind of literary gatherings. He's 
coming for a month, wants to sell his last bit of property here. I nearly 
met him in Switzerland - not that I wanted to in the least. However, I 
hope he will do me the honour of recognizing me. He used to corre­
spond with me in the old days, been at my house. I wish you'd dress 
more decently, Mr Verkhovensky. You're getting more slovenly every 
day . . . .  Oh, how you torture me ! What are you reading now ?' 
'Me ?  Well, I -' 
' I  see. Same as ever - friends, drinking, the club and cards, and the 
reputation of an atheist. I don't like that reputation of yours, Mr Verk­
hovensky. I wish they wouldn't call you an atheist, particularly now. 
I didn't like it before, for it's just empty talk and nothing more. It 
must be said at last.' 
'Mais, ma chere -' 
'Listen to me, Mr V crkhovensky. So far as learning is concerned, I 
am, of course, an ignoramus compared with you, but on my way 
back here I've been thinking a lot about you. I've come to one con­
clusion.' 
' What conclusion ? '  
' I've come to the conclusion that we're not the only intelligent 
people in the wcrld, but that there are people who are much more 
intelligent than we.' 
'Witty and to the point. If there are people who are more intelli­
gent than we are, there must also be people who are more right than 
we are, and that meam that we, too, can make mistakes, doesn't it ? 
Mais, ma bonne amie", let us suppose that I do make a mistake, but I still 
possess my human, eternal, supreme right of freedom of conscience, 
don't I ?  I have the right to refuse to be a bigot and a religious £·matic 
if I want to, for which I shall naturally be hated by all sorts of people 

74 
THE DEVILS • P A R T  O NB 
to the end of time. Et puis, comme on trouve toujours plus de moines que 
de raison, and as I thoroughly agree with that.' 
'What, what did you say ?' 
'I said : on trouve toujours plus de moines que de raison, and as I -' 
'That's not yours, is it ? You must have taken it from somewhere.' 
' It was Pascal who said it.' 
'I thought it wouldn't be - you !  Why don't you ever say something 
short and to the point, but always go on and on and on ? That's much 
better than what you had to say about administrative enthusiasm.' 
'Ma foi, chere - why ? Well, first of all, probably because I am not, 
after al, a Pascal, and, secondly, because we Russians don't know how 
to say anything in our own language. At least, so far we haven't said 
anything.' 
' Well, perhaps that's not quite true. At any rate, you ought to make 
a note of such sayings and remember them, in case, you know, they 
come in useful in a conversation. Oh, my dear Mr Verkhovensky, on 
my way back here I did intend to have a serious, a very serious talk 
with you.' 
'Chere, chere amie!' 
' Now that al these Lembkes and Karmazinovs . . . .  Goodness, how 
you've let yourself go ! Oh, how you torture me! I'd have liked al 
those people to feel a respect for you because they are not worth your 
little fmger ; but the way you carry yourself! What will they ·see? 
What am I going to show them ? Instead of being a noble example, 
instead of keeping up the tradition of the past, you surround yourself 
with all sorts of riff-raff, you have acquired al sorts of horrible habits, 
you've grown old and feeble, you can't live without wine and cards, 
you read nothing but Paul de Kock, and you don't write anything, 
while they all write. All your time is wasted in talk. How can you 
possibly be friends with such a dreadful man as your inseparable 
Liputin ?' 
'Why, pray, mine and inseparable?' Mr Verkhovensky protested 
timidly. 
'Where is he now ? '  Mrs Stavrogin went on sharply and sternly. 
' He - he has the utmost respect for you, and he's gone to S-k to 
receive an inheritance which was left him by his mother.' 
' He seems to do nothing but get money. How is Shatov ? Still the 
same ?' 

PRI N C E  HARRY · A M A R R I A G E  P R O P O S A L  
75 
'Irascible, mais bo11.' 
'I can't stand that Shatov of yours. He's spiteful and thinks a lot of 
himself.' 
' How is Miss Shatov ?' 
'You mean Dasha ? What do you want to know that for ?' Mrs 
Stavrogin looked curiously at him. ' She's all right. I left her with the 
Drozdovs. I heard something about your son in Switzerland. Some­
thing bad, not good.' 
'Oh, c' est une histoire bien bhe! Je vous attendais, ma honne amie, pour 
vous raconter . . . .  
' 
' I've had enough, Mr Verkhovensky ; do leave me in peace. I'm 
worn out. We shall have plenty of time .to talk things over, bad things 
especially. You're beginning to splutter when you laugh - that's senil­
ity or something very like it. And how strangely you seem to laugh 
now. Gracious me, how many bad habits you've managed to collect ! 
Karmazinov will never call on you !  And here they are glad of any­
thing as it is. Oh, well, that's enough for the present. I'm tired ! You 
really might spare me ! '  
Mr Verkhovensky ' spared' her, but he went away great! y per­
turbed. 
5 
Our friend had certainly acquired not a few bad habits, especially dur­
ing recent months. He let himself rw1 to seed visibly and rapidly, and 
it is quite true that he had become slovenly. He drank more, he was 
more easily moved to tears, and his nerves grew weaker. He had be­
come far too sensitive to everything of artistic value. His face had ac­
quired a strange faculty for changing extraordinarily rapidly, from 
the most solenm expression, for instance, to the most ridiculous and 
even stupid. He could not bear being left alone, and he was incessantly 
craving for amusement. He demanded to be told the latest bit of scan­
dal, some local anecdote, insisting on something fresh every day. If no 
one came to see him for a long time, he paced the room disconsolately, 
walked up to ilie window, chewed his lips pensively, heaved deep 
sighs, and finished up almost by whimpering. He seemed to be full of 
forebodings, afraid of something unexpected and inevitable ; he had 
become apprehensive ; he began to pay great attention to his dreams. 
He spent the whole of that day and evening very dejectedly, sent 

THE D EVI L S  • P A R T  O NE 
for me, was very excited, talked a lot, told me everything in great de­
tail, but all rather incoherently. Mrs Stavrogin had known for a long 
time that he did not conceal anything from me. At last I could not 
help feeling that he was worried by something special, something 
which, perhaps, he did not clearly understand himself. As a rule, when 
we had met before and he had begun complaining to me, a bottle of 
vodka would almost invariably make its appearance after a little time 
and everything would become more cheerful. But this time there was 
no vodka, and he obviously had again and again to suppress his desire 
to send for it. 
'And why is she so angry with me ? '  he kept complaining almost 
every minute like a child. 'Tous les hommes de genie et de progrts en 
Russic etaient, sont et seront toujours des drunkards et des gamblers, qui 
boivent like fish - and I'm not such a drunkard and gambler as all that . 
. . . She reproaches me for not writing anything. What a curious idea! 
Why do I lie down? She says I ought to be "an example and a re­
proach ". Mais entre nous so it dit, what else should a man who Is 
destined to be "a reproach" do but lie down - doesn't she know 
that ? '  
And at last I saw what was the chief and particular trouble that was 
worrying him so persistently that evening. Many times he went up to 
the looking-glass and stood a long time before it. At last he turned 
from the looking-glass to me and said with a sort of strange despair : 
' Mon cher,je suis a man who has let himself go to pieces! '  
And, to be sure, till then, till that very day, he had always remained 
absolutely confident of one thing, in spite of all Mrs Stavrogin's 'new 
views ' and all her 'changed ideas ' - namely, that he was stil irresist­
ible to her feminine heart, that is to say, not only as an exile or as a 
famous savant, but as a handsome man. For twenty years he had har­
boured that flattering and soothing conviction, and quite possibly of 
all his convictions this was the most dificult to part with. Had he a 
foreboding that evening of the great ordeal he would have to undergo 
so soon ? 
6 
Let me now describe the almost forgotten incident with which my 
story really begins. 
At the very end of August, the Drozdovs, too, at last returned. 

P R I N CE HARRY · A M AR R I A G E  P R O P O S A L  
77 
'heir arrival, which took place shortly before that of their relative, 
lle long-expected wife of our Governor, made a deep impression on 
ur society. But I shall speak of al these interesting events later; now 
shall merely state that Mrs Drozdov presented Mrs Stavrogin, who 
•as expecting her so impatiently, with a most difficult problem : 
olid1olas had parted from them in July and, having met Cotmt K. on 
he Rhine, gone with him and his family to Petersburg. (N.B. The 
:ount's three daughters were all of a marriageable age.) 
'I could get nothing out of Lisa,' Mrs Drozdov concluded. ' You 
:now how proud and stubborn she is. But I saw witl1 my own eyes 
hat something had taken place between her and Nicholas. I don't 
::now al the ins and outs, but I think that you, my dear, will have to 
ISk your Dasha about it. If you ask me, Lisa was offended. I'm awfully 
̸ad to have brought your favourite back to you at last and handed 
1er over to you: a good riddance.' 
These venomous words were uttered with remarkable exasperation. 
It was obvious that the ' flabby ' woman had prepared them before­
ttand and had been gloating over their effect long before she had ut­
tered them. But Mrs Stavrogin was not the woman to be put out by 
sentimental effects and innuendoes. She sternly demanded the most 
precise and satisfactory explanations. Mrs Drozdov immediately 
lowered her tone, and even ended up by bursting into tears and plung­
ing into avowals of the deepest friendship. This irritable but sentimental 
lady, like Mr Verkhovensky, was always in need of true friendship, 
and her clllef complaint against her daughter Lisa was that she was ' no 
friend to her'. 
But the only thing that could be gathered with any certainty from 
al her explanations and outpourings was that there really had been 
some quarrel between Lisa and Nicholas, but Mrs Drozdov evidently 
had no definite idea what sort of quarrel it was. As for her imputations 
against Dasha, she not only withdrew them completely in the end, but 
even asked Mrs Stavrogin particularly not to attach any importance to 
her words, because she had uttered them ' in irritation'. In short, every­
thing was extremely vague, even suspicious. According to her ac­
count, the quarrd was due to Lisa's ' stubborn and sarcastic ' character; 
Nicholas, on the other hand, though greatly in love, was too proud 
to put up with her sarcastic remarks, and became sarcastic himsel£ 
' Soon afterwards,' she went on, ' we made the acquaintance of a 

THE D E V I L S · P A R T  ONE 
young man, the nephew of your " professor", I believe, and indeed 
he has the same surname . . . .' 
' He's his son, not his nephew,' Mrs Stavrogin corrected her. 
Mrs Drozdov never could remember the surname of Mr Verk­
hovensky, and she always called him the ' professor'. 
'Well, his son, then ; so much the better, it's all the same to me. An 
ordinary young man, very lively and unconventional, but nothing 
special about him. Well, I'm afraid Lisa herself did wrong there. She 
made friends with the young man to make Nicholas jealous. I can't 
blame her for it very much : it's the sort of thing every girl would do -
something rather charming, I think. Only instead of being jealous 
Nicholas made friends with the young man himself, as if he did not 
notice anything and just as though he did not really care. That made 
Lisa furious. The young man soon left (he seemed to be in a hurry to go 
somewhere), and Lisa began to pick quarrels with Nicholas at every 
favourable opportunity. She noticed that Nicholas was sometimes 
talking to Dasha, and that made her fly into such rages that life wasn't 
worth living, my dear. The doctors have forbidden me t̹ get angry, 
and I got so sick of that lake that they make such a fuss about that it 
only gave me toothache and most awful rheumatism. Why, I've seen 
it stated in print that Lake Geneva gives people the toothache. It's one 
of its characteristics, it seems. And just then Nicholas received a letter 
from the Countess, and left us at once ; he packed his things in one day. 
I must·say they parted friends, and Lisa, too, was very gay and frivol­
ous, and laughed a lot when she saw him off Only she was pretending 
all the time. After he had gone she grew very wistful, and stopped 
mentioning him at all. Didn't let me mention him, either. And I'd 
advise you, too, my dear, not to mention it again to Lisa. You'll only 
mess things up. If you don't say anything, she will be the first to talk 
to you about it. You'll find out more that way. I think they'll make it 
up if only Nicholas carries out his promise and comes back soon.' 
' I'll write to him at once. If that's all that's happened, it's just a silly 
quarrel ; it's all nonsense! You see, I know Dasha very well. There's 
nothing in it.' 
' I'm sorry about dear Dasha - I  shouldn't have said that. They just 
used to talk to one another in the ordinary way - and aloud, too. But 
the whole thing, my dear, upset me at the time. Besides, Lisa, too, I 
could see treated her again with the same kindness as before.' 

PRINCE HARRY • A M A RRIAGE PROPOSAL 
79 
Mrs Stavrogin wrote to Nicholas on the same day, imploring him 
to come back at least one month earlier than he had intended. But 
there still remained something about the affair which she could not 
explain, something she did not know. She thought about it the whole 
evening and the whole night. Mrs Drozdov's opinion seemed too in­
nocent and too sentimental to her. ' Praskovya,' she thought, 'has all 
her life been too sentimental, ever since she was at boarding-school. 
Nicholas is not the sort of man to run away because of some sarcastic 
remarks of a young girl. If they did quarrel, then there must have been 
some other reason for it. They brought that officer with them, though. 
Lives in their house as a relative. And about Dasha, too, Praskovya 
was a little too quick to apologize : I expect she must have kept some­
thing to herself, something she did not want to tell me .
. . .
' 
In the morning Mrs Stavrogin made up her mind to put an end to 
at least one perplexing problem, and her plan was quite remarkable 
for its unexpectedness. What did she really think of when she made it ? 
It is difficult to say, and, besides, I cannot undertake to explain before­
hand all its contradictions. As a chronicler, I am content to present the 
events exactly as they happened, and it is not my fault if they appear 
incredible. I must, however, put it once more on record that by the 
morning there was no suspicion left in her mind so far as Dasha was 
concerned, and, to tell the truth, she never really suspected her ; she 
had too much confidence in her. And, besides, she thought it highly 
unlikely that Nicholas could fall in love with her - 'with Dasha '. 
Next morning, when Dasha was pouring out the tea at the breakfast 
table, Mrs Stavrogin observed her closely for a long time and, perhaps 
for the twentieth time since the day before, said to herself with utter 
conviction : ' It's all nonsense ! '  
She did notice, however, that Dasha looked tired and that she was 
more quiet and apathetic than usual. After breakfast both of them, ac­
cording to their long-established custom, sat down to needlework. Mrs 
Stavrogin demanded from her a full account of her impre>sions 
abroad, especially of the cotmtryside, the inhabitants, their towns, 
their customs, their arts and commerce - everything she had had time 
to observe. Not one question about the Drozdovs or about her life 
with the Drozdovs. Dasha, who sat beside her at the work-table and 
helped her with the embroidery, told her all about it for half an hour 
in her even, monotonous, but somewhat weak voice. 

So 
THE DEVILS • PART ONB 
'Darya,' Mrs Stavrogin interrupted her suddenly, ' you have noth­
ing special you would like to tell me, have you?' 
'No, nothing,' said Dasha, after a moment's thought, looking at 
Mrs Stavrogin with her bright eyes. 
'Nothing on your soul, on your heart, on your conscience? '  
' Nothing,' Dasha repeated quietly, but with a sort of sullen firm­
ness. 
'I knew there wasn't! I want you to know, Darya, that I shall never 
doubt you. Now sit stil and listen. Sit down on that chair, dear, oppo­
site ; I want to see you properly. That's right. Listen - do you want to 
be married ? ' 
Dasha responded with a long, though not too astonished, question­
ing look. 
' Wait, don't say anything. In the first place, there is a great differ­
ence in age - a very great difference - but you know better than any­
one what nonsense that is. You're a sensible girl, and there must be no 
mistakes in your life. However, he is still a handsome man . . . .  I mean, 
Mr Verkhovensky, whom you have always respected. Well?' 
Dasha looked even more questioningly, and this time she was not 
only astonished, but blushed perceptibly. 
' Wait, don't say anything. Don't be in a hurry. Though I have left 
you money in my will, what's to become of you should I die, even if 
you have money ? You wil be deceived and your money wil be 
taken away from you - you wil be ruined. But if you marry him, 
you'll be the wife of a famous man. Now let's consider it from his 
point of view: if I die now, what wil become of him, though I've 
provided for him ? But I know I can trust you to look after him. 
Wait, I haven't finished : he's thoughtless, irresolute, callous, egoistic, 
a man of low habits; but you must appreciate him if only because 
there are men who are much worse than he is. I do not want to get 
you off my hands to some blackguard, do I ?  Or do you think I do ? 
But you wil appreciate him mainly because I ask you to,' she broke 
off suddenly, irritably. 'Do you hear ? What are you staring at me 
for ?' 
Dasha still listened and said nothing. 
' Wait a moment - don't speak ! He's an old woman - but that's all 
the better for you. A pathetic old woman, I admit. There is not a 
woman in the world whose love he deserves. But he deserves to be 

P R I N C E  H A R R Y · A M A R R I A G E  P R O P O S A L  
81 
loved for his helplessness, and you will love him for his helplessness. 
You understand me, don't you? Don't you ? '  
Dasha nodded. 
'I knew you would. I did not expect anything else from you. He 
will love you, because he must, he must. He must adore you ! '  Mrs 
Stavrogin screamed with peculiar irritation. ' Besides, he is sure to fall 
in love with you, even if it were not his duty to do so. I know him. 
And I shall always be here. You needn't worry about that: I shall al­
ways be here. He wil complain about you, he will tell discreditable 
stories about you, he will whisper things about you to the first person 
he meets, he will be whining, for ever whining ; he will write you let­
ters from one room to another, two letters a day ; but he won't be able 
to live without you all the same, and that's the main thing. Make him 
do as you like; if you can't make him, you'll be a fool. He'll want to 
hang himself. He'll threaten to do so - don't you believe it. It's just 
nonsense! Don't believe it, but keep your eyes open all the same, for 
you never can tell : he may hang himself. This sort of thing does hap­
pen with people like that : they hang themselves out of weakness and 
not out of strength. And that's why you must never drive him too far 
- that's the first rule in married life. Don't forget that he is a poet, 
either. Listen, Dasha: there is no greater happiness than self-sacrifice. 
Besides, you'll be doing me a great favour, and that's the main thing. 
Don't think that I've been talking nonsense. I know what I am talk­
ing about. I'm an egoist, so you be an egoist, too. I'm not forcing 
you to do anything; it all depends on you : whatever you say will 
be done. Well, what are you sitting there like that for ?  Say some­
thing ! '  
' It makes no difference to me, Mrs Stavrogin, ifl really must marry 
someone,' Dasha said firmly. 
' Must ? What are you hinting at ?' Mrs Stavrogin looked sternly 
and intently at her. 
Dasha was silent, picking at the embroidery frame with her needle. 
' You may be a clever girl, but you're talking nonsense. It may be 
true that I'm very anxious for you to marry now, but that's not be­
cause I think it's necessary. It's merely because I've set my heart on it, 
and only to Mr Verkhovensky. But for Mr Verkhovensky I should not 
have thought of marrying you now, though you are twenty . . . .  
Well ?' 

82 
THE D EV I L S  • PART O NE 
' I'll do as you wish, rna' am.' 
' You agree, then ! Wait, don't say anything. Why are you in such 
a hurry? I haven't finished: I've left you fifteen thousand roubles in 
my will. I'm going to give them to you now, on your wedding day. 
You will give eight thousand to him - I mean, not to him but to me. 
He owes eight thousand; I'll pay his debt, but he must know that it has 
been paid with your money. You wil be left with seven thousand, 
and, remember, don't give him one rouble of it. Never pay his debt-. 
If you pay them once, you'll never see the end of it. I'll make the two 
of you an allowance of one thousand two hundred a year, with extras, 
one thousand five hundred, besides board and lodging, which I shall 
also pay for, just as I do for him now. Only you must have your own 
servant-. Your yearly allowance I shall pay you in a lump sum, I shall 
give it to you - straight into your hands. But you, too, be kind to him, 
give him some money occasionally, and let his friends visit him once a 
week ; if they come more often, tum them out. But I shall be here my­
self. And ifl die, the allowance wil go on till his death - do you hear ? 
- till his death, because it is his allowance, and not yours. I'll leave you 
in my wil besides your seven thousand - which, if you're not a fool, 
you will keep intact - another eight thousand. You won't get another 
penny from me. It's right that you should know that. Well, do you 
agree or not? Won't you say something at last?' 
'I've told you already, Mrs Stavrogin.' 
' Remember it's for you to decide. It will be just as you wish.' 
' In that case, could you tell me, Mrs Stavrogin, whether Mr Verk­
hovensky has said anything to you about it ?' 
' No, he hasn't, and he doesn't know anything about it, but - he will 
presently! ' 
She got up at once and threw on her black shawl. Dasha again 
blushed a little and followed her with a questioning glance. Mrs Stav­
rogin turned suddenly to her with a face burning with anger. 
' You fool! '  She pounced upon her like a hawk. 'You ungrateful 
fool ! What are you thinking about ? Do you really believe that I'd 
compromise you in any way - however little ? Why, he'll be crawling 
on his knees to beg you to marry him, he ought to die of happiness ­
that's how it shall be arranged. You know perfectly well that I wil 
never allow anyone to hurt you. Or do you think that he'll marry you 
for the eight thousand and that I'm runing now to sell you to him ? 

P R I N CE H A R RY • A M A R R I A G E  P R O P O S A L  
83 
Vou're a fool, a fool ! You're all ungrateful fools. Give me my um­
brella ! '  
And she went off on foot along the wet brick pavements and 
wooden planks to Mr Verkhovensky. 
7 
It was quite true that she would not let anyone hurt Dasha; on the 
contrary, it was now that she considered herself to be acting as her 
benefactress. The most high-minded and virtuous indignation blazed 
up in her heart when, as she put on her shawl, she caught the embar­
rassed and mistrustful glance of her protegee fixed upon her. She had 
genuinely loved Dasha ever since she was a little girl. Mrs Drozdov 
was right in saying that Dasha was her favourite. Long ago Mrs Stav­
rogin had made up her mind once and for al that Dasha' s character was 
not in the least like her brother's (not, that is, like the character of her 
brother, Ivan Shatov), that she was quiet and gentle, capable of great 
acts of self-sacrifice; that she was loyal, extraordinarily modest, un­
usually sensible, and, above all, grateful. So far Dasha evidently came 
up to her expectations. 'There wil be no mistakes in her life,' Mrs 
Stavrogin said when the girl was only twelve years old, and as it was 
her nature to attach herself obstinately and passionately to any illusion 
that fascinated her, any new design, any idea that took her fancy, she 
decided there and then to bring up Dasha like her own daughter. She 
immediately set aside a sum of money for her, and engaged a gover­
ness, Miss Criggs, who lived with her til Dasha was sixteen, but who 
was suddenly dismissed for some unknown reason. Teachers from the 
grammar school came to give her lessons, among them, incidentally, a 
real Frenchman, who taught Dasha French. The Frenchman, too, was 
suddenly dismissed, almost turned out of the house. A poor lady, a 
widow of good family, who was a stranger in the town, taught her to 
play the piano. But her chief tutor was Mr Verkhovensky. It was he 
who really first discovered Dasha: he began teaching the quiet child 
before even Mrs Stavrogin thought of her. Let me repeat again : it was 
wonderful how children took to him! Lisa Tushin had been taught by 
him from the age of eight til eleven (Mr Verkhovensky, of course, 
taught her without any fee, which he would not have taken from the 
Drozdovs for anything in the world). But he grew very fond of the 

THE D E V I L S · PART O N E  
lovely child, and used to tell her all sorts of romantic tales about the 
creation of the world, the earth, and the history of mankind. His lec­
tures about primitive man and the primitive peoples were more inter­
esting than the Arabian tales. Lisa, who was deeply moved by these 
stories, used to mimic Mr Verkhovensky very amusingly at home. 
He got to know about it, and once took her by surprise. Lisa, thrown 
into confusion, flung herself into his arms and burst out crying. Mr 
Verkhovensky wept, too, with delight. But Lisa soon went away, and 
Dasha alone remained. When other teachers were engaged for Dasha, 
Mr V erkhovensky stopped his lessons with her and gradually lost in­
terest in her altogether. That went on for a long time. One day, when 
she was already seventeen, he was suddenly amazed by her prettiness. 
It happened at dinner in Mrs Stavrogin's house. He began talking to 
the young girl, was very pleased with her answers, and ended up by 
proposing to give her a serious and comprehensive course of lectures 
on the history of Russian literature. Mrs Stavrogin was delighted, and 
thanked him for his excellent idea, and Dasha was very excited about 
it. Mr Verkhovensky prepared his lectures with special care, and at 
last they began. They started with the ancient period ; the first lecture 
went off very well ; Mrs Stavrogin was present. When Mr Verk­
hovensky had fmished, and just as he was about to tell his pupil that 
next time he would discuss The Lay of (or's Army, Mrs Stavrogin 
suddenly got up and declared that there would be no more lessons. 
Mr Verkhovensky winced, but said nothing. Dasha flushed crimson. 
That was the end of the matter, however. That had happened exactly 
three years before Mrs Stavrogin's present unexpected whim. 
Poor Mr Verkhovensky was sitting alone in his room without the 
slightest premonition of what was about to happen. Sunk in melan­
choly thoughts, he had for a long time been glancing through the 
window to see whether any of his friends were coming. But no one 
would come. It was drizzling. It was getting cold. The stove would 
have to be heated. He sighed. Suddenly a terrible spectre appeared be­
fore his eyes : Mrs Stavrogin was coming to see him in such weather 
and at such an ungodly hour ! And on foot! He was so startled that he 
forgot to put on his coat, and received her as he was : in his usual pink, 
wadded jacket. 
'Ma /Jonne amie,' he cried weakly, rising to meet her. 
'You're alone ? I'm glad. I can't stand your friends. Oh, how you do 

P R I N C E  H A RRY · A M A R R I A G E  P R O P O S A L  
85 
smoke ! Gracious, what an atmosphere! You haven't finished your tea, 
and it's almost twelve o'clock ! Your idea of heaven is disorder. Your 
idea of enjoyment is dirt. What are these torn bits of paper doing on 
the floor ? Nastasya !  Nastasya! What is your Nastasya doing ? Open 
the windows, my dear, the ventilation windows, the doors - every­
thing! Open them wide, please ! We'll go into the drawing-room. I've 
come to you on business. And, please, sweep up, my dear, for once in 
your life ! '  
'Master makes such a mess, rna' am ! '  Nastasya squeaked in an ex­
asperated, plaintive voice. 
' Well, keep on sweeping ! Sweep fifteen times a day, my dear! 
What a horrible room ! '  she said when they had gone into the draw­
ing-room. ' Close the door properly; I'm sure she'll be eavesdropping. 
You simply must get new wallpaper. I sent you the decorator with 
a pattern book ; why didn't you choose one ? Sit down and listen. 
Sit down, please! Where are you off to ? Where are you off to ? 
Where ?' 
' One moment - I -' cried Mr Verkhovensky from the other room ; 
' here I am ! '  
" Oh, you've changed your coat.' She looked him up and down 
quizzically. (He had put on his coat over the jacket.) ' Yes, that cer­
tainly is more in tune with - with what I have to tell you. Sit down, 
please! '  
She told him everything all at once, sharply and forcefully. She 
hinted at the eight thousand which he wanted so badly. She spoke at 
great length about the dowry. Mr Verkhovensky glared at her and 
trembled. He heard everything, but could not understand it properly. 
He tried to speak, but his voice failed him. All he knew was that every­
tiling would be as she said, that it was useless to argue and object, and 
that the question of his marriage had been irrevocably settled. 
' Mais ma bonne amie - for the third time and at my time of life and 
to such a child ! '  he brought himself to say at last. ' Mais c' est tme 
enfant!' 
' A  child who is twenty years old, thank goodness ! Don't roll your 
eyes, please, I beg you. You're not on the stage. You're a very clever 
and learned man, but you don't understand anything about life. You 
must always have a nurse to look after you. What's going to happen to 
you when I'm dead ? And she'll be a good nurse to you. She's a modest, 

86 
THE DEVILS • PART ONE 
determined, sensible girl. Besides, I shall always be here, I'm not 
thinking of dying yet. She's a home-loving girl, an angel of gentle­
ness. This happy thought occurred to me in Switzerland. Don't you 
see ? I tell you she's an angel of gentleness! '  she suddenly screamed 
furiously. ' Your place is always filthy. She'll keep it clean and-orderly. 
Everything wil shine like a mirror. Gracious, you don't think I'm 
going to implore you to marry such a treasure, count up all the advan­
tages, go down on my knees before you, do you ? Why, it's you who 
ought to go down on your knees ! Oh, you vain, vain, faint-hearted 
man ! '  
'But - I'm an old man ! '  
'What do your fifty-three years matter ? Fifty is not the end, but 
the middle of a man's life. You're a handsome man, and well you 
know it. You also know how much she respects you. If l die, what's 
to become of her ? But married to you, she need not worry and I need 
not worry. You're a man of importance; you have a name, a loving 
heart. You receive a pension which I look upon as an obligation. You 
will save her, perhaps, save her ! In any case, you'll be doing her an 
honour. You will teach her to live; you will enlarge her mind, guide 
her thoughts. How many people are ruined to-day because their 
thoughts are not properly guided. By that time you wil have finished 
your book, and you'll at once remind people of your existence.' 
'As a matter of fact,' he murmured, gratifted by Mrs Stavrogin's 
adroit flattery - 'as a matter of fact I'm just about to start writing my 
Stories from Spanish History.' 
' Well, there you are ! ' 
'But - what about her ? Did you tell her ?' 
' Don't worry about her; and you needn't be so curious to know, 
either. Of course, you must ask her yourself, beg her to do you the 
honour - understand ? But don't worry, I'll be there. Besides, you love 
her, don't you?' 
Mr Verkhovensky's head began to swim : the walls were going 
round and round. There was one terrible idea he could not grasp, try 
as he might. 
'Excellente amie,' he said, his voice trembling suddenly, ' I - I could 
never imagine that you - you would make up your mind to - to 
marry me off to another woman ! '  
'You're not a young lady, my dear sir. Only young ladies are 

PRINCE HARRY • A MARRIAGE PROPOSAL 
87 
married off; you're getting married yourself,' Mrs Stavrogin hissed 
venomously. 
'Oui,j'ai pris un mot pour un autre. Mais - c'est tgal.' He stared at her, 
looking lost. 
'I can see that it is ega/,' she said with slow, contemptuous delibera­
tion. 'Heavens, he's fainted ! Nastasya, Nastasya! Water! '  
But there was no need for water. He came to. Mrs Stavrogin picked 
up her umbrella. 
. 
'I see that it's no use talking to you now.' 
'Oui, oui, je suis incapable.' 
'But by to-morrow, I hope, you will have rested and thought it 
over. Stay at home. If anything happens, let me know, even if it's at 
night. Don't write me any letters, for I shan't read them. But to­
morrow I shall come here again myself at the same time alone for 
your final answer, and I trust it wil be satisfactory. See that no one is 
here and that everything is nice and tidy, for this is really disgusting. 
Nastasya, Nastasya! '  
Of course, the next day he gave his consent ; and he could hardly 
have done otherwise. There was one special circumstance here . . . .  
8 
Mr Verkhovensky's estate, as we all knew (consisting of fifty serfs 
according to the old register, and adjoining Skvoreshniki), was not 
his at all, but belonged to his first wife, and was therefore the property 
of his son Peter now. Mr Verkhovensky was merely his son's trustee, 
and so, when his son came of age, he was put in charge of it because he 
had received a formal authorization from his son to manage his estate. 
Such an arrangement was to the advantage of the young man, for he 
received about 1,00 roubles a year from his father in lieu of the in­
come from the estate, which under the new regime did not produce 
500 (perhaps even less). Lord knows how such a relationship had been 
established. In any case, the whole of the 1,00 roubles was sent by 
Mrs Stavrogin, Mr Verkhovensky not contributing a rouble to it. On 
the contrary, he put all the money he received from the estate in his 
own pocket, and, besides, completely ruined it, having let it to a busi­
nes man and sold, without Mrs Stavrogin's knowledge, the timber 
which was its only valuable asset. He had been selling the timber bit 

8!1 
THE D E V I L S  • PART ONE 
by bit. The whole of it was worth at least 8,00 roubles, but he sdd it 
for 5 ,000. He sometimes lost a lot of money at the club, and .vas 
afraid to ask Mrs Stavrogin for it. She was wild with anger when dt 
last she got to know about it. And now his beloved son wrote to 
say that he was coming himself to sell his property at whatever price 
it would fetch, and asked his father to make the necessary arrange­
ments for its sale. It was clear that, in view of his generous and selfless 
nature, Mr Verkhovensky was ashamed of the way he had treated 
le cher e'!fant (whom he had last seen nine years ago as a student in 
Petersburg). Originally, the whole estate was worth 13 ,000 or 14,00 
roubles, but at present it was doubtful whether anyone would give 
more than 5 ,000 for it. No doubt Mr Verkhovensky was fully en­
titled, by the terms of the trust, to sell the timber and, taking into 
account the 1,000 roubles his son had been receiving punctually for so 
many years, he could have put up a good case against any unfair de­
mands at the final settlement. But Mr Verkhovensky was an honour­
able man of high principles. A marvellously beautiful idea occurred to 
him : when his darling Peter arrived, he would lay on the table before 
him 1 5 ,000 roubles - that is, the maximum amount the estate would 
ever have realized - without hinting at the yearly payments his son 
had been receiving. Instead, he would press ce cher fils with tears to his 
heart, thus putting an end to all their business accounts. He began to 
unfold this beautiful picture carefully and in a roundabout way to Mrs 
Stavrogin. He hinted that that would shed a sort of special, noble 
lustre on their long friendship - their ' idea '. It would also show up the 
fathers of the older generation and, generally, everyone who belonged 
to it, in a selfless and magnanimous light as compared with the 
younger generation of frivolous and socialistic young men. 
He said a lot more, but Mrs Stavrogin made no comment. At last 
she told him drily that she was ready to buy their land for its maxi­
mum price - that is, for 6,ooo or 7,000 roubles (while it could have 
been bought for four). About the remaining 8,ooo, which had van­
ished with the woods, she never uttered a word. 
This had happened a month before Mrs Stavrogin proposed that he 
should marry Dasha. Mr Verkhovensky was shocked and began to 
ponder. There might in the past have been a hope that his darling son 
would not make an appearance at all - at least, an outsider might have 
expressed such a hope. Mr Verkhovensky himself, as a father, would 

PRINCE HARRY · A MARRIAGE PROPOSAL 
89 
of course have indignantly rejected the very suggestion of such a hope. 
However that may be, all sorts of queer rumours had till then been 
reaching us about darling Peter. At first, after fmishing his course at the 
university six years before, he seemed to have loafed about Petersburg 
without a job. Suddenly we received the news that he had taken part in 
the distribution of some anonymous propaganda leaflet and was await­
ing trial. Then that he had suddenly turned up abroad, in Switzerland, 
at Geneva - that is to say, we were afraid that he had run away. 
'It al seems very queer to me,' Mr Verkhovensky used to harangue 
us at the time, looking greatly embarrassed. 'Dear Peter, c
' est une si 
pauvre tete! He's kind, noble-minded, very sensitive, and I must say 
that I was very glad in Petersburg when I compared him with our 
modem young people, but c' est un pauvre sire tout de meme .
. . . And, 
you know, it's al because of that half-bak:edness, that sentimentality! 
What fascinates them is not realism, but the sentimental and idealist 
side of socialism; its religious aspect, as it were; its poetry - al of it 
second-hand, of course. And yet think what it al means to me! I have 
so many enemies here, and more there, and they are certain to ascribe 
it to his father's influence. Heavens, Peter a leader of the revolutionary 
movement! What times we live in ! '  
However, Peter very soon sent his full address from Switzerland for 
his money to be forwarded to him as usual, which meant that he was 
not exactly a political emigre. And now, after having spent four years 
abroad, he suddenly appeared in his own country again and sent news 
of his imminent arrival : which meant that he was not accused of any­
thing. What was more, someone seemed to have taken an interest in 
hi.-n and become his patron. He wrote now from the south of Russia, 
where he was on some private business, having been entrusted with 
some important commission by someone. All this was admirable, but 
the question still remained where Mr Verkhovensky was to get the 
other 7,00 or 8,00 roubles to make up the 'fair' price for the estate. 
And what if his son should raise a clamour, and instead of that 
inspiring picture it should come to a lawsuit? Somehow he felt that 
his sensitive Peter would not give up anything that was to his interest. 
'Why is it, as I have noticed,' Mr Verkhovensky whispered to me 
once - 'why is it that all these desperate socialists and communists are, 
at the same time, also such incredible misers, such acquisitive fellows, 
such believers in private property, and indeed, the bigger the socialist, 

THE D E V I L S  • P A R T  O N E  
the more extreme he is, the stronger is his instinct for private owner­
ship - why is it ? Can that, too, be mere! y the result of sentimentality ?' 
I don't know if there is any truth in this observation ofMr Verk­
hovcnsky's. All I know is that Peter had been apprised of the sale of the 
timber and of everything else and that Mr Verkhovensky was aware 
that he had. I also happened to read Peter's letters to his father : he wrote 
very rarely - once a year or even less often. Only quite recently he had 
sent two letters, almost one after the other, to tell his father of his 
coming arrival. All his letters were short, dry, consisting entirely of in­
structions, and as father and son had since their meeting in Petersburg 
been on familiar terms, according to the latest fashion, Peter's letters 
reminded me forcibly of the injunctions former landowners used to 
send from Moscow or Petersburg to their serfs whom they had made 
their estate managers. And now all of a sudden the S,ooo roubles, 
which would settle Mr Verkhovensky's fmancial obligations to his 
son, emerged as if by magic from Mrs Stavrogin' s offer. And she had 
made it perfectly clear that they could not emerge from anywhere 
else. So, naturally, Mr Verkhovensky consented. 
As soon as she had gone, he sent for me, shutting himself up from 
everybody else for the whole day. He shed tears, of course; he talked 
a lot and well, frequently lost the thread of his thoughts, delivered 
himself of an occasional epigram, and was mightily pleased with it. 
Then he had a slight attack of gastric catarrh - in short, everything 
took its usual course. After which he brought out the portrait of his 
German wife, who had died twenty years before, and began address­
ing her plaintively: ' Will you ever forgive me ?' He seemed alto­
gether lost. To drown our sorrows, we indulged in a little drinking. 
Soon, however, he fell into a sweet slumber. Next morning he tied 
his cravat in a most artistic fashion, dressed with care, and went fre­
quently to look at himself in the mirror. He sprinkled perfume on his 
handkerchief- just a few drops, though - and the moment he caught 
sight of Mrs Stavrogin through the window, he quickly picked up 
another handkerchief and hid the scented one under a cushion. 
'That's excellent ! '  Mrs Stavrogin expressed her approval on re­
ceiving his answer. ' In the first place, it shows fme determination on 
your part, and, secondly, you've listened to the voice of reason, to 
which you so seldom pay any attention in your private affairs. There 
is no hurry, however,' she added, examining the knot of his white 

P R I N C E  H A R R Y · A M AR R I A G E  P R O P O S A L  
91 
cravat. ' For the time being say nothing, and I will say nothing. It will 
soon be your birthday ; I'll come to see you with her. Make us some 
afternoon tea and, please, no wine or snacks ; I'll see to it myself, 
though. Invite your friends - we shall make the selection together, 
however. If necessary, you can have a talk with her the day before, 
and at your party we shall not make any official announcement of 
your engagement, but just hint at it or make it public without any 
ceremonies. And then in about a fortnight there will be the wedding -
a quiet wedding, if possible. In fact, it wouldn't be a bad thing if the 
two of you would go away for a time immediately after the wedding 
ceremony, to Moscow, for instance. I, too, might com:: with you. But 
the chief thing is that you shouldn't say anything about it till then.' 
Mr Verkhovensky was surprised. He ventured to say that he could 
not possibly act like that and that it was necessary for him to t:Νlk it 
over with his future wife, but Mrs Stavrogin shouted at him irritably: 
' What do you want to do that for ?  First of all, perhaps nothing will 
come of it -' 
' What do you mean ? '  the future bridegroom murmured, com­
pletely stunned. 
' I  mean what I say. I haven't yet made up my mind. However, I'm 
sure everything will be as I said, so you needn't worry; I'll prepare her 
myself. You needn't do anything at all. Whatever is necessary will be 
said and done, and you have no business to sec her at all. Wh:Ξt for ?  
What part do you expect to play ? No, you'd better not come yourself 
nor write any letters. Not a word, I beg you. I, too, shan't say a word.' 
She firmly refused to offer any explanation and went away visibly 
upset. It would appear that Mr Verkhovensky's excessive readiness 
astonished her. Alas ! he simply did not realize his position, and he had 
not had time to consider the question from certain other points of 
view. On the contrary, a new tone emerged, something triumphant 
and flippant. He swaggered. 
' I  like that! '  he would exclaim, stopping before me and spreading 
out his arms. 'Did you hear that ? She wants to drive things so far that 
in the end I should be forced to refuse. I, too, can lose my patience and 
- refuse ! " Sit still, what do you want to go to her for ? "  But why, I 
ask you, must I be married ? Just because she gets some ridiculous idea 
into her head ? But I am a serious man, and I'm quite capable of refus­
ing to submit to the silly ideas of a crazy female! I have obligations 

92 
THE DEVILS • PART ONE 
towards my son and-and towards myself! I'm making a sacriftce-does 
she realize that ? I've consented perhaps because I'm tired of life and 
it's all the same to me. But she can easily provoke me, and then it 
won't be all the same to me. She'll get my back up and I shall refuse. 
Et en .fin le ridicule . . . .  What will they say at the club ? What will -
what will Liputin say ? " Perhaps nothing will come of it" - perfect, 
isn't it ? That's the limit ! That's - that's beyond everything ! ]e suis 
un forfat, un Badinguet, Jln man pushed to the wall . . .  
' 
But at the same time a sort of capricious self-complacency, some­
thing playfully flippant could be discerned amidst all these plaintive 
protestations. However, in the evening we had some more drinks. 
Another Man's Sins 
ABOUT a week passed, and things began to be a little more involved. 
Let me observe in passing that I had to put up witl1 a great deal dur­
ing that unhappy week - never leaving the side of my poor afianced 
friend, in the capacity of his closest confidant. He was mostly overcome 
with shame, though we saw nobody during that week and were en­
tirely alone; but he was ashamed even before me, and so much so that 
the more he confided in me, the more vexed he was with me for it. 
Being very sensitive, he suspected that everyone in town already knew 
about it, and he was afraid to show himself not only in the club, but 
even among his own circle of friends. He even took his regular con­
stitutional only well after nightfall, when it was quite dark. 
A week passed and he still did not know whether he was betrothed 
or not, and, however much he tried, he could not find out for cer­
tain. He had not met his betrothed and, indeed, he was not sure 
whether she was his betrothed or not ; he did not even know whether 
tl1ere was anything serious about the whole business. For some reason 
Mrs Stavrogin categorically refused to see him. In reply to one of his 
very first letters (and he wrote a great number of letters to her) she 
told him plainly not to bother her for the time being because she was 
very busy, and as she had a great deal of important business to com­
municate to him, she was purposely waiting for an opportunity when 

ANOTHER MAN ' s S I N S  
93 
she was less busy than at the moment, and in time she would let him 
know when he could come and see her. As for his letters, she declared 
that she would send them back nnopened, as it was 'just tomfoolery'. 
I read that note myself; it was he who showed it to me. 
Yet those harsh and vague statements were nothing compared with 
his main anxiety. That anxiety tormented him greatly, incessantly; he 
grew thin and lost courage because of it. It was something that made 
him feel more ashamed than anything else, something he refused 
even to discus with me. On the contrary, whenever I happened to 
mention it, he lied to me and dodged about like a little boy ;  and yet he 
sent for me himself every day: he could not be without me for two 
hours, needing me as much as air or water. 
Such behaviour somewhat hurt my vanity. It goes without saying 
that I had long since guessed that great secret of his and seen through 
it. I was firmly convinced at the time that the revelation of this secret, 
this chief anxiety of Mr V erkhovensky 's, would not have redonnded 
to his credit, and that was why, being stil young, I could ƿot help be­
ing indignant at the coarseness of his feelings and the ugly nature of 
some of his suspicions. In the heat of the moment and, I must confess, 
perhaps feeling tired of being his confidant, I may have blamed him 
too much. In my callousness, I tried to make him confess everything 
to me himself, though I was aware that it was dificult to confess cer­
tain things. He, too, saw through me; I mean, he realized that I saw 
through him and that I was, indeed, angry with him, and he was angry 
with me for being angry with him and seeing through him. My ex­
asperation with him was perhaps petty and stupid; but when two 
people spend al their time together, it makes real friendship between 
them rather difficult. From a certain point of view he had a true nnder­
standing of certain aspects of his position; indeed, he was very 
outspoken on those points which he did not think it necessary to 
conceal. 
' Oh, she was not at all like that before,' he would sometimes admit 
incautiously to me about Mrs Stavrogin. ' She was not at all like that 
before, when we used to discuss things together. Do you know that 
in those days she could talk? Wil you believe me when I tell you that 
in those days she had ideas, her own ideas ? Now everything has 
changed! She says it is only the old, old phrases all over again. She 
despises our past. . . . Now she is just a sort of shop-assistant, a 

94 
THE D EVILS • PART O N E  
housekeeper, a person who has a grievance against the world, and 
she's always cross . . . .' 
' But why should she be cross now that you have carried out her 
orders ? '  I objected. 
He gave me a shrewd look. 
'Cher ami, ifl had not consented, she would have been angry, ter­
ribly angry ! But still not as much as she is now that I have consented.' 
He was very pleased with that paradox of his, and that evening we 
emptied a bottle between us. But that mood lasted only a short time; 
on the following day he 
.
was in a more dreadful state and more de­
pressed than ever. 
But I was even more vexed with him for his inability to make up 
his mind to pay a visit to the Drozdovs to renew their acquaintance, 
which he should have done on their arrival and which I understood 
they expected him to do, for they kept asking about him. He, too, 
was anxious to do it every day. He spoke of Lisa with an enthusiasm _ 
I could not understand. No doubt he remembered her as a child whom 
he had once been very fond of; but for some reason he imagined, be­
sides, that in her company he would fmd an alleviation of his present 
sufferings and even a solution of his gravest doubts. He expected to 
fmd a kind of extraordinary being in Lisa. But he did not call on her 
for all that, though he meant to do so every day. The main thing 
was that I wanted desperately to be introduced to her myself just then, 
and Mr Verkhovensky was the only person I knew who could do that. 
I was greatly impressed during my frequent meetings with her - in 
the street, of course, when she was out riding, wearing a riding habit 
and mounted on a fmc horse, in the company of her so-called relative, 
a handsome army officer, the nephew of the late General Drozdov. 
But my infatuation lasted only a very short time, and I soon realized 
the utter impossibility of my dreams myself - yet though it lasted 
only a very short time, it was real, and it may therefore be imagined 
how indignant I was with my poor friend sometimes for obstinately 
refusing to leave his house. 
All the members of our circle had been officially informed from the 
beginning that Mr Verkhovensky would not be receiving any visitors 
for a time and that he was anxious to be left alone. He insisted that a 
circular to that effect should be sent out to them, though I did my best 
to dissuade him. As a matter of fact, it was I who went to see them all 

ANOTHER MAN' s SINS 
95 
and, at his request, told everybody that Mrs Stavrogin had commis­
sioned our ' old man ' (as we all used to call Mr Verkhovensky among 
ourselves) to do some urgent job - namely, to arrange in order some 
correspondence of over several years - that he had shut himself up, and 
that I was helping him, etc., etc. Liputin alone I had not time to see, 
putting it off from day to day, but it would be truer to say that I was 
afraid to go to see him. I knew very well that he would not believe a 
word I said, that he was quite certain to jump to the conclusion that 
there was a secret we wanted to keep from him alone, and that the 
moment I left him, he would at once go al over the town to find out 
what it was and spread all sorts of slanderous stories about it. While I 
was telling myself al this, I accidentally ran across him in the street. 
It seemed that he had already learnt everything from our members 
whom I had just informed. But, strange to say, he never asked me any 
questions about Mr Verkhovensky and, far from being curious, inter­
rupted me himself when I began to apologize for not having been to 
see him before, and immediately changed the subject. It is true he had 
a great deal to tell me: he was very excited and was delighted to have 
found someone who would listen to him. He started talking of the 
news of the town, the arrival of the Governor's wife with ' new topics 
of conversation', of the opposition which had already been organized 
at the dub, of how everybody was shouting about the new ideas, and 
how ill it suited them, etc., etc. He talked for a quarter of an hour, and 
so amusingly that I could not tear myself away. Though I could not 
stand him, I must admit that he had the gift of making people listen to 
him, especially when he was very angry about something. This man 
was, in my opinion, a born spy. He knew at any given moment the 
latest news and all the unsavoury secrets of our town, and one could 
not help but be amazed how he took to heart things which sometimes 
did not concern him at all. It always seemed to me that the main 
feature of his character was envy. When I told Mr Verkhovensky the 
same evening of my meeting with Liputin that morning and of our 
conversation, the latter, to my surprise, grew very excited and put the 
preposterous question to me: 'Does Liputin know or not ?' I tried to 
prove to him that it was quite impossible for him to have found out 
so soon and that, besides, there was no one he could have found out 
from, but Mr Verkhovensky would not agree with me. 
' Believe it or not,' he finaly concluded unexpectedly, ' but I'm 

THE D E V I L S · P A R T  O N E  
convinced that he not only knows every detail of our position already, 
but that he knows something else besides which neither you nor I 
know anything about, and perhaps will never know, or will only 
know when it's too late, when there won't be any turning back! '  
I said nothing, but these words suggested a great deal. We did not 
mention LipΟltin's name for the next five days after that ; I could not 
help feeling that Mr Verkhovensky was very sorry to have revealed 
his suspicions to me and let the cat out of the bag. 
2 
One morning - that is, about seven or eight days after Mr Verkho­
vensky had consented to become betrothed - about eleven o'clock, 
when I was hurrying as usual to my sorely tried friend, an adventure 
befell me on the way. 
/ 
I met Karmazinov, ' the great writer ', as Liputin called him. I read 
Karmazinov as a child. His novels and stories were well known to the 
older and even to the younger generation. I revelled in them ; they 
were the delight of my boyhood and youth. Later I grew a little in­
different to his works ; I did not care as much for his problem novels, 
which he wrote more recently, as for his first, his very first works, 
which were so full of spontaneous poetry ; and his latest works I did 
not like at all. 
Generally speaking, if I may be permitted to express my opinion, 
too, on so delicate a subject, all these second-rate gentlemen, who in 
their lifetime are usually hailed as geniuses, not only vanish almost 
without a trace and are erased from the memory of men as soon as 
they die, but are often quite forgotten and neglected after an incred­
ibly short period even during their lifetime, as soon as a new genera­
tion grows up and takes the place of the one in which they were active. 
This seems to happen in our country somehow instantaneously -just 
like a change of scenery in a theatre. Oh, it is not at all the same as with 
the Pushkins, Gogols, Molieres, and Voltaires, or with all those dis­
tinguished men who had something new and original to say ! It is, of 
course, also true that these second-rate gentlemen usually write them­
selves out in the most pathetic way on reaching a venerable age, with­
out even being aware of it themselves. Quite often, too, a writer who 
has for a long time been believed to possess a great store of extra-

A N O THER MAN ' s S I N S  
97 
otdinarily profotmd ideas, and who is expected to exercise an extra­
ordinary and serious influence on the progress of society, in the end 
betrays such shalowness and insipidity ofhis fundamental idea that no 
one is sorry when he succeeds in writing himself out so soon. But the 
old men don't notice it, and are angry. Their vanity sometimes 
assumes, especially towards the end of their careers, quite amazing 
proportions. Goodness only knows who they think they are - gods at 
least. People said about Karmazinov that his connexions with high 
society and persons of great consequence were almost dearer to him 
than his own soul. It was said about him that he would extend a cor­
dial welcome to you, flatter and charm you by his simplicity and good 
humour, especially if for some reason he thought that you might be 
useful to him and, of course, if you came to him with a good intro­
duction. But that should some prince, countess, or anyone he was 
afraid of happen to come in while you were there, he would consider 
it his most sacred duty to ignore you in a most insulting way, just as 
if you were some worthless rag or a fly, before you had time to take 
your leave, and that he seriously regarded this as good form. In spite 
of his perfect self-possession and excellent knowledge of good man­
ners, his vanity, they say, reaches so hysterical a pitch that he cannot 
conceal his peevishness as an author even in those society circles where 
people are little interested in literature. If, on the other hand, someone 
accidentally takes him by surprise by his indifference, he becomes 
morbidly offended and tries to revenge himself. 
About a year before, I read an article of his in a periodical written 
with a most dreadful affectation of the crudest kind of poetry as well 
as psychology. He described the wreck of a steamer somewhere near 
the English coast, which he had witnessed himself, and how he had 
watched the drowning people being saved and the dead bodies 
brought ashore. The whole of this rather long and verbose article was 
written solely with the object of showing what a fme fellow he was. 
Between the lines one could actually read : ' Look at me, see how 
bravely I behaved at those moments. What is the sea, the storm, the 
cliffS, the wreckage of the steamer to you ? I have described it all suffi­
ciently with my mighty pen. Why look at that drowned woman with 
the dead child in her dead arms ? You'd better look at me. See how I 
was unable to bear the sight, and turned away from it. Look, here I 
stood with my back to it; here I was horrified, and could not bring 

THE DEVILS · PART ONE 
myself to look back; I closed my eyes - don't you think it is very in­
teresting?' When I told Mr Verkhovensky my opinion of Karma­
zinov's article, he agreed with me. 
When recently the news of the arrival of Mr Karmazinov reached 
us, I was naturally very anxious to see him and, if possible, to make his 
acquaintance. I knew that I could have done it through Mr Verkho­
vensky, for they had once been friends. And now I suddenly met him 
at a street crossing. I recognized him at once; he had been pointed out 
to me three days before when he drove past in a carriage with the 
Governor's wife. 
He was a short, prim old man, though not over fifty-five, with a 
rather rubicund little face, with thick grey locks ofhair straying from 
under his round, cylindrical hat and curling round his clean little pink 
ears. His clean little face was not very handsome, with its thin, long, 
cunningly pursed lips, with its rather fleshy nose, and with its sharp, 
shrewd little eyes. He was dressed somewhat shabbily, in a sort of 
cloak which would be worn in Switzerland or in Northern Italy at 
that time of the year. But, at all events, all the minor articles of his 
clothing - the cuff-links, collar, buttons, a tortoise-shell lorgnette on a 
thin, black ribbon, and his signet ring - were the same as are worn by 
people of irreproachable taste. I am certain that in summer he always 
wore coloured prunella shoes, fasterung at the side with mother-of­
pearl buttons. When we ran into each other, he had just stopped at the 
street crossing and was looking round carefuly. Noticing that I was 
observing him with interest, he asked me in a sugary, though rather 
shrill, voice: 
' Would you be so kind as to tell me how I am to get to Bykov 
Street?' 
'Bykov Street?' I exclaimed in great excitement. 'Why, it's not 
far from here. Straight along this street and the second turning to the 
left.' 
'Thank you very much.' 
Oh, damn that minute! I believe I was shy and looked obsequious. 
He noticed it all in a flash and, of course, understood everything; I 
mean, he realized that I knew who he was, that I had read his books 
and worshipped him ever since I was a child, and that I was shy and 
regarded him obsequiously. He smiled, nodded again, and went 
straight along the street as I had directed him. I don't know why I 

' 
A N O T HER MAN S S I N S  
99 
turned back and followed him ; I don't know why I ran for ten yards 
beside him. He suddenly stopped again. 
'And couldn't you please tell me where the nearest cab rank is ?' he 
cried again, addressing me. 
A nasty shout ; a nasty voice ' 
'A cab rank ? The nearest cab rank is - er - by the cathedral - there 
are always cabs standing there,' and I nearly turned and ran for a cab. 
I imagine that that was exactly what he expected me w Lio. Of 
course, I came to my senses immediately and stopped dead, but he 
noticed my movement and watched me with the same nasty smile. 
Then somethinՅ happened which I shall never forget. He suddenly 
dropped a small bag which he was carrying in his left hand. As a mat­
ter of fact, it was not a bag at all, but a small case, or rather a sort of 
attache-case, or perhaps a reticule - something like an old-fashioned 
lady's reticule. However, I don't know what it was ; all I know is that 
I rushed to pick it up. 
I am absolutely certain that I did not pick it up, but my fmt impulse 
to pick it up could not be denied. I certainly could not conceal it, and 
I blushed like a fool. The cunning fellow at once got all that could be 
got out of the situation. 
'Don't trouble, sir ;  I'll pick it up myself,' he said charmingly, 
though not before he had realized that I would not pick up his reti­
cule; he picked it up as if forestalling me, and, nodding again, went 
on his way, leaving me looking like a fool. It was just as ifl had picked 
it up myself. 
For five minutes I considered myself utterly disgraced for ever ; bm 
as I reached Mr Verkhovensky's house, I suddenly burst out laughing. 
The meeting struck me as so amusing that I immediately made up my 
mind to entertain Mr Verkhovensky with an account of it, and even 
to act the whole scene tv him. 
This time I found him, to my surprise, extraordinarily changed. It is 
true that as soon as I entered the room he rushed to meet me with a 
sort of extraordinary avidity, bm he looked so lost that I doubt if he 
knew what I was talking about. But no sooner did I mention Karma­
zinov's name than he suddenly flew into a terrible temper 

100 
THE D E V I L S · P A R T  ONE 
' Don't speak ofhim! Don't mention his name!' he cried, almost in 
a frenzy. 'Here, look at this ! Read! Read! '  
He opened a drawer and threw on the table three small pieces of 
paper, written hurriedly in pencil, all from Mrs Stavrogin. The first 
note was written two days before, the second the day before, and the 
third that day, only an hour before; their contents were of no import­
ance whatever; they were all about Karmazinov, and showed how 
greatly her vanity and ambition might suffer if Karmazinov should 
forget to call on her. Here is the first one, written the day before yes­
terday (there had probably been one written three days before and 
another four days before) :  
Ifhe at last honours you with his visit to-day, please not a word about 
me. Not the faintest hint. Don't talk to him about me and don't remind 
him of me. 
V. S. 
Yesterday's note: 
If he decides at last ro pay you a visit this morning, I think the mosr 
dignified thing to do would be not to receive him at all. That's what I 
think about it, I don't know what you think. 
v . s. 
To-day's note, the last one: 
I am certain that your place is ftlthy and full of tobacco smoke. I'm 
sending Maria and Foma ; they'll tidy everything up in half an hour. 
Don't interfere with them, but stay in the kitchen while they are tidying 
your rooms. I'm sending you a Bokhara rug and two Chinese vases; 
I've long been intending to make you a present of them; and also my 
Teniers (for a time). You can put the vases on the window-sil, and hang 
the Teniers on the right under the portrait of Goethe; it's more con­
spicuous there, and it's always light in the morning. If he does turn up 
at last, receive him with the utmost courtesy, but whether you talk of 
trifles or of some erudite subject, behave as though you had only parted 
from him yesterday. Not a word about me. Perhaps I may drop in to 
sec you in the evening. 
v . s. 
P.S. If he doesn't come to-day, he won't come at all. 
I read the notes, and was surprised that he should be so agitated over 
such a trivial matter. Glancing inquiringly at him, I suddenly noticed 

' 
A N O T H E R  M A N  S S I N S  
1 0 1  
that while I was reading he had changed the white cravat he always 
wore for a red one. His hat and walking-stick lay on the table. He was 
pale and his hands were trembling. 
' I  don't care a damn about her excitement ! '  he cried, beside himself 
with rage, in reply to my questioning glance. 'Je m'en fiche! She has 
the cheek to be excited about Karmazinov, while not answering my 
letters ! Here, here is one of my unopened letters she returned to me 
yesterday, here on the table, under that book, under L' Homme qui rit. 
What do I care if she is worried to death about her darling Nicholas ? 
Je m' en fiche et je proclame ma liberte. Au diable lc Karmazinoff! Au diable 
Ia Lembke! I've hidden the vases in the hall and the Teniers in the chest 
of drawers, and I have demanded that she should receive me at once. 
You hear : I've demanded it ! I've sent her a note in pencil on a similar 
piece of paper, unsealed, by Nastasya, and I'm waiting. I want Dasha 
to tell me with her own lips and before the face of Heaven or, at any 
rate, before you. Vous me seconderez, n'est-ce pas, comme ami et remoin. 
I don't want to blush, to tell lies ; I don't want secrets; I won't have 
any secrets in this business ! Let them confess everything to me frankly, 
openly, honourably, and then - then I shall perhaps surprise every­
body by my magnanimity ! Am I a scoundrel or not, my dear sir ? '  he 
concluded suddenly, looking menacingly at me, as though it was I 
who considered him a scoundrel. 
I begged him to have a drink of water ; I had never seen him so ex­
cited before. While talking, he kept running from one corner of the 
room to the other, but he suddenly stopped dead before me in an 
extraordinary attitude. 
' Do you really think, ʬir," he began again, with passionate disdain, 
looking me up and down - ' do you really suppose that I, Stepan Verk­
hovensky, will not find enough moral strength in myself to pick up 
my bag, my pauper's bundle, and, lifting it on to my feeble shoulders, 
leave this house and disappear for good when honour and the great 
principle of independence demand it ? It will not be the first time that 
Stepan Verkhovensky has had to ward off despotism by an act of 
self-denial, even if it is the despotism of a crazy woman - that is to 
say, the most cruel and humiliating despotism which can exist in the 
world, in spite of the fact that you, sir, have presumed to smile at my 
words. Oh, you don't believe that I can find enough moral strength in 
myself to end my life as a tutor in the house of some merchant or to 

102 
THE D E V I L S · P A R T  O N E  
die of hunger in a ditch ! Answer me, answer me at once : do you or 
don't you believe it? '  
But I purposely said nothing. I even pretended that I could not 
bring myself to offend him by a negative reply, but that I could not 
possibly say that I believed him. In all this exasperation of his there 
was something that really did offend me, and not personally, oh no ! 
But - I shall explain myself later. 
He actually turned pale. 
'Perhaps I bore you, Mr G-v ' (that's my name), ' and you'd pre­
fer not to come to see me at all,' he said in the same tone of pale com­
posure which usually precedes some uncontrollable outburst of anger. 
I jumped up in alarm ; at that very moment Nastasya walked into 
the room and silently handed him a small piece of paper, on which 
something was scribbled in pencil. He glanced at it and threw it to 
me. On the paper only three words were written in Mrs Stavrogin's 
hand : ' Stay at home.' 
Mr Verkhovensky grabbed his hat and walking-stick in silence and 
quickly went out of the room ; I went after him mechanically. Sud­
denly voices and the sound of rapid footsteps were heard in the pas­
sage. He stopped dead, as though thunderstruck. 
' It's Liputin, and I'm done for,' he whispered, seizing me by the 
arm. 
At that moment Liputin walked into the room. 
4 
Why he should be done for because of Liputin I did not know, and I 
did not really attach any significance to his words ; I put everything 
down to his nerves. But all the same his terror was quite extraordinary, 
and I decided to watch him closely. 
Lipntin's expression as he walked into the room showed that this 
time he had a special right to come in, in spite of all the prohibitions. 
He brought with him an unknown man - a new arrival, by the look 
of him. In answer to Mr Verkhovensky's senseless stare, he immedi­
ately cried aloud : 
' I'm bringing you a visitor, and a special one, too ! I take the liberty 
of intruding on your solitude, sir. Mr Kirilov, a most remarkable 
structural engineer. And what is so important, sir, he knows your son, 

' 
A N OTHER M A N  S S I N S  
103 
Peter Verkhovensky. He's a great friend of his. He has a message from 
him, too. He's only just arrived.' 
'The message is your own invention,' the visitor remarked sharply. 
'There was no message at all, but it's quite true that I know Verkho­
vensky. I left him in the province of Kharkov ten days ago.' 
Mr Verkhovensky shook hands with him mechanically and mo­
tioned him to sit down ; he looked at me, he looked at Liputin, and 
suddenly, as though recollecting himself, he quickly sat down himself, 
but still keeping his hat and walking-stick in his hand without 
noticing it. 
'Good Lord, you were just going out ! And I was told that you 
were indisposed from too much work ! '  
'Yes, I'm afraid I'm not feeling well. I was just going out for a walk, 
I -' Mr Verkhovensky stopped short, put down his hat and walking­
stick on the sofa and - reddened. 
Meantime I was hurriedly examining the visitor. He was a young 
man - about twenty-seven - decently dressed, a well-proportioned, 
spare, dark-haired man, pale and with a somewhat muddy com­
!Jlexion and black, lustreless eyes. He looked a little pensive and absent­
minded, he spoke abruptly and not altogether grammatically, trans­
posing the words rather queerly and getting muddled if he had to use 
a sentence that was too long. Liputin noticed Mr Verkhovensky's 
great alarm, and was obviously gratified. He sat down in a wicker 
chair, which he dragged almost into the middle of the room, so as to 
be at the same distance from both the host and his visitor, who had 
installed themselves on sofas at opposite sides of the room. His sharp 
eyes darted about curiously, all over the room. 
' I  haven't - er - seen Peter for a long, long time,' Mr Verkhovensky 
brought himself to murmur to his visitor. ' You met him abroad ?' 
'Here and abroad.' 
' Mr Kirilov,' Liputin put in quickly, 'has only just arrived from 
abroad himself, after an absence of four years. He went there to per­
fect himself in his profession, and arrived here in the hope of obtaining 
a job on the construction of our railway bridge. He's at present wait­
ing for a reply. He knows the Drozdovs and Lisa through Peter.' 
The engineer sat rather stifly and listened with awkward im­
patience. I couldn't help feeling that he was angry about something. 
'He knows Mr Stavrogin, too.' 

THE DEVILS · PART ONE 
'You know Mr Stavrogin, too ?' Mr Verkhovensky inquired. 
'Yes, sir; I know him too.' 
'I - I haven't seen Peter for a very long time and - and so I have 
hardly the right to - er - cal myself his father - c'est le mot. I - er ­
how was he when you left him ?' 
' Well, I just left him - he's coming himself.' Mr Kirilov again 
hastened to extricate himself from the necessity of going into details. 
He certainly was angry. 
' He's coming! At last I - You see, I haven't seen Peter for such a 
long time ! '  Mr Verkhovensky got entangled in his sentence. 'I'm now 
waiting for my poor boy, before whom - oh, before whom I'm so 
guilty ! That is, what I really meant to say was that when I left him in 
Petersburg, I - I mean, I didn't think - er - there was much in him ­
que/que chose de ce genre. A very nervous boy, you know, very emo­
tional and - er - timid. When he went to bed he said his prayers, 
bowed down to the ground and made the sign of the cross on his pil­
low for fear of dying in the night -je m' en souviens. Enfin, no artistic 
feeling of any kind, I mean no feeling for higher things, for something 
fundamental, no germ of any future great idea - c' etait comme un petit 
idiot. But I'm afraid I've become a little muddled. I'm sorry, I - er -
you've found me -' 
'Are you serious about his crossing his pillow ?' the engineer sud-
denly inquired, with a kind of special curiosity. 
' Yes, he did.' 
'Al right; just wanted to know - go on.' 
Mr Verkhovensky looked questioningly at Liputin. 
'I'm very glad you came to see me, but I'm afraid I'm not in a posi-
tion at present to - er - where, incidentally, are you staying ?' 
'Bogoyavlenskaya Street, at Filippov' s house.' 
'Oh,' I observed involuntarily, 'that's where Shatov lives.' 
' Yes, in the very same house,' Liputin cried. ' Shatov lives in the 
attic upstairs, and Mr Kirilov has taken a room downstairs in Captain 
Lebyatkin's flat. He knows Shatov, and he knows Shatov's wife, too. 
He was a close friend of hers abroad.' 
'Comment! Do you realy know something about that unhappy 
marriage de ce pauvre ami and that woman ?' cried Mr Verkhovensky, 
suddenly carried away by emotion. ' You're the first man I've met 
who has known her personally ; and if only -' 

' 
A N O THER M A N  S S I N S  
1 05 
'What nonsense! '  the engineer cut him short, flushing all over. 
'How you exaggerate everything, Liputin! I haven't seen Sharov's 
wife at all - perhaps once only from a distance, and not at all near to. 
I know Shatov. Why do you invent all sorts of things ?' 
He turned sharply on the sofa, snatched up his hat, put it back 
again, and, settling down once more as before, glared challengingly 
with his flashing black eyes at Mr Verkhovensky. I could not for the 
life of me understand such strange irritability. 
'Excuse me,' Mr Verkhovensky observed importantly, 'I realize 
that it can be a most delicate matter -' 
'No question of any delicate matter here at all, and it's really shame­
ful, but I didn't shout "Nonsense" at you, sir, but at Liputin, because 
he always exaggerates. I'm sorry if you thought I was referring to you. 
I know Shatov, but I don't know his wife at al - not at all ! '  
'I quite understand. I understand. And ifl insisted, it's only because 
I'm very fond of our poor friend, notre irascible ami, and have always 
taken an interest in him . . .  I can't help thinking that he changed his 
former, perhaps too youthful, but quite sound ideas a little too 
abruptly. And he is now clamouring so much about notre sainte 
Russie that I have for some considerable time been inclined to ascribe 
this sudden organic change - I can't call it anything else - to some 
violent shock in his family life, to wit, to his unhappy marriage. I, 
who know my poor Russia like the palm of my hand and who have 
given my whole life to the Russian people, and what's more -' 
'I don't know the Russian people either and - I've no time to stndy 
them,' the engineer once more snapped out and again turned sharply 
on the sofa. 
Mr Verkhovensky stopped short in the middle of his speech. 
'He is - he is studying them,' Liputin broke in. 'He has already be­
gun his study, and is writing a most interesting article on the causes of 
the increasing number of suicides in Russia and, generally, on the 
causes which lead to the increase or decrease of suicides in society. He 
has reached amazing conclusions.' 
The engineer became terribly excited. 
'You've no right at all,' he muttered angrily. ' It isn't an article at 
all - I never - such silly things - I asked you confidentially, just by 
chance. It's not an article at all ; I'm not publishing and you have no 
right to -' 

106 
THE DEVILS · PART O N E  
Liputin was obviowly enjoying himself. 
' Sorry; perhaps I've made a mistake in calling your literary work an 
article. Mr Kirilov is only collecting observations, and not dealing 
with the essence of the problem or, as it were, its moral aspect. In­
deed, he rejects morality as such and is in favour of the latest principle 
of general destruction for the sake of the ultimate good. He already 
demands more than a hundred million heads for the establishment of 
common sense in Europe - many more than they demanded at the last 
Peace Congress. In this sense Mr Kirilov goes further than anybody else.' 
The engineer listened with a faint, contemptuow smile. For half a 
minute they were al silent. 
'All this is stupid, Liputin,' Mr Kirilov said at last with some dignity. 
' If I by chance pointed out something to you and you got hold of 
it, I can't help it. But you've no right, becawe I never talk to anyone. 
I scom to talk. If I've convictions, then it's clear to me; but you -
you've acted stupidly. I don't discws things if everything's done with. 
I hate discwsions. I never want to discws -' 
' Well, perhaps you're quite right,' Mr Verkhovensky could not 
resist interposing. 
' I' rn sorry, but I'm not angry with anyone here,' the visitor went on 
warmly, talking very fast. ' For four years I've seen few people. . . .  
For four years I spoke very little, and have done my best not to meet 
anyone, for reasons of my own, which is nobody's concern - for four 
years. Liputin discovered it and laughs. I understand and don't mind. 
I don't take offence - just annoyed at his liberty. And if I don't ex­
pound my ideas to you,' he concluded unexpectedly, glancing round 
at us all with a resolute look, ' it's not becawe I'm afraid that you will 
inform the Government against me. That's not it. Please, don't imag­
ine any nonsense of that kind . . . . '  
No one made any reply to these words. We merely exchanged 
glances. Even Liputin forgot to snigger. 
'I'm awfully sorry, gentlemen.' Mr Verkhovensky got up from the 
sofa determined! y - ' but I'm not feeling too well and I'm rather upset. 
You'll have to excwe me.' 
' Oh, you want w to go,' Mr Kirilov started, snatching up his cap. 
'Glad you said so ; I'm so forgetful, you know.' 
He rose and went up good-humouredly to Mr Verkhovensky with 
an outstretched hand. 

ANOTHER MAN' S SINS 
107 
'I'm sorry you're not well, and I came.' 
'I wish you every success among us,' replied Mr Verkhovensky, 
shaking his hand benevolently and without hurry. 'I quite understand 
that if, as you say, you have spent so many years abroad and avoid 
people for reasons of your own and forgot Russia, you must look 
with surprise upon us who are born and bred Russians, as indeed we 
must look on you likewise. Mais cela passera. One thing, though, does 
puzzle me: you want to build our bridge, and yet you say you're in 
favour of the principle of general destruction. They won't let you 
build our bridge! '  
'What? What did you say ? Oh, hang it all ! ' cried the astonished 
Kirilov, and suddenly burst into a merry and good-humoured laugh. 
For a moment his face assumed a most child-like expression which I 
thought suited him very much. Liputin rubbed his hands with delight 
at Mr Verkhovensky's happy remark. But I couldn't help wondering 
all the time why Mr Verkhovensky was so frightened of Liputin and 
why he had cried, 'I'm done for,' when he heard him coming. 
s 
We were all standing in the doorway. It was the moment when hosts 
and visitors exchange their last hurried and most courteous words, and 
then part in the best of humour. 
'Mr Kirilov is so upset to-day,' Liputin suddenly put in as he was 
going out of the room, as it were casually, 'because he's had a row 
with Captain Lebyatkin over his sister. Captain Lebyatkin thrashes 
that fair, crack-brained sister of his with a whip - a real Cossack whip 
- every morning and evening. Mr Kirilov has taken the little cottage 
in the yard so as not to have anything to do with it. Well, good­
bye.' 
'His sister? A sick one ? With a whip ?' Mr Verkhovensky cried as 
though somebody had suddenly hit him with a whip. ' What sister ? 
What Lebyatkin ?' 
His former terror came back all at once. 
'Lebyatkin ? He's a retired captain. He used to call himself a first 
lieutenant before.' 
'What do I care about his rank ? What sister? Good Lord ! You say 
Lebyatkin? But theŜe used to be a Lebyatkin here -' 

!08 
T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  O N E  
' It's the same fellow - o11r Lebyatkin - you remember at Virgin­
sky's ? '  
' But that one was caught with forged notes, wasn't he ?' 
'Well, he's come back now. Been here for almost three weeks, and 
under the most singular circumstances.' 
' But he's a scoundrel ! '  
' Is there any reason why we shouldn't have a scoundrel among us ? '  
Liputin grinned suddenly, feeling Mr Verkhovensky all over with his 
furtive eyes. 
' Good Lord ! I didn't mean that at all - though, as a matter of fact, 
I quite agree with you about the scoundrel, with you particularly. But 
go on, go on ; tell me more. What did you mean by that ? I'm quite 
certain you meant something by that ! '  
' Oh, it's all a lot of nonsense, sir. I mean, it seems the Captain didn't 
go away from us because of any forged notes, but merely because he 
wanted to fmd his sister, who had apparently been hiding from him 
somewhere. Well, now he has brought her ; that's all there is to it. 
Why do you look frightened, sir ? Anyway, I'm merely repeating 
what he told me when he was drunk. When he's sober he doesn't say 
a word about it. He's a highly irritable fellow, and, if you know what 
I mean, a military aesthete, but in very bad taste. And his sister is 
lame as well as mad. She seems to have been seduced by someone, and 
Mr Lebyatkin, it appears, has for many years been receiving a yearly 
allowance from her seducer as a sort of compensation for his wounded 
honour. That's what can be gathered from his talk, at any rate ; 
though if you ask me, it's only drunken talk. He's just boasting. And, 
besides, that sort of thing is usually settled much more cheaply. Still, 
there can be no doubt that he has large sums of money in his posses­
sion ; about a fortnight ago he was walking about barefoot, but now 
I've seen hundreds of roubles in his hands. His sister has some sort of 
fit every day. She screams, and he " keeps her in order" with his whip. 
A woman, he says, must be inspired with respect. What I can't under­
stand is how Shatov can live in the same house with him. Mr Kirilov 
has only been able to stay three days there. He knows him from Peters­
burg, and now he's taken the cottage so as not to be disturbed.' 
' Is that true ? '  Mr Verkhovensky addressed the engineer. 
' You talk, Liputin,' Kirilov muttered angrily. 
'Mysteries, secrets,' Mr Verkhovensky exclaimed, unable to restrain 

' 
A N O THER M A N  S S I N S  
109 
himself. ' Where have we suddenly got so many mysteries and secrets 
from?' 
The engineer frowned, blushed, shrugged his shoulders, and walked 
out of the room. 
' Mr Kirilov even snatched the whip away from him,' added Lipu­
tin. ' He broke it, threw it out of the window, and they had a violent 
quarrel.' 
' Why do you blab, Liputin ?' Kirilov quickly turned round again. 
' It's silly. Why do you do it ?' 
' But why out of modesty conceal the most generous impulses of 
one's heart ? Your heart, I mean, not mine.' 
' How silly and quite unnecessary . . . .  Lebyatkin's stupid and quite 
worthless - useless for the cause and utterly pernicious. Why do you 
babble all sorts of things ? I'm going.' 
'Oh, what a pity ! '  cried Liputin, with a bright smile. ' I'd have 
liked to amuse you, Mr Verkhovensky, with another little anecdote. 
As a matter of fact, I came here with the intention of telling you it, 
though I expect you must have heard about it yourself. Another time, 
then. Mr Kirilov is in such a hurry. Good-bye, sir. The anecdote con­
cerns Mrs Stavrogin. She greatly diverted me the other day. Sent for 
me specially. It's too funny for words. Good-bye, sir.' 
But here Mr Verkhovensky simply pounced upon him : he seized 
him by the shoulders, dragged him back into the room, and made him 
sit down on a chair. Liputin looked scared. 
' Why, yes,' he began, watching Mr Verkhovensky warily from his 
chair, ' she sent for me suddenly and asked me to tell her " confidenti­
ally " what I honestly thought about Mr Stavrogin : was he mad or 
not ? Don't you think it's amazing ?' 
'You're crazy ! '  Mr Verkhovensky murmured, and all of a sudden 
completely lost control of himself. ' Liputin, you know very well that 
you only came here to tell me a vile story of this sort and - something 
worse ! '  
In a flash I remembered his suggestion that Liputin knew not only 
more than we did about our affair, but also something we should 
never know. 
' Really, Mr Verkhovensky,' Liputin murmured as though he were 
frightened, ' really -' 
' Shut up and begin ! I'd like to ask you very much, Mr Kirilov, to 

1 10 
THE DEVILS · PART ONE 
come back, too, and be present. Please do. Sit down. And you, Lipu­
tin, tell us all about it frankly, simply, and without humming and 
hawing ! '  
'Had I known, sir, that you'd be so shocked I wouldn't have begun 
at all. And I thought that you knew all about it from Mrs Stavrogin 
herself! '  
' You didn't think anything of the kind ! Begin, begin, I tell 
you.' 
' Oh, very well, but do me the favour of sitting down. I don't feel 
like sitting down and having you standing over me when you're so 
excited. Shan't be able to tell it to you coherently.' 
Mr Verkhovensky restrained himself and sank impressively into an 
arm-chair. The engineer stared gloomily at the floor. Liputin gazed at 
them with tremendous enjoyment. 
'Well, how shall I begin ? You've put me off -' 
6 
'The day before yesterday she suddenly sent one ofher servants to ask . 
me to call on her at twelve o'clock the next morning. Can you imag­
ine that ? I didn't go to my office, and punctually at twelve o'clock yes­
terday I was ringing the bell. I was shown into a drawing-room, and 
a minute later she came in, asked me to take a seat, and sat down her­
self opposite. I sat there unable to believe my senses : you know your­
self, sir, how she has always treated me ! She went straight to the heart 
of the matter without beating about the bush, as is her custom. " You 
remember ", she said, " that four years ago, when Mr Stavrogin was 
ill, he was responsible for some strange actions which puzzled the 
whole town till everything was explained. One of these actions con­
cerned you personally. When Mr Stavrogin recovered, he went, at 
my request, to call on you. I know that he talked to you before,-too. 
Tell me openly and frankly how did you " - here she became a little 
confused - " find Mr Stavrogin then ? What was your opinion of him 
in general ? What sort of opinion did you form of him, and - what do 
you think of him now ?" 
'At this point she was completely confused, so that for a whole 
minute she sat waiting, and then she suddenly flushed. I got scared. 
She began again in a tone of voice that was not exactly moving - that 

ANOTHER MAN ' s SINS 
I l l  
wouldn't have been at all what you would expect from her - but very 
impressive. 
' " I  want you", she said, " to listen to me very carefully. I sent 
for you now because I regard you as a perspicacious and clever person 
who is capable of forming an unbiased opinion " (What compli­
ments !) "You wil, of course," she said, "also realize that it's a mother 
who's talking to you. Mr Stavrogin has suffered many misfortunes 
in ʘ life and pased through many vicissitudes. All that, " she said, 
"might have ,affected the state of his mind. I don't mean madness, 
of course," she said ; " that's unthinkable ! "  She said that proudly and 
firmly. "But there might be something strange, something peculiar, 
a certain trend of thought, a tendency to take certain unconventional 
views." (Those were her exact words, sir, and I couldn't help being 
astonished at the preciseness with which Mrs Stavrogin is able to 
express herself. A lady of great intellect !) "At least," she said, " I  
myself have noticed a certain restlessness in him and a tendency to 
peculiar moods. But I'm his mother and you're a stranger, and 
therefore capable, with your intelligence, of forming an indepen­
dent opinion. I implore you, finally " (she actually used that expres­
sion : "I implore you") " to tell me the whole truth, without any pre­
varication. And if you will give me your word never to forget that I 
have spoken to you in confidence, you can expect me always to be 
ready and willing to show you my gratitude in future at every oppor­
tunity." Well, sir, what do you think of it ? '  
'You - you've so shocked me,' Mr Verkhovensky murmured 
feebly, 'that I don't believe you.' 
'No, no, please observe,' Liputin cried, as though he had not heard 
Mr Verkhovensky, 'please observe how upset and worried a woman 
of her high social standing must have been to put such a question to 
a man like me, and even condescend to ask me to keep it a secret­
What can it mean ? She hasn't received some unexpected piece of news 
from Mr Stavrogin, has she ?' 
' I  don't know - I don't think there has been any news - I haven't 
seen her for some days, but - but let me tell ʙou, sir,' Mr Verkhoven­
sky murmured, evidently hardly able to think clearly - ' but let me tell 
you, Liputin, that if she told you all that in confidence and you're now 
discussing it in the presence of all of us -' 
'Absolutely in confidence! May the Lord strike me dead ifl - But 

I I2 
THE D E V I L S · PART O N E  
as for talking about it here - well, what about it ? We're not strangers, 
are we ? Take Mr Kirilov - he isn't exactly a stranger either, is 
h ? ' 
e .  
' I'm afraid I can't agree with you. No doubt we shall keep the 
secret - the three of us here, I mean - but I'm afraid you, Liputin, 
won't, and I don't trust you in anything.' 
' What do you mean, sir ? Why, I'm more interested than anybody 
else, for wasn't I promised eternal gratitude ? As a matter of fact, I 
wanted to draw your attention in this connexion to a very strange in­
cident, psychological rather than simply strange. Last night, under the 
influence of my conversation with Mrs Stavrogin (you can imagine 
yourself what an impression it made on me), I put a rather discreet 
question to Mr Kirilov : " You knew Mr Stavrogin, both in Petersburg 
and abroad," I said. " What is your opinion of the state of his mind 
and his abilities ?" He replied in his usual laconic manner that he was a 
man of fine intellect and sound judgement. "And have you ever 
noticed in the course of years," I further asked, " any, as it were, aber­
ration of ideas or any peculiar turn of thought or any - how shall ! put 
it? - signs of madness ? "  In short, I repeated Mrs Stavrogin's own 
question. Well, what do you think ? Mr Kirilov suddenly grew 
thoughtful and frowned, just as he is doing now. " Yes," he said, " I  
have sometimes thought there was something strange." And, mind 
you, if Mr Kirilov could have thought there was something strange, 
something must really be the matter with him, mustn't it ?' 
' Is it true ?' Mr Verkhovensky asked, turning to Kirilov. 
' I'd rather not talk about it,' Kirilov replied, suddenly raising his 
head and looking at him with flashing eyes. ' I'd like to contest your 
right, Liputin. You have no right in this case to mention me. I did not 
give you the whole of my opinion at all. I may have known him in 
Petersburg, but that was ages ago, and though I've met him recently, 
I know Mr Stavrogin very little. Please leave me out, and - and all 
this looks like gossip.' 
Liputin threw up his hands with an air of wronged innocence. 
' So I'm a gossip, am I ?  Are you sure I'm not a spy as well ? It's all 
right for you to criticize, Kirilov, if you insist on being left out of it 
all. You wouldn't believe it, Mr Verkhovensky - I  mean, Captain 
Lebyatkin, sir, does seem to be a stupid fellow - that is, he is as stupid 
as - well, I'm ashamed to say how stupid he is - there's a Russian com-

ANOTHER MAN ' s S I N S  
113 
parison signifying the degree of it; but he, too, considers himself 
injured by Mr Stavrogin, though he has a high opinion of his clever­
ness. " I'm amazed at that man," he says. " He is a wise serpent" 
(his own words, sir). Well, I asked him (still under the influence of 
yesterday's interview and after my talk with Mr Kirilov), "Cap­
tain," I said, "what do you think: is your wise serpent mad or not?" 
Well, believe me, it was just as if I had whipped him from behind, 
without his pennission. He simply leapt to his feet. " Yes," he said, 
"yes, but that can't influence -" but what it could not influence he 
did not say ; and he fell to thinking so sadly, so deeply, that he seemed 
to have grown sober al of a sudden. We were sitting in Filippov's 
public-house at the time. Half an hour later he suddenly banged the 
table with his fist. "Aye,'' he said, " perhaps he is mad ; but that cannot 
influence -" and again he did not say what it could not influence. Of 
course, I'm only giving you the gist of our conversation, but the idea 
is clear enough : ask whom you like, they are all struck by one thought, 
though it never occurred to them before. "Aye," they all say, "he's 
mad ; he is very clever, but maybe he's mad too." '  
· 
Mr Verkhovensky sat, looking pensive and thinking hard. 
'And how does Lebyatkin know ?' 
'You'd better ask Mr Kirilov, who has just called me a spy. I'm a 
spy and I don't know, but Mr Kirilov knows everything there is to 
know about it, but he keeps mum.' 
'I don't know anything, or very little,' the engineer replied with 
the same exasperation. 'You made Lebyatkin drunk to fmd out. You 
brought me here to find out and make me talk. You must be a spy, 
then! '  
' I  haven't made him drunk yet ! He isn't worth the money, with all 
his secrets. That's what they are worth to me ; I don't know what they 
are to you. It is he who flings money about. Twelve days ago he came 
to ask me to lend him fifteen copecks ; now it's he who treats me to 
champagne, and not I him. But you've given me an idea, and I dare­
say, when I think it necessary, I'll make him drunk just to fmd out 
what it's al about, and perhaps I shall find out - all your little secrets,' 
Liputin snapped back spitefully. 
Mr Verkhovensky looked in bewilderment at the two disputants. 
Both were giving themselves away, and they did not seem to care 
Ƕbout it. I couldn't help thinking that Liputin had brought that fellow 

1 14 
THE D E V I LS · PART O N E  
Kirilov to us with the sole purpose of drawing him into a conversation 
through a third person for reasons of his own - his favourite trick. 
' M r  Kirilov knows Mr Stavrogin very well,' he went on irritably; 
'only he conceals it. As for your question about Lebyatkin, he got to 
know him in Petersburg before any of us, five or six years ago, during 
that little known, if I may put it that way, period of Mr Stavrogin's 
life before he ever dreamed of gladdening our hearts by coming here. 
Our Prince, I can only presume, gathered a very curious set of people 
round him in Petersburg in those days. It was at that time, I believe, 
that he made his acquaintance with Mr Kirilov.' 
' Take care, Liputin ! I warn you Stavrogin means to come soon, and 
he knows how to stand up for himself.' 
' Why warn me ? I'm the fmt to shout from the house-tops that he's 
a man of the fmest and most discriminating intellect, and I entirely re­
assured Mrs Stavrogin yesterday on that score. " The only thing I 
can't vouch for," I told her, "is Ius character." Lebyatk.in, too, kept 
repeating yesterday : " He's the victim of his own character." Yes, in­
deed, Mr Verkhovensky, it's all very well for you to shout about slan­
ders and spying, and, mind, only after you've wormed everything out 
of me, and with such extraordinary curiosity, too. Now, Mrs Stavro­
gin - she went straight to the point yesterday. "You were personally 
interested in that aff.1ir,'' she said to me, " and that's why,'' she said, 
" I  appeal to you." And I should think so, too ! What motive could I 
possibly have when I've swallowed a personal insult from his lordship 
in public ! I should have thought I had excellent reasons to be inter­
ested, and not only for the sake of gossip. He shakes hands with you 
one day, and next day he slaps your face for no earthly reason in return 
for your hospitality and in the presence of your best friends, just be­
cause the fancy takes him. Too well off, if you ask me ! And the lair sex 
means everything to these butterflies and brave cock-sparrows. Coun­
try squires with tiny wings like the ancient cupids. Romantic lady­
killers ! It's all very well for you, sir, a confirmed bachelor, to talk, and 
to accuse me of talking scandal about Ius lordship. Now, if you'd only 
marry a young and pretty girl - for you're still a very handsome man 
- you, too, would lock and bolt the door against our Prince, and put 
up barricades in your own house ! Why, if only Miss Lebyatk.in, who's 
whipped every day, were not mad and lame, I most certainly would 
have thought that she was the victim of the passions of his lordship and 

' 
A N O T H E R  M A N  S S I N S  
that it was from him Captain Lebyatkin had suffered " in his family 
dignity ", as he expressed it himself Only perhaps that's inconsistent 
with his refined taste, though even that wouldn't have stopped him. 
Every pretty face has its attractions for him so long as he's in the right 
mood for it. You're talking about scandalous stories I'm supposed to 
be spreading, but am I spreading them, when the whole town is talk­
ing about it ? I'm just listening and nodding in agreement. There's no 
law against nodding, is there ? '  
'The town's talking ? What's the town talking about ?' 
' I  mean, it's Captain Lebyatkin who screams for all the town to 
hear when he's drunk, and isn't that the same thing as if the whole 
market-place were ringing with it ? Is it my fault ? I' rn only interested 
in it as among friends, and I'm among friends here, am I not ? '  he 
asked, looking at us with an innocent air. ' Now, take the following 
case, for instance : it would appear that his lordship had sent Captain 
Lebyatkin three hundred roubles from Switzerland by a most honour­
able young lady, a very modest person, as it were, an orphan, whom 
I have the honour of knowing. But a little later Lebyatkin received 
most precise information from someone whose n:une I need not men­
tion, except that he, too, is a most honourable, and hence a most 
trustworthy person, to the effect that he'd been sent not three hundred 
but one thousand roubles ! Which means, Lebyatkin keeps clamour­
ing, that the " young lady has robbed me of seven hundred ", and he 
vows to get his money, even if he has to send for the police, at least he 
threatens to, and he goes on shouting for the whole town to hear.' 
' It's vile, vile of you ! '  cried the engineer,jumping up suddenly from 
his chair. 
' But it's you who are the honourable person who assured Lebyatkin 
in Mr Stavrogin' s name that he'd been sent one thousand roubles, not 
three hundred. Why, the Captain told me so himself when he was 
drunk.' 
' It's an - an unfortunate misunderstanding. Someone's made a mis­
take and - it's nonsense, and you, sir, you - it's vile ! '  
' But I'd like to believe that it's nonsense, and I'm very sorry to have 
to listen to all that talk, for, say what you will, a girl of a most sterling 
character is implicated, first, in the matter of the seven hundred 
roubles, and secondly, in undeniable intimate relations with Mr Stav­
rogin. For his lordship would certainly not hesitate to disgrace a girl 

I I 6  
THE DEVILS · PART ONE 
of good character o r  to bring dishonour upon a married woman, as 
indeed that incident in my house proves. If he happened to come 
across a great-hearted man, he'd force him to cover up another man's 
sins with his honourable name. That is the sort of thing I had to put up 
with - I'm speaking of myself, sir. . .  
.' 
· 
'Take care, Liputin! '  Mr Verkhovensky said, half rising from his 
arm-chair and tuming pale. 
' Don't believe him - don't believe him,' the engineer kept exclaim­
ing in great agitation. ' Someone's made a mistake and Lebyatkin's 
drunk - everything will be explained - I can't stand it any more - I ­
I think it's mean and - enough - enough ! '  
He ran out of the room. 
' What on earth are you doing ? Wait, I'm coming with you ! '  Lipu­
tin cried in alarm. He jumped up from his chair and rushed out after 
Kirilov. 
7 
Mr Verkhovensky stood pondering for a moment, looked at me out 
of the corner ofhis eye, picked up his hat and stick, and walked quietly 
out of the room. I went after him again as before. 
' Oh, yes, you can be a witness - de I' accident,' he said, as he went out 
of the gates, noticing that I was following him. 'Vous m' accompagnerez, 
n' est-ce pas?' 
' You're not going there again, are you, sir ? Have you considered 
what might happen ? '  
' But I can't possibly marry to cover up " another man's sins", can 
I?' he whispered to me, stopping for a moment, with a pathetic and 
uneasy smile - a smile of shame and utter despair and, at the same time, 
of a strange kind of exaltation. 
I was just waiting for those words. At last those unmentionable 
words, so carefully concealed from me, were out, after a whole week 
of evasion and pretence. I was absolutely mad with fury. 
' How could such a dirty, such a base idea occur to you, sir, to you 
with your lucid mind, your kind heart, and - even before Liputin! '  
He looked at me, made no answer, and walked on. I did not want 
to lag behind. I wanted to tell Mrs Stavrogin what I thought of it all. 
I could have forgiven him if, coward that he was, he had only learnt 
it from Liputin, but it was perfectly plain now that he had thought of 

ANOTHER MAN ' S SINS 
I I7 
it long before Liputin, and that Liputin had merely confirmed his sus­
picions and added fuel to the flames. He had not hesitated to cast sus­
picion upon the girl from the very first day, even before he had any 
grotmds for it, even those that had occurred to Liputin. Mrs Stavro­
gin's tyrannical actions he explained by her desperate desire to cover 
up the aristocratic misdeeds of her precious Nicholas by a marriage 
to an honourable man ! I dearly wished he should be punished for 
it. 
'0! Dieu, qui est si grand et bon! Oh, who can comfort me ? '  he cried, 
stopping dead suddenly after walking another hundred paces. 
'Please, let's go back at once and I'll explain everything to you ! '  I 
exclaimed, turning him by force towarcls home. 
' Look who's here ! '  A fresh, cheerful young voice rang out near us 
like music. ' Mr Verkhovensky, is it you ? You? '  
We had not seen anything, and yet a young girl on horseback, Lisa 
Tushin, with her inseparable escort, suddenly made her appearance 
beside us. She pulled up her horse. 
' Come here, come here, quickly! '  she called out gaily in a loud 
VC'ice. ' I  haven't seen him for twelve years, and I recognized him at 
once, while he - Do you really not recognize me ? '  
M r  Verkhovensky seized the hand held out to him and kissed it 
reverently. He gazed at her as though he were lost in prayer and could 
not utter a word. 
'He knows me and is pleased ! Maurice, he is delighted to see me ! 
Why haven't you been to see us this fortnight ? Auntie tried to per­
suade me that you were il and mustn't be disturbed, but I knew Auntie 
was lying. I kept stamping my feet and swearing at you, but I was 
absolutely, absolutely determined that you should call on us ftrst, and 
that's why I never sent for you. Goodness, he hasn't changed a bit! '  
She scrutinized him, bending down from the saddle. ' He's quite ridi­
culously unchanged! Oh yes, he has. He has wrinkles, lots of wrinkles 
round his eyes and on his cheeks, and some grey hair, too ; but his eyes 
are the same! And have I changed ? Have I ?  Why don't you say some­
thing?' 
I remembered at that moment the story that she had been ill when 
she was taken away to Petersburg at the age of eleven ; and that during 
her illness she had cried and asked for Mr Verkhovensky. 
' You - I -' he murmured in a voice breaking with joy. 'I was just 

1 1 8 
THE D E V I L S · P A R T  O N E  
exclaiming, " Who will comfort me ?" and then I heard your voice. 
I think it's a miracle ct jr WIIIIIICIICC a croirc.' 
'En Dieu! En Dicu qui est la-lulllt ct qui est si grand et si bo11? You sec, 
I remember all your lessons by heart. Maurice, if only yon knew what 
faith he preached to me at that time en DiCII, qui est si grand et si bo11! 
And do you remember your stories about how Columbus discovered 
America and how all of them cried : " Land ! land ! " ?  My nanny Al­
yona says that after that lesson [ was feverish all night and cried : 
" Land ! land ! "  And do you remember how you told me the story of 
Prince Hamlet ? And do yon remember how you described to me how 
the poor emigrants were transported from Europe to America ? And 
it wasn't true at all : I found out later how they were transported. But 
how well he lied to me. Maurice ! It was almost better than the truth. 
Why do you look at Mr Drozdov like that ? He's the best and most 
faithful man in the whole world, and you simply must love him as you 
love me ! I/ fait tout cc qur_ie Vt'IIX. But, darling Mr Vcrkhovensky, you 
must be unhappy again, or you wouldn't shout in the middle of the 
street asking who was going to comfort you. You're unhappy, aren't 
you ? Aren't you ?' 
' Now I am happy ! '  
' Is Auntie treating you badly?' Նhe went on, without listening. 
'The same wicked, unjust, dear old Auntie who is so precious to us 
all ! And do you remember how you used to throw yourself into my 
arms in the garden and how I used to comf;)rt you and cry - but don't 
be afraid of Mr Drozdov. He knows all, all about you. He's known 
everything a long time. You can cry on his shoulder as much as you 
like and he'll stand there as long as you like! Raise your hat, take it off 
for a minute, stand on tiptoe, and r'll kiss you on the forehead as I 
kissed you the last time when we parted. Do you sec how that young 
girl is watching us out of the window ? But come closer, closer ! 
Heavens, how grey he is ! '  
And, bending over in the saddle, she kissed his forehead. 
' Now let's all go back to your home ! I know where you live. I shall 
be there directly, in a minute. I'll make you the first visit, you obstin­
ate man, and then r'll drag you home for a whole day. Go, please, and 
get ready to welcome me.' 
And she galloped off with her yotmg man. We went back. Mr 
Verkhovensky sat down on the sofa and burst into tears. 

. 
ANOTHER MAN S SINS 
119 
'Dieu! Dieu!' he cried, 'en fin une minute de l1onheur!' 
In less than ten minutes she arrived as promised, accompanied by 
Mr Drozdov. 
'Vous et le b01theur, vous arrivez en me me temps!' he said, rising to 
meet her. 
' Here are some flowers for you; I've just been at Madame Cheva­
lier's ; she has flowers all the winter for birthday gifts. Here's Mr 
Drozdov; let me introduce him to you. I wanted to bring you a pasty 
instead of flowers, but Mr Drozdov assures me that it's not in the 
Russian spirit.' 
Maurice Drozdov was an artillery captain, a tall and handsome man 
of about thirty-three, of an irreproachably correct appearance, with an 
impressive and at first sight even stem countenance, in spite of his re­
markable and most delicate kindness which one could not fail to per­
ceive almost at the first moment of making his acquaintance. He was 
taciturn, however, appeared to be self-sufficient, and was not keen on 
making friends. Many in our town said later that he was not very in­
telligent : but that was not altogether fair. 
I won't attempt to describe how beautiful Lisa was. The whole 
town was already talking about her beauty, though some of our ladies 
and yonng girls indignantly disagreed with those who were impressed 
by it. There were some among them who already hated her, chiefly 
for her pride: the Drozdovs had scarcely begnn paying visits, which 
offended many people, though the real reason for the delay was Mrs 
Drozdov's indisposition. She was also hated because she was a relative 
of the Governor's wife and because she went out riding every morn­
ing. Hitherto we had never had any horsewomen ; it was natural, 
therefore, that the appearance of Lisa on horseback in the streets be­
fore she had had time to pay calls should have offended our society. 
Yet everybody knew that she went out riding on doctor's orders, and 
that gave rise to all sorts of sarcastic remarks about her delicate health. 
The first thing one noticed about her was her morbid, nervous, inces­
sant restlessness. Alas! the poor girl was very unhappy, and everything 
was explained later. Now, as I recall the past, I could not say that she 
was as beautiful as she seemed to me tl1en. Perhaps she was not beauti­
ful at all. Tall, slender, but supple and strong, one could not help 
being struck by the irregularities of her features. Her eyes seemed to 
slant Kalmuk-fashion ; she was pale, she had high cheekbones, a dark 

1 20 
T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  O N E  
complexion, and a thin face ; but there was something attractive and 
irresistibly engaging in that face. There was tremendous power in the 
burnmg look of her dark eyes ; she came ' conquering and to con­
quer '. She seemed proudand occasionally even arrogant ; I don't know 
if she ever succeeded in being kind, but I do know that she badly 
wanted to and that she went through agonies to force herself to be a 
little kind. There were, of course, many fme impulses and most com­
mendable initiative in her nature ; but everything in her seemed to be 
perpetually seeking its equilibrium and not fmding it ; everything was 
in chaos, in a state of agitation and restlessness. Perhaps the demands 
she made upon herself were too severe and she was unable to fmd in 
herself the necessary strength to satisfy them. 
She sat down on the sofa and looked round the room. 
' Why do I always feel sad at such moments ? Can you answer that 
one, you learned man ? All my life I thought that I'd be awfully 
pleased when I saw you and remembered everything, and now I don't 
seem to be pleased at all, though I do love you . . . .  Good heavens, 
look, there's my portrait ! Let me see it. Oh, yes, I remember it, I 
remember ! '  
The excellent miniature of twelve-year-old Lisa in water-colours had 
been sent nine years before by the Drozdovs from Petersburg to Mr 
Verkhovensky. Since then it had always hung on the wall in his study. 
' Was I really such a pretty child ? Can that really have been my face ?' 
She got up, and with her portrait in her hand looked at herself in 
the mirror. 
'Take it away quickly ! '  she cried, giving back the portrait. ' Don't 
hang it up now, please. Do it later. I don't want to look at it again I '  
She resumed her seat on the sofa. ' One life is over, another has begun 
and gone, then a third one begins, and so it goes on and on. All the 
ends seem to be cut off, as though with a pair of scissors. You see what 
old tales I'm telling you, and yet there's a lot of truth in them.' 
She looked at me and smiled ; she had glanced at me several times 
already, but in his agitation Mr Verkhovensky forgot that he had pro­
mised to introduce me. 
'And why does my portrait hang under those daggers in your 
room? And why have you such a large collection of daggers and 
swords ?' 
He had, as a matter of fact, hanging crossways on the wall, two 

A N O T H E R  M A N ' s S I N S  
T21 
curved daggers, I don't know why, and one real Circassian sword. As 
she asked this question she looked so directly at me that I wanted to 
say something, but I stopped short. Mr Verkhovensky realized what 
was wrong at last and introduced me. 
'I know, I know,' she said; ' I'm very pleased to meet you. Mother, 
too, has heard a lot about you. Let me introduce you to Mr Drozdov ­
he's a splendid person. I had already formed an amusing idea about 
you : you're Mr Verkhovensky's confidant, aren't you ?' 
I blushed. 
' Oh, I'm awfully sorry ; I haven't used the right word at all - not at 
aU amusing, but just -' (She flushed and was overwhelmed with con­
fusion.) ' However, why be ashamed of the fact that you're a splendid 
person ? Well, it's time we were going, Maurice. I shall expect you in 
half an hour, Mr Verkbovensky. Goodness, what a lot we shall have 
to talk about ! Now I'm your confidante, and we shall talk about 
everything - about everythill!l, you understand ?' 
Mr Verkhovensky was alarmed at once. 
' Oh, Mr Drozdov knows everything ! Don't mind him ! '  
'What does he know ?' 
'What do you mean ?' she cried in astonishment. ' Why, so it's true 
that they're concealing it ! I refused to believe it. They're biding 
Dasha, too. Auntie would not let me see Dasha this morning. She says 
Dasha's got a headache.' 
'But - but how did you find out ?' 
'Goodness gracious, like everyone else. Really ! '  
' But does everyone know ?' 
' Why, of course ! Mother, it 1s true, got to know about it first 
through Nanny, who was told by your Nastasya. You told Nasrasya, 
didn't you ? She says you told her yourself.' 
'I - I  did say something to her once,' Mr Verkhovemky murmured 
feebly, blushing all over, 'but I - I just hinted - j'etais si nerveux et 
malade et puis -' 
She burst out laughing. 
' Your confidant was not at hand, and Nastasya happened to be 
there - well, that was quite enough ! And all the gossips in town are 
her best friends ! Oh, never mind, it doesn't matter ; let them all know, 
it's better that way. Please, don't be late: we dine early. Oh, I forgot,' 
she sat down again. ' Listen, what is Shatov like ?' 

122 
THB DEVILS • PART ONE 
' Shatov ? He's Miss Shatov' s brother.' 
' I know he is her brother,' she interrupted him impatiently. 'What 
a funny person you are, really! I want to know what he is like, what 
sort of person ?' 
'C'est un pense-creux d'ici. C'est le meilleur et le plus irascible homme du 
monde.' 
. 
' I've heard that he's a very queer person. However, that wasn't 
what I meant. I understand he knows three languages, English, too, 
and can do literary work. In that case I've lots of work for him ; I want 
an assistant, and the sooner the better. Do you think he'll take the 
work or not ? He's been recommended to me.' 
' Oh, I'm sure he will, et vous Jerez un bienfait.' 
'I'm not doing it for the sake of a bien{ait; I really want an assistant.' 
'I know Shatov pretty well,' I said, ' and if you authorize me to give 
him your message I'll go at once.' 
'Tell him to come to-morrow morning at twelve o'clock. Splen­
did ! Thank you. Are you ready, Maurice ?' 
They went away. I, of course, ran off at once to see Shatov. 
'Mon ami,' Mr Verkhovensky said, overtaking me on the front 
steps, 'I simply must see you at ten or eleven o'clock when I come 
back. Oh, I feel very, very guilty before you and - and before every­
one.' 
8 
Shatov was not at home. I ran round two hours later - again he was 
out. At last, at eight o'clock, I went to his place again, hoping to fmd 
him in or else to leave a note; agam he was out. I thought of going to 
see Captain Lebyatkin downstairs to ask him about Shatov; but every­
thing was locked up there, and everything quiet and dark inside as 
though the place had been deserted. Remembering the stories I had 
heard so recently, I passed by the door of Lebyatkin's flat with some 
curiosity. In the end I decided to call again early next morning. To tell 
the truth, I did not think much of my idea of leaving a note. Shatov 
might have ignored it - he was such a shy and stubborn fellow. Curs­
ing my bad luck, I was on the point of going out at the gate when I 
suddenly ran into Mr Kirilov; he was just going into the house and 
recognized me first. As he himself began questioning me, I told him 
everything in general terms, and that I had a note for Shatov. 

' 
A N O THER M A N  S S I N S  
1 2 3  
'Come along,' he said, ' I'll arrange everything.' 
I remembered Liputin telling us that he had taken the wooden cot­
tage in the yard that very morning. A deaf old peasant woman, who 
waited on him, lived in the same cottage, which was too large for 
him. The owner lived in a new house in another street, where he kept 
a public-house, and the old woman, who was apparently a relation of 
his, stayed behind to keep an eye 011 his old house. The rooms in the 
cottage were fairly clean, but the wallpaper was dirty. In the room 
we entered the furniture was of all sorts and sizes and utterly worth­
less : two card-tables, a chest of drawers made of alder, a large deal 
table from some peasant cottage or kitchen, chairs and a sofa with a 
wicker-work back and hard leather cushions. In one corner was an 
ancient iron, in front of which the old woman had lit a lamp before 
we came in, and on the walls hung two large dark oil-portraits, one 
of the late Emperor Nicholas I, painted, to judge by the look of it, in 
the twenties, and the other of some bishop. 
On entering the room, Mr Kirilov lighted a candle and took out of 
his trunk which stood, still unpacked, in a corner, an envelope, scaling­
wax, and a glass seal. 
' Seal your note and address the envelope.' 
I tried to explain that I did not think that was necessary, but he in­
sisted. Having addressed the envelope, I picked up my cap. 
'I thought you might like a cup of tea,' he said. ' I  have bought 
some tea. Will you have some ? '  
I did not refuse. The old woman soon brought in the tea - that is, a 
huge teapot of boiling water, a little teapot full of strong tea, two 
large earthenware, coarsely decorated cups, a loaf of white bread, and 
a whole soup-plate of lump sugar. 
' I  like tea,' he said, ' at night ; I walk about a lot and drink ; till day­
break. Abroad tea at night is inconvenient.' 
'Do you go to bed at daybreak ?' 
'Always ; for ages. Don't eat a lot ; always tea. Liputin's cunning, 
but impatient.' 
I was surprised that he should want to talk ; I made up my miad to 
take advantage of the opportunity. 
' I'm afraid we had some unpleasant misunderstandings this morn­
ing,' I observed. 
He scowled. 

124 
THB DEVILS · PART ONB 
'Damn nonsense; silly! It's al damn nonsense, because Lebyatkin's 
drunk. I said nothing to Liputin, but just explained a few things be­
cause he got it all wrong. Liputin lets his imagination run away with 
him. Made a mountain out of a molehill. I trusted Liputin yester­
day.' 
'And me to-day ?' I said, laughing. 
' Well, you know everything, don't you ? This morning Liputin was 
weak, or impatient, or unreliable, or - envious.' 
The last word surprised me. 
' I'm afraid you've used so many adjectives that it would be strange 
if one of them did not apply to him.' 
' Or al of them together.' 
' Well, that's what Liputin really is. He is - chaos ! Tell me, he was 
lying this morning when he said that you wished to write something, 
wasn't he?' 
' Why should he ? '  he said, frowning again and staring at the floor . 
I apologized and tried to assure him that I was not attempting to pry 
into his private affairs. He blushed. 
' He spoke the truth - I am writing. Only it makes no difference.' 
We were silent for a minute. He suddenly smiled his childlike smile 
I had noticed that morning. 
'He invented that about the heads himself out of a book. He told 
me first himself. Understands it badly. All I'm looking for are the 
reasons why people dare not kill themselves. That's all. And all that 
m.:\es no difference, either.' 
' How do you mean they don't dare ? Are there so few suicides ?' 
'Very few.' 
' Do you really think so ?' 
He did not reply, got up and began pacing the room lost in thought. 
' What deters people from committing suicide in your opinion ?' I 
asked. 
He looked at me absent-mindedly, as though trying to remember 
what we were talking about. 
'I-I'm afraid I don't know much yet. Two prejudices deter them, 
two things. Two only. One a very little one, and the other a very big 
one. But the little one is also big.' 
' What's the little one ?' 
'Pain.' 

A N O T HER M A N ' S S I N S  
125 
'Pain ?  Do you really think that's so important in - in a case like 
that ?' 
'Most important. There are two kinds : those who kill themselves 
from great sorrow or from spite, and those who are mad or whatever 
it is - those do it suddenly. They think little about the pain, but do it 
suddenly. But those who do it from reason - they think a lot.' 
'But are there people who do it from reason ? ' 
'Lots. But for prejudice tl1ere would be more ; many more ; all.' 
' Not all, surely ?' 
He said nothing. 
'But aren't there ways of dying painlessly ?' 
'Imagine,' he said, stopping before me, ' imagine a stone as big as a 
large house; it's suspended and you are under it; if it fell on you - on 
your head - would you feel any pain ?' 
'A stone as big as a house ? Of course, I'd be frightened.' 
'I'm not talking of fear. Would it hurt ?' 
'A stone as big as a mountain weighing millions of pounds ? Of 
course, it wouldn't hurt.' 
'But if you stood under it while it was hanging over you, you'd be 
terrified of the pain. Everybody would be terrified - the greatest 
scientist - tl1e greatest doctor. Everyone will know it won't hurt, and 
everyone wil be afraid that it will hurt.' 
'Well, and what is the second reason, the big one ?' 
' The next world ! ' 
'You mean punishment?' 
'Makes no difference. The next world - just the next world.' 
'But aren't there atheists who do not believe in the next world at 
all ?' 
Again he said nothing. 
'Perhaps you judge from yourself?' 
'Everyone must judge from himself,' he said, reddening. ' Full free­
dom will come only when it makes no difference whether to live or 
not to live. That's the goal for everybody.' 
'The goal ? But perhaps no one will want to live then.' 
' No one,' he said emphatically. 
'Man's afraid of death because he loves life,' I remarked. ' That's 
how I see it, and that's how nature has ordered it.' 
'That's despicable and that's where the whole deception lies.' His 

126 
T H E  D EV I L S · P A R T  O N E  
eyes flashed. ' Life is pain, life is fear, and man is unhappy. Now all is 
pain and fear. Now man loves life. And that's how they've done it. 
You're given life now for pain and fear, and that's where the whole 
deception lies. Now man is not yet what he will be. A new man will 
come, happy and proud. To whom it won't matter whether he lives 
or not. He'll be the new man ! He who conquers pain and fear will 
himself be a god. And that other God will not be.' 
' So, according to you, the other God does exist, after all ? '  
'He doesn't exist, but H e  is. There's no pain in a stone, but there's 
pain in the fear of a stone. He who conquers pain and fear will himself 
become a god. Then there will be a new life, a new man, everything 
will be new. Then history will be divided into two parts : from the 
gorilla to the annihilation of God, and from the annihilation of God 
to -' 
'To the gorilla ?' 
' . . .  to the physical transformation of the earth and man. Man will 
be god. He'll be physically transformed. And the world, too, will be 
transformed, and things will be transformed, and thoughts and all 
feelings. What do you think ? Will man be physically transformed 
then ?' 
' If it is all the same whether to live or not to live, everyone will kill 
himself and that's perhaps the only change that will come about.' 
' It makes no difference. Deception will be killed. Everyone who 
desires supreme freedom must dare to kill himself. He who dares to 
kill himself has learnt the secret of the deception. Beyond that there is 
no freedom ; that's all, and beyond it there is nothing. He who dares 
to kill himself is a god. Now every one can make it so that there shall 
be no God and there shall be nothing. But no one has done so yet.' 
'There have been millions of suicides.' 
' But none of them for that reason. All of them did it from fear, and 
not for that. He who kills himself only to kill fear will at once become 
a god.' 
'Perhaps he won't have time,' I observed. 
'That makes no difference,' he replied quietly, with calm pride, al­
most with contempt. 'I'm sorry you seem to be laughing,' he added 
half a minute later. 
' I  ftnd it strange that you should have been so irritable this morning 
and are now so calm, though you speak with warmth.' 

ANOTHER M A N ' s S I N S  
'This morning ? I t  was funny this morning,' he replied with a smile. 
'I don't like abusing people, and I never laugh,' he added sadly. 
'Well, you don't seem to spend your nights very cheerfully over 
your tea.' 
I got up and took my cap. 
'You think so ?' He smiled with some surprise. ' Why not ? No, I - I 
don't know.' He suddenly grew confused. ' I  don't know about the 
others, but I feel that I can't do the same as everybody. Everybody 
thinks and then at once thinks of something else. I can't think of some­
thing else. All my life I think of one thing. God has tormented me all 
my life,' he concluded suddenly with amazing frankness. 
' Would you mind telling me why you d()n' t speak our language 
correctly ?  Have you forgotten how to speak .tfter five years abroad ?' 
' Don't I speak correctly? I don't know. No, it's not because of liv­
ing abroad. I've spoken like that all my life. Makes no difference to me.' 
'Another more delicate question : I quite believe you that you don't 
like meeting people and talk very little with people. Why have you 
talked so much with me now ?' 
'With you ? You sat so quietly this morning and you - but, it makes 
no difference - you're very like my brother, very, extremely,' he said, 
blushing. ' He died seven years ago. He was older - very, very much.' 
' I  expect he musthavehad agreatinfluence on your way of thinking.' 
' N-no, he spoke little - never said anything. I shall give your note 
to Shatov.' 
He saw me to the gate with a lantern, to lock it after me ' He's mad 
as a hatter, of course,' [ decided. 
At the gate [ had another encounter. 
9 
No sooner did I lift my foot over the high beam at the bottom of the 
gate than I was suddenly seized by the chest by a strong hand. 
'Who's that?' roared a voice. ' Friend or foe? Own up ! '  
' He's one of us, one of us ! '  Liputin squeaked in his thin voice 
nearby. ' It's Mr G-v, a yotmg gentleman of classical education and 
in close touch with the highest society.' 
' I  like a chap who belongs to society, classi- - that means high-ly 
ed-duc-cated. Retired Captain Ignatius Lebyatkin, sir, at the service 

128 
THB DBVILS • PART ONB 
of the world and friends - if they're true friends, if they're true friends, 
the scoundrels ! '  
Captain Lebyatkin, a stout and fleshy man over six feet in height, 
with curly hair and a red face, stood before me. He was so drunk that 
he could scarcely stand on his feet and he articulated his words with 
difficulty. I had seen him before, as a matter of fact, from a distance. 
' Oh, and that one, too,' he roared again, noticing Kirilov, who was 
still standing there with his lantern. He raised his fist, but put it down 
at once. 'I forgive you for your !-learning! Ignatius L-lebyatkin -
high-ly ed-duc-cated -
A blazing cannon-ball exploded 
In Ignatius' breast with love corroded. 
And, armless, in an agony of pain, 
For Sebastopol he wept again. 
Though I was never at Sebastopol, and though I never lost an arm ; 
but what rhymes, sir, what rhymes ! '  he shouted, thrusting his drunken 
face forward. 
' He is in a hurry, he's going home,' Liputin tried to persuade him. 
'He'll tell Miss Lisa about it to-morrow.' 
' Lisa! '  he roared again. ' Stop ! Don't go ! Another version : 
A star goes riding graciously 
In a throng of amazons wild; 
And from her horse she smiles at me 
The aris-tocra-tic child. 
Why, it's a paean ! It's a paean, you stupid ass, to a Star-Amazon ! The 
loafers, they don't understand! Stop ! '  
He grabbed hold o f  my overcoat, though I was trying with all my 
might to escape through the gate. 
'Tell her that I'm the soul of honour, and as for that hussy Dasha ­
I'll break her in two. A damned serf girl, and she dare not -' 
At this point he fell down, for I had torn myself out of his hands by 
force and fled down the street. Liputin followed on my heels. 
' Kirilov wil pick him up,' be chattered away, in great excitement. 
'Do you know what I've just found out from him? Did you hear his 
verses ? He's sealed those very verses to the "Star-Amazon " in an en­
velope and is going to send them to Miss Tushin to-morrow. He signed 
them with his full name! What a fellow ! '  

A N O T H E R  M A N ' s S I N S  
I 29 
' I  bet you suggested it to him yourself.' 
' You'll lose your bet,' Liputin broke into a loud laugh. ' He's in 
love, in love like a cat, and, you know, it all began with hatred. At 
first he hated Miss Tushin so much for riding on horseback that he al­
most swore at her in the street. He did swear at her, in fact ! Only the 
day before yesterday he swore at her as she rode past. Luckily, she 
did not hear. And to-day he wrote her a poem ! Do you know 
that he even intends to take the risk of proposing to her ? Seriously! 
Seriously ! '  
'I'm surprised at you, Liputin,' I said furiously ; ' you're always to 
be found in the companv of some villainous rogue, and you always 
lead him on.' 
' You're going a bit too far, Mr G-v ! You don't feel jusr a little bit 
afraid of a rival by any chance, do you ? '  
' Wha-at ?' I cried, stopping in my tracks. 
' Very well, as a punishment I shan't tell you anything more ! And 
you would like to know. wouldn't you ? For instance, thar that silly 
fool isn't an ordinary captain now, but a landowner of our province, 
and a substantial one at that, for Mr Stavrogin has just sold him his 
estate, formerly of two hundred serfs, and God's my witness, I'm not 
lying. I've only just found it out myself, but from a most trustworthy 
source. And now fmd the rest out for yourself. Shan't say another 
word. Good-bye ! '  
I O 
Mr Verkhovensky was expecting me with hysterical impatience. He 
had been back an hour. He gave me the impression of being drunk ; 
indeed, for the fust five minutes I thought he was drunk. Alas ! his 
visit to the Drozdovs had completely unsettled him. 
' Mon ami, I've completely lost the thread of my thoughts. Lisa ·- I 
adore that angel and I think as much ofher as ever ; but I couldn't help 
/::.Jing that they both wanted to see me solely in order to fmd some­
thing out from me - that is, simply worm it out of me, and then 
good-bye ! Yes, I'm afraid, that's what it was.' 
'You ought to be ashamed of yourself to talk like that ! '  I exclaimed, 
unable to control myself. 
' My dear friend, I'm utterly alone now. Enfin c' est ridicule. There, 
too, you know, the whole thing's full of mystery. They simply flung 

IJO 
THE D E V I L S · PART O N E  
themselves upon me about those noses and ears and about some sort 
of Petersburg secrets. You see, it's only now that they have found out 
about those incidents with Nicholas four years ago. " You were here, 
you saw it; is it true that he is insane ?" And where they got the idea 
from I don't know. Why is Mrs Drozdov so anxious that Nicholas 
should be mad ? The woman wants it. She wants it, I tell you. Ce 
Maurice, or what's his name ? - that Drozdov fellow, brave homme tout 
de meme, it can't be for his sake, surely; and after she was the first to 
write from Paris to cette pauvre amie . . . .  En.fin, this Praskovya, as cette 
chere amie calls her; she's a real type, she's Gogol's Korobochka; only 
she's a spiteful Mrs Box, a provocative Mrs Box, of immortal 
memory, and in a greatly magnified form.' 
' Why, that'll make her into a big trunk! Are you sure she's a mag­
nified version of Gogol' s character ?' 
' Well, a reduced form, then. What does it matter ? Only don't in­
terrupt me, for the whole thing just keeps going round and round in 
my head. They seemed to have fmally fallen out there. Except Lisa ; 
She still keeps on with her "Auntie, Auntie", but Lisa's sly, and 
there's something there I can't make out. Secrets. But she's fallen out 
with the old woman. Cette pauvre Auntie, it is true, tyrannizes over 
everyone - and now she has to deal with the Governor's wife, the dis­
respect of society, and Karmazinov' s "disrespect". Then she suddenly 
gets that idea about her son's madness, ce Lipoutine, ce que je ne com­
prends pas, and - and I'm told she's been dabbing her forehead with 
vinegar, and here are we with our complaints and letters. Oh, how I 
have tortured her; and at such a time, too ! Je suis un ingrat! Just think, 
on my return I found a letter from her. Read it, read it! Oh, how 
beastly it was of me ! ' 
He gave me the letter he had just received from Mrs Stavrogin. She 
seemed to be sorry for this morning's ' stay at home'. Her letter was 
polite, but brief and emphatic for all that. She asked Mr Verkhoven­
sky to go to see her the day after to-morrow - on Sunday - at twelve 
o'clock, and advised him to bring one of his friends (she mentioned 
my name in brackets} with him. For her part, she promised to invite 
Shatov as the brother of Dasha. ' You wil be able to get your final 
answer from her: wil that satisfy you ? Is this the formality you were 
so anxious about?' 
'Note that exasperated phrase about the formality at the end of her 

ANOTHER M A N' S SINS 
1 3 1  
letter. Poor, poor woman, my lifelong friend !  I confess, this sudden 
decision on which my whole future depends came as a great blow to 
me. I must say I still had hopes, but now tout est dit, I know now that 
all is over ; c' est temble. Oh, that that Sunday would never come and 
everything would be as before : you'd be coming to see me, and I'd 
be here . . . .' 
'You're distraught by all those nasty things Liputin said. All those 
innuendoes.' 
'My friend, you've laid your well-meaning fmger on another sore 
spot. These well-meaning fingers are pitiless, as a rule, and sometimes 
blundering. I'm sorry, but, you know, I'd almost forgotten all about 
it. I mean, about those nasty innuendoes, that is. I hadn't really for­
gotten about them; but, in my folly, tried all the time I was with Lisa 
to be happy, and persuaded myself I was happy. But now - oh, uow 
I'm thinking of that generous and kind-hearted woman, so tolerant of 
my despicable shortcomings - that is to say, she may not be so tolerant 
as all that; but think what I'm like, with my worthless, rotten char­
acter! Why, I'm just a spoilt child, with all the egoism and none of the 
innocence of a child. For twenty years she has been looking after me 
like a nurse, cette pauvre Auntie, as Lisa so delightfully calls her. And 
suddenly, after twenty years, the child has got it into its head to get 
married - sending her one letter after another, and she has vinegar 
compresses on her head and - and, well, I've got what I wanted now, 
and on Sunday I shall be a married man - of all things! And why on 
earth did I insist on it myself? Why did I write those letters ? Oh, yes, 
I forgot to tell you : Lisa worships Dasha. At least, she says so. "C' es1 
un ange," she says about her, "only a rather secretive one." They both 
advised me to marry her - even Praskovya - well, no, not Praskovya. 
She didn't advise me. Oh, how much venom there is locked up in 
that little " box " !  As a matter of fact, Lisa didn't advise me, either. 
"What do you want to get married for ? "  she said to me. " Your in­
tellectual pleasures ought to be enough for you ! "  She laughed. I for­
gave her her laughter, for she's so unhappy hersel£ But, they told me, 
you certainly cannot get on without a woman. The infirmities of age 
are coming upon you, and she'll tuck you in, or whatever it is. . .. 
Mafoi, while I've been sitting with you here, I kept on saying to my­
self that Providence was sending her to me at the close of my stormy 
days, and that she would tuck me in, or whatever it IS • • •  enfin, she'll 

1 32 
THE D EV I L S · PART O N E  
be useful ro keep house for me. Everything is in such a frightful mesԿ 
here. Look at all that rubbish ! I told Nastasya this morning to tidy upj 
and that book is still on the floor. La pauvre amie is always cross wit 
me for the untidiness of my rooms. Oh, now I shall no longer hear1 
her voice ! Vingt ans! And - and I believe they've been getting anony1 
mons letters, too. Think of it ! Nicholas is said to have sold his e1tatei 
to Lebyatkin. C' est un monstre! et enfin who's that Lebyatkin ? Lis'l lisՀ 
tens, listens - oh, how she listens ! I forgave her her laughter, for I saw 
her face as she listened, and ce Maurice - I shouldn't like to be in his 
shoes now, brave homme tout de memc, but rather shy ; but never mind 
him . . . .' 
He fell silent ; he was tired and confused, and sat with his head 
drooping, gazing motionless at the floor with weary eyes. I rook ad­
vantage of the lull in our conversation to tell him about my visit to 
Filippov's house, and curtly and dryly expressed the opinion that Leb­
yatkin's sister (whom I had never seen) might really at one time have 
been one of Nicholas's victims during the mysterious period of his 
life, as Liputin had put it, and that it was very probable indeed that 
Lebyatkin was receivmg money for some reason from Nicholas. But 
that was all. As for the slanderous stories about Dasha, I was sure that 
it was all nonsense - innuendoes spread by Liputin - and that this, at 
any rate, was what Kirilov, whom there was no reason to disbelieve, 
warmly maintained. Mr Verkhovensky listened to my assurances with 
a distracted air, as though they had nothing ro do with him. I men­
tioned, by the way, my conversation with Kirilov, adding that Kiri­
lov was probably mad. 
' He's not mad,' Mr Verkhovensky muttered listlessly, as though 
against his will, ' but he's one of those people who have little minds. 
Ces getts-la supposent Ia nature et Ia societe humaiue autres que Dieu ne les 
a faites et qu' elles ne sont reellement. People make advances to them, but 
not Stepan Verkhovensky, at any rate. I saw them that time in Peters­
burg, avec cette chhe amie (oh, how I used to humiliate her then !), and 
I wasn't afraid of their insults or their praise. I shan't be afraid now, 
either, mais par lollS d' autre chose. I think I've done something dreadful ­
you see, I sent Dasha a letter yesterday and - oh, how I curse myself 
for it ! '  
' What did you write to her about ?' 
'Oh, my friend, believe me, it was so honourably meant. I told her 

A N O T H ER M A N ' s S I N S  
1 3 3 
. that I had written to Nicholas five days before, and with the most 
honourable intentions.' 
' I  understand now ! '  I cried warmly. 'And what right had you to 
couple their names like that ?' 
' But, mon cher, please don't crush me completely, don't shout at 
me! I am as it is utterly squashed, like - like a cockroach, and, after 
all, I still think that it was all so honourable. Suppose there really 
was something - en Suisse - or - or that something was just starting. 
Oughtn't I to consult their hearts first, so as not to - en.fin, so as not to 
interfere with their hearts and be an obstacle in their paths ? . . .  My 
motives were absolutely honourable . . . .  
' 
' Oh, dear, what a stupid thing you've done ! '  I cried involuntarily. 
' It was stupid,' he echoed eagerly ;  ' you've never said anything 
more imelligent, c
' hait here, mais que fa ire, to til est dit. For I shall marry 
her just the same, even if it is only to cover up another man's sins. So 
what did I have to write those letters for? Isn't that so ?' 
' You're starting all over again ! '  
' Oh, now you won't frighten me with your shouts. You see quite 
a different Stepan Verkhovensky before you now. The other one has 
been buried ; en.fin, tout est dit. And why do you shout? Only because 
you're not getting married yourself and you won't have to carry the 
notorious ornament on your head. Do you wince again ? My poor 
friend, you don't know women, whereas I've spent all my life study­
ing them. " If you want to conquer the whole world, conquer your­
self," that is the only good thing that other romantic like you, my 
future bride's brother, Shatov, ever said. I gladly appropriate that say­
ing from him. Well, I, too, am ready to conquer myself, and I'll be 
getting married ; but what is it that I'll be conquering instead of the 
whole world ? Oh, my friend, marriage is the moral death of every 
proud soul, of all independence. Married life will corrupt me, will rob 
me of my strength, my courage to serve our cause. There will be chil­
dren ; not mine, either, I daresay - I mean certainly not mine: a wise 
man is not afraid to look truth in the face. This morning Liputin ad­
vised me to put up barricades against Nicholas ; he is stupid, Liputin 
is. A woman will deceive the all-seeing eye itself. In creating woman 
le bon Dieu knew, of course, the risk he was running, but I'm sure that 
it was she who interfered with him and forced him to create her that 
way and - with such attributes ; who would otherwise have incurred 

134 
THE DEVILS · PART O NE 
so much trouble for nothing ? Nastasya, I know, might be angry with 
me for such free-thinking, but - en.fin, tout est dit.' 
He wouldn't have been himself if he had dispensed with the cheap, 
quibbling sort of free-thinking which flourished in his day. Now, at 
any rate, he comforted himself with his little quibble, but not for long. 
' Oh, if only there wouldn't be any day-after-to-morrow, any Sun­
day ! '  he cried suddenly, but in utter despair this time. 'Why shouldn't 
there be one week without a Sunday - si le miracle existe? What would 
it really have cost Providence to blot out one Sunday from the calen­
dar ? Just to prove His power to the atheist et que tout soit dit! Oh, how 
I have loved her ! Twenty years, all these twenty years, and she has 
never understood me ! ' 
'But who are you talking about ?' I asked in surprise. 'I don't under­
stand you, either! '  
'Vingt ans! And not once has she understood me - oh, that is cruel! 
And does she really think that I'm getting married because I'm afraid 
or because I'm poor ? Oh, the disgrace of it ! Auntie, Auntie, I'm doing 
it for you ! Oh, let her know that, auntie, that she was the only woman 
I have adored for twenty years ! She must know that, for otherwise 
there won't be any wedding, otherwise they'll have to drag me by 
force to ce qu' on appelle le altar! '  
It was the first time I had heard this confession, made with such 
energy, too. I won't conceal the fact that I was terribly tempted to 
laugh. But I was wrong. 
' He's the only one left to me now, the only one, my only hope,' he 
cried suddenly in great agitation, as though struck all at once by a 
new thought. ' Now only he, my poor boy, can save me and - oh, 
why doesn't he come ? Oh, my son, oh, my dear Peter - and though 
I don't deserve to be called father, but rather a tiger, still - laissez-moi, 
mon ami, I'll lie down a little to collect my thoughts. I'm so tired, so 
tired, and I expect it's time you went to bed too. Voyez vous, it's 
twelve o'clock. . .  .' 

THE CRIPPLB 
135 
4 
The Cripple 
SHATOV made no dificulties and, as I had suggested in my note, 
called at midday on Lisa. We arrived almost at the same time; I, too, 
was paying my first call. Al of them - that is, Lisa, her mother, and 
Mr Drozdov - were sitting in the large drawing-room and having an 
argument. The mother was asking Lisa to play some waltz on the 
piano - and when Lisa began to play the waltz asked for, her mother 
declared that it was not the right one. Mr Drozdov, in the simplicity 
of his heart, took Lisa's part and tried to convince the old lady that it 
was the right waltz; but Mrs Drozdov lost her temper and began to 
cry. She was il, and even walked with difficulty. Her legs were swol­
len, and for the last few days she had done nothing but make scenes 
and find fault with everyone, though she was rather afraid of Lisa. 
They were pleased to see us. Lisa flushed with pleasure, and after say­
ing 'Merci' to me for bringing Shatov, of course, went up to him, 
regarding him with curiosity. 
Shatov stopped awkwardly in the doorway. Having thanked him 
for coming, she led him up to her mother. 
'This is the Mr Shatov I told you about, and this is Mr G-v, a 
great friend of mine and Mr Verkhovensky's. Maurice also made his 
acquaintance yesterday.' 
'And which is the professor ?' 
'There's no professor at al, Mother.' 
' I'm sure there is. You said yourself that there'd be a professor - I 
suppose it's that one.' She indicated Shatov disdainfully. 
' I  never said anything to you about expecting a professor. Mr G-v 
is in the civil service and Mr Shatov is a former student.' 
' Student or professor - they're al from a university. You only want 
to argue. But the Swiss one had a moustache and a little beard.' 
'Mother always calls Mr Verkhovensky' s son a professor,' Lisa said, 
and she took Shatov away to the sofa at the other end of the drawing­
room. 
' I'm awfully sorry,' she whispered to Shatov, 'but when her legs 
are swollen she's always like that. I'm afraid she's il,' she added and 

1 36 
T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  O N E  
wcnt on scrutinizing h i m  with great curiosity, especially his shock oԹ 
hair. 
'Are you in the army, sir ?' asked the old woman to whom Lisa hadl 
so mercilessly abandoned me. 
' No, ma'am, I'm in the Civil Service.' 
'Mr G-v is a great friend of Mr Vcrkhovensky's,' Lisa immedi­
atcl y called out. 
' Do you serve under Mr Verkhovensky ? He, too, is a professor, 
isn't he ? '  
' Goodness, Mother, you must be seeing professors in your dreams, 
too,' Lisa cried with annoyance. 
'There arc too many of them about in real life. You're always con­
tradicting your mother, darling. Were you here four years ago, when 
Mr Stavrogin was staying with his mother ?' 
I replied that I was. 
'And wasn't there some Englishman with you, too ?' 
' No, ma'ant, there wasn't.' 
Lisa laughed. 
' Well, you see, there was no Englishman. It must be a lie, then. 
Mrs Stavrogin and Mr Verkhovensky are lying. Everybody is lying.' 
' It was Auntie and Mr Verkhovensky yesterday who thought there 
was some resemblance between Mr Stavrogin and Prince Harry in 
Shakespeare's Henry IV, and that's why Mother thinks there ought to 
be an Englishman,' Lisa explained to us. 
' If Harry wasn't there, there was no Englishman there, either. It 
was Nicholas alone who was playing the fool.' 
'Mother is saying that on purpose, I assure you,' Lisa found it neces­
sary to explain to Shatov. ' She knows all about Shakespeare. I read 
her the first act of Ot!!dlo myself, but she's in great pain now. Mother, 
it's striking twelve - it's time you took your medicine.' 
'The doctor is here, ma'am,' a maid announced at the door. 
The old lady got up and started calling her dog : ' Zemirka, Zemir­
ka, you'll come with me, at any rate, won't you ?' 
Zemirka, a repulsive old lap-dog, refused to obey her mistress and 
crawled under the sofa where Lisa was sitting. 
' So you don't want to ! Very well, I don't want you, either. Good­
bye, sir ;  I'm sorry I don't know your name,' she addressed me. 
'Anton Lavrentyevich -' 

THE CRIPPLE 
137 
, 'Never mind, sir; with me it goes in at one ear and out at the other. 
Don't you come with me, Maurice ; it was Zemirka I called. Thank 
God, I can still walk about by myself, and to-morrow I'll go for a 
drive.' 
She walked out of the room in a temper. 
'Please,' said Lisa to me, ' talk to Mr Drozdov. I'm sure you will 
both profit from getting to know one another better.' 
She smiled nicely at Mr Drozdov, who beamed all over with de­
light. I had, willy-nilly, to talk to Mr Drozdov. 
2 
To my surprise, Lisa's business with Shatov was really concerned only 
with literature. I don't know why, but I imagined that she wanted to 
se him on quite a different matter. We - that is, Mr Drozdov and 
myself - seeing that they were not trying to hide anything from us 
and were talking aloud, began to listen to their conversation. Pre­
sently we, too, were invited to join in. It was all about an idea Lisa 
had had for some time of publishing what she considered would be a 
useful book; but, being quite inexperienced, she wanted someone to 
help her with it. The seriousness with which she began to explain her 
plan to Shatov quite surprised me. ' Must be one of the new women,' 
I thought. ' She's not been to Switzerland for nothing.' Shatov listened 
to her attentively, his eyes fixed on the floor, and showed no surprise 
whatever that a frivolous society girl should take up such a seemingly 
unsuitable job. 
Her literary plan was as follows. Hundreds of papers and journals 
are published in Russia, both in the capital cities and in the provinces, 
and every day inumerable events are reported in them. The year 
passes, the papers are everywhere put away in cupboards or torn up 
and thrown away, or are used for making bags, or all sorts of things. 
Many of the facts published in them make an impression and are re­
membered by the public, but are eventually forgotten. Many people 
would like to look them up, but what a labour it is to try to find what 
they want in that sea of paper, when they often do not know either 
the day or the place or even the year in which the incident occurred. 
And yet if al the facts for a whole year were to be carefily clasified 
and published in one book, according to a definite plan and with a 

T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  O N E  
definite object in view, under their appropriate headings, with cross­
references, and arranged according to months and days, such a refer­
ence book might provide a useful outline of the characteristics of Rus­
sian life for the whole year, even though the actual number of published 
facts would be very small compared with the events of the year. 
' Instead of a large number of sheets of paper, you would get a few 
bulky volumes - that's all,' observed Shatov. 
Dut Lisa spoke warmly in defence of her idea, though, because of 
her inexperience, she found it difficult to express herself clearly. She 
maintained that there need be no more than one book, and that even 
that need not be too bulky. But even if it were bulky it would be easy 
to consult, for everything depended on the plan and the way the facts 
were presented. Naturally, not everything would be collected and re­
published. Off1cial decrees, Government Acts, local regulations, laws ­
all such facts, however important, might be entirely omitted from the 
proposed publication. Quite a lot could be omitted, only those events 
being selected for publication which were more or less typical of the 
moral life of the people, the personal character of the Russian people 
at any given moment. Anything, of course, might be included : odd 
incidents, fires, public subscriptions, good or bad actions, all sorts of 
pronouncements and speeches, perhaps even reports of floods, per­
haps even some Government decrees ; but whatever was selected must 
be characteristic of the period ; everything published would express a 
certain point of view, a certain well-defmed intention, an idea that 
would throw a light on the whole mass of events. And, fmally, the 
book would also be of interest to the general reader, apart from its 
usefulness as a reference book. It would have to give, as it were, a pic­
ture of the spiritual, moral, and inner life of Russia for a whole year. 
' We want everyone to buy it,' Lisa insisted. ' We want it to be 
found in every house. I realize, of course, that everything depends on 
the plan, and that's why I apply to you,' she concluded. 
She talked very excitedly, and though her explanations were rather 
obscure and incomplete, Shatov began to understand. 
' You want something with a tendency, a selection of factԺ with a 
well-defmed tendency,' he muttered, still not looking up. 
' Not at all. There's no question of selecting anything of a tendenti­
ous nature. We don't want any bias. Complete impartiality - that 
must be our only tendency.' 

THE C R I P P LE 
139 
'There's nothing wrong about a tendency,' said Shatov, stirring. 
'Besides. it will be impossible to avoid it if there is going to be any 
selection at all. The selection of the facts will show the way they are to 
be interpreted. Your idea isn't bad.' 
' So you think that it is possible to publish such a book ?' Lisa cried 
happily. 
' It will have to be carefully looked into. It's a big thing. It's impos­
sible to plan it all at once. You must have experience. And even when 
we come to publish the book, I doubt whether we shall know how 
to do it. After many trials, perhaps. But the idea is certainly worth 
considering. It's a useful idea.' 
He raised his eyes at last, and they were beaming with pleasure - so 
interested was he. 
'Did you rhink of it yourself?' he asked Lisa tenderly and as though 
shyly. 
' The snag is how to carry it out, not the idea itself,' Lisa replied, 
smiling. ' I'm not very clever, I'm afraid. I understand very little and 
I can follow only what's clear to myself.' 
' Follow ?' 
' It isn't the right word, is it ?' Lisa inquired quickly. 
'Oh, you can use that word if you like. I don't mind.' 
' I  thought when I was abroad that I, too, could be of some use. I 
have money of my own and I am not doing anything with it. Why 
shouldn't I, too, do something for the common cause ? llesides, the 
idea came to me suddenly, as though of itself. I didn't invent it at all, 
and I was delighted with it. But I realized at once that I wouldn't be 
able to carry it out without someone to assist me, because I can't do 
anything by myself. My collaborator would of course become the co­
editor of the book. We'd go halves : the plan and the work will be 
your contribution, and the original idea and the means for carrying it 
out mine. Don't you think such a book will pay its expenses ?' 
' If we plan it properly, it will sell.' 
'I warn you I'm not doing it for profit, but I would like the book to 
sell, and I'd be proud if we did make a profit.' 
' I  see ; but what have I got to do with it ?' 
'Why, I want you to be my collaborator - we'll go halves. You'll 
work out the plan.' 
'But how do you know that I shall be able to work out the plan ?' 

140 
THE DEVILS · PART ONE 
' I  was told about. you and - and here, too, I've heard - l  know that 
you're very clever and - and - are doing useful work - and - think a 
lot; Peter Verkhovensky spoke of you to me in Switzerland,' she 
aJded hurriedly. ' He's a very clever man, isn't he ?' 
Shatov glanced at her quickly, but at once lowered his eyes. 
' Mr Stavrogin, too, told me a lot about you.' 
Shatov suddenly reddened. 
' Here - here are the newspapers.' Lisa hastily picked up from a chair 
a bundle of tied-up newspapers she had previously prepared. 'I've 
tried to mark the facts for selection, to sort them out, and I've num­
bered them - you'll see.' 
Shatov took the bundle. 
'Take it home with you and have a look. Where do you live ?' 
' In Bogoyavlenskaya Street, Fihppov' s house.' 
' I  know. I'm told a certain captain hves in the same house as you, 
a Mr Lebyatkin,' Lisa went on, speaking rapidly as before. 
Shatov sat for a whole minute without r.eplying, staring at the floor 
and holding the bundle in his outstretched hand. 
'You'd better look for someone else for that kind ofjob,' he said at 
last almost in a whisper, dropping his voice in a very strange way. 'I 
won't be of any use to you at all.' 
Lisa flushed. ' What job are you talking about? Maurice,' she cried, 
'please let me have the letter I received yesterday.' 
I also went after Mr Drozdov to the table. 
' Have a look at this,' she addressed me suddenly, 1mfolding the let­
ter in great agitation. ' Have you seen anything hke it ? Read it, please. 
Read it aloud. I want Mr Shatov to hear it too.' 
With no little astonishment I read aloud the following missive : 
Madam, 
To the paragon of Ladies, Miss Tushin. 
Oh, what grace 
In Miss Tushin's face, 
When with her cousin on side-saddle forth she sallies, 
And playful zephyr with her tresses dallies, 
Or when with her mother in church she bows low, 
And on devout faces a red flush doth show ! 
Then for the joys of lawful wedlock I yearn 
And after her, with her mother, never a tear I spurn. 
Composed by an untutored man during an argument. 

THE CRI PPLE 
Madam, 
I pity myself most of al that I have not lost an arm at Sebastopol for 
the glory of our country, not having been there at all, but having served 
throughout the campaign as a supplier of low victuals which I consider 
a scurvy business. You are a goddess of antiquity and I am nothing, and 
have caught a vision of immortality. Look on these as verses and noth­
ing more, for verses are after al nonsense and justify what would have 
been considered rank insolence in prose. Can the sun be angry with an 
amoeba if the latter should write a poem to it from the drop of water 
where there are milions of them if you look through a microscope ? 
Even the club for the protection of larger animals in the best Petersburg 
society, which quite rightly shows compassion to the dog and the horse, 
despises the tiny amoeba, not mentioning it at al on account of its not 
being big enough. I am not big enough either. The idea of marriage 
may seem absurd; but I shall soon be the owner of a property which 
in the old days would have been worth two hundred serfs through 
the good offices of a hater of mankind whom you should despise. I 
could tell a lot and I can produce documents which may even mean 
Siberia. Don't despise my offer. For the letter from the amoeba see the 
poem. 
Captain Lebyatkin, your most humble servallt who is ever 
at your command. 
'That was written by a man who was drunk, a scoundrel ! '  I cried 
indignantly. ' I  know him.' 
'I received the letter yesterday,' Lisa began to explain, blushing and 
speaking hurriedly. ' I  at once realized, of course, that it was from 
some fool, and I haven't yet shown it to Mother because I don't want 
to upset her more. But if he means to go on like that, I don't know 
what to do. Mr Drozdov wants to go to see him and forbid him to 
pester me any more. But as I have already looked on you as my colla­
borator,' she addressed Shatov, ' and as you live in the same house, I 
wanted to question you, to get an idea what more to expect from him.' 
'He's a drunkard and a blackguard,' Shatov muttered with some 
reluctance. 
' But is he always as stupid as that ? '  
'Good Lord, no ! He isn't stupid at all when he's sober.' 
' I  knew a general who used to write verses exactly like that,' 
observed, laughing. 
' Even this letter shows that he knows very well what he is up to,' 
the taciturn Mr Drozdov remarked unexpectedly. 

142 
THE DEVILS · PART ONE 
' I'm told h e  lives with some sister - does he ?' asked Lisa. 
' Y  cs, he docs.· 
' I'm told he bullie: her. Is that true ? '  
Sl1Jtov glanced a t  Lisa again, scowled, and muttering, ' What do I 
care ? '  moved towards the door. 
' Wait, please,' Lisa cried in Jlarm. ' Where are you going ? We've 
still Scl many things to discuss.' 
' What is there to discuss ? I'll let you know to-morrow.' 
' Why, the most importam thing of all - the printers ! Please believe 
me, I'm not treating it as a joke. I'm quite serious about it,' Lisa assured 
him with growing alarm. ' I f  we decide to publish it, where are we go­
ing to have it printed ? That's the most important question, for we 
shan't go to Moscow for it, and such a publication cannot be entrusted 
to any of our local printers. I made up my mind long ago to get a 
priming-press of my own, in your name, if necessary, and I know 
Mother w11l let me do so, provided it is in your name.' 
' How do you know that I could be a printer ?' Shatov asked 
sullenly. 
' Whv, Peter Verkhovensky told me in Svmzerland that you're just 
the right persDn to manage a prmnng-press and that you are tamiliar 
with that sort of busincs;. He even wanted to give me a note to you, 
but I forgot to ask him tor it. ' 
Shatov, as I now recall, changed colour. He stood still for a few 
seconds more, and then suddenly walked out of the room. 
Lisa got angry. 
' Does he always go away like that ? '  she asked, turning to me. 
I was abom to shrug mv shoulders when Shatov suddenly rcmrned, 
went straight up to the table, and put down the bundle of newspapers 
he had taken with him. 
'I shan't be your coliaborJror ; I can't spare the time.' 
'But why not ? Why not ? You're not angry, are you ?' Lisa asked 
in a grieved and beseeching voice. 
The sound of her voice seemed to surprise him ; for a few seconds he 
looked intently at her, as though wishing to penetrate into her very 
soul. 
' Makes no difference,' he muttered, ' I  don't want to . . . . ' 
And he left the house. Lisa was completely taken aback, quite un­
reasonably so - at least so it seemed to me. 

THE CRIPPLE 
143 
'What an extraordinarily queer chap ! '  Mr Drozdov remarked in a 
loud voice. 
No doubt he was 'queer ', but there was a great deal that was not clear 
to me in all that. There was some hidden meaning in it. I simply could 
not believe in this publication; then there was that stupid letter, in 
which a suggestion was quite clearly made to give some information 
and 'produce documents ', which they all seemed to have ignored, 
talking about something quite different; lastly that printing-press and 
Shatov' s sudden departure just because they spoke of a printing-press. 
All this led me to believe that something had happened before my 
arrival, something I knew noclling about, and that, consequently, I 
was not wanted and that it was none of my business. Besides, it was 
time I left. I had been there long enough for a first visit. I went up to 
say good-bye to Lisa. 
She seemed to have forgotten that I was in the room. She was still 
standing in the same place by the table, with her head bowed and her 
eyes ftxed on one spot on the carpet. 
'Oh, I'm sorry,' she murmured in an ordinary polite tone of voice. 
'You're going, too. Well, good-bye. Give my regards to Mr Verkh<>­
vensky, and do ask him to come to see me as soon as possible. Maurice, 
Mr G-v is going. I'm sorry Mother can't come out to say good-bye 
to you.' 
I went out, and had reached the bottom of the stairs when a footman 
overtook me at the front door. 
'Mistress wants you to come back, sir . . . .' 
'Your mistress or Miss Lisa ?' 
'Miss Lisa, sir.' 
I found Lisa not in the large drawing-room, where we had been 
sitting, but in the reception-room next to it. The door leading to the 
drawing-room, where Maurice was left alone, was closed. 
Lisa smiled at me, but she looked pale. She was standing in cl1e 
middle of the room, evident! y unable to make up her mind and strug­
gling with herself. But she suddenly took me by the hand, and with­
out uttering a word, led me quickly to the window. 
'I must see her at once,' she whispered, gazing at me with burn­
ing, determined, impatient eyes, which did not brook the slightest 

144 
T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  ONE 
contradiction. ' I  must see her with my own eyes, and I ' m  asking you 
to help me.' 
She was completely beside herself and in despair. 
'Who do you want to sec, Miss Lisa ?' I asked in alarm. 
'That Miss Lebyatkin, that cripple . . . .  Is it true that she is lame ?' 
I was amazed. 
' I  have never seen her, but I've heard that she is lame,' I murmured 
with hurried readiness and also in a whisper. ' I  heard it yesterday.' 
'I must see her. I simply must. Could you arrange it for to-day ?' 
I felt awfully sorry for her. 
'I'm afraid it's impossible, and, besides, I should not know how to 
arrange it,' I tried to persuade her. ' I'll go and sec Shatov -' 
' If you won't arrange it for to-morrow, I shall go to her myself, 
alone, because Mr Drozdov refuses to come with me. You're my only 
hope, for I have no one else I can turn to. I'm afraid I spoke stupidly 
to Shatov . . . .  I'm sure you're a very honest person and, perhaps, de­
voted to me. Please arrange it.' 
I was overcome by a passionate desire to help her in every way. 
'Tius is what I'll do,' I said, after thinking it over for a moment. 
' I'll go there myself, and I'll sec her to-day for certain.jor certain. I'll 
arrange it so that I'll see her. I give you my word. Only, please let me 
take Shatov into my confidence.' 
'Tell him that I want to see her and that I can't wait any longer, but 
that I wasn't deceiving him just now. Perhaps he went away because 
he's very honest and didn't like to think that I was deceiving him. I 
wasn't deceiving him. I really want to publish the book and found a 
printing business.' 
'He is honest,' I affirmed warmly. 
'However, if you can't arrange it for to-morrow, I shall go there 
myself, whatever happens, and even if everyone were to find out.' 
' I'm afraid I shan't be able to see you before three o'clock to­
morrow,' I observed, recovering my senses a little. 
' Very well, at three o'clock, then. So I was right in thinking at Mr 
Verkhovensky's yesterday that you're a little - devoted to me, wasn't 
I ? '  she said, smiling as she pressed my hand to say good-bye and hur­
ried olf to rejoin Drozdov. 
I left the house, feeling uneasy about my pronlise, and scarcely realiz­
ing what had happened. I had seen a woman in real despair, who was 

THE C R I P P L E  
145 
not afraid to compromise herself by confiding in a man she hardly 
knew. Her sweet smile at so difficult a moment in her life and her hint 
that she had already noticed my feelings yesterday stabbed me to the 
heart. But I was sorry for her, I was sorry for her - that was all !  Her 
secrets suddenly becarae something sacred to me, and even if anyone 
had tried to reveal them to me now, I believe I would have stopped my 
ears and refused to listen to anything more. I had a curious premoni­
tion of something . . . .  Besides, I had no idea how I could possibly do 
anything. What's more, I did not know what exactly I was supposed 
to arrange - an interview, but what sort of an interview ? And how 
was I to bring them together ? My only hope was Shatov, though I 
should have known beforehand that he would not help me in any way. 
But I rushed off to see him all the same. 
4 
It was after seven o'clock in the evening that I found him at home. To 
my surprise, he had visitors - Mr Kirilov and another man I knew only 
slightly, a certain Shigalyov, Mr Virginsky's brother-in-law. 
This Shigalyov had apparently been staying in our town for the last 
two months ; I don't know where he came from ; all I heard about 
him was that he had published some sort of article in a Petersburg pro­
gressive journal. Virgimky had introduced him to me casually in the 
street. Never in my life have I seen such dejection, gloom, and de­
spondency on the face of a man. He looked as though he were expect­
ing the end of the world not at some indefinite time, according to 
prophecies which might never come true, but with absolute defmite­
ness - say, the day after to-morrow, at exactly twenty-five minutes 
past ten. We hardly said a word to one another on that occasion, bur 
merely shook hands like two conspirators. I was particularly struck by 
his ears, which were of unnatural size, long, broad, and thick, sticking 
out in a most peculiar way. His movements were awkward and slow. 
IfLiputin did sometimes dream of the phalanstery being established in 
our province, Shigalyov most certainly knew the day and the hour 
when it would come to pass. He made an ominous impression on me ; 
I was the more surprised at meeting him at Shatov's, as Shatov was 
not particularly fond of visitors. 
From the stairs I could hear them talking very loudly, the three of 

THB DEVILS • PART ONB 
them together, and apparently having an argument; but the moment 
I entered the room they fell silent. They were arguing standing up, 
but now they al suddenly sat down, so that I, too, had to sit down. 
The stupid silence lasted for fully three minutes. Though Shigalyov 
:ecognized me, he pretended not to know me, not because of any un­
friendly feelings towards me, but for no particular reason. Kirilov and 
I exchanged bows, but in silence and for some reason we did not shake 
hands. At last Shigalyov began looking at me sternly and frowningly, 
with the most naive assurance that I should suddenly get up and go 
away. Finally, Shatov got up from his chair and al of them, too, sud­
denly jumped to their feet. They went out without saying good-bye, 
Shigalyov alone saying in the doorway to Shatov, who was seeing 
them off: 
' Remember that you are obliged to submit a full account of your 
action.' 
'To hell with your accounts, and I'm hanged ifl am under any obli­
gation to anybody,' Shatov said, seeing him out and fastening the door 
on the latch. 
'The dirty twisters! '  he said, glancing at me and smiling somewhat 
wryly. 
He looked angry, and it seemed strange to me that he should have 
spoken first. Whenever I had gone to see him before (which was not 
often) he would invariably sit scowling in a comer, answer sullenly, 
and it was only after a long time that he grew animated and began 
talking with pleasure. Even then he always scowled when saying good­
bye, and opened the door for you as though he were getting rid of a 
personal enemy. 
'I had tea yesterday with that Kirilov,' I observed. ' He seems to 
have gone mad on atheism.' 
'Russian atheism has never gone farther than a pun,' Shatov mut­
tered, putting in a new candle in place of the burnt-out end. 
' No, that man did not give me the impression of a punster. I don't 
think he knows how to talk, let alone make puns.' 
'They're men made of paper,' Shatov observed calmly, sitting 
down on a chair in a comer and leaning with both hands on his knees. 
' It's all because of their servile thoughts. There's also hatred there,' he 
went on after a minute's silence. 'They would be the first to be dread­
fully unhappy ifRussia were suddenly to be reorganized even according 

THE CRIPPLE 
147 
to their own ideas and if, somehow or other, she were suddenly to 
become an immeasurably prosperous and happy country. They would 
have no one to hate then ; no one to despise; no one t9 laugh at. It's 
just an everlasting animal hatred of Russia which has corroded their 
organism. And there's no question here of any tears through smiles, 
tears hidden from the world. Never has an untruer word been said in 
Russia than that about the hidden tears,' he shouted, almost fero::iously. 
' Good Lord, what are you saying ! '  I said, laughing. 
'You're of course a " moderate liberal ",' Shatov said, smiling, too. 
'You know,' he went on suddenly, ' I  may have been talking non­
sense about "servility of thoughts " ;  I expect you will tell me at once, 
"It's you who are the son of a flunkey, but I'm not a flunkey " ' 
' I  certainly did not want to say anything of the kind - good Lord ! '  
'Don't apologize. I'm not afraid of you. Once I was only the son of 
a flunkey, but now I've become a flunkey myself. Same as you. Our 
Russian liberal is a fhmkey before everything else. He's only waiting 
for the opportunity of polishing someone's boots ' 
' What boots ? What sort of allegory is this ? '  
'Dear me, it's not a n  allegory at all ! I see, you are laughing. Mr 
Verkhovensky was right when he said that I lay under a stone, 
squashed, though not crushed to death, but only wriggling ; it was a 
good image.' 
' Mr Verkhovensky assures everybody that you're mad on the sub­
ject of the Germans,' I laughed. ' But we've picked up something from 
them, all the same.' 
' We took twenty copecks from them and gave them a hundred 
roubles.' 
We were silent for a minute. 
'He got that sore lying in America.' 
'Who ? What sore ? '  
' I'm talking ofKirilov. I spent four months with him there lying on 
the floor of a hut.' 
'Why, have you been to America ? '  I asked, surprised. 'You never 
mentioned it before.' 
'There was nothing to tell. Two years ago we spent our last penny, 
three of us, to go to the United States in an emigrant steamer " to find 
out for ourselves what the life of the American worker was like and 
in this way to check by personal experience the state of a man living 

THE D EV I L S  • PART O N E  
Wlder the worst possible social conditions ". That was why we went 
there.' 
' Good Lord ! '  I laughed. ' If you wanted to find that out " by per­
sonal experience" you should have gone to some place in our pro­
vince at harvest time, and not rushed olf to America! '  
' W  c hired ourselves out as workers to an exploiter of labour there. 
There were six of us Russians working for him - students, landowners 
who had left their estates, army officers - and all with the same noble 
object. Well, so we worked, got drenched, were worn out, and at last 
Kirilov and I left. We fell ill. We couldn't stand it any longer. When 
he paid us off, our employer, the exploiter, cheated us, and instead of 
thirty dollars as agreed, he paid me eight and him fifteen; we were 
also beaten there more than once. So after that Kirilov and I, unable to 
obtain employment, lay on the floor of a hut side by side for four 
months in that filthy little town ; he thought of one thing and I of 
another.' 
' Did your employer really beat you ? In America ? I can imagine 
the names you must have called him ! '  
' Not a bit of it. On the contrary, Kirilov and I at once decided that, 
compared to the Americans, we Russians were like little children, and 
that one had to be born in America, or at least get thoroughly 
acclimatized there, before one could hope to be on the same level with 
them. Why, even when they asked us a dollar for something that 
wasn't worth a penny, we paid it with pleasure, nay, with enthusiasm. 
We praised everything : spiritualism, lynch law, six-shooters, hoboes. 
One day when we were travelling a chap put his hand into my pocket, 
took out my hairbrush, and began brushing his hair with it; Kirilov 
and I just glanced at each other and made up our minds that it was 
quite all right and that we liked it very much.' 
' It's funny how we not only think of such things, but actually do 
them,' I observed. 
' Men made of paper,' Shatov repeated. 
' Still, to cross the ocean in an emigrant ship to an unknown coun­
try, even if it is only to " find out by personal experience", etc. - well, 
there's something fine about it, something that requires a lot of guts. 
But how did you get out of it ?' 
' I  wrote to a man in Europe, and he sent me a hWldred roubles.' 
While talking, Shatov, as usual, kept his eyes fixed steadily on the 

THE CRIPPLE 
149 
floor, even when he was excited. But now he suddenly raised his 
head. 
'Do you want to know the name of that man ?' 
'Who was it ?' 
'Nicholas Stavrogin.' 
He got up suddenly, turned to his limewood writing-desk, and be­
gan rummaging in it. There was a vague, though well-authenticated, 
rumour in our town that about two years ago his wife had been Stav­
rogin's mistress in Paris. That was at the time Shatov was in America, 
and, it is true, long after she had left him in Geneva. ' If that is so,' I 
thought, ' then what made him mention Stavrogin's name now, and 
why be so emphatic about it ?' 
'I haven't repaid him the money yet,' he said, turning suddenly to 
me again, and, looking hard at me, resumed his seat in the corner and 
asked abruptly in quite a different tone of voice: ' I  presume you've 
come for something. What is it ? '  
I at once told him everything, in its exact chronological order, add­
ing that though I had had time to collect my thoughts after the first ex­
citement was over, I felt more confused than ever : I realized that it 
was of great importance to Lisa, I wanted very much to help her, but 
the trouble was that I did not know how to keep my promise, and 
that I could not even tell what exactly I had promised her. Then I told 
him firmly once again that she never meant to deceive him, that there 
had been some misunderstanding, and that she was very upset by the 
extraordinary way in which he had gone off that morning. 
He listened very attentively. 
' Perhaps I did do a stupid thing this morning. I'm afraid I often do. 
Anyway, if she did not know herself why I went away like that, then 
so much the better for her.' 
He got up, went to the door, opened it a little, and began to listen 
for any noise on the stairs. 
'Do you want to see that person yourself?' 
'Yes, that's exactly what I do want; but how is it to be done ?' I 
said, jumping up from my chair, greatly pleased. 
' Well, all we have to do is to go down while she is alone. When he 
comes back he'll beat her black and blue if he finds out that we've 
been there. I often go there without his knowledge. I had a fight with 
him the other day when he started beating her again.' 

150 
T H E  D EV I L S · P A R T  O N E  
'Good Lord ! '  
'Ob, yes. I dragged him away from her by the hair. He tried to 
thrash me, but I frightened him. That was the end of it. I'm afraid 
he'll come back drunk and remember u - he'll give her a bad beating 
for that.' 
We went downstairs at once. 
5 
The door of Lebyatkin's flat was closed but not locked, and we had 
no difficulty in getting in. The whole flat consisted of two dismal 
little rooms with grimy walls on which the filthy wallpaper literally 
hung in shreds. That part of the house had been used for some years 
as a public-house, til its landlord Filippov moved it to his new house. 
The other rooms of the former public-house were locked up, and 
these two were let to Lebyatkin. The furniture consisted of ordinary 
benches and deal tables, with the exception of an old easy-chair with 
one arm missing. In the second room, in a comer, was a bed covered 
with a cotton counterpane, which belonged to Miss Lebyatkin ; as for 
the Captain himself, he slept on the floor, often without bothering to 
undress. Crumbs, dirt, wet puddles were everywhere ; a large, soak­
ing-wet floor-doth lay in the middle of the first room, together with 
an old, worn-out shoe in the same puddle. One could see that no one 
bothered to do any housework here : the stoves were not heated, food 
was not cooked ; they did not even have a samor1ar, as Shatov later 
told me. The Captain had arrived penniless, with his sister, and, as 
Liputin said, at first had really gone begging from house to house. 
Having unexpectedly got money, he had at once started drinking and 
gone crazy with drink, so that he was incapable of looking after the 
house. 
Miss Lebyatkin, whom I was so anxious to meet, was sitting as 
quiet as a mouse on a bench at a deal kitchen table in a corner of the 
second room. She did not call out to us when we opened the door; 
she did not even stir from her place. Shatov told me that they never 
locked their front door and that on one occasion it was left wide open 
all night. By the dim light of a thin candle in an iron candlestick I 
caught a glimpse of a woman of about thirty, thin and pale, wearing 
an old dark cotton dress, with a long, uncovered neck, and scanty, dark 

T H E  C R I P P L E  
1 5 1  
hair twisted into a knot on the nape o f  her neck as big as the fist of a 
two-year-old child. She looked at us rather gaily ; besides the candle­
stick, she had on the table in front of her a little peasant looking-glass, 
an old pack of cards, a tattered song-book, and a white roll of Ger­
man bread from which one or two bites had been taken. It was ob­
vious that Miss Lebyatkin used powder and rouge and painted her 
lips. She also blackened her eyebrows, which were long, thin, and 
dark anyhow. Three long wrinkles stood out rather sharply on her 
high, narrow forehead in spite of the powder. I already knew that she 
was lame, but during our visit she did not get up and walk about. Her 
emaciated face might have been quite good-looking a long time ago 
when she was still a young girl ; but her soft, tender grey eyes were 
remarkable even now; there was something dreamy and sincere in the 
gentle, almost joyful look she gave us. This gentle and unruffled joy, 
which also came out in her smile, surprised me, after all I had heard 
about the Cossack whip and the other brutalities of her precious 
brother. It was strange that instead of the uncomfortable feeling of 
revulsion and even dread one usually experiences in the presence of 
these God-afflicted creatures, I almost took pleasure in looking at her 
from the very first moment, and it was pity rather than revulsion that 
I felt afterwards. 
'This is how she sits literally for days on end, all alone, without 
moving, telling her own fortune by cards or looking at herself in the 
glass,' Shatov said, pointing her out to me from the doorway. ' He 
doesn't even get any food for her. The woman from the cottage some­
times brings her something out of the goodness of her heart. It beats 
me how they can leave her all alone with a candle ! '  
To my surprise, Shatov spoke in a loud voice, as though she were 
not in the room. 
' Good evening, my dear,' Miss Lebyatkin said affably. 
' I've brought you a visitor, Miss Lebyatkin,' said Shatov. 
' I'm glad to see him,' she said, looking intently at me from behind 
the candle. ' I  don't know who it is you've brought. I don't remember 
seeing him before.' 
She at once turned again to Shatov, without paying any attention 
to me during the whole of the ensuing conversation, just as if I were 
not in the room at all. 
'You must have Իot tired walking up and down alone in your little 

I j2 
THE DEVILS • PART ONE 
room in the attic, I suppose ?' she said, laughing and showing two rows 
of excellent teeth. 
'Yes, I got tired ot" it, and I wanted to pay you a visit, too.' 
Shatov moved a bench up to the table, sat down on it, and made 
me sit down beside him. 
' I'm always glad to have a talk, my dear ; only you're a funy man, 
all the same - just like a hermit. When did you comb your hair last? 
Come on, let me comb it for you again,' she said, producing a little 
comb from her pocket. ' I  expect you've never touched it since I 
combed it last.' 
'Why, I don't believe I have a comb,' Shatov said, laughing, too. 
' Haven't you really? Then I'll give you mine, not this one - an­
other one - only don't forget to remind me.' 
She began combing his hair with a most serious air, and even parted 
It on one side. Then she drew back a little to have a good look whether 
1t was al right, and put the comb back into her pocket. 
' Do you know, my dear,' she said, shaking her head, ' you may be 
a sensible man, but you're bored. I find it strange to look at you al. I 
can't understand how people can be bored. Heartache is not boredom. 
I'm happy.' 
'Are you happy with that brother of yours, too ?' 
' Do you mean Lebyatkin ? He's my footman. And I don't care a bit 
whether he's here or not. I tell him: Lebyatkin, fetch me some water, 
Lebyatkin, fetch me my shoes, and he runs to fetch them. Sometimes 
you just can't help laughing at him.' 
'And that's exactly how it is,' Shatov addressed me again uncere­
moniously in a loud voice. ' She treats him just like a footman. I've 
heard her myself shouting to him : " Lebyatkin, fetch me some water! "  
Only, you see, he doesn't run to fetch her the water, but beats her for 
orderi.."J.g him about like that. But she isn't in the least afraid of him. 
She has some sort of nervous fit almost every day, accompanied by 
loss of memory, so that afterwards she doesn't remember anything of 
what has happened. And she's always confused about time. Do you 
think she remembers when we came in ? Well, perhaps she does, but 
I'm sure she's already changed everything to suit her own fancy and 
takes us now for some other people, though she may remember that 
I'm her darling Shatov. It makes no difference whether I speak in a 
loud voice or not. She never listens to you. Becomes engrossed in 

T H E  C R I P P LE 
1 5 3 
her own day-dreams at once. Yes, becomes engrossed in them. Quite 
an extraordinary dreamer. She'll sit in the same place for eight hours, 
for a whole day even. Look at that roll : she's probably had one bite of 
it this morning, and she'll finish it to-morrow. Now she's started tell­
ing her fortune by cards.' 
' I'm doing my best to tell my fortune, my dear, but it doesn't come 
out right, somehow,' Miss Lebyatkin interposed, catching the last 
word, and she put out her left hand without looking for the roll (she 
must have also heard Shatov mention the roll). She got hold of it at 
last, but after keeping it for some time in her left hand, she became so 
engrossed in what she was saying that she put it back on the table again 
without being conscious of it and without having taken a bite of it. 
' It always comes out the same : a journey, a wicked man, some­
body's treachery, a death-bed, a letter from somewhere, unexpected 
news. I think it's al lies. What do you think, my dear ? If people tell 
lies, why shouldn't cards tdl lies ?' She suddenly mixed up th.: cards. 
' I  told Mother Praskovya - such a nice old woman - the same thing. 
She used to come to my cell to ask me to tell her fortune on the cards, 
without letting the Mother Superior know about it. And she wasn't 
the only one who came. " Oh dear, oh dear," they all kept crying ex­
citedly, shaking their heads and talking nineteen to the dozen, but I 
just laughed. " How can you expect to get a letter, Mother Praskovya," 
I said to her, " when you haven't had one for twelve years ?" Her 
daughter had been taken to some place in Turkey by her husband, and 
for twelve years she had had no news of her. Well, so next evening I 
was having tea with the Mother Superior (a princess by birth she was), 
and there was some lady visitor there, too - ever such a romantic lady 
she was - and also a little monk from Athas monastery happened to 
be there at the time ; such a funny man, I thought. And what do you 
think, my dear ? That same little monk had brought Mother Praskov­
ya a letter from her daughter in Turkey that very morning - so much 
for the knave of diamonds - unexpected news, you see! Well, so we 
are having our tea, and the little monk from Atl1os says to the Mother 
Superior, "And most of all, reverend Mother Superior," he says, " the 
Lord will bless your convent for having such a great treasure hidden 
in it." " What treasure is that ?" asks the Mother Superior. " Why," 
says the monk, " Mother Lisa veta the Blessed." And that saintly Lisa­
veta, she lived in a cage seven feet long and ftve feet high that was let 

154 
THE D E V I L S · PART ONE 
into the wall of our nunery, and she had been sitting there behind 
the iron bars for seventeen years, come summer, come winter, in 
nothing but a hempen shift, and all the time she kept poking at the 
hempen cloth with a straw or a twig that she would pick up, and she 
never uttered a word, never combed her hair or washed for seventeen 
years. In winter they would push a sheepskin through the bars to her, 
and every day a crust of bread and a mug of water. The pilgrims 
gazed, marvelled, sighed, and put down some money. " Some treas­
ure ! "  the Mother Superior replied (she was angry, for she disliked 
Lisa veta very much). "Lisa veta only sits there out of sheer spite, out of 
sheer obstinacy, and the whole thing is nothing but hypocrisy." I 
must say I did not like that; for, you see, in those days I was thinking 
of shutting myself up too. "If you don't mind my saying so," I says, 
" God and nature are one and the same thing." They all cried in one 
voice : " Well, I never! "  The Mother Superior laughed, started whis­
pering something to the lady visitor, asked me to come up to her and 
was ever so nice to me, and the lady visitor gave me a pink ribbon for 
a present. Would you like me to show it to you ? Well, and the little 
monk at once began to lecture me, and he talked ever so kindly and 
humbly, and I daresay he knew what he was talking about, too. I sat 
and listened. "Do you understand ?" he asked. " No," I said, "I don't 
understand a word, and," I said, "leave me alone, wil you?" And 
since then they've left me in peace, my dear. Meanwhile one of our 
lay sisters, who lived in our convent as a penance for uttering pro­
phecies, whispered to me as we were coming out of church: "What 
is the Mother of God, do you think ?" " She's the great Mother," I 
said, " the hope of the human race." "Yes," she said, " the Mother of 
God is great mother earth, and therein lies a great joy for men. And 
every earthly sorrow and every earthly tear is a joy for us; and when 
you have fi.lled the earth under you with your tears a foot deep, you 
wil rejoice at everything at once. And there wil be nothing, nothing 
left of your sorrow; for such," she said, "is the prophecy." Those 
words sank into my mind at the time. Since then, when saying my 
prayers and bowing down to the ground, I kiss the earth every time. 
I kiss it and weep. And let me tell you this, my dear: there is nothing 
wrong about those tears ; and though you may not grieve at al, your 
tears wil flow all the same from joy. They wil flow of themselves; 
that's the truth. Sometimes I would go off to the shore of the lake: on 

THE CRIPPLE 
I SS 
one side was our convent and on the other our hil with its pointed 
top - they called it the Peak. I would go up that hill, turn my face to 
the east, fall down to the ground, and weep and weep, and I don't 
know how long I wept, and I didn't remember anything then, and I 
don't know anything. Then I'd get up and go back. The sun would 
be setting - oh, so big, so glorious, so lovely - do you like looking at 
the sun, my dear? It's ever so nice, but ever so sad, too ! I would turn 
to the east again, and the shadow, oh, the shadow from our hill was 
flying like an arrow far, far away over the lake - so narrow and so 
long, almost a mile long - as far as the island on the lake, and it would 
cut that rocky island right in two, and as it cut it in two, the sun 
would set altogether and suddenly everything would grow dark. 
Then I would feel so miserable and my memory would suddenly 
come back. I'm afraid of the dark, my dear. But it was my little baby 
I wept for most . .  .' 
'Why, did you have a baby ? '  Shatov, who had been listening very 
attentively all the time, nudged me with his elbow. 
' Of course I had a baby : a little, rosy baby with such tiny little 
nails, and I was so miserable because I couldn't remember whether it 
was a boy or a girl. Sometimes I thought it was a boy and sometimes a 
girl. As soon as it was born, I wrapped it in cambric and lace, tied it 
round with pink ribbons, strewed it with flowers, got it ready, said a 
prayer over it, and carried it away, unbaptised as it was, carried it 
through a wood ; and I was afraid of the wood, and was frightened; 
and what I wept for most was that I had a baby but couldn't remem­
ber whether I had a husband or not.' 
'You may have had one, mayn't you ?' Shatov asked cautiously. 
'You're so funy, my dear. The way you talk ! I may have had one, 
but what's the use of it if it's the same as if I hadn't had one ? There's 
an easy riddle for you - guess it if you can ! '  she laughed. 
' Where did you take your baby ? ' 
'I took it to the pond,' she sighed. 
Shatov nudged me with his elbow again. 
' But what if you never had a baby at all and you just imagined it 
all - eh ?' 
'You ask me a hard question, my dear,' she replied pensively, with­
out being in the least surprised at such a question. ' I  can't tell you any­
thing about it. Perhaps I hadn't. But I daresay it's just your curiosity. 

THE D E V I L S · PART O N E  
I'II never stop crying for him, in any case. I couldn't possibly have 
dreamt about it, could I ? '  And big tears glistened in her eyes. ' Oh, 
my dear, is it true that your wife has run away from you ? '  she asked, 
suddenly putting both hands on his shoulders and gazing at him pity­
ingly. ' Don't be angry ; I feel miserable mysel( Do you know what 
kind of dream I had, my dear ? He came to me again, beckoned to me, 
and said: " My little pussy, little pussy, come to me! "  It was his calling 
me his " little pussy " that pleased me so much ; he loves me, I thought.' 
' Maybe he reaiiy will come,' Shatov muttered in an undertone. 
' No, my dear, that's just a dream - he will never come. Do you 
know the song -
Not for me thy new tall house, 
Mine alone this little cell. 
Here I'll dwell to save my soul, 
Here I'll pray to God for thee. 
Oh, my dear, my dear, why don't you ever ask me anything ?' 
' Because you won't teii - that's why I don't ask.' 
'I shan't tell you, I shan't, I shan't; even if you kiii me, I shan't tell 
you,' she said quickly. ' Burn me, if you like, but I shan't tell you. And 
however much I suffered, I shan't teii anything. People wiii never 
know ! '  
'There, you see, everyone has his own troubles,' Shatov said more 
softly, lowering his head more and more. 
' But if you'd asked me, I might have told you - I might have told 
you ! '  she repeated rapturously. ' Why don't you ask ? Ask, ask me 
properly, and perhaps I will teii you. Beg me, my dear, so that I 
should agree . . . .  Oh, my dear, my dear ! '  
But Shatov said nothing ; the silence lasted about a minute. Tears 
streamed softly down her powdered cheeks ; she sat leaning with both 
her hands on Shatov's shoulders, but no longer looking at him. 
' Oh, what do I care about you ? '  Shatov said, suddenly getting up 
from the bench. ' Besides, it's not my business to pry into your affairs. 
Come on, get up ! '  He angrily pulled the bench from under me and, 
picking it up, put it back where it stood before. 
' If he comes, he must not know that we've been here. It's time we 
were off.' 
' Oh, still talking about that flunkey of mine, are you ?' Mary Leb­
y at kin laughed suddenly. ' You're afraid ! Well, good-bye, dear visitors. 

THE CRIPPLE 
157 
One minute, though ; I've something to tell you. That Kirilov 
and our landlord, Filippov, the man with the big red beard, came 
here this morning, just as my brother flew at me. Our landlord caught 
hold ofhim and flung him across the room, and he shouted, " It's not 
my fault, sir; I'm suffering for another man's iniquity ! "  So, would 
you believe it, we nearly split our sides with laughter . .  . ' 
' Oh, my dear woman, it was I, and not the red-beard. It was I who 
dragged him away from you by the hair ; your landlord was here the 
day before yesterday. He came to have it out with you, and you've 
got all mixed up.' 
' Wait; I think that I have got mixed up. Perhaps it was you . But 
why argue about silly things like that ? It makes no difference to him 
who drags him off, does it?' She laughed. 
' Let's go,' Shatov suddenly gave me a pull. ' The gate's creaking. If 
he finds us here, he'll beat her black and blue.' 
But we had scarcely time to run out on the stairs when we heard a 
drunken shout at the gate, followed by a string of oaths. Shatov let me 
into his room and locked the door. 
' You'll have to stay here for a minute if you don't want to be in­
volved in a row. Listen to him squealinԼ like a littlԽ pig He must 
have stumbled over the Ծate again. Every time he falls flat over it.' 
We did not get off without a row, however. 
6 
Shatov stood listening at the locked door of his room. Suddenly he 
sprang back. 
' He's coming here; I knew it! '  he whispered furiously. ' I'm afraid 
we shan't get rid of him till midnight.' 
There followed several heavy knocks on the door with a fist. 
' Shatov, Shatov, open up !' the Captain yelled. ' Shatov, my dear 
friend ! 
I've come to bid thee, friend, good morrow, 
To tell thee that the sun doth r-rise, 
That with its light it hath banished sorrow, 
Filled the for-ests - with wild surmise, 
To tell thee I'm awake - curse thee! ­
Wide-awake 'neath a birch. 

I j !!  
THE DEVILS • PART ONE 
' Reminds me of the birch, ha, ha ! 
Every little bird - from thirst expires ­
I'm going to have a drink . . . .  
A drink - don't know what drink -
Oh, to hell with stupid curiosity ! Shatov, do you realize how good it 
is to be alive ?' 
'Don't answer,' Shatov whispered to me again. 
'Open up ! Do you realize, I say, that there is something higher than 
a brawl - among men ? There are moments of an hon-our-able per­
son . . . .  Shatov, I'm a good chap ; I'll forgive you . . .  Shatov, to hell 
with political leaflets, eh ?' 
Silence. 
'Don't you realize, you silly ass, that I'm in love? I've bought myself 
a frock-coat. Look, the frock-coat of love. Paid fifteen roubles for it. 
A captain's love calls for good manerǿ . . . .  Open up ! '  he roared 
savagely al of a sudden and again began knocking furiously on the 
door with his fists. 
' Go to blazes ! '  Shatov, too, suddenly roared. 
'You s-slave! You bondslave! And your sister, too, is a slave, a 
bondswoman - a th-thief! ' 
'And you sold your sister.' 
'That's a lie ! I put up with this libellous accusation, but with one 
word I could - can you guess who she is ?' 
'Who ?' Shatov, unable to suppress his curiosity, suddenly went up 
to the door. 
'Can you guess, I ask you ?' 
'Don't you worry ; I shall guess. Tell me who ?' 
' I'm not afraid to say ! I'm never afraid to say anything in public ! '  
' I  question it,' Shatov taunted him, nodding to me to listen. 
' No ?' 
' I  don't think so.' 
'You don't think so ? '  
'Well, say it, if you're not afraid o f  being birched by your master. 
You're a coward, aren't you ? A captain, indeed! '  
' I  - I - she - she is -' the Captain stammered in a voice trembling 
with excitement. 
' Well ? '  Shatov put his car to the door. 

THE CRIPPLI! 
159 
A silence ensued for at least half a minute. 
' Dirty rotter! '  the Captain said at last, and he beat a hasty retreat 
downstairs, pufing like a samovar, and stumbling noisily on every 
step. 
' He's a cunning devil,' Shatov said, coming back from the door. 
'He won't give himself away even when he's drunk.' 
' What is. it all about ? '  I asked. 
Shatov dismissed my question with a wave of the hand, opened the 
door, and again began listening for any noise on the stairs. He listened 
a long time, and even quietly descended a few steps to make sure. At 
last he came back. 
'Can't hear anything, which means that he isn't thrashing her. Must 
have dropped off at once. It's time you were gone.' 
'Look here, Shatov; what am I to make of it all now ?' 
'Oh, anything you like! '  he replied in a weary and disgusted voice, 
sitting down at his writing-desk. 
I went away. A highly improbable idea was getting a stronger and 
stronger hold of me. The thought of the next day made my heart sink. 
7 
That 'next day' - that is, the Sunday on which Mr Verkhovensky's 
fate was to be irrevocably decided - was one of the most momentous 
days in my chronicle. It was a day of surprises, a day on which events 
of the past came to a head and events of the future had their beginning, 
a day of harsh explanations and even greater confusion. In the morn­
ing, as the reader knows already, I had to accompany my friend to 
Mrs Stavrogin' s, while at three o' dock in the afternoon I had to see 
Lisa to tell her - I did not know what - and to assist her - I did not 
myself know how. And yet it all ended !n a way nobody could have 
expected. In a word, it was a day of most extraordinary coincidences. 
To begin with, when Mr Verkhovensky and I arrived at Mrs Stav­
rogin's at precisely twelve o'clock - the time she had fixed - we did 
not find her at home : she had not yet returned from church. My poor 
friend's composure, or rather discomposure, was such that this cir­
cumstance at once bowled him over. He sank into an arm-chair in the 
drawing-room almost in a state of collapse. I offered him a glass of 
water; but in spite of his pallor and shaking hands he refused it with 

I6o 
THE D E V I L S  • P A R T  O N E  
dignity. B y  the way, his rig-out on that occasion was remarkable for 
its unusual smartness : he had got himself up almost as if he were going 
to a ball, in an embroidered lawn shirt, a white cravat, a new hat in 
his hand, new straw-coloured gloves, and even a faint odour of scent. 
No sooner did we sit down than Shatov arrived, ushered in by the 
butler, which clearly showed that he, too, came by official invitation. 
Mr Verkhovensky was about to get up to shake hands with him, but 
Shatov, after glancing at us attentively, walked off to the opposite 
corner of the room, where he sat down without even nodding to us. 
Mr Verkhovensky again looked at me in dismay. 
We sat like that for a few minutes in utter silence. Mr Verkhoven­
sky began whispering something to me very rapidly, but I did not 
catch his words. He stopped abruptly, being too excited to finish what 
he was going to say. The butler came in again, ostensibly to put some­
thing right on the table, but more probably to have a look at us. Shatov 
suddenly addressed him with a loud question. 
'Do you happen to know, Alexey ,' he said in a loud voice, ' if Miss 
Shatov has left with Mrs Stavrogin ?' 
' Mrs Stavrogin, sir,' the butler explained decorously and edifyingly, 
' has gone to the cathedral alone, and Miss Shatov was pleased to re­
main in her room upstairs, as she isn't feeling quite well.' 
My poor friend again exchanged a rapid and alarmed glance with 
me, so that in the end I even began to turn away from him. Suddenly 
a carriage drove up to the entrance of the house with a loud clatter, 
and a certain distant commotion announced the return of Mrs Stav­
rogin to us. We all jumped up from our chairs, but another surprise 
awaited us : we heard the approach of many footsteps, which meant 
that Mrs Stavrogin did not return alone, and that really was rather 
odd, because she herself had asked us to come at that particular time. 
At last we heard someone come in very rapidly, as though running, 
and Mrs Stavrogin certainly could not have come in like that. Sud­
denly she almost flew into the room, out of breath and in a state of great 
agitation. She was followed at some distance and at a slower pace by 
Lisa, and arm in arm with her - Miss Mary Lebyatkin ! If I had seen it 
in a dream I would not have believed it ! 
To explain this utterly unexpected development, I must go back an 
hour and describe in greater detail the extraordinary adventure that 
had befallen Mrs Stavrogin at the cathedral. 

THE CRIPPLE 
161 
T{) begin with, almost our whole town - that is, of course, all the 
upper strata of our society - was present at the morning service. It was 
known that the Governor's wife would attend the cathedral for the 
first time since her arrival in our town. Let me observe that it was 
already rumoured that she was a free-thinker and an adherent of ' the 
new principles'. All our ladies knew, besides, that she would be most 
exquisitely and elegandy dressed, and that was why the dresses of our 
ladies were this time quite unusualy smart and gorgeous. Mrs Stavro­
gin alone was, as always, modestly dressed in black ; she had invariably 
dressed like that for the past four years. On her arrival at the cathedral 
she took up her usual place in the first row on the left, and a liveried 
footman placed a velvet cushion for kneeling on before her - in short, 
everything was just as usual. But it was also noticed that al through 
the service she prayed with quite unwonted zeal ; afterwards, when 
people recaled the events of that day, it was said that she had even had 
tears in her eyes. At last the morning service was over and our chief 
priest, Father Pavel, came out to deliver a solemn sermon. His ser­
mons were popular and were highly thought of in our town ; people 
even tried to persuade him to publish them, but he never could make 
up his mind to. This time the sermon happened to be quite unusually 
long. 
And it was during the sermon that a lady drove up to the cathedral 
in an old-fashioned cab - that is, a cab in which ladies could only sit 
sideways, holding on to the cabman's belt and swaying at every jolt 
of the carriage, like a blade of grass in the wind. Such cabs still ply their 
trade in our town. Stopping at the corner of the cathedral - for there 
were a great number of carriages and even mounted police at the gates 
- the lady jumped out of the cab and offered the cabby four copecks in 
silver. 
' You don't want more, do you, cabby ?' she cried, seeing him pull 
a face. ' Iǀm afraid it's all I have,' she added in a plaintive voice. 
' Oh, well, never mind, lady ; I expect it's my own fault for not tell­
ing you the right fare,' the cabby said, with a hopeless wave of the 
hand, looking at her as though he had wanted to add, 'And it would 
be a sin to take advantage of the likes of you, anyway' ;  then, thrusting 
the leather purse into his coat, he started his horse and drove off. fol­
lowed by the jeers of the cabbies who were standing by. Jeers and ex­
clamations of surprise also followed the young woman as she made 

162 
T H E  D E V I L S · PART O N E  
her way to the cathedral gates between the carriages and the footmen 
who were waiting for their masters to come out soon. And, indeed, 
there was something strange and unexpected in the sudden appearance 
of such a person among the people in the street. She looked haggard 
and pale, and she walked with a limp ; her face was thickly covered 
with powder and rouge, her long neck was quite bare, for she wore 
neither kerchief nor pelisse, but only an old dark dress, in spite of the 
cold and windy, though bright, September day. Her head was bare, 
too, and her hair was gathered in a tiny bun at the nape of the neck, 
with an artificial rose stuck on the right side of it, the kind of rose that 
was sold together with a palm and a little cherub in the market during 
Holy Week. I had noticed such a palm and cherub in the wreath of 
paper roses under the icons in the corner of the room when I visited 
Miss Lebyatkin the day before. And as a finishing touch, the young 
woman, though walking modestly and with downcast eyes, was smil­
ing slyly and gaily. If she had lingered a moment longer, she would 
probably not have been admitted to the cathedral. But she managed 
to slip in and, on entering the church, pushed her way imperceptibly 
to the front. 
Though the sermon was only half over, and though the entire con­
gregation listened to it with complete and hushed attention, a few 
eyes glanced with curiosity and amazement at the new arrival. She 
knelt down on the dais in front of the high altar, her powdered face 
touching the floor. She lay there a long time, and was apparently 
weeping. But on raising her head again and getting up from her knees, 
she very soon recovered her high spirits. Gaily and with obviously in­
tense enjoyment, she let her eyes roam over the faces of the congrega­
tion and over the walls of the cathedral ; she gazed with special inter­
est at some of the ladies, even standing on tiptoe to have a better look 
at them, and she even laughed once or twice, her laughter ending in a 
strange sort of giggle. But the sermon came to an end and the cross 
was brought out. The Governor's wife was the first to go up to the 
cross, but she stopped two paces in front of it, evidently with the in­
tention of letting Mrs Stavrogin go up to it first ; Mrs Stavrogin, for 
her part, was walking straight up to it, as though she did not notice 
anyone in front of her. The unusual courtesy of the Governor's wife 
no doubt implied an unmistakable and, in a way, clever snub ; so 
everybody in the cathedral interpreted it. Mrs Stavrogin, too, no 

THE CRIPPLE 
doubt interpreted i t  that way; but she walked on as before without 
noticing anyone and, having kissed the cross with an unshaken air of 
dignity, she immediately turned and walked to the entrance. A liver­
ied footman cleared a path for her, though everyone made room for 
her anyhow. But at the very door, before she had time to reach the 
front steps, a small crowd of people blocked her way for a moment. 
Mrs Stavrogin stopped, and suddenly a strange, extraordinary crea­
ture, a woman with a paper rose in her hair, pushed through the 
crowd and went down on her knees before her. Mrs Stavrogin, who 
was not easily put out, especially in public, looked at her sternly and 
gravely. 
I hasten to point out here, as briefly as possible, that though Mrs 
Stavrogin had in recent years become, it was said, a little too careful, 
and even somewhat stingy, she did not mind giving money occasion­
ally to some charity. She was a member of a benevolent society in 
Petersburg. In the last year of famine she sent soc roubles to the cen­
tral committee of the fund in aid of the sufferers, and tlus was talked 
of in our town. Finally, quite recently, before the appointment of the 
new Governor, she was planning to found a local ladies' commit­
tee to raise a fund in aid of the poorest expectant mothers of our town 
and province. In our town she was accused of being ambitious ; but 
the well-known impetuosity of her character, as well as her persist­
ence, nearly triumphed over the difficulties ; the committee was on 
the point of being founded, and the original idea assumed greater and 
greater dimensions in the entranced mind of the foundress : she was 
already dreaming of the foundation of a similar committee in Mos­
cow and of the gradual expansion of its activities throughout all the 
other provinces. And now, with the sudden appointment of a new 
Governor, everything had come to a standstill ;  the wife of the new 
Governor, it was said, had already delivered herself in public of a few 
biting and, above all, shrewd and sensible remarks about the supposed 
impracticability of the fundamental idea of such a committee, which, 
needless to say, had been passed on, suitably embellished, to Mrs Stav­
rogin. The Lord only knows what is hidden in men's hearts, but I ex­
pect Mrs Stavrogin now stopped at the very gates of the cathedral 
with a certain feeling of pleasure, knowing that the wife of the Gover­
nor, followed by the entire congregation, would have to pass by any 
moment, and thinking to herself : ' Let her see for herself that I don't 

THE DEVILS • PART ONE 
care what she may think of me or what clever remarks she may make 
about the vanity of my charitable works. I don't care a fig for all of 
you ! '  
'What's the matter, my dear ? What do you want?' Mrs Stavrogin 
said, looking more attentively at the kneeling young woman. 
Mary Lebyatkin stared at her with an awfully timid, shamefaced, 
but almost reverent expression. Suddenly she gave the same strange 
giggle. 
'What does she want ? Who is she ?' Mrs Stavrogin asked, looking 
imperiously and inquiringly at the crowd. 'Are you wiliappy ?  Are 
you in need of assistance ?' 
' Yes, ma'am, I'm in need - I've come -' the ' wiliappy ' woman 
murmured in a voice that shook with emotion. ' I've come only to 
kiss your hand -' And again she giggled. 
With the childish expression with which little children make up to 
someone in order to get something, she bent forward to grasp Mrs 
Stavrogin's hand, but suddenly, as though frightened, she drew her 
hands back. 
'Was that all you came for ?' Mrs Stavrogin said, smiling compas­
sionately, but at once took her mother-of-pearl purse out of her 
pocket, and producing a ten-rouble note, gave it to the stranger. She 
took it. Mrs Stavrogin was very interested, and evidently did not con­
sider the strange woman a common beggar. 
'Fancy giving her ten roubles ! '  someone cried in the crowd. 
'Please, ma'am, let me kiss your hand,' the 'unhappy' woman 
murmured, holding on tightly with the fmgers of her left hand to a 
comer of the ten-rouble note, which fluttered in the wind. 
Mrs Stavrogin for some reason frowned slightly and held out her 
hand with a grave, almost stem, expression; the young woman kissed 
it reverently. Her grateful eyes glowed with emotion. It was just at 
that moment that the Governor's wife came up, followed by a whole 
crowd of our ladies and high officials. The Governor's wife was forced 
to stop for a moment in the crush; many other people also stopped. 
'You are shivering. Are you cold ?' Mrs Stavrogin said suddenly 
and, slipping off her cloak, caught by her footman in mid-air, she re­
moved from her shoulders her black (and not by any means cheap) 
shawl and with her own hands wrapped it round the bare neck of the 
young woman who was still kneeling before her. 

THE C R I P P L E  
'Please get up ; get up from your knees, I beg you ! '  
The woman got up. 
165 
' Where do you live ? Doesn't anyone know where she lives ?' Mrs 
Stavrogin asked, looking round impatiently again. 
But it was no longer the same crowd : all she could see were the 
familiar faces of fashionable men and women, observing the scene, 
some with disapproval and surprise, some with sly curiosity and, at 
the same rime, with an innocent but keen desire for some scene, while 
some went so far as to grin. 
' I  think it's Lebyatkin's sister,' some good-natured fellow at last 
volunteered an answer to Mrs Stavrogin's question. 
It was our worthy merchant Andreyev, a man who was generally 
respected, in spectacles, a grey beard, wearing a Russian coat and a 
round, cylindrical hat, which he was now holding in his hand. ' She 
lives at Filippov's house in Bogoyavlenskaya Street,' he added. 
'Lebyatkin ? Filippov's house ? Yes, I've heard something about it. 
Thank you, Mr Andreyev. But who's this Lebyatkin ?' 
' He calls himself a captain, rna' am. A man who is not too mindful 
of what he does or says, I'm afraid. She's his sister all right. I expect 
she must have escaped from the house,' Mr Andreyev added, lowering 
his voice and giving Mrs Stavrogin a significant look. 
' I  see. Thank you, Mr Andreyev. Are you Miss Lebyatkin, my dear ?' 
'No, ma'am, I'm not Miss Lebyatkin.' 
'Then perhaps your brother is Lebyatkin ?' 
'Yes, ma'am, Lebyatkin is my brother.' 
'Now, this is what I'm going to do, my dear. You'll come with 
me, and I'll see that you're taken to your home from my house. 
Would you like to come with me ?' 
' Oh, yes, I'd love to! '  Miss Lebyatkin clapped her hands with 
excitement. 
'Auntie, take me with yon, too, please ! '  Lisa cried. 
Lisa, I ought perhaps to explain, arrived at the service with the 
Governor's wife, while her mother had, by the doctor's orders, gone 
for a drive in her carriage, taking Mr Drozdov with her to keep her 
company. 
'My dear, you know I'm always glad to have you, but what will 
your mother say ?' Mrs Stavrogin began, with a grand air, but be­
came suddenly confused, noticing Lisa's unusual excitement. 

166 
THE DEVILS · P A R T  O N E  
'Please, Auntie, you simply must take me with you,' Lisa implored, 
kissing Mrs Stavrogin. 
'Mais qu' avez vous done, Lise!' the Governor's wife said with dis-: 
tinct surprise. 
' Oh, I'm awfully sorry, darling ; but I have to go to Auntie's,' Lisa 
turned quickly to her unpleasantly surprised chere cousine and kissed 
her twice. 
'And please tell maman to come to fetch me at once at Auntie's,' 
Lisa rattled on. 'Maman was awfully anxious to call on you. She 
told me so herself tlus morning. I forgot to mention it to you. I'm 
sorry. Please, don't be angry, Julie, chr•e . . .  cousiue. Auntie, I'm 
ready ! '  
'If you won't take me with you, Auntie,' she whispered rapidly and 
desperately in Mrs Stavrogin's car, 'I'll run screaming after your car­
riage.' 
It was a good tiling no one heard her. Mrs Stavrogin even recoiled 
a step and glared at the mad girl. That look decided everything: she 
made up her mind there and then to take Lisa with her. 
' We must put an end to this ! '  she cried involuntarily. ' Very well, 
I'll be glad to take you, Lisa,' she said at once in a loud voice, 'if Mrs 
Lembke will let you come, of course,' she added, turning with a 
frank look and a dignified air to the Governor's wife. 
'I most certainly don't want to deprive her of that pleasure, par­
ticularly as' - Mrs Lembke suddenly murmured with surprising 
courtesy - ' I  know myself what a fantastically despotic little head she 
carries on her shoulders.' Mrs Lembke smiled charmingly. 
' Thank you very much indeed,' Mrs Stavrogin thanked her with a 
courteous and stately bow. 
'And I am all the more pleased to do it,' Mrs Lembke went on mur­
muring rapturously, even flushing all over with agreeable excitement, 
'because I'm sure Lisa is not only delighted to be with you, but also 
carried away by such a beautiful - such - iff may say so - such a lofty 
feeling of- of compassion -' She glanced at the 'unhappy' woman, 
'and - and on the very steps of the cathedral, too ! '  
' Such feeling does you honour, madam,' Mrs Stavrogin expressed 
her approval magnificently. 
Mrs Lembke held out her hand impulsively, and Mrs Stavrogin 
hastened to touch it with her fingers. The general effect was excellent, 

THE WISE SERPENT 
the faces of some of those present beamed with pleasure, while others 
smiled sweetly and ingratiatingly. 
In a word, it now became perfectly clear to everybody that it was 
not Mrs Lembke who had till now been slighting Mrs Stavrogin by 
refusing to pay a call on her, but, on the contrary, Mrs Stavrogin her­
selfhad kept Mrs Lembke 'at arm's length ', while the Governor's wife 
would have rw1 to pay a call on her if she were sure that Mrs Stav­
rogin would not turn her out of her house. Mrs Stavrogin's standing 
rose incredibly high. 
'Do get in, my dear,' Mrs Stavrogin motioned Miss Lebyatkin into 
the carriage which had just then driven up. 
The ' unhappy ' woman rushed joyfully to the carriage door, where 
the footman helped her in. 
'Gracious me, are you lame ?' cried Mrs Stavrogin, as though she 
were really terrified, and she turned pale. (Everyone noticed it at the 
time, but did not wtderstand what it meant.) 
The carriage rolled away. Mrs Stavrogin's house was very near the 
cathedral. Lisa told me afterwards that Miss Lebyatkin laughed hysteri­
caly during the three mmutes of the drive, while Mrs Stavrogin sat 
'as though in a trance' - that was Lisa's own expression. 
The Wise Serpent 
MRS STA VRO G!N rang the bell and flung herself into an arm-chair by 
the window. 
' Sit down here, my dear.' She motioned Miss Lebyatkin to a chair 
by a large rowtd table in the middle of the room. ' Mr Verkhovensky, 
what do you think this means ? Here, have a look at that woman -
what does it mean ?' 
' I - I,' murmured Mr Verkhovensky. 
But a footman came in. 
'A cup of coffee at once, please! As quickly as possible ! Let the 
::arriage wait! ' 
'Mais, chere et excellente amie, dans quelle inquietude -' Mr Verkh()­
vensky cried in an expiring voice. 

168 
T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  O N E  
'Oh, French, French ! You can see at once that it's high society! '  
Miss Lebyatkin cried, clapping her hands and preparing to listԿn 
ecstatically to a conversation in French. 
Mrs Stavrogin stared at her almost in terror. 
We were all silent, waiting to see what the end of it would be. 
Shatov did not raise his head, and Mr Verkhovensky looked dismayed, 
as if he were to blame for everything. Beads of perspiration broke out 
at his temples. I glanced at Lisa (she was sitting in a corner, almost next 
to Shatov). Her eyes darted piercingly from Mrs Stavrogin to the 
lame woman and back again ; her lips were distended in a smile, but 
it was not a nice smile. Mrs Stavrogin saw that smile. In the mean­
time Miss Lebyatkin looked completely entranced : she studied Mrs 
Stavrogin's beautiful drawing-room with delight and without the 
least sign of confusion - the furniture, the rugs, the pictures on the 
walls, the painted rococo ceiling, the big bronze crucifix in the corner, 
the porcelain lamp, the albums, the bric-a-brac on the table. 
' So you're here, too, my dear! '  she cried suddenly, addressing 
Shatov. 'Just fancy, I saw you ages ago, but I thought to myself, " It 
can't be him !  How could he have come here ? " '  and she laughed gaily. 
'You know this woman ?' Mrs Stavrogin turned to him at once. 
' Yes, ma'am,' Shatov muttered, about to move from his chair, but 
he remained sitting. 
' What do you know ? Please tell me quickly ! '  
' Why,' he faltered, grinning without any reason. ' You can see for 
yourself . .  .' 
' What can I see ? Come on, say something !' 
' Well, she lives in the same house as I - with her brother, an army 
officer.' 
' Well ?' 
Shatov again hesitated. 
'Oh, it's hardly worth talking about,' he grunted and fell silent de­
terminedly. He even went red in the face with determination. 
' To be sure, I could hardly have expected anything more from 
you ! '  Mrs Stavrogin cut him short indignantly. 
She saw clearly now that everybody in the room knew something, 
and yet they were all afraid of something and evaded her questions, 
anxious to conceal something from her. 
The foonnan entered carrying a small silver tray and handed her 

THE W I S E  SERPENT 
the cup of coffee she had specially ordered, but at a sign from her 
went immediately over to Miss Lebyatkin with it. 
'Drink it, dear, and get warm. You must have got frozen outside 
the church.' 
'Merci,' said Miss Lebyatkin, taking the cup and suddenly bursting 
out laughing at having said merci to the footman. But, catching Mrs 
Stavrogin's stern look, she flushed and put the cup on the table. 
'You're not angry, Auntie,' she murmured with a kind of flippant 
playfulness. 
' Wha-a-at? '  Mrs Stavrogin sat up in her chair with a start. ' I  am 
no aunt of yours, am I ?  What did you mean by that ?' 
Miss Lebyatkm, not expecting such an outburst of anger, trembled 
all over convulsively and fell back in her chair. 
' I  - I thought that's how I should address you,' she murmured, 
staring wide-eyed at Mrs Stavrogin. ' Lisa called you that.' 
' Which Lisa are you talking about ?' 
'That young lady there.' Miss Lebyatkin pointed to Lisa with a 
finger. 
' Since when has she become Lisa to you ?' 
' Why, you called her that yourself ten minutes ago,' Miss Lebyat­
kin said, recovering her spirits a little. 'And I saw a beautiful girl like 
her in my dream.' She smiled as though unintentionally. 
Mrs Stavrogin reflected and calmed down a little ; she even smiled 
faintly at Miss Lebyatkin's last words. The young woman, having 
caught sight of her smile, got up and, limping, walked shyly up to 
her. 
' Please take it back,' she said suddenly, taking off the black shawl 
Mrs Stavrogin had put round her shoulders earlier. ' I  forgot to return 
it to you. Don't be angry with me for being so rude.' 
'Put it on at once and keep it. Go and sit down and have your coffee, 
and please don't be afraid of me, my dear. Calm yourself. I'm begin-
ning to tmderstand you.' 
· 
'Chere amie -' Mr Verkhovensky ventured again. 
' Heavens, Mr Verkhovensky, I scarcely know where I am without 
you - You might at least spare me. Please ring the bell beside you -
the maids' room.' 
No one spoke. Her eyes darted suspiciously and irritably over all 
our faces. Agasha, her favourite parlour-maid, came in. 

170 
THE DEVILS · PART ONE 
' Dring me the check shawl I bought in Geneva, please. What's Miss 
Shatov doing ?' 
· 
' She isn't very well, ma'am.' 
'Will you go and ask her to come here, please ? Tell her that I'd be 
greatly obliged if she came here, even if she does not feel well.' 
At that moment there was again an unusual noise of footsteps and 
voices in the adjoining rooms and, suddenly, the panting and 'dis­
traught' Praskovya Drozdov, leaning on the arm of Maurice Droz­
dov, appeared in the doorway. 
' Oh, dear, I could scarcely drag myself here. Lisa, you mad thing, 
what are you doing to your mother ?' she screamed, putting, as all 
weak and irritable women often do, all her accumulated irritation into 
that scream. 'My dear Mrs Stavrogin, I've come to you for my 
daughter! '  
Mrs Stavrogin glanced at her frowningly, half rose to meet her, 
and, making little attempt to conceal her vexation, said: 
'Good afternoon, Praskovya. Do me a favour and take a seat. I had 
an idea you would come.' 
2 
Mrs Drozdov could not possibly have been surprised by such a recep­
tion. Mrs Stavrogin had always, indeed from the time they were chil­
dren, treated her former school friend despotically and, under the 
guise of friendship, almost with contempt. But this was quite an ex­
ceptional occasion. During the last few days the two households had 
almost reached the point of a complete rupture, a fact I have already 
mentioned briefly. The reasons for the incipient rupture were still a 
mystery to Mrs Stavrogin, and that made them all the more offen­
sive ; but what especially aroused Mrs Stavrogin's anger was that Mrs 
Drozdov had begun treating her of late with quite extraordinary 
disdain. Mrs Stavrogin, of course, felt deeply hurt, and in the mean­
time certain rumours had begun to reach her which also irritated her 
exceedingly, particularly because of their vagueness. Mrs Stavrogin 
was of a most straightforward and frankly proud disposition, with, if 
I may put it that way, a propensity for taking things by direct assault. 
And she always showed a preference for open warfare. However that 
may be, the fact remains that the two ladies had not met for the last 

THE W I S E  SERPENT 
171 
five days. The last visit had been made by Mrs Stavrogin, who had 
left ' that Drozdov creature ' feeling offended and perplexed. I think 
I am justified in stating that Mrs Drozdov had come with the 
naive conviction that Mrs Stavrogin had some reason to be afraid of 
her. That could be plainly discerned from the way she looked. But 
it would seem that Mrs Stavrogin was possessed by the demon of the 
most arrogant pride every time there was the least suspicion that she 
was for some reason supposed to have been humiliated. Like many 
women of weak character who allow themselves to be insulted for a 
long time without protest, Mrs Drozdov, for her part, showed quite 
an extraordinary enthusiasm for launching an attack at the first 
favourable oppurtunity. It is true she was ill just then, but it was 
during her bouts of illness that she always was more irritable than 
usual. I may add, finally, that if a quarrel had broken out between the 
two old childhood friends, none of us in the drawing-room would 
have embarrassed them in any way, for we were looked upon as old 
friends and almost as Wlderlings. I realized this not without a certain 
feeling of alarm at the time. Mr Verkhovensky, who had not sat 
down since the arrival of Mrs Stavrogin, sank exhausted into a chair 
the moment he heard Mrs Drozdov's scream, and tried desperately to 
catch my eye. Shatov turned sharply in his chair and even grunted 
something under his breath. I had the impression that he wanted to 
get up and go away. Lisa was on the point of getting up, but she re­
sumed her seat immediately without paying the slightest attention to 
her mother's scream, not because of her ' contrariness ', but because 
she was apparently entirely obsessed by some other powerful L'lllO­
tion. Her eyes were fixed almost abstractedly on some invisible point 
in the air, and she even stopped taking any notice of Miss Lebyatkin. 
'Oh dear, here, is it ?' Mrs Drozdov exclaimed, pointing to the arm­
chair near the table and sinking down in it heavily with the help of 
Mr Drozdov. ' I  wouldn't have sat down in your house, my dear, 
if it weren't for my poor legs ! '  she added in a strained voice. 
Mrs Stavrogin raised her head slightly and pressed the fingers of her 
right hand gingerly to her right temple, evidently feeling an acute 
twinge of pain there (tic douloureux). 

172 
THE D E V I L S  • P A R T  O N E  
'Good gracious, Praskovya, why shouldn't you sit down in my 
house ? Your husband has treated me as a good friend al his life, and 
you and I used to play at school together as little girls.' 
Mrs Drozdov waved her hands in annoyance. 
'I knew it! You always start talking about our school when you 
want to be nasty to me - it's a well-known trick of yours ! But if you 
ask me, it's only fme talk. I can't stand that boarding-school of yours! ' 
' I  can see that you're in a particularly bad temper to-day. How are 
your legs ? Here, they're bringing you some coffee. Have it, please, 
and don't be cross - there's a dear ! '  
'You always talk to me as if l were a little girl. I don't want your 
coffee - so there! '  
And she waved her hand querulously at the servant who was offer­
ing her the coffee. (The others, too, by the way, refused coffee, except 
Mr Drozdov and mysel£ Mr Verkhovensky accepted it, but put it 
down on the table. Though Miss Lebyatkin wanted another cup badly 
and, indeed, had already put out her hand for it, she changed her mind 
and declined it decorously, quite obviously pleased with herself for 
doing so.) 
Mrs Stavrogin smiled wryly. 
' I  expect you're again imagining something, my dear Praskovya, 
and that's why you've come here. All your life you've only lived by 
imagining things. You got cross with me just now because I men­
tioned our boarding-school. But do you remember how you came 
one day and told the whole class that the Hussar officer Shablykin had 
propnsed to you and how Mme Lefebure proved that you were telling 
a lie. But you did not tell a lie - oh, no - you just imagined it al to 
amuse yourself. Well, come, tell me what's wrong now ? What are 
you imagining now ?  What are you so dissatisfied with now ?' 
'And you fell in love with the priest at our school, our scripture 
master. There's something for you to remember, since you're so spite­
fit! ! Ha, ha, ha! ' 
She laughed maliciously, and then went off into a fit of coughing. 
' Oh, so you haven't forgotten the priest, have you ?' Mrs Stavrogin 
gave her a baleful look. 
Her face turned green. Mrs Drozdov suddenly sat up with a digni­
fied air. 
' I'm afraid, my dear, I'm not in a laughing mood now. Why did 

THE WISE SERPENT 
173 
you involve my daughter in your family scandal before the whole 
town ? That's what I've come here to fmd out.' 
'In my family scandal ?' Mrs Stavrogin asked, drawing herself up 
menacingly. 
'Mother, I, too, would like to ask you very much to moderate your 
language,' Lisa said suddenly. 
'What did you say ? '  Her mother was about to start screaming 
again, but controlled herself suddenly as she caught sight of her 
daughter's flashing eyes. 
'How could yon talk about a family scandal, Mother ?' Lisa cried, 
flushing. ' I  came here of my own free will, with Mrs Lembke's per­
mission, because I wanted to fmd out this poor woman's story and be 
of some use to her.' 
'The poor woman's story ! '  Mrs Drozdov repeated slowly, with a 
spiteful laugh. ' Is it your business to get yourself mixed up in such 
"stories" ?  We've had enough of your bullying, my dear,' she turned 
furiously to Mrs Stavrogin. 'I don't know whether it's true or not, but 
I've heard it said that you've got everybody in the town dancing to 
your tune. Well, it seems your tum has come, too.' 
Mrs Stavrogin sat straight as an arrow on the point of being shot 
from the bow. For ten seconds she looked sternly and fixedly at Mrs 
Drozdov. 
'Well, Praskovya,' she said at last with ominous calm, ' thank God 
that there are no strangers here. You've said a lot you'll be sorry 
for.' 
' I'm not so frightened of public opinion as some people I could 
mention are, my dear. It's you who, because of your pride, are terrified 
of public opinion. As for there being no strangers here, I daresay that's 
certainly something you ought to be pleased about.' 
'You've grown wiser this last week, have you ?' 
'It's not I who've grown wiser this week. It's just that truth has this 
week come out at last.' 
'Which truth has come out this week ? Listen, Praskovya ; don't you 
try to exasperate me. Explain yourself this very minute. I ask you 
frankly: what truth has come out and what exactly do you mean by 
that?' 
' Why, the whole truth is sitting there ! '  Mrs Drozdov suddenly 
pointed a fmger at Miss Lebyatkin with that desp:rate determination 

174 
THE DEVILS · PART ONE 
which no longer cares for any consequences so long as i t  can crush an 
opponent. 
Miss Lebyatkin, who had watched her all the time with gay curi­
osity, burst out laughing joyfully at the sight of the angry visitor's 
fmger pointing at her and shifted excitedly in her chair. 
' Dear Lord, have they all gone off their heads ? '  Mrs Stavrogin 
cried, and, turning pale, she threw herself against the back of her 
chair. 
She turned so pale that it even caused a commotion in the room. 
Mr Verkhovensky was the first to rush up to her ; I, too, drew near; 
even Lisa got up, though she remained standing by her chair ; but the 
most frightened person of all was Mrs Drozdov herself: she uttered a 
cry, raised herself in her chair as much as she could and almost wailed 
in a mournful voice : 
'My dear, please forgive me for my wicked foolishness ! Water ! 
Give her some water, somebody ! '  
' Don't whimper, I beg you, Praskovya ; and go back to your places, 
gentlemen, please. I don't want any water ! '  Mrs Stavrogin said firmly, 
though not in a loud voice, with pale lips. 
' Oh, my dear,' Mrs Drozdov went on, having composed herself a 
little, ' my dear friend, I may be guilty of having said something I 
shouldn't, but it's those anonymous letters some horrible people have 
been bombarding me with that have exasperated me beyond all en­
durance. I wish they'd send them to you, since it's you they are writ­
ing about! After all, my dear, I have a daughter! '  
Mrs Stavrogin gazed at her in silence with wide-open eyes, listening 
with astonishment. At that moment a side-door in the corner was 
opened noiselessly and Dasha Shatov walked into the room. She 
stopped and looked round. She was struck by our dismay. Quite pos­
sibly she did not at once notice Miss Lebyatkin, of whose presence 
no one had warned her. Mr Verkhovensky caught sight of her first. 
He made a quick movement, went red in the face, and for some un­
known reason announced in a loud voice : 'Miss Shatov ! '  so that al 
eyes at once turned on her. 
' So that's Dash a ! '  Miss Lebyatkin cried. ' Well, Shatov, darling, 
your sister is not at all like you ! How dare my brother call such a 
beautiful girl the serf-girl Dashka! '  
Meanwhile Dasha had gone up to Mrs Stavrogin ; but, struck by 

THE W I S E  SERPENT 
1 75 
Miss Lebyatkin's exclamation, she turned round quickly and stopped 
dead before her chair, staring fixedly at the half-witted woman. 
' Sit down, Dasha,' Mrs Stavrogin said with terrifying composure. 
'Nearer ; that's right. You can see this woman from your seat. Do you 
know her ?' 
'I've never seen her,' Dasha replied quietly and, after a short pause, 
added : ' I  suppose it's the sick sister of a Mr Lebyatkin.' 
'And I, too, my dear, see you for the first time now, though I've 
long ago wanted to meet you because in every gesture of yours I can 
see an educated lady,' Miss Lebyatkin cried with enthusiasm. 'As for 
that flunkey of mine calling you names, is it really possible that a 
charming and educated young lady like yourself should have taken his 
money ? For you are a dear, a dear, a dear ; you can take it from me ! '  
she concluded rapturously, waving her hand in front of her own face. 
'Do you understand anything ?' Mrs Stavrogin asked with proud 
dignity. 
' I  understand everything, ma'am.' 
'You've heard about the money ?' 
'I suppose it must be the money which in Switzerland I undertook 
to hand over to Mr Lebyatkin, her brother, at the request of Mr 
Stavrogin.' 
For a moment there was silence. 
'Did Nicholas himself ask you to hand it over ?' 
' He was very anxious to send that money - three hundred roubles 
in all - to Mr Lebyatkin. He did not know his address, but only knew 
that he would be in our town. He asked me to give it to Mr Lebyatkin 
if he arrived.' 
' But what money was - lost ? What was that woman talking about 
just now ?' 
'That I don't know, ma'am. I, too, have heard that Mr Lebyatkin 
is saying about me in the hearing of other people that I didn't give 
him all the money, but I don't know what he means. I was given three 
hundred roubles, and I sent him three hundred roubles.' 
Miss Shatov had almost regained her composure completely. And 
let me add here that it was difficult to astonish this girl and disconcert 
her for long - whatever her real feelings might be. She now gave all 
her answers without hurrying, replying to each question with pre­
cision, quietly, smoothly, without a trace ofher first sudden agitation 

THE D EVILS · PART ONE 
and without the least embarrassment which might have implied a 
consciousnes of any sort of guilt. Mrs Stavrogin kept her eyes fixed 
on her all the time she was speaking. For a minute Mrs Stavrogin 
thought it over. 
'If,' she said at last firmly, and obviously addressing herself to the 
spectators in the room, though she looked only at Dasha, 'if Nicholas 
addressed his request not to me but asked you, he must have had his 
own reasons for doing so. I have no right to pry into them if he 
thought it necesary to keep it a secret from me. But the very fact that 
you took part in this business is sufficient to put my mind at rest about 
those reasons of his. I want you to know that, Dasha. You above all. 
But you see, my dear, you, who are ignorant of the ways of the world, 
could commit an indiscretion with a clear conscience; and you did so 
when you undertook to have dealings with some rascal. The rumours 
spread by this rascal merely prove your mistake. But I shall find out 
about him, and, since it is my duty to protect your interests, I shall 
know how to take your part. Now we have to put an end to all this.' 
'The best thing to do when he comes to see you,' Miss Lebyatkin 
suddenly interposed, leaning forward in her chair, 'is to send him to 
the servants' quarters. Let him play cards on a chest with the servants, 
while we sit here and have coffee. I daresay you might send him a cup 
of coffee, but J have nothing but contempt for him.' 
And she tossed her head expressively. 
'We must put an end to this,' Mrs Stavrogin repeated, after having 
listened attentively to Miss Lebyatkin. 'Please ring the bell, Mr Verk­
hovensky.' 
Mr Verkhovensky rang and suddenly stepped forward in great 
agitation. 
'If- ifl -' he murmured excitedly, getting red in the face, faltering 
and stanunering - 'if I, too, have heard a most disgusting story, or 
rather slander, then - it was with the utmost indignation - enfin c'est 
un homme perdu et quelque chose comme un forfat evade . . . .  ' 
He broke off and did not finish ; Mrs Stavrogin screwed up her eyes 
and examined him from top to toe. The deferential butler came in. 
'The carriage,' Mrs Stavrogin ordered. 'And you, Alexey, get 
ready to take Miss Lebyatkin home. She'll tell you where hersel£' 
'Mr Lebyatkin, rna' am, has been waiting for her for some time 
downstairs and has asked me to anounce him.' 

T H E  WISE SERPENT 
177 
'That's impossible, madam.' Maurice Drozdov, who had sat all the 
rime without uttering a word, suddenly stepped forward agitatedly. 
'If you don't mind my saying so, madam, he is not the sort of person 
who can be admitted into a drawing-room. He - he - he's an impos­
sible fellow, madam.' 
' Let him wait,' Mrs Stavrogin said to the butler, who disappeared. 
'C' est un lzomme 111alhounerc et je crois mf.me que c
' est uu .forrar cl'ade, 
ou que/que chose dans cc genre,' Mr Verkhovensky muttered again, and 
again he reddened and again stopped abruptly. 
' Lisa, it's time we were going,' Mrs Drozdov declared with a touch 
of contempt in her voice, getting up from her seat. 
She was apparemly sorry for having, in her alarm, called herself a 
fool a few minutes ago. When Dasha was speaking, she had listened 
with her lips pursed superciliously. But what struck me most was the 
way Lisa looked from the moment Dasha had come in : her eyes 
flashed with hatred and contempt which she did not trouble to conceal. 
' Wait a moment, Praskovya, I beg you,' Mrs Stavrogin stopped 
the old lady with the same unnatural placidity. ' Will you please sit 
down ? I want to say all I have to say, and your poor legs must be 
hurting you. That's right. Thank you. A short while ago I lost my 
temper and spoke rather impatiently to you. I am sorry, and I beg you 
to forgive me. I behaved foolishly, and I'm the first to regret it, for 
above all I like to Le fair in everything. Now you, too, lost your 
temper, of course, and you mentioned certain anonymom letters. 
Every anonymous communication must be treated with contempt, if 
only because it is not signed. If you're not of that opinion, I don't envy 
you. In any case, if I were in your place I shouldn't have mentioned it 
at all ; I shouldn't have soiled my hands with it. But you did. However, 
as you have started it, I can tell you that six days ago I, too, received 
a ludicrous anonymous letter. The rascal who wrote it informs me 
that Nicholas has lost his reason and that I ought to beware of some 
lame woman who " will play an important part in my life". I remem­
ber the exact phrase he used. Knowing that Nicholas has very many 
enemies, I immediately sent for a certain person here, one of the most 
secret, most vindictive, and most despicable of his enemies, and after 
talking to him I realized at once what the contemptible source of the 
anonymous letter was. If you, too, my poor Praskovya, have because 
of me been troubled by similar despicable letters and, as you put it, 

THE D E V I LS • PART ONE 
were bombartkd with them, I am of course the first to be sorry to have 
been the innocent cause of it. That's ali i wanted to say to you by way 
of explanation. I'm sorry to see that you're so tired and so worried 
now. Moreover, I have defmitely made up my mind to admit the 
suspicious character whom Mr Drozdov has just inaccurately described 
as a person you could not receive. Lisa, in particular, has no business 
to be here. Come, Lisa, my dear, and let me kiss you again.' 
Lisa crossed the room and stopped silently before Mrs Stavrogin, 
who kissed her, took her hands, and, holding her at a little distance 
from herself, looked at her with feeling, made the sign of the cross 
over her, and then kissed her again. 
'Well, good-bye, Lisa,' she said (there were almost suppressed tears 
in her voice). ' Believe me when I tell you that I shall never give up 
loving you, whatever may be in store for me now. God bless you. I 
have always done his holy will. . .  .' 
She was about to say something more, but restrained herself and 
fell silent. Lisa went back to her seat, still without uttering a word 
and as though deep in thought, but she suddenly stopped before her 
mother. 
' I  shan't go yet, Mother,' she said in a quiet voice ; ' I  shall stay with 
Auntie a little longer.' 
There was a note of iron determination in those quiet words of hers. 
'Goodness me ! what's this I hear ?' Mrs Drozdov cried, throwing 
up her hands helplessly. 
But Lisa did not reply. She did not seem to hear her. She returned 
to her seat in the corner of the room and again fixed her gaze on some 
invisible spot in tl1e air. 
A triumphant and proud expression came into Mrs Stavrogin's face. 
' Mr Drozdov,' she said, ' I  have a great favour to ask of you. Will 
you be so good as to go and have a look at that man downstairs, 
and if there is the slightest possibility of his being admitted, bring him 
up here.' 
Mr Drozdov bowed and went out. A minute later he brought in 
Mr Lebyatkin. 
4 
I have, I believe, already described the appearance of that gentleman: 
a tall, curly-headed, thick-set fellow of about forty, with a purple, 

THE WISE SERPENT 
179 
rather bloated and flabby face, with cheeks that shook with every 
movement of his head, with tiny, bloodshot, sometimes ci.UlJling eyes, 
with a moustache and side-whiskers, and a repulsive-looking Adam's 
apple which was beginning to be covered with a layer of fat. But 
the most striking thing about him was that he appeared wearing 
a frock-<:oat and clean linen. 'There are people who look indecent 
in clean linen,' as Liputin had once said to Mr Verkhovensky, who 
had reproached him jestingly for being untidy. The Captain even 
had a pair of black gloves, the right one of which he held in his 
hand, and the left, tightly stretched and unbuttoned, covered only 
half his fleshy left paw, in which he held a brand-new glossy top hat 
which he must have worn for the first time that day. It seemed, 
therefore, that the ' frock-coat of love', about which he had shouted 
to Shatov the day before, did actually exist. Al this - that is, the frock­
coat and the clean linen - had been procured (as I found out later) on 
the advice ofLiputin for some mysterious purpose. There could be no 
doubt that his arrival now (in a hackney carriage) was most certainly 
at the instigation and with the connivance of some other person ; alone 
it would never have occurred to him, nor would he have been able to 
dtess, get ready, and make up his mind in three-quarters of a hour at 
most, even if it could be assumed that he had learnt of the scene out­
side the cathedral immediately. He was not drunk, but was in the 
heavy, dull, hazy condition of a man who had suddenly come to after 
many days of drinking. It seemed to me that one had only to tap him 
on the shoulder once or twice and he would be drunk again. 
He was about to rush into the drawing-room, but suddenly tripped 
over the rug near the doorway. Miss Lebyatkin nearly died with 
laughter. He gave her a fierce look and suddenly took a few rapid 
steps towards Mrs Stavrogin. 
'I have come, madam,' he roared out in a thunderous voice. 
'Be so good, sir, as to sit down there, on that chair,' Mrs Stav­
rogin said, drawing herself up. ' I  shall hear you from there as well, 
and I shall be able to see you better from here.' 
The Captain stopped short, looking vacantly before him, but he 
turned and sat down where he was told on the chair close to the door. 
His face betrayed a great lack of self-<:on.fidence and, at the same time, 
arrogance and a sort of incessant exasperation. He was in a state of 
panic, that was clear enough ; but his vanity, too, was hurt; and it was 

1 80 
THE D E V I L S · PART O N E  
easy to see that his exacerbated vanity might, on occasion, tempt him 
to do something rash, in spite of his cowardice. He was apparently 
afraid of every movement of his clumsy body. lt is a well-known fact 
that such gentlemen, finding themselves by some miracle in society, 
are driven into a state of horrible misery by their own hands and their 
mability to frnd a place for them. The Captain sat motionless in his 
chair, with his hat and gloves in his hands, glaring stupidly at Mrs 
Stavrogin's stern face. He would, no doubt, have liked to have a good 
look round the room, but for the time being he could not summon 
enough courage to do so. Miss Lebyatkin, finding his figure again ter­
ribly funny, went off into another peal oflaughter, but he did not stir. 
Mrs Stavrogin kept him in that position pitilessly for a long time - a 
whole minute - scrutinizing him relentlessly. 
' Will you first of all, sir, be so kind as to give me your name your­
self?' she said in a measured and expressive tone of voice. 
' Captain Lebyatkin, ma'am,' the Captain roared. ' I've come, 
ma'am -' He stirred in his chair again. 
'Allow me ! '  Mrs Stavrogin stopped him again. ' Is this pathetic 
creature who has aroused my interest so much reallv your sister ?' 
'Yes, ma'am, she is my sister who has escaped from my supervision, 
for she is in such a condition -' 
He suddenly faltered and turned purple. 
' Don't misunderstand me, madam,' he said, growing terribly con­
fused. ' Her own brother will not soil the - I mean, in such a condition 
does not mean in such a condition - in the sense that is derogatory to 
her - her reputation - lately -' 
He stopped short suddenly. 
' Sir ! '  Mrs Stavrogin raised her head 
' I  mean in this condition ! '  he suddenly concluded, tapping the 
middle of his forehead with his finger. 
There was a short pause. 
'And has she suffered from this illness long ? '  Mrs Stavrogin asked 
with some hesitation. 
' Madam, I've come to thank you for your generosity at the church 
in a Russian, a brotherly way -' 
'A brotherly ?' 
' I  mean, not a brotherly, but merely in the sense that I'm my sister's 
brother, madam, and believe me, madam,' he went on, speaking 

THE W I S E  S E R P E N T  
181 
rapidly and again turning purple i n  the face, ' I  am not s o  uneducated 
as might appear at first sight in your drawing-room. My sister and I, 
madam, look very small in the luxurious surroundings here. And, be­
sides, madam, I'm afraid I have many enemies who are only too glad 
to spread all sorts of disreputable stories about me. But I care nothing 
for reputation. Lebyatkin, madam, is proud, and - and I - I've come 
to thank you - here's the money, madam ! '  
And so saying, he snatched a wallet ont of his pocket, pulled a 
bundle of banknotes out of it, and began counting them with shaking 
fingers in a fierce fit of impatience. It was plain that he was anxious to 
explain something as quickly as possible and, in fact, an explanation 
was badly needed ; but probably realizing that his preoccupation with 
the money made him look even more silly, he entirely lost control of 
himself: he just could not manage to count the money, his fingers got 
in each other's way, and, to complete his humiliation, a green note 
slipped out of his wallet and fell zigzagging to the carpet. 
'Twenty roubles, madam,' he cried suddenly, jumping up with the 
bundle of notes in his hand and his face covered with perspiration 
from his agony of mind ; noticing the note which had dropped on the 
floor, he bent down to pick it up, but, feeling ashamed for some 
reason, he gave it up with a wave of the hand. 
' For your servants, madam - for the footman who picks it up - let 
him remember Miss Lebyatkin ! '  
' I'm afraid I can't possibly permit that,' Mrs Stavrogin said hur­
riedly and with some alarm. 
' In that case -' 
He bent down, picked it up, went purple in the face, and suddenly 
walking up to Mrs Stavrogin, held out the money he had counted. 
'What's the meaning of this, sir?' she cried, apparently alarmed in 
good earnest and recoiling in her chair. 
Mr Drozdov, Mr Verkhovensky, and myself stepped forward. 
'Don't be afraid, don't be afraid ;  I'm not mad, indeed I'm not mad,' 
the Captain assured everybody excitedly. 
'Yes, sir, you are mad ! '  
'Madam, it's not at all what you think ! Of course, I'm just an in­
significant link - your mansions, madam, are richly furnished, but not 
those of Mary the Unknown, those of my sister, madam, my sister, 
nee Lebyatkin, but whom we shall for the time being call Mary the 

182 
THE DEVILS · PART ONE 
Unknown, for the time being, madam, for the time being, mind you;Ƣ 
for God himself will not allow it for ever ! Madam, you gave her ten 
roubles, and she took them, but only because it was from you, madam ! 
Do you hear that, madam? This Unknown Mary would not take it 
from anyone in the world, for if she did her grandfather, the officer 
who was killed in the Caucasus before the very eyes of General Yer­
molov, would turn in his grave ; but from you, madam, from you she 
will take anything. But with one hand she will take it and with the 
other she wil hold out to you twenty - yes, madam, twenty - roubles 
as a subscription to one of the charitable societies in Petersburg of 
which you, madam, are a member, for you yourself, madam, pub­
lished an anonncement in the Moscow Gazette that you have in your 
possession a subscription list of a charitable society to which everyone 
may subscribe . . . .  
' 
The Captain suddenly stopped short; he was breathing heavily, as 
though after some dificult feat. All that about the charitable society 
he had probably prepared beforehand, perhaps even with Liputin's 
direct assistance. He perspired more than ever : beads of perspiration 
literally stood out on his temples. Mrs Stavrogin watched him closely. 
'The subscription list,' she said severely, ' can always be had from 
my doorkeeper downstairs and, if you want to, you can enter your 
subscription there. I must therefore ask you to put your money away 
and not wave it in the air. Thank you. I must also ask you to resume 
your seat. Thank you. I'm very sorry, sir, to have been mistaken about 
your sister and given her some money because I thought she was poor, 
whereas she is so rich. One thing, though, I cannot nnderstand, sir. 
Why can she take money only from me, and not from anyone else? 
You were so insistent on this point that I must ask you to give me a 
most precise explanation of it.' 
'Madam, that is a secret which can be buried only in the grave ! '  
replied the Captain. 
' But why ?' Mrs Stavrogin asked, but, somehow, no longer so 
firmly. 
' Madam, madam! '  
He fell silent gloomily, his eyes fixed on the ground and his right 
hand pressed to his heart. Mrs Stavrogin waited without taking her 
eyes off him. 
' Madam,' he roared suddenly, 'wil you permit me to ask you one 

THE WISE SERPENT 
JUestion ? Only one, but frankly, openly, in the Russian fashion, from 
:he heart? '  
'Please do.' 
'Have you ever suffered in your life, madam ?' 
'I suppose what you want to say is that you have suffered or that 
fOU are stil suffering because of someone.' 
'Madam, madam' - he suddenly jumped to his feet again, perhaps 
10t even noticing it and beating his breast - ' so much has accumulated 
1ere, in this heart of mine, so much, madam, that God himself wil be 
mrprised when it all comes out on the Day of Judgement! '  
'You put it rather strongly, didn't you ? '  
'Madam, I may be speaking irritably -' 
'Don't let it worry you, sir. I shall know when to stop you.' 
'May I ask you one more question, madam ?' 
' By al means.' 
'Can one die just out of the nobility of one's soul ? '  
' I'm afraid I don't know. I've never asked myself that question.' 
'You don't know! You never asked yourself that question ! '  he 
cried with pathetic irony. 'Well, if that is so then 
Be stil, despairing heart ! ' 
and he smote his breast fiercely. 
He was again pacing the room. It is characteristic of these people 
that they are completely incapable of controlling their desires ; on the 
contrary, they are overcome by an irresistible urge to reveal them in 
al their squalidness the moment they arise. Finding himself in a 
strange environment, such a man usually starts timidly, but if you give 
in to him by a hair's breadth, he wil immediately begin treating you 
with arrogance. The Captain was already excited. He walked about 
the room, waving his arms, not listening to questions, talking about 
himself very rapidly, so that his tongue would sometimes refuse to 
obey him, and without finishing one sentence, began another. It is 
true, he could not possibly have been absolutely sober. Lisa, too, was 
in the room - Lisa, whose presence seemed to have gone to his head, 
though he never glanced at her once. However, this is merely my 
theory. Anyway, there must have been some reason which induced Mrs 
Stavrogin to overcome her repugnance for that man and listen to him. 
Mrs Drozdov was simply shaking with terror without, apparently, 

T HE D E V I L S  • PART ONE 
realizing what i t  was all about. Mr Verkhovensky, too , trembled, 
but that, on the contrary, was because he was always inclined to 
sec too much in everything. Mr Drozdov stood in the attitude of a 
man who was ready to rush to everybody's defence. Lisa was very 
pale. She watched the wild Captain steadily with wide-open eyes. 
Shatov sat without stirring ; but the strangest thing of all was that 
Miss Lebyatkin had not only ceased laughing, but had grown terribly 
sad. She leaned against the table with her right arm and followed her 
brother's harangues with a long, melancholy gaze. Dasha alone 
seemed to me to be perfectly composed. 
'All this is just absurd nonsense,' Mrs Stavrogin said, getting angry 
at last. 'You haven't answered my question - why ? I'm waiting for an 
answer.' 
' I  haven't answered - why ? You're waiting for my answer - why ? '  
the Captain repeated with a wink. 'This little word " why " has cover­
ed the whole universe like a flood ever since the fust day of creation, 
madam, and every minute all nature cries to its Creator : " Why ? "  
And for seven thousand years i t  has received no answer. D o  you really 
expect Captain Lebyatkin alone to answer it ? Would that be fair, 
madam ?' 
'That's all nonsense, and it isn't at all what I mean,' Mrs Stavrogin 
fumed, losing her patience. ' It's an allegory. And, besides, sir, you're 
using a much too florid style, and I consider that to be a piece of im­
pertinence on your part.' 
'Madam,' the Captain went on, without listening to her, ' I  might 
have liked to be called Ernest, and yet I'm forced to go through life 
with the vulgar name oflgnatius - why is that, do you think ? I should 
have liked to be called Prince de Monbart, and yet I'm only Lebyat­
kin, a name derived from the Russian word for swan - " lebed". Now, 
why's that? I am a poet, madam, a poet at heart, and I could have had a 
thousand roubles from a publisher, and yet I'm forced to live in a pig­
sty - why ? why ?  Madam, in my opinion Russia is nothing but a freak 
of nature - nothing else ! '  
'You absolutely refuse to say anything more definite ?' 
'I can read you my poem The Cockroach, madam.' 
· Wha-a-at ?' 
'Madam, I'm not mad! I shall go mad one day, I shall most cer­
tainly go mad one day, but I'm not mad yet. Madam, a friend of mine, 

THE WISE SERPENT 
1 most hon-nourable man, has written a Krylov fable under the title 
>f The Cockroach - may I read it?' 
'You want to read some Krylov fable ?' 
'No, madam, I don't want to read a Krylov fable; but my fable, my 
>wn fable, my own work ! Please, madam, believe me - and I mean no 
>ffence to you - that I'm not so corrupt and uneducated as not to 
lmow that Russia possesses a great fable-writer, Krylov, to whom the 
Minister of Education has raised a monument in the Summer Garde-ns 
for the diversion of young children. You'll find my answer is at the 
bottom of that fable, in letters of fire! ' 
'Very well, read your fable. ' 
'In a wood a cockroach lived, 
A cockroach old and wise, 
Into a glass one day he dived, 
Ful of cannibal flies.' 
'Goodness gracious, what is it al about ?' cried Mrs Stavrogin. 
'What I mean is,' the Captain hastened to explain, waving his arms 
about frantically with the exasperated irritation of an author who is 
interrupted in his reading, 'that when flies crawl into a glass in sum­
mer, they tum into cannibal-flies; any fool can understand that. Please, 
madam, don't interrupt. Don't interrupt. You will see, you will 
see . .  .' he went on, still waving his arms about: 
'Room enough the cockroach needs, 
The flies al murmur and rage -
Too ful our glass ! Our deeds, 
0 Jove, deserve a better stage. 
But while they clamour and rail 
Nikifor nears the place, 
Old and wise and bent and pale -
'I'm afraid I haven't quite finished it, but, never mind, I'll explain it 
in a few words,' the Captain rattled on. ' Nikifor takes the glass and, 
without taking any notice of the shouting, empties the whole thing into 
a pigsty, flies, cockroach and all, which he should have done long ago. 
But, mind you, madam, the cockroach does not raise a murmur ! That 
is the answer to your question : " Why?'" he cried triumphantly. 'The 
cockroach does not murmur! As for Nikifor, he represents nature,' he 
added, speaking rapidly and pacing the room self-complacently. 

1 86 
THE D E V I L S  • P A R T  O N E  
Mrs Stavrogin became terribly angry. 
'And may I ask you, sir, what about the money which you claim to 
have received from Mr Stavrogin and which you dare to accuse a 
member of my household of not having given you ' '  
'A libel ! '  Lebyatkin roared, raising his right hand tragically. 
' No, sir, it is not a libel ! '  
'Madam, there are circumstances which compel a man to put up 
with family disgrace rather than to proclaim the truth aloud. Lebyat­
kin, madam, will never say anything he shouldn't ! '  
He seemed to have gone blind; he was inspired ; he felt his import­
ance ; something of the kind he must certainly have dreamed about. 
He felt already like insulting somebody, playing some dirty trick on 
someone, showing his power. 
' Ring the bell, please, Mr Verkhovensky,' said Mrs Stavrogin. 
'Lcbyatkin is cunning, madam ! '  he said, winking, with an evil 
smile. ' He is cunning ; but he, too, has an Achilles' heel. He bas his 
portals to passion !  And these portals, madam, are the old, battle­
scarred bottle, in whose praise Denis Davydov bas sung. And, madam, 
it is while he finds himself in those portals that he sends off a letter in 
verse, a most wonderful letter, which, however, he would have dearly 
wished to take back afterwards with the tears of his whole life, for the 
feeling of the beautiful is destroyed. But the bird has flown, and you 
won't catch it by the tail ! It was in those portals, madam, that Lebyat­
kin might have said something about an honourable young lady, 
driven by the honourable indignation of his soul chafing under the 
injuries inflicted upon it, and his enemies have made use of it. But, 
madam, Lebyatkin is cunning. And in vain does the sinister wolf 
watch over him every minute, filling his gla.֏s and waiting for the end :  
Lebyatkin will never say anything he shouldn't, and instead o f  the ex­
pected revelation, all he finds at the bottom of the bottle is - Lebyat­
kin's cunning ! But enough - oh, enough ! Madam, your splendid 
mamions might belong to the most honourable of men, but the cock­
roach docs not murmur ! Make a note of that, madam ; make a note 
of the fact that he does not murmur, and recognize his great spirit ! '  
At that moment a bell rang downstairs in the porter's room, and al­
most immediately the butler, who had been rather late in answering 
Mr Verkhovensky's ring, came in. The sedate old servant was quite 
extraordinarily excited. 

THE W I S E  SERPENT 
'Mr Stavrogin has just arrived and is coming here,' he announced 
in answer to Mrs Stavrogin's inquiring look. 
I particularly remember her at that moment : at ftrSt she went pale, 
but suddenly her eyes flashed. She drew herself up in her chair with a 
look of extraordinary determination. Everyone, in fact, was startled. 
The completely unforeseen arrival of Stavrogin, who was only ex­
pected to arrive in a month's time, was not only strange because of its 
unexpectedness, but because of its fateful coincidence with the present 
moment. Even the Captain stood still like a post in the middle oi 
the room, with his mouth open, looking at the door with a terribly 
stupid expression. 
And presently we heard footsteps in the next room, a very long and 
narrow room, little hurried footsteps, which were approaching rapid­
ly. Someone seemed to be running, and suddenly there rushed into the 
drawing-room - not Mr Stavrogin, but a young man nobody seemed 
to know. 
5 
I think I'd better pause here a little and describe, in however cursory a 
way, the person who had made so sudden an appearance among tts. 
He was a young man of about twenty-seven, slightly above med­
ium height, with rather long, thin fair hair and with a wispy, barely 
discernible, moustache and beard. He was dressed decently, even fash­
ionably, but not smartly ; at the fmt glance he looked a little round­
shouldered and awkward, though in fact he was not round-shouldered 
at al, and rather free-and-easy in his manners. He seemed to be a sort 
of eccentric, and yet afterwards we all found his manners extremely 
agreeable and his conversation always to the point. 
No one could say that he was not good-looking, but no one liked 
his face. His head was elongated at the back and somewhat flattened 
at the sides, so that his face looked rather sharp. His forehead was high 
and narrow, but his features rather small ; his eyes were sharp, his nose 
small and pointed, his lips long and thin. He looked a little ill, but it 
only seemed so. He had wrinkles on each cheek and near his cheek­
bones, which made him look like a man who had just recovered from 
a serious illness. And yet he was perfectly well and strong, and he had 
never been ill. 
He walked and moved about very hurriedly, but he was in no hurry 

188 
THE D E V I L S  • P A R T  O NE 
to go anywhere. It seemed as though nothing could embarrass him; 
he remained the same in any situation and in any society. He possessed 
a great deal of self-complacency, but he was completely unaware of 
it himself. 
He talked rapidly and hurriedly ;  but at the same time self-confident­
ly, and he was never at a loss fora word. His thoughts were wuuffied, for 
all his hurried appearance, precise and fmal - and that was particularly 
noticeable. His articulation was amazingly clear ; his words fell from 
his lips like large, smooth grains, always carefully chosen and always 
at your service. At first you could not help liking it, but later on you 
hated it, and just because of his too clear enunciation, of this string of 
ever-ready words. You somehow could not help feeling that he must 
have a sort of peculiarly shaped tongue in his head, a sort of unusually 
long and thin one, very red and with an exceedingly sharp and in­
cessantly and uncontrollably active tip. 
Well, this was the young man who now flew into the drawing­
room, and, honestly, I still believe that he began talking in the next 
room and that he came in talking. He was at Mrs Stavrogin's side in a 
flash. 
' . . .  Just imagine, my dear Mrs Stavrogin,' he rattled away, ' I  came 
in thinking that he'd been here for at least a quarter of an hour - he 
arrived an hour and a half ago - I met him at Kirilov's - he went 
straight there half an hour ago. Told me to be here, too, in a quarter 
of an hour -' 
' But who told yon to come here ? Who ?' Mrs Stavrogin asked. 
'Why, Mr Stavrogin, of course ! Good Lord ! you don't mean to 
say that you've only heard of it this minute ? But his luggage at any 
rate should have arrived here long ago ! Do you mean to say they 
never told you? Well, then, I'm the first to bring the news. We could, 
of course, send someone to look for him, though I expect he's sure to 
be here himself any moment and, I daresay, at the moment which 
suits him best and, unless I am much mistaken, fits in with his plans.' 
Here he glanced round the room, his eyes resting with particular atten­
tion on the Captain. ' Why, my dear Miss Drozdov, how nice to meet 
you first! How do you do?' And he rushed up to shake hands with 
Lisa, who smiled gaily at him. 'And I can see that dear Mrs Drozdov 
hasn't forgotten her " professor", either, and I don't think she is as 
angry with him as she used to be in Switzerland, is she ? But how are 

THE W I S E  SERPENT 
your poor legs, my dear Mrs Drozdov ? And were your Swiss doctors 
right in prescribing the climate of your native country for them ? I 
beg your pardon ? Fomentations ? Y cs, I expect that must be very 
good for them. But, my dear Mrs Stavrogin ' - he quickly turned 
round again - 'you can't imagine how sorry I was to have missed you 
abroad and to have been unable to pay my respects to you personally. 
I had, besides, so much to tell you . . .  I did write to my old man here, 
but I expect that, as usual, he -' 
'Peter! '  Mr Verkhovensky cried, recovering from his stupor in a 
flash, throwing up his hands in surprise, and rushing up to his son. 
'Pierre, mon enfont, I never recognized you ! '  And he hugged him in 
his arms, tears streaming out of his eyes. 
' Now, now, don't be naughty, don't be naughty ! No noble ges­
tures, please. That wil do, that will do. Please, please,' Peter mur­
mured hurriedly, trying to free himself from Ius father's embrace. 
' I  never was a good father to you - never! ' 
'Al right, that'll do. We'll discuss it later. I knew you'd be a 
naughty boy. Come now, calm yourself, please.' 
' But I haven't seen you for ten years ! '  
'All the more reason why there shouldn't be any emotional scenes.' 
'Mon enfant!' 
'All right, I know you love me, Pater. I believe you. Please take 
your arms away. Don't you see how embarrassing it is for all the 
people here? Ah, here at last is Stavrogin ! Now, look here, Pater, do 
behave yourself! '  
Nicholas Stavrogin was, indeed, already in the room. He entered 
very quietly, and stopped for a moment at the door, imperturbably 
scrutinizing the company. 
I was struck by his appearance the moment I looked at him, just as 
I had been four years before, when I saw him for the first time. I had 
not forgotten him a bit, but there seem to be faces which every time 
they appear bring something new with them, something you have 
not noticed before, though you may have seen them a hundred times. 
He was apparently the same as he had been four years before : just as 
elegant, as impressive-looking, and almost as young, and he walked 
into a room as statehly as ever. His faint smile was just as officially 
amiable and just as complacent; his expression just as stem, thought­
ful, and rather absent-minded. In short, it seemed as though we had 

190 
T H E  D E V I L S · PART O N E  
parted only the day before. But one thing did strike me: though he 
had been considered very handsome before, his face really was ' like 
a mask ', as some sharp-tongued ladies of our society had expressed it. 
But now - now, I don't know why, he looked to me at the first glance 
as quite incontestably handsome, so much so that it was impossible to 
say that his face was like a mask. Was it because he was just a little 
paler than before and had apparently gone thinner ? Or was it perhaps 
because some new idea was now reflected in his eyes ? 
' Nicholas,' cried Mrs Stavrogin, sitting up erect in her chair and 
stopping him with an imperious gesture, ' stop a moment ! '  
But to explain the terrible question which immediately followed 
that gesture and exclamation - a question I could never have imagined 
even Mrs Stavrogin would have had the courage to utter - I must ask 
the reader to remember what Mrs Stavrogin's character had been all 
through her fife and its extraordinary impulsiveness at some moments 
of crisis. I must also ask him to take into account the fact that in spite 
of the unusual determination of her spirit and the considerable amount 
of common-sense and, as it were, practical and even business-like tact 
she possessed, there were moments in her life during which she sur­
rendered herself entirely and, if one may put it that way, completely 
without restraint. I should fmally like to ask him to take into account 
the fact that the present moment could really have been for her one of 
those moments in which the whole essence of her life was focused -
the whole of her past, present, and perhaps future. May I also remind 
him, in passing, of the anonymous letter she had received and the 
secret of which she had let out so irritably to Mrs Drozdov a short 
while ago, having, I believe, omitted to mention the contents of that 
letter ; and it was perhaps in that letter that the explanation of the ter­
rible question which she pnt to her son must be sought. 
'Nicholas,' she repeated, rolling out each word clearly in a firm 
voice, in which a menacing challenge could be heard, ' I  beg you to 
tell me at once, without moving from your place, whether it is true 
that this unfortunate cripple - there she is - there - look at her ! - is it 
true that she is - your lawful wife ? '  
I remember that moment very well : he did not bat an eyelid, but 
looked steadily at his mother; the expression of his face did not change 
in the slightest. At length he smiled slowly, a kind of condescending 
smile, and, without uttering a word in reply, went up quietly to his 

THE WISE SERPENT 
191 
mother, took her hand, raised it respectfully to his lips, and kissed it. 
And so strong was his invariable and irresistible inauence on his 
mother, that even at that moment she dared not snatch her hand away. 
She just looked at him, al of her transformed into a question, and her 
whole appearance showed that she would not be able to stand the un­
certainty another moment. 
But he still did not speak. Having kissed her hand, he once more 
looked round the room and, unhurriedly as before, went straight to 
Miss Lebyatkin. It is very difficult to describe people's faces at certain 
moments. I remember, for instance, that Miss Lebyatkin, frozen with 
panic, rose to meet him and folded her hands in front of her, as though 
beseeching him; at the same time I can distinctly remember the rap­
ture in her eyes, a sort of wild rapture, which almost distorted her 
features - a rapture people fmd it difficult to bear. Perhaps both were 
there, both the terror and the rapture ; but I remember moving quick­
ly towards her (I was standing almost beside her), for l thought that 
she was going to faint immediately. 
'You shouldn't be here,' Stavrogin said to her in a gentle, melo­
dious voice, and his eyes were filled with an extraordinary tenderness. 
He stood before her in a most respectful attitude, and every move­
ment of his showed his sincere respect for her. 
The poor woman murmured breathlessly and in an impulsive half­
whisper: 
'But may I - now - go down on my knees before you ?' 
'No, you can't possibly do that,' he replied, giving her a brilliant 
smile, so that she, too, al at once laughed happily. 
'You must remember,' he went on gravely in the same melodious 
voice, talking tenderly to her, as though she were a child, 'that you 
are a girl, and that though I'm your most devoted friend, I'm a stran­
ger to you, not your husband, nor your father, nor your fiance. Give 
me your arm and let us go ; I'll escort you to the carriage and, if you 
wil let me, I shall take you home.' 
She listened to him attentively and lowered her eyes, as though 
wondering what to do. 
' Let's go,' she said with a sigh, giving him her hand. 
But just then she had a slight accident. She must have turned a little 
carelessly and stepped on her lame leg, which was shorter than the 
other, and she fell sideways into the arm-chair, and but for that 

192 
THE DEVILS · PART O N E  
she would have fallen on the floor. He caught hold ofher at once and 
supported her. Then he took her firmly by the arm, looking greatly 
concerned for her, and led her carefully to the door. She was ob­
viously upset by her fall, for she was overcome with confusion, blush­
ed and felt terribly ashamed. Her eyes fixed silently on the floor and 
limping painfully, she hobbled after him, almost suspended on his 
arm. They went out of the room like that. Lisa, I observed, suddenly 
jumped up from her chair and for some reason as they were going out 
of the room followed them with a motionless stare to the very door. 
Then she sat down again in silence, but her face seemed to twitch 
spasmodically, as though she had touched some horrible snake. 
While the scene between Stavrogin and Mary Lebyatkin was going 
on, everybody in the room was speechless with amazement; you could 
have heard a pin drop ; but the moment they left, everybody suddenly 
burst into speech. 
6 
They said little, though : they mostly uttered astonished cries. I am 
afraid I can't very well remember the exact order in which it all hap­
pened at the time, for everything was in confusion. Mr Verkhovensky 
was shouting something in French and throwing up his hands in 
amazement, but Mrs Stavrogin was too preoccupied with her own 
thoughts to take any notice of him. Even Mr Drozdov muttered 
something abruptly and rapidly. But Peter Verkhovensky was more 
excited than anyone ; he was trying desperately to convince Mrs Stav­
rogin about something, gesticulating wildly, but for a long time l 
could not make out what he was talking about. He also addressed Mrs 
Drozdov and Lisa, and even shouted something in passing to his father 
in his excitement - in a word, he kept rushing about the room. Mrs 
Stavrogin, all flushed, jumped up from her chair and shouted to Mrs 
Drozdov, 'Did you hear ? Did you hear what he said to her just now ?' 
But Mrs Drozdov was not in a condition to reply. She just muttered 
something with a wave of the hand. The poor woman had her own 
worries : she kept turning her head every minute towards Lisa and 
looking at her in panic, not daring even to think of getting up and 
leaving before her daughter had got up. In the meantime the Captain 
was only too anxious to slip away. That I noticed very well. He 
had undoubtedly been in a state of great terror ever since Nicholas 

THE W I S E  SERPENT 
193 
Stavrogin had appeared ; but Peter seized him by the arm and would 
not let him go. 
'That's absolutely necessary ; it's absolutely necessary,' he rattled 
away, stil trying to convince Mrs Stavrogin. 
He stood before her, while she was sitting down again and, I re­
member it distinctly, was listening eagerly to him ; he succeeded in the 
end in getting her attention. 
'It's necessary. You can see for yourself, madam, that there is a mis­
understanding here. It looks very strange, I admit; but, actually, the 
whole thing is as clear as daylight and as plain as a pikestaff I realize 
very well that 1 haven't been authorized by anyone to tell you about 
it, and I daresay I cut rather a funny figure trying to thrust myself 
upon you. But, to begin with, Mr Stavrogin himself does not attach 
any importance to this business and, finally, you must admit yourself, 
madam, that there are cases in which a man finds it very difficult to 
offer a personal explanation. It is therefore absolutely necessary that a 
third person should undertake to do it for him, particularly as he finds 
it so much easier to discuss certain matters of a rather delicate nature. 
Believe me, madam, Mr Stavrogin cannot be blamed for refusing to 
answer your question at once by offering a completely satisfactory ex­
planation, in spite of the fact that the whole thing is of no importance 
whatever. I have known him in Petersburg. Besides, the whole inci­
dent really redounds to his honour, if one must use that vague word 
"honour " . . .  ' 
'Do you mean to say that you were the witness of a certain incident 
which gave rise to - to this misunderstanding ?' asked Mrs Stavrogin. 
'I not only witnessed it, I took part in it,' Peter replied quickly. 
'If you'll give me your word that dus won't offend Mr Stavrogin, 
who has always been most nice and considerate to me and who con­
ceals nothing, absolutely nothing, from me, and if you're quite sure 
that by doing so you'll give him pleasure -' 
'Why, of course it'll please him; for I cons1der it myself a highly 
pleasant duty on my part. I'm convinced that he would have asked me 
to do it himself.' 
The obtrusive desire of this gentleman, who seemed to have 
dropped from the sky, to relate incidents from another man's private 
life was rather strange, and contrary to all the accepted rules of con­
duct. But, having found her weakest spot, he succeeded in deceiving 

194 
THE DEVILS · PART ONE 
her. At the time I had no idea of the man's true character, let alone of 
his designs. 
'Go on ; I'm listening,' Mrs Stavrogin declared cautiously and with 
reserve, somewhat piqued by her own condescension. 
' There's nothing much to tell really and, as a matter of fact, it can­
not even be said to have been an incident,' he rattled on, ' though I 
daresay a novelist who had nothing else to do might make a novel of 
it. It's a rather interesting little affair, Mrs Drozdov, and I'm sure that 
Miss Lisa wil be interested to hear it, for there's a lot here which, 
though not particularly odd, is certainly rather fantastic. Five years 
ago Mr Stavrogin met this man in Petersburg - I mean, this Mr Leb­
yatkin who stands gaping here and who, I believe, was trying to give 
us the slip. I beg your pardon, Mrs Stavrogin. I shouldn't advise you 
to nm off, though, my dear retired official of the commissariat de­
partment (you see, I remember you very well). Mr Stavrogin and I 
know all about your little escapades here, for which, don't forget, 
you'll be called to account. I beg your pardon again, Mrs Stavrogin. 
In those days Mr Stavrogin used to call this gentleman his Falstaff; 
that,' he suddenly explained, ' must be some old burlesque character, 
at whom everybody laughs and who lets everybody laugh at him 
provided he's paid for it. In those days Mr Stavrogin led a rather -
shall I say ? - burlesque sort of life in Petersburg - I'm afraid I can't 
describe it by any other word, because he's not the sort of man to give 
in to despair, and he wasn't keen on doing anything in particular at 
the time. I'm only speaking of that time, Mrs Stavrogin. Lebyatkin 
had a sister, the woman who has been sitting here just now. The 
brother and sister had no place of their own, but just lived wherever 
they could. He used to roam about under the arches of the arcade, 
always in his old uniform, stopping the more decently dressed passers­
by, and spending whatever money he got on drinks. His sister sub­
sisted like a bird of the air. She helped with the charring in the fur­
nished rooms and lived on the few pennies she earned as a servant. 
It was a frightful life. I won't attempt to describe the life in those slum 
tenements, a life to which Mr Stavrogin had taken in those days out 
of sheer eccentricity. I'm only talking about tl1at particular time, Mrs 
Stavrogin ; as for "eccentricity ", that's his own expression. He does 
not conceal much from me. Miss Lebyatkin, who for a time happened 
to meet Mr Stavrogin rather frequently, was greatly struck by his 

THE W I S E  SER PENT 
195 
appearance. He was, as it were, a diamond on the filthy background of 
her life. I'm not very good at describing feelings, and that's why I'd 
rather say nothing about them ; but the rabble there immediately made 
fun of her, and she became depressed. They always laughed at her 
there, but she had not noticed it before. Even then she was not quite 
right in her head, though she was not as bad as now. I have reason to 
believe that as a child she had received some sort of education through 
a rich lady who was interested in her. Mr Stavrogin had never paid 
any attention to her, and spent his time mostly in playing preference 
with a greasy old pack of cards for farthing stakes with some Govern­
ment clerks. But on one occasion when she was being treated badly he 
(without so much as a by yom leave) caught a Government clerk by 
the scruff of his neck and threw him out of a first-floor window. It 
was not a question of any chivalrous indignation at injured innocence : 
the whole operation was performed amid roars of laughter, and Mr 
Stav10gm laughed more than anybody !  Everything, however, ended 
happilv, and they made friends again and started drinking punch. But 
the injured innocence herself never forgot it. In the end, of course, she 
lost her reason completely. I repeat, I'm not very good at describing 
feelings, but in her case it was all a matter of a delusion. And, as though 
on purpose, Mr Stavrogin aggravated her condition ; instead of laugh­
ing at her, he suddenly began treating Miss Lebyatkin with unwonted 
respect. Kirilov, who happened to be there (a highly original fellow, 
Mrs Stavrogin, and an exceedingly abrupt man ; you'll meet him 
perhaps one day, he lives here now) - well, so this Kirilov, who as a 
rule never opens his mouth, suddenly got excited and, I remember, 
told Mr Stavrogin that by treating that woman like a marquise, he 
was wrecking her life completely. I may add that Mr Stavrogin had 
a certain respect for Kirilov. Well, what do you think he said to him ? 
"You, Mr Kirilov," he said, " think that I'm laughing at her, but 
you're wrong. I do indeed respect her because she is better than any 
of us." And, you know, he said it in such a serious tone of voice, too. 
And yet during those two or three months he never really said a word 
to her, except good morning and good-bye. 1, who was there, remember 
very well that in the end she went so far as to look on him almost as 
her fiance who dared not " elope" with her because he had many ene­
mies and all sorts of family troubles, or something of the sort. There 
was a lot of laughter about it, I can tell you! The end of it was that 

THE D E V I L S · PART O N E  
when Mr Stavrogin had to leave for home, he had made some pro­
vision for her upkeep, settling on her a considerable yearly allowance 
of, I believe, three hundred roubles, if not more. Anyway, let's say it 
was a silly idea of his, the whim of a prematurely tired man, or even, 
as Kirilov maintained, a new experiment of a man who was weary of 
life and who was anxious to find out to what a pass a mad cripple 
could be brought. "You've purposely chosen one of the most wretch­
ed human beings," Kirilov s;Ud, " a  cripple, a woman doomed to 
suffer disgrace and blows al her life, knowing, too, that this poor 
woman was dying of comic love for you, and you're trying to spoof 
her on purpose just to find out what will come of it." But, after all, 
why should a man be blamed for the delusions of a crazy woman with 
whom, mind you, he had scarcely exchanged two sentences all the 
time ? There are things, Mrs Stavrogin, which it is not only impossible 
to discuss intelligently, but which it is not even intelligent to discuss. 
All right, let's say it was a piece of eccentricity, but there's nothing 
worse one can say about it, is there ? And yet they've made a whole 
story out of it. You see, Mrs Stavrogin, I'm not entirely w1aware of 
what's been going on here.' 
The speaker suddenly broke off, and was about to turn to Lebyat­
kin, but Mrs Stavrogin stopped him. She was in a state of tremendous 
exaltation. 
' Have you fmished ?' she asked. 
' Not yet. To complete my story I should like, if you don't object, 
to ask this gentleman a few questions about a certain matter. You'll 
sec what it is in a minute, Mrs Stavrogin.' 
'Not now; leave it till later, please. Just wait a moment, I beg you. 
Oh, how right I was to have let you speak ! '  
'And please consider this, Mrs Stavrogin,' Peter said with a start. 
'Could Mr Stavrogin possibly have explained it all himself in answer 
to your question, which was perhaps a bit too categoric ?' 
'Oh, it was ! '  
'And wasn't I right in saying that in certain cases it is much easier 
for a third person to explain things than for the man who is interested 
in the affair himself?' 
' Yes, yes . . . .  But you're mistaken about one thing, and I'm sorry 
to say you are still mistaken . . . . ' 
'Oh ?  What is it?' 

THE W I S E  SERPENT 
'You see - but won't you sit down, Mr Verkhovensky ?' 
'Oh, just as you like. I'm feeling rather tired. Thank you.' 
197 
He quickly pulled out an easy-chair, turned it so that he was sitting 
between Mrs Stavrogin, on one side, Mrs Drozdov at the table, on 
the other, while facing Mr Lebyatkin, from whom he did not take his 
eyes for a moment. 
'You are mistaken in calling tlus an "eccentncity" . .  . '  
'Oh, well, if that's all . . . . ' 
'No, no, no ; wait, please,' Mrs Stavrogin stopped him, evidently 
preparing herself for a long and ecstatic talk. 
No sooner did Peter Verkhovensky notice that than he was all 
attention. · 
'No, that was something higher than eccentricity and, I assure you, 
something sacred even ! A proud man, a man who has suffered humi­
liation early in life, a man who has reached the stage of " mockery " 
to which you have so aptly referred - in short, a Prince Harry, as your 
father so splendidly called him at the time, wruch would have de­
scribed him perfectly if he did not resemble Hamlet even more, in my 
opinion, at any rate.' 
'Et vous avez r{dsvn,' Mr Verkhovensky senior remarked impres­
sively and with feeling. 
'Thank you, my dear Mr Verkhovensky. I thank you, too, especi­
ally for your undeviating faith in Nicholas and in the greatness of his 
soul and calling. This faith you even strengthened in me when I was 
losing heart.' 
'Chere, chere . .  .' Mr Verkhovensky was about to step forward, but 
checked himself in time, having realized that it was dangerous to 
interrupt. 
'And if there had always been near Nicholas,' Mrs Stavrogin was 
almost intoning now, ' some gentle Horatio, great in his humility -
another beautiful expression of yours, my dear Mr Verkhovensky -
he might have long ago been saved from the sad and sudden " demon 
of irony " who has tormented him all his life. (The Demon oflrony is 
another wonderful expression of yours, my dear Mr Verkhovensky.) 
But Nicholas has never had a Horatio, or an Ophelia. He only had a 
mother, and what can a mother do alone and in such circumstances, 
too ? Do you know, Mr Verkhovensky' - she turned to Peter - 'I can 
quite well understand how a man like Nicholas could frequent even 

THE D E V I L S · P A R T  O N E  
such filthy slums as those you have told us about. I can see so clearly 
now that " mockery " of life (what a wonderfully apr expression of 
yours !), that insatiable desire for contrast, that gloomy background 
of the picture against which he appears like a diamond, according to 
your comparison, Mr Verkhovensky. And then one day he meets 
there a human being who is ill-treated by everybody, a cripple, half 
insane, but at the same time one who is perhaps filled with the most 
noble sentiments ! . . .  
' 
' Well, yes, I suppose so . . . . '  
'And after that don't you understand that he is not laughing at her 
like the rest. Oh, you people !  You can't understand that he is protect­
ing her against those who might do her wrong, that he is treating her 
with respect like a " marquise " (this Kirilov probably has a deep un­
derstanding of people, though he did not understand Nicholas !). If 
you like, it was probably just this contrast that caused the trouble ; if 
the unfortunate woman had been in a different environment she'd 
probably never have been brought to such a state offrenzied delusion. 
A woman, only a woman can understand it, my dear Peter Verkho­
vensky, and what a pity it is that you - I mean, not that you are not a 
woman, but, at any rate, that you are not one for once to under­
stand ! '  
' What you mean is that the worse things are, the better it is - I 
quite understand, I quite understand, Mrs Stavrogin. It's the sort of 
thing we find in religion : the harder a man finds life, or the more 
downtrodden and the poorer the people are, the more stubbornly they 
dream of their heavenly rewards, and if a hundred thousand priests 
also invoke the same thing, inflaming their dream and building on it, 
then - oh, I understand you, Mrs Stavrogin, don't you worry.' 
' Well, it's not exactly what I meant ; but tell me, should Nicholas 
have laughed to dispel that delusion in that unhappy organism . .  .' 
(Why Mrs Stavrogin used the word organism, I could not under­
stand) ' . . .  should he have laughed at her and treated her as the other 
clerks ? Do you really not see the lofty feeling of compassion, the 
noble thrill of the whole organism with which Nicholas sternly an­
swered Kirilov : " I  do not laugh at her." Oh, what a lofty, what a 
sacred answer! '  
'Sublime,' Mr Verkhovensky senior murmured. 
'And please note that he's not at all so rich as you think. It is I who 

T H E  W I S E  SERPENT 
199 
am rich, and not he, and he took practically nothing from me at that 
0 
' 
time. 
' I  understand, I understand it all, Mrs Stavrogin,' said Peter Vcr­
khovcnsky, with rather an impatient movement. 
'Oh, it's my character! I recognize myself in Nicholas. I recognize 
that youthfulness, that tendency towards dark and stormy impulses. 
And if we ever get to know one another better, Mr Verkhovcnsky -
and for my part I sincerely wish it, particularly as I am already so 
much indebted to you - you will then perhaps understand . . . .' 
' Oh, believe me, I wish it, too, madam,' Peter Verkhovcnsky mut­
tered abruptly. 
'You will understand then the impulse which, because of the blind­
ness of your unselfish feelings, makes you take up a man who may be 
unworthy of you in every respect, a man who docs not in the least 
understand you, who is ready to torture you at every opportunity ; 
and in spite of everything make him all of a sudden into a sort of 
ideal, into your dream. To concentrate all your hopes on him, wor­
ship him, love him all your life absolutely without knowing why -
perhaps just because he is unworthy of it . . . .  Oh, how I've suffered all 
my life, my dear Peter V crkhovcnsky ! '  
Mr Verkhovensky senior, with a pained look on his face, tried to 
catch my eye, but I avoided him in time. 
' . . .  And only recently, quite recently - oh, how unfair I've been to 
Nicholas ! You won't believe me, but they have been worrying me on 
al sides, all of them, al - my enemies, my friends, all sorts of stupid, 
loathsome people ; my friends perhaps more than my enemies. When 
they sent me the first contemptible anonymous letter, you won't be­
lieve it, Mr Peter Verkhovcnsky, but I hadn't contempt enough left 
in me to answer all that wickedness. Never, never shall I forgive my­
self for my lack of spirit! '  
' I've heard something about the anonymous letters here,' said Peter 
Verkhovcnsky, coming suddenly to life, ' and I shall fmd those who 
wrote them, don't you worry ! '  
'But you can't imagine the sort of intrigues that have been started 
here! They have driven even our poor Mrs Drozdov to distraction ­
and what has she to do with it ? Perhaps, my dear Praskovya, I was 
rather unfair to you to-day,' she added in a generous outburst of ten­
der emotion, though not without a certain triumphant irony. 

200 
THE DEVILS · PART ONE 
'Oh, I shouldn't worry about that, my dear,' Mrs Drozdov mur­
mured reluctantly. ' If you ask me, we ought to put an end to all this . 
. . . There's been too much talk about it . . . .' And again she glanced 
timidly at Lisa, but Lisa was looking at Peter Verkhovensky. 
'And that poor, that unfortunate creature, that insane woman, who 
had lost everything but only kept her heart, I am now determined to 
adopt,' Mrs Stavrogin suddenly cried. ' It is a sacred duty that I intend 
to fulftl. From this day I shall take her under my protection! '  
'And that would be even a very good thing in a certain sense,' Peter 
cried, coming entirely to life. ' I'm sorry, but I haven't finished yet. It 
is the question of her protection I want to discuss. You see, after Mr 
Stavrogin had gone at the time (I'm begirming from where I left off, 
Mrs Stavrogin), this gentleman here, this same Mr Lebyatkin, imme­
diately took it into his head that he had the right to do anything he 
liked with the allowance provided for his sister, with the whole of it ; 
and he did. I don't know exactly how it had been arranged at the time 
by Mr Stavrogin, but a year later, when he was abroad, he got to 
know what was happening, and was forced to make other arrange­
ments. Again I don't know the details, but I do know that the charm­
ing young lady was placed in some remote convent, in very comfort­
able surroundings, but under friendly supervision. You see what I 
mean, don't you ? Well, what do you think Mr Lebyatkin decided to 
do ? First of al he did his utmost to fmd out where his source of in­
come - that is, his sister - had been hidden. Only a short time ago he 
attained his object, took her away from the convent, having asserted 
some sort of right over her, and brought her straight to this town. 
Here he does not feed her; he beats her, bullies her, and after getting a 
considerable sum of money from Mr Stavrogin in some way, he at 
once takes to drink and, instead of showing his gratitude, finishes up 
by sending an arrogant challenge to Mr Stavrogin, making all sorts of 
absurd demands and threatening to issue a summons against him if he 
does not pay the allowance directly to him. In this way he takes Mr 
Stavrogin's voluntary gift for an enforced tribute - how do you like 
that ? Mr Lebyatkin, is everything I've said just now true ?' 
The Captain, who had been standing silently and with lowered eyes, 
took two quick steps forward and turned purple. 
'You have treated me cruelly, sir,' he exclaimed with abrupt em­
phasis. 

THE WISE SERPENT 
201 
' How do you mean - cruelly, and why ? But, if you don't mind, we 
shall talk of cruelty or kindness later ; now I must ask you just to an­
swer my first question : is everything I've said true or not ? If you find 
that it isn't true, you'd better let us hear your statement at once.' 
'I - you know yourself, sir -' the Captain muttered, but he broke 
off and fell silent. 
I ought to explain that Peter V erkhovensky was sitting in an arm­
chair with his legs crossed, while the Captain was standing before him 
in a most respectful pose. 
Mr Lebyatkin's hesitations did not apparently please Peter Verkho­
vensky : his face was distorted for a moment by a spasm of anger. 
' You're not by any chance about to make some statement, arc 
you ?' he said, looking meaningfully at the Captain. 'In that case 
please do - we're waiting.' 
'You know yourself, sir, that I can't make any statement.' 
'I don't know it. In fact, it's the first I've heard of it. Why can't you 
make any statement ?' 
The Captain was silent, his eyes fixed on the ground. 
'Permit me to go, sir,' he said firmly. 
'But not before you give us some answer to my first question : is 
everything I've s;tid true ?' 
'It's true, sir,' Lebyatkin said in a dull voice, raising his eyes to his 
tormentor. Beads of perspiration broke out on his forehead. 
'Is all of it true ?' 
'Yes, sir, it's all true.' 
' Have you nothing to say or add ?  If you feel that we've been til-
just, say so : protest, speak up if you're dissatisfied.' 
'No, sir, there's nothing.' 
' Have you been threatening Mr Stavrogin lately ?' 
'That - that - that was more drink than anything, sir.' He suddenly 
raised his head. ' Sir, if family honour and unmerited disgrace cry out 
among men, is then - is then a man to blame ?' he roared again, sud­
den! y forgetting himself. 
'And are you sober now, Mr Lebyatkin ?' Peter Verkhovensky 
looked piercing! y at him. 
'Yes, sir, I'm - sober.' 
' What do you mean by family honour and unmerited disgrace, 
sir ?' 

202 
THE D E V I L S · P A R T  O N E  
' I  wasn't talking about anybody, I didn't have anybody in mind - I 
was merely talking to myself,' the Captain said, breaking down again. 
' It seems you were very offended by the expressions I used about 
you and your conduct, weren't you ?  You're very touchy, Mr Leb­
yatkin. But, mind, I haven't even begun to discuss your conduct in 
its real sense. I shall begin discussing it, that may very well happen, but 
I haven't begun yet - not in its real sense.' 
Lebyatkin gave a start and stared wildly at Peter Verkhovensky. 
' Sir, I'm only just beginning to wake up.' 
' I  see! And was it I who woke you up ?' 
' Yes, sir, it was you who woke me up. I have been asleep for four 
years under a lowering sky. May I go now, sir? '  
' You may now, unless Mrs Stavrogin finds it necessary -' 
But Mrs Stavrogin waved her hands, dismissing him. 
The Captain bowed, took two steps towards the door, stopped sud­
denly, put his hand to his heart, tried to say something, did not say it, 
and rushed hurriedly out of the room. But in the doorway he knocked 
against Stavrogin, who quickly stepped aside. The Captain somehow 
suddenly cowered before him and stopped dead in his tracks without 
taking his eyes off him, like a rabbit in front of a boa-constrictor. 
After a moment's pause, Stavrogin pushed him gently aside with his 
hand and walked into the drawing-room. 
7 
He looked cheerful and composed. Perhaps something very nice had 
just happened to him, something we still knew nothing about. He 
seemed, indeed, to be particularly pleased with something. 
' Will you forgive me, Nicholas ? '  Mrs Stavrogin could not forbear 
asking as she got up hastily to meet him. 
But Nicholas just laughed. 
'Just as I thought ! '  he cried good-humouredly and jokmgly. 'I see 
that you know everything already. After I had gone out of this room 
I could not help wondering in the carriage whether I shouldn't really 
have told you my little adventure, for my going off like that was cer­
tainly strange. But when I remembered that I had left Peter with you 
I stopped worrying.' 
As he spoke, he threw a quick glance round the room. 

THE WISE SERPENT 
203 
'Mr Verkhovensky told us an old Petersburg interlude from the life 
of a whimsical fellow,' Mrs Stavrogin interposed ecstatically. 'A mad, 
wayward fellow, but one whose feelings were always lofty, one who 
was always chivalrous and noble . . .  ' 
'Chivalrous ? Good Lord, have you really got as far as that ? '  
Nicholas said, laughing. 'However, I'm very grateful to Peter for be­
ing in such haste this time.' (He exchanged a quick glance with Peter.) 
'You ought to know, Mother, that Peter is a universal peacemaker. 
That's his role in life, his hobby, his ilness, and I should like to recom­
mend him to you especially as such. I can imagine the sort of tale he 
dashed off to you here. He always, as it were, scribbles away when 
telling you something : there's a regular Record Office in his head. 
And, please, remember that being a realist he canot tell a lie and that 
he puts truth far above his own interests.' (As he said this, he was stil 
looking round the room.} 'You can, therefore, clearly see, Mother, 
that it is not you who should ask me for forgiveness, and if there is a 
streak of madness in this affair, it is I who am responsible for it, which, 
of course, means that, when all is said and done, it is I who am mad -
for after al I must keep up my reputation here.' 
At this point he embraced his mother tenderly. 
'At all events, you have heard everything now and the whole busi­
ness is over and done with, so that there's no need to discuss it any 
more,' he added, and a sort of firm, dry note crept into his voice. 
Mrs Stavrogin understood that note, but her exaltation did not pass 
away ; quite the contrary, in fact. 
'I didn't expect you for another month, Nicholas! '  
' I'll explain everything to you, of course, Mother, but now -' 
And he went across to Mrs Drozdov. 
But that lady scarcely turned her head to him, in spite of the fact 
that she had been stunned by his sudden appearance half an hour ago. 
She had fresh worries now: from the very moment the Captain had 
walked out of the room and collided with Stavrogin in the doorway, 
Lisa had suddenly started laughing, at first quietly and intermittently, 
then her laughter grew more uncontrollable, louder and more audible. 
She became red in the face. The contrast with her recent gloomy ex­
pression was quite striking. While Stavrogin was talking to his mother, 
she motioned twice to Mr Drozdov to come up to her, as though 
wishing to whisper something to him; but the moment he bent over 

204 
THE D E V I L S · P A R T  ONE 
her, she burst out laughing. I t  looked as though she were laughing at 
poor Mr Drozdov. She did, however, try to control herself, and put 
her handkerchief to her lips. Stavrogin turned to greet her wicl1 a 
most innocent and good-humoured air. 
' Please, excuse me,' she replied, speaking very rapidly, 'you - you 
have, of course, met Mr Drozdov. Goodness, how inexcusably tall 
you are, Maurice ! '  
And again laughter. Mr Drozdov was tall, but not at all inexcus­
ably so. 
' Have you - been here long ? '  she murmured, again restraining her­
self and even looking embarrassed, but with flashing eyes. 
' Oh, over two hours,' replied Nicholas, scrutinizing her intently. 
I must explain that he was unusually reserved and courteous, 
bur apart from his courtesy he looked absolutely indifferent, even 
bored. 
'Ai1d where are you going to stay ? '  
' Here.' 
Mrs Stavrogin was also observing Lisa, but she was suddenly struck 
by an idea. 
' But where have you been all this time, Nicholas, for over the last 
two hours ? '  she asked, going up to him. ' The train arrives at ten 
o'clock.' 
'I first took Peter to see Kirilov. I met Peter at Matveyeva ' (three 
stations before our town) ' and we travelled together in the same com­
partment.' 
' I  had been waiting for the train at Matveyeva sin֐e daybreak,' 
Peter Verkhovensky interposed. ' Our back carriages were derailed 
during the night. I nearly broke my legs.' 
' Broke your legs ! '  Lisa cried. 'Mummy, and we wanted to go to 
Matveyeva last week, so we, too, might have broken our legs !' 
' Merciful heaYens ! '  Mrs Drozdov cried, crossing herself. 
' Mummy, Mummy, darling Mummy, you mustn't be frightened 
if I really break both legs. It may really happen to me. You say 
yourself that I gallop like mad every day. Will you take me out for 
walks when I'm lame, Maurice ? '  She burst out laughing again. ' If 
that should happen, I won't allow anyone to take me out except you. 
You need have no doubt about that. But, suppose I break only one 
leg. Do be a darling and say that you'll consider it a great pleasure.' 

T H E  W I S E  SERPENT 
205 
'A pleasure ro have only one leg?' Mr Drozdov said, frowning 
ՠravely. 
' But you'll be able to take me out, only you and no one else!' 
'You'll be taking me out even then, Lisa,' Mr Drozdov growled 
even more gravely. 
'Goodness, do you realize that he has just been trying ro make a 
joke ?' Lisa cried almost in a panic. ' Don't you ever dare do anything 
of the kind, Maurice! But, really, what an awful egoist you are! I do 
think that, to your credit, you're slandering yourself. I know that, on 
the contrary, you'll be telling me from morning till night that with­
out a leg I've become much more fascinating. There's one thing, 
though, that can't be helped, I'm afraid: you're so awfully tall, and 
without a leg I shall be ever so small: how will you manage to take 
me on your arm, I wonder. No, we shall certainly be no march then! '  
And she went off into a nervollS fit oflaughing. Her jokes and con­
jectures fell flat, but she was obviously not after glorv. 
' Hysterics! '  Peter whispered to me. ' We'll have to get a glass of 
water quick ! '  
He was right. A minute later everybody was fussing round her and 
a glass of water was brought. Lisa kept embracing her darling mum­
my, kissing her warmly, weeping on her shoulder, and almost at the 
same moment throwing back her head and gazing intently at her face, 
she burst out laughing again. Mrs Stavrogin quickly took both of 
them off to her rooms, going out by the same door by which Dasha 
had come in earlier. But they were not away long, not more than four 
rnim1tes . . .  
I'm trying now to remember every detail of those last few moments 
of that memorable morning. I remember that when we were left 
without the ladies (except only Dasha, who had not stirred from her 
seat), Stavrogin went up to every one of us and exchanged greetings 
with each one except Shatov, who remained sitting in his corner, his 
head lowered more than ever. Mr Verkhovensky began making some 
rather witty remarks to Stavrogin, but the latter quickly went up to 
Dasha. On the way, however, he was intercepted by Peter Verkho­
vensky, who dragged him off almost by force to the window, where 
he began whispering something very rapidly to him, evidently some­
thing very important, to judge by the expression on his face and the 
gestures which accompanied his whispering. But Stavrogin listened to 

206 
THE DEVILS • PART ONE 
him very languidly and absent-mindedly, with his official smile, and 
in the end even impatiently, and al the time he seemed to be trying to 
get away. He left the window just as our ladies returned. Mrs Stavro­
gin made Lisa sit down in her old place, telling her that they must 
wait and rest for at least another ten minutes and that fresh air would 
scarcely be good for her strained nerves. She certainly was putting her­
self out a little too much in looking after Lisa, and she sat down beside 
her hersel£ Peter, who was now free, immediately rushed up to them 
and started a rapid and gay conversation. It was then that Stavrogin at 
last went up to Dasha with his unhurried step. Dasha was all in a 
quiver at his approach and jumped up quickly with unconcealed em­
barrassment and blushing all over. 
' I  believe I ought to congratulate you - or not yet ? '  he said, with a 
rather peculiar expression on his face. 
Dasha said something in reply, but I could not catch her words. 
'I' rn sorry if I' rn being indiscreet,' he said, raising his voice, ' but 
you know that I was expressly informed about it. Did you know ?' 
'Yes, I know that you were expressly informed.' 
'I hope I haven't dropped a brick by my congratulations,' he 
laughed, ' and if Mr Verkl1ovensky -' 
' What on ? What have you to be congratulated on ?' Peter suddenly 
rushed up to them. ' What have we to congratulate you on, Miss 
Shatov? Why, not on that, surely ? Your blushes tell me that I've 
guessed right. And, indeed, what else does one congratulate our fair 
and virtuous maidens on ? And what congratulations mostly bring a 
blush to their cheeks ? Well, accept my congratulations, too, if I' rn 
right in my guess, that is. And pay up ! You remember we had a bet 
in Switzerland that you would never get married, don't you ? Good 
heavens, talking of Switzerland - what am I thinking of? You know 
that's really what I carne for, and I almost forgot. Tell me,' he turned 
quickly to his father, ' when are you going to Switzerland ?' 
' I  - to Switzerland ?' Mr Verkhovensky asked, looking astonished 
and confused. 
'Why ? Aren't you going ? But you are getting married, aren't you ? 
Didn't you write ?' 
'Pierre! '  cried Mr Verkhovensky. 
' What do you mean - Pierre ? You see, I don't mind telling you, if 
it'll please you, that I've come flying here to let you know that I'm 

THE WISE SERPENT 
207 
not at al against it, since you insisted on having my opinion as soon as 
possible. But if,' he rattled on, 'you have to be " saved ", as you wrote 
and implored me in the same letter, then I am of course at your ser­
vice again. Is it true that he is getting married, Mrs Stavrogin ?' He 
quickly turned to that lady. 'I hope I'm not being indiscreet. He wrote 
me himself that the whole town knew about it and that all are con­
gratulating him, so that to avoid them he only goes out at night. I 
have his letter in my pocket. But would you believe it, Mrs Stavrogin, 
I simply can't make head or tail of it ! Just tell me one thing, sir' - he 
turned to his father - 'have I to congratulate you or to "save" you ? 
I know it sounds incredible, but in one line he writes that he is the 
happiest man in the world, and in the next that he is plunged in the 
most profound despair. To begin with, he asks me to forgive him. 
Well, I suppose he's true to type there, but all the same I must say 
this : just imagine, the man has only seen me twice in his life, and that, 
too, by the sheerest accident, and now that he is getting married for 
the third time, he suddenly takes it into his head that by his marriage 
he is violating some sort of parental obligations towards me, he im­
plores me a thousand miles away not to be angry with him and to 
grant him my permission ! Now, please don't be offended, sir. I dare­
say it's typical of your age. I'm broad-minded and I don't blame you, 
and let us even assume that it does you honour, etc., etc. But, again, 
the trouble is, you see, that I can't understand what the chief trouble 
is about. There is something here about some "sins in Switzerland". 
I'm getting married, he writes, because of some sort of sins or because 
of another man's sins, or whatever it is - in short, " sins ". The girl, he 
says, is a real treasure, but, of course, he is " unworthy" of her - that's 
his style, I suppose. But apparently because of those sins or circum­
stances, he is forced to lead her to the altar and go to Switzerland. 
Therefore, leave everything and come at once to save me. Can you 
make anything of it ? However - however, I can see from the expres­
sion on your faces,' he went on, turning round with the letter in his 
hand and scrutinizing every face in the room with an innocent smile -
'I can see that, as usual, I've dropped a brick - at least, I believe I have ­
as a result of my foolish frankness or, as Mr Stavrogin says, by being 
too precipitate. You see, sir' - he turned to his father again - ' I  
thought that I was among friends here, among your friends, sir, your 
friends. For I'm realy a stranger in this company, and I see - I see that 

208 
THE D E V I L S  • P A R T  ONE 
all of you know something and that I'm the only one who does not 
know that something.' 
He still went on looking round the room. 
' So Mr Verkhovensky wrote to you that he was getting married 
for the sins another man had committed in Switzerland and that vou 
were to Ay here to " save" him - in those very words ?' Mrs Stavrogin 
said, going up to him, yellow with rage, with her face distorted and 
her lips twitching. 
'I mean to say, you see, if there is something here I haven't under­
stood,' Peter said, looking as though he were alarmed and talking 
more rapidly than ever, ' then, of course, it's entirely his fault for writ­
ing like that. Here's Ius letter. You sec, Mrs Stavrogin, there was 
simply an endless and uninterrupted succession of letters, and during 
the last two or three months one letter followed another, and J must 
admit that in the end I sometimes did not read through them. You must 
forgive me, old boy, for my stupid admission ; but come, be frank, 
admit that though addressing them to me, you wrote them more for 
posterity, so that it really doesn't make any difference to you. Please, 
please, don't be offended. After all, we are blood relations, you know! 
But this letter, Mrs Stavrogin, this letter I did read through. These 
" sins", madam, these "sins of another man " - must be some little 
sins of our own, and I bet anything you like most innocent ones at 
that, though they made us suddenly start tlus mare's nest with its 
undercurrent of self-sacrificing zeal - it was, indeed, this self-sacrificing 
zeal .that made us start it. For, you see, our financial position is not 
quite as it should be, and we can't very well keep it a secret any longer. 
We have, you know, a weakness for cards - but, I'm sorry, perhaps I 
ought not to have said it - that's quite beside the point - I'm afraid I 
talk too much. But I do assure you, Mrs Stavrogin, he did 'righten me 
and I was really half ready to " save" him. After all, I feci •ather 
ashamed myself Why should I be holding a knife to his thro;.t ? I'm 
not such a heartless creditor, am I ?  He writes something here of a 
dowry - but, look here, old boy, you're not really getting married, 
are you? That's just like you - talk nineteen to the dozen, but more 
for the sake of hearing yourself talk . . . .  Oh dear, I'm sure, Mrs Stav­
rogin, you're probably blaming me now and quite certainly for the 
way I talk . . . . ' 
'On the contrary,' Mrs Stavrogin interposed maliciously, 'I can see 

THE WISE SERPENT 
209 
that you've reached the end of your patience and, I daresay, for a very 
good reason.' 
She had listened with malicious glee to all the ' truthful ' outpour­
ings of Peter Verkhovensky, who was quite obviously playing a part 
(what kind of a part I did not know at the rime, but that he was play­
ing a part was all too plain, and he played it rather clumsily, too). 
' On the contrary,' she went on, ' I'm only too grateful to you for 
speaking. Without you I should never have fonnd it out. For the first 
rime in twenty years my eyes have been opened. Nicholas, you said 
just now that you, too, had been expressly informed. Was it Mr Verk­
hovensky who wrote to you to the same effect ?' 
' I  did get a most innocent and - and very honourable letter from 
him.' 
' I  see that you are embarrassed and are trying to find the right 
words - that's enough ! Mr Verkhovensky, I'd like you to do me a 
great favour,' she suddenly addressed him with flashing eyes. ' Be so 
good as to leave us at once and don't ever darken my door again ! '  
I must ask the reader to remember her recent ' exaltation ' which 
h1d not yet passed. It is true Mr Verkhovensky, too, was not free from 
blame. But what really amazed me at the time was the extraordinary 
dignity with which he had heard Peter's ' exposures ', which he had 
never thought of interrupting, and Mrs Stavrogin' s ' excommunica­
tion '. Where did he get so much spirit from ?  One thing only was 
clear to me; namely, that he was nndoubtedly deeply grieved at his 
first meeting with his darling Peter - that is, by the way his son had 
repaid him for his embraces. That was a deep and real grief to his 
heart and in his eyes, at least. There was something else that hurt him 
badly at that moment; namely, his own poignant realization that he 
had acted despicably. He admitted this to me himself afterwards very 
frankly. -And surely a real genuine grief is sometimes capable of trans­
forming even a phenomenally irresponsible person into a resolute and 
determined one, for a short rime, at all events ; and what's more, 
genuine grief sometimes turns even fools into wise men, also for a 
time, of course; that is the characteristic of such grief. And if so, what 
might not happen with a man like Stepan Verkhovensky ? A revolu­
tion, in fact - also for a time, of course. 
He bowed with dignity to Mrs Stavrogin without uttering a word 
{it is true, there was nothing he could do). He had meant to leave the 

210 
THE D E V I L S · PART ONE 
house like that, but he could not restrain himself, and went up to 
Dasha. She seemed to have anticipated it, for she began speaking at 
once herself, almost in a panic, as though hastening to forestall him : 
'Please, Mr Verkhovensky, don't say anything, for goodness sake,' 
she began, speaking rapidly and excitedly, with a drawn face and 
hastily holding out her hand to him. 'Rest assured that I still respect 
you as much as ever and - and that I think just as highly of you, and -
and please think well of me too - Mr Verkhovensky, and I shall appre-
ciate it very, very much.' 
· 
Mr Vcrkhovcnsky bowed very low to her. 
' It's your business, Dasha,' Mrs Stavrogin said. 'You're absolmely 
free to do as you like. You've been so before, you arc so now, and you 
will be so in future,' she concluded impressively. 
'Good Lord, I sec it all now! '  Peter V crkhovensky cried, slapping 
himself on the forehead. ' But - but what an awful position to be in, 
after all this! My dear Miss Shatov, I'm frightfully sorry! Do you 
realize what you let me in for, old boy, ch ?' he addressed his father. 
'Pierre, you might speak differently to me, mightn't you, my· 
friend ?' Mr Verkhovensky said very quietly. 
'Don't shout, please,' Pierre said, with a wave ofhis hands. ' Believe 
me, it's all your sick old nerves, and it won't do you a bit of good to 
shout. You'd better tell me why you didn't warn me, for you must 
have realized that I'd be the first to start talking! '  
Mr Verkhovensky gave him a penetrating look. 
'Pierre, do you really mean to say that you, who know so much of 
what is going on here, knew nothing about this business, and heard 
nothing about it?' 
'Good Lord ! What extraordimry people ! So it isn't enough that 
you are an old baby, you must be a spiteful baby as well ? Mrs Stav­
rogin, did you hear what he said ? '  
A hubbub o f  voices arose; but suddenly an extraordinary incident 
occurred which no one could have anticipated. 
8 
Let me first of all mention the fact that during the last two or three 
minutes a new sort of mood came over Lisa: she was whispering 
something very rapidly to her mother and to Mr Drozdov, who was 

THE W I S E  S ERPENT 
211 
bending over her. She looked worried, but at the same time deter­
mined. At last she got up from her place, evidently anxious to leave 
at once, and-she hurried her mother, who was assisted out of the arm­
chair by Mr Drozdov. But it seemed they were not destined to leave 
without seeing everything to the end. 
Shatov, who had been completely forgotten by everyone in his 
corner (not far from Lisa) and who in all likelihood did not know 
himself why he was sitting there and not going away, suddenly got 
up from his chair and walked unhurriedly, but with resolute steps, 
across the room to Stavrogin, looking him straight in the face. Stav­
rogin noticed him approaching at a distance and smiled faintly ;  but 
when Shatov came up close to him he stopped smiling. 
When Shatov stopped silently before him withont taking his eyes 
otfhis face, everybody in the room suddenly became aware of it and 
fell silent, Peter Verkhovensky last of all ; Lisa and her mother stopped 
in the middle of the room. So passed five seconds ; the i<Jok of insolent 
perplexity on Stavrogin's face suddenly changed to that of anger, he 
knit his brows and suddenly -
And suddenly Shatov swung his long, heavy arm and, with all his 
might, struck him a blow in the face. Stavrogin staggered violently. 
Shatov hit him in a rather special sort of way, not at all as one would 
expect a man to slap another man's face (if one may use such an ex­
pression), not with the palm of his hand, but with his clenched fist, 
and his fist was big, heavy, and bony, with red hairs and freckles. If 
the blow had fallen across the nose, it would have broken it. But it fell 
across the cheek, brushing against the left corner of the lip and the 
upper teeth, from which blood streamed at once. 
I believe this was immediately followed by a cry, perhaps it was 
Mrs Stavrogin who cried out - that I can't remember because again 
everything in the room was plunged into dead silence. However, the 
whole scene did not last more than about ten seconds. 
Still, a great deal happened in those ten seconds. 
Let me again remind the reader that Stavrogin was one of those 
men who knew not the meaning of fear. At a duel he could coo !I y face 
his opponent's pistol, take aim himself, and kill with calm brutality. 
If anyone had slapped his face he would, I believe, not have challenged 
him to a duel, but killed him on the spot; he most certainly belonged 
to those men who would do that, and he would have kiled his man 

212 
THE DEVILS • PART ONE 
knowing perfectly well what he was doing and not at all in a fit of 
anger. I can't help feeling, indeed, that he never knew those outbursts 
of blazing anger during which it is impossible to think rationally. 
Even during the f1ts of blind rage which sometimes overcame him, he 
was always able to retain full control of himself, and therefore to real­
ize that he would certainly be sentenced to penal servitude for murder­
ing a man not in a duel ; nevertheless, he would certainly have killed 
anyone who insulted him, and without the slightest hesitation, either. 
I have been carefully studying Stavrogin during the last year and, 
because of special circumstances, I know a great number of facts about 
him when writing this. I should compare him perhaps with certain 
gentlemen long since dead, about whom some legendary stories have 
been preserved in our midst. It was said, for instance, about the mem­
ber of the Decembrist insurrection L-n that he knowingly looked for 
danger all his life, that he revelled in the sensation of it and made it 
into a physical necessity ; that as a young man he would fight a duel 
for no reason at al ; that in Siberia he would go hnnting bears armed 
only with a knife, that in the Siberian forests he liked to meet escaped 
convicts, who, I may observe in passing, are more terrible than bears. 
There can be no doubt that these legendary gentlemen were capable 
of experiencing, and that to the highest degree, the sensation of fear, 
otherwise they would have led much quieter lives and the feeling of 
danger would not have become a physical necessity to them. What 
fascinated them so much was, of course, the conquest of fear. What 
appealed to them was the continual flush of victory and the conscious­
ness that no one in the world could conquer them. L-n had long be­
fore his exile to Siberia struggled with hunger and laboured hard to 
earn a bare subsistence rather than accept his rich father's demands, 
which he considered nnjust. His conception of struggle was therefore 
many-sided ; and he did not esteem his steadfastness and strength of 
character so highly only in bear-hnnts and duels. 
But, nevertheless, many years have passed since then, and the ner­
vous, tortured, and dichotomous nature of the people of our time is 
quite incompatible with the craving for those direct and nnmixed 
sensations which were so sought after by some restlessly active gentle­
men of tl1e good old days. Stavrogin would perhaps have looked 
down on L-n, and he might even have called him a bragging bully 
and a coward, though it is true, he would not have said it aloud. He 

THE WISE SERPENT 
21 3 
would have shot his opponent dead in a duel and would have gone 
hunting bears, if necessary, and would have defended himself against 
a robber in a forest as successfully and as fearlessly as L-n, though 
without any sensation of enjoyment, but simply from unpleasant 
necessity, languidly, listlessly, and even with a feeling of boredom. So 
far as malice is concerned, there has undoubtedly been an advance as 
compared with L-n or even Lermontov. There was perhaps more 
malice in Stavrogin than in those two put together, but his malice was 
cold, calm, and, if one may put it that way, rational, which means that 
it was the most abominable and most terrible kind of malice. I repeat 
again : I thought him at the time and I still think him (now that every­
thing is over) the sort of man who, if he received a blow in the face or 
a similar insult, would have killed his adversary on the spot and with­
out challenging him to a duel. 
And yet in the present case what occurred was something quite 
different and amazing. 
No sooner had he regained his balance after having been almost 
knocked down in so humiliating a way, and the horrible and, as it 
w-:re, wet thud of the blow in the face had scarcely died away in the 
room, than he seized Shatov by the shoulders with both hands ; but at 
once, almost at the same moment, he snatched his hands away and 
folded them behind his back. He did not utter a word, but looked at 
Shatov and turned as white as a sheet. But, strangely enough, the light 
in his eyes seemed to go out. Ten seconds later his eyes looked cold 
and - I'm sure I'm not lying - calm. Only he was terribly pale. Of 
course I don't know what was going on inside him, I merely saw him 
from the outside. I can't help feeling, though, that if such a man exist­
ed who, to test his fortitude, would, for instance, seize a red-hot iron 
bar and clench it in his hand, and for the next ten seconds try to over­
come the unbearable pain and end up by overcoming it, then that 
man, so it seems to me, would have gone through an experience simi­
lar to what Stavrogin had gone through during those ten seconds. 
Shatov was the first to lower his eyes, and evidently because he was 
forced to lower them. Then he turned slowly and walked out, but not 
at all in the same way as he had walked up to Stavrogin. He went out 
of the room quietly and, somehow, awkwardly, with his shoulders 
hunched up, his head hanging, and as though he were debating some­
thing with himsel£ I think he was whispering something. He walked 

214 
THE D E V I L S  • P A R T  O N E  
up to the door carefully, without brushing against anything or up­
setting anything ; he opened the door just enough to squeeze through 
it almost sideways. As he was going out, the tuft of hair standing on 
end at the back ofhis head was particularly noticeable. 
Then, before anybody had time to cry out, one fearful scream was 
heard. I saw Lisa seize her mother by the shoulder and Mr DrC)7dov 
by the arm and pull them violently two or three times in a:1 attr·mpt 
to drag them out of the room. But she suddenly uttered a scream and 
fell full length on the floor in a faint. I can still heard the thud of her 
fall as her head hit the carpet. 

 
i l  
+ 
P A R T 
T W O 
1 1 •  
I 
11 
1 
Night 
EIGHT DAYS PASSBD. NOW T H A T  IT IS A LL OVER A N D  I AM 
writing this chronicle, we know what it was all about; but at the time 
we did not know anything, and it is only natural that all sorts of things 
seemed strange to us. Mr Verkhovensky and I, at any rate, at first shut 
ourselves up and looked on with apprehension from a distance. I did 
go out occasionally and, as before, brought him various pieces of 
news, without which he could not rest. 
Needless to say, all sorts of rumours spread throughout the town, 
that is, about the slap in the face, Lisa's fainting fit, and the other events 
of that Sunday. But what we could not make out was who was re­
sponsible for divulging so quickly and so accurately all that had hap­
pened. None of those present, it seemed to us, would have thought it 
to their advantage or, indeed, necessary to give away the secret of 
what had taken place. There were no servants in the room; Lebyatkin 
alone might have told something, not so much out of malice, for he 
had left in a state of extreme fear (and fear of an enemy destroys one's 
malice against him), but simply out of sheer inability to keep any­
thing to himself. But Lebyatkin and his sister had disappeared without 
a trace next day ; he was no longer at Filippov's house, he had moved 
no one knew where and seemed to have vanished into thin air. Shatov, 
from whom I wanted to fmd out about Miss Lebyatkin, shut himself 
up in his room and, I believe, remained there during the whole of 
those eight days, even discontinuing his work: in the town. He refused 
to see me. I went to se him on Tuesday and knocked at his door. I 

2 16 
T H E  D EV I L S · P A R T  T W O  
received no answer, but being convinced by unmistakable evidence that 
he was at home, I knocked again. Then, apparently jumping off his 
bed, he strode to the door and shouted to me at the top of his voice: 
' Shatov is out.' With that I went away. 
Mr V crkhovensky and I, not without apprehension about the bold­
ness of our theory, but encouraging each other, at last came to the 
conclusion that only Peter Verkl10vensky could have been responsible 
for spreading these rumours, though shortly afterwards he told his 
father himself that he was surprised to hear everybody discussing the 
story, especially at the club, and that the Governor and his wife seemed 
to know every detail of it. Another remarkable thing was that already 
on Monday evening I met Liputin and he knew everything to the last 
word, so that he certainly must have been one of the first to find out. 
Many of the ladies (and some from the highest circles) showed an 
unusual interest in the ' mysterious cripple', as they called Mary Lcb­
yatkin. Some of them were even anxious to sec her and make her ac­
quaintance, which shows that the people who were in such haste to 
hide the Lebyatkins had apparently been well advised to do so. But 
what everybody was particularly interested in was Lisa's fainting fit, 
and all ' society' showed the utmost curiosity about it, if only because 
it directly concerned our Governor's wife as Lisa's relative and patron­
ess. And the things they said ! The air of mystery that surrounded the 
affair naturally intensified the gossip : both houses were shut up; Lisa, 
it was said, was in bed with a high temperature; the same thing was 
asserted of Stavrogin, all sorts of disgusting details being added about 
a knocked-out tooth and a swollen cheek. It was even whispered here 
and there that there would soon be a murder in our town, that Stav­
rogin was not the sort of man to put up with an insult, but that he 
would kill Shatov, though in mysterious circumstances reminiscent of 
a Corsican vendetta. The idea was found to be rather attractive; but 
the majority of the young people belonging to the higher strata of our 
society listened to these stories with contempt and with an air of most 
contemptuous indifference, which was certainly not genuine. In 
general, the old hostility of our society to Stavrogin became strikingly 
evident. Even serious-minded people were eager to accuse him, 
though they did not know themselves of what. It was whispered that 
he had ruined Lisa's reputation and that they had had an affair in 
Switzerland. Cautious people, of course, restrained themselves, but 

NIGHT 
21 7  
everybody listened with relish. Other things were occasionally said, 
though not in public, but in private, and almost behind closed doors -
strange things which I mention here merely as a warning to my readers 
and solely with a view to the further developments of my story. Some 
people, knitting their brows, said, goodness only knows on what 
ground, that Stavrogin had some special business in our province, 
that through Count K. he had entered in Petersburg into relations 
with some highly placed persons, that it was quite likely that he had 
some important Government job and had perhaps even been entrusted 
with some mission by someone. When sober-minded and sedate 
people smiled at this rumour, observing, reasonably enough, that a 
man who existed on public scandals and who started his public life in 
our town with a swollen face did not look like a Government official, 
they were informed in a whisper that his job was not official but 
rather confidential, and that in such cases the very nature of the job 
demanded that the man carrying it out should be as little like a 
Government official as possible. Such a remark produced an effect : it 
was a well-known fact that our rural self-governing boards were 
w;,tched rather carefully in Petersburg. I repeat, these rumours lasted 
only a short time and disappeared without a trace, for the time being 
at any rate, when Stavrogin made his first public appearance; but I 
may add that many of these rumours were to a certain extent due to a 
few brief but spiteful remarks dropped, abruptly and vaguely, in the 
club by Artemy Gaganov, a retired captain in the Guards, who had 
recently returned from Petersburg. Gaganov was a very big land­
owner of our province and district, a man of high Petersburg society, 
and the son of the late Pavel Gaganov, the greatly respected commit­
tee member of our club, who over four years before had been assaulted 
in so extraordinarily sudden and coarse a manner, a fact I have men­
tioned earlier at the beginning of my story. 
It immediately became known to everyone that Mrs Lembke had 
made a special call on Mrs Stavrogin and that at the door she was in­
formed that Mrs Stavrogin was very sorry she could not receive her 
because she was not well. It was also known that two days later Mrs 
Lembke sent to inquire after Mrs Stavrogin's health. Finally, that she 
began 'defending' Mrs Stavrogin everywhere, of course only in the 
highest sense ; that is, in the vaguest possible way. She listened coldly 
and sternly to the hurried insinuations first made about the Sunday 

218 
T H E  D E VI L S · PART T W O  
incident, so that in the following days they were no longer made in 
her presence. It was in this way that the idea generaly gained ground 
everywhere that Mrs Lembke knew not only al about that mysteri­
ous affair, but also all its mysterious significance to the smallest detail, 
and she knew it not as a third person, but as one who had taken part in 
it. Let me add in pasing that gradually she was already beginning to 
acquire that great influence among us which she undoubtedly craved 
to possess and that she was already beginning to see herself as 'sur- · 
rounded' by a circle of devotees. A section of our society recognized 
her practical ability and tact - but of that later. Peter Verkhovensky's 
rapid social success, which surprised his father very much at the time, 
can also partly be explained as due to Mrs Lembke's patronage. 
Perhaps Mr Verkhovensky and I exaggerated it a little. To begin 
with, Peter Verkhovensky became acquainted almost instantly with 
the whole town, within the first four days of his arrival. He arrived on 
Sunday, and on Tuesday I already saw him in a carriage with Artemy 
Gaganov, who, in spite of his exquisite manners, was a proud, irrit­
able, and haughty man, and with whom, because of his character, it 
was very difficult to get on. Peter was also well received at the 
Governor's house - so much so, indeed, tlut he at once occupied the 
position of a young man who was an intimate friend of the family 
whose presence was always welcome. He dined there almost every 
day. He had first met Mrs Lembke in Switzerland, but there was really 
something curious about the rapidity of his success in the Governor's 
house. For, after all, at one time he was reputed to be a revolutionary 
ernil?re and, whether true or not, he did contribute to some revolution­
ary publications abroad and take part in congresses, which could be 
proved from newspaper reports, as I was one day maliciously inform­
ed by Alyosha Telyatnikov, now, alas, a retired low-grade civil ser­
vant, who had also been treated as a friend of the family in the house 
of our late Governor. But one fact was quite undeniable : the former 
revolutionary, far from being prevented from returning to his be­
loved country, seemed almost to have been encouraged to do so, so 
perhaps there was nothing in it. Liputin had whispered to me once 
that there were rumours that Peter Verkhovensky had fully accounted 
for his actions and had been pardoned on mentioning a number of 
names of other revolutionaries and in that way, perhaps, expiated his 
own transgressions, promising to be useful to his country in future. I 

N I G H T  
219 
repeated this malicious story to Mr Verkhovensky, who, though he 
was hardly able to think clearly, fell into deep thought. It became 
known later that Peter Verkhovensky had arrived in our town with 
excellent letters of introduction, at least he brought one to the Gover­
nor's wife from an important old lady whose husband was one of the 
most influential old gentlemen in Petersburg. This old lady, Mrs 
Lembke's godmother, mentioned in her letter that Count K. knew 
Peter Verkhovensky very well through Stavrogin, that he had treated 
him with the utmost kindness, and that he found him ' a  most worthy 
young man in spite of his former errors.' Mrs Lemkbe set great store 
on her meagre connexions with ' society', which she kept up with so 
·much difficulty, and was naturally pleased to receive the letter from 
the influential old lady ; but all the same there was something rather 
peculiar there. She put her husband on an almost familiar footing 
with Peter, so that Mr Lembke even found it necessary to complain 
about it - but of that, too, later. I may also mention, just as a matter of 
interest, that Karmazinov, too, was favourably disposed to Peter and 
immediately invited him to go and see him. Such promptitude, com­
ing from a man who had so high an opinion of himself, hurt Mr Verk­
hovensky's feelings most of alL But I interpreted it differently : in ask­
ing the nihilist to call on him, Mr Karmazinov no doubt had in view 
his relations with the progressive young people in Moscow and 
Petersburg. The great writer was most painfully afraid of the advanced 
Russian revolutionary youth, and imagining, in his ignorance, that 
_the keys to Russia's future were in their hands, he ingratiated lumself 
with them in a most humiliating way, mainly because they paid no 
attention to him whatever. 
2 
Peter Verkhovensky dropped in to see his father twice, but unfortun­
ately I was not there at the time. He visited him for the first time on 
Wednesday; that is, four days after their first meeting, and that, too, 
on business. By the way, they had settled their difficulties over the 
estate somehow without anyone being aware of it. Mrs Stavrogin 
took it all on herself and paid everything, taking possession of the 
land, of course, and merely informed Mr Verkhovensky that every­
thing had been settled, and her butler, Alexey Yegorovich, brought 

220 
T H E  D E VI L S · PART TWO 
him some papers to sign, which he did in silence and with the utmost 
dignity. I may add in connexion with his dignity that I hardly recog­
nized the old man during those days. He carried himself as he had 
never done before, became extraordinarily taciturn, and had not writ­
ten one letter to Mrs Stavrogin since that Sunday, which seemed a 
miracle to me. And, what was more surprising, he had become very 
quiet and composed. He seemed to have come to some fmal and irre­
vocable conclusion which made him face the world with complete 
calm. That was clear. He had hit upon this idea, sat still and waited for 
something. At first, though, he was indisposed, especially on Monday; 
he had an attack of his gastric catarrh. Nor could he remain without 
any news all that time ; but whenever, leaving the facts alone, I began 
to discuss the main point of the affair and advance some theories, he 
at once waved his hands at me, demanding that I should stop. Bur 
both his interviews with his darling son left a painful impression 011 
him for all that, though they did not shake him. On the two days 
after those interviews he lay on the sofa, his head wrapped round 
in a rowel soaked in vinegar; but at heart he remained absolutely 
calm. 
Occasionally, however, he did not wave his hands at me. Some­
times, too, I could not help feeling that the mysterious determination 
he had acquired seemed to be failing him and that he had begun 
struggling with some new and tempting trend of thought. That 
lasted only a few moments, but I put them on record. I suspected 
that he dearly wished to assert himself again, to leave his seclusion, 
to challenge them to a fight, to unsheathe his sword for the last 
time. 
'Chcr, I'd have crushed them ! '  he cried suddenly on Thursday even­
ing, after his second interview with his son, as he lay stretched out on 
the sofa with his head wrapped in a towel. 
Up to that moment he had not uttered a word to me all day. 
"'Fils, fils cher" and so on, I agree that all these phrases are non­
sense, the sort of language cooks would use, but, never mind, I can 
see it now myself. I didn't do anything for him, I sent him off from 
Berlin to his aunt in Russia, a baby in arms, by post, and so on - I ad­
mit it . . . . "You," he said to me, "did nothing for me; you sent me 
off by parcel post, and you've robbed me here." "But, you wretch," 
I shouted to him, "hasn't my heart been bleeding for you all my life, 

NI GHT 
221 
though I did send you away by parcel post ?" II rit. But I admit it, I 
admit it - all right, so I did send him off by parcel post,' he concluded 
almost in delirium. 
'Passons,' he resumed once more five minutes later. ' I  don't under­
stand Turgenev. His Bazarov is a sort of fictitious character, it does 
not exist at all ; they themselves were the first to repudiate him as 
bearing no resemblance to anyone. That Bazarov is a sort of vague 
mixture of Nozdryov and Byron, c'est le mot! Have a good look at 
them: they cut capers and squeal with joy like puppies in the sun. 
They are happy, they are the victors ! What sort of Byron is that? 
And, besides, how trivial ! What a vulgar, what an itching vanity, 
what a mean craving for faire du bruit autour de son nom, without 
noticing that son nom - Oh, what a caricature! " Good Lord ! "  I cried 
to him, "do you really mean to offer yourself to the people just as you 
are in the place of Christ ?" II rit. II rit beaucoup, il rit trop. He has a 
strange sort of smile. His mother did not have a smile like that. Jl rit 
toujours.' 
Again there was silence. 
'They're cuning ; they had arranged it all beforehand on Sunday,' 
he suddenly blurted out. 
'Oh, without a doubt,' I cried, pricking up my ears. 'It was all a 
conspiracy, and they didn't even bother to keep it dark, and it was so 
badly acted.' 
' I'm not talking about that. Do you realize that they did not bother 
to keep it dark on purpose so that those - those whom it concerned -
should notice it. Do you see that?' 
'No, I don't.' 
'Tant mieux. Passons. I'm very irritable to-day.' 
' But why argue with him, sir ?' I said reproachfully. 
'Je voulais convertir. You can laugh, if you like. Cette pauvre auntie, 
elle entendra de belles choses. Oh, my dear fellow, would you believe it 
that I felt like a patriot the other day ? But, then, I always knew I was 
a Russian - and a real Russian must always be like you and me. II y a 
IJ-dedans quelquechose d'aveugle e1 de louche.' 
'Absolutely,' I replied. 
'My dear friend, the real truth always sounds improbable, do you 
know that? To make truth sound probable you must always mix a lie 
with it. People have always done so. Perhaps there's something we 

222 
T H E  D E V I L S · PART T W O  
don't understand in that triumphant squeal ? I wish there was. I wish 
there was.' 
I said nothing. He, too, was silent for a long time. 
'They say French intellect -' he suddenly babbled incoherently, 
as though in a fever; ' that's a lie; it has always been like that. Why 
libel French intellect? It's simply Russian laziness, our humiliating in­
ability to produce an idea, our disgusting parasitism among the 
nations. lis sont simplemcnt des paresscux, and it has nothing to do with 
French intellect ! Oh, the Russians ought to have been extirpated for 
the good of humanity, like noxious parasites ! It wasn't that - it is not 
that at all we've been striving for. I don't understand anything. I've 
given up trying to understand! " But do you realize, do you realize," 
I cried to him, "that if you put the guillotine in the forefront, and 
with such enthusiasm, too, it is only because chopping offheads is the 
easiest thing in the world and having an idea the most difficult! "  Vous 
etes des parcsseux! Votre drape au est une gucnillc, 1111c impuissance. Those 
carts, or how docs it go there: " the rumble of the carts carrying bread 
to humanity", arc more useful than the Sistine Madonna, or how do 
they put it there - unc betisc dans cc genre. "But do you realize," I cried 
to him - "do you realize that unhappiness is just as necessary to man 
as happiness -just as necessary ! "  II rit. "You are delivering yourself of 
bons mots," he said, "while lying comfortably (he used a much coarser 
expression) on a velvet sofa." And, observe, too : our custom of a 
son addressing his father in familiar terms is all vաry well so long as 
both of them are good friends, but what if they keep abusing each 
other ?' 
We were again silent for a minute. 
'Ciu:r,' he suddenly concluded, raising himself quickly, 'do you 
know that this will most certainly end in something? '  
' I'm quite sure it will,' I said. 
'Vo11s tiC comprC11ez pas. Passous. But - as a rule, in our world things 
come to nothing, but here it will end in something. I'm sure of it. 
I'm sure of it.' 
He got up, paced the room in violent agitation, and, walking up to 
the sofa again, sank down on it exhausted. 
On Friday morning Peter left for some place in our district and 
stayed there till Monday. I learned of his departure from Liputin, and 
it was just then, too, that it came out in the course of our converբation 

NIGHT 
223 
that the Lebyatkins, brother and sister, were living somewhere in the 
Gorschechnaya suburb on the other side of the river. ' I  took them 
there myself,' added Liputin and, leaving the Lebyatkins, he suddenly 
informed me that Lisa was getting married to Mr Drozdov and that, 
though no public announcement of the engagement had been made, 
the engagement had taken place and the whole thing was settled. Next 
day I met Lisa out riding in the company of Drozdov, her first ride 
after her illness. She beamed at me from a distance, laughed and 
nodded to me in a very friendly way. I told Mr Vcrkhovcnsky about 
it, but he seemed only interested in the news about the Lebyatkins. 
And now, having described our enigmatic situation during the 
eight days we knew nothing, I shall go on to describe the subsequent 
events of my chronicle, writing, as it were, with full knowledge and 
describing everything as it became known afterwards and has now 
been explained. I shall start with the eighth day after that Sunday; 
that is, with the Monday evening, for it was as a matter of fact with 
that evening that ' the new troubles ' began. 
It was seven o'clock in the evening. Stavrogin was sitting alone in his 
study, the room he had always liked, lofty, covered with r<գgs, and 
with somewhat heavy, old-fashioned furniture. He was sitting in a 
corner on the sofa, dressed for going out, but he did not seem to 
be in a hurry to go anywhere. On the table in front of him stood 
a lamp with a shade. The walls and corners of the large room re­
mained in darkness. He looked pensive and absorbed, not altogether 
calm; his face looked tired and a little haggard. One of his checks was 
really swollen ; but the runwur about a knocked-out tooth was an 
exaggeration. The tooth had only been loosened, but now it had 
grown firm again. He had also had a cut inside his upper lip; but that, 
too, had healed. His swelling, however, had lasted a whole week 
merely because he refused to see a doctor and have it lanced in time, 
preferring to wait till the ulcer burst of itself. He not on! y refused to 
see a doctor, but would not even allow his mother to see him, except 
for a moment once a day and that, too, at dusk, when it was getting 
dark and the lamps had not been lighted yet. He did not receiv,· Peter 
Verkhovensky, either, though Peter ran over to see Mrs Stavrogin cwo 

224 
THE DEVILS • PART TWO 
or three times a day while he was in town. At last on Monday, return­
ing in the morning after his three days' absence, rushing al over the 
town and having dinner at Mrs Lembke's, he came in the evening to 
see Mrs Stavrogin, who had been expecting him impatiently. The 
veto had been removed: Stavrogin was receiving visitors. Mrs Stav­
rogin herself saw Peter to the door of the study; she had long been 
anxious for them to meet, and Peter promised to see her after his inter­
view with Nicholas and tell her al about it. She knocked timidly at 
the door of Stavrogin's study and, receiving no answer, ventured to 
open the door a couple of inches. 
' Nicholas, may I show Peter Verkhovensky into your room?' she 
asked quietly and restrainedly, trying to catch sight of Stavrogin be­
hind the lamp. 
' Of course, of course we may ! '  Peter himself cried in a loud and 
cheerful voice and, opening the door with his hand, he went in. 
Stavrogin had not heard the knock on the door; he only heard his 
mother's timid question, but had no time to answer it. Before him at 
that moment lay a letter he had just read and over which he was pon­
dering deeply. He gave a start on hearing Peter's sudden exclamation 
and covered up the letter quickly with a paper-weight he happened to 
lay his hand on; but he did not entirely succeed in hiding it : a corner 
of the letter and almost the whole of the envelope could be clearly 
seen. 
' I  purposely shouted at the top of my voice to give you time to 
prepare yourself,' Peter whispered hastily, with quite remarkable 
ingenuousness, rushing up to the table and at once staring at the paper­
weight and the corner of the letter. 
'And I suppose you were just in time to see me hiding the letter I 
had just received under the paper-weight,' Stavrogin said calmly, 
without stirring from his place. 
'A letter? Good heavens! what do I care about your letter ?' the 
visitor cried. 'But - the main thing is,' he whispered, turning to the 
door, which was already closed and nodding his head towards it. 
' She never eavesdrops,' Stavrogin remarked coldly. 
' I  wouldn't mind if she did,' Peter immediately interposed, raising 
his voice cheerfully and sitting down in an easy chair. 'I have nothing 
against it; only I've just dropped in to have a talk with you alone. 
Well, at last I've succeeded in getting to see you ! First of al, how are 

N I G H T  
22 5 
rou ? I can see you're all right. I suppose you'll be able to come to­
morrow, won't you ?' 
'Perhaps. ' 
'Set their minds at rest at last - set mine at rest! '  He gesticulated 
fUriously with a jocose and pleasant air. ' If only you knew what a lot 
Jf nonդense I've had to tell them. But I expect you know.' 
He laughed. 
'I don't know everything. I've only heard from my mmher that 
you've been rather - busy.' 
' I  mean I didn't tell them anything definite,' Peter suddenly bridled 
up, as if defending himself against a violent attack. 'You know, I put 
Shatov's wife into circulation ; that is, the rumours about your .1tfair 
with her in Paris, which of course explained the incident on Sunday ­
you're nm angry, arc you ?' 
' I'm sure you've done your best.' 
'Well, that's exactly what I was afraid of. But, anyhow, what does 
"done your best" mean ? It's a reproach, isn't it ? However, you go 
straight to the point. What I feared most when coming here was that 
you would refuse to come straight to the point.' 
' I  haven't the least intention of coming straight to anything,' Stav­
rogin said with some irritation, but he laughed at once. 
'I didn't mean that, no, no, don't misunderstand me, I didn't mean 
that at all ! '  Peter cried, waving his arms, pouring forth his words like 
so many peas, and immediately feeling pleased that Stavrogin was 
irritated. 'I shan't bother you with our business, especially in your 
present condition. I've only come to discuss Sunday's affair, and that, 
too, only with a view to taking the most necessary steps, for we can't 
go on like this. I've come with the frankest explanations, which I need 
more than you - I said that as a sop to your vanity, but at the same 
time it's quite true. I've got to be frank with you from now on.' 
'Am I to assume, then, that you haven't been frank before?' 
'You know that yourself. I've foxed you many times. You smile. 
Well, I'm glad you do, for I can use your smile as an excuse for an 
explanation; I purposely provoked that smile by using the word 
" foxed", so that you should get angry with me for daring to think 
that I might fox you, and that would give me the opportunity of ex­
plaining myself at once. You see, you see how frank I've become now. 
Well, are you going to listen ?' 

226 
THE D E V I L S  • PART T W O  
Stavrogin, who listened to Peter with a contemptuously calm and 
even ironical expression notwithstanding the latter's obvious desire to 
exasperate him by the insolence of his premeditated and intentionally 
crude naiveties, at last betrayed a certain uneasy curiosity. 
' Now, please listen.' Peter began wriggling more than ever. 'When 
I was coming here - I mean here in general - to this town ten days 
ago, I made up my mind, of course, to play a certain part. I daresay 
it would have been best without any part at all, my own character, 
wouldn't it? There's nothing more cuhning than my own character, 
for no one will believe it. To be frank, I had meant to play the part of 
a little fool, for a little fool is much easier than one's own character. 
But as a fool is after all something extreme, and as anything extreme 
arouses curiosity, I finally decided to be my own sel£ Well, sir, what 
is my own character like ? The golden mean : neither wise nor foolish, 
not very gifted, and dropped from the moon, as wiseacres here say, 
isn't it ?' 
' Well, I don't know ; perhaps it is,' Stavrogin said with a faint smile. 
'Oh, so you agree - I'm very glad. I knew all along that that was 
exactly what you thought. Don't worry, don't worry; I'm not angry 
and I haven't at all defined my character in that way to fish for com­
pliments : oh, no, no ! You're a very gifted fellow, a very clever fellow 
indeed! Aha, you're smiling again ! So I've slipped up again, have I ?  
You wouldn't have said : you're a clever fellow. Al right, then, I be­
lieve you: let's take it for granted. Passons, as my dear pater says, and, 
let me add parenthetically, don't be angry with me for my verbosity. 
By the way, there's a curious thing for you : I always talk a lot; I 
mean, I use a great many words and talk very fast, and yet I never 
somehow hit the mark. And why do I use a great many words and 
can't hit the mark ? Well, because I don't know how to speak. Those 
who know how to speak well, speak briefly. So, that proves - doesn't 
it ? - that I am not gifted. But as this gift of not being gifted is natural 
to me, why shouldn't I make an unnatural use of it ? And, in fact, I do. 
It is true that on my way here I thought at first of keeping silent. But, 
you know, to be silent requires a great deal of talent, and therefore it 
doesn't suit me at all. Secondly, say what you like, but to be silent is 
dangerous. And so I finally decided that it would be best to talk, but 
just as it behoves a man without talent; that is, to talk, talk and talk, to 
be in a devilish hurry to prove my point and, in the end, become 

NIGHT 
227 
nuddled in my proofs, so that the man listening to me should go away 
vithout knowing what exactly I was trying to prove, leave me with 
shrug, or, better still, with a smile of contempt. As a result you've 
:onvinced them of your simplicity, you've bored them to tears, and 
rou've been utterly incomprehensible - three advantages all at once! 
ilVho, I ask you, would suspect me of harbouring mysterious designs 
ǅfter that ? Why, every man-jack of them would consider himself per­
.onally offended if anyone were to suggest that I had some mysterious 
lesigns. And, besides, I sometimes amuse them - and that's absolutely 
nvaluable. Why, they're already quite willing to forgive me every­
:hing now because the clever fellow who had been publishing revo­
:utionary pamphlets out there had turned out to be stupider than 
dlemselves. It is so, isn't it ? I can see from your smile that you ap­
prove.' 
As a matter of fact, Stavrogin did not smile at all ; on the contrary, 
be was listening with a frown and with some impatience. 
' I  beg your pardon ? What was it you said ? Makes no difference ?' 
Peter rattled on (Stavrogin had not said anything at all). ' Of course, 
you may rest assured that I'm not here at all in order to compromise 
you by my association with you. But I'm afraid you're terribly touchy 
to-day. I came running to you with a cheerful and open heart, and you 
seem to be making a mental note of every word I utter in order to 
bring it in evidence against me. I assure you I'm not going to touch on 
any delicate subject to-day. I give you my word, and I agree to all 
your conditions beforehand.' 
Stavrogin was obstinately silent. 
'I beg your pardon ? What was it ? Did you say anything ? I see, I 
see, I seem to have made another blnnder. You have never offered me 
any conditions, and you're not going to. I believe you. Al right, don't 
worry. I know very well myself that it isn't worth while offering them 
to me. I'm right, am I not? I'm taking the words out of your mouth, 
and of course it's just because I'm not gifted. Not a trace of talent. 
You're laughing ? I beg your pardon ? What did you say?' 
' Nothing,' Stavrogin laughed at last. ' I  just remembered that I 
really called you a man without talent once, but you were not there 
at the time, so you must have been told about it. I wish you'd hurry 
up and get to the point.' 
' But I am at the point! I'm talking about Sunday! '  Peter rattled 

228 
T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  T W O  
away. ' Well, what was I on Sunday ? What was I on Sunday ? What 
do you think ? Whv, a man too much in a hurry, a mediocrity, and I 
took possession of the conversation by force in the most heavy-handed 
fashion. But they forgave me everything, first because I dropped from 
the moon - that, I believe, they arc all agreed on now - and, secondly 
because I told them a nice little story and got you all out of a mess. 
Isn't that so ? Isn't that so ?' 
'That is, what you did was to tell your story in such a way as to 
leave a doubt in their minds and suggest some previous understanding 
and conspiracy, while there was no such understanding between tiS 
and I had never asked you to do an ytlung.' 
'That's right, that's right! '  Peter cried as though he were really de­
lighted. ' I  did that just because I wanted you to sec what was at the 
back of my mind. I was playing the fool chiefly because I was trying 
to catch you, to compromise you. What I really wanted to find out 
was how much you were afraid.' 
' What I'd like to know is why you are so frank now ? '  
'Don't be angry ! Don't be angry! Don't glare at me! B<.t you're 
not glarmg at me at all, are you ? You want to know why I am so 
frank ? Why, just because everything is different now, everything is 
finished and done with, covered up in sand. I've suddenly changed my 
ideas of you. We've come to the end of the old road ; now I shall 
never compromise you in the old way ; I shall do it in a new way 
now.' 
' Changed your tactics, have you ?' 
'There are no tactics. Now you're entirely at liberty to do as you 
likr ; that is to say, if you want to you can say yl's, and if you want to 
you can say no. There's my new tactic for you. And I shan't breathe a 
word about our business until you tell me to yourself. You are laugh­
ing ? Go on, laugh. I'm laughing myself. Bnt I'm serious now, serious, 
serious, though it is true - isn't it? - that a man who is in such a 
hurry isn't gifted at all. All right, I may not be gifted; but I'm in 
earnest, I'm in earnest.' 
He was in fact speaking scrio!lsly, in quite a different tone of voice 
and in a peculiar state of excitement, so that Stavrogin gazed curiously 
at him. 
'You say that you've changed your ideas about me? '  he asked. 
'I changed my ideas about you the moment you withdrew your 

N I GH T  
229 
hands after Shatov had hit you, and please, that's enough, that's 
enough ! No more questions. I shan't say anything more now.' 
He jumped to his feet, waving his anns about, as though waving 
away any questions he might be asked; but as there were no guestions 
and there was no need for him to go, he sank back into his arm-chair, 
a little reassured. 
' Incidentally, parenthetically,' he rattled on immediately, 'some 
people here are saying that you're going to kill him and even taking 
bets about it, so that Lembke even thought of instructing the police to 
keep you under t'bservation, but his wife forbade it. But enough about 
that - enough. I just mentioned it to let you know. By the way, one 
more thing : I moved the Lcbyatkins to the other side of the river on 
the same day, you know. Did you get my note with their address ?' 
'I got it that day.' 
'I didn't do that out of " mediocrity ". I did it in all sincerity, be­
cause I wanted to be of use to you. If it showed any lack of talent, it 
was sincere, at any rate.' 
' Oh, it's all right, I suppose. Perhaps it was the only thing to do,' 
St::.vrogin said thoughtfully. ' Only, plea;e, don't write any more 
notes to me.' 
'I couldn't help it. It was only one.' 
'So Liputin knows ?' 
'I couldn't help that, either. Bur Liputin, you know yourself, dare 
not - incidentally, it wouldn't be a bad idea to go to see our chaps, I 
mean, the chaps and not ours, or you'll think I'm to blame again. But 
don't worry, not immediately, but sometime. It's raining just now. 
I'll let them know; they'll get together and we'll go there in the even­
ing. They're waiting with gaping mouths, like young rooks in a nest, 
to see what present we shall bring them. A hot-headed lot. They've 
got their note-books out, they're all ready for a debate. Virginsky - a  
cosmopolitan, Liputin a fourierist with a strong leaning towards police 
work ; an indispensable man, let me tell you, in one resepct, but de­
manding strict treatment in all others; and, last but not least, the fel­
low with the long cars ; he'll read a paper on his own system. And, you 
know, they are hurt that I'm treating them casually and throwing cold 
water over them - ha, ha! We must certainly go and see them.' 
'Ha vc you presented me to them as a sort of chief?' Stavrogin said 
as careless! y as possible. 

230 
THE DEVILS ' PART TWO 
Peter glanced at him quickly. 
' By the way,' he said, as though he had not heard Stavrogin's ques­
tion, to change the subject, ' I  have been here two or three times to see 
your mother and have been obliged to say a great deal to her.' 
' I can imagine it.' 
'No, don't imagine anything. I've merely told her that you won't 
kill anybody and all sorts of other sweet things. And do you know? 
She found out the very next day that I had moved Miss Lebyatkin to 
the other side of the river. Did you tell her that?' 
'I never thought of it.' · 
' I  knew it wasn't you. But who except you could have told her? It 
would be interesting to fmd out.' 
' Liputin, of course.' 
' N-no, not Liputin,' Peter murmured, frowning. ' I  shall find out 
who. It looks to me like Shatov. However, it's of no importance. Let's 
drop the subject. By the way, I was waiting all the time for your 
mother to ask me the main question . . . .  Well, yes, at first she was ter­
ribly morose, but when I arrived to-day she was beaming all over. 
What does that mean ?' 
'That was because I've given her my word to propose to Lisa within 
five days,' Stavrogin suddenly said with unexpected frankness. 
' Oh, well - of course,' Peter murmured, as though embarrassed. 
'There are rumours about her engagement, do you know ? It's true, 
though. But you're right ; she'd come runing from the altar; you 
have only to call her. You're not angry at my saying that?' 
' No, I'm not.' 
'I notice that it's awfully difficult to make you angry to-day, and 
I'm beginning to be afraid of you. I'm terribly curious to know how 
you will appear to-morrow. I expect you've got lots of things ready. 
You're not angry with me for my saying that?' 
Stavrogin said nothing at all, which completely exasperated Peter 
Verkhovensky. 
'By the way, did you answer your mother seriously about Lisa ?' 
he asked. 
Stavrogin gave him a cold, penetrating look. 
' Oh, I see; just to set her mind at rest, of course.' 
'And what if I meant it ?' Stavrogin asked firmly. 
' Well, may the Lord bless your union, as they say in such cases. It 

NIGHT 
23 1 
won't harm the cause (you see, I didn't say our cause; you don't like 
the word our), and as for me, well, I - I'm of course at your service. 
You know that.' 
' You think so ?' 
' I - I think nothing, nothing,' Peter said hurriedly, laughing, ' be­
cause I know that, so far as your private affairs are concerned, you've 
considered everything carefully beforehand and that whatever you do 
is carefuly thought out. I was merely saying that I am seriously at 
your service, always and everywhere and in any contingency, I mean 
in any - you understand, don't you ?' 
Stavrogin yawned. 
'I'm boring you,' Peter said, suddenly jumping to his feet, snatching 
his brand-new round hat, as though he were about to go. 
But he remained and went on talking incessantly, though he stood 
up, occasionally pacing the room, slapping his knee with his hat at the 
exciting parts of the conversation. 
'I also meant to amuse you by telling you about the Lembkes,' he 
cried gaily. 
' No, thank you. Later, perhaps. How is Mrs Lembke, by the 
way ?' 
'What fine maners you all have, though ! You care no more 
about how she is than about how a grey cat is, and yet you ask. Mind 
you, I'm al for it. She's all right, and she has an almost superstitious 
respect for you. She expects a lot from you, too, almost superstitiously. 
She doĖn't say a word about the Sunday affair, and she's certain that 
you wil come out of it with flying colours just by appearing in 
society. I assure you she imagines you can do anything. However, 
you're an enigmatic and romantic figure now, more than ever before 
- an extremely advantageous position. They're al agog to meet you. 
They were pretty warm when I went away, but now more than 
ever. By the way, thank you again for the letter. They're all afraid of 
Count K. You know, I believe they think you're a Government spy. 
I don't deny it - you don't mind ?' 
' No.' 
'That's nothing. It wil come in useful in the future. They have 
their own way of doing things here. I encourage it, of course. Mrs 
Lembke at the head, Gaganov too . . . .  You' relaughing ? It's al tactics on 
my part; I talk nonsense and then al of a sudden I make an intelligent 

232 
THE DEVILS · PART T W O  
remark, just when they are all looking for it. They crowd round 
me and I start talking nonsense again. They have all given me up by 
now. " He's a capable fellow," they say, " but he has dropped from 
the moon." Lembke invites me to join the civil service to put me on 
the right path. You know, I'm treating him terribly; that is, I'm com­
promising him, and he just glares at me. Mrs Lembke encourages it. 
And, by the way, Gaganov is awfully angry with you. He said all 
mrts of nasty things about you yesterday at Dukhovo. I told him the 
whole truth at once; I mean, not the whole truth, of course. I spent a 
whole day with him at his Dukhovo estate. A lovely estate, and an 
excellent country house.' 
' He isn't at Dukhovo now, is he ?' Stavrogin asked suddenly, almost 
jumping to his feet and leaning forward. 
' No, he drove me back to town this morning; we returned to­
gether,' said Peter, as though he had never noticed Stavrogin's sudden 
excitement. ' Sorry, I seem to have dropped a book.' He bent down to 
pick up an expensive book of drawings he had knocked down. 'The 
Wome11 o_{Balzac with illustrations.' He opened it suddenly. 'Haven't 
read it. Lembke, too, writes novels.' 
'Does he ?' Stavrogin asked, as though he were interested. 
'In Russian. In secret, of course. Mrs Lembke knows and allows it. 
He's a dolt, though he has his own methods; they have it all worked 
out. Such strict form, such self-restraint! I wish we had something of 
the kind.' 
' You're not praising the administration, are you ?' 
'Why, of course! It's the only thing in Russia that is natural and 
that's been successful - but I won't, I won't,' he cried suddenly. ' I'm 
not talking about that; not a word on so delicate a subject. However, 
good-bye. You look rather green.' 
' I'm feverish.' 
'I can believe it. You'd better lie down. By the way, we have mem­
bers of the sect of castrates in our district - an interesting people. How­
ever, about that later. Incidentally, here's another anecdote for you. On 
Friday evening I was drinking with some army officers. We have three 
friends among them, vous comprenez? They were discussing atheism, 
and I need hardly say they gave short shrift to God. Squealing with 
joy. By the way, Shatov maintains that the only way to start a revolu­
tion in Russia is to start with atheism. It may be true. One grey-

NIGHT 
233 
haired fool of a captain sat there a long time without uttering a word, 
then he suddenly stood up in the middle of the room and, you know, 
said aloud as if speaking to himself, " If there is no God, then what sort 
of captain am I after that ?", picked up his cap, threw up his arms, 
and went out.' 
'He expressed quite a sensible idea,' Stavrogin said, yawning for the 
third time. 
'Did he? I didn't understand it. I meant to ask you about it. Well, 
what else is there? The Spigulin factory is quite interesting. They em­
ploy, as you know, five hundred workers. It's a hotbed of cholera. It 
hasn't been cleaned for fifteen years, and the factory hands are never 
paid their proper wages. The owners are millionaires. I assure you that 
there are a number of workers there who have quite a good idea about 
the Internationale. You're smiling, are you ? You will see. Only give me 
just a little time! I've asked you to fix the time already, and now I ask 
you again, and then - but sorry, sorry; I won't, I won't. I'm not going 
to talk about it; don't frown. Well, good-bye. Good Lord,' he cried, 
coming back, ' I  forgot the most important thing : I was told just now 
th;:.t our box had arrived from Petersburg.' 
'You mean ?' Stavrogin looked at him, not understanding. 
' I  mean your box - your things, coats, trousers, underwear, linen, 
have come. Is it true ?' 
'Yes, I was told something about it this morning.' 
' I  see, so can't I get it now at once ?' 
'Ask Alexey.' 
'Al right, to-morrow then - to-morrow. My new jacket, my dress­
coat, and three pairs of trousers are with your things. From Char­
mer's, by your recommendation, you remember ?' 
'I hear that you are acting the gentleman here,' said Stavrogin, with 
a smile. 'Is it true that you're going to take riding lesons from the 
riding-master here ?' 
Peter smiled wrily. 
'Look here,' he said, speaking very rapidly in a trembling and chok­
ing voice, 'look here, we'd better leave personalities out of it once and 
for all. You can, of course, despise me as much as you like, ifit amuses 
you so much, but al the same I suggest it wil be much better if we 
leave personalities out of it for a time, don't you think so?' 
' Very well; I shan't do it again,' said Stavrogin. 

234 
THE DEVILS · PART TWO 
Peter grinned, slapped his knee with his hat, shifted from one leg to 
the other, and assumed his former expression. 
' Some people here,' he said with a laugh, 'even consider me as your 
rival with Lisa, so I must take care of my appearance, mustn't I ?  But 
who is supplying you with tlus information ? Good Lord, eight 
o'clock exactly. I must be off. I promised to go and sec your mother, 
but I don't dunk I will this time. You go to bed and you'll feel much 
better to-morrow. It's dark and raining outside, but I've a cab waiting 
for me, for it isn't quite safe at night in the streets . . . .  Oh, by the way, 
there's an escaped convict from Siberia roaming about the town and 
the neighbourhood, a fellow called Fedka. Used to be a serf of mine, 
but Father sent him to the army fifteen years ago and took money for 
him. Quite a remarkable personality.' 
' Have you - er - talked to him ?' Stavrogin asked, raising his eyes 
at him. 
' I  have. He doesn't hide from me. He's ready for anything - any­
thing; for money, of course; but he's got convictions, too, of a sort, 
to be sure. Oh, yes, again by the way : if you were serious about that 
plan of yours - you remember, about Lisa - then let me assure you 
again that I, too, am ready for anything. Whatever you say, I'm en­
tirely at your service. Why, what's the matter? What are you reach­
ing for your stick for ?  Good Lord, what am I talking about ? It isn't 
the stick at all. You know, for a moment I thought you were looking 
for your stick! '  
Stavrogin was not looking for anything and was not saying any­
thing either, but he got up rather suddenly, with a strange look on his 
face. 
' If you want me to do something about Mr Gaganov,' Peter blurted 
out suddenly, this time quite openly indicating the paper-weight with 
his head, ' then you can rely on me to make all the necessary arrange­
ments, and I'm sure you won't be able to do without my help.' 
He went out suddenly without waiting for an answer, but thrust his 
head through the door once more. 
' I'm saying this,' he cried, speaking rapidly, ' because Shatov had 
not the right, either, to risk his life last Sunday when he assaulted 
you, had he? I'd like you to make a note of that.' 
He disappeared again without waiting for an answer. 

NIGHT 
23 5  
4 
Perhaps he thought as he disappeared behind the door that, left alone, 
Stavrogin would start banging on the wall with his fists, and no doubt 
he would have been glad to have seen it if that had been possible. But 
- he would have been greatly mistaken : Stavrogin remained entirely 
composed. For about two minutes he remained standing at the table in 
the same attitude, apparently pondering deeply ;  but soon a cold, lan­
guid smile appeared on his lips. He sat down slowlv in his old seat on 
the sofa and closed his eyes as though he were feeling exhausted. The 
corner of the letter was still peeping out from under the paper-weight, 
but he made no attempt to put it right. 
Soon he was completely lost to his surroundings. Mrs Stavrogin, 
who had been terribly worried during the last few davs, could not re­
strain herself and, as soon as Peter Verkhovensky, who had promised 
to see her but had not kept his promise, left the house, she took the risk 
of going to see Nicholas herself, though it was not her usual time. She 
was still hoping against hope that he would tell her something definite 
at last. She knocked quietly as before and, again receiving no answer, 
opened the door herself. Seeing that Nicholas was sitting unusually 
motionless, she cautiously walked up to the sofa with a beating heart. 
She seemed to be surprised that he had fallen asleep so quickly and that 
he could sleep while sitting so upright and motionless, so that his 
breathing could scarcely be perceived. His face was pale and stern, but 
it looked completely frozen and immobile; his brows were slightly 
drawn together and frowning; he certainly looked like a lifeless wax 
tigure. She stood over him for about three minutes, hardly daring to 
breathe, and suddenly she was seized with panic; she tiptoed out of 
the room, stopped for a moment at the doorway, hurriedly made the 
sign of the cross over him, and went away unobserved, with a new 
heavy feeling and with a new anguish. 
He slept a long time - over an hour - and all in that state of stupor: 
not one muscle on his face stirred, not the slightest movement could 
be observed in his whole body; his brows were knit as sternlv as be­
fore. If Mrs Stavrogin had stayed in the room for another thr|e min­
utes, she would most certainly not have been able to bear the over­
powering sensation that lethargic immobility gave her and would 
have wakened him. But he suddenly opened his eyes himself, and 

THE D E V I L S  • PART TWO 
remaining absolutely still as before, seemed to be staring inquisitively 
and persistently at some object in the corner of the room, though there 
was nothing special or new there. 
At last the quiet, low chime of the large clock on the wall, striking 
the half-hour, resounded through the room. He turned his head to 
glance at it rather uneasily, but almost at the same moment the other 
door at the back of the room opened and the butler, Alexey Yegoro­
vich, came in. He carried in one hand a winter overcoat, a scarf, and a 
hat, and in his other a silver salver with a note on it. 
'Half-past nine,' he announced in a soft voice, and putting down the 
clothes on a chair in the corner, he held out the tray witl1 the note, a 
small piece of paper which was not sealed and which had only two 
lines written on it in pencil. 
After reading it, Stavrogin picked up a pencil from the table, 
scribbled a couple of words at the end of the note, and put it back on 
the tray. 
' Take it back as soon as I leave the house, and now help me to 
dress,' he said, getting up from the sofa. 
Noticing that he was wearing a light velvet jacket, he thought for a 
moment, and then told the butler to fetch him the coat he wore on 
more ceremonious evening visits. Having at last finished dressing and 
put on his hat, he locked the door through which his mother had 
come in, took the concealed letter from under the paper-weight, and, 
without uttering a word, went out into the corridor, followed by 
the butler. From the corridor they reached the narrow, stone back­
stairs and went down to the passage which led straight into the garden. 
A small lantern and a big umbrella, specially placed there for tfi.-e occa­
sion, stood in the corner of the passage. 
'This perpetual rain, sir, has made the streets very muddy,' the but­
ler announced in the faint hope of deterring his master for the last time 
from his trip. 
llut Stavrogin opened his umbrella and, without a word, went into 
the damp and wet old garden, which was dark as a cellar. The wind 
howled and tossed the almost denuded tops of the trees, and the little, 
sand-covered pams were soggy and slippery. The butler walked along 
as he was, bareheaded and in his frock-coat, lighting me way three 
paces ahead wim me lantern. 
'Won't we be seen ?' Stavrogin asked suddenly. 

NIGHT 
237 
'Not from the windows, sir,' the butler replied softly and in meas­
ured tones. 'Besides, I have taken care of everything.' 
'Is Mother asleep ?' 
'She retired to her room at exactly nine o'clock, sir, as she has been 
doing regularly during the last few days, and I don't think she could 
fmd out anything now. At what time shall I expect you back, sir ?' he 
added, plucking up courage to ask the question. 
'At one o'clock or half-past. Not later than two.' 
'Very good, sir.' 
After crossing the garden by the winding paths both of them knew 
so well, they came to the stone wall and there, in the farthest corner, 
they found a little gate, which led out into a narrow and deserted lane. 
The gate was almost always locked, but the old butler had the key in 
his hands now. 
' Won't the gate creak ?' Stavrogin asked again. 
But the butler told him that it had been oiled the day before, ' and 
to-day too.' He was soaked to the skin by now. Unlocking the gate, 
he handed the key to Stavrogin. 
'If you're going a long way, sir,' he could not resist warning his 
master for a second time, ' I  should like to remind you to beware of 
the local roughs, especially in the deserted lanes, and most of all on 
the other side of the river.' 
He was an old servant, who had looked after Stavrogin as a child, 
who had dandled him in his arms, a serious-minded and stem man, 
who was fond of reading or listening to devout works. 
' Don't worry, Alexey.' 
'May the Lord's blessing be upon you, sir ; but only if what you do 
is just and righteous.' 
' What did you say ?' Stavrogin stopped as he was about to step into 
the lane. 
The butler repeated his words firmly ; he had never before ventured 
to express himself in such words to his master. 
Stavrogin locked the gate, put the key in his pocket, and walked 
along the lane, sinking five inches into the mud with every step he 
took. He came out at last into a long, deserted street. He knew the 
town like the palm of his hand ; but it was a long way to Bogoyav­
lcnskaya Street. It was past ten o'clock when he stopped before the 
locked gates of Filippov's dingy house. The ground floor had been 

THE D E V I LS · PART TWO 
empty since the departure of the Lebyatkins, and its windows were 
shuttered, but there was a light in Shatov's attic. As there was no bell, 
he began pounding on the gates with his hand. A little window was 
opened, and Shatov looked out into the street; it was terribly dark and 
it was difficult to make anything out; Shatov peered for some time ­
over a minute. 
'Is it you ?' he asked sudden! y. 
'It's me,' replied the uninvited guest. 
Shatov slammed the window, went downstairs, and opened the 
gate. Stavrogin stepped over the high pl.mk at the bottom of the gate 
and, without uttering a word, passed by him straight into Kirilov's 
cottage. 
All the doors there were unlocked and not even closed. The pa՟sage 
and the first two rooms were dark, but there was a light burning in 
the last room where Kirilov lived and had his tea. Laughter and some 
very curious cries could be heard coming from it. Stavrogin went 
straight towards the lighted room, but stopped in the doorway with­
out going in. There was tea on the table. In the middle of the room 
stood the old woman, the landlord's relative, bareheaded and wearing 
only a petticoat, a pair of shoes on bare feet, and a hare-skin jacket. In 
her arms she held an eighteen-months-old baby with nothing on but a 
shirt, its little legs bare, its cheeks flushed, and its white hair ruffled. It 
had apparently just been taken out of its cradle, for there were still tears 
in its eyes; but at that moment it was stretching out its little arms, clap­
ping its hands, and laughing, as children do, with a sob in its voice. 
Kirilov was bouncing a red india-rubber ball on the floor before it; 
the ball bounced up to the ceiling and back again, the baby crying, 
'Baw! haw! ', Kirilov catching the 'haw' and giving it to the baby, 
who threw it clumsily with its little hands, and Kirilov ran to pick it 
up again. At last the 'haw' rolled under the cupboard. ' Baw, haw ! '  
shrieked the child. Kirilov lay flat on the floor and tried to reach the 
'haw' with his hand from under the cupboard. Stavrogin went into 
the room ; the child, catching sight of him, clung to the old woman 
and went off into a prolonged childish cry; the woman at once carried 
it out of the room. 
' Stavrogin ?' said Kirilov, raising himself from the floor with the 

NIGHT 
239 
ball in his hands and not in the least surprised at the unexpected visit. 
'Want any tea?' 
He got up from the floor. 
'Thank you. I won't refuse it, if it's hot,' said Stavrogin. 'I'm soaked 
to the skin.' 
' Yes, it's hot - very hot, in fact,' Kirilov declared, looking pleased. 
'Sit down. You're covered with mud, but it doesn't matter ; I'll go 
over the floor with a wet floor-cloth later.' 
Stavrogin made himself comfortable in a chair and drank his cup of 
tea almost at a gulp. 
'Another cup ?' asked Kirilov. 
' No, thank you.' 
Kirilov, who had not sat down till then, at once took a seat oppo­
site him. 
' What brought you here ?' he asked. 
'Business. Read this letter. It's from Gaganov. Remember I told you 
about it in Petersburg.' 
Kirilov took the letter, read it, put it on the table, and looked ex­
pectantly at Stavrogin. 
'I met this Gaganov for the first time in my life, as you know,' 
Stavrogin began to explain, ' a  month ago in Petersburg. We came 
across each other two or three times in the presence of other people. 
Without trying to make my acquaintance and without speaking to 
me, he still found an opportunity of being very insolent to ɥe. I told 
you about it at the time. But what you don't know is that before leav­
ing Petersburg he sent me a letter, which, though not like this one, 
was extremely impertinent, and the strange thing about it was that it 
contained no explanation of the reason why it was written. I replied to 
him at once, also by letter, and told him quite frankly that he was 
probably angry with me for the incident with his father four years 
ago in the club here and that I, for my part, was quite prepared to 
make him every possible apology on the ground that my action was 
unintentional and was caused by my illness. I asked him to take this 
into accow.t and accept my apologies. He did not reply and went 
away, and now I fmd him here absolutely mad with fury. Several things 
he has said about me in public have been repeated to me. They were 
extremely abusive and contained most extraordinary charges. Then 
to-day I received this letter, a letter the like of which I don't think 

240 
THE D E V I L S · PART T W O  
anybody ever received before, full of abuse and such expressions as 
"your slapped face". I came here hoping that you wouldn't refuse to 
be my second.' 
'You said a letter the like of which no one has ever received,' Kiri­
lov observed. ' It's possible to send one in a rage; lots write 'em. 
Pushkin wrote to Hekern. All right, I'll come. Tell me how.' 
Stavrogin explained that he wanted to settle it the next day and that 
he was most anxious that Kirilov should start again with offering an 
apology, and even with the promise of another letter of apology, but 
on condition that Gaganov, too, promised not to write any more 
letters. As for the letter he had received, he would consider it as though 
it had never been written. 
'Too many concessions,' said Kirilov. ' He won't agree.' 
' My chief idea in coming here was to find out whether you would 
agree to convey such terms to him.' 
'I will. It's your affair. But he won't agree.' 
'I know he won't agree.' 
' He wants to fight. Tell me how you intend to fight.' 
'You sec the point is that I'd like to have it all over by to-morrow. 
You'll be at his place at about nine o'clock in the morning. He'll listcn 
and won't agree, but he'll arrange a meeting between you and his 
seconds, let us say at eleven o'clock. You will arrange all the details 
with them, and about one or two o'clock we shall all meet at the ap­
pointed place. Please do your best to arrange it so. The weapons, of 
course, are to be pistols, and I ask you specially to arrange to fix the 
barriers at ten paces apart; you will then put us ten paces from the bar­
riers, and at a given signal we start walking towards one another. Each 
of us must walk up to the barrier, but we have a right to fire earlier if 
we like, while walking. That's all, I think.' 
'Ten paces between the barriers is too ncar,' Kirilov remarked. 
'Well, make it twelve, but not more. You realize that he wants to 
fight in earnest, don't you? Do you know how to load a pistol ?' 
' I  do. I've got pistols. I'll pledge my word that you've never used 
them. His second will do likewise about his. Two pairs of pistols, and 
we'll toss up, his or ours.' 
' Fine.' 
'Would you like to see the pistols ?' 
'By all means.' 

NIGHT 
241 
Kirilov squatted down on his haunches before his trunk in the cor­
ner. It had not been unpacked, but he took out the things he wanted 
from it when required. He pulled out from the bottom a palm-wood 
box lined with red velvet and produced a pair of beautiful and very 
expensive pistols from it. 
'I've got everything: powder, bullets, cartridges. I've also got a re­
volver. Wait a minute.' 
He went back to his trunk and pulled out another box with a six-
chambered American revolver inside it. 
'You've got lots of firearms, and expensive ones, too.' 
'Yes. Very.' 
Kirilov, who was poor and almost destitute, though he never 
noticed his poverty, was displaying his precious weapons, which 
he must have acquired at a great sacrifice to himself, with evident 
pride. 
'You haven't changed your mind, have you?' asked Stavrogin 
rather cautiously after a minute's pause. 
' No,' Kirilov replied curtly, having guessed at once from Stavro­
gin's tone of voice what his question was about. 
'When?' Stavrogin asked, more cautiously still, after a short pause. 
Meanwhile Kirilov had replaced the two boxes in the trunk and 
resumed his seat. 
'That doesn't depend on me, as you know - when they tell me to,' 
he muttered, as though a little troubled by the question, but at the 
same time with evident readiness to answer any other question. 
He did not take his black, lustrcless eyes off Stavrogin, looking very 
calmly, but also kindly and affably, at him. 
'I can understand a fellow wanting to shoot himself,' Stavrogin be­
gan, frowning a little, after a long and thoughtful silence that lasted 
three minutes. 'I've thought of it myself sometimes, and then always 
some new idea occurred to me; if one were to commit some crime, I 
mean, something shameful, that is, something really disgraceful, some­
thing very mean and - ridiculous, so that people would remember it 
for a thousand years and remember it with disgust for a thousand 
years, and suddenly the thought came: ''One blow in the temple and 
there would be nothing more." What would I care for people then or 
that they would remember it with disgust for a thousand years ? Isn't 
that so ?' 

THB DEVILS • PART TWO 
'You call that a new idea ? '  said Kirilov, after a moment's reflection. 
' I  - I don't say that - but when the idea occurred to me I felt it as 
quite a new idea.' 
' Felt an idea ? '  said Kirilov. 'That's good. There are many ideas 
which are always there and which suddenly become new. That's truž. 
I see a great deal now as though for the first time.' 
' Let us suppose that you had lived on the moon,' Stavrogin inter­
rupted, without listening and continuing to develop his idea. 'Let us 
suppose that you committed .til those ridiculous and abominable 
crimes there. You know from here that they wil laugh at you there 
and think of your name with disgust for a thousand years, for ever, 
for as long as the moon lasts. But now you are here and you're looking 
at the moon from here : what do you care what you've done there and 
that the people there will think with disgust of you for a thousand 
years ? It's true, isn't it? '  
' Don't know,' replied Kirilov. ' I've not been on the moon,' he 
added without any irony, but merely as a statement of fact. 
' Whose child was it just now ? '  
'The old woman's mother-in-law came on a visit - no, her daugh­
ter-in-law - it's all the same. Three days. Lying il with the baby. It 
howls at night - awful - it's the stomach. Mother's asleep; the old 
woman brings it here. I amuse it with the ball. The ball's from Ham­
burg. I bought it in Hamburg - to throw up and catch it. Strengthens 
the back. It's a girl.' 
' Do you love children ? ' 
'I do,' Kirilov replied, rather indifferently, however. 
'In that case you must love life, too, mustn't you ?' 
'Yes, I love life. Why ? '  
' But you've made up your mind to shoot yourself.' 
' What about it? Why put the two together ? Life's one thing, and 
that's another. Life exists, but death doesn't exist at all.' 
' Do you believe in a future everlasting life ? '  
' No, not in a future everlasting but in an everlasting life here. There 
are moments, you reach moments, and time comes to a sudden stop, 
.and it wil become eternal.' 
'You hope to reach such a moment ? '  
'Yes.' 
'That's hardly possible in our time,' Stavrogin said, also without the 

NIGHT 
243 
slightest irony, slowly and as though pensively. 'In the Revelation the 
angel swears that there will be no more time.' 
'I know. That's very true. Clear and precise. When all mankind 
achieves happiness, there will be no more time, for there won't be any 
o.eed for it. A very true thought.' 
'Where will it be hidden ? ' 
'It will not be hidden anywhere. Time is not an object, but an idea. 
It will be extinguished in the mind.' 
'Old philosophic cliches, the same from the beginning of time,' 
Stavrogin muttered with an expression of mingled pity and con­
tempt. 
'The same! The same from the beginning of time and never any 
others! '  Kirilov cried with glittering eyes, as though that idea con­
tained a triumphant proof of all he stood for. 
'I believe you're happy, aren't you, Kirilov?' 
'Yes, very happy,' Kirilov replied, as though making the most 
ordinary reply. 
'But weren't you distressed so recently ? Weren't you angry with 
Liputin ?' 
'Well - I don't feel like abusing anyone now. I didn't know then 
that I was happy Ever seen a leaf, a leaf from a tree?' 
'I have.' 
'I saw one recently, a yellow one, a little green, wilted at the edges. 
Blown by the wind. When I was a boy of ten I used to shut my eyes 
deiiberately in winter and imagine a green leaf, bright green with 
veins on it, and the sun shining. I used to open my eyes and couldn't 
believe it because it was so beautiful, and I used to shut them again.' 
'What's that? An allegory ?' 
' N-no - why ? Not an allegory, just a leaf, one leaf. A leaf's goud. 
All's good.' 
'All?' 
'All. Man's unhappy because he doesn't know that he's happy. Only 
because of that. That's al - that's all !  He who fmds out will become 
happy at once - that very minute. That mother-in-law will die, but 
the little girl will remain - all's good. I discovered it suddenly.' 
'But what about the man who dies of hunger or the man who in­
sults and rapes the little girl - is that good too ?' 
'Yes, it is. And he who blows his brains out for the child, that's 

244 
THE DEVILS · PART TWO 
good too. And he who doesn't blow his brains out, that's good too. 
All's good - all. It's good for all those who know that all's good. If 
they knew that it was good for them, then it would be good for them, 
and as long as they don't know that it is good for them, it will not be 
good for them. That's my idea in a nutshell - all of it - there isn't any 
other ! '  
' When did you find out that you were so happy?' 
' Last week, on Tuesday - no, on Wednesday, because it was already 
Wednesday - during the night.' 
' In what connexion ?' 
' Don't remember. It just happened. Was walking about the room ­
makes no difference. I stopped the clock. It was twenty-three minutes 
to three.' 
'As a symbol of the fact that time must stop ?' 
Kirilov said nothing. 
'They are not good,' he resumed suddenly, ' because they don't 
know that they are good. When they fmd out, they won't rape a little 
girl. They have to find out that they are good, for then they wil all at 
once become good, every one of them.' 
' Well, you've found that out, so I suppose you are good ?' 
'I am good.' 
'As a matter offact, I agree with you,' Stavrogin muttered, frown­
ing. 
' He who teaches that all arc good will bring about the end of the 
world.' 
' He who taught it was crucified.' 
' He wil come, and his name will be the man-god.' 
'The god-man ?' 
'The man-god; there is a difference there.' 
' It wasn't you who lighted the lamp before the icon, was it ?' 
'Y cs, I lit it.' 
'You believe in God, then ? ' 
'The old woman likes the lamp to be lit - and she was too busy to­
day,' Kirilov muttered. 
'But you don't yet say prayers yourself, do you?' 
' I  pray to everything. Look there : a spider crawling on the wall - I 
look at it and I am grateful to it for crawling.' 
Hi΂ eyes glowed again. He kept looking steadily at Stavrogin al the 

NIGHT 
245 
time, and his look was firm and implacable. Stavrogin watched him, 
frowning and with a feeling that amounted to disgust, but there was 
no sneer in his expression. 
' I  hope that when I come next time you will be believing in God, 
too,' he said, getting up and picking up his hat. 
'Why ?' said Kirilov, getting up too. 
'If you found out that you believed in God, you would believe in 
Him, but as you don't know that you believe in God, you don't be­
lieve in Him,' Stavrogin said with a laugh. 
'That's not it,' said Kirilov, after thinking it over. ' You've distorted 
my idea. A smoking-room joke. Remember what you've meant in 
my life, Stavrogin.' 
' Good-bye, Kirilov.' 
'Come at night. When ?' 
'You haven't forgotten about to-morrow, have you ?' 
' Oh dear, I had. But don't worry, I shan't over-sleep. At nine 
o'clock. I know how to get up when I want to. I go to bed and say to 
myself: " At seven o'clock ", and I wake up at seven o'clock; " At ten 
o'clock" - and I wake up at ten o'clock.' 
'You've quite remarkable powers,' Stavrogin said, looking at his 
pale face. 
'I'll come along and open the gate.' 
'Don't trouble, Shatov will open it for me.' 
' Oh, Shatov. Al right, good-bye.' 
6 
The front door of the empty house in which Shatov lived was not 
locked; but having got into the passage, Stavrogin found himself in 
complete darkness and began groping with his hand for the stairs to 
the attic. Suddenly a door opened on the top landing and a light ap­
peared. Shatov did not come out himself, but only opened his door. 
When Stavrogin stopped in the doorway, he saw him standing ex­
pectantly at the table in the comer. 
' You will receive me on business ?' he asked from the doorway. 
'Come in and sit down,' replied Shatov. 'Lock the door. Wait, I'll 
do it mysel£' 
He locked the door, returned to the table, and sat down opposite 

THE D E V I L S · PART T W O  
Stavrogin. He had grown thinner during this week and was now, it 
seemed, running a high temperature. 
'You've made me ill,' he said in a soft undertone, lowering his eyes. 
' Why didn't you come ?' 
'Were you so sure I'd come ?' 
'Yes. Wait a moment - I was delirious, perhaps I still am - wait a 
moment. 
. 
He got up and took down something from the top of the three 
shelves near the wall. It was a revolver. 
' One night, in delirium, I imagined that you were coming to kill 
me, and early next morning I spent my last penny on buying a revol­
ver from that rogue Lyamshin; I was not going to let you get me. 
Then I recovered my senses. I have no ammunition. Since then it has 
been lying there on the shelf. One moment -' 
He got up, and was about to open the ventilation window. 
' Don't throw it·out.' Stavrogin stopped him. ' What for ?  It costs 
money, and to-morrow people will be saying that there are revolvers 
lying about under Shatov' s window. Put it back. So. And now sit 
down. Tell me, why do you seem to apologize to me for thinking 
that I might come to kill you? I haven't come to make peace with you 
now, but to discuss some important business. First of all, tell me this : 
am I right in thinking that you didn't strike me because of my affair 
with your wife?' 
' So you know yourself that I didn't ?' Shatov said, lowering his eyes 
agam. 
'Nor because you believed the silly story about your sister.' 
' No, no, of course not! It is silly ! My sister told me from the very 
first,' Shatov said harshly and impatiently, stamping his foot slightly. 
' So that I was right and you, too, were right,' Stavrogin went on in 
a calm tone of voice. 'You are right: Mary Lebyatkin is my lawful 
wife, whom I married in Petersburg four and a half years ago. You 
struck me because of her, didn't you ?' 
Shatov, entirely taken aback, listened and said nothing. 
'Yes, I guessed it, but I didn't believe it,' he muttered at last, looking 
strangely at Stavrogin. 
'And you struck me?' 
'I did it because of your fall,' Shatov muttered almost incoherently, 
flushing, '- because of your lie. I didn't go up to you to punish you: 

N I GHT 
247 
when I went up to you I didn't know that I was going to hit you. I did 
it because you meant so much in my life. I -' 
'I understand, I understand. Spare your words. I'm sorry you are 
feverish. My business is most important.' 
'I have been waiting too long for you,' Shatov said, almost trem­
bling al over, and got up from his chair. 'Tell me what's your busi­
ness - I'll tell you too - later -' 
He sat down. 
'The business I've come about is of quite a different kind,' Stavro­
gin began, scrutinizing him with curiosity. ' Owing to certain circum­
stances I was compelled to choose this hour to-day to warn you that 
they might kill you.' 
Shatov looked wildly at him. 
'I know that my life may be in danger,' he said slowly, ' but how 
could you - know about it?' 
'Because I'm also one of them, like you. l'm a member Of their 
society, just as you are.' 
'You - you, too, are a member of the society?' 
'I can see from your eyes that you expected everything from me 
except that,' Stavrogin said, smiling faintly. 'But please tell me, did 
you know already that an attempt was going to be made on your 
life?' 
'The idea never occurred to me. And I don't think so even now, in 
spite of what you've said, though - though no one can possibly say 
what those fools may do ! '  he cried suddenly in a fury, banging the 
table with his fist. ' I'm not afraid of them ! I've broken with them. 
That fellow came four times to tell me that it was possible - but,' he 
looked at Stavrogin, ' what exactly do you know about it ?' 
' Doq.'t be alarmed; I'm not deceiving you,' Stavrogin went on 
rather coldly, with the expression of a man who was only doing his 
duty. 'You ask me what I know. I know that you became a member 
of the society abroad, two years ago, and at the time of the old organ­
ization, immediately before your departure for America and, it would 
appear, just after our last conversation, about which you wrote such 
a lot to me in your letter from America. By the way, I'm sorry for not 
having answered you by letter, but confined myself -' 
'- to sending money. Wait.' Shatov stopped him, hurriedly pull­
ing out a drawer and taking out a rainbow-coloured banknote from 

THE DEVILS ' PART TWO 
under the papers. ' Here, take it. It's the hundred roubles you sent me. 
I should have perished there without you. You would have had to 
wait a long time for it if it had not been for your mother: she gave 
me these htmdred roubles nine months ago because I was so poor after 
my illness. But go on, please.' 
He was breathless. 
'In America you changed your views, and on returning to Switzer­
land you wanted to resign. They said nothing to you, but ordered you 
to take over a printing-press here in Russia from someone and to keep 
it until you handed it over to someone who would come to you from 
them. I don't know al the details, but I believe that it's true on the 
whole, isn't it? You undertook to carry out their instructions in the 
hope or on condition that it would be their last demand on you and 
after that they would release you entirely. Whether true or not, I 
found it out not from them, but by chance. But what you don't seem 
to know even now is that those gentlemen have no intention of 
parting with you.' 
'That'.s absurd! ' Shatov cried at the top of his voice. 'I've told them 
honestly that I disagreed with them about everything! I've a right to 
do that, the right of conscience and thought . . . .  I won't put up with 
it! There's no power on earth which could -' 
' Look here, you'd better not shollt,' Stavrogin said earnestly, inter­
rupting him. ' That Verkhovensky is such a mean fellow that it 
wouldn't surprise me if he or a confederate ofhis was eavesdropping 
outside in your passage. Even that drunkard Lebyatkin has probably 
been instructed to keep an eye on you and, perhaps, you on him - am 
I right ? You'd better tell me whether Verkhovensky has agreed to 
accept your arguments now or not.' 
' He has. He said it was quite in order and that I had the right to -' 
' Well, in that case he's deceiving you. I know that even Kirilov, 
who scarcely belongs to them at al, has been supplying them with in­
formation about you; and they have many agents, some of whom 
don't even know that they are in the service of the society. You've al­
ways been kept under observation. Peter Verkhovensky, by the way, 
came to settle your business once for all, and he has been fuly author­
ized to do so - namely, to liquidate you at the first favourable oppor­
tunity as one who knows too much and who might inform the author­
ities. I tell you again that this is certain. And let me add that they are 

NIGHT 
249 
for some reason convinced that you are a police spy and that if you 
haven't informed against them as yet, you are sure to do so. Is that 
true?' 
Shatov made a wry face at hearing such a question, uttered in such 
a matter-of-fact tone of voice. 
' Even if l were a spy, against whom am I supposed to inform ?' he 
said angrily, without giving a direct answer. ' No, leave me alone; to 
hell with me ! '  he cried, grasping at his original idea which, according 
to all the signs, seemed to agitate him more powerfully than the news 
ofhis own dangerous position. ' You, you, Stavrogin, how could you 
get yourself involved in such a shameful and stupid, third-rate ab­
surdity ? You are a member of their society ! Is that Nicholas Sta vro­
gin' s great heroic feat ?' he cried almost in despair. 
He even clasped his hands, as though he could make no more bitter 
and melancholy discovery than that. 
' I'm sorry,' Stavrogin said, looking really surprised, ' but you seem 
to regard me as a sort of a sun and yourself as a sort of insignificant in­
sect compared with me. I noticed it even from the letter you sent me 
from America.' 
'You - you know - oh, don't let's discuss me,' Shatov broke off 
suddenly. 'If you can explain anything about yourself, then you'd 
better explain it. Answer my question ! '  he repeated heatedly. 
' With pleasure. You asked me how I could have got into such a 
thieves' kitchen ? After what I've told you I think I owe you a little 
frankness in this matter. You see, strictly speaking, I don't really be­
long to the society at all and have never belonged to it, and I am more 
entitled than you are to leave them because I never joined them. On 
the contrary, from the very beginning I told them that I was not one 
of them, and if I did occasionally help them, I did it merely by acci­
dent, having nothing else to do. I took a certain part in the reorganiza­
tion of the society according to the new plan, but that was all. But they 
have changed their minds now, and have decided that it would be dan­
gerous to let me go, and I believe that I, too, have been sentenced.' 
' Oh, it's always a death sentence with them, and it's al done on 
official documents, on papers with seals, signed by three men and a 
half. And do you really believe that they are capable of carrying it 
out ? '  
'As regards that particular point,' Stavrogin went on, looking as 

250 
THE D EVILS • PART TWO 
indifferent as ever, and speaking rather languidly, 'you're partly right 
and partly not. There can be no doubt that, as always in such cases, 
there's a lot that's fantastic about it: a handful of people exaggerates 
its own size and importance. I'll even go so far as to say that, in my 
opinion, the whole society consists only of Peter Verkhovensky, and 
it's merely his great modesty that makes him consider himself to be 
only an agent of his own society. However, the fundamental idea of 
it is no more silly than others of the same kind. They have connexions 
with the Intemationale; they have succeeded in getting their agents in 
Russia, they even hit on a highly original method - but, of course, 
only theoretically. As for their intentions here, you must not forget 
that the development of our Russian organization is so obscure, and 
indeed almost always so unexpected that they really might try any­
thing in this country. Verkhovensky, remember, is an obstinate 
fellow.' 
' He's a louse, an ignoramus, an idiot who doesn't understand a 
thing about Russia! '  Shatov shouted fiercely. 
'You don't know him well enough. It's true that all of them know 
very little about Russia, but only a little less than you and me. And, 
besides, Verkhovensky is an enthusiast.' 
'Verkhovensky an enthusiast? '  
'Yes, indeed. There is a point where he stops being a clown and is 
transformed into - a  madman. Let me remind you of one of your own 
sayings : "Do you realize how powerful one man can be?" Please 
don't laugh. He is quite capable of pulling a trigger. They are con­
vinced that I, too, am a spy. Al of them, inexperienced as they are 
in their own business, are terribly fond of accusing people of being 
spies.' 
' But you're not afraid, are you ?' 
'N-no. I'm not very much afraid. But your case is quite different. I 
warned you so that you should bear it in mind. To my way of think­
ing, you needn't take it amiss that you are threatened with danger by 
fools. It's not a question of whether they are intelligent or not. They've 
raised their hands against much better men than you or me. Oh, well, 
it's a quarter past eleven' - he looked at his watch and got up from his 
chair. 'I should like to ask you another question, a question that has 
nothing to do with what we've been discussing.' 
' For God's sake! ' cried Shatov, leaping to his feet. 

NIGHT 
25 1 
'You mean?' Stavrogin looked inquiringly at him. 
'Do, do ask your question, for God's sake,' Shatov repeated in in­
expressible agitation, ' but on condition that I ask you a question too. 
Please, let me - I can't - ask your question ! '  
Stavrogin waited a little and began : 
'I understand that you've had a certain influence on Mary and that 
she likes to see you and listen to you. Is that so ?' 
'Yes - she did listen -' Shatov said, looking a little embarrassed. 
'I intend to make a public announcement of my marriage to her in 
a short time here in town.' 
'But is that possible?' Shatov whispered, almost with horror. 
'How do you mean ? There's no difficulty about it. The witnesses to 
the marriage are here. It all took place in-a perfectly legal and orderly 
maner, and if it has not been made public til now it is only because 
the only two witnesses of the marriage, Kirilov and Peter V erkhoven­
sky, and, fmally, Lebyatkin himself (whom I have the pleasure of con­
sidering one of my relations now), gave their word to say nothing 
about it.' 
'I didn't mean that. You talk so calmly about it - but go on! Listen. 
You were not forced into that marriage, were you?' 
' No, nobody forced me into it,' said Stavrogin, smiling at Shatov's 
chalenging haste. 
'And what's al this about her baby she keeps talking about?' 
Shatov kept asking feverishly and disconnectedly. 
'Keeps talking about her baby ? Good Lord, I knew nothing about 
it. It's the first time I've heard of it. She never had a baby. She could 
not have had one: she is a virgin.' 
'I see! I thought so. Listen ! ' 
'What's the matter with you, Shatov?' 
Shatov hid his face in his hands, turned away, but suddenly gripped 
Stavrogin by the shoulder. 
'Do you know,' he cried, ' do you know at least, why you did all 
that and why you've made up your mind to accept such punishment 
now ?' 
'Your question is intelligent and malicious, but I'm going to sur­
prise you, too : yes, I almost know why I got married then and why 
I've made up my mind to accept such a punishment, as you call it, 
' 
now. 

252 
T H E  DEVILS · PART T W O  
' Let's leave it - we'll discuss it later. Let's talk about the main thing, 
the main thing : I waited two years for you.' 
' Did you ?' 
'I've waited too long for you, I've been thinking of you incessantly. 
You're the only man who could have - I wrote to you about it from 
America.' 
' I  remember your long letter very well.' 
'Too long to be read through? I agree. Six sheets of note-paper. 
Don't speak - don't speak ! Tell me, can you spare me another ten 
minutes, but now, immediately? I've waited too long for you! '  
' By all means, I can spare you half an hour, but no more, if that's 
all right.' 
'But,' Shatov interposed furiously, 'on condition that you change 
your tone. Do you hear? I demand it, when I should really beg you . 
. . . Do you understand what it means to demand when one should 
beg ?' 
' I  understand that in this way you exalt yourself over everything 
that is ordinary for the sake of higher things,' Stavrogin said with a 
faint smile. ' I'm also sorry to say that I can't help noticing that you're 
feverish.' 
'I ask to be treated with respect - I demand it! '  shouted Shatov. 
' Not respect for my personality - to hell with it! - but for something 
else, just for this once, just for a few words. We are two human beings 
and we've met in infinity - for the last time in this world. Drop your 
tone and speak like a human being ! Speak for once in your life with a 
human voice. I'm not asking it for myself, but tor you. Do you realize 
that you must forgive me for that blow in the face, if only because I 
presented you with the opportunity of learning how powerful you 
were. Again you smile your superior, disdainful smile. Oh, when will 
you understand me? Away with the gentleman! Please understand 
that I demand it - I demand it, otherwise I won't speak. I shan't for 
anything in the world ! '  
His frenzy was bordering on delirium. Stavrogin frowned and 
seemed to be more on his guard. 
' Since I have agreed to stay for half an hour,' he said earnestly and 
impressively, 'when time is so precious to me, you may be sure that I 
mean to listen to you, at least with interest and - and I'm sure I shall 
hear a lot that's new from you.' 

N I G H T  
253 
He sat down on a chair. 
' Sit down! '  cried Shatov and, somehow all at once, he sat down 
himself. 
'But let me remind you,' Stavrogin once more put in, ' that I was 
about to ask you a great favour regarding Mary, a favour which is 
very important to her, at any rate.' 
' Well ?' Shatov frowned sucldenly, like a man who has been inter­
rupted in the most important place and who, though still looking at 
you, has had no time to grasp your question. 
'And you did not let me fmish,' Stavrogin concluded with a smile. 
' Oh, that's nonsense - later, later ! '  Shatov waved his hand im­
patiently, having at last realized Stavrogin's grievance, and turned 
straight to his main subject. 
7 
' Do you know,' he began almost menacingly, leaning forward in his 
chair with flashing eyes and raising the fore-finger of his right hand 
before him (evidently without being aware of it himself) - ' do you 
know who are now the only " god-bearing " people on earth, destined 
to regenerate and save the world in the name of a new god and to 
whom alone the keys of life and of the new word have been vouch­
safed - do you know which is that people and what is its name ?' 
'To judge by your manner I must needs conclude and, I suppose, 
without delay that it is the Russian people.' 
'And you are already laughing - oh, what a tribe ! '  Shatov again 
nearly leapt to his feet. 
'Calm yourself, I beg you. On the contrary, I was, as a matter of 
fact, expecting something of the kind.' 
' Expecting something of the kind ? And don't you know those 
words yourself?' 
'I know them very well. I can see perfectly well what you are driv­
ing at. The whole of your phrase, and even the expression the " god­
bearing" people is merely the sequel of the talk we had abroad over 
two years ago shortly before your departure for America. At least, as 
far as I can remember now.' 
' It is entirely your phrase, and not mine. Your own, and not just 
the sequel of our conversation. " Our" conversation didn't take place 

254 
THE D E V I L S ' PART TWO 
at all ;  there was a teacher, uttering big words, and a pupil, who had 
arisen from the dead. I was that pupil and you were the teacher.' 
' But, if you remember, it was after those words of mine that you 
joined the society, and only then left for America.' 
' That's right, and I wrote to you from America about that. I wrote 
to you about everything. It is quite true that I could not tear myself 
away all at once from what I had grown so closely attached to since 
my childhood., on which I had lavished all the raptures of my hopes 
and all the tears of my hatred. It is difficult to change gods. I did not 
believe you then because I did not want to believe and for the last 
time I pinned al my hopes on that cesspool. But the seed remained 
and grew. Seriously, tell me seriously, did you read my letter from 
America to the end ? Perhaps you didn't read it at all ?' 
' I  read three pages of it: the first two pages and the last page and 
glanced through the middle. However, I always meant to -' 
' Oh, it makes no difference ! Forget it ! To hell with it! '  Shatov dis­
missed it with a wave of the hand. ' If you have gone back on those 
words of yours about the people, how could you have brought your­
ȩelf to utter them at that time ? That's what I find so unbearable now.' 
' I  wasn't joking with you then, either. By trying to convince you, 
I was perhaps more concerned about myself than about you,' Stavro­
gin said enigmatically. 
'You were not joking ! In America I lay three months on straw be­
side a wretched fellow, and I learnt from him that at the very time you 
were planting the idea of God and country in my heart, that at that 
very time, perhaps during those very days, you had been envenoming 
the heart of that poor fellow, of that maniac Kirilov. You filled him 
with lies and slanders and brought him to the verge of insanity. Go, 
look at him now - he's your creation. But you have seen him, haven't 
you?' 
'Let me first of all point out to you that Kirilov himself has just 
told me that he is happy and that he is very good. Your assumption 
chat it al happened at the same time is almost true; but what of it ? I 
repeat, I was not deceiving either of you.' 
'Are you an atheist? Are you an atheist now?' 
'Yes.' 
'And then ?' 
'Just as then.' 

NI GHT 
255 
' When I began the conversation it was not myself I asked yon to 
respect. A man of your intelligence ought to have understood it,' 
Shatov muttered indignantly. 
' I  did not get up at your first word, I didn't close the conversation, 
I did not go away from you, I stil am sitting here and answering your 
questions and - your shouts quietly, which means that I haven't yet 
lost my respect for you.' 
Shatov interrupted with a wave of the hand : 
'Do you remember your expression that "An atheist can't be a 
Russian," that "An atheist at once ceases to be a Russian " ?  Do you 
remember it?' 
'Oh ? '  Stavrogin asked, as though questioning him in tum. 
'Do you ask? Have you forgotten ? And yet that is one of the most 
precise formulations of one of the chief characteristics of the Russian 
spirit that you have divined. You can't have forgotten it ! Let me re­
mind you of something else you said at the same time : "A man who 
does not belong to the Greek Orthodox faith cannot be a Russian." ' 
' I  expect that's a Slavophil idea.' 
' No, our present-day Slavophils wil have nothing to do with it. 
But you went even further : you believed that Roman Catholicism is 
not Christianity; you maintained that Rome proclaimed a Christ who 
yielded to the third temptation of the devil, and that, having pro­
claimed to the whole world that Christ could not hold out on earth 
without an earthly kingdom, Catholicism had thereby proclaimed the 
antichrist and ruined the whole Western world. It was you who 
pointed out that if France was in agonies, it was solely the fault of the 
Catholic Church, for she had rejected the stinking Roman god, but 
had not found another one. That was what you could say then ! I re­
member our talks.' 
'If l  were a believer I should, without a doubt, repeat it even now. 
I did not lie, speaking as a believer,' Stavrogin said very seriously. ' But 
I assure you that this repetition of my old ideas makes an extremely 
unpleasant impression on me. Won't yon stop ?' 
'If you were a believer ? '  Shatov cried, without paying the slightest 
attention to Stavrogin's request. 'But didn't you tell me that if it were 
mathematically proved to you that truth was outside Christ, you 
would rather remain with Christ than with truth ? Did you say that ? 
Did you?' 

T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  T W O  
' Dut let me ask you a question too.' Stavrogin raised his voice. 
'What is the object of this impatient and - ill-natured examinari.m ?' 
'This examination will be over for ever and yon will never be re­
minded of it again.' 
'You still insist that we are beyond space and time.' 
' Shut up ! '  Shatov suddenly shouted. ' I'm stupid and clumsy, but 
let my name perish in ridicule! Will yon allow me to repeat your 
principal idea of that time ? Oh, only a dozen lines, just the con­
clusion.' 
' Repeat it if it is only the conclusion.' 
Stavrogin was about to look at his watch, but he controlled himself 
and did not look. 
Shatov again leaned forward in his chair, and for a fraction of a 
second even raised his fmger again. 
' Not one people,' he began, as though reading it line by line and at 
the same time continuing to look menacingly at Stavrogin - 'not nne 
people has yet ordered its life in accordance with the principles of 
science and reason. There has never been an instance of it, except only 
for a moment, ont of folly. Socialism is by its very nature bound to be 
atheistic because it has proclaimed from the very first that it is an 
atheistic institution and that it intends to organize itself exclusively o;1 
the principles of science and reason. Reason and science have always, 
to-day and from the very beginning of time, played a secondary and 
a subordinate part; and so they will to the end of time. Peoples are 
formed and moved by quite a different force, a force that dominates 
and exercises its authority over them, the origin of which, however, is 
unknown and inexplicable. That force is the force of an unquenchable 
desire to go on to the end and, at the same time, to deny the existence 
of an end. It is the force of an incessant and persistent affirmation of its 
existence and a denial of death. It is the spirit of life, as the Scripture 
says, "rivers ofliving water", the running dry of which is threatened 
in Revelation. It is the aesthetic principle, as the philosophers call it, 
an ethical principle, with which they identify it, the "seeking of 
God", as I call it much more simply. The purpose of the whole evolu­
tion of a nation, in every people and at every period of its existence, 
is solely the pursuit of God, their God, their very own God, and faith 
in Him as in the only true one. God is the synthetic personality of the 
whole people, taken from its beginning to its end. It has never 

NIGHT 
257 
happened that all or many peoples should have one common God, but 
every people has always had its own special one. The first sign of the 
decay of nations is when they begin to have common gods. When 
gods begin to be common gods, the gods die ֠ well as the faith in 
them, together with the peoples themselves. The more powerful a 
nation, the more individual its god. There has never yet been a nation 
without a religion, that is to say, without the conception of good and 
evil. Every people has its own conception of good and evil and its 
own good and evil. When the conceptions of good and evil become 
general among many nations, then these nations begin to die out, and 
the very distinction between good and evil begins to get blurred and 
to vanish. Reason has never been able to define good and evil, or even 
to separate good from evil, not even approximately; on the contrary, 
it had always mixed them up in a most pitiful and disgraceful fashion ; 
as for science, its solutions have always been based on brute force. 
This was particularly true of that half-science, that most terrible 
scourge of mankind, worse than pestilence, famine, or war, and quite 
unknown til our present century. Half-science is a despot such as has 
never been known before. A despot that has its own priests and slaves, 
a despot before whom everybody prostrates himself with love and 
superstitious dread, such as has been quite inconceivable till now, be­
fore whom science itself trembles and surrenders in a shameful way . 
These are your own words, Stavrogin, except only what I have said 
about half-science; that is mine, because I represent only half-science, 
and that's why I hate it particularly. As for your own ideas and even 
your own words, I haven't changed anything, not a single word.' 
'I don't think so,' Stavrogin remarked cautiously. ' You accepted 
them ardently and you modified them ardently without being aware 
of it. The very fact that you reduce God to a simple attribute of 
nationality -' 
He suddenly began watching Shatov with intensified and special 
attention, intent not so much on his words as on Shatov himself. 
'I reduce God to the attribute of nationality ?' Shatov cried. ' On 
the contrary, I raise the people to God. And indeed has it ever been 
otherwise? The people is the body of God. Every people is a people 
only so long as it has its own particular god and excludes all other 
gods in the world without any attempt at reconciliation; so long as it 
bdieves that by its own god it will conquer and banish all the other 

T H E  DEVILS · PART T W O  
gods from the world. So all believed from the very beginning of time 
- all the great nations, at any rate, all who have been in any way 
marked out, all who have played a leading part in the afiairs of man­
kind. It is impossible to go against the facts. The Jews lived only to 
await the coming of the true God, and they left the true God to the 
world. The Greeks deified nature and bequeathed the world their re­
ligion - that is, philosophy and art. Rome deified the people in the 
State and bequeathed the State to the nations. France throughout her 
long history was merely the embodiment and development of the 
idea of the Roman god, and if she at last flung her Roman god into 
the abyss and gave herself up to atheism, which for the time being 
they call socialism, it is only because atheism is still healthier than 
Roman Catholicism. If a great people docs not believe that truth resides 
in it alone (in itself alone and in it exclusively), if it docs not believe 
that it alone is able and has been chosen to raise up and save every­
body by its own truth, it is at once transformed into ethnographical 
material, and not into a great people. A truly great people can never 
reconcile itself to playing second fiddle in the affairs of humanity, not 
even to playing an important part, but always and exclusively the chief 
part. If it loses that faith, it is no longer a nation. But there is only one 
truth, and therefore there is only one nation among all the nations 
that can have the true God, even though other nations may have their 
own particular great gods. And the only "god-bearing " people is the 
Russian people and - and - and do you, Stavrogin, really think me 
such a fool,' he suddenly shouted furiously, 'as not to be able to dis­
tinguish whether my words at this moment are silly old platitudes that 
have been ground in all the Moscow Slavophil mills, or an entirely 
new word, the last word, the only word of regeneration and resurrec­
tion and - and what do I care whether you laugh at me or not at this 
moment? What do I care about your complete failure to understand 
me, not a word, not a sound? Oh, how I despise your supercilious 
laughter and your expression at this minute ! '  
He j umped up from his place ; he was positively foaming at the 
mouth. 
' On the contrary, Shatov, on the contrary,' Stavrogin said, looking 
extraordinarily serious and self-possessed, without rising from his seat, 
'on the contrary, your passionate words have brought back many ex­
tremely powerful recollections to my mind. In your words I recognize 

N I GHT 
259 
my own mood two years ago, and now I shall not say, as I did a 
short while ago, that you have exaggerated the ideas I had then. It 
seems to me, indeed, that they were even more exceptional and 
more absolute, and let me assure you for the third time that I'd very 
much like to confirm what you have said just now, even to the last 
syllable, but -' 
'But you a hare ?' 
'Wha-at ?' 
'Your own disgusting expression,' Shatov said, laughing spitefully 
and sitting down again. ' "To cook a hare - you must first catch it, to 
believe in God - vou must have God ", that, I'm told, was one of your 
favourite sayings in Petersburg, like Nozdryov, who tried to catch a 
hare by its hind legs.' 
'No, what he did was to boast that he had caught it. I hope you 
won't mind if I, too, trouble you with a t}Uestion, particubrly as I am, 
it seems to me, fully entitled to ask it now. Tell me, have you caught 
your hare, or is it still running about ?' 
'Don't dare to ask me in such words ! Use others, others ! '  Shatov 
suddenly began trembling all over. 
'By all means I shall put it differently,' Stavrogin said, looking 
sternly at him. 'All I wanted to know is whether you believe in God 
yourself.' 
'I believe in Russia. I believe in the Greek Orthodox Church. I - I 
believe in the body of Christ - I believe that the second coming will 
take place in Russia - I believe -' Shatov murmured in a frenzy. 
' Rut in God ? In God ?' 
'I - I shall believe in God.' 
Not a muscle moved in Stavrogin's face. Shatov looked defiantly 
at him with blazing eyes, as though he wished to reduce him to ashes 
with his look. 
'You see, I haven\ told you that I don't believe at all ! '  he cried at 
last. 'I merely want to let you know that I r"tn an unfortunate, dull 
book and nothing more so far, so far . . . .  But to hell with me! It is 
you, not I, who matters. I'm a man without talent, and I can only give 
my blood, and nothing more, like every man without talent. But to 
hell with my blood, too ! I'm talking about you. I've been waiting 
here two years for you. I've been dancing naked before you for the 
past half-hour. You, you alone could have raised the banner ! '  

é60 
THE DEVILS • PART TWO 
He did not ftnish what he wanted to say, and leaned, as though in 
despair, with his elbows against the table, his head propped up on his 
hands. 
' Since you mention it,' Stavrogin interrupted suddenly, ' I'd like to 
draw your attention to something rather odd: why, do you think, is 
everybody so anxious to· thrust a banner in my hand ? Peter Verkho­
vensky, too, is convinced that I could have " raised their banner" - at 
least, that's what I'm told he said. He's got the idea that I could play 
the part of a Stenka Razin for them because of my " unusual aptitude 
for crime" - those were his very words.' 
' What did you say ?' asked Shatov. 'Because of your " unusual 
aptitude for crime " ? ' 
' Exactly.' 
'I see. And is it true,' he said, with a malicious grin, 'is it true that 
in Petersburg you belonged to a secret society given up to a bestial sen­
suality? Is it true that the Marquis de Sade could have taken lessons 
from you ? Is it true that you enticed and debauched children ? Speak, 
don't dare to lie! '  he cried, beside himself. ' Nicholas Stavrogin can­
not lie before Shatov who slapped his face ! Tell me everything, and 
if it's true I'll kill you at once, right here, on the spot! '  
' I  did say it, but I didn't molest children,' said Stavrogin, but only 
after a pause that lasted much too long. He went pale in the face and 
his eyes flashed. 
'But you did say it! ' Shatov went on imperiously, without taking 
his gleaming eyes off him. 'Is it true that you maintained that you saw 
no distinction in beauty between some voluptuous and brutish act and 
any heroic exploit, even the sacrifice oflife for the good ofhumanity ? 
Is it true that you found the same sort of beauty and equal enjoyment 
in both extremes ?' 
' It's impossible to answer likǐ this - I  refuse to answer,' muttered 
Stavrogin, who could have got up and gone away if he liked, but 
who did not get up and go away. 
' I  don't know why evil is bad and good is beautiful either,' Shatov, 
who was still trembling all over, persisted, 'but I do know why the 
feeling for the distinction between them becomes blurred and is lost in 
such gentlemen as the Stavrogins. Do you know why you got mar­
ried to that woman in so infamous and despicable a fashion ? Just be­
cause the infamy and absurdity of such a marriage reached the pitch 

NIGHT 
of genius ! Oh, you never walk at the edge of the abyss, but precipi­
tate yourself over it boldly, head downwards. You got married be­
cause of your passion for cruelty, because of your passion for remorse, 
because of your moral turpitude. It was a case of morbid hysteria. The 
challenge to common sense was too tempting to be resisted! Stavrogin 
and a wretched. mentally deficient, destitute cripple ! Did you feel a 
sensuous thrill when you bit the Governor's ear ? Did you? You idle, 
loafmg son of a nobleman, did you ?' 
' You're a psychologist,' said Stavrogin, growing paler and paler, 
'though you're partly mistaken about the reasons for my marriage. I 
wonder who could have supplied you with all this information,' he 
asked, smiling constrainedly. ' Not Kirilov ? But he took no part in 
it.' 
'You're turning pale, aren't you ?' 
'·But what do you want ?' Stavrogin asked, raising his voice at last. 
'I've been sitting for half an hour under your lash, and the least you 
can do is to let me go civily, if - if you really have no reasonable 
motive for treating me like that.' 
'A reasonable motive ?' 
'Certainly. It is your duty at least to let me know your motive. I've 
been waiting for you to do so, but all I got was frenzied spite. I must 
ask you to be so good as to open the gate for me.' 
He got up from his chair. Shatov rushed after him furiously. 
' Kiss the earth, drench it with your tears, ask forgiveness ! '  he cried, 
seizing him by the shoulder. 
'But I didn't kil you - that morning, did I ?  I drew back my hands, 
didn't I?' Stavrogin said, almost with anguish, lowering his eyes. 
'Come on, tell me everything! You came to warn me of danger -
you've let me speak - to-morrow you intend to make a public an­
nowlcement of your marriage ! Do you suppose I don't see from your 
face that some new menacing idea has taken hold of you? Stavrogin, 
why am I condemned to believe in you for ever ? Could I have spoken 
like this to anyone else ? I have modesty, but I was not ashamed of my 
nakedness because I was speaking to Stavrogin. I was not afraid of 
caricaturing a great idea by my touch because Stavrogin was listen­
ing to me. . . .  Don't you know that I shall kiss your footprints 
after you have gone ? I can't tear you out of my heart, Nicholas 
Stavrogin ! '  

2.62 
THE D E V I L S · PART T W O  
'I'm sorry I cannot bring myself to like you, Shatov,' said Stavroginl 
coldly. 
' 
' I  know you cannot. I know you're not lying. Listen. I can put 
everything right : I'll catch the hare for you.' 
Stavrogin was silent. 
'You're an atheist because you're a spoilt son of a gentleman, the 
last son of a gentleman. You've lost the distinction between good and 
evil because you no longer know your own people, and you won't 
know it at all, neither you, nor the Verkhovenskys, father and son - nor 
I, for I, too, am a gentleman - I, the son of your serf and footman 
Pashka . . . .  Listen, find God through work ; everything is in that, or 
you'll vanish like rotten mildew; fmd God through work.' 
' God through work ? What kind of work ? '  
' Peasants' work. Go, give up your riches. Ah, you're laughing ! 
You're afraid it might turn out to be a trick ? '  
But Stavrogin was not laughing. 
' You think that it is possible to find God through work, and by 
peasants' work ?' he repeated, after thinking it over, as though he'd 
really come across something new and serious which was worth con­
sidering. ' By the way,' he changed the subject, ' you just reminded 
me : do you know that I'm not rich at all, so that I haven't anything to 
throw away ? Indeed, I'm scarcely in a position even to provide for 
Mary's future. And another thing : I came to ask you if you can pos­
sibly manage to see Mary in future, too, because you're the only per­
son who can exert some influence on her poor brain. I'm saying this 
just in case anything should happen.' 
'All right, you want me to see Mary,' Shatov said, waving one hand 
while he held a candle in the other. 'All right, afterwards, of course . 
. . . Listen, go and see Tikhon.' 
' Whom ?' 
'Tikhon. Tikhon, who used to be a bishop, but retired because of 
illness. He lives here in the town, on the outskirts, in the Efimevsky 
Borogorodsky monastery.' 
' What is it all about ?' 
'Nothing. Lots of people go and see him. You go and sec him, too. 
Why shouldn't you ?  Why not ?' 
' It's the first time I've heard of him and - and I've never met that 
sort of man. Thank you, I'll go and see him.' 

NIGHT 
'This way,' Shatov said, lighting him down the stairs. 'Here you 
are,' he said, flinging open the gate into the street. 
'I shan't come to see you again, Shatov,' Stavrogin said quietly as 
he stepped through the gateway. 
It was stil as dark as ever and pouring with rain. 
Night (continued) 
HE walked al along Bogoyavlenskaya Street ; at last it was downhill 
all the way, his feet slithered in the mud, and suddenly a wide, misty, 
and apparently empty expanse opened up before him - it was the 
river. Instead of houses there were hovels, and the street was lost in a 
large number of irregular lanes. For a long time Stavrogin made his 
way alongside the fences without going too far away from the river, 
but he never lost his way and scarcely thought of it. He was pre­
occupied with something else and, on coming out of a deep reverie, 
he looked round with surprise when he found himself almost in the 
middle of our long, wet pontoon bridge. There was not a soul about, 
so that he could not help feeling strange when he suddenly heard, al­
most at his elbow, a familiarly obsequious but rather pleasant voice 
with that sweetly drawling intonation affected by our over-civilized 
tradesmen or the young, curly-headed shop-assiStants from the shop­
ping arcade. 
'Excuse me, sir, but would you mind very much ifl got under your 
umbrella?' 
And, sure enough, a figure crept, or merely pretended to creep, 
tmder his umbrella. The tramp walked beside him, almost 'shoulder to 
shoulder', as soldiers put it. Slowing down, Stavrogin bent over to 
examine him more closely as far as it was possible in the darkness : 
he was a short man, looking like a tipsy artisan, and wearing 
rough and shabby clothes. A soaked cloth cap with its brim half 
tom off was perched precariously on his shaggy, curly head. He 
seemed a strong, spare, swarthy man with very dark hair and large 
eyes, which were certainly black, with a hard glitter and a yellow­
ing tinge in them, like a gipsy's ; that could be divined even in the 

THE D E V I L S · PART T W O  
pitch darkness. He was probably about forty, and he was not 
drunk. 
' Do you know me ?' asked Stavrogin. 
' You're Mr Stavrogin, sir. You was pointed out to me at the rail­
way station just as the train stopped last Sunday. Besides, I've heard a 
lot about you, sir, before.' 
' From Mr Verkhovensky ?  You - you're not Fedka the Convict, are 
you ?' 
'I was baptised Fyodor, sir. I still got my mother living in these here 
parts. She's a very old woman now, sir, and she gets more and more 
bent every day; offering up prayers for me day and night, she is, sir, 
so that she don't waste her time, seeing as how she is so old, lying 
about doing nothing on the stove.' 
' You're an escaped prisoner, aren't you ?' 
'Yes, sir, changed my occupation, I have. Gave up my books, bells, 
and church work because I got a life sentence and I'd have had to wait 
a long time to serve my sentence, sir.' 
'What are you doing here ?' 
'Well, sir, I gets along as best I can. My uncle died in the prison here 
last week - been serving a sentence for counterfeiting, he has - so by 
way of holding a wake I threw two doz.en stones at the dogs - that's 
all I been doing so far, sir. Besides, Mr Verkhovensky, sir, promises to 
get me a passport, a merchant's one, too, that'll give me the oppor­
tunity of travelling all over Russia. So, you see, sir, I've to wait till he's 
good enough to get it for me. He's doing me a kindness, he is, because, 
you see, sir, he says to me : " My dad," he says, "lost you at cards at 
the English club, and I," he says, " consider it an unjust act of in­
humanity," he says. Won't you give me three roubles, sir, for some­
thing to warm myself?' 
' So you've been waiting for me here, have you ?  I don't like that. 
By whose orders ?' 
' I  ain't received no orders from nobody, sir. I done it just because I 
knows how kind-hearted you arc, sir, and everybody knows that, sir. 
I'm on my beam end, honest I am, as you can see for yourself, sir. 
Last Friday I stuffed my belly full of meat pasty. Since then I ate noth­
ing one day, fasted another, and hadn't a bite on the third. There's 
plenty of water in the river, to be sure, but I've drunk so much of it, 
sir, that there's a regular tiddler's pond in my belly. So won't you 

NIGHT 
spare something for a poor devil like me, sir ? I have a lady friend wait­
ing for me not far from here, but I daren't show her my face without 
a couple of roubles in my pocket.' 
' What did Mr Verkhovensky promise you from me ?' 
' He didn't promise nothing, sir, but only said in so many words 
that I might be of some use to you, sir, if an occasion should arise. But 
he didn't rightly explain what it was exactly he had in mind, for Mr 
Verkhovensky, sir, seems very anxious to see whether I have the 
patience of a Cossack, and he won't trust me an inch, he won't.' 
' Oh ?  Why not ?' 
'Mr Verkhovensky, sir, is an astrologer and there ain't a planet he 
don't know, but he, too, can make a slip like the rest of us. It's gospel 
truth I'm telling you, sir, as afore God because I've heard so much 
about you. Mr Verkhovensky, sir, is one thing, and you, I daresay, is 
another. Once he says a man's a scoundrel, nothing will make him 
change his mind : a scoundrel he'll remain. Or if he calls a man a fool, 
he won't know nothing more of that man except that he's a fool. But 
mӇ.sir, I may be a fool Tuesdays and Wednesdays, but a much cleverer 
man than him on Thursdays. So, you see, sir, what he knows very 
well about me is that I'm in a hell of a ftx about getting myself a pass­
port - for without proper documents it ain't possible to live in Russia ­
and that's why he thinks he has me in the hollow of his hand. I tell 
you, sir, Mr Verkhovensky fmds life very easy - very easy, indeed, sir 
- for once he's got a certain opinion of a man, he sticks to it. And, be­
sides, he's a terrible miser, he is. He thinks that without his knowing 
about it I shan't dare to trouble you, but I'm standing afore you just as 
afore God - been waiting for yon on this here bridge, sir, for three 
nights, I have, in the belief that I can find my own way, quiet-like, 
without him. Much better, I thinks to myself, bow to a boot than to 
a bast-shoe.' 
'And who told you that I was going to cross the bridge at night ?' 
' Well, sir, to tell the truth, I got to know about it by chance, most 
through the stupidity of Captain Lebyatkin, for he can't keep his 
mouth shut, he can't. So that your three roubles, sir, will just pay me 
for the boring time I've had these three days and nights. As for my 
clothes what got soaked, I shan't say nothing about it - I'll just grin 
and bear it, sir.' 
' I'm going to the left, you to the right. Here's the end of the bridge. 

THE DEVILS · PART TWO 
Listen, Fyodor, I like people to understand what I say once for all : I 
won't give you a penny. Don't let me see you again on the bridge or 
anywhere else. I have no use for you now or in future, and if you 
won't obey, I'll tie your hands behind your back and take you to the 
police. Be off! ' 
'Ah, well, you could have let me have something for my company, 
sir. Made you feel more cheerful like, I have, by walking alongside of 
you.' 
'Away with you ! '  
' But do you know your way, sir ? There are hundreds of turnings 
here - I could show you which to take, for this here town, sir, is just 
as if the devil himself had carried it in his basket and strewn it all over 
the blooming place.' 
' I'll tie you up ! '  Stavrogin turned round to him menacingly. 
'Perhaps you'll change your mind, sir. It doesn't take much to do 
an injury to a poor bloke like me.' 
'I see you're sure of yourself! '  
' I'm sure o f  you, sir, and not very much of myself' 
' I  don't need you at all. I've told you so already.' 
'But I need you, sir, that's the trouble ! Well, it can't be helped. I'll 
wait for you on your way back, sir.' 
'I give you my word of honour if l meet you I'll tie you up.' 
' In that case, sir, I'd better get a belt ready for you. Good-bye, sir, 
and thank you for sheltering me under your umbrella: l shall be grate­
ful to you for it to my dying day.' 
He fell behind. Stavrogin reached his destination, feeling worried. 
This man who had dropped out of the blue was absolutely convinced 
that he was indispensable to him and could not wait to tell him so. 
People, in fact, treated him unceremoniously all round. But it was also 
possible that the tramp had not been altogether lying and that it was' 
not at Peter Verkhovensky's instigation, but on his own initiative, 
that he hoped to obtain some employment from him ; and if that was 
so, it certainly was most interesting. 
2 
The house which Stavrogin had reached stood in a deserted lane be­
tween fences, behind which kitchen gardens stretched literally to the 

NIGHT 
very end o f  the town. It was an entirely secluded little wooden house, 
which had just been built and not yet lined with thin planks. The shut­
ters of one of the windows were left open on purpose and a lighted 
candle was placed on the window-sill - evidently as a signal to the late 
visitor who was expected that night. Thirty paces away from the 
house Stavrogin made out on the front steps the figure of a tall man, 
probably the master of the house, who had come out impatiently to 
scan the road. He soon heard his voice which sounded impatient and 
rather timid. 
'Is that you, sir ? You, sir ?' 
' It's me,' Stavrogin replied, but not before he had reached the front 
steps, closing his umbrella. 
'At last ! '  Captain Lebyatkin - for it was he - began stamping and 
fussing round him. ' Please let me take your umbrella, sir. It's very wet, 
sir. I'll open it and let it drip here on the floor in the corner. Come in, 
sir, come in.' 
The door, leading from the passage into a room which was lighted 
by two candles, was wide open. 
'If you hadn't promised to come for certain, I'd have given up wait­
ing for you.' 
'A quarter to one,' St:J.vrogin said, looking at his watch as he entered 
the room. 
'And it's pouring with rain and such a prodigious distance. I'm 
afraid I've no watch, and all I can see from the windows are kitchen 
gardens, so that - er - one lags behind the times - but - er - I'm not 
complaining, because I haven't a right to complain, sir. I'm merely 
saying this because I've been eaten up with impatience all the week to 
- er - have it all settled at last.' 
' What do you mean ?' 
'I mean to hear my fate, sir. Sit down, please.' 
He inclined his head, pointing to a chair by a table in front of the 
sofa. 
Stavrogin looked round ; the room was tiny with a low ceiling ; the 
furniture consisted only of the most essential things, wooden chairs 
and a sofa, all new, without covering or cushions, two limewood 
tables, one by the sofa and the other in a corner, covered -with a 
table-doth and laid with al sorts of things over which a spotlessly 
clean napkin was spread. Indeed, the whole room was apparently kept 

268 
THE D E V I L S · PART TWO 
spotlessly clean. Captain Lebyatkin had not been drunk for the last 
eight days ; his face looked bloated and yellow; his eyes darted about 
w1easily, curiously, and evidently puzzled. It was all too obvious that 
he did not know himself in what tone to speak and what line it would 
be most advantageous for him to take. 
'As you see ' - he waved his hand rolUld the room - ' I  live like the 
holy man Zossima. Sobriety, solitude, and poverty - the vow of the 
knights of old.' 
' You think the knights of old took such vows ?' 
' Perhaps I'm mistaken. Alas, I haven't had a proper education ! I've 
ruined everything! Believe me, sir, it was only here that I first re­
covered from my shameful weakness - not a glass, not a drop, sir ! I 
have my little home, and for six whole days I've experienced the bliss 
of a clear conscience. Even the walls smell of resin and remind me of 
mother nature. And what sort of man have I been ? What was I ?  
At night homeless l wander, 
My tongue hanging out by day, 
as the poet so felicitously puts it. But - you're soaked to the skin -
won't you have some tea ?' 
' No, thank you.' 
'The samovar has been boiling since eight o'clock, but I'm afraid 
it's - er - gone out now - like everything in this world. The slUl, too, 
they say, wil go out one day. However, I'll get it going again, if 
necessary. Agafya isn't asleep yet.' 
'Tell me, Mary -' 
'Is here, is here,' Lebyatkin assured him quickly in a whisper. 
' Would you like to have a look at her ?' he asked, pointing to the 
closed door of the adjoining room. 
' She is not asleep ? '  
' No, no, good heavens, no ! How could she be ? O n  the contrary, 
she's been expecting you all the evening, and the moment she heard 
of your coming, she at once dolled herself up,' he concluded, twisting 
his face into an amused smile, but instantly checking himself. 
' How is she in general ? '  Stavrogin asked, frowning. 
' In general ? You know that yourself, sir,' he said with a pitying 
shrug. ' But at the moment - at the moment, sir, she's telling her for­
tune by cards.' 

NIGHT 
'Al right, later. First I have to settle with you.' 
Stavrogin sat down on a chair. 
The Captain did not dare to sit down on the sofa, but immediately 
pulled up another chair and bent forward, in tremulous expectation, 
to listen. 
'What have you got there under the napkin in the corner ?' Stavro­
gin asked, suddenly noticing it. 
'That, sir?' Lebyatkin, too, turned to look. 'That's also part of your 
generous gifts, sir. by way of a house-warming, as it were, and taking 
into consideration the great distance you had to walk and your natural 
fatigue,' he sniggered complaisantly. 
He got up from his chair and, tiptoeing to the little table in the cor­
ner, reverently and carefully lifted the napkin. Beneath it was a cold 
meal : ham, veal, sardines, cheese, a small green decanter, and a tall 
bottle of Bordeaux; everything had been laid neatly, expertly, and 
almost swaggeringly. 
'Was it you who took the trouble to prepare it ?' 
' Me, sir. I got it all ready yesterday. Everything to the best of my 
ability. Mary, as you know, isn't very interested in these things. But 
the main tiling is that it's all part of your own generous gifts, it's all 
your own, for you're the master here, and not I. I am, as it were, only 
your agent; for in spirit, sir, in spirit I am independent of all that. 
You will never rob me of this my last possession! '  he concluded 
touchingly. 
' I  see. Well, won't you resume your seat ?' 
·I'm grateful, sir, grateful and independent! '  he cried, sitting down. 
'Oh, sir, so much has accumulated in my heart, that I could hardly 
wait for you to come. Now you've to decide my fate and the fate of 
that - that unfortunate woman, and then - then I shall, as in the old 
days, four years ago, pour out my heart to you. You did me the 
honour to listen to me in those days, you read my stanzas. What does 
it matter if they did call me your Falstaff from Shakespeare ? What 
does that matter, I say, if you meant so much in my life! But now, sir, 
I'm in a state of great apprehension, and it is from you alone that I 
look for advice and light. Mr Verkhovensky is treating me abomin­
ably! '  
Stavrogin listened with interest and scrutinized him closely. It was 
plain that though Captain Lebyatkin had given up drinking, his state 

T H E  D E V I L S  • P A R T  T W O  
of mind was still far from harmonious. Such confirmed drunkards al­
ways end up by becoming permanently incoherent, dazed, and, as it 
were, a little touched in the head and crazy, though, given the right 
opportunity, they will go on cheating, bluffing, and swindling almost 
as well as anybody else. 
' I  can sec that you haven't changed a bit in these four years and 
more, Captain,' Stavrogin said in what sounded a more affable tone 
of voice. ' It seems it is true that the second half of a man's life is usually 
only made up of the habits he has amassed during the firSt half.' 
' Grand words, sir ! You solve the riddle of life ! '  the Captain cried, 
half bluffing and half really in undisguised admiration, for he was a 
great lover of aphorisms. ' Of all your sayings, sir, I've memorized one 
especially, one I heard you say in Petersburg : " One must really be a 
great man to be able to hold out even against common sense." Yes, 
. 
I '  
Sir . 
·And a fool as well.' 
' Quite right, sir, and a fool as well, but you've been delivering your­
self of such witty sayings all your life, while they - why, let Liputin, 
let V crkhovensky try to say anything of the kind ! Oh, how cruelly 
I've been treated by Mr Verkhovcnsky, sir ! '  
' But what about yourself, Captain ? How did you behave ?' 
'I was drunk, sir ; and, besides, I have hundreds of enemies ! But 
now, now I've turned over a new leaf and I shall renew myself like a 
serpent. Do you know, sir, that I'm making my will and that, in fact, 
I' vc made it already ? '  
'That's interesting. What are you leaving and to whom ?' 
'To my country, to humanity, and to the students, sir. I read in the 
papers the biography of an American. He left his huge fortune to fac­
tories and to the applied sciences, his skeleton to the students of the 
academy there, and his skin to be made into a drum with the proviso 
that the American national anthem might be beaten on it day and 
night. Alas, we are pigmies compared with the soaring thoughts of the 
United States of America. Russia is a freak of nature, but not of intel­
lect. Ifi were to try to bequeath my skin for a drum to, let us say, the 
Akmolinsky infantry regiment, in which I had the honour of starting 
my service, with the proviso that the Russian national anthem might 
be beaten on it every day in front of the drawn-up regiment, they 
would consider it a liberal idea and forbid my skin to be used for that 

N I G H T  
271 
purpose, and therefore I confine myself to the_ students. I want to be­
queath my skeleton to the Academy of Sciences, but only on one con­
dition - namely that a label should be stuck on its forehead for ever 
with the inscription : "A Repentant Freethinker". Yes, sir ! '  
The Captain spoke warmly, and there could be no doubt that he 
believed in the grandeur of the American's will, but that he was also a 
rogue who was very anxious to amuse Stavrogin, whose jester he had 
been for a very long time before. The latter did not even smile, but, 
on the contrary, asked in a rather suspicious tone of voice : 
' So you intend to publish your will in your lifetime and receive a 
reward for it ?' 
' Well, what if I do, sir, what if I do ?' Lebyatkin said, obӈerving 
him closely. 'Think of the sort of life I have had ! Why, I've even 
given up writing poetry, and yet there was a time, sir, when even you 
found my verses very amusing over a bottle! Don't you remember ? 
But my writing dayӉ are over. I've written only one poem, like Gogo! 
his Last Story. Do you remember he proclaimed to Russia that it came 
" in a burst of song " out of his heart ? Well, so I, too, have sung mv 
last song and it's all over now ! '  
' What poem is that ?' 
"'If She A Leg Should Break ! " '  
' Wha-at ?' 
That was what the Captain was waiting for. He had an unbounded 
admiration and respect for his poems, but owing to a certain duplicity 
of his nature, he was also pleased that in the past Stavrogin had been 
vastly amused and sometimes even convulsed with laughter by his 
verses. In this way he killed two birds with one stone : his vanity as a 
poet was satisfied and he kept his job as Stavrogin' s jester ; but now he 
had a third verv special and ticklish object in view : by bringing his 
verses on the scene, the Captain intended to justify himself in one 
point about which he always felt for some reason most apprehensive 
and most guilty. 
"'If She A Leg Should Break," that is, if she should have a fall from 
her horse. It's a fantasy, sir, a mad dream, but the dream of a poet. I 
waӊ struck one day when I saw a lady on horseback and I asked myself 
the important question : " What would happen then ?" I mean, in case 
of an accident. Well, it's obvious : all her admirers would beat a hasty 
retreat, all her suitors would disappear, nothing doing, my pretty lass -

272 
THE D EVILS • PART TWO 
only the poet would remain true to her with his heart crushed in his 
breast. And, mind you, sir, even a louse may be in love and there is no 
law against it. And yet the young lady was offended by my letter and 
my verses. I'm told that even you were angry. Were you? That's a 
pity. I wouldn't believe it. But who could I harm with my imagina­
tion alone? Besides, I swear on my honour, Liputin kept egging me 
on : " Send it, send it! Every man has a right to send a letter!" So I 
sent it.' 
'I believe you sought her hand in marriage, didn't you?' 
'Enemies, enemies, enemies! ' 
'Read me your verses ! '  Stavrogin interrupted him sternly. 
'Ravings, ravings, just ravings.' 
However, he drew himself up, stretched forth his hand and began: 
The fairest of al has broken a leg, 
And now she is fairer than ever before, 
And far more I love her, my sweet, and I beg 
Her remember how I loved her of yore. 
'That'll do,' Stavrogin said with a wave of the hand. 
'I'm dreaming ofPetersburg,' Lebyatkin quickly changed the sub­
ject, as though he had never written the verses, 'I'm dreaming of re­
generation . . . .  Sir, you who've done so much for me, could I count on 
you not to refuse me the money for the journey? I've been waiting for 
you all the week, as if you were the sun.' 
' I'm sorry. I have hardly any money left and, besides, why should I 
give you money?' 
Stavrogin seemed suddenly angry. Drily and briefly he enumerated 
al the Captain's misdeeds: drunkenness, lying, squandering the money 
intended for Mary, taking her from the convent, his insolent letters 
threatening to make public the secret, the way he had behaved about 
Dasha, etc., etc. The Captain rocked to and fro in his chair, gesticu­
lated, began to reply, but every time Stavrogin stopped him peremp­
torily. 
'And another thing,' he said at last, 'you keep on writing about 
your "family disgrace". Why do you consider your sister's mariage 
to Sta vrogin a disgrace?' 
'But her marriage is kept a secret, sir! Her marriage is kept a secret, 
a fatal secret. I receive money from you and then I'm suddenly asked: 

N I G H T  
273 
what is that money for ?  But my lips are sealed. I can't answer, for my 
answer would do harm to my sister and to my family honour.' 
The Captain raised his voice : it was his favourite subject and he 
considered it to be his trump card. Poor man ! he never suspected what 
a blow was in store for him. Calmly and precisely, as though it were 
a matter of a most ordin:ӌry family arrangem;;nt, Stavrogin told him 
that in a few days, perhaps even the next day or the day after, he in­
tended to make his marriage known everywhere, ' to the police as well 
as to the public at large ', Ӌo that the question of family honour would 
be settled by itself as well as the question of subsidies. The Captain 
glared at him : at first he didn't even understand what he was talking 
about; it had to be explained to him. 
' But - but she's a half-wit ! ' 
' I'll make the necessary arrangements.' 
'But - but what about your mother ?' 
'Well, she can do as she likes.' 
'But will you take your wife to your house ?' 
' Perhaps I will. However, that's not your business. It has nothing at 
all to do with you.' 
' What do you mean - it's nothing to do with me ?' the Captain 
cried. ' But what's going to happen to me ?' 
'Well, you will cert.linly not be admitted to my house.' 
'But I'm a relation.' 
'People nm from such relations. Why should I go on giving you 
money then ? Tell me if you can.' 
'But, sir, that's impossible ! You'll reconsider it, I'm sure. Why, you 
don't want to commit suicide, do you ? And what will people think ? 
What will the world say ?' 
'I don't care a damn for your world ! I married your sister when I 
wanted to, after ·a drunken dinner, for a bet, for a bottle of wine, and 
now I shall announce it publicly. Why shouldn't I, if it amuses me ? '  
H e  said it with a special sort o f  irritability, so that Lebyatkin began 
with horror to believe him. 
'But what about me ? What about me ? It's me who matters most! 
You're not pulling my leg, are you ?' 
'No, I'm not.' 
' Well, say what you will, sir, but I don't believe you. If you do that, 
I'll summons you.' 

274 
THE DEVILS ' PAR f T W O  
' You're a damned fool, Captain.' 
' I  don't care. What else is there left for me to do ?' the Captain said, 
utterly at a loss. ' Before at least I got free lodgings for the housework 
she did in those furnished rooms, but what's going to happen to me 
now if you abandon me to my fate ?' 
' But you want to go to Petersburg to get a new job, don't you ? By 
the way, is it true what I hear about your intention of going to Peters­
burg to lay information with the authorities in the hope of obtaining 
a pardon by turning King's evidence?' 
The Captain glared with a gaping mouth and did not reply. 
'Listen, Captain,' Stavrogin suddenly said, speaking very seriously 
and bending down to the table. Till then he had been talking a little 
ambiguously, so that Lebyatkin, who had got used to his role as a 
jester, was up to the last moment a little uncertain whether Stavrogin 
was angry in good earnest or whether he was only pulling his leg, 
whether he really had the wild notion of announcing his marriage or 
whether he was only fooling. But now Stavrogin's stem expression 
was so convincing that a shiver ran down the Captain's spine. 'Listen 
and speak the truth, Lebyatkin. Did you inform the authorities about 
anything or didn't you? Did you really manage to do anything or 
not ? Have you out of sheer stupidity sent a letter to someone?' 
' No, sir, I haven't and - and I never thought of doing it,' the Cap­
tain said, staring blankly at Stavrogin. 
'You're lying. You did think of it. That's what you want to go to 
Petersburg for. If you haven't written, have you by any chance said 
something to somebody here ? Tell me the truth. I've heard some­
thing.' 
'I told Liputin when I was in my cups. Liputin's a traitor. I opened 
my heart to him,' whispered the poor Captain. 
' Never mind your heart, you mustn't be a damned fool. If you 
thought of it, you should have kept it to yourself: intelligent people 
hold their tongues nowadays and don't talk.' 
'But,' the Captain said, trembling, 'you've taken no part in any­
thing, sir. It's not you I -' 
'I daresay you wouldn't have informed against your milch-cow, 
would you ?' 
'Judge for yourself, sir! '  And, in despair and with tears, the Cap­
tain began hurriedly to tell the story of his life for the last four years. 

NIGHT 
275 
It was the most stupid story of a fool who had got himsdfinvolved in 
some business that did not concern him and the importance of which 
he did not grasp up to the last moment because of his drunkenness and 
debauchery. He told how already in Petersburg he had allowed him­
self to be drawn in at fJrSt simp! y through friendship, like a true stu­
dent, though he was not a student, and without knowing anything 
and without being guilty of anything, he had scattered all sorts ofleaf­
lets on staircases, leaving them by the dozen at doors, putting them 
through letter-boxes instead of newspapers, taking them to theatres, 
throwing them into people's hats, and slipping them into pockets . 
Later on he began taking money from them, for 'I was so hard up, 
sir, I was so hard up ! '  He had distributed ' all sorts of rubbish' in differ­
ent districts of two provinces. 'What got my goat most of all, sir,' he 
cried, 'was that it was against all civil and still more patriotic laws ! 
One day they suddenly printed that peasants should go out with pitch­
forks and that they should know that those who went out poor in the 
morning would go home rich at night - think of it, sir! It made me 
shudder, but I went on distributing them. Or suddenly five or six lines 
addressed to the whole of Russia and without rhyme or reason : 
"Hurry up and close down your churches, abolish your God, break 
your marriage vows, do away with the rights of inheritance, arm 
yoursdves with knives," and goodness only knows what dse. It was 
with that bit of paper - the one with the five lines - that I was nearly 
caught, but the officers in the regiment, bless their hearts, gave me a 
thrashing and let me go. And last year I was nearly caught when I 
was passing off French counterfeit notes for fifty roubles on Koro­
vayev, but, thank goodness, Korovayev fell into a pond when he was 
drunk and they did not succeed in showing me up. Here at Virginsky's 
I proclaimed the freedom of the socialist wife. Last June I was again 
distributing illegal leaflets in one of our districts here. I'm told I'll 
have to do it again. Mr Verkhovensky suddenly gave me to under­
stand that I have to carry out his orders; he's been threatening me 
for some time. Look how he treated me on Sunday ! I'm a slave, 
sir, I'm a worm and not a God, and that's where I differ from our poet 
Derzhavin. But, sir, think how hard up I am! '  
Stavrogin listened to it all with interest. 
'A great deal of what you tell me I didn't know at all,' he said. ' But, 
of course, anything could have happened to you. Listen,' he said, after 

THE DEVILS • PART T W O  
a moment's reflection, 'if you like, you can tell them - you know 
whom - that Liputin told a lie and that you merely wanted to scare 
me by threatening to inform against me, believing that I, too, was 
compromised and that you might get more money from me that 
way. Do you understand ?' 
' But do you really think, sir, that I'm in such great danger ? I was 
only waiting for you to come to ask you.' 
Stavrogin laughed. 
'They wouldn't of course let you go to Petersburg even if I were to 
give you the money for the journey - but it's time I went to see Mary.' 
And he got up from his chair. 
' But what about Mary, sir ?' 
' Why, I told you.' 
' Bur did you mean that, too ?' 
'You still don't believe it, do you ?' 
' Will you really cast me off likc an old worn-out boot?' 
'I'll see,' laughed Stavrogin. 'All right, let me go now. ' 
'Would you like me to wait on the front steps so that - er - I 
shouldn't by chance overhear something, for - er - the rooms here are 
so small, sir.' 
'That's a good idea. Wait on the steps. Take my umbrella.' 
'Your umbrella ?  But, sir, am I worth it ?' the Captain said in­
gratiating! y. 
' Every man has a right to an umbrella.' 
'You've defined the minimum of human rights in one short sen­
tence, sir.' 
But already he was muttering mechanically; he was too much 
crushed by the news and was completely at a loss what to make of it. 
And yet no sooner had he gone out on the front steps and had put up 
the umbrella than the usual comforting idea that he was being de­
ceived and lied to began to take shape in his foolish and knavish head, 
and if that was so he had nothing to be afraid of, for they were afraid 
of him. 
' If they lie and cheat, then what is it all about ?' the thought stirred 
uneasily in his head. The announcement of the marriage seemed an 
absolute absurdity to him. ' It is true anything may come to pass with 
a wonder-worker like that; he lives to do harm to people. But what 
if he is afraid himself after the insult he received on Sunday, and 

NIGHT 
277 
afraid as he has never been before ? So, fearing lest I should announce 
it myself, he comes running here to tell me that he will do it. Don't 
slip up, Lebyatkin ! And why does he come sneaking here at night if 
he means everybody to know it himself? And if he is afraid, then it 
is right now he is afraid, for the last few days. Look out, Lebyatkin, 
don't make a mess of things ! 
'Trying to frighten me with Verkhovensky. Hell, I'm in a mess! 
I'm in a frightful mess ! Shouldn't have said anything to Liputin ! The 
devil knows what those fiends are up to. Never could make them out. 
Getting busy again as they were five years ago. And to whom could I 
have given the inf"ormation ? "You haven't written to anyone out of 
sheer stupidity ?" I _see ! So it's possible to write to someone as though 
out of stupidity ? Is he perhaps advising me to do it? "You're going 
to Petersburg for that purpose." The rogue ! I was j nst toying with the 
idea, and he guessed it! Just as if he were suggesting to me to go him­
self. It's one of two things : either he is really afraid himself because 
he's done something he shouldn't or - or he isn't afraid of anything, 
but is merely egging me on to inform against them all ! Oh, dear. 
what a mess you're in, Lebyatkin, old fellow ! Oh, I hope to goodness 
I don't make a mistake ! '  
He was so absorbed in thought that he was even forgetting to eaves­
drop. However, eavesdropping was not so easy ; the door was a thick 
one, made of one piece of wood, and they were talking in very low 
voices ; all he could hear was some indistinct sounds. The Captain even 
spat with annoyance and went out again, lost in thought, to whistle on 
thl" front steps. 
Mary's room was twice as big as that occupied by the Captain, and its 
furniture was also of the same rough-and-ready kind ; but the table in 
front of the sofa was covered with a gay-coloured cloth, and a lamp 
was burning on it; the bed was screened off by a green curtain which 
ran the whole length of the room, and, in addition, there was a big, 
soft arm-chair beside the table in which, however, Mary never sat. In 
the corner of the room, as in her old room, there was an icon with a 
little lighted lamp in front of it. On the table the same indispensable 
things were laid out : a pack of cards, a small hand mirror, a song-book, 

THE D E V I L S  • PART TWO 
and even a fancy loaf. There were, besides, two books with coloured 
pictures, one - extracts from a popular travel book, adapted for boys 
and girls in their teens, and the other - a collection of light, edifying 
stories, mostly about the age of chivalry, specially written for Christ­
mas presents and schools. There was also an album with various photo­
graphs. Mary was, of course, expecting the visitor, as the Captain had 
warned him ; but when Stavrogin entered her room she was asleep, 
half reclining on the sofa, her head lying on a wool-embroidered 
cushion. The visitor closed the door noiselessly behind him and, with­
out moving from his place, began scrutinizing the sleeping young 
woman. 
The Captain had told a little lie when he said that she had dolled 
herself up. She was wearing the same dark dress as on Snnday at Mrs 
Stavrogin's. Her hair, too, was done up in the same small bnn at 
the nape of her neck ; her long, lean neck was nncovered in the same 
way. The black shawl, which Mrs Stavrogin had given her as a pre­
sent, lay carefuly folded on the sofa. Her face was crudely rouged and 
powdered as before. Stavrogin had been standing for scarcely a min­
ute when she suddenly woke up, as though she had felt him looking at 
her, opened her eyes, and quickly sat up. But something strange must 
have happened to her visitor, for he remained standing in the same 
place at the door, his motionless and piercing glance ftxed steadily and 
silently upon her face. Perhaps his glance was nnecessarily stern. Per­
haps it showed disgust and even a malignant enjoyment ofher fright ­
or perhaps Mary had imagined it all at the moment she had awakened 
from her sleep ; but suddenly, after waiting for almost a minute, the 
face of the poor woman became positively distorted with terror: it 
twitched convulsively, she raised her trembling hands and suddenly 
burst into tears, exactly like a frightened child; in another moment 
she would have begun to scream. But the visitor recollected himself; 
his face changed in a flash, and he walked up to the table with the most 
affable and kindly smile. 
' I'm sorry I frightened you, Mary, by coming in so nnexpectedly 
when you were asleep,' he said, holding out his hand to her. 
His words, spoken in so kindly a voice, produced their effect. Her 
panic was gone, though she was still looking at him with dread, evi­
dently trying to grasp something. She held out her hand, too, fear­
fully. At last a smile appeared timidly on her lips. 

NIGHT 
279 
'Hullo, Prince,' she whispered, looking rather strangely at him. 
'I expect you had a bad dream, didn't you ?' he went on, with a still 
more friendly and amiable smile. 
'And how did you know that I was dreaming about that?' 
And suddenly she began trembling again, recoiling from him, and 
raising her hand as though in self-defence, she was again about to burst 
into tears. 
'Come, pull yourself together,' Stavrogin tried to argue with her. 
'What is there to be afraid of? Don't you recognize me ? '  
But for a long time his words had no effect on her. She gazed at him 
in silence with the same agonizing perplexity. with a distressful 
thought in her poor head, trying painfully to grasp something. One 
moment she lowered her eyes and another she shot a quick, all-em­
bracing glance at him. At last, though she did not quieten down, she 
seemed to make up her mind. 
' Sit down beside me, please, so that I can have a good look at you 
afterwards,' she said in quite a firm voice, clearly with some new ob­
ject in mind. 'And don't worry now, please, for J shan't look at you, 
but wil keep my eyes fixed on the ground. And don't look at me, 
either, until I ask you to. Sit down,' she added impatiently. 
A new feeling was apparently taking possession of her more and 
more. 
Stavrogin sat down and waited; they were silent for rather a long 
time. 
'I must say,' she murmured suddenly almost with a feeling of re­
pugnance, 'it al seems so strange to me. It is true I had bad dreams, 
but why should I have dreamt of you looking like that ?' 
'Oh, let's leave your dreams aloneř' he said impatiently, turning to 
her, in spite of her request, and, perhaps, the same expression came 
back for a moment into his eyes. He saw that she would have liked to 
look at him, very much, perhaps, but that she restrained herself stub­
bornly and kept her eyes fixed on the ground. 
'Listen, Prince' - she suddenly raised her voice, 'listen, Prince -' 
'Why did you turn away ?' he cried, unable to control himself. 
'Why don't you look at me ? What is the meaning of this comedy ?' 
But she did not seem to hear him at all. 
'Listen, Prince,' she repeated for the third time in a firm voice, with 
an unpleasant, troubled expression, 'when you told me the other day 

280 
THE DEVILS • PART T W O  
in the carriage that our marriage was to be announced, I felt frightened 
because I thought that that would be the end of our secret. But now I 
don't know. I've been thinking it over, and I'm afraid I'm not good 
enough for it at all. I daresay I could dress and perhaps receive visitors, 
too : it's easy enough to invite someone for a cup of tea, especially if 
you have servants. Dm, all the same, what will people say ? I had a 
goocl look round that house that Sunday morning. That pretty girl 
never rook her eyes off me, especially when you came in. It was you 
who came in, wasn't it ? Her mother is just a silly old society woman. 
My Lebyatkin excelled himself too. I kept looking at the ceiling not 
to burst om laughing - the ceiling there is beamifully painted. His 
mother should have been an abbess. I'm afraid of her, though she gave 
me her black shawl. No doubt, they must all have formed quite a 
strange idea of me; I wasn't angry, only I sat there thinking : what kind 
or a relation am I to them ? Of course, all people expect from a coun­
tess are spiritual qualities, for she has plenty of servants for her domes­
tic ones - and I suppose some kind of refined coquetry, to be able to 
receive foreign travellers. But all the same that Sunday they looked on 
me as hopeless, I'm afraid. Dasha alone is an angel. I'm awfully afraid 
that they may hurt his feelings by some careless remark about me.' 
'Don't be afraid and don't worry,' Stavrogin said, making a wry 
face. 
' However, it won't matter much to me if he does feel a little 
ashamed of me, for there will always be more pity than shame, 
though of course it does depend on the man. You see, he knows that 
I ought to pity them more than they me.' 
'I suppose you were rather offended with them, Mary, weren't 
you ?' 
'Who, me? No,' she laughed good-naturedly. 'I wasn't offended at 
all. I had a good look at you all then : you were all angry, you had all 
quarrelled with one another; you meet and you don't know how to 
have a good laugh together. So rich and so little gaiety - it seems all 
so revolting to me. But I don't pity anybody now, except myself' 
'I've heard that you found it hard to live with your brother without 
me. Did you ?' 
'Who rold you that ? It's nonsense. It's much worse now. I'm hav­
ing bad dreams now, and my dreams are bad because you've come. 
What have you come for, I'd like to know ?' 

NIGHT 
281 
'Would you like to go back to the convent ?' 
'Well, I knew they would suggest that I should go back there! 
Good heavens, do you think I don't know what your convent is like ? 
And why should I go back to it ? What am I to go there with ? I'm all 
alone in the world now! It's late for me to start a third life.' 
'You seem to be very angry. You're not afraid that I'm no longer 
in love with you, are you ?' 
' Oh, I don't care a pin about you! I'm afraid that I might complete­
ly fall out oflove with someone.' 
She gave a disdainful laugh. 
'I suppose I must have done something very wrong to him,' she 
suddenly added, as though speaking to herself. ' Only I don't know 
what it is. Oh, the consciousness of that wil haunt me all my life. Al­
ways - always - all these five years - day and night - I was afraid that 
I'd done something wrong to him. I've prayed and prayed, thinking 
al the time how greatly I've wronged him. And now it i:ums out to 
be only too true.' 
'What turned out?' 
'What worries me is whether there isn't something on his part,' she 
went on without answering his question, indeed even without hearing 
it. 'And then again how could he associate with such worthless 
people? The Countess would have been glad to devour me, though 
she made me sit in the same carriage with her. They're all in the plot 
- could he be in it too ? Could he have betrayed me too ?' Her chin 
and lips were twitching. ' Listen, have you read about Grishka Otrep­
yev, the Pretender to the Russian throne, who has been damned in 
seven cathedrals?' 
Stavrogin did not reply. 
'Well, I think I'm going to tum round now and look at you,' she 
said, apparently making up her mind suddenly. 'Tum to me, too, and 
look at me, only more closely, please. I want to make sure for the last 
time.' 
' I  have ben looking at you for a long'time.' 
'Fancy that! '  said Mary, looking intently at him, ' you've grown 
very fat.' 
She was about to say something else, but suddenly her face becam& 
distorted, for the third time, with terror and again she recoiled from 
him, raising her hand before her. 

THE D E V I L S  • P A R T  T W O  
' What on earth is the matter with you?' cried Stavrogin, almost in 
a fury. 
But her terror lasted only a moment; her face was distorted by a 
strange smile, suspicious and tmpleasant. 
'Please, Prince, get up and come in,' she said suddenly in a firm and 
insistent voice. 
'Come in ? Where am I to come in from?' 
'For five years I've kept imagining how he would come in. Get up 
and go out of the door into that room. I'll sit as though I were not ex­
pecting anything, and pick up a book, and then you'll suddenly come 
in after travelling abroad for five years. I want to see what it will be 
like.' 
Stavrogin gnashed his teeth inwardly and muttered something to 
himself. 
'That's enough,' he said, striking the table with his hand. 'Please 
listen to me, Mary. Do me a favour and attend to me carefully, if you 
can. You're not completely mad, are you ?' he blurted out impatiently. 
'To-morrow I shall announce our marriage. You will never live in a 
big mansion. You can get that idea right out of your head. Do you 
want to live with me for the rest of your life, but only far, far away 
from here? I mean in the mountains, in Switzerland; there's a place 
there I know. And don't be afraid ; I shall never leave you and I shan't 
put you in a lunatic asylum, either. I shall have enough money to live 
without having to ask for help. You'll have a maid; you won't have 
to do any work at all. Everything you want that it is possible to have, 
you shall have. You will say your prayers, go anywhere you like and 
do what you like. I won't touch you. I won't ever leave that place, 
either. If you like I won't speak to you all my life; or if you like you 
can tell me your stories every evening as you used to do in those fur­
nished rooms in the Petersburg tenements. l'll read books to you, if 
you want me to. But on one condition : that we stay in that place -
and it is a very gloomy place - all our lives. Would you like to ? Do 
you a!!ree ? You won't regret it, torment me with tears and curses, will 
you?' 
She listened to him with great interest, and for a long time she said 
nothing, thinking it over. 
'The whole thing seems incredible to me,' she said at last ironically 
and sulkily. 'I might have to live for forty years in those mountains.' 

NIGHT 
She laughed. 
'All right, so we shall live forty years there,' Stavrogin said, 
frowning. 
'I see. No, I won't go there for anything in the world.' 
' Not even with me?' 
'Why, what are you that I should go with you? Sit on top of a 
mountain with you for forty years - what an idea ! And, really, how 
patient people have become nowadays! No, it's impossible for a falcon 
to be an owl. My prince isn't like that at all ! '  She raised her head 
proudly and solemnly. 
It suddenly dawned on him: 
'Why do you call me Prince?' he asked guickly. 'And who do you 
take me for?' 
'Why, aren't you a prince ?' 
'I never have been a prince.' 
' So you admit it yourself- you tell it to my face yourself that you're 
not a prince ? ' 
'I tell you I have never been one.' 
'Merciful heavens! '  she cried, clapping her hands together in as­
tonishment. 'I expected everything from his enemies, but such inso­
lence - never! Is he alive ?' she shrieked, beside herself, turning on 
Stavrogin. 'Have you killed him or not? Confess! '  
'Who do you take me for?' he cried, jumping to his feet with a dis­
torted face. 
But it was difficult to frighten her now. She was triumphant. 
'Who knows who you are and where you've sprung from? On1 y 
in my heart, deep down in my heart, have I felt all this intrigue! And 
I've been sitting here wondering what blind owl has been trying to 
humour me. No, my dear, you're a poor actor, even worse than Leb­
yatkin. Give my regards to the Countess and tell her to send a better 
man than you. Has she hired you? Tell me! Has she given you a job 
in her kitchen out of the kindness of her heart? I can see through your 
tricks. I understand you all, every one of you ! '  
He seized her firmly by the arm above the elbow, but she laughed 
in his face. 
'You certainly are very like him, perhaps you're a relation of his ­
what a clever lot! Only my man is a bright falcon and a prince, and 
you're an owl and a shopkeeper! My man will bow down to God or 

T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  T W O  
won't bow down to Him - just as he pleases, and - why, Shatov (oh, 
the darling !) slapped you on the cheek, my Lebyatkin told me. And 
what were you so afraid of when you came into the room that 
Sunday ? Who had frightened you ? As soon as I saw your mean face 
when I fell and you picked me up - it was as if a worm had crawled 
into my heart: it's not he, I thought to myself, not he! My falcon 
would never have been ashamed of me in front of a young society 
lady ! Oh, dear Lord. the only thing that kept me happy all these five 
years was the thought that my falcon was living somewhere beyond 
the mountains, flying there and looking at the sun . . . .  Tell me, you 
pretender, how much money did they pay you ? Did they have to pay 
you a lot of money before you gave your consent ? I wouldn't have 
given you a penny. Ha, ha, ha ! Ha, ha, ha! '  
' Oh, you idiot ! '  Stavrogin snarled, grinding his teeth and still hold­
ing her firmly by the arm. 
'Away, pretender! '  she cried imperiously. ' I'm the wife of my 
Prince ! I'm not afraid of your knife ! '  
' Knife ! '  
'Yes, knife! You've a knite in your pocket ! You thought I was 
asleep, but I saw it: the moment you entered the room, you took out 
your knife ! '  
' What did you say, you unhappy wretch ? What dreams do you 
dream?' he cried, pushing her away from him with all his might so 
that she knocked her shoulders and head painfully against the back of 
the sofa. 
He bolted from the room. But she jumped up immediately and ran 
after him, hopping and limping, and, though kept back by the fright­
ened Lebyatkin with all the force he could muster, she shouted after 
him in the darkness, shrieking and laughing : 
' Grishka Otrepyev - anathema ! '  
4 
'A knife ! A knife ! '  he repeated in unquenchable rage, striding along 
through the mud and the puddles without picking his way. It is true 
that there were moments when he badly wanted to laugh, loudly and 
furiously ; but for some reason he controlled himself and restrained his 
lauǡhter. He came to his senses only on the bridge, on the very spot 

NIGHT 
where he had met Fedka a few hours ago. Fedka was indeed waiting 
for him there. Seeing Stavrogin, he took off his cap, bared his teeth in 
a gay grin. and at once began chattering briskly and merrily about · 
something. At first Stavrogin went past him without stopping, and 
for some time he did not even bother to listen to the tramp who 
trailed behind him. Suddenly he was struck by the thought that he 
had completely forgotten him, forgotten him just when he was him­
self muttering under his breath : 'A knife ! A knife ! '  He grabbed the 
tramp by the scruff of the neck and gave vent to the pent-up rage 
within him by flinging him violently against the bridge. For a mo­
ment Fedka thought of showing fight, but realizing almost immedi­
ately that in the hands of his adversary, who had, besides, taken him 
by surprise, he was like a wisp of straw, he quieted down and fell 
silent and did not even think of offering any resistance. Pinned to the 
ground on his knees and with his elbows twisted behind his back, the 
cunning tramp calmly waited for what was going to happen next, 
without, it seems, the slightest apprehension of danger. 
He was not mistaken. Stavrogin had already taken off his woollen 
scarf with his left hand in order to bind his prisoner's arms, but sud­
denly he released him for some reason and pushed him away. The 
tramp jumped to his feet at once, turned round, and a short, broad 
cobbler's knife, which seemed to have appeared out of nowhere in a 
flash, gleamed in his hand. 
'Away with that knife ! Put it away, put it away at once ! '  Stavrogin 
ordered with an impatient gesture, and the knife vanished as instan­
taneously as it had appeared. 
Stavrogin went on his way without uttering a word and without 
turning round; but the pertinacious villain kept pace with him in 
spite of everything, though he was no longer chattering and even kept 
his distance respectfully, trailing a yard behind. They both crossecl the 
bridge like that and came out on the bank of the river, turning this 
time to the left, again into a long, deserted lane, which led to the centre 
of the town by a shorter way than through Bogoyavlenskaya Street. 
'Is it true what I hear, that you robbed a church in our district the 
other day ?' asked Stavrogin suddenly. 
'Well, you see, sir, I went to the church with the idea of saying my 
prayers,' the tramp answered sedately and courteously, as if nothing 
special had happened; not only sedately, but even with dignity. There 

286 
THE DEVILS · PART TWO 
was no trace of his former ' friendly' familiarity. The man who was 
talking now was quite obviously a serious, business-like man, one, it 
is true, who had been gratuitously insulted, but who was capable of 
overlooking an insult. 
'And when the good Lord brought me here,' he went on, 'I thought 
to myself - oh, what heavenly bliss! The whole thing, sir, happened 
because I was destitute, and the likes of us, sir, can't carry on without 
some help. As God is my witness, sir, it was a sheer loss to me - the 
good Lord has truly punished me for my sins : I got only twelve 
roubles for the censer, the pyx, and the deacon's strap. I got next to 
nothing for the chin setting of St Nicholas of pure silver; they said it 
was plated.' 
'Murdered the watchman, didn't you ?' 
' You see, sir, it was together with the watchman that [ robbed the 
church, and it was only later, at daybreak, by the river, that we had 
an argument about who should carry the sack. Afraid, sir, [ didn't 
ought to have done it, but I did make it a little easier for him.' 
'Go on killing, go on stealing - go on ! '  
'Well, sir, Mr Verkhovensky says the same to me - just like you ­
the ৴arne advice, word for word, because, sir, he's uncommonly mean 
and hard-hearted about helping a fellow creature. And, besides, he 
don't believe one bit in the Heavenly Father what has created us out of 
a little earthly clay. He says that it was nature what done everything 
even to the last beast. He don't understand, besides, that a chap like 
me can't do nothing without someone stretching out a helping hand 
to him 'cause that's the way it is with the likes of us. If you starts telling 
him, he just stares at you like a sheep at the water. You can't help 
marvelling at him. Now rake Captain Lebyatkin, sir, him you've just 
been visiting. When he was living at Filippov's house before you 
came, he left his door standing wide open all night, himself lying 
asleep on the floor dead drunk and his money dropping all over the 
floor from his pockets. Seen it with my own eyes, I have, sir, 'cause 
for the likes of us it ain't possible to get along without somebody 
holding out a helping hand.' 
'Did yon say yon saw it with your own eyes? Why, you didn't go 
there at night, did you ?' 
'Maybe r did, sir; only no one knows nothing about it.' 
'Why didn't you kill him ?' 

THE D UEL 
' Well, sir, I thought it over - see ? - and I resisted the temptation, 
in a manner of speaking. For, you see, sir, having found out for cer­
tain that I can always count on picking up a hundred and ftfty roubles, 
why should I do a thing like that if by biding my time I could help 
myself to a thousand and five hundred ? For Captain Lebyatkin, sir, 
and I've heard him with my own ears, greatly relied on your gener­
osiry when drunk, and there ain't an in in this here town, sir, not 
even the lowest pub, where he hasn't shouted about it every time he 
was drunk good and proper. So that, having had it repeated by hun­
dreds of people, I, too, sir, began to put all my hopes on your lord­
ship. I'm telling you this, sir, like you was my own father or my own 
brother, for Mr Verkhovensky will never hear about it from me, and 
not a soul in the world, neither. So won't your lordship let me have 
.three roubles now? You'd set my mind at rest, sir, I mean by letting 
me know what's on your mind, for the likes of us can't get along with­
out somebody holding out a helping hand, sir.' 
Stavrogin burst out laughing and, taking out his purse, in which he 
had about fifry pounds in smal notes, he threw him one note out of 
the btmdle, then another, a third, and a fourth. Fedka caught them in 
the air, rushing after the notes which dropped in the mud, snatching 
them up and shouting, ' Oh, oh, oh ! '  Stavrogin ended up by throw­
ing the whole bundle at him and, still laughing, walked on along the 
street, tltis time alone. The tramp stayed behind to pick up the money, 
crawling on his knees in the mud after the scattering notes, which were 
blown about on the wind and fell into puddles, and for a whole hour 
his fitful cries, ' Oh! oh! ', could be heard in the darkness. 
J 
The Duel 
I 
THI! duel took place on the following day, at two o'clock in the after­
noon, as arranged. Artemy Gaganov's determination to fight at all 
costs helped to bring about a quick decision. He did not understand 
his opponent's conduct and was in a state of blazing fury. For a whole 
month he had been insulting him with impuniry and was unable to 
make him lose his temper. He had to receive a challenge from Stavrogin, 

288 
THE DEVILS · PART T W O  
for he himself had no real excuse for issuing a challenge. And he 
was ashamed to acknowledge his secret motive for the fight, namely 
his morbid hatred of Stavrogin for the insult to his family four years 
before. Besides, he considered such an excuse impossible himself, par­
ticularly in view of the humble apologies Stavrogin had offered him 
twice already. He decided that Stavrogin was a shameless coward; he 
just could not understand how Stavrogin could have put up with the 
public insult he had received from Shatov. That was why he had made 
up his mind at last to send that extraordinarily rude letter, which fm­
ally forced Stavrogin to propose a meeting. Having dispatched the 
letter the day before, he was awaiting Stavrogin's challenge with im­
patience, calculating morbidly the chances of its being issued, one mo­
ment full ofhope and another full of despair. In any case, he took steps 
to provide himself with a second the evening before, namely Maurice 
Drozdov, an old friend of his, a former schoolmate, and a man he 
greatly respected. So that when Kirilov came with his message at nine 
o'clock next morning, he found the ground already prepared. All 
Stavrogin's apologies and quite unheard-of concessions were at once 
rejected, at the first word, and with quite unwonted passion. Droz­
dov, who had only learnt of the turn the affair had taken the evening 
before, opened his mouth with surprise at such incredible proposals 
and was about to insist on a reconciliation, but observing that Gaga­
nov, who had divined his intentions, was almost trembling in his seat, 
he held his peace and said nothing. But for the word he had given his 
old schoolfellow, he would have gone away at once; he only remained 
in the hope of being of some help at the crucial moment of the affair. 
Kirilov passed on the challenge; all the conditions of the encounter 
proposed by Stavrogin were at once accepted without the slightest ob­
jection. Only one addition, and a ferocious one at that, was made. If 
after the first shots nothing decisive happened, they were to have an­
other encounter, and if that, too, was inconclusive, a third one. Kiri­
lov frowned, objected to the third encounter, but, having got nothing 
for his pains, agreed on one condition, namely : 'Three times - yes, 
but a fourth time - no ! '  
This was conceded. At two o'clock in the afternoon the meeting 
therefore took place at Brykov, that is, in the small copse on the out­
skirts of the town between Skvoreshniki and Spigulin's factory. The 
rain of the previous night was over, but it was wet, damp, and windy. 

THE D UEL 
Low, ragged, sooty clouds scudded across the cold sky; the tree-tops 
rustled intermittently in the gusts of wind and creaked on their roots ; 
it was a melancholy morning. 
Drozdov and Gaganov arrived at the spot in a smart open carriage 
and pair, driven by the latter; they were accompanied by a groom. 
Stavrogin and Kirilov arrived almost at the same moment, not in a 
carriage but on horseback, and they, too, were accompanied by a 
groom. Kirilov, who had never mounted a horse before, sat bolt up­
right in the saddle, grasping in his right hand the heavy box of pistols 
which he would not entrust to the groom, while with his left hand he 
was, in his inexperience, continually tugging at the reins, which made 
his horse toss its head and show an inclination to rear; this, however, 
did not alarm the rider in the least. Touchy and quick to take offence, 
Gaganov considered the arrival of the horsemen a fresh insult directed 
at himself, since his enemies seemed to be too sure of success if they did 
not think it necessary to bring a carriage with. them in case Stavrogin 
was wounded and had to be driven back home. He alighted from his 
carriage yellow with rage, feeling that his hands were trembling, a 
fact which he communicated to Drozdov. He ignored Stavrogin's 
bow completely and turned away. The seconds cast lots : it fell on 
Kirilov's pistols. They measured out the barriers, the opponents were 
put in their proppr places, and the carriage and horses were sent off 
with the grooms at a distance of three hundred yards. The pistols were 
loaded and handed to the combatants. 
It is a pity I have to get on with the story and can't spare any time 
for descriptions, but I shall have to make a few comments for all that. 
Drozdov looked upset and worried. Kirilov, on the other hand, was 
completely composed and unconcerned, very precise about the small­
est details of the duties he had tmdertaken, but without the slightest 
fuss and almost without any curiosity as to the fatal issue of the affair 
which was so close. Stavrogin looked paler than usual. He was rather 
lightly dressed in an overcoat and a white goatskin hat. He seemed 
very tired, frowning from time to time and not caring to disguise his 
low spirits. But Gaganov was at that moment the most remarkable 
figure of them all, so that I simply must say a few words about him in 
particular. 

THE DEVILS • PART TWO 
2 
So far I have had no opportunity of describing his appearance. He was 
a very taU man of about thirty-three, with a fair complexion, well 
fed, as the common people say, almost fat, with rather handsome fea­
tures. He had retired from the army with the rank of colonel, and if 
he had served long enough to become a general, he would have cut an 
even more-impressive figure and would quite likely have made a good 
fighting general. 
It is important for the proper characterization of the man to men­
tion the fact that the chief reason for his retirement from the army .was 
the thought of the family disgrace which had haunted him so long and 
so painfully after the indignity Stavrogin inflicted upon his father in 
the club four years before. He honestly believed that it was dishon­
ourable to remain in the service and was quite certain in his mind that 
he was discrediting his regiment and his fellow-officers, though none 
of them knew of the incident. It is true that he had wished to resign 
his commission on a former occasion, long before the insult to his 
father and for quite a different reason, but he could not make up his 
mind. Strange as it may sound, his original desire, or rather motive for 
his retirement, was the manifesto of 19 February about the liberation 
of the peasants. Gaganov, who was one of the richest landowners of 
our province, whose material losses after the manifesto had not been 
so great, either, and who, moreover, was quite capable of convincing 
himself of the humanity of the measure and almost understanding the 
economic advantages of the reform, suddenly thought himself per­
sonally insulted after the publication of the manifesto. It was some­
thing unconscious, something in the nature of a feeling, but the more 
unaccountable it was, the stronger it grew. Until the death of his 
father, however, he could not make up his mind to take any drastic 
steps ; but in Petersburg he became known for the 'honourable' trend 
of his thoughts among many important personages with whom he 
zealously kept up his connexions. He was a self-centred man, a man 
who shut himself up from the rest of the world. Another character­
istic : he belonged to those strange, but still surviving, types of noble­
men in Russia who are exceedingly proud of the purity of their an­
cient lineage and take it too seriously. At the same time he could not 
bear Russian history and, generaly, regarded Russian customs as more 

THE D UEL 
291 
or less brutish. Even in his childhood, in the special military school for 
the children of the wealthier and more distinguished families in which 
he had the privilege of being educated, certain romantic notions struck 
deep roots in his mind : he loved castles, medieval life, all the operatic 
part of it, chivalry ; even in those days he almost wept with shame that 
in the days of the Moscow Kingdom the Tsar could inflict corporal 
punishment on a Russian nobleman, and blushed when he compared 
it with his present position. Tlus stiff, extremely stern man, who had 
such an excellent knowledge of the army and who carried out all his 
duties, was a dreamer at heart. It was said of him that he could have ad­
dressed meetings and that he had the gift oflanguage ; but he had never 
opened his mouth during the thirty-three years of his life. He held 
himself haughtily aloof even in the distinguished Petersburg circles in 
which he had moved of late. His meeting in Petersburg with Stavro­
gin, who had just returned from abroad, nearly drove him out 
of his mind. At this moment, standing at the barrier, he was in a 
state of terrific excitement. He kept imagining that the duel would 
somehow not come off, and the slightest delay threw him into a 
panic. He looked pained when Kirilov, instead of giving the signal 
for the duel to begin, suddenly addressed the combatants, just 
for the sake of form, it is true, as he himself explained in a loud 
voice. 
' I  am only saying it as a matter ofform. Now that the pistols are in 
your hands and it is time to utter the word of command, I must ask 
you for the last time whether you would like to make it up. It's the 
duty of a second.' 
As though on purpose, Drozdov, who had not uttered a word till 
then, but who had been reproaching himself ever since the day before 
for his compliance and connivance, suddenly welcomed Kirilov's sug­
gestion. 
' I'm entirely in agreement with what Mr Kirilov has said,' he de­
clared. 'The idea that it is impossible to become reconciled at the bar­
rier is a superstition which is only suitable for Frenchmen. Besides, I 
honestly can't see what the offence is supposed to be - I - er - I've 
been wanting to say so for a long time because - because all sorts of 
apologies have been offered, haven't they ?' 
He flushed all over. He had rarely had an opportunity of speaking 
so much and with such excitement. 

THE DEVILS · PART TWO 
' I'd like to repeat again that I'm ready to make every possible 
apology,' Stavrogin put in quickly. 
' Such a thing is impossible,' Gaganov shouted furiously, addressing 
Drozdov and stamping with rage. ' If you are my second and not my 
enemy, sir, you will explain to that man ' - he pointed with his pistol 
at Stavrogin - ' that such concessions only add insult to injury ! He 
doesn't think it's possible to be insulted by me! He doesn't consider 
it disgraceful to run away at the barrier from me ! Who does he take 
me for after that, do you think ? And you - you're my second, sir! 
You're only irritating me so that I should miss him.' He stamped again, 
his lips covered with foam. 
' Negotiations are at an end,' Kirilov shouted at the top ofhis voice. 
' Please, listen to the words of command. One, two," three! '  
At the word three, the combatants began walking towards each 
other. Gaganov at once raised his pistol and fired at the fifth or sixth 
step. He stopped for a second and, having made sure that he had miss­
ed his opponent, quickly walked up to the barrier. Stavrogin, too, 
walked up to it, raised his pistol, but, holding it rather high, fired with­
out taking aim at all. Then he took out his handkerchief and wrapped 
it round the little finger of his right hand. It was only then that they 
noticed that Gaganov had not missed him altogether, but that the bul­
let had only grazed the fleshy part of his finger without touching the 
bone : it was only a slight scratch. Kirilov at once declared that, if the 
opponents were not satisfied, the duel would go on. 
' I  declare,' Gaganov croaked (his throat was parched), addressing 
himself again to Drozdov, 'that this man ' - he pointed again at Stav­
rogin - 'fired in the air on purpose - deliberately. That's another in­
sult! He wants to make the duel impossible !' 
' I  have the right to fire as I like so long as I keep to the rules,' Stav­
rogin declared firmly. 
' No, he hasn't! '  Gaganov shouted. ' Explain it to him, please! '  
' I'm entirely of the same opinion as Mr Stavrogin,' Kirilov an­
nounced. 
' Why does he spare me ?' Gaganov raged, without listening. ' I  de­
spise his clemency ! I refuse to accept it - I -' 
' I  give you my word that I had no intention of insulting you,' Stav­
rogin declared impatiently. ' I  fired in the air because I don't want to 
kil any more people, either you or anyone else. It's nothing to do with 

THE D UEL 
293 
you personally. It's true, I don't consider myself offended, and I'm 
sorry that makes you angry. But I shall not permit anyone to interfere 
with my rights.' 
'If he is so afraid of the sight of blood, then ask him why he chal­
lenged me,' Gaganov roared, still addressing Drozdov. 
' How could he help challenging you ? '  Kirilov interposed. ' You 
wouldn't listen to anything. How was he to get rid of you ?' 
'Let me say this,' Drozdov, who was considering the position pain­
fully and with an effort, declared. ' If an opponent declares beforehand 
that he intends to fire in the air, the duel cannot possibly go on for - er ­
delicate and - er - obvious reasons.' 
' I  never said that I intended to fire in the air every time,' Stavrogin 
cried, losing patience. ' You can't possibly know what I have in mind 
and how I'm going to fire next time. I'm not interfering with the duel 
at all.' 
'If that is so, then the encounter can go on,' said Drozdov to 
Gaganov. 
'Gentlemen, take your places! '  Kirilov commanded. 
Again they walked towards each other, again Gaganov missed, 
and again Stavrogin fired into the air. It is true that he could have 
denied firing in the air : he could have claimed to have aimed pro­
perly, if he had not admitted that he had missed deliberately. He 
did not aim straight at the sky or at a tree, but seemed to aim 
at his opponent, though he pointed his pistol several feet above 
his hat. The second time his aim was indeed much lower and much 
more plausible. But it was quite impossible to convince Gaganov 
now. 
'Again ! '  he cried, grinding his teeth. ' Never mind ! I have been 
challenged and I'm going to make use of my rights ! I shall fire a third 
time - I insist! '  
'You're fUly entitled to do so ! '  Kirilov rapped out. 
Drozdov said nothing. They were placed a third time; the signal to 
fire was given. This time Gaganov walked right up to the barrier and 
began taking aim from there at a distance of twelve paces. His hands 
were trembling too much to take good aim. Stavrogin stood with his 
pistol lowered awaiting his shot without moving. 
'Too long! You're taking aim too long,' Kirilov shouted impetu­
ously. ' Fire! Fi-i-re! '  

294 
T H E  D E V I L S  • PART TWO 
But the shot rang out, and this time Stavrogin's white fur hat flew 
off. The aim had been fairly good; the crown of the hat was pierced 
very low down ; a quarter of an inch lower and everything would 
have been at an end. K.irilov picked up the hat and handed it to Stav­
rogm. 
' Fire, don't keep your opponent waiting! '  Drozdov shouted in 
great excitement, seeing that Stavrogin seemed to have forgotten to 
fire as he was examining his hat with Kirilov. 
Stavrogin gave a start, glanced at Gaganov, turned away and with­
out caring this time for his opponent's feelings, fired into the copse. 
The duel was over. Gaganov stood as though he had been crushed. 
Drozdov went up to him and started saying something, but he did not 
seem to understand. As he was going away, K.irilov took off his hat 
and nodded to Drozdov ; but Stavrogin forgot his former politeness; 
after firing into the copse, he didn't even turn towards the barrier. He 
handed his pistol to Kirilov and walked quickly towards the horses. 
He looked angry; he did not speak. Kirilov, too, was silent. They 
mounted their horses and set off at a gallop. 
3 
' Why don't you speak ?' he called impatiently to Kirilov when they 
were not far from home. 
'What do you want ?' Kirilov replied, almost slipping off his horse 
which reared up. 
Stavrogin controlled himself. 
' I  didn't want to offend that - fool, but I have offended him again,' 
he said softly. 
'Yes, you have offended him again,' K.irilov snapped. 'And, besides, 
he isn't a fool.' 
' Still, I did what I could.' 
'No, you didn't.' 
'What should I have done, then ?' 
'You shouldn't have challenged him.' 
'And have my face slapped again?' 
'Yes, have it slapped again.' 
'I can't understand it! '  Stavrogin said angrily. ' Why does everv­
body expect something from me that is not expected from anybody 

THE D UEL 
295 
else? Why should I put up with things no one else puts up with ? Why 
should I agree to burdens no one else can bear?' 
'I thought you were looking for a burden yoursel£' 
'Me looking for a burden ?' 
'Yes.' 
'You - you realized that?' 
'Yes.' 
'Is it so noticeable?' 
'Yes.' 
They were silent for a minute. Stavrogin looked very troubled. He 
was almost sttmned. 
'I did not shoot at him because I didn't want to kill anyone. I assure 
you there was nothing else,' he said quickly and uneasily, as though 
justifying himsel£ 
'You shouldn't have offended him.' 
' But what else should I have done?' 
'You should have killed him.' 
'Are you sorry I didn't kill him ?' 
'I'm not sorry for anything. I thought you really meant to kill him. 
You don't know what you're looking for.' 
'I'm looking for a burden,' Stavrogin laughed. 
'If you didn't want bloodshed yourself, why did you give him a 
chance to kill you?' 
'Ifl hadn't challenged him, he would have killed me anyhow with-
out a duel.' 
'That's not your business. Perhaps he wouldn't have killed you.' 
' But just given me a beating ?' 
'That's not your business. Bear your burden. There is no merit 
otherwise.' 
'To hell with your merit. I'm not looking for anyone's approval.' 
'I thought you were,' Kirilov concluded very coolly. 
They rode into the courtyard of Stavrogin's house. 
'Won't you come in?' Stavrogin asked. 
' No, thanks. I'm going home. Good-bye.' 
He dismounted and put his box under his arm. 
'You're not angry with me, are you?' Stavrogin said, holding out 
his hand to him. 
' Not at all ! '  Kirilov said, coming back to shake hands with him. ' If 

THE DEVILS • PART TWO 
I find my burden light because I'm made that way, then perhaps yours 
is heavier because that's how you're made. There's not much to be 
ashamed of, just a little.' 
'I know that I'm a worthless character, but I'm not trying to pre­
tend to be a strong one.' 
' Don't try. You're not a strong man. Come and have tea with me.' 
Stavrogin entered his room greatly perturbed. 
4 
He found out at once from the butler that Mrs Stavrogin, very pleased 
that her son had gone out for a ride for the first time after the eight 
days of his illness, had ordered her carriage and had driven out alone 
for a breath of fresh air, as she used to do regularly before, for, the 
butler added, during the last eight days she had forgotten what it 
meant to have a breath of fresh air. 
' Has she gone alone or with Miss Shatov?' Stavrogin interrupted 
the butler with a quick question, and he frowned when he heard that 
Dasha felt too unwell to accompany his mother and was at present in 
her rooms. 
'Listen, old man,' he said as though suddenly making up his mind, 
'keep an eye on her al day to-day, and if you see her coming to me, 
stop her at once, and tell her that for the next few days, at any rate, I 
cannot see her - that I ask her not to come and that - when the time 
comes - I  shall send for her myself - do you hear?' 
'I shall tell her, sir,' said the butler in a distresed voice, dropping his 
eyes. 
'But not before you're quite sure that she's coming to me hersel£' 
'Don't worry, sir, there won't be any mistake. It was through me 
that your meetings were arranged til now. Miss Shatov always turned 
to me for help.' 
'I know. But don't say anything before she comes hersel£ Let me 
have some tea, please, as soon as possible.' 
As soon as the old man went out, however, the door opened and 
Dasha appeared in the doorway. She looked composed, but her face 
was pale. 
'Where have you come from ?' Stavrogin cried. 
' I  was standing outside and waited for him to leave the room before 

THE D U E L  
297 
I went in. I heard what you said to him, and when he came out just 
now I hid behind the wall round the corner, on the right, and he did 
not notice me.' 
'I have long been thinking of breaking off with you, Dasha, for a 
while - for the present. I couldn't see you last night in spite of your 
note. I meant to write to you myself, but I'm not good at writing,' he 
added with annoyance and as though with disgust, too. 
'I thought myself that we'd better break it off. Mrs Stavrogin is 
very suspicious about our relations.' 
' Well, let her be.' 
' She mustn't be worried. So now it's the end?' 
'You're always expecting the end, aren't you ?' 
'Yes, but I'm sure of it.' 
৵othing comes to an end in this world.' 
'But here it will be the end. When you call me, I'll come. Good­
bye now.' 
'And what sort of end will it be?' Stavrogin asked with a grin. 
'You're not wounded and you haven't - shed any blood ?' she 
asked without answering his question about the end. 
'The whole thing was silly. I didn't kill anyone, don't worry. How­
ever, you'll hear everything to-day from everyone. I'm a little out of 
sorts.' 
'I'm going. There won't be any announcement of your marriage 
to-day, will there?' she added irresolutely. 
'Not to-day, nor to-morrow. I don't know about the day after to­
morrow. Perhaps we shall all be dead then, and so much the better. 
Leave me, please. Leave me.' 
'You won't ruin the other woman - the mad one - will you?' 
'I shan't ruin the mad ones, either the one or the other, but I believe 
I shal ruin the sane one: I'm so mean and wicked, Dasha, that I 
shouldn't be surprised ifl really did call you " at the very end", as you 
say, and you'll come in spite of your sanity. Why are you ruining 
yourself?' 
'I know that at the end I shall remain alone with you and - I'm wait­
ing for that.' 
'But what if I do not call for you at the end? What if I run away 
from you?' 
'That will never happen. You will call for me.' 

THE DEVILS • PART TWO 
'There's a great deal of contempt for me in the way you said that.' 
'You know that it's not contempt only.' 
'So you admit that there is some contempt?' 
'Sorry, I didn't express myself properly. God's my witnes that it 
.s my dearest wish that you should never need me.' 
'One sentence deserves another. I, too, should have wished not to 
ruin you.' 
'You can never ruin me, whatever you do, and you know it better 
than anyone,' Dasha said quickly and firmly. 'Ifl can't come to you, 
I'll be a hospital nurse or a district nurse, or I shall go about selling the 
Bible. That's what I have decided to do. I can't be anyone's wife. I 
can't go on living in such a house as this. I don't want that. You know 
it all, don't you?' 
'No, I never could make out what you wanted. I can't help feeling 
that you are interested in me just as some elderly nurses are for some 
reason interested in one particular patient as compared with other 
patients, or rather as some pious old ladies, who never miss a funeral, 
find some corpses more fascinating than others. Why do you look so 
strangely at me?' 
'Are you very ill ?' she asked sympathetically, scrutinizing him in a 
rather peculiar way. 'Heavens, and this man thinks he can do without 
me!' 
'Listen, Dasha, I seem to be always seeing phantoms now. One little 
devil proposed to me on the bridge yesterday to murder Mary and 
Lebyatkin so as to put an end to my marriage without anybody sus­
pecting anything. He asked me for three roubles on account, but made 
it quite clear that the whole transaction would cost no less than fifteen 
hundred. There's a calculating devil for you! A book-keeper! Ha, ha! '  
'But are you quite sure it was just a phantom?' 
'Oh, no, it wasn't a phantom at all! It was Fedka the convict, an 
escaped prisoner. But that's not important. What do you think I did? 
I gave him all the money from my purse, and he is now absolutely 
convinced that I've given him that on account! '  
'You met him last night and he made you such a proposal? But 
can't you see that they've entangled you completely in their net?' 
'Oh, let them! But,' he added with a malicious and irritable smile, 
'I can see by the way you look at me that there's a question on the tip 
of your tongue you're dying to ask me.' 

ALL AGOG 
299 
Dasha looked frightened. 
'I've no question to ask you and I've no doubts at all,' she cried in 
alarm, as though wishing to get rid of the question. 'You'd better say 
nothing! '  
'You mean you're quite sure that I won't go to Fedka's shop ?' 
'Oh God ! '  she cried, clasping her hands in despair, 'why do you 
torture me like this ?' 
'I'm sorry; forgive my silly joke. I expect I must be picking up bad 
maners from them. Since last night, you know, I feel awfully like 
laughing - laughing all the time, without stopping, for hours and 
hours. I seem to be infected with laughter. Listen - Mother has just 
arrived. I recognize her carriage by the noise it makes when it stops at 
the front steps.' 
Dasha seized his hand. 
'May the Lord protect you from your demon and - call me, call me 
as soon as possible! ' 
'Oh, what sort of a demon is it? It's simply a nasty, scrofulous little 
devil with a cold in his head, one of the failures. But I can see, Daŝha, 
that there's something you again don't dare to say, isn't there ?' 
She looked at him with pain and reproach and turned to go. 
'Listen,' he called after her with a malicious, twisted smile, 'if ­
well, I mean if- you see, if I were to go to that shop and then called 
for you afterwards - would you come after that?' 
She went out without turning or replying, her face buried in her 
hands. 
' She'll come even after I've been to the shop ! ' he whispered after a 
moment's thought, and a look of disdainful contempt came into his 
face. 'A hospital nurse! Well . . .  But perhaps that's really what I want. ' 
4 
All Agog 
T H E  impression created on our entire society by the story of the duel, 
which spread quickly all over the town, was particularly remarkable 
for the unanimity with which everyone hastened to take Mr Stavrogin's 
part. Many of his former enemies now resolutely declared themselves 

300 
THE D E V I L S  • PART T W O  
to be his friends. Such an w1expected change in public opinion was 
mainly due to a certain person, who till then had expressed no 
opinion on the matter, but who now uttered a few very pointed words 
that at once lent a significance to the event which was exciting the 
curiosity of the great majority of our citizens. It happened like this : 
on the very next day after the duel the whole town gathered at the 
house of our marshal of nobility, whose wife's name-day it was. Julia 
Lembke was present, or, rather, presided over the festivities. She 
arrived with Lisa, radiant with beauty and looking particularly gay, 
which at once seemed rather suspicious to many of our ladies at this 
time. By the way, there could no longer be any doubt about her en­
gagement to Maurice Drozdov. In reply to a playful question of a re­
tired, bnt highly important, general, of whom more will be said later, 
she said openly that evening that she was betrothed. And what do you 
think ? Not one of our ladies would believe in her engagement. All of 
them went on stubbornly to assume some romance, some fatal family 
mystery, which had taken place in Switzerland, and for some reason 
Mrs Lembke was supposed to have had a hand in it. It is difficult to 
say why these rumours or, as it were, fancies had gained so firm a hold 
and why it was so resolutely maintained that Mrs Lembke was in­
volved in it. As soon as she came in, all turned to her with strange 
looks, all agog. I may add that because the duel had happened so re­
cent! y and because of the certain circumstances attending it, it was dis­
cussed with a certain circumspection at the party, and in whispers. Be­
sides, nothing was yet known about the steps the authorities intended 
to take. The two duellists, so far as was known, were not troubled by 
the police. It was common knowledge, for instance, that Mr Gaganov 
had returned to his Dukhovo estate early in the morning without any 
i.merference. Meanwhile everybody, of course, was eager for some­
body else to be the fmt to broach the subject and thus open the door 
to the impatience of everybody. They pinned their hopes on the above­
mentioned general, and they were not disappointed. 
This general was one of the most pompous members of our club. 
He was not a very wealthy landowner, but a man of a most fascinating 
turn of mind, an old-fashioned lady-killer, by the way, who was very 
fond, in large assemblies, of talking aloud, with all the weighty author­
ity of a general, about the very subjects everyone spoke of in discreet 
whispers. That was, so to speak, his special role in our society. On such 

ALL AGOG 
301 
occasions he usually spoke in a drawl, enunciating each word with 
particular rehsh. He most probably acquired tlus habit from the Rus­
sians travelhng abroad or from those wealthy Russian landowners 
who had incurred the largest financial losses from the peasant reform. 
Mr Verkhovensky even remarked on one occasion that the greater a 
landowner's losses, the more genteel was his speech and the more he 
drawled his words. He himself, incidentally, spoke in a most genteel 
and drawling manner, but never noticed it in himself 
The General began speaking like a man who was competent to ex­
press an opinion. For he was not only a distant relation of Gaganov's 
and, indeed, had engaged in a law-suit with him, but had fought two 
duels himself in the old days, and had even been reduced to the ranks 
and exiled to the Caucasus for one of them. Someone mentioned that 
Mrs Stavrogin had been seen driving out after her indisposition that 
day and the day before. As a matter of fact, he did not even mention 
her by name but merely referred to the most excellent matching of 
her four grey horses from the Stavrogins' stud. The General suddenly 
observed that he had met ' the young Stavrogin ' that very day on 
horseback. Everyone at once fell silent. The General munched his lips 
and all of a sudden announced, twisting his presentation gold snuff­
box between his fmgers : 
'I'm sorry I wasn't here a few years ago - I mean, that I was in 
Carlsbad at the time. H'm !  I'm very interested in that young man 
about whom so many stories reached me at the time. H'm !  Is it true 
that he's mad ? Someone told me so then. A few days ago I'm suddenly 
told that a student has insulted him in the presence of his cousins and 
that he crawled under the table to hide himself from him. And yester­
day I heard from Stepan Vysotsky that Stavrogin had just fought a 
duel with that - er - that Gaganov fellow. Just with the gallant idea 
of putting himself up as a target to an infuriated man. To get rid of 
him. H'm ! That's the sort of thing a Guards officer would have done 
in the twenties. Does he visit anyone here ?' 
The General paused as though in expectation of an answer. The 
door of pubhc impatience had been flung wide open. 
' Why, what can be simpler ? '  Mrs Lembke suddenly cried in a loud 
voice, irritated by the way everyone in the room suddenly turned 
their eyes on her as though by word of command. ' Is there anything 
mrprising in the fact that Stavrogin fought a duel with Gaganov but 

302 
THE DEVILS • PART TWO 
took no notice of the student ? He couldn't possibly challenge one of 
his former serfs to a duel, could he?' 
Significant words ! A clear and simple idea which seemed, however, 
never to have occurred to anyone til then. Words which had quite 
extraordiriary consequences. All scandal and gossip, all the petty small 
talk was at once pushed to the background. Those words put an en­
tirely new complexion on the affair. A new character appeared on the 
scene, a person everyone had misjudged, a person with an almost ideal 
severity of social standards. Mortally insulted by a student, that is to 
say, an educated man and no longer a serf, he ignored the insult be­
cause the man who had attacked him was a former serf of his. Society 
had gossiped and slandered him ; frivolous society had looked with 
contempt upon a man who had had his face slapped ; but he had 
scorned public opinion which had failed to rise to an understanding of 
the real standards of social conduct and yet discussed them. 
'And in the meantime you and I, sir, sit and discuss the correct stan­
dards of conduct,' one old club member said to another, moved by 
a vehement and generous feeling of self-reproach. 
'Yes, sir, yes,' the other agreed with pleasure; 'you never can tell 
with the younger generation, can you ?' 
' It's not a question of the younger generation, sir,' a third one, who 
happened to be standing near them, observed; ' it's not a question of 
the younger generation. The man we're talking about is a star, sir, and 
not just one of our younger set. That's the way to look at it.' 
'It's just the man we need. We haven't enough people of his sort.' 
The main point about it was that the 'new man' had not only re­
vealed himself as ' a  genuine nobleman ', but was also one of the 
wealthiest landowners in the province, and therefore could be counted 
on being one of the leading personages in our town who could be of 
great assistance in public affairs. I beheve I have already briefly re­
ferred to the attitude of our landowners. 
They even got excited about it. 
' He not only refused to challenge the student, but also took his 
hands off him - mark that specially, sir,' one club member pointed 
out, addressing the General. 
"Nor did he drag him through our new courts,' added another. 
·In spite of the fact that for a personal insult to a born gentleman 
he would have got fifteen roubles damages - ha, ha, ha ! '  

ALL AGOG 
303 
'No, let me tell you the secret of our new courts,' a third one cried, 
working himself up into a frenzy. ' If a man is caught red-handed steal­
ing or embezzling money, he had better run home quickly while there 
is still time and murder his mother. He'll then at once be acquitted of 
everything, and the ladies will wave their lawn hankies at him from 
the public galery. It's the truth I'm telling you ! '  
' It's the truth! It's the truth ! '  
The inevitable anecdotes were trotted out. Stavrogin's connexions 
with Count K. were mentioned. Count K.'s severe and private views 
on the latest reforms were well known, as well as his remarkable pub­
lic activities, that had a little slackened off lately. Suddenly everyone 
became convinced that Stavrogin was engaged to one of Count K.'s 
daughters, though there seemed to be no ground whatever for such a 
rumour. As for his marvellous adventures in Switzerland and his affair 
with Lisa, even our ladies no longer mentioned them. Let me, inci­
dentally, add that the Drozdovs had by this time managed to pay all 
the visits they had omitted at first. They al found Lisa to be a most 
ordinary girl who 'flaunted' her delicate nerves. Her fainting on the 
day of Stavrogin's arrival, it was now explained, was simply due to 
her terror caused by the student's outrageous behaviour. They all did 
their best to emphasize the prosaic nature of the events which they had 
before tried to put in so fantastic a light. As for the lame woman, they 
forgot al about her now and were even ashamed to talk of her. ' Why, 
even if there had been hundreds of lame women - who hasn't been 
young once! '  Stavrogin' s respectful treatment of his mother was 
harped upon, various virtues were discovered in him, and the learning 
he had acquired during the four years he had spent at the German uni­
versities was good-naturedly commented on. Gaganov' s conduct was 
declared to be absolutely unpardonable. Mrs Lembke was fmally ac­
knowledged to be a woman of remarkable insight. 
When, therefore, Stavrogin himself at last made his appearance in 
society, he was received by everyone with the most naive gravity. In 
al the eyes :fixed upon him the most impatient expectations could be 
read. Stavrogin at once lapsed into most stern silence, which, of 
course, satisfied everybody much more than if he had talked his head 
off. In a word, he was successful in whatever he did; he became the 
fashion. Anyone who once appears in provincial society, cannot pos­
sibly hide himself away again. Stavrogin began to carry out his social 

304 
T H E  D E V I L S  • PART T W O  
duties as punctiliously as before. People did not fmd him very cheerful 
company : 'The man has been through a great deal ; he is not like other 
people ; he has something to be sad about.' Even his pride and that 
fastidious unapproachability, for which he was so hated in our town 
four years before, were now liked and respected. 
Mrs Stavrogin exulted more than anyone. I cannot say whether she 
was really sorry about her shattered dream of her son's marriage to 
Lisa. Here, of course, her family pride, too, came to her assistance. One 
thing was strange, though : Mrs Stavrogin suddenly became most 
firmly convinced that her Nicholas had ' made his choice' at Count 
K.'s, but, which was even stranger than that, what convinced her were 
the idle rumours which reached her as they did everybody else. She 
was afraid to ask Stavrogin a direct question. Once or twice, however. 
she could not refrain from reproaching him good-humouredly and in 
a rather roundabout way for not being frank with her. Stavrogin smiled 
and remained silent. The silence was taken as a sign of assent. And yet, 
for all that, she never forgot the cripple. The thought of her lay like a 
heavy stone on her heart, like a nightmare. It tortured her with 
strange phantoms and conjectures, and all this side by side with her 
dreams of the daughters of Count K. But of that later. It goes without 
saying that the attitude of society towards Mrs Stavrogin was again 
marked by extreme courtesy and respect, but she took little advantage 
of it and very seldom drove out on visits. 
She did, however, pay an official visit to the Governor's wife. No 
one, of course, was more enchanted and charmed by Mrs Lembke's 
words at the name-day party of the Marshal's wife than she. They re­
moved a great deal of worry from her mind and explained much of 
what had been troubling her since that luckless Sunday. ' I  did not 
understand that woman ! '  she said solemnly and, with the impulsive­
ness characteristic of her, she frankly told Mrs Lembke that she had 
come to thank her. Mrs Lembke was flattered, but remained as inde­
pendent as ever. She was beginning at this time to be aware of her 
own importance, perhaps a little too much so. For instance, she de­
clared in the course ofher conversation with Mrs Stavrogin that she had 
never heard ofMr Verkhovensky either as a public figure or as a scholar. 
' I  am, of course, only too glad to receive young Verkhovensky. He 
is rather absurd, but he's young, though he certainly is a highly edu­
cated man. He is not some retired old-fashioned critic like his father.' 

ALL AGOG 
Mrs Stavrogin at. once hastened to observe that Mr Verkhovensky 
had never been a critic, but had, on the contrary, spent all his life in 
her house. He became famous for the circumstances that attended his 
early career, circumstances which were 'well known to the whole 
world', and more recently for his work on Spanish history. He also 
planned to write about the position of modern German universities 
and, she believed, something else on the Dresden Madonna. In a 
word, Mrs Stavrogin was determined not to surrender Mr Verkho­
vensky to the tender mercies of Mrs Lembke. 
'The Dresden Madonna? You mean the Sistine Madonna ? My dear 
Mrs Stavrogin, I sat for two hours before that picture and came away 
completely disilusioned. I couldn't make it out at all and was quite 
astonished. Karmazinov, too, says that it is dificult to understand. No 
one finds anything remarkable in it now, neither Russians nor the 
English. It's the old men who made such a fuss of it.' 
'It's the new fashion, then, I suppose ? ' 
' Well, you know, I believe that we mustn't treat our younger 
generation with disrespect. People shout that they are communists, 
but in my opinion we must treat them with understanding, and not 
underestimate them. I read everything now - al the papers, tl1e com­
munes, natural sciences - I get everything, for after all one must know 
where one's living and with whom one has to deal. One can't spend 
al one's life in the world of one's imagination. I've come to the con­
clusion and made it my rule to be as nice as possible to the young 
people and in this way keep them from going over the brink. Believe 
me, my dear Mrs Stavrogin, that only we who belong to the best 
society can by our good influence and, above all, by our kindness keep 
them from the abyss into which the intolerance of these stupid old 
men pushes them. However, I am glad to learn from you about Mr 
Verkhovensky. You've given me an idea: he may be useful at our 
literary reading. I'm arranging a fete, you know, a subscription enter­
tainment in aid of the poor governesses of our province. They are 
scattered al over Russia; there are six of them in our district alone; in 
addition there are two telegraphist girls, two academy students, and 
the rest would like to be trained for some job, but they haven't the 
means. The lot of the Russian woman is terrible, Mrs Stavrogin! This 
has now been made into a university question and there has even been 
a meeting of the State Council about it. In this strange Russia of ours 

306 
THE D E V I L S · PART T W O  
one can do anything one likes. And that again is why I believe that 
only by the kindness and the warm sympathy of all our best people can 
this great common cause be put on the right path. Dear me, haven't we 
plenty of people of irreproachable character among us ? To be sure 
we have, but they are all scattered. Let us close our ranks and we shall 
be stronger. In a word, I am thinking of arranging a literary matinee, 
then a light luncheon, then an intermission, and in the evening of the 
same day a ball. We thought of starting the evening with tableaux 
vivants, but that apparently would be too expensive, and so there will 
be for the public one or two quadrilles in masks and fancy dress repre­
senting well-known literary movements. It was Mr Karmazinov who 
suggested this amusing idea. He has been helping me a lot. You know, 
he's going to read us his last work, which no one knows yet. He is lay­
ing down his pen and isn't going to write anything any more ; this last 
thing of his is his farewell to the public. It's a delightful little thing, 
called Merci. The title is in French, but he fmds it even more amusing 
and subtle because of that. I do, too, and as a matter of fact I advised 
him to choose this title. I think Mr Verkhovensky, too, might read us 
something, if it isn't too long and - not too learned. I think Peter 
Verkhovensky and someone else will also read something. Peter will 
be round at your place and tell you the programme. Or perhaps I'd 
better bring it to you myself.' 
'You won't mind if I add my name to your subscription list, will 
you ? I'll tell Mr V erkhovensky and ask him myself.' 
Mrs Stavrogin returned home completely enchanted. She had been 
won over to Mrs Lembke's side and was, for some reason, very angry 
with Mr Verkhovensky, who, poor man, sat at home and knew 
nothing about it. 
' I'm charmed with her and I can't understand how I could have 
been so mistaken about that woman,' she said to Stavrogin and to 
Peter Verkhovensky, who had dropped in to see them in the even­
mg. 
'But you must make peace with the old boy, all the same,' Peter 
urged. ' He's in despair. You've cut him completely. Yesterday he saw 
you in your carriage and bowed, and you turned away. You know, 
we can give him a leg up. I'm counting on him to do something for 
me and I think he can still be useful.' 
' Oh, he'll read something.' 

ALL A G O G  
307 
'It wasn't that I had in mind. I meant to go and see him to-day. 
Shall I tell him about it ?' 
' If you like. I don't know, though, how you're going to arrange it,' 
she said irresolutely. 'I intended to have it out with him myself and 
wanted to fix the time and place.' 
She frowned. 
' Oh, it's not worth while fixing a time. I'll simply tell him.' 
'Very well, tell him. However, you may as well add that I shall 
most certainly fix a time to see him. Do tell him that.' 
Peter ran off, grinning. As far as I can remember, he was particu­
larly spiteful all the time, and even allowed himself to be extremely 
rude and abrupt with almost everyone. It was curious how everyone 
somehow forgave him. Everyone seemed to take the view that he had 
to be regarded in a special sort of way. I may add that his attitude to 
Stavrogin's duel was particularly malicious. It took him by surprise ; 
he even turned green when he was told about it. But perhaps his van­
ity was hurt : he learnt about it only on the following day when every­
one knew of it. 
'But you had no right to fight a duel,' he whispered to Stavrogin 
five days later, meeting him by chance at the club. 
It is certainly remarkable that they had not met anywhere during 
those five days, though Peter had called on Mrs Stavrogin almost 
every day. 
Stavrogin gave him a silent, absent-minded look, as though not 
understanding what he was talking about, and went on his way with­
out stopping. He was just then passing through the large ballroom on 
his way to the bar. 
'You've been to see Shatov, too . . . .  You intend to make it known 
about Mary,' he whispered, running after him and, as it were absent­
mindedly, catching hold of his shoulder. 
Stavrogin shook off his hand and quickly turned to him, with a 
menacing frown. Peter looked at him with his lips distended in a 
strange smile. Stavrogin walked on. 
2 
He went to see the 'old man' straight from Mrs Stavrogin's, and ifhe 
was in such haste, it was simply out of spite, because he had made up 

308 
THE DEVILS • PART TWO 
his mind to get his own back for an insult of which I had no idea at 
the time. What happened was that during their last interview -
namely, on Thursday of the previous week - Mr Verkhovensky, who, 
as a matter of fact, himself started the quarrel, had ended by driving 
his son out of his house with a stick. He concealed the fact from me 
at the time; but now, no sooner did Peter rush into the room with 
his usual grin, which was so grossly arrogant, and his unpleasantly 
inquisitive eyes darting al over the place, than Mr Verkhovensky 
made a secret signal to me not to leave the room. This was how their 
real relations were revealed to me, for this time I heard their whole 
conversation. 
Mr Verkhovensky was sitting stretched out on the sofa. Since that 
Thursday he had grown thin and sallow. Peter sat down beside him 
with a most familiar air, tucking his legs up unceremoniously and tak­
ing up much more room on the sofa than his respect for his father 
warranted. Mr V erkhovensky made room for him in silence and with 
a dignified air. 
An open book was on the table. It was Chemyshevsky's novel 
What's To Be Done? I'm afraid I must reveal one strange weakness in 
my friend: the fantastic idea that he must leave his seclusion and fight 
a last battle took more and more possession ofhis sick fancy. I realized 
that he had got hold of the novel and was studying it with the sole pur­
pose of knowing their arguments and methods beforehand from their 
'catechism' so that when the inevitable conflict with the 'shriekers' 
came he would be ready to refute them triumphantly before her eyes. 
Oh, how that book tortured him! He sometimes threw it down in de­
spair and, jumping up from his seat, walked up and down the room 
almost in a frenzy. 
'I agree that the author's fundamental idea is right,' he said to me 
feverishly, 'but that makes it more awful ! It's just our idea - yes, ours ! 
We were the first to plant it, to nurture it, to get it ready - and what 
new thing could they say after us? But, good Lord, how they have 
expressed it all, distorted, mutilated it! ' he cried, rapping on the book 
with his fingers. ' Were those the conclusions we wanted to draw ? 
Who can recognize the original idea here?' 
'Enlarging your mind ?' Peter said with a grin, picking up the book 
from the table and reading the title. 'You should have done it long 
ago. I'll bring you much better books, if you like.' 

ALL AGOG 
309 
Mr Verkhovensky again ignored his son's remark with dignity. I 
IVas sitting on a sofa in the corner of the room. 
Peter quickly explained the purpose of his visit. Mr Verkhovensky 
vas of course greatly taken aback and listened in alarm which was 
nixed with extreme indignation. 
'And that Mrs Lembke realy thinks that I'd go to read at her 
touse?' 
'But, don't you see, they don't need you at all. What they want is 
o be nice to you so as to get into Mrs Stavrogin's good books. And I 
lon't think you wil dare to refuse. Besides,' he added with a grin, 
I expect you're dying to do it. Al you old fogies are hellishly con­
:eited. But take my advice, old man, don't be too boring. What have 
rou got there? Spanish history? You'd better let me have a look at it 
:hree days before the reading, or I'm sure you'll send them al to sleep.' 
The hurried and al-too-obvious rudeness of these stinging remarks 
Nas quite obviously deliberate. He was apparently trying to pretend 
:hat it was quite impossible to talk to Mr Verkhovensky in a more re­
J.ned and intelligent manner. Mr Verkhovensky continued resolutely 
:o ignore his son's insults. But the news brought by his son produced 
1 more and more overwhelming impression on him. 
'And she herself, she herself, sir, asked you to tell me this?' he asked, 
turning pale. 
'Well, you see, as a matter of fact she is going to let you know when 
and where she'd like to see you so that you can come to a mutual 
understanding - that, I suppose, is all that's left over from that roman­
tic love affair of yours. You've been flirting with her for twenty years 
and you've certainly managed to teach her some droll methods. But 
don't worry, it's quite different now. She herself keeps repeating 
every minute that she is only just beginning " to see things in their true 
light". I told her in so many words that al this friendship of yours is 
nothing but a mutual outpouring of slops. She told me a lot of things, 
old man. Dear me, you have been a regular flunkey al this time, 
haven't you? I just couldn't help blushing for you.' 
'I've been a regular flunkey?' cried Mr Verkhovensky, no longer 
able to restrain himself. 
'Worse, you were a hanger-on; tl1at is, a flunkey of your own free 
will. Too lazy to do a job of work, and we've quite a passion for 
money, haven't we? She, too, can see it al now - at least, she's been 

3 10 
THE D E V I L S · PART T W O  
telling me some horrible things about you. Why, old man, I simply 
roared with laughter over your letters to her. I felt ashamed and dis­
gusted. But, then, you're so depraved, so depraved ! There's always 
something fw1damentally depraving in charity - you're the best ex­
ample of that ! '  
' She showed you my letters ! '  
' All o f  them. But o f  course I couldn't possibly read them all - could 
I? Good Lord, the reams and reams of paper you've covered ! There 
must be more than two thousand letters there, I should think. But you 
know, old man, it's my belief that there was one moment when 
she'd have been ready to marry you. Wasn't there ? You missed your 
chance in the stupidest way ! I'm speaking from your point of view, of 
course, but you would certainly have been better off than now when 
you've almost been married off to cover up " another man's sins ". 
Married off like a clown to make people laugh - for money.' 
' For money ! Did she say it was for money ?' Mr Verkhovensky 
cried, deeply hurt. 
' What else ? But don't worry, I stood up for you. It's the only way 
you have ofjustifying your actions. She realized herself that you needed 
money like everybody else, and that from that point of view you were 
probably right. I proved it to her as clearly as I could that such an 
arrangement had been to the advantage of both of you. She was the 
capitalist and you were her sentimental clown. Still, I don't think she's 
angry about the money, though you did milk her like a nanny-goat. 
What she is so furious about is that she should have believed in you 
for twenty years, that you should have taken her in with that high­
falutin talk of yours and made her go on lying for so long. That she 
was lying herself- that she will never admit, but that's why she'll jolly 
well make you suffer for it. What I can't understand is how it never 
occurred to you that you'd have to pay for it one day. You couldn't 
have been as stupid as that. I advised her yesterday to send you to the 
workhouse - now, keep your temper, please. I meant a decent work­
house, of course - nothing to hurt your feelings. I believe she'll do it, 
too. Do you remember your last letter to me three weeks ago ?' 
' You didn't show it to her, did you ? '  Mr Verkhovensky cried, 
jumping up with horror. 
' Rather! Showed it to her first thing. The very same letter in which 
you told me that she was exploiting you, that she was jealous of your 

ALL AGOG 
3 1 1  
talent, and - well - that business about the other man's "sins ". But, 
incidentally, old boy, you are devilishly conceited, you know. I simp­
ly roared with laughter. Your letters are damned boring, though. 
Your style is just horrible. I often didn't bother to read them at al. As 
a matter of fact, I've still got a letter of yours I've never opened. I'll 
send it back to you to-morrow. But that last letter of yours is a real 
masterpiece! How I laughed. Lord, how I laughed! ' 
' Monster! Monster! '  cried Mr Verkhovensky. 
' Damn it, one can't talk to you. Look here, you're not getting 
offended, as you were last Thursday, are you ?' 
Mr Verkhovensky drew himself up menacingly. 
'How dare you talk to me like that ?' 
' Like what? Am I not making myself plain ?' 
' Tell me, you monster, are you my son or not ?' 
'You ought to know that better than I. But, of course, every father 
is inclined to be blind in such a case -' 
' Shut up ! Shut up! '  Mr Verkhovensky cried, trembling all over. 
' Now, look here, you go on screaming and swearing as you did 
last Thursday when you tried to threaten me with your stick, but I 
found that document, you know. I found it on that very day. Turned 
my trunk inside out just from curiosity. It's true there's nothing de­
finite - you can take as much comfort as you like from that. It's only 
a note from my mother to that Polish gentleman. But if we take her 
character into account.' 
'Another word and I'll box your ears ! '  
' What a man ! '  said Peter, suddenly addressing himself to me. 'You 
se, this has been going on between us since last Thursday. I'm glad 
you're here to-day, at any rate. You can judge between us. To begin 
with, a fact: he reproaches me for talking like this about my mother, 
but wasn't he the ftrst to suggest it to me? In Petersburg, when I was 
still at school, didn't he wake me twice in the night, embrace me, and 
cry like an old woman; and what do you think he told me during 
those nights ? Why, the same indecent stories about my mother. It was 
from him I first heard about it.' 
'Oh, I did it from the highest motives in the world! Oh, you didn't 
understand me. You understood nothing, nothing ! '  
'But al the same your action was meaner than mine - it was 
meaner, you must admit. For, you see, it makes no difference to me 

3 12 
THE D EVILS · PART TWO 
really. So far as I'm concerned, you needn't worry : I'm not blaming 
my mother. Whether it was you or that Pole, it's all the same to me. 
It's not my fault that you made such a stupid mess of things in Berlin. 
I could hardly have expected you to have managed it more intelli­
gently. But aren't you a funny man after all that ? And what differ­
ence does it make to you whether I am your son or not ? Listen,' he 
said, turning to me again, 'he's never spent a rouble on me all his life. 
Till I was sixteen he didn't know me at all, then he robbed me here, 
and now he shouts that his heart has been bleeding for me all his life 
and struts about like an actor before me. Good heavens ! man, I'm not 
Mrs Stavrogin, am I ?' 
He got up and picked up his hat. 
' Henceforth a father's curse be upon you! '  Mr Verkhovensky 
stretched forth his hand over him, looking as white as a sheet. 
' The idiotic things the man will say ! '  Peter exclaimed with genuine 
surprise. ' Well, good-bye, old boy. I shan't be coming to see you 
again. Don't forget to let me have your stuff in good time, and do try 
not to write some nonsense : facts, facts, and facts, and, above all, keep 
it short. Good-bye.' 
. 
3 
However, there were other reasons there. Peter Verkhovensky really 
had certain designs on his father. As I see it, he meant to drive the old 
man to despair, and thus involve him in a public scandal of a certain 
kind. He needed that for some other, independent, reasons, which I 
shall discuss later. A great multitude of such plans and designs had 
accumulated in his brain at that time - all of them, needless to say, 
fantastic. He had another victim, besides Mr Verkhovensky, in mind. 
In general, he had quite a number of victims, as became apparent after­
wards ; but on this one he counted especially, and it was none other 
than Mr von Lembke himself 
Andrey Antonovich von Lembke belonged to that favoured (by 
nature) tribe, of which there are several hundred thousand in Russia, 
according to the official census, and which perhaps does not realize it­
self that, taken as a whole, it forms a closely organized union. A union 
that has, of course, not been deliberately organized, but that exists as 
an independent tribal unit, without any verbal or written agreement, 
by dint of some moral compulsion, and which can always count on 

ALL A G O G  
3 1 3 
the mutual support of its members everywhere and in any circum­
stances. Von Lembke had the honour to be educated in one of those 
Russian educational establishments to which the young people of the 
wealthier and better connected families are sent. Almost immediately 
after the completion of their studies, the pupils of this establishment 
are appointed to rather important positions in one of the Govern­
ment departments. One of von Lembke's uncles was a lieutenant­
colonel of the Engineering Corps, and another a baker. But he man­
aged to get into this select public school, where he met not a few of his 
fellow tribesmen. He was a good sport and not a particularly brilliant 
scholar, and everybody liked him. And when many of the boys in the . 
higher forms, mostly Russians, had already learnt to discuss important 
social problems and in a way, too, that seemed to suggest that they 
were only waiting to leave school to solve them all, von Lembke still 
indulged in the most innocent schoolboy pranks. He amused them all, 
it is true, by these not particularly clever pranks, which were cynical 
at best, but that was exactly what he had set out to do. Sometimes 
when his teacher asked him some question during a lesson, he would 
blow his nose in a remarkable sort of way which would make his 
schoolmates and the teacher laugh ; another time, in the dormitory, 
he would act some obscene living picture amid general applause, or, 
again, he would play the overture from ' Fra Diavolo ' with his nose 
(and very cleverly, too). He was also remarkable for his deliberately 
untidy appearance, fmding it for some reason very witty. In his last 
year at school he began writing Russian verses. His own tribal lan­
guage he spoke rather ungrammatically, like many others of his tribe 
in Russia. This bent for versifiCation led him to strike up a friendship 
with a gloomy classmate, who seemed to be depressed by something, 
the son of a poor Russian general, who was considered in school as one 
of the great future luminaries of Russian literature. The boy took a 
patronizing interest in von Lembke. But it happened that three years 
after leaving school, this gloomy schoolboy, who had given up his job 
in order to devote himself to Russian literature and was as a result go­
ing about in torn boots, his teeth chattering with cold, wearing a sum­
mer overcoat in the late autumn, one day accidentally met his former 
protege ' Lembke', as everybody, incidentally, called him at school, on 
the Anichkin bridge. And what do you think ? He did not even recog­
nize him at first and stopped dead with surprise. Before him stood an 

314 
THE DEVILS · PART TWO 
irreproachably dressed young man, with wonderfully trimmed side­
whiskers of a reddish tint, wearing pince-nez and patent-leather boots, 
gloves of the freshest hue, and a wide Charmere overcoat, and with a 
brief-case under his arm. Lembke was very nice to his old school­
friend, gave him his address, and asked him to call on him some even­
ing. It also appeared that he was no longer ' Lembke' but von Lembke. 
His school-friend did call on him, however, though perhaps just out 
of spite. On the staircase, which was far from beautiful and certainly 
not the main entrance of the house, but which was covered with red 
felt, he was stopped by the porter, who asked him what his business 
was. A bell rang loudly on the top floor. But instead of the riches 
which the visitor expected to find, he discovered his ' Lembke' in a 
very smal sideroom, which looked dark and dilapidated, divided into 
two by a large, dark-green curtain, and furnished with upholstered 
though old furniture, with dark-green curtains at high, narrow win­
dows. Von Lembke lived in the house of a very distant relative, a 
general who had taken him under his wing. He welcomed his visitor 
cordially, was serious and gracefully courteous. They talked of literature, 
too, but strictly within the bounds of decorum. A footman in a white 
tie brought them some weak tea and little dry, round cakes. His friend, 
out of spite, asked for some soda-water. It was brought, but after some 
delay, Lembke looking rather embarrassed as he summoned the foot­
man a second time and gave him the order. However, he asked his 
visitor himself whether he would like something to eat, and was evi­
dently relieved when the latter declined his offer and, at last, went 
away. Lembke was simply embarking on his career just then and 
merely sponged on his fellow-tribesman, the important General. 
He was at that time sighing for the General's fifth daughter, and his 
feeling was apparently reciprocated. But Amalia was nevertheless 
married in due course to an elderly German factory owner, an old 
friend of the General's. Lembke did not shed many tears and set about 
making a cardboard theatre. The curtain went up, the actors came out 
and gesticulated with their hands ; the audience sat in the boxes, the 
orchestra moved their bows across the fiddles by some mechanical de­
vice, the conductor waved his baton, and in the stalls the young gentle­
men and the officers clapped their hands. It was all made out of card­
board, and it was all devised and executed by von Lembke himsel£ 
He spent six months on his theatre. The General arranged an intimate 

ALL AGOG 
3 1 5 
party on purpose; the theatre was exhibited ; all the General's five 
daughters with the newly-wed Amalia, her factory owner, and many 
young married ladies with their German escorts examined and ad­
mired the theatre ; then there was dancing. Lembke was very satisfied 
and was soon consoled. 
Years passed and his career was made. He always secured important 
jobs in Government departments, and always under chiefs of his own 
tribe, and he was promoted at last to a rather high rank for a man of 
his age. He had wished to get married for a long time and he had long 
since been looking out for the right sort of girl. He had sent a novel 
to a magazine without telling his superiors about it, but it had not been 
accepted. On the other hand, he made a cardboard model of a railway 
train, and again the result was most successful : the passengers with 
their children and dogs, carrying trunks and bags, came out on the 
platform and got into the carriages. The guards and the porters walked 
about, the bell was rung, the signal given, and the train moved out of 
the station. He spent more than a year over that clever toy. But still 
he had to get married. His circle of acquaintances was fairly large, 
mostly in the world of his German fellow-countrymen. But he also 
mixed in Russian society, chiefly as part of his duties, of course. At 
last, when he was in his thirty-ninth year, he came in for a legacy. His 
uncle the baker died, leaving him thirty-seven thousand in his will. 
Al he needed now was an important post. In spite of his rather high 
official standing, Mr von Lembke was a very modest man. He would 
have been perfectly satisfied with some independent little official post, 
giving him the right to superintend the purchase of firewood for 
Government departments, or something nice and comfortable of that 
kind, and he would have been glad to keep such a job all his life. But 
just then, instead of the Minna or Ernestine he had expected, Julia sud­
denly appeared on the scene. His career at once rose a rw1g higher. 
The modest and precise von Lembke felt that he, too, could be 
ambitious. 
By the old way of reckoning, Julia owned two hundred serfs, and 
she had besides a great number of friends in high places. On the other 
hand, von Lembke was a handsome man and she was already over 
forty. The interesting thing is that he gradually fell in love with her in 
good earnest, as he became more and more used to the idea that he 
was her fiance. On the morning of their wedding day he sent her a 

3 16 
THE DEVILS • PART TWO 
poem. She liked it all very much, even the verses: to be forty is no 
joke. Very soon a certain rank and a certain decoration were bestowed 
on him and then he was appointed governor of our province. 
Before her arrival in our town, Julia Lembke put in a good deal of 
work on her husband. In her view, he was not without abilities, he 
knew how to enter a room and to show off to advantage, he knew 
how to listen to a person and keep silent with a thoughtful air, he had 
acquired a few highly decorous poses, he could even make a speech, 
had indeed some odds and ends of ideas, and he had assumed the neces­
sary gloss of the latest 'liberal ' idea. But she was stil worried that he 
was somehow very unsusceptible to new ideas and that, after his long 
and arduous pursuit of a career, was quite undeniably beginning to 
feel the need of a rest. She tried to inspire him with her ambition, and 
he suddenly started making a Lutheran church : the pastor came out to 
preach the sermon, the congregation listened with piously folded 
hands, one lady was drying her tears with a tiny handkerchief, an old 
gentleman was blowing his nose; in the end a little organ, specially 
ordered and dispatched from Switzerland at no small expense, played 
a tune. As soon as she got wind of his new toy, Julia became really 
alarmed, carried it all off, and locked it up in a box in her room: to 
make up for it she let him write a novel, but on condition that it was 
kept secret. Since then she had decided to depend only on hersel£ Un­
fortunately, there was a great deal of frivolity and very little method 
in her plans. Destiny had kept her an old maid too long. One idea after 
another flashed through her ambitious and somewhat exasperated 
mind. She nourished grandiose schemes, she resolutely made up her 
mind to rule the province, she dreamed of immediately surrounding 
herself with loyal followers, she adopted a defmite policy. Von Lembke 
even got a little alarmed, though, with his Civil Service tact, he soon 
realized that there was actually nothing he need be afraid of so far as 
his position of governor was concerned. The first two or three months 
passed very satisfactorily indeed. But then Peter Verkhovensky turned 
up and rather queer things began to happen. 
The trouble was that from the very first young Verkhovensky had 
shown a most flagrant disrespect for von Lembke and had assumed 
some strange rights over him, while Julia, always so jealous of her hus­
band's position, refused to notice it at all ; at least, she did not think it 
important. The young man became her favourite; he ate, drank, and 

ALL A G O G  
3 17 
almost slept in the house. Von Lembke tried to defend himself, called 
him 'young man' before strangers, patted him patronizingly on the 
shoulder, but he made no impression : Peter Verkhovensky still seem­
ed to be laughing in his face, even while conducting an apparently 
serious conversation, and he would say the most outrageous things to 
him before people. One day, on his return home, he found the young 
man asleep in his study without permission. Peter explained that he 
had come in, and not finding him at home, 'had a nap '. Von Lembke 
was offended and again complained to his wife ; after making fun of 
his irritability, she pointedly remarked that he did not apparently 
know how to make people treat him with respect. At least ' that boy' 
never permitted himself any undue familiarity with her, and, besides, 
he was 'naive and fresh, though perhaps a little unconventional'. Von 
Lembke sulked. This time she made peace between them. Peter did 
not, it is true, apologize, but dismissed the whole matter with a crude 
joke, which might at another time have been taken for a new insult, 
but was taken in the present circumstances as a sign of repentance. The 
weak spot in their relationship was that von Lembke had from the 
very begining made the mistake of telling Peter about his novel. 
Imagining him to be an ardent young man of a romantic disposition 
and having long been dreaming of a listener, he had one evening dur­
ing the first days of their acquaintance read him two chapters from his 
novel. Peter listened without concealing his boredom, yawning dis­
courteously, and without saying one word in its praise ; as he was 
leaving, he asked for the manuscript so as to be able to form an opin­
ion of it at home at his leisure, and von Lembke gave it him. He had 
not returned the man!Jscript since that evening, though he called every 
day and replied to all inquiries with a laugh. In the end he said that he 
had lost it in the street. When she heard of it, Julia was terribly angry 
with her husband. 
'You didn't tell him anything about your cardboard church, did 
you ?' she asked him almost in dismay. 
Von Lembke began to brood, and brooding was bad for his health 
and had been forbidden by his doctors. Apart from the fact that there 
was apparently a great deal of trouble in the province, of which we 
shall speak later, he had special reasons - his feelings were hurt, let 
alone his vanity as a governor. When contracting his marriage, 
. von Lembke had never entertained the possibility of any domestic 

3 1 8  
T H E  D E V I L S  • PART T W O  
disagreements and conflicts. That was what he had imagined all his 
life when dreaming of his Minna or Ernestine. He felt that he was not 
able to stand domestic storms. At last Julia had a frank talk with 
him. 
' You can't possibly be angry with him for that,' she said, 'if only 
because you're three times more sensible than he and because your 
social position is infmitely higher than his. The boy still has a great deal 
of his old freethinking habits. In my opinion, it is simply naughtiness. 
But nothing can be done in a hurry. It must all be done gradually. 
We nn1st not under-estimate our young people. My policy is to be 
kind to them and in this way hold them back from going over the 
brink.' 
'But he says such awful things,' von Lembke replied. 'I can't treat 
him tolerantly when he asserts in public and in my presence that tl1e 
Government deliberately makes the common people drunk on vodka 
in order to brutalize them and prevent them from rising against it. 
Imagine my position when I'm forced to listen to that kind of talk in 
the presence of all sorts of people.' 
As he said this, von Lembke recalled a conversation he had had with 
Peter Verkhovensky a few days before. With the innocent purpose of 
disarming him by his liberal ideas, he had shown him his own private 
collection of all sorts of political leaflets, printed in Russia and abroad, 
which he had been carefully collecting since r859, not so much as a 
hobby, but out of commendable curiosity. Realizing what he was 
after, Peter said rudely that there was more sense in one line of some 
of those leaflets than in a whole Government office, 'perhaps not 
excepting your own '. 
Lembke winced. 
'But in our country this is premature, much too premature,' he said 
almost beseechingly, pointing to the leaflets. 
' No, it isn't. You see, you're afraid, and that means that it isn't 
premature.' 
'But, look here, in this one, for instance, they call for the demolition 
of churches.' 
'Why not? You're an intelligent man, and I think I'm right in say­
ing that while you're not a believer yourself, you realize very well 
that religion is necessary in order to brutalize the people. Truth is more 
honest than lies.' 

ALL AGOG 
3 19 
'I agree, I agree, I agree with you entirely, but I still maintain that 
it is premature in this country, much too premature,' von Lembke 
said, pulling a face. 
'Well, in that case what sort of Government servant are you if you 
agree to the demolition of the churches and marching on Petersburg 
with staves and make it merely a question of time ?' 
Caught out so crudely, Lembke was greatly shocked. 
'It isn't that, it isn't that at all,' he went on, carried away and be­
coming more and more exasperated in his vanity. 'You're a young 
man and you don't know our aims, and that is why you are mistaken. 
You see, my dear fellow, you call us Government officials, don't you? 
Al right. Independent officials ? All right. But what do we do, do you 
think ? We bear the responsibility and, as a result, we serve the com­
mon cause just as you do. We merely hold together what you arc pull­
ing apart and which without us would fall apart. We're not your ene­
mies. Not by any means. We say to you: go on, progress, and you 
may even w1dermine certain things - I mean, of course, everything 
that's old and has to be completely reorganized. But, if need be, we 
shall keep you within the necessary limits, and by doing so save you 
from yourselves ; for without us you would only set Russia rocking 
and rob her of her decent appearance, while it is our task to take 
care of her decent appearance. Please, reali2'c that we need each 
other. In England the Whigs and the Tories also need each other. 
Well, then : we are the Tories and you are the Whigs. That's how 
I see it.' 
Von Lembke grew positively excited. He had been fond of talking 
in a clever and liberal vein even in Petersburg, and, besides, no one 
was eavesdropping on him here. Peter did not speak and, contrary 
to his custom, looked grave. That excited the orator more than 
ever. 
'Do you know that I, the " master of the province",' he went on, 
pacing his office - 'do you know that just because I've so many duties, 
I cannot carry out a single one of them, and, on the other hand, I can 
say just as truly that there's nothing for me to do here. The whole 
secret lies in the fact that everything here depends on the views of the 
Government. Let's suppose that for political reasons or for the sake of 
allaying popular passions the Government decided to found a repub­
lic and, simu.ltaneously, strengthen the powers of the governors. If 

320 
THE DEVILS ' PART TWO 
that should happen, we, the governors, wil accept a republic. But 
why only a republic ? We'll swallow anything you like. At least, I feel 
that I'm ready. In a word, let the Government instruct me by tele­
graph to carry out an activite devorante, I shall give them an activite 
devorante. I told them straight : " Gentlemen, one thing only is needed 
to maintain the equilibrium and assure the well-being of all provin­
cial institutions - the strengthening of the Governor's powers." You 
see, it is absolutely necessary that all these institutions, whether agri­
cultural or legal, should lead as it were a dual sort of existence - that 
is, on the one hand, it is necessary (and I agree that it is necessary) that 
they should exist; but, on the other hand, it is necessary that they 
should not exist - all in accordance with the views of the Government. 
If the Government should take it into their heads to declare that the 
institutions had suddenly become necessary, I should immediately see 
to it that they were there. Should the need for them pas, no one would 
be able to find them in my province. That's how I understand activite 
devorante, and you can't have it without strengthening the Governor's 
powers. I'm telling you tllis as man to man. I've already told them in 
Petersburg, you know, that I must have a special sentry at the entrance 
to the Governor's house. I'm waiting for an answer.' 
' You must have two,' said Peter. 
' Why two ?' von Lembke asked, stopping short before him. 
' I  think one isn't enough to make people respect you. You must 
have two.' 
Lembke made a wry face. 
' You - you do permit yourself goodness only knows what, sir. You 
take advantage of my good nature and you make all sorts of insulting 
insinuations and play the part of some bourru bienfaisant.' 
' Well, that's as may be,' Peter muttered, ' but all the same you're 
paving the way for us and preparing for our success.' 
' But who is "us", pray, and what success ?' von Lembke said, star­
ing at him in surprise, but he got no answer. 
After listening to this account of their conversation, Julia was great­
ly displeased. 
' But,' von Lembke defended himself, ' I  can't possibly treat your 
favourite as ifl were his superior, especially when we're alone in the 
room. I - I  admit I might have said something I shouldn't just -just 
out of the goodnes of my heart.' 

A L L  A G O G  
321 
' From too much goodness. I didn't know you had a collection of 
political leaflets. Can I see it ?' 
'But - but he asked me ifhe could borrow it for one day.' 
'And again you gave it to him ?' Julia cried angrily. 'How m-
discreet! '  
'I'll send someone round to him at once to bring it back.' 
'He won't give it back.' 
'I shall demand it! '  von Lembke cried, flying into a rage, and he 
even jumped up from his seat. 'Who is he, pray, that I should be so 
much afraid ofhim, and who am I that I should not dare to do anything ?' 
' Sit down and calm yourself,' said Julia, restraining him. 'I'll an­
swer your first question : he came to me with most excellent letters of 
introduction. He has ability and occasionally he says very clever 
things. Karmazi.nov assured me that he had connexions almost every­
where and that his influence on the young people in Petersburg and 
Moscow was very great. And if through him I succeed in winning 
them all over and grouping them all round me, I shall save them from 
ruin by providing a new outlet for their ambitions. He is devoted1:o 
me with all his heart and he obeys me implicitly.' 
'But while you're being nice to them, they might do - goodness 
only knows wlJ.tt. Of course, it's an idea,' von Lembke defended him­
self vaguely, ' but - but I've just heard that similar political leaflets 
have appeared in one of our districts.' 
'But there was such a rum our in the summer - leaflets, counterfeit 
notes, al sorts of things, and yet so far not one of those has been found. 
Who told you ?' 
' I  heard it from von Blum.' 
'Oh, save me from your von Blum and please don't ever mention 
him to me again ! ' 
Julia was so furious that for a minute she could not utter a word. 
Von Blum was a clerk in the office of tl1e Governor whom she par­
ticularly detested. Of that later. 
'Please don't worry about Verkhovensky,' she said in conclusion. 
'Ifhe had taken part in any pranks he would not talk as he does to you 
and to everyone else here. People who are fond of using fme phrases 
are not dangerous. Even I might talk like that. And if anything did 
happen, I should be the first to fmd out from him. He is fanatically, 
fanatically devoted to me.' 

322 
THE DEVILS ' PART TWO 
I may add here, anticipating events, that were it not for Julia 
Lembke's self-conceit and ambition, probably nothing of what those 
wretched people succeeded in perpetrating among us would have hap­
pened. She was undoubtedly responsible for a great· deal. 
Before the Fete 
THE day of the fĔte, which Julia Lembke organized in aid of the 
governesses of our province, had been several times fixed and put off. 
She was always surrounded by Peter Verkhovensky and the little 
Civil Servant Lyamshin, who ran errands for her. Lyamshin used to 
visit Stepan Verkhovensky at one time, but he suddenly found favour 
in the Governor's house because he played the piano. Liputin, too, 
whom Julia Lembke planned to appoint the editor of a future inde­
pendent provincial newspaper, was often in her company. There were 
also several married and unmarried ladies and, fmally, even Karma­
zinov, who, though he was not dancing attendance on the Governor's 
wife, had declared aloud and with a complacent air that he had a pleas­
ant surprise for everybody when the literary quadrille began. There 
was a great number of subscribers and donors, al of them belonging 
to the most select provincial society ; but even the most unselect were 
admitted provided they came with money. Julia Lembke observed 
that an intermingling of the different classes of the population ought 
sometimes to be permitted, for 'otherwise who wil enlighten them ?' 
A private domestic committee was organized at which it was decided 
that the fete would be of a democratic character. The large number of 
subscriptions tempted them to indulge in a vast expenditure of money ; 
they wanted to do something marvellous - that was why the fĔte was 
postponed. They could still not make up their minds where to hold 
the ball : whether at the huge house of the wife of the marshal of nobil­
ity, which she put at their disposal for that day, or at Mrs Stavrogin's 
country mansion in Skvoreshniki. Skvoreshniki was a little too far, 
but many members of the committee insisted that it would be 'freer' 
there. Mrs Stavrogin herself would have very much liked the festivi­
ties to take place in her house. It is dificult to say why this proud 

BEFORE THE FèTE 
323 
woman almost fawned on Julia Lembke. She probably liked to see 
how Mrs Lembke, in her tum, almost humbled herself before Nicho­
las Stavrogin, and was nicer to him than to anyone. I repeat again: 
Peter Verkhovensky constantly impressed upon everyone in the 
Governor's house in whispers the idea - an idea he had already ex­
pressed earlier - that Stavrogin was a man who had most mysterious 
connexions with most mysterious circles and that he had certainly 
been entrusted with some secret mission. 
The people of our town were in a strange state of mind at the time. 
Among the ladies, especially, a sort offrivolous attitude was to be ob­
served, and it cannot be said that it al happened gradually. A number 
of extremely free-and-easy notions seemed to be in the air. A mood 
oflevity and frivolity set in, and I can't say that it was always pleasant. 
A certain moral laxity was in fashion. Afterwards, when it was al 
over, the blame was put on Julia Lembke, her circle and her influence; 
but I doubt if it was Julia alone who was the cause of it. On the con-· 
trary, at first many people fell over themselves in praising our new 
Governor's wife for her ability to unite society, as well as for the fact 
that things became much more cheerful. Several rather scandalous in­
cidents occurred for which Mrs Lembke could not be blamed at al, 
but at the time everybody laughed and was highly amused, and there 
was no one who could put a stop to it. It is true that a rather large 
number of people kept away, having their own particular views on 
the course of events; but even they did not grumble at the time ; in­
deed, they even smiled. 
l remember a rather large circle of people sprang into being at the 
time whose centre was perhaps really to be found in Mrs Lembke's 
drawing-room. In that intimate circle, which always surrounded her ­
among the young people, of course - all sorts of mischievous pranks, 
sometimes of a rather free-and-easy nature, were allowed, and even 
· became the rule. This circle even included several very charming 
ladies. The young people arranged picnics, parties, sometimes rode 
through the streets in a regular cavalcade, in carriages and on horse­
back. They looked for adventures, even deliberately organized and 
invented them themselves, solely for the sake of having an amusing 
story to tell. They treated our town as if it were the town of Folly 
from Shchedrin's famous satire. They were called buffoons or scoffers, 
because there was nothing much that they would not do. It so 

324 
T H E  D E V I L S  • PART T W O  
happened, for instance, that the wife of one of the army lieutenants 
stationed in our town, a very young and pretty brunette, though she 
looked worn out from her husband's ill-treatment, thoughtlessly sat 
down to play whist for high stakes at a party in the hope of winning 
enough money to buy herself a cloak, but instead of winning, lost 
fifteen roubles. Afraid of her husband, and having no money <-f her 
own, she remembered what a spirited girl she had been before her mar­
riage and decided to ask the son of our mayor, a young blade worn 
out with dissipation, though he was still young, who was also at the 
party, to lend her some money. He not only turned down her request, 
but went, laughing at the top of his voice, to tell her husband. The 
lieutenant, who found it hard to make ends meet on his scanty army 
pay, took his wife home and there proceeded to get his own back on 
her to his heart's content in spite ofher wails, shrieks, and entreaties on 
her knees to forgive her. This outrageous incident excited nothing but 
laughter in our town, and though the poor wife of the lieutenant did 
not belong to Mrs Lembke's circle, one of the ladies of the ' cavalcade', 
an eccentric and dashing young woman, who happened to know her, 
went to see her and took her away to sray at her house. Here our mad­
caps at once got hold of her, made much of her, loaded her with pre­
sents, and kept her for four days without returning her to her hus­
band. She lived with the adventurous lady, and spent her days driving 
about with her .and with the rest of the frolicsome company in their 
trips round the town and taking part in their gay parties and dances. 
They were all the time trying to make her summons her husband and 
start a lawsuit. They assured her that they would stand by her and 
would appear as witnesses in court. The husband kept quiet, not dar­
ing to assert his rights. The poor girl realized at last that she had got 
herself into a mess and, nearly dead with fear, ran away in the evening 
of the fourth day from her protectors to her lieutenant. Exactly what 
happened between her and her husband is not known; but two shut­
ters of the little wooden bungalow in which the lieutenant lived were 
not opened for two weeks. When Mrs Lembke heard of what had 
happened, she was very angry with the mischief-makers and greatly 
displeased with the conduct of the dashing lady, though the latter had 
introduced the lieutenant's wife to her on the first day of her abduc­
tion. However, the whole incident was soon forgotten. 
Another time, a young Government clerk from another district 

BEFORE THE FETE 
325 
married the daughter of a Government clerk of our town, a beautiful 
girl of seventeen, known to everybody in our town. But suddenly the 
news leaked out that the young husband treated the beautiful girl very 
discourteously on the wedding night in revenge for his insulted hon­
our. Lyamshin, who was almost a witness of the affair, because he had 
got drunk at the wedding and stayed the night in the house, rushed 
round the town in the early morning to spread the glad tidings. At 
once a party of about a dozen men was made up, all of them on horse­
back, some on hired Cossack horses - for instance, Peter Verkhoven­
sky and Liputin, who in spite of his grey hair took part in almost all 
the scandalous adventures of our flighty youth. When the yOtmg 
couple appeared in the street in a carriage and pair on their way to pay 
visits, according to the generally observed custom on the day after a 
wedding, in spite of anything that might have happened, the whole 
cavalcade surrounded the carriage, laughing merrily and accompany­
ing them all over the town the whole morning. It is true, they did not 
follow them into the houses, but waited on their horses by the gates; 
they also refrained from any special insults to the groom or the bride, 
but still they caused a public scandal. The whole town talked about it. 
Everybody, of course, laughed. But this time von Lembke got angry 
and again had a lively scene with his wife. Mrs Lembke, too, was ex­
ceedingly angry, and even made up her mind to close the door of her 
house to the reprobates. But on the following day she forgave every­
body as a result of Peter Verkhovensky's exhortations and of a few 
words from Karmazinov. The latter thought the 'joke' rather amusing. 
' It is in accordance with the local customs,' he said. 'At any rate, it's 
characteristic and - daring. And, look, everybody is laughing; you 
alone are outraged.' 
But there were pranks which were quite intolerable and which be­
trayed a certain unmistakable tendency. 
A certain respectable woman, though of the artisan class, appeared 
in our town, selling gospels. People started talking about her, because 
of the interesting reports about such sellers of gospels which had re­
cently appeared in the Moscow and Petersburg newspapers. Again the 
same rogue Lyamshin, assisted by an unemployed divinity student 
who hoped to get a job at a school, quietly secreted into the woman's 
bag, while pretending to buy books from her, a whole bundle of in­
decent and obscene photographs from abroad, donated specially for 

326 
THE DEVILS • PART TWO 
that purpose by a highly respectable old gendeman, whose name I 
shall not mention, but who wore a high decoration round his neck 
and who, as he put it, loved 'a healthy laugh and a merry jest'. When 
the poor woman began taking out the sacred books in our shopping 
arcade, the photographs, too, were scattered all over the place. There 
was loud laughter and murmurs of indignation. A crowd surrounded 
the woman and started abusing her, and she would certainly have been 
attacked if the police had not arrived in the nick of time. The woman 
was locked up in a cell at the police station, and it was only in the 
evening, thanks to the efforts of Maurice Drozdov, who had learnt 
with indignation the full details of this horrible story, that she was set 
free and escorted out of town. Mrs Lembke would now most cer­
tainly have turned Lyamshin out of her house, but the young people 
had brought him to her that very evening with the news that he had 
composed a new piece for the piano and persuaded her to hear it. The 
litde piece, which, in fact, was rather entertaining, bore the comic 
title: 'Franco-Prussian War'. It began with the menacing strains of the 
Marseillaise: 
Qu'un sang impur abreuve nos sillons! 
A flamboyant challenge was heard, the flush of future victories. But 
suddenly, mingling with the masterly variations on the national an­
them - somewhere on one side, from below, from some corner, but 
very close, came the trivial strains of Mein Iieber Augustin. The Mar­
seillaise ignored them; the Marseillaise reached the climax of intoxica­
tion with its own grandeur; but Augustin was gaining strength, it was 
getting more and more insolent, and suddenly the strains of Augustin 
began to blend with the strains of the Marseillaise. The latter was ap­
parently getting angry; unable to ignore Augustin any longer, it tried 
to shake it off, to brush it off, like some obtrusive, insignificant fly, 
but Mein Iieber Augustin was hanging on firmly; he was gay and self­
confident, he was full of joy and arrogance, and the Marseillaise sud­
denly somehow became terribly stupid: it could no longer conceal its 
resentment and exasperation; it was a wail of indignation, tears, and 
oaths with arms outstretched to Providence: 
Pas un pouce de notre terrain, pas une de nos fortresses. 
But already it was forced to sing in time with Mein Iieber Augustin. 
Its melody passed in a most stupid way into that of Augustin, it drooped 

BBPORE THE PèTE 
327 
10d died. Only from time to time could a snatch of the original 
:une be heard: qu' un sang impur . . .  but immediately they pased most 
nortifyingly into the horrible waltz. Finaly, it was utterly subdued: 
t was Jules Favre sobbing on Bismarck's bosom and giving away 
:verything, everything . . . .  But now it was Augustin's tum to assert 
:rimself: hoarse sounds were heard, one had a feeling of countless bar­
:els of beer, the frenzy of self-glorification, demands for miliards, ex­
?CDsive cigars, champagne and hostages; Augustin passed into a wild 
:oar . . . .  The Franco-Prussian war was at an end. Our young people 
lpplauded. Mrs Lembke smiled and said, ' Well, how can one tum 
:rim out?' Peace was made. The blackguard really had a sort of talent. 
Mr V erkhovensky assured me one day that men of the highest artistic 
talent could be the most awful blackguards and that one thing had 
[).Othing to do with the other. There was a rumour afterwards that 
Lyantshin had stolen that piece from a talented and modest young 
fellow he knew, who happened to be passing through our town and 
whose name remained unknown, but that is by the way. This scoun­
drel, who had been following Mr Verkhovensky about for several 
years, mimicking at his parties, when requested, all sorts of Jews, the 
confession of a deaf peasant woman or the birth of a child, now some­
times caricatured Mr Verkhovensky himself in a most diverting man­
ner at Mrs Lembke's parties under the title of' A Liberal of the Forties'. 
Everybody was convulsed with laughter, so that in the end it was 
quite impossible to tum him out: he had become too indispensable. 
Besides, he fawned slavishly on :Peter Verkhovensky, who by that 
tim֟ had obtained quite an unusually powerful influence over Mrs 
Lembke. 
I shouldn't have talked about this blackguard, and he would not 
have been worth discussing, but for an outrageous incident in which 
he, too, was said to have taken part, and that incident I ca1mot possibly 
omit from my chronicle. 
One morning the news of an infamous and outrageous sacrilege 
spread like wildfire through the town. At the entrance to our huge 
market-place stands the ancient church of Our Lady's Nativity, which 
is one of the most remarkable ancient monuments of our old town. At 
the gates of the enclosure surrounding the church, a large icon of the 
Blesed Virgin had for many years been displayed behind a grating in 
the wal. One night this icon had been robbed, the glass of the icon-<ase 

J28 
THE D E V I L S ' PART TWO 
broken, the grating smashed, and a few stones and pearls (I don't 
know whether they were worth anything) removed from the crown 
and the setting. But the chief thing was that besides the robbery a 
senseless and mocking sacrilege had been perpetrated: behind the 
broken glass of the icon a live mouse was said to have been found. 
Now, four months later, it was positively established that the crime 
was committed by Fedka the convict, but, for some reason, Lyamshin 
is said to have been involved in it. At the time no one mentioned 
Lyamshin and he was not suspected at all, but now everyone is 
saying that it was he who put the mouse there. I remember that our 
authorities were rather at a loss. A crowd had gathered round the 
place of the crime since early morning. There was always a crowd 
there, though perhaps not such a big one - about a hundred people all 
told. Some came, others went. Those who came, crossed themselves 
and kissed the icon; people began contributing to a collection, a 
church plate made its appearance, and a monk was stationed near it, 
and it was only at three o'clock in the afternoon that the authorities 
realized that the people should be told not to stand there in a crowd, 
but move on after they had prayed, kissed the icon, and contributed 
to the collection. This unfortunate incident produced a most gloomy 
impression on von Lembke. Mrs Lembke, as I was told, said after­
wards that since that ill-omened morning she began to notice in her 
husband that strange dejection which persisted up to the time, two 
months ago, when he left our town on account of illness and which 
apparently affiicts him even now in Switzerland, where he continues 
to rest after his brief term of office in our province. 
I remember I went into the square at one o'clock in the afternoon; 
the crowds were silent and their faces grave and gloomy. A merchant 
drove up in a hackney carriage. He was fat and sallow-faced. He 
alighted, bowed to the ground, kissed the icon, put a rouble in the col­
lection plate, got back, sighing, into the carriage, and drove off again. 
Then a carriage drove up with two of our ladies accompanied by two 
of our madcaps. The young men (one of whom was not so young, 
either) also got out and made their way to the icon, pushing people 
aside rather unceremoniously. Neither of them took off bs hat, and 
one of them put his pince-nez on his nose. The crowd began to mur­
mur - in low voices, it is true, but far from amiably. The chap with 
the pince-nez took out of his purse, which was crammed with bank-

BEFORE THE P^TE 
329 
notes, a copper coin and flung it on the plate; both of them, laughing 
and talking loudly, went back to their carriage. At that moment Lisa 
suddenly rode up, accompanied by Maurice Drozdov. She jumped off 
her horse, threw the reins to her escort, whom she told to stay on his 
horse, and went up to the icon just when the copper coin had been 
flung on the collection plate. Her cheeks coloured with indignation; 
she took off her round hat and gloves, fell on her knees before the icon 
on the muddy pavement, and reverently prostrated herself three times. 
Then she took out her purse, but as there were only a few silver coins in 
it, she at once took offher diamond ear-rings and put them on the plate. 
'May I ?  May I? As an ornament for the setting ? ' she asked the 
monk in great excitement. 
'You may,' the monk replied. 'Every contribution is a blessing.' 
The people were silent, neither approving nor disapproving. Lisa 
mounted her horse in her muddy dress and galloped away. 
2 
Two days after the incident I have just described I met her among a 
large company of people who were setting out to go somewhere in 
three carriages surrounded by men on horseback. She signalled to me 
with her hand, stopped her carriage, and insisted that I should join 
their company. There was room for me in the carriage, and she intro­
duced me laughingly to her companions, smartly dressed ladies, ex­
plaining to me that they were off on a highly interesting expedition. 
She went on laughing loudly, and seemed a little too happy. Just re­
cently she had become rather playfully gay. The expedition was in­
deed an eccentric one: they were all going across the river to the house 
of the merchant Sevostyanov, where our saintly half-wit and prophet 
Semyon Y akovlevich, famous not only in our town but also in the sur­
rounding provinces as well as in Moscow and Petersburg, had been 
living for the past ten years in a cottage in the courtyard. in seclusion, 
contentment, and comfort. Everyone went to see him. especially visi­
tors from all parts of the country, in an attempt to get some saintly 
message from him, paying homage and bringing offerings. The offer­
ings, sometimes considerable ones, were piously sent to some church, 
mostly to the monastery of Our Lady, unles Semyon Yakovlevich 
disposed of them himself; for that purpose a monk from the monastery 

3 30 
THE D EV I L S  • PART T W O  
was always on duty in Semyon Yakovlevich's room. They were 
all expecting to get a great deal of amusement from their visit. No one 
of the company had ever seen Semyon Yakovlevich. Only Lyamshin 
had been there before, and he was telling everybody that the saint had 
ordered him to be driven out with a broom and had thrown two large 
boiled potatoes after him with his own hand. I noticed Peter Verkh­
ovensky among the horsemen, again on a hired Cossack horse, which 
he rode rather clumsily, as well as Stavrogin, also on horseback. 
Stavrogin occasionally joined these diverting excursions, in which 
case he assumed a correspondingly gay demeanour, though, as usual, 
he spoke little and seldom. When, after crossing the bridge, the caval­
cade was passing our local inn, someone suddenly announced that a 
man had just been found shot in one of the rooms of the inn and that 
the police had been sent for. It was at once proposed that the company 
should have a look at the suicide. The proposal fonnd general support: 
our ladies had never seen a suicide. I remember one of them said in a 
loud voice that she felt" so bored with everything that she did not 
think they need worry their heads about the kind of entertainment 
they might get, provided it was interesting. Only a few of them re­
mained outside the in ; the rest entered tl1e dirty corridor in a body 
and among them, to my surprise, I also noticed Lisa. The door of the 
room of the man who had shot himself was open and they did not, of 
course, dare to prevent us from going in. The suicide was quite a 
young fellow of about nineteen, no more, who must have been very 
good-looking. He had thick fair hair, a regular oval face, and a beau­
tiful, noble forehead. Rigor mortis had already set in, and his small 
white face looked as if it had been carved out of marble. On the table 
lay a note in his own hand, asking the police not to blame anyone for 
his death and explaining that he had shot himself because he had 
'squandered' 400 roubles. The word 'squandered' was actually used 
in the note : there were three grammatical mistakes in the four lines of 
the note. A fat landowner, who was evidently a neighbour of his and 
who had been staying at the inn on some business of his own, seemed 
to be particularly distressed. It appeared from his words that the boy 
had been sent by his family, his widowed motl1er, sisters, and aunts, 
from the country to the town to make all sorts of purchases under the 
supervision of a woman relative in our town, for the trousseau of his 
eldest sister, who was going to be married, and bring them home. He 

BEFORE THE FETE 
3 3 1 
was entrusted with the 400 roubles, saved up in the course of many 
years, his relatives sighing with apprehension and sending him off 
with endless exhortations, prayers, and signs of the cross. Till then the 
boy had been modest and reliable. On his arrival in town three days 
before he had not gone to his relation, but had stopped at the inn and 
gone straight to the club in the hope of fmding in some back room a 
travelling croupier or, at least, some card game at high stakes. But 
there was no card game that evening, nor any croupier. On his return 
to his hotel room about midnight, he asked for champagne, havana 
cigars, and ordered a supper of six or seven courses. But the cham­
pagne made him drunk and the cigars made him sick, so that he did 
not even touch the food they had brought, and he went to bed almost 
unconscious. On awakening next morning as fresh as a daisy, he at 
once went to a gipsy camp in the suburb on the other side of the river 
about which he had been told at the club the day before, and he did 
not come back to the inn for two days. At last at five o'clock in the 
afternoon of the previous day he had arrived drunk, gone to bed at 
once, and had slept till ten o'clock in the evening. When he woke up, 
be ordered a cutlet, a bottle of Chateau d'Yquem, and some grapes, 
paper, ink, and his bill. No one noticed anything peculiar about him; 
he was calm, gentle, and amiable. He must have shot himself at about 
midnight, though it was strange that no one had heard the shot, and 
they only discovered it that day at one o'clock in the afternoon when, 
failing to get an answer to their knocks, they broke down the door. 
The bottle of Chateau d'Yquem was half empty, and there was half a 
plateful of grapes left over. He had shot himself through the heart 
with a small, double-barrelled revolver. There was very little blood; 
the revolver had fallen out of his hand on to the carpet. The boy him­
self was half-reclining on a sofa in the corner of the room. Death must 
have been instantaneous ; there was no sign of any death agony on the 
face; he looked very serene, almost happy, as though he had no worry 
in the world. Our entire company stared at him with eager curiosity. 
Generally speaking, there is always something diverting for a stranger 
in every calamity that befalls one of his fellow-men - whoever he may 
be. Our ladies looked at the dead boy in silence, while their com­
panions excelled themselves by their witty remarks and their cool pre­
>ence of mind. One of them remarked that it was the best solution and 
that the boy could not have done anything more sensible; another one 

332 
THE DEVILS • PART TWO 
concluded that he had had a good time, short though it was. A third 
one suddenly blurted out the question why people had started hanging 
and shooting themselves so frequently among us, as though they had 
become uprooted or as though the floor had suddenly given way un­
der their feet. The people in the room looked at the philosopher ask­
ance. Then Lyamshin, who prided himself on his role as a clown, 
filched a bunch of grapes from the plate, another one, laughing, did 
the same, and a third one stretched out his hand for the Chateau 
d'Yquem, but was stopped by the arrival of the police commissioner, 
who even told them to ' clear out of the room'. As all of them had al­
ready seen all they wanted, they left the room at once without any 
argument, though Lyamshin began pestering the police commission­
er about something. The general merriment, laughter and playful talk 
were almost twice as lively during the second half of the journey. 
We arrived at Semyon Yakovlevich's exactly at one o'clock in the 
afternoon. The gate of the merchant's rather large house was wide 
open and everyone was free to enter the cottage. We learnt at once 
that Semyon Yakovlevich was having his lunch, but that he was re­
ceiving. The whole crowd of us went in together. The room in which 
the saintly half-wit received his visitors and had his meals was fairly 
large. It had three windows and was divided into two equal parts by 
a wooden lattice-work partition right across the room from one wall 
to the other which was about four feet high. The ordinary visitors re­
mained outside the partition, and the lucky ones, at a signal from the 
saint, were admitted through a little door in the partition into his 
half of the room where, if he felt like it, he asked them to sit down on 
the sofa or on old leather chairs. He himself invariably presided in an 
old-fashioned, shabby Voltaire chair. He was a rather big, bloated, 
sallow-faced man of about fifty-ftve, fair and bald, clean-shaven, with 
a swollen right cheek and a somewhat twisted mouth. He had a large 
wart on the left side of his nose, narrow eyes, and a calm, stolid, sleepy 
face. He was dressed German fashion in a black frock-coat, but with­
out waistcoat or tie. A rather coarse, but white shirt peeped out from 
under his frock-coat; his feet (there was apparently something wrong 
with them) he kept in a pair of slippers. I have heard that he had been a 
Civil Servant and had received some rank. He had just finished his fish 
soup and was starting on his second course - potatoes in their jackets 

BEFORE THE FftTB 
3 3 3 
with salt. He never ate anything else, but he drank a lot of tea, of 
which he was very fond. Three servants, provided by the merchant, 
were continuously scurrying round him, one of them wearing a frock­
coat, another one looking like a labourer, and a third like a verger. 
There was also a very high-spirited boy of sixteen. Besides the ser­
vants there was present a venerable-looking, grey-haired monk with 
a collection mug, who was a little too fat. On one of the tables a huge 
samovar was boiling, and there was also a tray on it with almost two 
dozen glasses. On another table opposite the gifts brought by the visi­
tors had been placed: some loaves and some pounds of sugar, about 
two pounds of tea, a pair of embroidered slippers, a silk handkerchief, 
a length of cloth, a piece of linen, etc. Practically all the gifts of money 
went into the monk's mug. The room was full of people - about a 
dozen visitors alone; two of whom sat in Semyon Yakovlevich' s part 
of the room : a grey-headed old man - a pilgrim of ' the common 
people' - and a little, dried-up monk, who seemed to have come a 
long way and who was sitting demurely with his eyes cast down. The 
other visitors all stood on the other side of the partition, most of them 
also peasants, with the exception of a fat merchant, who had come 
from the county town, a man with a large beard, dressed in the tradi­
tional Russian garb, who was known to be worth Ioo,ooo roubles ; 
there were, besides, a poor, elderly gentlewoman and a landowner. 
They were all waiting for their lucky tum, not daring to be the fJrSt to 
speak. Four people were kneeling, but the man who attracted most 
attention was the landowner, a corpulent man of about forty-ftve, 
who knelt close to the partition, most conspicuous of all, and waited 
reverently for a friendly look or word from Semyon Yakovlevich. 
He had been kneeling there for about an hour, but the saint still took 
no notice of him. 
Our ladies crowded close to the partition, whispering gaily and 
giggling. They pushed aside or got in front of the other visitors, even 
those who knelt on the floor, except the landowner, who remained 
stubbornly in full view of everybody, even holding on to the par­
tition by his hands. They looked gaily and with eager curiosity at 
Semyon Yakovlevich, through lorgnettes, pince-nez, and even opera­
glasses ; Lyamshin, at any rate, gazed at him through a pair of opera­
glasses. Semyon Yakovlevich glanced calmly and lazily at them with 
his little eyes. 

334 
T H E  D E V I L S · PART TWO 
'Good-lookers ! Good-lookers ! '  he was good enough to say in his 
hoarse bass and with a light exclamatory note in his voice. 
Everyone in our party laughed : 'What is the meaning of good­
lookers ?' But Semyon Y akovlevich rei a psed into silence and finished 
eating his potatoes. At length he wiped his mouth with a napkin and 
they gave him his tea. 
He did not usually have his tea alone, but invited some ofhis visitors 
to have it with him, as a rule, pointing himself to the lucky ones. Ig­
noring the rich and the highly placed, he sometimes ordered tea to be 
given to some peasant or to some decrepit old woman ; another time 
he would ignore the beggars and treat some fat, wealthy merchant. 
The tea, too, was served in different ways, some getting lumps of 
sugar to suck, some having their tea sweetened with sugar, while some 
got it without sugar altogether. This time he favoured the little monk 
with a glass of sweetened tea, and the old pilgrim, who was given tea 
without sugar. The fat monk with the collection mug from the mon­
astery was for some reason not given any tea at all, though hitherto he 
had been given his glass every day. 
'Semyon Yakovlevich, do say something to me; I've been dying to 
meet you for ages,' the gorgeously attired lady from our carriage, who 
had observed that one ought not to stand on ceremony with amuse­
ments so long as they were diverting, sang out with a smile, screwing 
up her eyes. 
Semyon Yakovlevich did not even look at her. The landowner, 
who was kneeling, heaved a loud and deep sigh, which sotmded as 
though it had come out of a huge pair of bellows. 
'A glass of sweet tea!' Semyon Yakovlevich suddenly pointed to 
the merchant who was worth Ioo,ooo. 
The merchant came forward and stood next to the landowner. 
'Put more sugar in his tea!' Semyon Yakovlevich ordered after the 
glass of tea had been poured out, and more sugar was added to it. 
'More, more!' and they put in more sugar a third time, and then a 
fourth. 
The merchant began drinking his syrup without a murmur. 
'Lord! '  whispered the people and began crossing themselves. 
The landowner heaved another loud and deep sigh. 
'Father! Semyon Yakovlevich ! '  the poverty-stricken lady, whom 
our company had pushed to the wall, cried in an anguished voice, 

BEFORE THE F.hE 
335 
which was so strident that everybody in the room looked up at her in 
surprise. 'I've been waiting for a blessing for a whole hour, dear 
father. Tell me what to do ; advise me, poor wretched woman that I 
am ! '  
'Ask her,' Semyon Yakovlevich ordered the verger. 
The verger went up to the partition. ' Have you done what Semyon 
Yakovlevich told you last time ?' he asked the widow in a quiet, 
steady voice. 
'How could I, Father ?' the widow wailed. ' How could I do it ? 
I can't do anything with them. They're cannibals ; they've issued a 
writ against me. They threaten to drag me to the Supreme Court. 
Their own mother, too ! '  
'Give it her! '  Semyon Yakovlevich pointed to a sugar-loaf 
The boy rushed up to the table, grabbed the sugar-loaf and took it 
to the widow. 
'Thank you, Father ; you're very good to me, I'm sure. And what 
am I to do with it all ?' the widow wailed. 
'More, more! '  Semyon Yakovlevich heaped his gifts upon her. 
fhey dragged another sugar-loaf to her. ' More, more ! '  the saintly 
half-wit ordered, and she was given a third and, then, a fourth. 
The monk from the monastery sighed : as on previous occasions, all 
that could have gone to the monastery that very day. 
'But what am I to do with it all ?' the poor widow moaned humbly. 
'Can't keep it al myself, can I ?  It'll only make me sick. It isn't some 
sort of prophecy, is it, Father ?' 
'Aye, aye,' someone said in the crowd. 'It is a prophecy ! '  
'Another pound for her, another ! '  Semyon Yakovlevich persisted. 
There was a whole sugar-loafleft on the table, but Semyon Yakov-
levich pointed to the pound of sugar, and the widow was given the 
pound. 
'Lord, Lord!' the peasants sighed and crossed themselves. 'It's a 
prophecy for sure!' 
' First sweeten your heart with mercy and loving-kindness, and then 
come here to complain against your own children, the flesh of your 
flesh - that's, I daresay, the meaning of this emblem,' the fat monk 
from the monastery, who had not been favoured with a glass of tea, 
said quietly but self-complacently, having taken upon himself to act 
as an interpreter in a fit of wounded vanity. 

THE DEVILS • PART T W O  
'How can you say such a thing, Father ?' the little widow suddenly 
burst out angrily. 'Why, they dragged me into the flames by a rope 
when Vershinin's house caught fire. They put a dead cat in my trunk. 
They're up to all sorts of wickedness.' 
' Kick her out!' Semyon Yakovlevich suddenly waved his arms. 
'Kick her out! ' 
The verger and the boy rushed behind the partition. The verger 
took the widow by the arm, and, calming down, she shuffied off to 
the door, looking back at the sugar-loaves which the boy was drag­
ging behind her. 
'Take one back! '  Semyon Yakovlevich ordered the labourer who 
had stayed behind. 
The servant rushed after them, and the three servants came back 
after a short time, carrying the sugar-loaf which had been given the 
widow and then taken away from her. She carried off three, however. 
' Semyon Yakovlevich,' someone cried at the back of the crowd by 
the door, ' I  saw a bird in my dream - a jackdaw. It flew out of water 
and into the fire. What does the dream mean?' 
'Frost,' said Semyon Yakovlevich. 
' Semyon Yakovlevich, why don't you answer me?' the lady in 
our party began again. ' I've been interested in you for such a long 
time.' 
'Ask him,' said Semyon Yakovlevich, pointing to the landowner 
who knelt on the floor without listening to her. 
The monk from the monastery, to whom the order was addressed, 
walked gravely up to the landowner. 
'What sin have you committed? And have you been ordered to do 
something?' 
' Not to fight, not to give rein to my hands,' the landowner replied 
hoarsely. 
'Have you done it?' asked the monk. 
'Can't do it. My own strength gets the better of me.' 
'Kick him out! Kick him out! Use the broom ! The broom!' cried 
Semyon Yakovlevich, waving his hands. 
Without waiting for the punishment to be meted out, the land­
owner jumped up from the floor and rushed out of the room. 
'He's left a gold coin behind,' the monk announced, picking up a 
half imperial from the floor. 

BEFORE THE FETE 
3 37 
' Give it him,' Scmyon Yakovlevich thrust a finger at the rich mer­
chant, who took the gold piece, not daring to refuse it. 
' Gold unto gold,' said the monk from the monastery, unable to 
restrain himself. 
'And give this one tea with sugar,' Semyon Yakovlcvich suddenly 
pointed to Maurice Drozdov. 
The servant poured out the tea, and was about to offer it by mistake 
to the dandy with the pincc-nez. 
' The long one, the long one,' Scmyon Yakovlevich corrected him. 
Maurice took the glass, made a milit:ry lulf bow, and beg:n drink­
ing it. I don't know why, but everybody in our company was con­
vulsed with laughter. 
' I  say,' Lisa suddenly addressed herself to Maurice Drozdov, ' won't 
you kneel down where the gentleman who has just left was kneeling ?' 
Drozdov looked bewildered at her. 
' Please, you'll do me a ;:>;reat favour. Look here, Maurice,' she burst 
out suddenly, speaking rapidly, persistently, stubbornly, and passion­
ately, 'you must kneel down. I must sec you on your knees. If 
ycu won't, I shall never sec you again. I want you to - I want you 
to ! '  
I don't know what she had in mind, but she dcnunded it with re­
lentless persistence, as though she were hysterical. Drozdov, as we 
shall see later, attributed these capricious impulses of hers, which had 
recently become particularly frequent, to outbursts of blind hatrd for 
him, and not to spite, for, on the contrary, she thought very highly of 
him, she was fond of him and respected him, and he knew that him­
self - but to some peculiar unconscious hatred she was at times quite 
unable to suppress. 
He silently handed his glass to an old woman who was standing be­
hind him, opened the door of the partition, and, without being in­
vited, stepped into Scm yon Yakovlevich's private half of the room, 
and knelt down in the middle of the floor in the sight of all. I can't 
help thinking that his simple and delicate soul was deeply shocked by 
Lisa's crude and scoffmg whim before the whole company. Perhaps he 
thought that she would be ashamed of.herself when she saw his humi­
liation on which she had so insisted. Of course no one but he would 
have dreamt of changing a woman's character by so naive and risky a 
method. He remained kneeling looking grave and imperturbable, tall, 

THE D E V I L S  • PART TWO 
ungainly, ridiculous. But no one of our party laughed; the unexpected­
ness of his action produced a painful effect. Everybody looked at Lisa. 
· 'Anoint ! Anoint ! '  Semyon Yakovlevich muttered. 
Lisa went suddenly pale, cried out, and rushed behind the partition. 
A rapid, hysterical scene took place : she tried with all her might to 
raise Drozdov from his knees, tugging at his elbow with both hands. 
'Get up, get up ! '  she screamed, beside hersel£ 'Get up at once ! At 
once ! How dare yon kneel ! '  
Drozdov got up from his knees. She squeezed his arms above the 
elbows and looked intently into his face. There was terror in her eyes. 
' Good-lookers ! Good-lookers ! '  Semyon Yakovlevich repeated 
agam. 
She dragged Drozdov back behind the.,partition at last; an agitated 
stir passed through our whole company. The lady from our carriage, 
probably wishing to relieve the tension, asked Semyon Yakovlevich 
for the third time in a loud and strident voice, with her affected smile : 
' Well, Semyon Yakovlevich, won't you " pronounce " something 
to me too ? And I did count a lot on you, I must say.' 
' Kick her in the -, in the - ! '  Semyon Y akovlevich addressed him­
self to her with an extremely indecent word. 
The words were uttered fiercely and with terrifying clarity. Our 
ladies shrieked and ran headlong out of the place and the gentlemen 
burst into homeric laughter. That was the end of our visit to Semyon 
Yakovlevich. 
And it was at this point that another extremely enigmatic incident 
is said to have occurred and, to be quite frank, it is because of it that I 
have described this visit in such detail. 
I am told that when they all rushed in a crowd out of the room, 
Lisa, supported by Drozdov, suddenly found her-self face to face with 
Stavrogin in the doorway. I may add that since that Sunday morning 
when she fainted they had not approached each other or spoken to 
each other, though they had met frequently. I saw them meeting in 
the doorway : it seemed to me that both of them stood stil for a mo­
ment and looked rather strangely at one another. But I may not have 
seen them properly for the crowd. I am assured, on the contrary, and 
very seriously, too, that after having looked at Stavrogin, Lisa quickly 
raised her hand to the level of his face and would certainly have struck 
him if he had not managed to draw back in time. Perhaps she objected 

BEFORE THE FETE 
3 39 
to the way he had looked at her or perhaps to the way he grinned, 
especially after such an episode with Drozdov. l admit I did not see 
it myself, but everyone assured me that they had, though all of them 
could not possibly have seen it in that confusion, but perhaps some of 
them might. Only I did not believe it at the time. I do remember, 
though, that Stavrogin was rather pale all the way back to town. 
3 
Almost at the same time - that is to say, on the same day - the inter­
view between Mr Verkhovensky and Mrs Stavrogin took place at last. 
Mrs Stavrogin had long been thinking about it, and had informed her 
former friend about it, but for some reason she kept putting it off. It 
took place at Skvoreshniki. Mrs Stavrogin arrived at her country 
house, full of bustling activity: the day before it was finally decided 
that the fete would be given at the house of the marshal's wife. But 
Mrs Stavrogin, with her quick brain, at once realized that there was 
nothing to prevent her afterwards from holding her own fete in Skvo­
reshniki to which the whole town would again be invited. Then every­
one would be able to see for themselves whose house was best and 
where people could count on a better reception and where a ball was 
given with better taste. In general, it was impossible to recognize her. 
She looked quite a different woman and seemed to have been trans­
formed from an unapproachable 'high society lady ' (Mr Verkho­
vensky's expression) to a most ordinary, feather-brained society 
woman. However, that may have only seemed so. 
Having arrived at her empty country house, she went through all 
the rooms in the company of her faithful old butler, Alexcy Yegorych, 
and foma, a man of wide experience of affairs and a specialist in in­
terior decorations. They started discussing plans : what furniture to 
bring from the town house; what things and what pictures ; where to 
put them ; how best to arrange the flowers and which flowers to get 
from the hot-houses ; where to hang the curtains, where to have the 
buffet, and should they have one or two buffets, etc., etc. And it was 
while thus busily engaged that she suddenly took it into her head to 
send a carriage for Mr Verkhovensky. 
Mr Verkhovensky had long before been warned about his coming 
visit and was ready, expecting to receive such a sudden invitation any 

340 
THE D E V I L S · P A R T  T W O  
day. As he got into the carriage, he crossed himself; his fate was being 
decided. He found his friend in the big drawing-room, sitting on a 
small sofa in the recess in front of a small marble table, a paper and 
pencil in her hands; Foma was measuring the height of the gallery 
and the windows, while Mrs Stavrogin herself was putting down the 
figures and making notes on the margin. She nodded to Mr Verkho­
vensky, without interrupting her work, and when the latter mur­
mured a greeting, she gave him her hand hurriedly and, without 
looking, motioned him to a scat beside her. 
' I  sat there waiting for five minutes, "suppressing my feelings",' he 
told me afterwards. 'The woman I saw was not the woman I had 
known for twenty years. The utter conviction that everything was at 
an end lent me a strength that surprised even her. I swear to you she 
was astonished by my steadfastness in that last hour.' 
Mrs Stavrogin suddenly put down her pencil on the table and turn­
ed quickly to Mr Verkhovemky. 
'Mr Verkhovensky, we have to discuss business. I'm sure you've 
prepared all your high-sounding words and all sorts of fine phrases, 
but we'd better go straight to the point. Don't you think so ?' 
He was shocked. She was in a hurry to show her hand. What might 
be her next move ? 
' Wait. Don't say anything. Let me speak first, and then you can say 
what you like, though I really don't know what you could say to me,' 
she went on, talking very rapidly. ' The twelve hundred roubles of your 
allowance I consider it my sacred dmy to continue to the end of your 
life. Well, perhaps not my sacred duty, but simply an agreement. 
That's much more realistic, isn't it? If you like, we can have it in writ­
ing. I have made special arrangements in case of my death. But you 
will get from me at present a flat and servants and your maintenance in 
addition. Put into cash, it would make another fifteen hundred roubles, 
wouldn't it ? I'll add an extra three hundred roubles, making a total of 
three thousand. That should suffice you for a year, shouldn't it? It's 
not too little, is it? In special emergencies I shall of course let you have 
more. And so, take your money, let me have my servants back and 
live just by yourself where you like - in Petersburg, in Moscow, 
abroad or in our town, but not with me. Do you hear?' 
' Not so long ago I was presented with quite different demands from 
the same lips and with the same suddenness and the same insistence,' 

BEFORE THE FETE 
34I 
Mr Vcrkhovensky said slowly and with melancholy distinctness. 'I 
humbled myself and danced the gopak to please you. Oui, Ia com­
paraison peut hre pcrmise. C' hait comme un petit cosak du Don, qui sautait 
sur sa propre tombe. Now -' 
' Stop, sir. You talk an awful lot. You did not dance, but you came 
to sec me in a new cravat, new linen and gloves, oiled and scented. I 
assure you, you were very anxious to get married yourself; it was 
written on your face and, believe me, it was a most inelegant expres­
sion. If I did not fell you about it at the time, it was only out of deli­
cacy. But you w!'re anxious to get married in spite of the disgusting 
things you wrote privately about me and your betrothed. Now it's 
quite different. And why drag in the cosak du Do11, and what grave 
have you in mind? I don't understand your comparison at all. I don't 
want you to die. Live as long as you like. I shall be delighted.' 
'In a workhouse? ' 
'A workhouse? One doesn't go into a workhouse with an income 
of three thousand a year. Oh, I see,' she said with a laugh. 'Peter did 
make a joke about a workhouse one day. Gracious me ! there really is 
a special workhouse which it is worth keeping in mind. It's for most 
respectable people. There arc colonels there, and a general is very 
anxious to go there too. If you went there with all your money you'd 
find peace, contentment, and servants, too. You'd be able to de\·otc 
yourself to your studies there and you could always make up a party 
for a game of preference.' 
'Passo11s.' 
'Passons? '  Mrs Stavrogin winced. ' Well, in that case, that's all I 
have to say. From now on we shall live separately.' 
'Is that all ? Is that all that remains after twenty years ? Our last 
farewell?' 
' You' rc awfully fond of pathetic exclamations, Mr V crkhovcnsky. 
It's no longer the fashion. People to-day talk rudely but plainly. And 
you would harp on our twenty years ! Twenty years of mutual sdf­
admiration and nothing more. Every letter you wrote to me was not 
written for me but for posterity. You're a stylist and not a friend. 
Friendship is merely a glorified expression. In reality it is nothing but 
a reciprocal outpouring of slops.' 
' Heavens, how many words you've picked up from others! Lessons 
learnt by heart! And they've already put their uniform on you! You, 

342 
THE DEVILS · PART TWO 
too, are rejoicing! You, too, are basking in the sun! Chtre, chtre, for 
what a mess of pottage have you sold them your freedom!' 
'I'm not a parrot to repeat other people's words,' Mrs Stavrogin 
said, boiling with rage. 'Don't worry, I have saved up plenty of words 
of my own. What have you done for me during those twenty years? 
You wouldn't even let me look at the books which I ordered for you, 
and which but for the bookbinder would have remained uncut. What 
did you give me to read when I asked you during those first years to 
be my guide? Always Kapfig. Nothing but Kapfig. You were even 
afraid that I might become an educated woman, and you took appro­
priate measures. And yet it is at you that people are laughing. I must 
confess I always considered you only as a critic and nothing more. 
When on our way to Petersburg I told you that I intended to publish 
a periodical and dedicate my life to it, you at once looked at me ironic­
ally and became horribly supercilious.' 
'You're quite wrong, quite wrong. At the time we were afraid of 
persecution.' 
'I'm not wrong at all, and you had no reason to be afraid of perse­
cution in Petersburg. Do you remember how afterwards in February, 
when the news of the liberation of the serfs came, you suddenly came 
running to me in a panic and began demanding that I should at once 
give you a written statement that the proposed periodical had nothing 
to do with you and that the young.people had been coming to see me 
and not you, and that you were only a tutor who lived in my house 
because he had not been paid his fees? Isn't that so ? Do you remember 
it? You most certainly have been overdoing things all your life, Mr 
V erkhovensky .' 
'That was only a moment of weakness, a moment while we were 
alone,' he cried sorrowfully. 'But are we really to break off every­
thing because of such unimportant impressions? Is there nothing more 
left between us after all those long years?' 
'You're horribly calculating. You always want me to be in your 
debt. When you returned from abroad, you looked down on me and 
you wouldn't let me utter a word. But when I went abroad myself 
and spoke to you afterwards about my impressions of the Madonna, 
you wouldn't listen to me and you smiled in a superior way into your 
cravat, as though I was incapable of the same feelings as you.' 
'It wasn't that at al - it probably wasn't that at al -J'ai oublie.' 

BEFORE THE FöTE 
343 
'It was that all right. And, besides, what was there to be so superior 
about, because it was all nonsense and just one of your inventions. 
Now no one, no one gets excited over the Madonna. No one wastes 
time over it, except some old-fashioned old men. That's been proved.' 
' It's been proved, has it ?' 
'lt's of no use whatever. This jug is useful because one can pour 
water into it; this pencil is useful because you can write anything with 
it, but that Madonna is just a woman's face which is inferior to any 
face in nature. Try drawing an apple and put a real apple beside it -
which would you take ? You wouldn't hesitate, would you? That's 
what all our theories boil down to now that the first light of free in­
vestigation has fallen on them.' 
' I see, I see.' 
'You laugh ironically. And what, for instance, did you tell me 
about charity ? And yet the enjoyment you get from charity is a super­
cilious and immoral enjoyment, the enjoyment a rich man gets from 
his wealth, his power, and his importance when he compares it with 
the importance of a poor man. Charity corrupts both giver and re­
ceiver and, besides, does not achieve its aim because it merely increases 
poverty. Loafers who are too lazy to work crowd round those who 
give away money like gamblers round a gaming-table, hoping to 
win. But the miserable coppers which are thrown to them are not 
enough to satisfy one man out of a hundred. How much have you 
given away in your life ?  Not more than a few pennies, I'm sure. Try 
to remember when last you gave something away. Two years ago ? 
More likely four. You're just raising a clamour and hindering progress. 
Charity ought to be forbidden by law, even in the present state of our 
society. Under the new regime there won't be any poor at all.' 
' Oh, what a cataract of borrowed phra5es ! So it's come to the new 
regime, has it ? Un\lappy woman, may the Lord help you ! '  
'Yes, sir, it has come to that. You were very careful to conceal all 
these new ideas from me, with which everyone is already familiar, and 
you did it solely out of jealousy, so as to wield your power over me. 
Even that Julia creature is a hundred miles ahead of me. But I, too, am 
beginning to see things clearly now. I've defended you, sir, as much as 
I could. Everybody without exception thinks that it is your fault.' 
'That'll do ! '  he said, rising from his seat; ' that'll do. And what else 
shall I wish you ? Not repentance, surely ?' 

344 
T H E  D E V I L S · PART T W O  
' Sit down for a minute, sir. I have something else I'd like to ask you. 
You've received an invitation to read at the literary matinee. I was re­
sponsible for it. Tell me, what arc you going to read.' 
'I'm going to read about that queen of queens, that ideal of human­
ity, the Sistine Madonna, who in your opinion is not worth a glass or 
a pencil.' 
' Not something from history ?' said Mrs Stavrogin in mournful 
surprise. 'But they won't listen to you. You would think of that 
Madonna ! What's the usc of talking about her if you'll on I y send 
them all to sleep ? I assure you, Mr Vcrkhovcnsky, that what I'm say­
ing is entirely in your own interest. Don't you think it would be much 
wiser if you took some short but entertaining medieval Court inci­
dent from Spanish history, or, better still, some anecdote which you 
could enlarge with some anecdotes and witty sayings of your own? 
They had such gorgeous courts in those days, such fine ladies, poison­
ings. Karmazinov says it would be strange indeed if you couldn't find 
something entertaining to read from Spanish history.' 
' Karmazinov, that fool who's written himself out, looking for a 
subject for me! '  
' Karmazinov, that almost statesman-like intellect! You're very free 
with your language, sir! '  
'Your Karmazinov is a silly old woman, spiteful and worthless. 
Clzerc, chhe, since when have you become so enslaved by them ? Oh, 
dear God ! '  
'I can't stand him even now for the airs he gives himself, but I must 
do justice to his great intellect. I repeat I've defended you as far as I 
could and to the best of my ability. And why must you be so dull and 
ridiculous ? Couldn't you instead walk on to the platform with a nice 
smile as the representative of a past age, and just tell them two or three 
anecdotes in your inimitable way as you alone. can sometimes tell 
them ? Even though you're an old man, though you belong to an age 
that has passed, and though you have dropped behind them, there's 
nothing to prevent you from admitting it with a smile, in your fore­
word, and everybody will realize that you're a nice, good-natured, 
witty old fossil. In a word, a man of the old school, but so far advanced 
that he is able to appreciate the absurdity of certain ideas which he has 
hitherto followed at their true value. Do me a favour, I beg you.' 
'Chere, enough! Don't ask me. I can't. I'll talk to them about the 

BEFORE THE FETE 
345 
Madonna, but I shall raise a storm which will either crush them all or 
strike me down alone ! '  
'It's sure to strike you down alone, M r  Verkhovensky.' 
'Such is my fate. I shall tell them about that vile slave, that stinking 
and depraved flunkey who will first mount the ladder with a pair of 
scissors in his hands and slash the divine countenance of the great ideal 
in the name of equality, envy, and - and digestion. Let my curse thun­
der out and then, then -' 
'To a lunatic asylum ֎· 
'Maybe. llut in any case, whether I'm defeated or whether I'm vic­
torious, I shall take up my bag that very evening, my pauper's bag, 
leave all my belongings behind. me, all your gifts, all your allowances 
and promises of future blessings, and go away on foot to end my life 
as a tutor in some merchant's house or die of hunger in some ditch. I 
have spoken. Alcajacta <'st!' 
He rose again. 
'I've been convinced,' Mrs Stavrogin said, getting up with flashing 
eyes - 'I've been convinced for years that all you live for is to put me 
and my house to shame by some disgraceful story like that! What do 
you mean by your tutorship in a merchant's house or by your dying 
in a ditch ? It's just spite, calumny, and nothing else! '  
'You've always despised me, but I shall end up like a true knight 
who remains faithful to his lady, for your opinion of me has always 
been dearer to me than anything in the world. From now on I shall 
accept nothing, but shall revere you disinterestedly.' 
'How silly! '  
'You've never respected me. I may have had thousands of weak­
nesses. Yes, I have sponged on you ; I speak the language of nihilism; 
but sponging has never been the guiding principle of my actions. It 
has just happened like that, of itself; I don't know how. I always 
thought that there was something higher than food between us and -
I've never, never been a scoundrel ! And so I go on my way to make 
amends ! I'm setting out late in the year, in the late autumn, a mist lies 
over the fields, the road before me is covered with the hoar frost of 
old ֏ge, and the wind howls about the grave towards which I walk . . . .  
But forward, forward on my way, on my new way -
Full of the purest love, 
True to his own sweet dream .
. • •  

T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  T W O  
Oh, farewell, my dreams. Twenty years ! Aleajacta est!' 
His face was wet with tears that suddenly gushed out of his eyes ; he 
picked up his hat. 
'I don't understand Latin,' said Mrs s·tavrogin, trying hard to con­
trol herself. 
Who knows, perhaps she too felt like crying, but indignation and 
caprice got the better of her once more. 
'I know only one thing : that all th\s is just a silly whim. You'll 
never be able to carry out your threats, which are full of egoism. You 
won't go anywhere. You won't go to any merchant. You'll end your 
days quite simply on my hands, getting your pension and having your 
dreadfUl friends come to see you on Tuesdays. Good-bye, sir.' 
'Ale a jacta est!' he said, bowing low to her, and came back home 
more dead than alive with excitement. 
Peter Verkhovensky is Busy 
I 
T H E  day of the fete was fmally fixed, and von Lembke was looking 
more and more melancholy and pensive. He was ful of strange and 
ominous forebodings, and this worried Mrs Lembke gready. It is true 
everything was not quite right. Our former easy-going Governor had 
left the administration of the province not altogether in good working 
order ; at the moment a cholera epidemic was approaching ; there 
were serious outbreaks of plague among the cattle in some country 
districts ; al that summer ftres raged in towns and villages, and among 
the common people the foolish rumours of incendiarism gained more 
and more ground. Cases of robbery were twice as numerous as usual. 
But all this, of course, would have been perfectly normal had there 
not been other weighty reasons which disturbed the composure of the 
hitherto happy von Lembke. 
What worried Mrs Lembke most of all was that he was becoming 
more tmcommunicative every day and, strange to say, more secretivt;. 
And what indeed did he have to hide? It is true he rarely answered her 
back and mostly obeyed her implicitly. At her insistence, for instance, 
two or tltree measures were passed of a very risky and almost ilegal 

PETER VERKHOVENS KY I S  B USY 
347 
:haracter with the idea of increasing the Governor's powers. A num­
x:r of rather sinister actions were connived at with the same aim in 
Tiew; for instance, people who should have been put on trial and sent 
:o Siberia were, at her insistence, recommended for promotion. It was 
Jso decided systematically to ignore certain complaints and inquiries. 
\I this came to light afterwards. Lembke not only signed everything, 
>Ut did not even discuss the question of his wife's share in the execu­
ion of his duties. On the other hand, he would at times start a row 
>Ver ' absolute trifles', to Mrs Lembke's great surprise. No doubt he 
:elt the need of recompensing himself by a few moments of mutiny 
ur the days of obedience. Unfortunately, Mrs Lembke, for all her in­
;ight, could not grasp the noble finesse of her husband's noble charac­
:er. Alas, she had other worries, and that was the source of many mis­
mderstandings. 
It ill becomes me to dwell on cȁrtain things and, besides, I don't 
:hink I am able to. Neither is it my business to discuss administrative 
mistakes, and that is why I shall completely leave out the administra­
tive aspect of the whole affair. When I began my chronicle, I had quite 
:>ther tasks in mind. Besides, the Commission of Inquiry which has 
just been set up in our province will no doubt bring to light a great 
mmy things; it is only a matter of waiting a little. However, it is im­
possible to avoid certain explanations. 
But to return to Mrs Lembke. The poor lady (I feel very sorry for 
her) could have achieved everything that attracted and allured her so 
much (glory and so on) without any of the violent and eccentric 
efforts she resolved to make from the very start. But whether it was 
from an excess of romantic feelings or from the long and sad failures 
she had sufered as a young girl, she felt suddenly, with the change in 
her fortunes, that she had been somehow specially chosen, almost 
anointed, that over her 'a tongue, like as of fire' had burst, and it was 
that tongue of fire that was the cause of all the trouble: for, say what 
you will, it is not like a chignon which will fit any woman's head. But . 
it is the hardest thing in the world to convin,ce a woman of this truth; 
on the contrary, anybody who has a mind to agree with her, will be 
sure of success, and they vied with each other in agreeing with her. 
The poor woman suddenly found herself the sport of the most con­
flicting influences while imagining that she was highly original. Many 
clever people feathered their nests and took advantage of her simplicity 

T H E  D E V I L S · PART T W O  
during the short period of her rule. And what a hopeless tangle 
she got herself into under the pretence of independence! She was in 
favour of big agricultural estates, the aristocratic clement, and the in­
crease of the Governor's prerogatives and, at the same time, of the 
democratic clement, the new institutions, law and order, free-think­
ing, and social reforms; the strict etiquette of an aristocratic salon and 
the free-and-easy, almost public-house ma1mers of the young people 
who surrounded her. She dreamed ofgivi11g happi11ess and reconciling 
the irreconcilable, or, what was more likely, of the union of every­
thing and everybody in the adoration of her own person. She had 
special favourites; she was very fond of Peter Verkhovensky, who, 
incidentally, got his way with her by the grossest flattery. Dut she 
liked him for another reason, too, a reason that is most remarkable and 
most characteristic of the poor lady : she was always hoping that he 
would disclose to her a conspiracy against the Government! However 
hard it may be to imagine it, that was so. For some obscure reason she 
believed that it was in our province that a plot against the Government 
was being hatched. Dy his silence on certain occasions and his hints 
on others, Peter helped to confirm her in that strange idea. She, on the 
other hand, imagined that he had connexions with every revolution­
ary movement in Russia and, at the same time, was loyal to her to the 
point of adoration. The discovery of the plot, gratitude from Peters­
burg, a brilliant career in front of her, the exercise of an influence on 
the younger generation by 'kindness' so as to keep it from going over 
the brink - all this lived happily side by side in that fantastic head of 
hers. For she had saved and mastered Peter Verkhovensky (for some 
reason she was absolutely convinced of this) and she would save the 
others, too. None of them would perish. She would save them all. 
She would sort them out, she would send in the right report about 
them, she would act in the highest interests of justice, and history and 
the entire Russian liberal movement would possibly bless her name. 
Dut the conspiracy would be discovered, all the same. All the advan­
tages at one blow. 
Still, it was absolutely necessary that Mr Lembke should be more 
cheerful, at least before the fete. He simply had to be cheered up and 
reassured. With that aim in view, she sent Peter to him in the hope 
that he might relieve his depression by some sedative known only to 
him. Perhaps even by conveying some information to him, as it were, 

P ETER VERKHOVENSKY I S  B U S Y  
349 
from the horse's mouth. She had implicit faith in his adroitness. Peter 
had not been in von Lembke's office for some time. He rushed in 
there at the very moment when the patient was in a most difficult 
mood. 
2 
A contingency had arisen with which Mr von Lembke was utterly un­
able to deal. In the district in which Peter Vcrkhovcnsky had been 
having a great time recently a second lieutenant had been reprimanded 
by his superior ofEccr in front of the whole company. The second 
lieutenant was a \"otmg man who had recently arrived from Peters­
burg. He was taciturn and morose, of a dignified appearance, though 
rather small, stout, and ruddy-checked. He resented the reprimand 
and suddenly flung himself upon his superior officer with a sort of un­
natural scream that astonished the whole company; his head bent 
down savagely, he struck the officer and bit him on the shoulder with 
all his might, and it was with some difficulty that he was dragged off 
There could be no doubt that he had gone mad. At least it was found 
that during recent weeks his behaviour had been very peculiar. For 
instance, he had thrown two icons belonging to his landlady out of 
his room, having chopped up one of them with an axe ; in his room 
he had placed on three stands, in the form of three lecterns, the works 
ofVogt, Moleschott, and Buechner, and before each lectern he burned 
a wa>. church candle. From the large number of books founo in his 
room it could be gathered that he was a well-read man. If he han had 
fifty thousand francs he might have sailed to the Marqucsas Islands 
like the 'cadet' to whom Mr Hcrzen refers with such gay humour in 
one of his works. When he was arrested, a whole bundle of the most 
desperate political leaflets was found in his pockets and in his lodgings. 
Political leaflets are by themselves a trivial affair and, in my opinion, 
not worth worrying about. We've seen lots of them. Besides, those 
leaflets were not new: exactly the same were, as I was told later, not 
so long ago scattered in another province, and Liputin, who had 
visited that district and the neighbouring province six weeks earlier, 
assured me that he had seen similar leaflets there. But what struck von 
Lembke was that the manager of Spigulin's factory had brought the 
police just at the same ti֐e two or three bundles of exactly the same 
leaflets as those found in the second lieutenant's room. They had been 

3 50 
THE DEVILS • PART T W O  
left at the factory during the night and had not yet been opened, so 
that none of the workmen had had time to read any of them. The 
whole thing was silly, but it made Lembke ponder deeply. The affair 
appeared to him in an unpleasantly complicated light. 
This happened just at the beginning of the ' Spigulin incident ' at the 
factory. The incident had caused a great deal of excited talk in our 
town and had created a stir in the Petersburg and Moscow papers, 
which published all sorts of versions of it. About three weeks earlier 
I 
one of the workmen there had fallen ill and died of Asiatic cholera. A 
few more people fell il of it later. The townspeople were in a panic 
because the cholera epidemic was approaching from the neighbouring 
province. I ma_y add that, so far as possible, all the necessary sanitary 
precautions had been taken to meet the Wlinvited guest. But the fac­
tory of the Spigulins, who were millionaires and people with in1lu­
ential connexions, had _somehow been overlooked. And then every­
body started clamouring that the factory was the breeding-place of 
the infection and that the factory itself, and especially the workmen's 
quarters, were so filthy that, if there had been no cholera epidemic at 
al, it would have started there. Precautionary measures were, of 
course, taken immediately, and Mr Lembke vigorously insisted on 
their being carried out without delay. The factory was thoroughly 
cleaned up in three weeks, but the Spigulins, for some unknown rea­
son, closed it. One of the Spigulin brothers resided permanently in 
Petersburg and the other left for Moscow after the authorities had 
ordered his factory to be cleaned up. The manager began to pay off 
the workers and, as it now appears, swindled them right and left. The 
workers began to protest, demanding to be paid fairly, and rather 
foolishly went to the police, but without raising a great clamour and 
without getting very much excited over it. It was jl.JSt then that the 
revolutionary leaflets were handed to Lembke from the manager. 
Peter Verkhovensky flew into the Governor's study without send­
ing in his name, just like an old friend of the family, and, besides, he 
had a message from Mrs Lembke. Seeing him, von Lembke scowled 
and stood still at his desk with an unfriendly look on his face. Till then 
he had been walking up and down his study, discussing some private 
business with an official of his office by the name of Blum, a very awk­
ward and morose German whom he had brought with him from 
Petersburg in spite of his wife's strong opposition. At the entrance of 

PETER VERKHOVENSKY IS BUSY 
3 5 1 
Peter Verkhovensky, Blum retired to the door, but he did not leave 
the room. Peter even imagined that he had exchanged a significant 
glance with. his superior. 
'Aha, so I've caught you, you secretive ruler of the town,' Peter 
cried, laughing and covering up the leaflet which lay on the table with 
his hand. 'That will add to your collection, won't it ?' 
Von Lembke flushed. His face seemed suddenly to twitch. 
'Leave it alone at once ! '  he shouted, wincing with anger. 'And 
don't you dare, sir -' 
' What's the matter with you ? I believe you're angry.' 
'Let me tell you, sir, that I do not intend to put up with your sans 
(llfOn any more and I'd like you to remember -' 
'Good gracious, he really is angry! ' 
' Shut up ! Shut up ! '  von Lembke cried, stamping on the carpet. 
'And don't dare -' 
Goodness only knows what might have happened. There was, in­
deed, another thing, besides, which neither Peter nor Mrs Lembke 
knew anything about. The nnhappy Lembke had been so upset during 
the last few days that he had even begw1 to be secretly jealous of his 
wife and Peter Verkhovensky. In solitude, especially at night, he spent 
some very disagreeable moments. 
'And I thought that if a man reads you his novel in private for two 
days running til after midnight and wants to know your opinion of 
it, he has at least given up these official relations. Mrs Lembke treats 
me as a friend - what on earth is one to make of you ?' Peter said with 
rather a dignified air. ' Here's your novel, by the way,' he said, putting 
on the table a large, heavy, rolled-up manuscript, wrapped in blue 
paper. 
Lembke blushed and looked embarrassed. 
' Where did you find it?' he asked cautiously, with a rush of joy he 
was nnable to control, but which he did his best to conceal. 
'Well, just imagine it, wrapped up as it is, it had rolled nnder the 
chest of drawers. I must have thrown it down ramer carelessly on the 
chest of drawers as I came in. My charwoman found it me day before 
yesterday when she was scrubbing me floor. Dear me, you certainly 
gave me some work! '  
Lembke dropped his eyes sternly. 
'Haven't slept for two nights running, manks to you. It was found 

3 52 
THE D E V I L S · P A R T  TWO 
the day before yesterday, but I kept it - been reading it ever since. Too 
busy in the daytime, so I read it at night. Well, sir, I can't say that I 
liked it. It's not my kettle of fish. But what docs that matter? I've 
never claimed to be a critic, and the important thing is, my dear chap, 
that I simply couldn't tear myself away from it, though I didn't like 
it. The fourth and fifth chapters are ,.. arc damned good! Damned 
good ! And what a lot of humour you've shoved into it - I roared with 
laughter. But how wonderfully you can make fun of things sans que 
eel a paraisse! Well, the ninth and tenth chapters arc all about love - not 
my kettle of f1sh, I'm afraid, but it certainly is cftcctivc. Nearly burst 
into tears when I read Igrcncv's letter, though you've certainly shown 
him up cleverly. You know, it's moving all right, but at the same 
time you tried, as it were, to exhibit hi֑ false side. Am I right? Have I 
guessed it or not ? But the ending, you know - oh, well, I really felt 
like giving you a good beating for it. For what idea arc you trying to 
develop ? Why, it's the same old deification of domestic happiness, 
multiplying of children and money - and they lived happily ever after 
- good Lord ! You'll enchant your readers, for even I couldn't tear 
myself away from the book, but that makes it all the worse! The 
reader is as big a fool as ever, but that's why intelligent people ought 
to shake him up, while you - but there, that's enough. Good-bye. 
Don't be angry another time. I've come because I had something to 
tell you, but you're such a funny fellow -' 
Meanwhile Lembke took his novel and locked it up in an oak book­
case, having managed incidentally to give Blum a wink to make him­
self scarce. Blum disappeared with a long, mournful face. 
'I'm not such a funny fellow, but I'm simply - it's all these unpleas­
antnesses,' he muttered, frowning, but without anger and sitting down 
at the table ' Sit down, please, and tell me what you have to say. I 
haven't seen you for a long time, Mr Vcrkhovcnsky , only, please, 
don't rush in again with that manner of yours - when one's busy it 
sometimes is - er -' 
'My manner is always the same.' 
'I know, my dear fellow, and I believe you don't mean anything by 
it, but sometimes one is worried - please take a seat.' 
Peter sprawled on the sofa and at once tucked up his legs under him. 

PETER VERKHOVENSKY I S  B U S Y  
3 5 3  
3 
'What are you so worried about - not about that silly nonsense, 
surely ?' he nodded towards the leaflet. 'I can bring you as many of 
these leaflets as you like. I've already made their acquaintance in the 
Kh-v province.' 
'You mean when you were staying there?' 
'Why, of course; it was not in my absence. There was one with a 
vignette - an axe printed at the top of it. Allow me.' He picked up the 
leaflet. 'Ah, yes, rhere's an axe on this one, too. It's the same one - an 
exact replica of it.' 
'Y cs, an axe. You sec, an axe.' 
'Why, you're not frightened of the axe, arc you ?' 
'I'm not referring to the axe, sir, and - cr - I'm not frightened. But 
this business, I mean, it's such an awful business - there arc circum­
stances here.' 
'Which ? You mean that they should have brought it from the fac­
tory ? Ha, ha! Do you know that in that factory of yours the workers 
will soon be composing such leaflets themselves.' 
'What do you mean?' von Lembke glared at him sternly. 
'I mean what I say. You'd better look after them carefully. You're 
much too mild a man, Mr Lembke. You write novels. You want the 
good old-fashioned methods here.' 
' What old-fashioned methods? What arc you talking about? The 
factory has been cleaned. I gave the order and ir was cleaned up.' 
'But there's mutiny among the workers. You should have them flog-
ged , every man-jack of them, and the whole thing would be settled.' 
'Mutiny ? Nonsense! I gave the order, and it was cleaned up.' 
'Good Lord! Mr Lembke, you're too mild a man.' 
'First of all, I'm not so mild as you think, and, secondly -' von 
Lembke felt hurt again. He spoke to the young man with an effort, 
out of curiosity, wondering whether he would tell him anything new. 
· 
'Ah-h, another old friend! '  Peter interrupted him, swooping down 
on another piece of paper lying under a paper-weight, some kind of 
political leaflet, but obviously printed abroad, and in verse. 'Well, 
this one I know by heart: A Noble Character! Let's sec. Yes, it is A 
NoMe Character. I met this character when I was abroad. Where did 
you dig it up ?' 

354 
THE DEVILS · PART TWO 
'You say yon met him abroad?' von Lembke said with a start. 
'I should think so. Four months ago, or five even.' 
'You seem to have seen quite a great deal abroad, ' von Lembke said, 
giving him a sharp look. 
Peter unfolded the piece of paper without listening to him, and read 
the poem aloud: 
A Noble Character 
Not for him the pride of place, 
Champion of the Human Race, 
Victim of the tyrant's spite, 
And the nobles' rancorous might, 
TI1c life he chose was one of seeking 
Torture, misery, death, and beating ­
With this intent to teach the people 
That all are brothers, free and equal. 
Leader of a rebel band, 
He sought, at last, a foreign strand, 
Fleeing from the Tsar's dark dtmgeons, 
Thong and rack and hangman's bludgeons. 
But the people, resolved to smash 
The tyrant's chains and flee the lash, 
From Smolensk to far Tashkent, 
Chafing, waited for the student. 
They waited for him all to rise 
'Gainst tyrant Tsar and nobles' prize, 
To claim their right to own the land 
And forever more for truth to stand, 
Against the bonds so triple twined, 
Dark deceivers of the human mind, 
Marriage, church, and family ties, 
That filled the old world with tricks and lies. 
'I expect you got it from that officer, didn't you?' Peter asked. 
'Do you know the officer, too?' 
'I should think so. I went on the spree with him for two days. I'm 
afraid he certainly deserved to go off his head.' 
'Perhaps he didn't go off his head at al.' 
'Oh ?  You mean because he started biting people?' 
'But, look here, if you saw that poem abroad and then it's found 
here in that officer's room -' 
'What? Rather mysterious, don't you think? You're not by any 

PETER VERKHOVENSKY " I S  B U S Y  
355 
chance cross-examining me, are you ? You see,' he began suddenly in 
a tone of tmusual gravity, ' on my return from abroad I explained to 
certain people what I saw there, and my explanations were found to 
be satisfactory, otherwise I should not have rejoiced this town with 
my presence. I think that so far as that goes the affair is at an end and 
that I owe no more explanations to anyone. And, mind you, it is not 
at an end because I was an informer, but because,J couldn't help doing 
otherwise. The people who wrote to Mrs Lembke knew the position, 
and wrote about me as an honest man. But, damn it, all that is over 
and done with. I've come to discuss a serious matter with you, and 
I'm glad you've told that chimney-sweep to clear out. It's something 
of the utmost importance to me, Mr Lembke. I have something special 
to ask you.' 
' Oh ?  Well, go on. I'm waiting and, I must confess, I am very curi­
ous to hear what you have to say. And may I add, sir, that you rather 
surprise me.' 
Von Lembke was a little agitated. Peter crossed his legs. 
'In Petersburg,' he began, ' I  talked frankly of many things, but cer­
tain other things - this, for instance,' he tapped A Noble Character with 
his finger, 'I passed over in silence, first, because it wasn't worth talk­
ing about and, secondly, because I only told them what they wanted 
to know. In things of this kind I hate to put myself out too much. 
That's the difference, as I see it, between a scoundrel and an honest 
man who is the victim of circumstances. Anyway, let's forget it. Well, 
sir, but now - now when these fools - I mean now when it has all 
"come out and is already in your hands and I can see that it's impossible 
to hide anything from you, for you arc a man who has eyes in his 
head and it is impossible to say what's in your mind, I - I - er - in 
short, I've come to ask you to save one mari, another fool, possibly 
even a madman, for the sake of his youth, his misfortunes, and also 
because of your humanitarian principles . . . .  For I suppose it's not only 
in those novels of yours that you are so humane ! '  He suddenly cut 
short his speech with impatience and coarse sarcasm. 
In a word, one cou,ld see that he was a straightforward man, though 
awkward and not very shrewd, from an excess of humanitarian feel­
ings and, perhaps, also of delicacy - above al, a little on the stupid 
side, as von Lembke at once summed him up with great acuteness. 
He had indeed long suspected it, especially when, during the last week, 

T H E  D E V I L S · PART T W O  
particularly at night, he had cursed him inwardly for his inexplicable 
successes with Mrs Lembke. 
'Who is the man you arc asking a favour for and what is it all 
about?' he inquired majestically, doing his best to conceal his curi­
osity. 
'It's - it's - damn it, I can't be blamed for trusting you, can I ?  It's 
not my £1ult if I respect you as a man of honour and, above all, as a 
sensible fellow who's capable of understanding - oh, damn it . . . .' 
The poor fellow evidently could not pull himself together. 
' You must realize, of course,' he went on, ' that by giving you 
his name I'm betraying him. I am betraying him, am I not ? Am I 
not ?' 
' llut how do you expect me to guess his name if you can't make up 
your mind to tell it me?' 
' Well, of course, that's the trouble. You alway֒ knock a fellow 
down with that logic of yours - damn it - well, damn it, that "noble 
character", that "student" is - Shatov - that's all I have to tell you.' 
' Shatov ? How do you mean Shatov ? ' 
' Shatov is the " student" who is mentioned in that poem. He lives 
here. A former serf, the fellow who slapped -' 
'Oh, yes, I know, I know ! '  Lembke cried, screwing up his eyes. 
'But, look here, what exactly is he accused of and, what's more im­
portant, what do you want me to do ?' 
'Why, don't you sec ? I want you to save him ! I used to know him 
eight years ago, I - well, I might almost be said to have been his 
friend,' Peter V crkhovensky said, getting more and more agitated. 
'Well, but I am under no obligation to give you an account of my 
past life,' he declared, dismissing it with a wa vc of the hand. 'All this is 
of no importance. Just a matter of three and a half persons, and if you 
add those abroad, there won't be even a dozen of them. The main 
thing is that I put my trust in your humanitarian feelings and your in­
telligence. I'm sure you'll understand and you'll put the matter in its 
true perspective and not as goodness knows what: just as the foolish 
fancy of a crazy chap, as the result of misfortunes - misfortunes, mind 
you, that go back for many years, and not as some sort of unheard of 
conspiracy against the Government! '  
He was almost breathless. 
' Yes, I see. It's he who's responsible for the revolutionary leaflets 

PETER VERKHOVENSKY I S  BUSY-
3 5 7  
with the picture of the axe,' von Lembke concluded almost majestic­
ally. 'But, look here, ifhe alone is involved, then how could he have 
distributed them here and in the provinces and even in the Kh-v 
province and, fmally and most important of all, where did he get 
them ?' 
'But I'm telling yOti that there are only about tive of them, or a 
dozen at most - how should I know ?' 
'You don't know ?' 
'But, damn it all, why should I know ?' 
'But you knew that Shatov was one of the conspirators, didn't 
you ?' 
'Oh, well ! '  Peter Verkhovensky gave it up with a wave of the 
hand, as though defending himself against the overwhelming per­
spicacity of his questioner. ' Well, listen. I'll tell you the whole truth. 
I don't know a thing about the revolutionary leaflets, I mean, not a 
damn thing - nothing at all, do you understand what that means ? 
Well, of course, the second lieutenant, and someone else, and again 
someone else here, and - well, perhaps Shatov, too, and someone else 
- well, that's the lot - flotsam and jetsam all of them. But it's for 
Shatov I've come to intercede. He must be saved because this poem is 
his, his own composition, and it was through him it was published 
abroad. That I know for certain. As for those leaflets, I know nothing 
about them.' 
' If the poem is his, then the leaflets arc quite certainly his too. But 
what makes you suspect Mr Shatov?' 
With the air of a man who had completely lost his patience, Peter 
Verkhovensky snatched his wallet from his pocket and took a note 
out of it. 
'Here is the evidence you want! '  he cried, flinging it on the table. 
Lembke unfolded it. The note was written apparently about six 
months before from our town to some place abroad. It was very short, 
only a few words. 
I can't print A Noble Clraracter here. Can't do anything. Print it abroad. 
IV. SIIATOV. 
Lembke gazed intently at Peter. Mrs Stavrogin was right in saying 
that he had a somewhat sheep-like look, at times especially. 
· What I mean is this,' Peter said quickly. 'He wrote tlus poem here 

T H E  D E V I L S  • PART 'l'WO 
six months ago, but he could not get it printed - I mean, on a secret 
printing press, and that is why he asks that it should be printed abroad . 
. . . That's clear, isn't it?' 
'Yes, sir, that's clear ; but whom is he asking? That's what's not so 
clear,' Lembke observed with sly irony. 
'Why, Kirilov of course. The note was written to Kirilov, who 
was abroad at the time. You didn't know it, did you ?  Though what 
really annoys me is that you're probably only pretending not to know, 
and that actually you knew about this poem and everything else long 
ago. How else did it come to be on your desk? Just happened to get 
there ? Why are you tormenting me if that is so ?' 
He mopped his brow agitatedly with his handkerchief. 
'Perhaps I do know something,' Lembke parried cleverly. 'But 
who is this Kirilov ?' 
'Well, he's an engineer who arrived in our town a few weeks ago. 
He was Stavrogin's second. A maniac. A madman. Your second 
lieutenant might indeed be suffering only from delirium tremens, but 
that one is stark raving mad - I guarantee you that. Oh, sir, if the 
Government only knew what sort of people they all are, they wouldn't 
bother to raise a hand against them. Every one of them ought to be 
locked up in a lunatic asylum. I had a good look at them in Switzer­
land and at their congresses.' 
' You mean from where they direct the movement in this cowltry ?' 
'But who directs it ? Three men and a half? Why, one gets bored 
to tears looking at them. And-what movement in this country do you 
mean ? The leaflets ? And what new members have they got? Second 
lieutenants who suffer from delirium tremens and two or three stu­
dents! You're an intelligent man; let me put this question to you: why 
don't they get more important people to join their movement? Why 
are they always students and two or three hobbledehoys of twenty­
two ? I daresay a milion sleuth-hounds are after them, and how many 
have they found? And have they got so many members ? Seven people. 
I tell you, it's too boring for words.' 
Lembke listened to him attentively, but with an expression which 
said: ' Don't you tell me such stories!' 
'But, look here. You just said that this note was sent to some address 
abroad, but there is no address on it. How, then, do you come to know 
that the note was addressed to Mr Kirilov and, besides, that it was sent 

PETER VERKHOVENSKY IS B U S Y  
3 59 
to some address abroad and - and that it really was written by Mr 
Shatov?' 
'Well, all you have to do is to get a specimen of Shatov's hand­
writing and compare it. You must have some signature ofhis in your 
office. As for Kirilov, he showed it to me himself at the time.' 
' So you were yourself-' 
'Of course I was myself. They showed me all sorts of things there. 
As for this poem, it seems that the late Herzen wrote it for Shatov 
when Shatov was still wandering abroad, in memory of their meet­
ing, it seems, as an expression of his admiration or as a letter of recom­
mendation - damn it - and Shatov circulates it among the young 
people. This is what Herzen thinks of me, as it were.' 
'I see!' Lembke saw the point at last. 'No wonder I couldn't make 
it out: a political leaflet - well, that's easy to understand, but why a 
poem?' 
'I knew you'd see it. And why the hell did I have to tell you about 
it? Look here, let me have Shatov; as for the rest, to hell with al of 
them; and that goes for Kirilov, too, who has shut himself up in Filip­
pov's house, where Shatov lives too. He is hiding there. They don't 
like me because I've gone back - but promise to let me have Shatov, 
and I'll deliver you the rest on a plate. You'll find me useful, sir! The 
whole wretched lot of them, I think, numbers only nine or ten people. 
I'm keeping an eye on them mysel£ For reasons of my own, sir. Three 
of them are already known to us: Shatov, Kirilov, and the second 
lieutenant. The rest I'm just keeping an eye on - I'm not very short­
siɚhted, though. It's the same as in the Kh-v province: two students, 
one schoolboy, two twenty-year-old noblemen, one teacher, and one 
retired mɛor of about sixty, who has gone silly with drink, have been 
caught there. That was all. And you can take my word for it that that 
was all. The authorities were surprised to fmd that there were no more. 
But you must give me six days. I've got it all worked out: six days 
and no more. If you want some sort of result, don't touch them for 
another six days, and I shall tie them all up in a bundle for you. If you 
stir, the birds will fly away. But let me have Shatov. I'm for Shatov. 
The best thing would be to summon him in secret and in a friendly 
way to your office and cross-examine him, having first let him see 
that you know everything. But I expect he'll throw himself at your 
feet and burst into tears! He's a neurotic fellow. Very unhappy. His 

T H E  D E V I L S  • PART T W O  
wife is Stavrogin's mistress. Be nice to him and he'll tell you every­
thing, but you must give me my six days first. And above all -
above all : not a word to Mrs Lembke. It's a secret. Can you keep a 
secret ?' 
'What do you mean ?' Lembke cried, staring at him in surprise. 
'Haven't you told Mrs Lembke - anything at all ?' 
'Told her ? Good Lord, no. Oh, my dear Mr Lembke, really! You 
sec, I value her friendship too much and I have too great a respect for 
her - and so on and so forth - but you won't catch me slipping up like 
tlut. I do not contradict her because, as you know yourself, it is dan­
gerous to contradict her. I may have dropped a hint to her, because 
she loves it; but, good heavens, I'd never dream of betraying any 
names to her or anything of that sort, as I have to you just now. For 
why have I turned to you now ? Because after all you're a man, a 
serious man, a man of long and dependable experience in the Service. 
You've had experience of life, too. I suppose you know every step in 
such a matter by heart from your experience in Petersburg. Why, if 
I were to tell her those two names, for instance, she'd raise such a 
storm . . .  For, you know, she'd like to astonish Petersburg. No, sir, 
she's too hot-headed - that's the trouble.' 
'Y cs, there's something of that fougue in her,' Lembke murmured, 
not without pleasure, though feeling sorry at the same time that the 
boor had had the impudence to express himself rather freely about 
Mrs Lembke. 
But Peter probably thought that what he said was not enough, and 
that he had to exert himself a little more to flatter ' that Lembke fel­
low' and get him completely in his power. 
'Yes, you' rc quite right: a {ougue it is,' he said. ' She may be a woman 
of genius, a literary lady, but - she's sure to frighten away the birds. 
She wouldn't be able to keep the secret for six hours, let alone six 
days. Oh, my dear Mr Lembke, never rely on a woman to keep any­
thing for six days! You do admit that I've had some experience in 
such matters, don't you ? I do know something about it, don't I ?  And 
I think that you, too, know that I'm in a position to know something 
about it. I am not asking you to wait for six days just for fun, but be­
cause I have a good reason for it.' 
'I've heard,' Lembke said hesitatingly, afraid to reveal his thoughts, 
' I've heard that on your return from abroad you expressed - er -

PETER VERKHOVENSKY I S  B U S Y  
as it were - your repentance to - er - the proper quarters - didn't 
you ?' 
'Well, whatever happened there is nobody's business.' 
'Well, of course, I - er - don't want to pry into - cr - but I couldn't 
help feeling that you've talked in quite a different vein till now : about 
the Christian faith, for instance, about social institutions and, last but 
not least, about the Government.' 
'I may have said all sorts of things. I'm saying them still, but these 
ideas ought not to be applied as those fools do it - that's the point. For 
what's the usc ofbiting a man's shoulder ? Why, you agreed with me 
yourself, only you said that it was premature.' 
' It wasn't that I agreed about or said that it was premature.' 
' You certainly weigh every word you say, don't you ? Ha, ha! A 
careful man!' Peter suddenly remarked gaily. ' Listen, my dear sir, I 
had to get to know you better, and that's why I spoke in that vein. 
You're not the only one I get to know like that. There arc lots of other 
people I treat in the same way. I may have wanted to fmd out what 
sort of a man you were.' 
'What did you want to know that for?' 
' Oh, I don't know,' he said, laughing again. ' You sec, my dear and 
highly esteemed sir, you're very clever; but it hasn't yet come to that, 
and it won't come to it, either. You sec what I mean ? Perhaps you do. 
Though I did give certain explanations to the proper quarters on my 
return from abroad, and I really don't know why a man of certain 
convictions should not be able to act for the success of his sincere con­
victions, but - cr - no one there asked me to send in a report about 
your character, and I've not accepted any such orders from there. Con­
sider: I need not have divulged those two names to you. I could have 
sent them off straight there, that is, where I made· my first explanations. 
And if I'd been acting for the sake of my financial or some personal 
advantage, it would have paid me better not to have told you, for now 
they will be grateful to you, and not to me. I've done it solely for 
Shatov,' Peter added nobly, 'for Shatov alone because of our old 
friendship. Well, of course, when you take up your pen to write there, 
I shouldn't mind at all if you said something in my favour, if you like 
- I  shouldn't dream of stopping you, ha, ha! Good-bye, sir. I'm afraid 
I've stayed too long as it is and,' he added pleasantly as he got up, ' I  
shouldn't really have talked so much! ' 

THE Dl!VILS · PART TWO 
'On the contrary, I'm very glad that the affair is, so to speak, being 
cleared up,' von Lembke said, getting up and looking very amiable, 
too, evidently under the impression of Peter's last words. 'I accept 
your services gratefully, and you may be sure that so far as I'm con­
cerned I shall do my best to put in a good word about your zeal . . . .' 
' Six days, that's the chief thing. I must have six days, and you must 
not do anything during that time.' 
'All right.' 
'Of course, I don't tie your hands, and I shouldn't dare to do any­
thing of the sort. You naturally have to keep an eye on them, but 
please don't shoo them off before the right time - that's where I rely 
on your intelligence and experience. I suppose you've got lots of 
bloodhounds hidden away somewhere as well as sleuth-hounds - ha, 
ha! '  Peter blurted out gaily and thoughtlessly (like a young man). 
'Oh, it isn't at all like that,' von Lembke declined a direct answer 
pleasantly. 'That is the sort of thing young people are apt to think - I 
mean, that the authorities have lots of things up their sleeves. But, by 
the way, there is something I'd like to ask you about: if that Kirilov 
was Stavrogin's second, then Mr Stavrogin, too, is in that cɜ -' 
'What about Stavrogin?' 
'I mean, if they're such friends -' 
'Oh, no, no, no! You're wrong there, clever as you are. You sur­
prise me! I thought that you were not without some information 
about it. You see, Stavrogin is quite the opposite; I mean, absolutely. 
Attis au lecteur!' 
'Really? Are you quite sure?' Lembke asked mistrustfuly. 'Mrs 
Lembke told me that according to the information she had received 
from Petersburg, he is a man with certain, as it were, instructions -' 
'I don't know anything, nothing at all - good-bye, good-bye - avis 
au lecteur! ' Peter suddenly and openly declined to discuss it. 
He rushed to the door. 
'Please, please, Mr Verkhovensky,' Lembke cried, 'I have one more 
little thing to discuss with you, and I won't detain you long.' 
He took an envelope out of the drawer ofhis desk. 
'Here's another specimen of the same kind, and you may take it ;IS 
proof that I trust you implicitly. Here, have a look. What do you 
make of it?' 
There was a letter in the envelope, a strange, anonymous letter 

PETER VERKHOVENSKY IS BUSY 
303 
.ddressed to Lembke which he had only received the day before. Peter, 
:o his intense annoyance, read as follows: 
Your Excellency, 
For that you are according to your rank. I declare herewith an 
1ttempt on the life of gentlemen of the rank of general and on our 
motherland. For everything points to that. Have been distributing hun­
:lreds for many years myself. Also godlessness. A mutiny is being organ­
iZed, and several thousands of revolutionary leaflets, and after each of 
:hem a hundred people will be rwming, with their tongues hanging out, 
if the authorities do not first confiscate them; great rewards have been 
promised them, ;md the commop people is stupid, and there's vodka 
too. The common people, looking for the guilty ones, ruin both guilty 
and innocent, afraid of the one and the other. I repent of what I have 
not done, for such are my circumstances. If you'd like me to inform the 
authorities for the salvation of our country, and also of the churches and 
the icons, I am the only man who can do it. But on condition that I get 
a pardon from the secret police by telegraph at once, for me alone, and 
let the rest answer for it. Put a candle at seven o'clock each evening in 
the porter'nvindow for a signal. When I see it, I shall believe and come 
to kiss the merciful hand from the capital city, but on condition that I 
get a pension, for else how am I to live ? But you won't be sorry, for 
you'll get a star. It must be done in secret, or they'll wring my neck. 
Your Excellency's desperate servant. 
Falls to your feet 
repentant freethinker Incognito. 
Von Lembke explained that the letter was left the day before in the 
porter's room when there was no one there .
.
 
'Well, what do you think ?' Peter asked almost rudely. 
'In my opinion it's an anonymous squib, by the way of a joke.' 
'Most likely it is. One can't fool you.' 
' I  think so chiefly because it's so stupid.' 
'And have you received any other squibs here ?' 
' Yes, twice; anonymous letters.' 
' Well, of course, they wouldn't sign it. In a diferent style? By dif-
ferent hands ? ' 
' Yes, in a different style and by different hands.' 
'Facetious ones, like this one ?' 
' Yes, facetious and, you know, very disgusting.' 
' Well, if there were others, then this one must certainly be the same.' 

THE D E V I L S · PART T W O  
'And, above all, because it's so stupid. For those fellows arc edu-
cated, and they would never write like that.' 
' Y  cs, yes, of course.' 
'But what if this one really wants to inform the authorities ?' 
' Not likely,' Peter snapped drily. ' What docs he mean by the telt>-
gram from the secret police and the pension? It's obviously a squib.' 
' Y  cs, yes,' Lembke said shamefaced) y. 
' Do you know what ? Leave it with me. I promise to fmd out who 
wrote it. I'll find it out before the others.' 
'Take it,' Lembke agreed, though with some hesitation. 
' H<t vc you shown it to anyone?' 
' NL>, of course not. I showed it to no one.' 
'I mean, to Mrs Lembke ?' 
'Good Lord, no ! And for goodness sake don't show it to her your­
self! ' Lembke cried in alarm. ' She'll be so shocked and - she'll be 
awfully angry with me.' 
' Yes, I daresay you'd be the first to catch it. She'd say it was your 
own fault if people write such letters to you. I know what female logic 
is like. Well, good-bye. I may even present you with the author of 
this letter in a coupic of days. Above all, remember our agreement! '  
4 
Peter Vcrkhovensky may have been far from stupid, but Fedka the 
convict was right when he s::tid that he would invent a man himself 
and live with him. He left Lembke fully convinced that he had put his 
mind at rest for six days at le::tst, and he wanted those six days very 
badly indeed. But he was wrong, his idea being merely based on the 
fact that from the very start he had invented for himself once and for 
all a Lembke who was a complete simpleton. 
Like any other morbidly mistrustful person, Lembke was always 
exceedingly and joyfully trustful the moment he left uncertainty be­
hind him. The new turn of events appeared to him at first in a most 
favourable light, in spite of certain new and troublesome complica­
tiom. At any rate, his old doubts entirely vanished. Besides, he had 
been so tired during the last few days, he had felt so worn out and so 
helpless that his soul longed for a rest. But, alas, he was troubled again. 
His long !ifc in Petersburg had left ineradicable traces on his mind. 

PETER VERK HOVENSKY I S  B U S Y  
The official and even the secret history of the 'new generation ' were 
fairly familiar to him - he was a curious man and he used to collect 
revolutionary leaflets - but he could never understand a word of it. 
And now he felt like a man lost in a forest: he felt instinctively that 
there was something incongruous and utterly absurd and anomalous 
in Peter Vcrkhovensky's words - 'Though,' he said to himself, feeling 
entirely at a loss, 'goodness only knows what may not happen with 
this "new generation" and what they may be up to ! '  
And as though on purpose, Blum again poked his head in through 
the door. He bad :JCcn waiting not far off all during Peter's visit. This 
Blum was a distant relation of Lembke, though he had carefully and 
timidly concealed this fact all his life. l must ask the reader's indul­
gence if l devote just a few words to this insignificant person. Blum 
belonged to the strange category of' unlucky ' Germans, not at all be­
cause he had no ability, but for no reason whatsoever. ' Unlucky ' Ger­
mans arc not a myth, but rc֓lly do exist even in Russia, and form a 
class of their own. Lembke had a most touching sympathy for him all 
his lire, anJ he got him some subordinate job under him wherever he 
cou:d and as much as his own successes in the Service would allow. 
But he had no luck anywhere. Either his job was temporarily abol­
ished, or a new man was appointed as the head of his department ; and 
once he was nearly put on trial with some other officials. He was ex­
tremely conscientious, but gloomy without reason and to his own 
detriment: red-haired, tall, stooping, dismal, even sentimental and, 
though very humble, obstinate and pertinacious like an ox, but always 
at the wrong moment. He, as well as his wife and his numerous chil­
dren, had been deeply attached to Lembke for many years. With the 
exception of Lembke, nobody ever liked him. Mrs Lembke at once 
demanded his dismissal, but she could not overcome her husband's 
obstinacy. That was the cause of their first quarrel. It happened imme­
diately after their marriage, during the first days of their honeymoon, 
when Blum, who had till then been carefully concealed from her, sud­
denly materialized with the humiliating secret· of his relationship. 
Lembke besought her with folded hands, told her pathetically all the 
story of Blum and their friendship since the days of their childhood, 
but Mrs Lembke considered herself disgraced for ever, and even re­
sorted to fainting. Von Lembke, however, would not budge an inch, 
declaring that he would not give up Blum for anything in the world, 

J66 
T H E  D E V I L S · PART T W O  
o r  let him go, so that in the end she was astonished and was obliged to 
let Blum stay. It wa.Ӎ decided, however, that their relationship to Blum 
should be concealed even more carefully than before, if that were pos­
sible, and that even Blum's Christian name and patronymic should be 
changed, because for some reason he, too, had the same name and 
patronymic as Mr Lembke. In our town Blum did not know anybody 
except the German chemist ; he paid no visits to anyone and led, as 
was his wont, a solitary and parsimonious existence. He had known of 
Mr Lembke's reprehensible literary efforts for a long time. He was for 
the most part called in to listen to secret readings of the novel, and he 
would sit there like a post for six hours on end ; he perspired, made 
superhuman efforts to keep a wake and to smile ; on returning home he 
groaned and moaned together with his long-legged and scraggy wife 
about their benefactor's unhappy weakness for Russian literature. 
Lembke gave Blum an anguished look. 
'I beg you, Blum, to leave me alone,' he began, speaking rapidly 
and agitatedly, evidently anxious to prevent the resumption of their 
talk, which had been interrupted by the arrival of Peter Verkhovensky.-
' But, sir, it could all be arranged in the most delicate manner and 
without any publicity, for you possess all the necessary powers,' Blum 
insisted respectfully but doggedly on something, stooping as he came 
nearer and nearer by small steps to- J,cmbke. 
' Blum, you're so loyal and devoted to me that I'm always in a panic 
when I look at you.' 
' You always say witty things and you're so delighted with what 
you say that it never interferes with your sleep. But that's how you 
do yourself harm.' 
' Blum, I've just come to the conclusion that we're wrong, abso­
lutely wrong .' 
' Not from what that false and vicious young man whom you sus­
pect yourself has been telling you, sir ? He got the better of you by 
his flattery and praise of your literary talent.' 
' Blum, you don't understand a thing. Your plan is absurd, I tell 
you. We shan't find anything, and there's sure to be a terrible to-do, 
then laughter, and then Mrs Lembke -' 
' We shall most certainly find what we're looking for, sir,' Blum 
said, stepping up to him firmly and placing his right hand on his heart. 
' We shall search his place suddenly early in the morning, showing the 

PETER VERKHOVENSKY IS BUSY 
utmost courtesy to the gentleman himself and acting strictly in ac­
cordance with the letter of the law. The yoWig men, Lyamshin and 
Telyamikov, are quite certain that we shall fmd all we want. They've 
been there many times. No one is well disposed to Mr Verkhovensky. 
Mrs Stavrogin has openly refused to do anything for him any more, 
and every honest man, if there is such a man to be foWld in this un­
civilized town, is convinced that the source of disbelief in God and 
socialist doctrine has always been concealed there. He keeps all the 
prohibited books, Ryleyev's Rc:flectrons and all Herzen's works. I have, 
in any case, got a rough catalogue of his books.' 
'Good heavens, everyone has those books. How simple-minded 
you are , my poor Blum! ' 
'And many political leaflets,' Blum went on, without listening to 
his superior's remarks. ' We shall end by getting on the track of the 
leaflets which are printed here. That young Verkhovcnsky looks very 
suspicious to me, sir.' 
'But you arc mixing up the father and the son. They don't get on 
together. The son openly laughs at his father.' 
'That's only a mask, sir.' 
'Blum, you've sworn to worry me to neath. Just think! He's, :1fter 
all, a person of consequence here. He's been a professor, he's a well­
known man. He'll raise a clamour, and everybody in town will at 
once start making jokes at our expense, and, well, we'll make a mo.:ss 
of everything and - and think, man, what will Mrs Lembke say . . . .' 
. Blum pressed on and did not listen. 
'He was only a lecturer, sir. Only a lecturer, and just a collegiate 
assessor by rank when he retired.' He smote his chest. ' He hasn't any 
marks of distinction and he was dismissed on suspicion of plotting 
against the Government. He's been under police supervision and I'm 
sure he still is. And in view of the disorders, which have come to light 
now, it is most certainly your duty, sir. It's you, sir, who are missing 
the chance of obtaining a distinction by your tacit support of the real 
criminal.' 
'Mrs Lembke! Get out, Blum!' von Lembke cried suddenly on 
hearing his wife's voice in the next room. 
Blum started, but he did not give in. 
'Please, sir, please give me your permission,' he persisted, pressing 
both his hands more firmly to his chest. 

T H E  D EV I LS • PART T W O  
' Get out ! '  von Lembke cried, grinding his teeth. ' Do what you 
like - afterwards - Oh , Lord ! ' 
The curtain was parted and Mrs Lembke came in. She stopped 
majestically at the sight of Blum, giving him a haughty and offensive 
look, as though the very ·presence of that man was an affront to her. 
Blum made her a deep bow, silently and respectfully, and, doubled up 
with respect, tiptoed to the door, with his hands held a little apart. 
Whether he really took Lembke's last hysterical cry as a direct per­
mission to carry out his request, or whether he acted against his con­
science for the direct advantage of his patron, being quite certain that 
all would turn out well in the end, the result of this talk between
-
the 
Governor and his subordinate was, as we shall present! y see, most un­
expected. It amused a great many people ; it received the greatest pos­
sible publicity ; it made Mrs Lembke furious with anger, utter! y dis­
concerting Mr Lembke and throwing him at the most critical time 
into a state of the most lamentable indecision. 
5 
It was a very busy day for Peter Verkhovensky. From von Lembke 
he hurried off to Bogoyavlenskaya Street, but while walking along 
Bykov Street, past the house where Karmazinov was staying, he sud­
denly stopped, grinned, and went into the house. He was told by the 
servant that he was expected, which interested him greatly, for he had 
not warned Karmazinov of his coming visit. 
But the great writer really had been expecting him, and not only 
that day but the day before and the day before that. Three days earlier 
he had given him his manuscript of Mcrci (which he had intended to 
read at the literary matinee on the day of Mrs Lembke's fete). He had 
done it out of kindness, for he was certain that he would agreeably 
flatter the yotmg man's vanity by letting him read the great work be­
forehand. Peter had long noticed that this vain, pampered gentleman, 
who was so offensively unapproachable to anyone but the elect, this 
almost ' statesmanlike' writer, was simply trying to ingratiate himself 
with him, and that with quite unwonted eagerness. I can't help think­
ing that the young man realized at last that Karmazinov, even if he 
did not consider him to be the ringleader of all the secret revolution­
ary organizations in Russia, at least considered him one of the few men 

PETER VERKHOVENSKY I S  B U SY 
who were initiated into all the secrets of the Russian revolution and 
who had an incontestable influence upon the younger generation. 
The state of mind of the ' cleverest man in Russia' interested Peter, but 
for certain reasons he had so far tried to avoid entering into any 
explanations with him. 
The great writer was staying at his sister's house. His sister was the 
wife of a Court chamberlain who owned land in our district. Both of 
them, husband and wife, worshipped their famous relative, but to 
their great regret they were in Moscow during his present visit, so 
that the honour of welcoming him fell to an old lady, a very distant 
and poor relation of the Court chamberlain's, who lived with the 
family and had long been in charge of the housekeeping. Since Mr 
Karmazinov's arrival the whole household walked about on tiptoe. 
The old lady wrote to Moscow almost every day, how he had slept 
and what he had for his dinner, and once she even sent a telegram 
with the news that after a dinner at the Mayor's he had to take a spoon­
ful of a certain medicine. It was only on rare occasions that she dared 
to enter his room, though he treated her courteously, but drily, and 
sp0ke to her orJy when he wanted something. 
When Peter came in, he was having his morning cutlet with half a 
glass of red wine. Peter had been to see him before, and every time he 
found him having his morning cutlet, which he ate in front of him, 
but he never asked the young man to join him in the meal. After the 
cutlet, a small cup of coffee was brought in. The footman, who served 
the food, wore a frock-coat, soft, noiseless boots and gloves. 
'Ah-h ! '  Karmazinov got up from the sofa, wiping his mouth with 
a napkin and with an expression of the purest joy came up to exchange 
kisses with Peter - a characteristic habit of Russians, if they are very 
faԢ10us indeed. 
But Peter knew from experience that while Karmazinov seemed 
eager to exchange kisses, he merely held up his cheek, and so he did 
the same this time ; both their cheeks touched. Karmazinov, without 
showing that he had noticed it, sat down on the sofa and very pleas­
antly pointed to an arm-chair opposite in which Peter sprawled. 
' I  don't suppose you - er - would like any lunch, would yon ? • 
Karmazinov asked, this time contrary to his custom, but of course 
with an air which implied that he expected a polite refusal. 
Peter, however, at once expressed a desire to have lunch. A shadow 

370 
THE DEVILS ' PART TWO 
of offended surprise passed over the face of the host, but only for a 
fraction of a second. He rang nervously for the servant, and in spite 
of his breeding, raised his voice fastidiously as he gave orders for a 
second lunch to be served . 
'What wil you have : a cutlet or coffee ?' he asked once more. 
'A cutlet and coffee, please, and tel him to bring some more wine; 
I'm famished,' replied Peter calmly, scrutinizing his host's clothes. 
Mr Karmazinov was wearing a kind of indoor wadded jacket with 
little mother-of-pearl buttons, but it was very short, which was not 
becoming to his rather prominent belly and his firmly rounded thighs ; 
but tastes differ. A woollen checkered rug covered his knees and 
trailed to the floor, though it was warm in the room. 
' You're not ill, are you ?' Peter observed. 
' No, I'm not ill, but I'm afraid of fal.ing ill in this climate,' the 
writer answered in his shrill voice, scanning every word very tenderly, 
however, and witlt his agreeable, aristocratic lisp. ' I've been expecting 
you since yesterday.' 
'But why ? I didn't promise to come.' 
'That's true, but you have my manuscript. Have you - er - read it ?' 
'Manuscript? What manuscript ?' 
Karmazinov looked terribly surprised. 
'But you've brought it with you, haven't you?' he cried, becoming 
suddenly so alarmed that he even stopped eating and looked panic­
stricken at Peter . 
' Oh, you mean your Bonjour, do you?' 
'Merci.' 
'Very well, Merci. I've forgotten all about it. Afraid I haven't read 
it. I've had no time. I really don't know - it's not in my pockets - must 
have left it on my desk. Don't worry, it'll turn up.' 
' No, I think I'd better send somebody to your place at once. It 
might get lost and, besides, it might be stolen.' 
' Oh, who'd want it? And why are you so afraid ? Mrs Lembke told 
me that you always have several copies made - one abroad at your 
notary's, another in Petersburg, a third in Moscow, and ilie fourth you 
send to your bank, I believe.' 
'But, my dear fellow, Moscow might burn down and my manu­
script with it. No, I think I'd better send for it at once.' 
'Wait, here it is !' Peter said, producing a bundle of notepaper from 

PETER VERKHOVENSKY I S  BUSY 
371 
his back pocket. ' Got a little crumpled, I'm afraid. Would you believe 
it ? It's been lying in my pocket with my handkerchief ever since I 
took it from you. Forgot all about it.' 
Karmazinov seized his manuscript eagerly and, for the time being, 
put it respectfully on a special table ncar him, but so that he could 
keep it in sight every moment. 
' I  don't suppose you read very much, do you ? '  he hissed, unable to 
restrain himself. 
' No, not very much.' 
'And nothing at all in the way of Russian literatnre ?' 
' In the way of Russian literature ? One moment, though, I believe 
I have read something. On the Way, By the Way, or At thω P.ming of 
the Ways, or something of the kind. Can't remember. Read it a long 
tirrte ago, five years ago. I've no time.' 
A short pause ensued. 
'As soon as I arrived I assured everyone that you're a very intelligent 
man and now, I believe, they're all raving about you.' 
'Thank you,' Peter answered calmly. 
Luncheon was brought in. Peter applied himself to his cntlet with 
extraordinary appetite, dispatched it at once, drank his wine and 
gulped down his coffee. 
'This boor,' Karmazinov thought, looking askance at him as he 
finished eating his cutlet and draining his wine to the last gulp, ' this 
boor probably grasped at once the biting irony of my words - and 
I'm sure he's read my manuscript with avidity. He's just lying for 
some good reason ofhis own. But quite likely he isn't lying at all, but 
really is genuinely stupid. I like a man of geniԜ to be a little stupid. 
Isn't he a sort of genius among them? To hell with him, though.' 
He got up from the sofa and began pacing the room from one cor­
ner to another, by way of a constitutional, which he did every day 
after lunch. 
' You're leaving soon ?' asked Peter from his arm-chair, lighting a 
cigarette. 
' I  real I y came to sell my estate, and I'm entirely in the hands of my 
manager.' 
' But didn't you come here because they expected an epidemic there 
after the war ? ' 
' N-no, not entirely for that reason,' Mr Karmazinov continued, 

372 
THE D EVILS • PART TWO 
scanning his sentences good-naturedly, and each rime he turned from 
one corner to the other he threw out his little right foot jerkily, 
though only a little. ' I  really do intend to live as long as possible.' He 
laughed, not without venom. 'There's something in our landed gen­
try that makes them wear out very quickly, in every respect. But I 
mean to wear out as late as possible, and now I am going abroad for 
good; there the climate is better and the houses are of stone and every­
thing much stronger. Europe will last my time, I think. What do you 
think ?' 
'How should I know ? '  
'Well, if the Babylon there really does fall and if its fall be great (and 
I agree with you entirely about that, though I think that it will last 
my time), there's nothing that can fall here in Russia, comparatively 
speaking. We have no stones to crash upon us, and I suppose every­
thing wil dissolve in mud. Holy Russia is least of all capable of offer­
ing resistance to anything. The peasants still carry on·somehow with 
the help of their Russian God, but, according to the latest information, 
the Russian God is very unreliable and scarcely held out against the 
peasant reform. It shook him up a bit, anyway. And what with the 
railways, and what with you . . . .  I'm afraid I don't believe in the Rus­
sian God at all.' 
'And in the European one ?' 
'I don't believe in any. I've been slandered to the Russian youth. 
I've always sympathized with every one of its movements. I was 
shown the revolutionary leaflets you have here. People are puzzled by 
them because they are afraid of their form, but they are all convinced 
of their power, though they may not realize it. Everyone has long ago 
been going downhill and everyone has known fo'r a long time that 
there's nothing they can hold on to. What makes me absolutely con­
vinced of the success of this mysterious propaganda is that Russia to­
day is pre-eminently the only place in the world where anything you 
like may happen without the slightest opposition. I know perfl"ctly 
well why well-to-do Russians all rush abroad and why more and more 
of them go abroad every year. It's simply instinct. The rats are first to 
leave a sinking ship. Holy Russia is a country of wood, of poverty. A 
dangerous cotmtry, a country of vainglorious paupers in the highest 
strata of society, while the overwhelming majority of the people live 
in tumbledown shacks. She'll be glad of any solution. Al you have to 

PETER VERKHOVENSKY IS B USY 
373 
do is to explain it to her. The Government alone still tries to resist, 
but it just waves its cudgel about in the dark and hits its own sup­
porters. Everything here is doomed and sentenced to death. Russia, as 
she is now, has no future. I've become a German and I'm proud of it.' 
' But you began about the leaflets. Tell me everything : what do you 
think of them?' 
'Everyone is afraid of them, so that they must be powerful. They 
openly expose deceit and prove that there's nothing we can get a 
firm grip on in our country, nothing to lean on. They speak aloud, 
while all are silent. What is so irresistible about them (in spite of their 
form) is their hitherto unheard-of boldness in looking the truth 
straight in the face. This ability to look the truth straight in the face is 
characteristic only of the Russians of this generation. No, in Europe 
they are not so brave: theirs is a kingdom of stone, they still have 
something to lean on there. As far as I can see and as far as I can judge, 
the whole essence of the Russian revolutionary idea consists of the 
negation ofhonour. I like its being so boldly and fearlessly expressed. 
No, in Europe they won't understand it yet, but that's just what we 
shall so eagerly embrace here. For a Russian honour is just an unneces­
sary burden. And it always has been a burden, throughout the whole 
of our history. He can be attracted much more by the open " right to 
dishonour". I belong to the older generation and, I confess, I'm still 
in favour of honour, but that's just a matter of habit. I'm still fond of 
the old forms, let us say, out of cowardice. I must somehow carry on 
for the few more years that are left to me.' 
He suddenly stopped short. 
'Good Lord! '  he thought to himself, ' I  go on talking, and he's 
watching me in silence. He wants me to ask him a straight question. 
That's what he's come for. And, by Jove, I will.' 
' Mrs Lembke asked me to find out from you by some subterfuge 
what sort of surprise you are preparing for the ball the day after to­
morrow,' Peter Verkhovensky asked suddenly. 
'Yes,' Karmazinov said with a dignified air, 'there most certainly 
wil be a surprise, and I shall certainly make them all sit up, but I 
shan't tell you my secret.' 
Peter did not insist. 
'Doesn't a certain Shatov live here?' the great writer asked. 'Just 
think of it, and I haven't seen him yet.' 

3 74 
THE D E VILS • PART T W O  
'A very nice chap. What about it ?' 
'Oh, nothing. He seems to be saying all sorts of things. It was he 
who slapped Stavrogin's face, wasn't it ?' 
' Yes.' 
'And what's your opinion of Stavrogin ?' 
' Don't know. A lady-killer, I believe.' 
Karmazinov hated Stavrogin because the latter had taken it into his 
head to ignore him completely. 
' I  daresay,' he said. with a titter, 'the lady-killer will be the first to 
be strung up on a tree, if what they say in those revolutionary leaflets 
comes to pass.' 
' Perhaps even sooner than that,' Peter said suddenly. 
' Serve him right, too,' Karmazinov assented, no longer laughing, 
but apparently in good earnest. 
'You said so once before and, you know, I wid him about it.' 
' Did you really ?' Karmazinov laughed again. 
'He said if he were to be hanged, it would be quite enough if you 
were flogged, and not just as a matter of form, but so that it hurts, 
just as peasants are flogged.' 
Peter took his hat and got up. Kaԝmazinov held out both hands to 
him at parting. 
'And what,' he suddenly squeaked in his honeyed voice and with a 
sort of special intonation, still keeping Peter's hands in his, ' and what 
if what you're planning were actually to happen - when, do you 
think, is it to be ?' 
'How should I know ? '  Peter answered rather rudely. 
Both looked intently into each other's eyes. 
'Just roughly ? Approximately ?' Karmazinov squeaked still more 
sweetly. 
' You'll have time to sell your estate and to clear out, too,' Peter 
muttered still more rudely. 
Both looked at each other even more intently. There was a 
minute's silence. 
' It'll start at the beginning of May and will be over by the first of 
October,' Peter said suddenly. 
'Thank you, thank you very much,' Karmazinov said in a fervent 
voice, pressing Peter's hands. 
'A rat like you will have plenty of time to leave tl1e ship! '  Peter 

PETER VERKHOVENSKY I S  B U S Y 
375 
bought as he went out into the street. ' But if that almost statesman­
ike mind so confidently inquires about the exact time and thanks 
ne so respectfully for the information I've given him, then we no 
onger need have any doubts about ourselves,' he added, grinning. 
Well - well. He isn't such a fool, after all, and - he's only an emi­
:rating rat. A man like him will never tell the police ! '  
He ran off to Filippov's house in Bogoyavlenskaya Street. 
6 
>eter first of all called on Kirilov. The latter was, as usual, alone, and 
:his time he was doing some physical exercises, that is to say, he was 
;tanding with· his legs apart and waving his arms above his head in 
.orne special sort of way. A ball lay on the floor. His breakfast had 
Ԟone cold on the table and had not been cleared away. Peter stood for 
1 minute on the threshold. 
' I  can see you're taking great care of your health,' he said in 
1 loud and cheerful voice as he entered the room. ' What a 
iovely ball, though ; bounces beautifully, too. Is it also for your ex­
!rcises ?' 
Kirilov put on his coat. 
' Yes, that, too, is for my health,' he muttered drily. ' Sit down.' 
' I've only come in for a minute. However, I will sit down. Your 
health is all very well, but I've come to remind you of our agreement. 
The time's approaching in - a certain sense,' he concluded with an 
awkward twist of his body. 
' What agreement ?' 
' What do you mean ԟ what agreement ? '  Peter asked with a sudden 
start. He even looked alarmed. 
' It's not an agreement nor an obligation. Haven't botmd myself to 
do anything. Your mistake.' 
' Look here, what on earth do you mean ?' Peter j umped ur 
'] ust as I like.' 
' Meaning ?' 
'Just as ever.' 
' How am I to understand that ? Does it mean that you're still of th 
same mind ? '  
'It does. Only there's n o  question of any agreement. I haven't 

THE DEVILS • PAJtT TWO 
bound myself to do anything. I promised of my own free wil, and 
now, too, it's of my own free wil.' 
Kirilov offered his explanations in a sharp and scornful voice. 
'Al right, all right, so it is of your own free wil, so long as you 
don't change your mind,' Peter said, sitting down again with a satis­
fied air. 'You're losing your temper over a word. You've become 
very irritable oflate. That's why I've avoided caling on you. Still, I 
was absolutely sure that you wouldn't betray us.' 
'I can't say that I like you very much, but you can be absolutely 
sure. Though I don't recognize betrayal or non-betrayal.' 
' Still, you know,' Peter said, looking alarmed again, 'we must get 
everything settled so that we know where we are. The whole thing 
demands the utmost precision, and you keep on administering shocks 
to me. May I talk it over with you?' 
'Go on,' Kirilov snapped, without looking at him. 
'You decided long ago to commit suicide - I  mean you had such an 
idea in your mind. Am I expressing myself properly? There's no 
mistake, is there?' 
'I've still got the same idea.' 
'Very well. And don't forget that no one has forced you to it.' 
'I should think not. What silly nonsense you talk! '  
'Al right. I'm sorry I expressed myself so stupidly. No doubt it 
would have been very foolish to force you. To continue: you were a 
member of the society during its old organization and disclosed it to 
one of its members.' 
'I didn't disclose it to anybody. I simply told him.' 
'Al right. It would have been absurd to " disclose it", anyway. 
What sort of disclosure is it? You simply told it. Very well.' 
'It isn't very well, because you go on jabbering. I don't owe you 
any explanation, and you wil never understand my ideas. I want to 
commit suicide because I've got such an idea, because I don't hke the 
fear of death, because - because it's not your business to know. What 
do you want? Some tea ? It's cold. Let me get you another glass.' 
Peter had really got hold of the tea-pot and was looking for an 
empty glass. K.irilov went to the cupboard and brought a clean 
glass. 
'I've just had lunch at Karmazinov's,' the visitor observed. 'Then 
I listened to him talking and was covered with perspiration. I ran all 

PETER VERKHOVENSKY I S  BUSY 
377 
he way to your place and also got covered with perspiration. I'm 
lying for something to drink.' 
'Drink it. Cold tea's good.' 
Kirilov resumed his seat and once more stared at the opposite 
:omer of the room. 
'The idea has occurred to the society,' he went on, ' that I could be 
JSeful to them by committing suicide, and that when you get yourself 
n a mess here and the police are looking for those responsible for it, 
should suddenly shoot myself, leaving a letter in which I'd take the 
;lame for everything, so that they wouldn't suspect you for a whole 
rear.' 
'For a couple of days, anyway. Even one day can be precious.' 
'All right. So I was told that ifl had nothing against it I should wait. 
told them I'd wait until the society let me know the time, because it 
nakes no difference to me.' 
'Yes, but remember that you undertook to write your last letter 
with my help and that, on your arrival in Russia, you'd be at my -
well, in a word, at my disposal ; I mean, for that occasion only, of 
:ourԠe. You're quite free to do what you like otherwise,' Peter added 
almost amiably. 
'I didn't undertake it. I agreed to it, because it makes no difference 
to me.' 
'All right, all right. I haven't the least intention of hurting your 
feelings, but -' 
' It's not a question of my feelings.' 
'But don't forget that they collected one hundred and twenty 
thalers for your fares, which means that you've taken money.' 
'Not at all.' Kirilov flushed. 'The money wasn't for that. One 
doesn't take money for that.' 
'One sometimes does.' 
' You're lying. I made a statement in a letter which I sent from 
Petersburg, and I repaid you one hundred and twenty thalers in 
Petersburg ; I repaid you personally - and it was sent off from there 
unless you kept it for yourself.' 
'All right, all right, I don't want to argue about it. It was sent off 
The important thing is that you're still of the same mind as before.' 
'I am. When you come and say : " It's time ! "  I'll carry it all out. 
Well, is it to be soon ?' 

THE UEVILS • PART TWO 
· Not very many days now. But remember we compose the letter! 
together on that very night.' 
'I don't mind if it's the same day. You told me I'd have to take the 
responsibility for the leaflets, didn't you?' 
'And something else.' 
'I shan't take the responsibility for everything.' 
'What won't you be responsible for ?' Peter asked, looking startled 
agam. 
' What I don't choose. That's enough. I don't want to talk about it 
any more.' 
Peter controlled himself and changed the subject. 
'I've something else I want to talk to you about,' he said. ' Will you 
spend this evening with us ?  It's Virginsky's birthday, and we'll al 
meet there on this pretext.' 
'Don't want to.' 
'Please do come. It's important. We must create an impression by 
our numbers and - and our faces. You've a face - I mean, you have a 
fateful face.' 
'You think so ?' Kirilov laughed. 'Al right, I'll come, but not be­
cause of my face. When ? '  
' Oh, as early as possible. About half-past six. And, you know, you 
can go in, sit down and not speak to anyone, however many there 
may be there. Only please don't forget to bring a pencil and a piece 
of paper with you.' 
' What's that for?' 
' What dilference does it make to you ? It's my special request. 
You'll sit there without speaking to anyone, listen, and just pretend 
to take a few notes from time to time. You can draw something, if 
you like.' 
'What nonsense ! What for?' 
' But what dilference does it make to you? You keep saying that 
it's al one to yolL' 
'No - what for? '  
'I'll tell you. Because one member of our society, the inspector, has 
stayed behind in Moscow, and I told someone here that the inspector 
might pay us a visit. They'll think that you are the inspector, and as 
you've already been here three weeks, they'll be even more surprised.' 
'Hocus-pocus. There's no inspector in Moscow.' 

PETER VERKHOVBNSKY I S  BUSY 
379 
'Al right, so there isn't. To hell with him! But what business is that 
,f yours, and what sort of trouble wil it be to you ? You are a member 
tf the society, aren't you?' 
'Tell them that I'm the inspector. I'll sit there without uttering a 
1'/ord . But I don't want pencil and paper .' 
'But why not?' 
'Don't want them.' 
Peter got very angry; he even went green in the face, but again he 
:ontrolled himsel£ He got up and took his hat. 
'Is he here?' he asked suddenly in an undertone. 
'Yes.' 
'That's good. I'll soon get him out of here. Don't worry.' 
'I'm not worrying. He only spends the night here. The old woman 
s in the hospital. Her daughter-in-law is dead. I've been here alone for 
:wo days. I've shown him the place in the fence where a board can be 
:aken out. He crawls through. No one sees.' 
'I shall take him away soon.' 
'He told me he had many places where he could spend a night.' 
'Be is lying. The police are after him, and here it's safe so far. You 
!on't discuss things with him, do you?' 
'I do. Al night. He calls you awful names. I've been reading Rev­
elation to him at night. We have tea, too. He listened. Yes, he was 
interested, very interested, the whole night.' 
'Damn it, you'll convert him to Christianity ! '  
'But he is a Christian. Don't worry. He'll kill them. Why do you 
want to kil?' 
'No, I don't want him for that. I've other plans for him. Does 
Shatov know about Fedka? '  
'I don't talk to Shatov. Don't see him.' 
'He isn't angry, is he ?' 
'No, we're not angry, but just avoid each other. Spent too much 
time in America together.' 
' I'm going to call on him now.' 
'As you like.' 
'Stavrogin and I may come and see you after the meeting, about 
ten.' 
'Do.' 
' I  have some important matter to discuss with him. Look here, 

THE DEVILS · PART TWO 
make me a present of your ball. You don't want it any more now, do 
you? I may use it for my exercises. I can pay you for it, if you wish.' 
'Take it. I don't want your money.' 
Peter put the ball in the back pocket of his coat. 
'But I'll give you nothing against Stavrogin,' he muttered as he sԼw 
his visitor out. 
Peter glanced at him in surprise, but did not reply. 
Kirilov's last words disconcerted Peter greatly; he had scarcely time 
to make up his mind what they could mean, but as he was walking up 
the stairs to Shatov's room he did his best not to look displeased but 
was as amiable as he could. Shatov was at home and a little indisposed. 
He was lying on his bed, but was fully dressed. 
' What awful luck ! '  Peter cried from the doorway. 'Are you seri­
ously ill ?' 
The amiable expression suddenly vanished from his face ; his eyes 
flashed with hatred. 
' Not at al,' Shatov replied, jumping up nervously. ' I'm not ill at 
all ; just a little headache . . . .  
' 
He looked a little lost. The sudden appearance of such a visitor 
alarmed him. 
' I've come to you on a business which does not allow for any ill­
ness,' Peter began quickly and in a rather imperious tone. ' May I sit 
down ?' He sat down. ' Please sit down on your bed again. So. On the 
pretext of Virginsky's birthday some of our members will hold a 
meeting at his place. However, there's not going to be anything more 
- we've taken all the necessary measures. I shall come with Nicholas 
Stavrogin. I shouldn't, of course, have dragged you there, for I know 
your present frame of mind - I mean, we don't want to make you feel 
uncomfortable - not that we're afraid you'd inform the police. But, 
as things have turned out, you'll have to come. You'll meet there the 
people with whom we shall have fmally to decide how you are to 
leave the society and to whom you are to hand over what you've got. 
We shall arrange it very quietly. I'll take you into some corner. 
There'll be lots of people there, and there's no reason why they should 
all know. I must say I had to do a bit of talking on your behalf, but 
now I think that they, too, wil agree on condition that you hand over 
the printing press and al the papers. After that you can go where you 
like.' 

PETER VERKHOVENSKY IS BUSY 
Shatov listened, frowning and resentful. The nervous fear he had 
felt a moment earlier had left him completely. 
' I  don't recognize any obligation on my part to give an account to 
anyone you damn well may appoint,' he declared categorically. ' No 
one has a right to set me at liberty.' 
• I'm afraid that's not quite so. A lot of things have been entrusted to 
you. You hԽ no right to break with LIS just like that. And, fmally, 
you made no clear statement about it, so that you put them in an 
ambiguous position.' 
' I  stated my position clearly in writing as soon as I arrived here.' 
' No, it wasn't clear at all,' Peter objected calmly. ' For instance, I 
sent you A Noble Character to print here and keep the copies in your 
place until called for. Also two leaflets. You returned it all with your 
ambiguous letter which did not mean anything.' 
' I  refused point blank to print them.' 
' Yes, you refused, but not point blank. You wrote that you 
couldn't, but you didn't explain why. " I  can't" isn't the same as " I  
don't want to". One might have thought that you couldn't print 
them for fmancial reasons. That's how it was Lmderstood, and they 
thought that you were still willing to continue your connexion with 
the society, and hence they could have entrusted you with some other 
job and, as a result, have compromised themselves. Here they main­
tain that you simply wanted to deceive them so that you might inform 
the police when you received some important communication. I de­
fended you as much as I could and showed them your brief note of a 
couple oflines as evidence in your favour. But, having re-read it now, 
I had to admit that your two lines are far from clear and are liable to 
be misleading.' 
' So you very carefully preserved my letter, did you ?' 
'The fact that I kept it means nothing ; I've got it still.' 
' Well, to hell with it ! '  Shatov cried furiously. ' Let your fools think 
that I've informed the police. What do I care ? I'd like to see what you 
can do to me! '  
' You'd be put on a black list and hanged at the first success of the 
revolution.' 
'That's when you seize power and conquer Russia ?' 
'You needn't laugh. I repeat, I did my best to defend you. But what­
ever your attitude, I'd still advise you to come to the meeting 

THE DEVILS · PART TWO 
to-night. Why al these meaningless words from false pride? Wouldn't 
it be much better to part friends ?  In any case, you'll have to hand over 
the printing press, the type, and the old papers. We could discuss 
that.' 
' I'll come,' Shatov muttered, looking down thoughtfully. 
Peter kept casting sidelong glances at him from his chair. 
'Wil Stavrogin be there?' Shatov asked suddenly, raising his head. 
'Most certainly.' 
' Ha, ha! ' 
Again they were silent for a minute. Shatov was grinning scornfully 
and irritably. 
'And what about that rotten Noble Character of yours which I re­
fused to print? Has it been published ?' 
'It has.' 
'You're making schoolboys believe that Herzen himself wrote it in 
your album, aren't you ?' 
'Yes, Herzen himsel(' 
Again they were silent for about three minutes. At length Shatov 
got up from the bed. 
'Get out of here! I don't want to be in the same room with you ! '  
'I'm going,' Peter replied rather cheerfully, getting up at once. 
'Just one more thing : Kirilov is al by himself in his cottage without 
a maidservant, isn't he?' 
' Yes, he's al by himself there. Go, please; I can't stand being in the 
same room with you! '  
' Well, you're a fine fellow now,' Peter thought to himself gaily as 
he went out into the street. ' You'll be a fme fellow in the evening, 
too, and that's just how I want you to be. I couldn't wish for anything 
better ! The God of the Russians himself seems to be helping me! '  
7 
He must have been very busy that day running about from one place 
to another; and apparently successfully - to judge from the self-satis­
fied expression on his face when, exactly at six o'clock that evening, 
he called on Stavrogin. But he was not at once admitted to Stavrogin' s 
room; Maurice Drozdov was having an interview with Stavrogin 
behind the locked door of the latter's study. This piece of news 

PETER VERKHOVENSKY IS B USY 
immediately disturbed him. He sat down close to the door ef the study 
to wait for the visitor to go away. He could hear the conversation, but 
could not make out the words. The visit did not last long; soon he 
heard a noise, the sound of a loud and sharp voice, then the door 
opened and Drozdov came out, looking as white as a sheet. He did not 
notice Peter, and walked away quickly. Peter at once rushed into the 
study. 
I cannot omit a detailed account of the very brief interview of the 
two 'rivals' - an interview which seemed impossible in the circum­
stances, but which had nevertheless taken place. 
It happened like this. Stavrogin was taking an after-dinner nap on 
the sofa in his study when the butler announced the arrival of the un­
expected visitor. When he heard his name, Stavroginjumped up, un­
able to believe it. But presently a smile appeared on his lips - a smile 
of haughty triumph and, at the same time, of blank, incredulous as­
tonishment. As he came in, Drozdov was apparently struck by this 
curious smile; at least, he suddenly stopped in the middle of the room, 
as though undecided whether to go any farther or retrace his steps. 
His host, however, at once assumed a different expression, and with a 
look of grave perplexity took a step towards him. Drozdov did not 
accept the hand Stavrogin held out to him, pulled up a chair awkward­
ly, and, without uttering a word, sat down before his host, without 
waiting to be asked. Stavrogin sat down on the sofa facing him 
obliquely and waited, gazing in silence at Drozdov. 
'Marry Miss Lisa, if you can,' Drozdov suddenly said, making him 
a present of the girl, and the curious part of it was that from the tone 
of his voice it was impossible to say whether it was a request, a piece 
of advice, a concession, or an order. 
Stavrogin still remained silent, but his visitor had apparently said al 
he had come to say, and he kept looking straight at Stavrogin, expect­
ing a reply. 
'If I am not mistaken, and I'm informed that it is indeed so, Lisa is 
already engaged to you,' Stavrogin said at last. 
'She is,' Drozdov confirmed in a clear and firm voice. 
'You haven't quarrelled, have you ? You - you must forgive me for 
mentioning it, Mr Drozdov .' 
'No, she "loves and respects " me - those are her words. Her words 
are most precious to me, sir.' 

T H E  D E VILS · PART T W O  
' I  don't doubt it.' 
' But you ought to know that even if she were standing at the altar 
and vou were to call her, she'd leave me and everyone else and go to 
you.' 
' From the altar ? '  
' Even after the wedding ceremony.' 
'Aren't you mistaken ?' 
' No, I'm not mistaken. Out of her intense hatred of you, a hatred 
that is absolutely sincere, there come every. moment flashes of love 
and - inf
.
1tuation - the most sincere and immeasurable love and - in­
fatuation ! On the other hand, out of the love that she feels for me, a 
love that is also sincere, there come every moment flashes of hatred -
oh, the most intense hatred ! I could never have imagined such - such 
metamorphoses.' 
' But I'm surprised that you should have taken upon yourself to 
come here to dispose of Lisa's hand. Have you any right to do so ? 
Has she authorized you ? '  
Drozdov frowned and lowered his head for a minute. 
'That's all words on your part,' he said suddenly, ' revengeful and 
triumphant words. I'm sure you can read between the lines, and do 
you really think this is the time for petty vanity ? Aren't you satisfted 
yet ? Must I go into it in detail and dot my i's and cross my t's ? AU 
right, I will do so, if you are so anxious to witness my humiliation : I 
have no right whatever, and there can be no question of any author­
ization. Lisa knows nothing about it, but her fiance is otfhis head and 
should be locked up in a lunatic asylum, and, to crown all, has come 
to tell vou about it himself You're the only man in the whole world 
who can make her happy, and I'm the only one to make her unhappy. 
You arc after her, you are pursuing her, but - I don't know why - you 
won't marry her. If it is a lovers' quarrel that vou had abroad and if, 
to make it good, you have to sacriftce me - do so. She is too unhappy, 
and I cannot bear it. My words are not an order or a permission, and 
there is therefore no reason why your vanity should be hurt. If you 
had wished to take my place at the altar, you could have done it with­
out any permission on my part, and I should not, of course, have had 
to come with my mad proposals, particularly as now there can no 
longer be any question of our marriage. I can't lead her to the altar 
when I feel that I've acted like a blackguard, can I ?  For what I'm 

PETER VERKHOVENSKY IS BUSY 
doing now and the fact that I'm giving her to you, her worst enemy, 
is in my opinion so discreditable a thing that I shall never get over it.' 
'Are you going to shoot yourself on our wedding day?' 
'No, much later. Why stain her bridal dress with my blood ? Quite 
possibly I shall not shoot myself at all, either now or later.' 
'I take it that by saying that you merely wish to set my mind at rest 
- or do you?' 
'Your mind? What can a few more drops ofblood mean to you?' 
He turned pale and his eyes glittered. For a minute they were silent. 
'I'm sorry I've asked you those questions,' Stavrogin began once 
more. ' Some of them I had no right to ask you, but one question I 
have the right to ask you: tell me, what facts have led you to form a 
conclusion as to my feelings for Lisa? I mean your assumption of the 
strength of my feelings which you seem to be so sure about that you 
came here and - took the risk of such a proposal.' 
'What do you mean?' Drozdov cried with a start. ' Haven't you 
been trying to get her? Aren't you still trying to get her, and don't 
you want her any more ?' 
'I must say that, generally speaking, I dislike discussing my feelings 
for any woman with anyone, no matter whom, except the woman 
herself. I'm sorry, but I'm afraid that's the sort of queer person I am. 
But instead I shall tell you the whole truth about myself: I am married, 
and it's quite impossible for me either to marry or to try to " get" 
anyone.' 
Drozdov was so taken aback by these words that he fell back in his 
chair and for some time stared speechlessly at Stavrogin. 
'You know, I never thought of that,' he muttered. 'You said that 
morning that you were not married and - and I believed you were not 
married.' 
He turned terribly pale; suddenly he banged his fist on the table 
with all his might. 
'If after this admission you won't leave Lisa alone, and if you make 
her unhappy, I'll knock your brains out with a stick like a dog in a 
ditch! '  
He jumped to his feet and walked quickly out o f  the room. 
When Peter ran into the room he fmmd Stavrogin in a most un­
expected frame of mind. 
' Oh, it's you! '  Stavrogin burst out laughing at the top of his voice, 

THE D E V I L S  • PART T W O  
and he seemed to be laughing at Peter, who had rushed into the room 
looking so curious. 
' So you've been listening at the keyhole, have you ? Wait a minute. 
Now what have you come for ?  I believe I promised you something. 
Oh, yes, I remember : " our" meeting ! Let's go. I'm very glad, and 
you couldn't have thought of anything more appropriate at this 
moment.' 
He grabbed his hat, and both of them at once left the house. 
'Are you laughing in anticipation of meeting " our" crowd ?' Peter 
cried gaily in an ingratiating voice, sometimes trying to walk beside 
Stavrogin on the narrow brick pavement, and sometimes running 
down into the mud of the road ; for his companion was completely 
unaware that he was walking in the middle of the pavement and 
leaving no room for anyone else. 
' I'm not laughing at all,' Stavrogin replied in a loud and cheerful 
voice. ' On the contrary, I'm sure that they are all extremely serious 
people.' 
' " Dismal blockheads ", as you were good enough to call them on 
one occasion.' 
'There can be nothing more amusing than a dismal blockhead.' 
' Oh, you mean Drozdov, don't you ?  I'm sure he came to give up 
his fiancee to you. Didn't he ? It was I who asked him indirectly - be­
lieve it or not. And if he won't give her up, we'll take her away from 
him ourselves, won't we ?' 
Peter, of course, realized the risk he was running in venturing on 
such dangerous ground, but when he was excited he preferred to risk 
anything rather than remain in ignorance. Stavrogin just laughed. 
'And you still hope to help me ?' he asked. 
'If you ask me to. But do you know there is a better way ?' 
' I  know your way.' 
' No, no. That is a secret so far. Only remember that a secret costs 
money.' 
'I know what it costs,' Stavrogin muttered under his breath, but he 
controlled himself and was silent. 
'How much ? What did you say ?' Peter gave a start. 
' I  said : to hell with you and your secret! You'd better tell me who 
you have got there. I know that we're going to a birthday party, but 
who is going to be there ?' 

PETER VERKHO VENSKY T S  BUSY 
'Oh, the whole damn crowd. Even Kirilov.' 
'Are all of them members of circles ?' 
'You're in the devil of a hurry, aren't you ? We haven't formed 
even one group here so far.' 
'How, then, did you distribute so many political leaflets ?' 
' Where we are going now there are only four members of the 
group. The rest, in expectation of being admitted, keep spying on one 
another and come running to me with their reports. A reliable lot. 
All of it material that we have to organize before we clear out. How­
ever, you wrote the rules yourself, so there is no need to explain.' 
. ' Well, do you find it hard going ? Any hitch ?' 
' Hard going ? Couldn't be better. I'll tell you something really 
funny : the first thing that creates a tremendous impression is a uni­
form. There's nothing more powerful than a uniform. I purposely in­
vent titles and appointments : I have secretaries, secret emissaries, 
treasurers, chairmen, registrars and their assistants - they lap it all up, 
they love it. The next powerful force is, of course, sentimentality. You 
know, socialism among us spreads chiefly because of sentimentality. 
The only trouble is the second lieutenants who bite people. However 
careful you are, you're sure to get into trouble. Then come the down­
right swindlers, though I must say that they aren't perhaps such a bad 
lot; sometimes, indeed, they are very useful, but one has to spend a 
great deal of time on them : they must be kept under constant observa­
tion. And, well, fmally, the main force - the cement that holds every­
thing together - is their being ashamed of possessing an opinion of 
their own. Yes, indeed, that is a most wonderful force ! And who has 
worked so much, who is the " dear man " who has laboured so hard 
that not a single idea of their own has been left in their heads ! They 
think it's a disgraceful thing! '  
'But if so, why are you so worried ?' 
' Why, if a chap is just lying about gaping at everybody, you can't 
help grabbing him. Don't you seriously believe in the possibility of 
success ? I see, you have faith, but the will is wanting. It's just with 
people like this that success is possible. I tell you they'll go through 
fire for me. All I have to do is to raise my voice and tell them that they 
are not sufficiently " liberal ". The fools reproach me for having de­
ceived them about the central committee and its "innumerable 
branches". You once blamed me for it yourself, but what sort of 

THE DEVILS ' PART TWO 
deceit is it? You and I are the central committee. As for the branches, 
there will be as many of them as you like.' 
'What a rabble! '  
'Good material. They, too, will come in useful.' 
'And you're still counting on me ?' 
'You're the boss. You're a force. I shall only be at your side, your 
secretary. We, you know, will get into our bark, our oars of maple, 
our sails of silk, the fair maiden Lisa at the helm - or how the hell does 
that ballad go -' 
' Got stuck,' Stavrogin burst out laughing. 'No, my dear fellow, let 
me add a little introduction to your fairy-tale. Can you count on 
your fingers the people who can be accepted as members of your 
circles? Al this is just bureaucracy and sentimentality - all this is just 
so much cement, but there's one thing that is much better: persuade 
four members of the circle to murder a fifth on the excuse that he is 
an informer and you'll at once tie them all up in one knot by the blood 
they've shed. They'll be your slaves. They won't dare to rebel and call 
you to account. Ha, ha, ha! ' 
' Well, well,' thought Peter to himself, 'you'll pay dearly for those 
words, my dear chap, and this very evening, too. You go a little too 
far.' 
So, or almost so, Peter must have thought to himself. However, 
they were already approaching Virginsky's house. 
'I suppose you must have told them that I'm a member from 
abroad who is in touch with the lnternationale - a sort of inspector ?' 
Stavrogin asked suddenly. 
'No, not an inspector. You won't be the inspector. But you are one 
of the founder-members from abroad, who knows the most import­
ant secrets - that's the part you have to play. You wil, of course, make 
a speech, won't you?' 
'What gave you that idea ?' 
'You simply must make a speech now.' 
Stavrogin was so surprised that he stopped dead in the middle of the 
street not far from a street lamp. Peter met his stare calmly and arro­
gantly. Stavrogin spat and walked on. 
'And are you going to make a speech ?' he suddenly asked Peter. 
'No, I'd rather listen to you.' 
' Confound you, you give me an idea! '  

' 
AT VIRGINSKY S 
' What idea?' Peter rasped out. 
'Perhaps I shall make a speech, but I shall give you a thrashing after­
wards - a jolly good thrashing, you know.' 
'By the way, I told Karmazinov this morning that you said he 
ought to be thrashed, and not only as a matter of form but as they 
flog peasants, til it hurts.' 
'But I never said anything of the kind, ha, ha ! ' 
'Never mind. Se non e vero.' 
'Well, thanks - thanks a lot.' 
'Do you know what Karmazinov said ? That our creed is in essence 
a negation of honour and that the easiest way in which a Russian 
could be won over is by telling him frankly that he has a right to be 
dishonourable.' 
'Excellently put ! Golden words ! '  Stavrogin cried. 'A bull' s eye ! 
The right to be dishonourable - why, this ought to make everybody 
come running to us. No one wil be left behind ! But, look here, Verk­
hovensky, you're not by any chance a member of the secret police, are 
you? ' 
' rf you really thought so, you wouldn't have said it aloud.' 
'I understand, but we're by ourselves.' 
'No, for the time being I'm not a member of the secret police. All 
right, here we are. Assume the right expression, Stavrogin. I always 
do when I go in. Try to look as grim as possible. That's all you need. 
It's very simple really.' 
At Virginsky' s 
VIRGINSKY lived in his own house, or rather in his wife's house in 
Muravyinaya Street. It was a wooden bungalow, and there were no 
lodgers in it. On the pretext of Virginsky 's birthday party, about fifteen 
people had gathered there ; but the party was not at all like an ordinary 
provincial birthday party. From the very begining of their married 
life, the Virginskys had decided once and for all that it was silly to invite 
people to a birthday party and that there was 'nothing to be so glad 
about'. In a few years they had somehow managed to withdraw from 

390 
T H E  D E V I L S · PART T W O  
all society. Though a man o f  ability and far from poor, people for some 
reason regarded him as an eccentric fellow who was fond of seclusion 
and who, in addition, talked ' disdainfully '. Mrs Virginsky herself, a 
professional midwife, was for that very reason considered to occupy 
the lowest rung of the social ladder, lower even than the priest's wife, 
in spite of the fact that her husband had been an army officer. But 
there was no trace of the humility proper to her social station about her. 
And after her most stupid and inexcusably candid affair on principle 
with a scoundrel like Captain Lebyatkin, even the most indulgent of 
our ladies turned away from her with singular contempt. But Mrs 
Virginsky took it all as though it were just what she needed. It was re­
markable that the very same high-and-mighty ladies always sought 
. the professional services of Mrs Virginsky, if they happened to fmd 
themselves in an interesting condition, completely ignoring the other 
three midwives of our town. She was sent for even by the country 
families of our district - so great was everybody's faith in her know­
ledge, luck, and skill in emergency cases. In the end she confmed her 
practice entirely to the wealthiest houses ; for she had quite an in­
ordinate love of money. Fully aware of her power, she made no at­
tempt to curb her character. She would, perhaps on purpose, frighten 
her nervous patients in the best houses by some incredible nihilist dis­
regard of the decencies of social behaviour or by jeering at everything 
'holy ' just when the 'holy' might have come in most useful. Our 
town doctor Rozanov, who was. also an obstetrician, positively as­
serted that on one occasion, when a patient in labour was screaming 
and calling on the name of the Almighty, Mrs Virginsky's atheistic 
remarks, which came unexpectedly like ' a  pistol shot', so scared the 
patient that it helped to bring about a quick delivery. But though a 
nihilist, Mrs Virginsky, when necessary, did not disdain social or old­
fashioned prejudices, provided they could be of advantage to her. She 
would, for instance, never miss a christening of a baby she had brought 
into the world, and she always arrived wearing a green silk dress with 
a train, and always made up the hair at the back of her head into curls 
and ringlets, though at any other time she seemed to take a special 
delight in her untidy appearance. And though during the christening 
ceremony she always preserved ' a  most insolent air ', to the great em­
barrassment of the officiating clergy, when it was over she invariably 
handed round the champagne herself (it was for that reason that she 

AT VIRGINSKY ' s 
391 
came and dressed up), and woe betide any guest who, having taken 
the glass, forgot to put some money on the tray for her 'tip'. 
The guests who gathered that evening at Virginsky's (most of them 
were men) had a sort of casual and special look. There were neither 
refreshments nor cards. Two tables were drawn together in the middle 
of the large drawing-room, which was papered with rather old blue 
wallpaper. The tables were covered with a large and not very clean 
table-doth, and two samovars were boiling on them. A huge tray 
with twenty-five glasses and a basket with white French bread, cut 
into a great number of small pieces, just as in a high-class boarding­
school for boys and girls, stood at one end of the table. The tea was 
poured out by Mrs Virginsky's sister, an unmarried woman of thirty, 
a taciturn and venomous creature, with hair that was almost colour­
less and no eyebrows, a staunch upholder of the 'new' ideas, of whom 
Virginsky was mortally afraid in his domestic life. There were only 1 
three ladies in the room: Mrs Virginsky herself, her browless sister, 
and Virginsky's sister, a young girl who had just arrived from Peters­
burg. Mrs Virginsky, a lady of a very imposing appearance, good­
looking but rather dishevelled, wearing an everyday greenish woollen 
dress, was sitting and gazing at her guests with bold eyes as though 
she were in haste to say with her look: 'You see, I'm not a bit afraid 
of anything.' The newly arrived Miss Virginsky, a student and a 
nihilist, who was also rather good-looking, red-cheeked, short, plump, 
and round as a little ball, was sitting beside Mrs Virginsky, almost in 
her travelling clothes. She held a roll of paper in her hand and gazed 
at the guests with impatient, dancing eyes. Virginsky himself felt a 
littie indisposed that evening, but he came out and sat in an arm-chair 
by the table. The guests were also all sitting down, and there was the 
feeling of an official meeting in the staid manner in which they all 
occupied their seats round the table. They were all evidendy expecting 
something, and in the meantime carried on a loud and irrelevant con­
versation. When Stavrogin and Verkhovensky appeared, a sudden 
hush fell on the room. 
But I think I ought to give a few explanations to make the position 
clear. 
I can't help thinking that these people had assembled that evening 
at Virginsky's house in the agreeable hope ofhearing something speci­
ally interesting, and that they had been told beforehand what to 

392 
T H E  D EV I L S · PART T W O  
expect. They represented the flower of the reddest 'liberalism' o f  our 
ancient town, and had been very carefully selected by Virginsky for 
this ' meeting'. I may add that some of them (not very many, though) 
had never visited him before. No doubt, most of the guests had no 
clear idea what exactly they were to expect. It is true that they all 
looked upon Verkhovensky at the time as an emissary from abroad 
who was armed with plenary powers. That notion had somehow been 
generally accepted at once, and naturally appealed to them. And yet 
among the small number of citizens who had met under the pretext 
of celebrating a birthday there were a few who had received definite 
proposals. Peter Verkhovensky had succeeded in forming a 'group 
of five' in our town just like the one he had formed in Moscow and 
the one which, as it now appears, he had formed among the army 
officers of our district. I am told that he had another one in the Kh-v 
province. These five chosen ones were sitting now at the general 
table, and very skilfully assumed the air of ordinary men, so that no 
one would notice them. They were - since it is no longer a secret -
first, Liputin, then Virginsky himself, the long-eared Shigalyov, who 
was Mrs Virginsky's brother, Lyamshin, and lastly, a certain Tolka­
chenko - a queer fellow, a man of about forty who was famous for 
his great knowledge of the common people, mostly rogues and rob­
bers. He was fond of visiting low pubs (though not entirely for the 
study of the common people) and he liked to impress us with his 
shabby clothes, tarred boots, the cunning look of his screwed-up eyes 
and colloquial expressions of a rather florid kind. Lyamshin had once 
or twice brought him to Stepan Verkhovensky's parties, where he did 
not, however, create any special effect. He used to make an appear­
ance in our town only occasionally, mostly when he was out of a job, 
and he was employed on the railway. Every one of these five public 
men had formed the first group in the fervent belief that it was only 
one among hlllldreds and thousands of similar groups of five men 
scattered all over Russia, and that they all were connected with some 
vast and mysterious central organization which was in turn intimately 
connected with the European world revolutionary movement. But I 
must regretfully confess that even at that time there were already signs 
of dissension among them. The trouble was that though they had been 
waiting since the spring for the arrival of Peter Verkhovensky, first 
anounced to them by Tolkachenko and then by Shigalyov, who had 

AT VIR GINS KY ' s  
393 
just returned to our town, though they had been expecting great 
miracles from him, and though they had joined the group at once and 
without the slightest hesitation at his first summons, all of them felt 
for some reason let down, and I can't help thinking that it was be­
cause of the promptitude with which they had agreed to join the 
group. They had joined, of course, from a high-minded feeling of 
shame, so that people should not say afterwards that they had not the 
courage to join ; but, for all that, Peter Verkhovensky ought to have 
appreciated their valiant and selfless action, and as a reward at least 
told them some really important piece of news. But Verkhovensky 
had not the slightest intention of satisfying their legitimate curiosity, 
and never told them anything that he did not tell everybody else; 
generally speaking, he treated them with quite extraordinary severity 
and even casualness. This was absolutely exasperating, and one mem­
ber of the group, Shigalyov, was already agitating among the rest ' to 
demand an account' of him, but, naturally, not now at Virginsky's 
where so many strangers had gathered. 
Apropos of these strangers, I have an idea that the above-mentioned 
members of the group of five were inclined to suspect the presence of 
members of other unknown groups at Virginsky's party that evening, 
formed in our town according to the identical methods of the secret 
organization by the same Verkhovensky, so that in the end everyone 
in the drawing-room suspected everyone else, and assumed an air of 
importance, which gave the whole meeting a rather confused and 
even a slightly romantic character. However, there were people there 
who were quite above suspicion. Such, for instance, was a serving 
army Major, a close relation of Virginsky's, a perfectly innocent man, 
who had not been invited, but had come of his own accord to con­
gratulate Virginsky on his birthday, so that it was quite impossible 
not to receive him. But Virginsky was not in the least worried be­
cause the Major could not possibly 'inform the police ', for, though 
being a stupid man, he had all his life showed a liking for associating 
with extreme ' liberals' ;  he did not sympathize with their views him­
self, but he was very fond of listening to them. What's more, he had 
even been compromised once. It had happened that when he was a 
young man thousands of copies of Herzen's periodical The Bell, as 
well as political leaflets, had passed through his hands, and though he 
had been afraid even to open them, he would have considered it 

394 
THE DEVILS • PART TWO 
absolutely dishonourable to refuse to distribute them - and there are 
such Russians even to this day. 
The rest of the guests represented either persons whose self-esteem 
had been crushed and who had become embittered because of it, or 
those who were still in the first generous flush of youthful ardour. The 
former included two or three teachers, one of whom, a lame man of 
forty-five, a master of our local secondary school, was a very spiteful 
and exceedingly vain man, and two or three army officers. Of the 
latter one was a very young artillery officer who had arrived straight 
from his military college only a short time before, a taciturn boy who 
had not yet had time to make any friends and who now suddenly 
turned up at Virginsky's. He had a pencil in his hand and, while 
scarcely taking part in the conversation, kept making notes in his 
notebook. They all saw him do it, but for some reason they all pre­
tended not to notice it. The idle divinity student who had helped 
Lyamshin put the indecent photographs into the gospel-woman's 
pack was there too. He was a big fellow with free-and-easy, but at the 
same time mistrustful manners, with an eternally sardonic smile, and 
yet with the calm air of triumphant conviction of his own superiority. 
There was also present - I don't know why - the nasty-minded and 
prematurely aged son of our mayor to whom I have already referred 
in telling the story of the second lieutenant's little wife. Finally, there 
was a hot-headed and tousled schoolboy of eighteen who sat with the 
grim look of a young man whose dignity has been wounded and who 
was suffering visibly because of his eighteen years. This youngster was 
already the head of an independent small group of conspirators which 
had been formed in the top class of his school, which fact came to 
light - to everyone's astonishment - afterwards. 
I haven't mentioned Shatov : he was sitting at the farthest end of the 
table, his chair pushed back a little from the row, his eyes fixed on the 
ground. He was gloomily silent, refused tea and bread, and kept 
his cap in his hand all the time, as though wishing to indicate that 
he was not one of the guests but was there on business, and would 
get up and go away when he had a mind to. Kirilov took a seat not 
far from him. He, too, was very silent, but he did not look on 
the ground; on the contrary, he scrutinized every speaker with a 
motionless stare of his lustreless eyes and listened to everything with­
out the slightest excitement or surprise. Some of the guests who 

' 
AT V I R G I N S KY S 
395 
had never seen him before cast stealthy and inquisitive glances at 
him. 
I don't know whether Mrs Virginsky herself knew anything about 
the existence of the group of five. I imagine she knew everything and, 
no doubt, from her husband. The girl student, of course, took no part 
in anything, but she had a worry ofher own : she intended to stay in 
our town only for a day or two, and then to travel farther and farther 
afield, visiting every university town ' to take a sympathetic interest 
in the sufferings of the poor students and to arouse them to protest'. 
She was taking with her several hundred copies of a lithographed ap­
peal which, I believe, was her own composition. It is remarkable that 
the schoolboy conceived a deadly hatred for her at the first glance, 
though it was the first time in his life that he had seen her, and she 
fully reciprocated his feeling. The Major was an uncle of hers and met 
her that evening for the first time in ten years. When Stavrogin and 
Verkhovensky entered the room, her cheeks were as red as cran­
berries : she had only a minute before had a furious argument with her 
uncle about his views on the woman question. 
2 
Verkhovensky sprawled with amazing unconcern in the chair at the 
head of the table almost without greeting anyone politely, but in spite 
of the fact that everybody was waiting for them, they all, as though by 
a word of command, pretended that they had scarcely noticed them. 
Mrs Virginsky turned severely to Stavrogin as soon as he took his seat. 
' Stavrogin, do you want tea?' 
' Yes, thank you,' he replied. 
'Tea for Stavrogin,' she ordered her sister. 'And,' she turned to 
Verkhovensky, 'what about you ?' 
'Thanks, I'll have some tea, of course. What a question to ask your 
visitors ! And let me have some cream too, please. You always give 
one such horrible stuff instead of tea, and at a name-day party, too.' 
'Why, do you recognize name-days ?' the girl student laughed sud­
denly. ' We were just discussing it.' 
'Old stuff,' the schoolboy muttered from the other end of the table. 
'What is old stuff? To get rid of prejudices, even the most inno­
cent, isn't old-fashioned. On the contrary, it's still quite a new thing, 

THE D EV I L S  • PART TWO 
to everyone's disgrace,' the girl student declared promptly darting 
forward in her chair. 'Besides, there are no innocent prejudices,' she 
added fiercely. 
' I  merely wanted to say,' cried the schoolboy, getting terribly ex­
cited, 'that prejudices, of course, are old-fashioned and ought to be 
extirpated, but that so far as name-days are concerned everybody 
knows already that they are stupid and very old-fashioned, indeed, a 
sheer waste of time, which is being wasted as it is, so that you could 
have employed your wits on a more useful subject.' 
' You go on and on, but one can't understand a word you are say­
ing,' the girl student cried. 
' It seems to me that everyone has the same right to expres an opin­
ion as everyone else, and if I wish to express my opinion like anyone 
else, then -' 
' No one deprives you of your right to express an opinion,' Mrs 
Virginsky herself interrupted sharply. ' You were only asked not to 
mumble because no one can understand you.' 
'I must say you don't seem to treat me with any respect. If l could 
not finish what I had to say, it is not because I had nothing to say, but 
because I had too much to say,' the schoolboy muttered almost in 
despair, becoming completely muddled. 
'If you don't know how to talk, you'd better shut up,' the girl 
student snapped. 
The schoolboy jumped up from his chair. 
'All I wanted to say,' he cried, his cheeks burning with shame and 
afraid to look round, 'is that you merely wanted to show how clever 
you are because Mr Stavrogin has just come in - that's it! '  
'That's a filthy and immoral thing to say, and merely shows that 
you're suffering from arrested mental development. I'll thank you not 
to address yourself to me again,' the girl student rattled on. 
' Stavrogin,' Mrs Virginsky began, 'before you came they'd been 
having a furious discussion about the rights of the family. This army 
officer here,' she nodded towards her relation the major, 'and of 
course I shouldn't dream of bothering you with such old-fashioned 
rubbish which has long been disposed o£ But how could the concep­
tion of the rights and duties of the family have arisen in the form of the 
superstitious nonsense in which they appear to us now? That is the 
question. What's your opinion ?' 

AT VIRGINSKY0 S 
397 
'What do you mean by how they could have arisen?' 
'What she means is that, for instance, we know that the superstition 
about God arose from thunder and lightning,' said the girl student, 
throwing herself again into the fray and staring at Stavrogin with 
her eyes almost popping out of her head. 'It's a well-known fact 
that primitive man, terrified by thunder and lightning, deified the in­
visible enemy, being aware of his own weakness before it. But how 
did the superstition about the family arise? How did the family itself 
arise?' 
'That's not at all what I meant -' Mrs Virginsky made an attempt 
to stop her. 
'I suppose the answer to such a question would be rather indiscreet,' 
replied Stavrogin. 
'What do you mean?' the girl student asked, darting forward. 
But a tittering was heard in the group of the teachers, which was at 
once echoed by Lyamshin and the schoolboy at the other end of the 
table, followed by a hoarse chuckle from the Major. 
'You should be writing vaudevilles,' Mrs Virginsky observed to 
Stavrogin. 
'A remark like that hardly does you credit, sir - I don't know what 
your name is,' the girl student rapped out with positive indignation. 
"Don't you be too cheeky, madam,' the Major blurted out. "You're 
a young lady, and you ought to behave modestly, but you seem to be 
sitting on needles.' 
'Hold your tongue, please, and don't you dare to speak to me in so 
familiar a tone, sir, with your disgusting comparisons. I've never seen 
you before, and I don't care whether you're a relative of mine or not.' 
'But I'm your uncle. I used to carry you about in my arms when 
you were a baby .' 
'What do I care what you used to carry about? I didn't ask you to 
carry me about, did I? Which means that you liked carrying me about 
as a baby. And let me add that I strongly object to your familiar tone 
unles it's as a fellow citizen. Otherwise I forbid you to talk to me like 
that once and for al.' 
'They're all like that now!' the Major addressed Stavrogin, who 
was sitting opposite, banging the table with his fist. 'And let me tell 
you, sir, that I am fond of liberalism and modem ideas and I'm fond 
of listening to intelligent conversation, but, mind you, only to men's. 

T H E  D E V I LS · PART T W O  
A s  for listening to women, sir, to these modem forward minxes - no, 
sir, I just can't put up with ' em. They're a pain in the neck, that's what 
they are, sir. Don't fidget, madam ! '  he shouted at the girl-student, 
who was fidgeting on her chair. ' No, sir, I, too, demand to be heard. 
I've been insulted, sir ! '  
' You're only interfering with the others,' Mrs Virginsky muttered 
indignantly. ' You can't say anything yourself.' 
'Oh, no, sir, I shall most certainly say what's in my mind,' the Major 
cried agitatedly, addressing Stavrogin. ' I'm cotmting on you, Mr 
Stavrogin, because you have only just come in, though I haven't the 
honour of knowing you. Without men they'll perish like flies, sir ; 
that's what I think. All their woman question is just lack of originality. 
I assure you, sir, that all this woman question has been invented for 
them by men, out of sheer stupidity, as if they hadn't enough trouble 
in the world. Thank God, I'm not married ! No sense of discrimina­
tion, sir, none whatever. Can't invent a dress pattern of their own. 
Even that men invent for them ! Take her, sir; take that girl. I used 
to carry her about in my arms, used to dance the mazurka with her 
when she was ten years old, and when she arrived to-day I naturally 
rushed to embrace her, but all she had to say to me - and before I had 
time to speak a word, mind you - was that there was no God. If she 
had just waited a little, and not got it out as soon as she opened her 
mouth ! But, you see, she was in such a devil of a hurry ! Well, I sup­
pose intelligent people don't believe ; but if they don't, it's because 
they're brainy chaps. But you, I said to her, you dumpling, what do 
you know about God ? Why, I said to her, I'm damned if it wasn't 
some student who taught you all this, and if he had taught you to 
light the lamp before an icon, you'd jolly well have lighted it.' 
' You're always telling stories,' the girl student retorted disdainfully 
and as though she were ashamed to waste too many words on a man 
like him. ' You're a very spiteful person, and only a few moments ago 
I proved to you conclusively that you're quite incapable of conducting 
a rational argument. In fact, I told you just now that we have all been 
taught in the Catechism that if you honour your father and your 
mother, you will live long and be given riches. That's in the ten com­
mandments. lf God found it necessary to offer rewards for love, then 
your God must be immoral. That's how I proved it to you, and not at 
all the moment I opened my mouth. I did it because you asserted your 

AT VIRGINSKY ' s 
399 
rights. It's not my fault if you're stupid and haven't grasped it yet. 
You feel hurt and you're angry - that's what's really the matter with 
your generation.' 
'You're a silly goose ! '  said the Major. 
'And you're a silly fool ! '  
'Call me names ! ' 
'But, look here, sir,' Liputin squeaked from the end of the table, 
'didn't you tell me yourself that you don't believe in God ? '  
'Well, what i f  I did ? I'm quite a different matter ! Perhaps I d o  be­
lieve, but not altogether. And though I do not entirely believe, it 
would never occur to me to say that God ought to be shot. I thought 
about God while I served in the Hussar regiment. It is the accepted 
thing in poetry to pretend that hussars oniy drink and make merry. 
Well, sir, I might have been drinking ; but, believe me, sir, I used to 
jump out of bed at night in my socks and start crossing myself before 
the icon so that God should give me faith, because even then I was 
worried by the question whether there was a God or not. I had a bad 
time of it, I can tell you ! In the morning, of course, you'd amuse your­
self and your faith would apparently be gone again. I've noticed that, 
as a rule, your faith tends to evaporate a little in the mornings.' 
' Haven't you any cards ?' Verkhovensky asked their hostess, yawn­
ing heartily. 
' I'm entirely, entirely in sympathy with your question,' the girl 
student put in quickly, blushing with indignation at the Major's 
words. 
'We're wasting precious time listening to stupid talk,' Mrs Virgin­
sky rapped out with a severe look at her husband. 
The girl student pulled herself up. 
' I  should like to tell the meeting about the suffe-rings and the protest 
of the students, but as our time is being wasted in immoral conversa­
tions -' 
'There's no such thing as moral or immoral,' the schoolboy de­
clared, unable to restrain himself, as soon as the girl student began. 
' I  knew that long before they taught it to you, Mr Schoolboy,' said 
the girl student. 
'And what I say is,' the schoolboy rasped out in a fury, ' that you are 
a child who has just arrived from Petersburg to enlighten us all, while 
we know it all ourselves. As for the commandment " Honour thy 

400 
THE DEVILS • PART TWO 
father and thy mother ", which you misquoted, everyone in Russia 
knows that it is immoral since Belinsky's days.' 
'Will this never end ?' Mrs Virginsky addressed her husband in a 
firm tone of voice. 
As the hostess she blushed at the triviality of the conversation, espe­
cially as she had noticed that some of the newly invited guests smiled, 
and even looked bewildered. 
'Ladies and gentlemen,' Virgiusky suddenly raised his voice, 'if any­
one would like to say anything more pertinent to our business, or if 
anyone has any statement to make, I propose that he does so without 
wasting more time.' 
' I  should like, if l may, to ask one question,' the lame teacher who 
had been sitting very decorously til then, without uttering a word, 
said quietly. ' I  should like to know whether we constitute a meeting 
here now, or whether we are just a collection of ordinary mortals who 
have come to a party? I'm asking it just as a matter ofform, and be­
cause I don't want to remain in ignorance.' 
The 'crafty' question created an impression; they all exchanged 
glances, as though everyone were expecting an answer from everyone 
else, and suddenly, as though at a word of command, they all turned 
round to Verkhovensky and Stavrogin. 
'I simply propose that we should take a vote on the question 
whether we are a meeting or not,' Mrs Virginsky said. 
' I  second it,' Liputin concurred, ' though the proposal is a little 
vague.' 
' I  second it, too, and I,' they cried. 
' I, too, think that it wil be more in order,' Virginsky confirmed. 
'Let's take a vote, then,' Mrs Virginsky declared. 'Lyamshin, will 
you please sit down at the piano ? you can vote from there.' 
' Not again ?' Lyamshin cried. 'Haven't I been thumping it long 
enough ?' 
' Go on, please. I beg you to sit down at the piano and play. Don't 
you want to be useful to the cause ?' 
' But I assure you, my dear Mrs Virginsky, that no one is eaves­
dropping on us. It's just your imagination. Besides, your windows are 
so high, and who would be able to make anything out even if he did 
eavesdrop ? '  
'We can't make anything out ourselves,' someone muttered. 

A T  VIRGINSKY ' S 
401 
'And I'm telling you that precautions are always necessary. I mean, 
in case there should be spies,' she explained, turning to Verkhoven­
sky, ' let them hear from the street that we arc having a birthday party 
and music.' 
' Damnation ! '  Lyamshin swore, sitting down at the piano and be­
ginning to play a waltz, banging on the keys almost with his fists. 
'Those who are in favour of having a meeting, please raise their 
right hands,' Mrs Virginsky proposed. 
Some raised their hands, others did not. Some raised them and put 
them down, others put them down and raised them again. 
' Damn it all, I don't understand a thing,' one army officer cried. 
' I  don't either,' another one cried. 
' Well, I do,' cried a third one. 'If it's yes, then up with your hand.' 
'But what docs yes mean ?' 
' It means a meeting.' 
' No, it doesn't mean a meeting.' 
·1 voted for a meeting,' the schoolboy cried, turning to Mrs Virgin­
sky. 
'Then why didn't you raise your hand ?' 
' I  was looking at you : you didn't raise yours, so I didn't ra1se 
mine.' 
' How silly! l didn't raise mine because I was the proposer. Ladies 
and gentlemen, I propose we do it the other way round : those who 
are in favour of a meeting, sit quietly and don't raise your hands, and 
those who are not in favour of it, raise your right hands.' 
'Those not in favour ?' the schoolboy repeated the question. 
' You're not saying that on purpose, are you ?' Mrs Virginsky cried 
angrily. 
' No, please, who is in favour or who is not in favour, because you 
have to define it more precisely ? '  two or three voices cried. 
'Those not in favour, not in favour.' 
' Very well, but what have we to do ? Must we put up our hands or 
not if we are not in favour ?' the officer asked. 
'Ah, well,' the Major remarked ; ' it seems we haven't got used to a 
constitution yet.' 
'Mr Lyamshin, would you mind not banging away so much ?' the 
lame teacher observed. ' It's impossible to hear anything.' 
'But, really, Mrs Virginsky, no one is listening,' Lyamshin cried, 

402 
THE DEVILS · PART TWO 
Jumping up. 'I haven't the slightest wish to play. I've come here as a 
guest, and not as a piano thtunper.' 
' Ladies and gentlemen, will you answer verbaly - are we or are we 
not a meeting ? '  Virginsky proposed. 
'We are, we are ! '  
'Well, if so, there's no need to vote. Are you satisfied, ladies and 
gentlemen, or do you still wish to vote ?' 
'No, no! We understood ! ' 
' Is there anyone here who does not want a meeting ?' 
' No, no, we al want it.' 
'But what is a meeting ? '  someone asked ; but he received no reply. 
' We must elect a chairman,' people cried from different parts of the 
room. 
' Our host, of course, our host! ' 
' Ladies and gentlemen,' the elected chairman began, 'if so, I should 
like to move my first proposal : if there's anyone here who'd like to 
say anything more pertinent to the business in hand, or if there's any­
one who'd like to make a statement, let him do so without wasting 
any more rime.' 
No one spoke. Everyone in the room again turned to Verkhoven­
sky and Stavrogin. 
' Verkhovensky, have you no statement to make ?' Mrs Virginsky 
asked him directly. 
' None whatever,' he replied, yawning and stretching on his chair. 
' I'd like a glass of cognac, though.' 
' Stavrogin, what about you ?' 
' No, thank you. I don't drink.' 
'I mean would you like to speak or not? I didn't mean cognac.' 
' Speak ? What about ? No, I don't want to.' 
'They'll bring you your cognac,' she said, addressing Verkhoven­
sky. 
The girl student got up. She had been jumping up from her chair 
several times. 
' I  have come to make a statement about the sufferings of our tiD­
fortunate students and the ways of rousing them everywhere to pro-
test . . . .  
' 
But she stopped short ; at the other end of the table a rival had ap­
peared, and cvcrvhody's eyes turned to him. Long-eared Shigalyov 

A T  VIRGINSKY' S 
403 
slowly rose from his seat, looking grim and gloomy, and, with a 
melancholy expression, put down a thick, closely written note-book 
on the table. He remained standing in silence.' Many people looked in 
bewilderment at his note-book, but Liputin, Virginsky, and the lame 
teacher seemed to be pleased about something. 
'I ask leave to address the meeting,' Shigalyov said gloomily but 
6rrnly. 
'Please,' Virginsky gave his permission. 
The orator sat down, said nothing for half a minute, then uttered in 
a solemn voice : 
'Ladies and gentlemen! ' 
'Here's the cognac,' Mrs Virginsky's relation who had been pouring 
out tea and gone to fetch the brandy snapped distastefully and con­
temptuously, placing a bottle of brandy and a glass, which she had not 
put on a tray or a plate, before Verkhovensky. 
The interrupted orator waited with a dignified air. 
' Never mind, go on, I'm not listening,' Verkhovensky cried, pour­
ing himself out a glass. 
' Ladies and gentlemen,' Shigalyov began again, ' in calling for your 
attention and, as you will see later, in asking for your assistance in a 
matter of first-class importance, I must first of all say a few words by 
way of an introduction.' 
'Mrs Virginsky, have you any scissors ?' Verkhovensky asked 
suddenly. 
'What do you want scissors for ?' Mrs Virginsky glared at him. 
'I've forgotten to cut my nails - been meaning to for the last three 
days,' he replied, examining his long and dirty nails imperturbably. 
Mrs Virginsky flushed, but Miss Virginsky seemed pleased at some­
thing. 
'I believe I saw them on the window-sill a short while ago,' she 
said, getting up from the table. 
She went up to the window, found the scissors, and brought them 
back at once. V crkhovensky did not even glance at her. He took the 
scissors and began busying himself with them. Mrs Virginsky realized 
that there was sound method in Verkhovensky's request, and was 
ashamed of her touchiness. The people exchanged silent glances. The 
lame teacher was watching Verkhovensky enviously and angrily. 
Shigalyov went on: 

T H E  DEVILS • PART TWO 
'Having devoted all m y  energies to the study of the social organiza­
tion of the society of the future which is to replace our present one, I 
have come to the conclusion that all the inventors of social systems, 
from the ancient times to our present year, have been dreamers, story­
tellers, fools who contradicted themselves and had no idea of natural 
science or that strange animal called man. Plato, Rousseau, Fourier, 
aluminium pillars, all that is only good for sparrows, and not for 
human society. But as the future form of sociecy is of the utmost im­
portance now that we at last are all ready to act, I am submitting to you 
my own system of the world organization so as to make any further 
thinking unnecessary. Here it is ! '  he exclaimed, tapping the note-book. 
'I intended to explain the contents of my hook to this meeting. in the 
most abbreviated form possible. I'm afraid, however, that I shall have 
to add a great many verbal explanations, and that the whole of my 
exposition wiJI therefore take up at least ten evenings, one evening for 
each chapter of my book.' (There was laughter in the room.) ' In addi­
tion, I should like to state beforehand that my system is not yet com­
plete.' (Again laughter.) 'I'm afraid I got rather muddled up in my 
own data, and my conclusion is in direct contradiction to the original 
idea with which I start. Starting from unlimited freedom, I arrived 
at unlimited despotism. I will add, however, that there can be no other 
solution of the social formula than mine.' 
The laughter in the room grew loudԾr and louder, but it was mostly 
the yotmg people who laughed and, as it were, the uninitiated visitors. 
Mrs Virginsky, Liputin, and the lame teacher looked annoyed. 
'If you couldn't work out your system yourself, and are in despair 
about it, what do you expect us to do ? '  an officer observed cautiously. 
'You are right, my dear serving officer,' Shigalyov said, turning to 
him sharply, 'and most of all because you used the word " despair". 
Yes, I was in despair. Nevertheless, everything I say in my book is 
irrefutable, and there is no other solution. No one can invent anything 
else. And that is why I should like, without wasting any time, to invite 
you, ladies and gentlemen, to express your opinion after you have 
heard the contents of my book during the next ten evenings. If, how­
ever, the members of our society refuse to listen to me, let us part at 
the very beginning, the gentlemen to carry on with their official 
duties and the ladies to go back to their kitchens, for if you reject my 
solution, you will find no other. None whatever! By missing their 

AT V I R G I N SKY ' s 
opportunity, they'll have only themselves to blame, for they are 
bound to come back to it again sooner or later.' 
The people began to stir. ' What's the matter with him ? Is he mad ?' 
voices could be heard asking. 
' What it comes to,' Lyamshin concluded, 'is Shigalyov's despair, 
and the important question seems to be: should he or should he not be 
in despair ?' 
'The fact that Shigalyov is so near to despair is a personal question,' 
the schoolboy declared. 
' I  move that a vote should be taken how far Shigalyov's despair 
affects our common cause and, at the same rime, whether it is worth 
listening to him or not,' an officer suggested gaily. 
'It's not that at all,' the lame teacher at last intervened, speaking, as 
was his wont, with rather an ironic smile, so that it was difficult to say 
whether he was serious or joking. 'This, ladies and gentlemen, isn't 
the point at issue at all. Mr Shigalyov is too much devoted to his task 
and, besides, he is too modest. I know his book. He proposes as a final 
solution of the problem to divide humanity into rwo unequal parts. 
One-tenth is to be granted absolute freedom and unrestricted powers 
over the remaining nine-tenths. Those must give up their individual­
ity and be turned into something like a herd, and by their boundless 
obedience will by a series of regenerations attain a state of primeval 
inocence, something like the original paradise. They will have to 
work, however. The measures the author proposes for depriving the 
nine-tenths of humanity of their true will and their transformation 
into a herd by means of the re-education of whole generations, are 
very remarkable. They are based on the facts of nature and very logi­
cal. It is possible not to agree with some of his conclusions, but it is 
impossible to doubt the author's intelligence or knowledge. It is a pity 
that his stipulation that we should devote ten evenings to his theory is 
impracticable, or we might hear a great deal that is interesting.' 
'Are you really serious ?' Mrs Virginsky turned to the lame teacher 
in some alarm. ' I  mean if that man, not knowing what to do with 
people, turns nine-tenths of them into slaves ? I've suspected him for a 
long time.' 
'Do you mean your brother ?' asked the lame teacher. 
' Family relationship ? Are you laughing at me ?' 
'And, besides, to work for the aristocrats and obey them as if they 

THB DEVILS ' PART TWO 
were gods - that's an odious suggestion ! '  the girl student observed 
fiercely. 
' What I'm offering you is not odious suggestions, but paradise, 
paradise on earth ; for there can be no other one on earth,' Shigalyov 
concluded peremptorily. 
' For my part,' Lyamshin cried, 'instead of putting them into para­
dise, I'd take these nine-tenths of humanity, ifl didn't know what to 
do with them, and blow them up, leaving only a small number of 
educated people who'd live happily ever after in accordance with 
scientific principles.' 
' Only a clown could talk like that! '  the girl student cried, flushing. 
'He is a clown, but he's useful,' Mrs Virginsky whispered to her. 
'And very likely that is the best solution of the problem,' Shigalyov 
said, addressing Lyamshin heatedly. 'I don't expect you even realize 
what a profound thing you've just said, my dear, merry friend. But 
as it is practically impossible to carry out your idea, we must, I'm 
afraid, be content with the earthly paradise, since that's what it has 
been called.' 
' What awful rot ! '  Verkhovensky could not help saying, without 
raising his eyes, though he went on cutting his nails unconcernedly. 
'But why is it rot?' the lame teacher took it up at once, as though 
he had been expecting him to say something in order to attack him. 
'Why rot? Mr Shigalyov is rather a fanatic lover of mankind; but re­
member that Fourier, Cabet, and particularly Proudhon himself have 
proposed many more despotic and fantastic solutions of the problem. 
Mr Shigalyov's solution is perhaps far more sober. I assure you that, 
having read his book, it is almost impossible not to agree with certain 
things in it. He is perhaps much nearer to realism than anyone, and his 
earthly paradise is almost the real one, the same one, for the loss of 
which mankind is sighing, if it ever existed.' 
'Well, I knew I'd get it in the neck,' V erkhovensky muttered again. 
'Allow me to point out, sir,' the lame teacher went on, getting 
more and more excited, ' discussions on the future social organization 
of mankind are almost an urgent necessity for all modem thinking 
men. Herzen spent his whole life worrying about it. Belinsky - and I 
know it for a fact - used to spend whole evenings with his friends de­
bating and solving the smallest, as it were, domestic details of the 
future social organization of mankind.' 

AT VIRGINSKY' s 
'Some even go off their heads,' the Major suddenly remarked. 
'Anyway, you are more likely to arrive at something by talking 
than by sitting about without uttering a word as if you were dicta­
tors,' Liputin hissed, as though at last plucking up courage to start his 
attack. 
'I didn't mean Shigalyov when I said it was rot,' Verkhovensky 
mumbled. 'You see, ladies and gentlemen' - he raised his eyes a little 
- 'in my view al these books, Fourier, Cabet, al this talk about the 
" right to work", all this Shigalyov business - al are like novels, of 
which you can write a hundred thousand. An aesthetic pastime. I 
realize that in this provincial hole of a town you are bored, and so you 
rush to pick up any piece of paper that has something written on it.' 
'If you don't mind my saying so, sir,' said the lame teacher, ftdget­
ing on his chair, 'we may be provincials, and I daresay that we de­
serve to be pitied on that account alone, but we do know that so far 
nothing new has happened in the world to make us shed tears because 
we've missed it. We are urged, for instance, in the various leaflets of 
foreign make which are distributed among us, to close our ranks and 
form groups with the sole purpose of bringing about general destruc­
tion on the pretext that however much you tried to cure the world, 
you would never succeed in curing it, while by adopting the radical 
measure of chopping off a hundred million heads we should ease our 
burden and be able to jump over the ditch with much less trouble. 
It's an excellent idea, but one at any rate which is as incompatible with 
reality as the Shigalyov "theory ", which you referred to just now 
with such contempt.' 
'I'm afraid I haven't come here to engage in discussions,' Verkho­
vensky let drop a significant hint and, as though completely unaware 
of the slip he had made, drew the candle nearer to him to see better. 
'It is a pity, a great pity, that you haven't come here to engage in 
discussions, and don't you think it's an even greater pity that you 
should be preoccupied with your toilet now?' 
'What's my toilet got to do with you ?' 
'It's as difficult to cut off a hundred million heads as it is to change 
the world by propaganda. Much more dificult, perhaps, especially in 
Russia,' Liputin ventured again. 
' It's Russia they pin al their hopes on now,' said an army officer. 
'Yes, we've heard about that, too,' the lame teacher put in. ' We 

THE D E V I L S  • PART T W O  
know that a mysterious index finger is pointing to our fair country as 
the country most suitable for accomplishing the great task. Except for 
this : in the event of a gradual solution of the problem by propaganda 
I, at any rate, might gain something personally. I mean, I might enjoy 
some pleasant talk at least, and even obtain some reward from the 
Government for my services to social advancement. But in the event 
of the second solution by the rapid method of cutting off a hundred 
million heads, I don't stand to gain anything, do I ?  If you started pro­
pagating that, you might end up by having your tongue cut out.' 
' Yours certainly would be,' said Verkhovcnsky. 
'Ah, so there you are, sir. And since it is quite impossible, even in 
the most favourable circumstances, to complete such a massacre in less 
than fifty, or at most thirty years, for they arc not sheep and they 
wouldn't allow themselves to be slaughtered, wouldn't it be better to 
collect your pots and pans and emigrate overseas to some Pacific 
islands and there close your eyes in peace ? Believe me ' - he tapped 
his finger significantly on the table - ' all you're likely to achieve by 
such propaganda is mass emigration and nothing more ! '  
H e  concluded looking very pleased with himself. He was one of 
the intellectuals of our province. Liputin was smiling craftily. Virgin­
sky listened a little dejectedly, but all the others followed the discus­
sion with great attention, especially the ladies and the officers. They 
all realized that the upholders of the hundred million heads theory had 
been pushed against a wall, and they waited to see what would come 
of it. 
' You certainly put it very well,' Verkhovensky mumbled more tm­
concernedly than ever, looking as though he were bored. ' Emigration 
is a good idea. And yet if, in spite of the obvious disadvantages you 
foresee, the number of people who are ready to fight for the common 
cause grows daily, we shall be able to do without you. For what is 
happening here, my dear sir, is that a new religion is taking the place 
of the old one, and that is why we are getting so many new fighters 
and it is such a big thing. You can emigrate ! And, you know, I'd 
advise you to go to Dresden, and not to the Pacific islands. For, in the 
firSt place, it is a city which has never been visited by any epidemics, 
and as you're an educated man, you're quite certainly afraid of death; 
secondly, it is near the Russian border, so that you will be able to re­
ceive your income from your beloved country more easily ;  thirdly, 

AT VIRGINSKY' s  
it contains what are known as treasures of art, and you're an aesthetic 
fellow, a former teacher of literature, I believe; and, finaly, it is a sort 
of miniature Switzerland - and that will provide you with poetic in­
spiration, for I am sure you write verse. In a word, it's a treasure in a 
snufbox.' 
There was a general stir, especially among the officers. Another 
second and they would all have begun talking at once. But the lame 
man rose to the bait irritably. 
'No, sir, perhaps I won't run away from the common cause. You 
must realize, sir, that -' 
'Do you really mean that you would agree to join the group off1ve 
ifl proposed it to you ?' Verkhovensky suddenly rapped out, and he 
put the scissors down on the table. 
They all looked startled. The mysterious man had shown his hand 
too suddenly. He had even spoken openly about ' the group of five'. 
'Everyone feels himself to be an honest man and will not shrink 
from his responsibility for the common cause,' the lame teacher tried 
to wriggle out of it, 'but -' 
'No, sir, this isn't any longer a question of but,' Verkhovensky in­
terrupted him sharply and peremptorily. ' Ladies and gentlemen, I de­
mand a straight answer. I realize very well that having come here and 
having called you together myself, I'm obliged to give you some ex­
planations' (another unexpected disclosure), 'but I can't possibly give 
you any before I find out what your frame of mind is. Disregarding 
all this talk - for we can't just go on talking for another thirty years as 
people have done for the last thirty - let me ask you which you pre­
fer: the slow way consisting of the composition of social novels and 
the dry, unimaginative planing of the destinies of mankind a thou­
sand years hence, while despotism swallows the morsels of roast meat 
which would fly into your mouths of themselves, but which you fail 
to catch; or are you in favour of a quick solution, whatever it may be, 
which will at last untie your hands and which will give humanity 
ample scope for ordering its own social affairs in a practical way and 
not on paper ? They shout: a hundred million heads; well, that may 
be only a metaphor, but why be afraid of it if with the slow paper 
day-dreams despotism will in a hundred or so years devour not a hun­
dred but five hundred million heads? And please note that a man 
sufering from an incurable illness will not be cured, 
whatever 

410 
THE D E V I LS · PART TWO 
prcscri ptions are written for him on paper ; on the contrary, if there is 
any delay, he will go on festering so much that he will infect us all and 
corrupt all the healthy forces on which we can count now, so that in 
the end we shall all come to grief. I entirely agree that to chatter liber­
ally and eloquently is an exceedingly pleasant pastime, and that to act 
is a little dangerous. Anyway, I'm afraid I'm not very good at talking. 
I came here with certain communications, and I should, therefore, 
like to ask all of you, ladies and gentlemen, not to vote, but to tell me 
frankly and simply which appeals to you more - a snail's pace in a 
swamp or full steam ahead across it?' 
'I'm all for crossing at full steam ! '  the schoolboy cried enthusiasti­
cally. 
'Me, too,' said Lyamshin. 
' Well, of course,' an officer, followed by another and by someone 
else, muttered, ' there can be no doubt as to the choice.' 
What struck them most was that Verkhovensky had some 'com­
munications ' to make and that he had promised to speak at once. 
' Ladies and gentlemen, I see that almost all of you have decided to 
act in the spirit of the leaflets,' he said, scanning everybody in the 
room. 
'All, all,' a majority of voices cried. 
' I  must confess that I am more in favour of a humane policy,' said 
the Major, ' but as all are in favour of yours, I am with the rest too.' 
'It would seem, therefore, that even you are not against it,' Verk­
hovensky addressed the lame man. 
'I'm not really,' said the cripple, blushing, 'but if I agree with the 
others now, it's solely because I don't want to upset the -' 
'You're all like that! He's ready to argue for six months to show 
off his liberal eloquence, but he ends up by voting with the rest! 
Think it over, ladies and gentlemen. Are you really all ready ?' 
(Ready for what ? A vague, but very tempting question.) 
'Of course all -' they cried, but not without watching each other. 
'But afterwards perhaps you'll be sorry for having agreed so 
quickly ? That's how it almost always happens with you, you know.' 
They grew excited for different reasons, very excited. The lame 
teacher flew at Verkhovensky. 
'I should like to point out,' he said, ' that the answers to such ques­
tions depend on certain conditions. Even if we have given our 

AT VIRGIN S K Y ' S 
41 1  
decision, i:he question which was put to us in so strange a fashion, you 
must realize -' 
' In what strange fashion ? '  
'A fashion such questions are not asked in.' 
'Tell me how, please. But, you know, I was sure that you'd be the 
first to take offence.' 
'You've extracted from us an answer about our readiness tor im­
mediate action, but what right had you to do so ? What authority had 
you to ask us such questions ?' 
' You should have thought of asking that question before ! Why did 
you answer my question ? First you agree and then you change your 
mind.' 
· 
' If you ask me, I think that the irresponsible frankness of your prin­
cipal question shows that you've neither the authority nor the right to 
ask it, but you did so out of personal curiosity.' 
' What are you driving at ? '  Verkhovensky cried, as though he were 
beginning to be greatly disturbed. 
' What I am driving at is that new members are, anyway, recruited 
with the utmost secrecy, and not in the company of twenty people 
one doesn't know ! '  the lame teacher blurted out. 
He had put all his cards on the table, but then he was in a state of 
uncontrollable irritation. Verkhovensky turned quickly to the com­
pany witl1 a well-simulated e'xpression of alarm. 
' Ladies and gentlemen, I deem it my duty to announce to you all 
that all this is nonsense and that our conversation has gone too far. I 
'have recruited no members so far, and no one has the right to say of 
me that I am recruiting members. We were simply discussing our 
opinions. Isn't that so ? But be that as_it may ' - he turned to the lame 
man, - ' you, sir, alarm me greatly. l never thought that such innocent 
things had to be discussed in secrecy here. Or are you afraid that the 
police may be informed ? Do you really think tl1at there is an informer 
among us ?' 
They became terribly excited ; everybody was talking. 
' Ladies and gentlemen, if that is the case,' -v erkhovensky went on, 
'then I have compromised myself more than anybody, and, therefore, 
I must ask you to answer one question, if you care to, of course. It's 
entirely up to you.' 
' What question? What question ?' they all began to shout. 

41 2  
THI! D E V I L S  • PART T W O  
'A question that will make it absolutely clear whether we are to re­
main together or take our hats and go our several ways in silence.' 
'The question, the question?' 
' If any of us knew of the existence of a proposed political murder, 
would he inform the police about it, in view of all the consequences, 
or would he stay at home and wait to see what happened ? There can 
be all sorts of opinions about that. The answer to the question will tell 
us clearly whether we are to separate or whether we are to remain to­
gether, and that not for this evening only. May I ask you for your 
answer first ?' He turned to the lame teacher. 
' Why me first ?' 
' Because you started it all. Please don't try to wriggle out of it. 
Cleverness won't help you. Still, just as you like. It's entirely up to 
you.' 
'I'm sorry, but such a question is an insult.' 
' No, sir, that's not good enough. Please be more explicit.' 
' I've never been an agent of the secret police,' the lame teacher said, 
wriggling more than ever. 
'Please be more explicit, and don't keep us waiting.' 
The lame man got so angry that he wouldn't even reply. He glared 
furiously at his tormentor from under his glasses without uttering a 
word. 
'Yes or no ? Would you or would you not inform the police ?' 
Verkhovensky cried. 
' Of course I would not,' the lame teacher shouted twice as loudly. 
' No one would inform the police ! Of course not! '  many voices 
cried. 
' May I ask you, Major, whether you would inform the police or 
not ? '  Verkhovensky went on. 'And, mind, I ask you on purpose.' 
'No, sir, I would not inform.' 
' But if you knew that someone wished to rob and murder a man, 
an ordinary mortal, you would inform the police, wouldn't you? '  
'Yes, sir, but that would be merely a case of civil law, while what 
we are discussing is a political matter. I've never been an agent of the 
secret police.' 
' No one here has,' voices cried again. 'An unnecessary question. 
Everyone can give only one answer. There are no informers here! '  
'What's that gentleman getting up for ?' the girl student cried. 

AT VIRGINSKY ' S  
41 3 
'That's Shatov. Why did you get up, Shatov? '  Mrs Virginsky 
aied. 
Shatov had really got up. He held his hat in his hand and was 
looking at Verkhovensky. It seemed as though he wanted to say some­
thing to him, but was hesitating. He looked pale and angry, but he 
controlled himself and walked to the door without saying a word. 
' Shatov, that won't do you any good, you know,' Verkhovensky 
shouted enigmatically after him. 
'But it will do you good, you dirty spy and scoundrel,' Shatov 
shouted back at him from the doorway and went out. 
More cries and exclamations. 
' So that's the test, is it?' a voice cried. 
' Came in useful !' cried another. 
'I hope it isn't too late,' remarked a third. 
'Who asked him to come ? Who received him ? Who is he? Who's 
Shatov ? Will he inform the police or not ?' - questions were fired 
from all over the room. 
'Ifhe were an informer, he'd have pretended not to be one, but he 
had his say and went out,' someone observed. 
' Stavrogin, too, is getting up,' the girl student cried. ' Stavrogin 
hasn't answered the question, either.' 
Stavrogin actually got up, and after him Kirilov, too, got up at the 
other end of the table. 
'I'm sorry, Mr Stavrogin,' Mrs Virginsky addressed him sharply, 
'but we've all answered the question, but you are leaving without a 
. word.' 
'I see no necessity to answer the question which interests you so 
much,' Stavrogin murmured. 
'But we've compromised ourselves and you haven't,' a few voices 
cried. 
'What do I care whether you've compromised yourselves or not ?' 
Stavrogin said with a laugh, but his eyes flashed. 
'What do you care ? What do you care ?' several voices exclaimed. 
Many people jumped up from their chairs. 
'I say, ladies and gentlemen, I say,' the lame teacher cried, 'Mr 
Verkhovensky hasn't answered the question, either ; he's merely asked 
it.' 
His words produced an extraordinary sensation. They al exchanged 

414 
T H E  D E V I LS • PART T W O  
glances with one another. Stavrogin laughed aloud in the lame man's 
face and went out, followed by Kirilov. Verkhovensky rushed out 
into the hall after them. 
' What are you doing to me ?' he murmured, seizing Stavrogin's 
hand and squeezing it with all his might. 
Stavrogin pulled his hand away without a word. 
'Wait for me at Kirilov's. I'll be there. It's absolutely necessary ! 
Absolutely ! '  
'There's no need for me to be there ! '  Stavrogin cut him short. 
' Stavrogin will be there,' Kirilov observed with an air of finality. 
' Stavrogin, it is necessary for you to be there. I'll explain it to you 
there.' 
They went out. 
Ivan the Crown-Prince 
T H E Y  went out. Peter Verkhovensky was about to rush back to the 
' meeting ' in order to quell the clamour, but apparently coming to the 
conclusion that it was not worth troubling about, he left everything, 
and two minutes later was already streaking along the street after the 
two men. As he ran along, he remembered a short cut to Filippov's 
house ; up to his knees in mud, he ran tluough a side-street, and actu­
ally reached the house at the moment Stavrogin and Kirilov were 
going through the gates. 
' Here already ?' Kirilov observed. 'That's good. Come in.' 
' Why did you tell me that you lived alone ?' Stavrogin asked as he 
passed a boiling samovar in the passage. 
' You'll see presently who I'm living with,' Kirilov muttered. 
'Come in.' 
As soon as they had gone in, Verkhovensky took out of his pocket 
the anonymous letter he had been given by Lembke earlier that day, 
and put it before Stavrogin. The three of them sat down. Stavrogin 
read the letter in silence. 
' Well ? ' he asked. 
'That scoundrel will do as he writes,' Verkhovensky explained. 
' Since he is under your control, I'd be glad if you would tell me what 
to do. I ;\Ssure you he may go to Lembke to-morrow.' 

IVAN THE CROWN-PRINCE 
' well, let him go.' 
'Let him go ? But surely it can be arranged.' 
'You're mistaken ; he doesn't depend on me. And, besides, it's all 
one to me. He doesn't threaten me. He threatens you.' 
'You, too.' 
'I don't think so. 
'But others may not spare you. Don't you see? Listen to me, Stav­
rogin. This is only quibbling. You don't grudge the money, do you ?' 
'Is it money that is needed ?' 
'Most certainly, two thousand or at least fifteen hundred. Let me 
have the money to-morrow or even to-day, and I'll pack him off to 
Petersburg to-morrow evening. That's all he wants. With his sister 
Mary, if you like. Make a note of that.' 
He seemed to be a little distraught; he spoke, somehow, carelessly 
and without weighing his words. 
Stavrogin watched him with amazement. 
'There's no need for me to send Mary away.' 
'I daresay you don't even want to, do you ?' Verkhovensky smiled 
ironically. 
'Perhaps I don't.' 
'In short, are you going to let me have the money or not ?' Verkh­
ovensky shouted at Stavrogin with furious impatience and rather 
imperiously. 
Stavrogin looked him up and down gravely. 
'There won't be any money.' 
'Look here, Stavrogin; you either know something or have done 
something already. You're pulling my leg ! '  
Peter's face was distorted, the comers ofhis mouth twitched, and he 
suddenly burst out laughing a curiously aimless and meaningless 
laugh. 
'You've just received money from your father for your estate,' 
Stavrogin observed calmly. 'My mother paid you six or eight thou­
sand for your father. Well, why don't you lay out fifteen hundred of 
your money ? After al, why should I pay for somebody else ? And, 
besides, I've already paid out so much that I can't help feeling an­
noyed.' He smiled himself at his own words. 
' Oh, you're begining to joke, are you?' 
Stavrogin got up from his chair. Verkhovensky, too, was on Iris 

416 
THE D EVILS · PART TWO 
feet in a flash and stood with his back against the door as though bar­
ring the way. Stavrogin was about to push him away from the door 
in order to go out, but suddenly stopped dead. 
' I  won't let you have Shatov ,' he said. 
Verkhovensky gave a start ; both looked at each other. 
' I  told you this evening why you wanted Shatov's blood,' Stav­
rogin said with flashing eyes. ' You want to cement your little groups 
with it. The way you drove out Shatov just now was perfect : you 
knew very well that he would never say : " I won't inform the police," 
and he'd think it mean to tell a lie in your presence. But what do you 
want me for now ? Me ? You've been pestering me ever since I met 
you abroad. The explanation you've given me so far is just madness. 
And yet you suggest that I should give Lebyatkin fifteen hundred 
roubles and thus provide Fedka with an opportunity for murdering 
him. I know you think I'd like him to murder my wife, too. By tying 
me hand and foot with this crime, you hope, of course, to get me in 
your power. Why do you want to have me in your power ? What the 
hell do you want me for ?  Once for all, have a good look at me : am 
I your man ? And leave me alone.' 
' Has Fedka been to see you himself? '  Verkhovensky asked breath­
lessly. 
' Yes, he has. His price is fifteen hundred roubles. He'll confirm it 
himself. There he is.' 
Stavrogin stretched out his hand. Verkhovensky turned round 
quickly. A new figure emerged out of the darkness on the threshold: 
Fedka, in a sheepskin but without a cap, stood thѨre as if he were at 
home. He stood there grinning to himself and showing his even white 
teeth. His black eyes, with yellowish whites, darted cautiously about 
the room as he watched the gentlemen. There was something he did 
not understand ; Kirilov must have brought him in just now, and it 
was on Kirilov that he fixed his questioning glance. He stood in the 
doorway, but did not seem anxious to enter the room. 
' I  suppose you got him here to listen to our business transaction, or 
even to see the money in our hands, didn't you ?' Stavrogin asked, and 
without waiting for a reply, left the house. 
Verkhovensky overtook him at the gates almost in a mad frenzy. 
'Stop ! Not another step !' he cried, catching hold of his elbow. 
Stavrogin tried to pull away his arm, but couldn't. He was 

IVAN THE CROWN-PRINCE 
417 
overcome with fury : seizing Verkhovensky by the hair with his left 
hand, he flung him with all his might on the ground and walked out 
of the gate. But he had not walked thirty paces before Verkhovensky 
overtook him again. 
'Let's make it up, let's make it up,' he implored him in a spasmodic 
whisper. 
Stavrogin shrugged, but he did not stop or turn round. 
'Listen, I'll bring you Lisa to-morrow. Do ѩ·ou want me to ? No ? 
Why don't you answer ? Tell me what you want me to do and I'll do 
it. Listen, I'll give you Shatov. All right ?' 
' So it is true that you've decided to murder him ?' cried Stavrogin. 
'But what do you want Shatov for ?  What do you want him for?' 
the frantic man went on, breathlessly and rapidly, running ahead and 
seizing Stavrogin by the elbow, probably without noticing it himsel£ 
'Listen, I'll give him to you. Let's make it up. You're asking a big 
price, but - let's make it up ! '  
Stavrogin glanced at him at last and was shocked. It was not the 
same voice or the same look as always or as they had been in the room 
jus{ now. He saw almost another face. The inflexion of the voice was 
not the same, either: Verkhovensky was begging him, beseeching 
him. He was a man whose most precious thing was being or had 
been taken away and who had not yet had time to recover from the 
shock. 
'Good Lord ! what's the matter with you ?' Stavrogin cried. 
Verkhovensky did not reply, but ran after him, looking at him with 
the same imploring and yet relentless eyes. 
' Let's make it up ! '  he whispered again. ' Listen, like Fedka, I carry 
a knife in my boot, but I'll make it up with you.' 
' But, damn you, what do you want me for ? '  Stavrogin cried in 
positive amazement and anger. ' Is it a secret or what ? Have you got 
to have me as a sort of talisman ?' 
' Listen, we'll create political disturbances,' Verkhovensky muttered 
rapidly, almost in delirium. 'Don't you believe that we'll create dis­
turbances ? We shall create such an upheaval that the foundations of the 
State will be cracked wide open. Karmazinov is right. We have noth­
ing to hold on to. Another dozen of such small groups in Russia, and 
I'm safe.' 
'All the same sort of fools,' Stavrogin interposed involuntarily. 

THE DEVILS · PART TWO 
' Oh, try to be more foolish yourself, Stavrogin! Try to be more 
foolish yourself! You're not so clever, you know, that such a wish 
should seem absurd. You're afraid, you lack faith, you're scared by 
the magnitude of things. And why are they fools? They are not such 
fools. To-day no one has a mind of his own. There are awfully few 
people with a mind of their own to-day. Virginsky is a man of the 
purest heart - ten times purer than ours. But never mind him. Liputin 
is a scoundrel, but I know his one weak spot. There's not a scoundrel 
in the world who hasn't a weak spot. Lyamshin alone hasn't any, but 
he is completely in my hands. A few more groups, and I should have 
money and passports everywhere, that at least. Isn't that enough ? 
That alone? And hiding-places, too. Let them search. They'll destroy 
one group and miss another. We'll stir up trouble. Don't you really 
believe that we two are quite enough ?' 
'Take Shigalyov and leave me alone.' 
' Shiga! yov is a genius! Do you realize that he is a genius like 
Fourier? But bolder than Fourier, and stronger than Fourier. I'll give 
a lot of my time to him. He's invented " equality"!' 
'He's in a fever and he is raving; something peculiar has happened 
to him,' Stavrogin thought, glancing at him again. 
Both walked on without stopping. 
'He's got everything perfect in his note-book,' Verkhovensky went 
on. ' Spying. Every member of the society spies on the others, and he 
is obliged to inform against them. Everyone belongs to all the others, 
and all belong to everyone. All are slaves and equals in slavery. In ex­
treme cases slander and murder, but, above all, equality. To begin 
with, the level of education, science, and accomplishment is lowered. 
A high level of scientific thought and accomplishment is open only to 
men of the highest abilities! Men of the highest ability have always 
seized the power and become autocrats. Such men canot help being 
autocrats, and they've always done more harm than good; they are 
either banished or executed. A Cicero will have his tongue cut out, 
Copernicus will have his eyes gouged out, a Shakespeare will be 
stoned - there you have Shigalyov's doctrine! Slaves must be equal: 
without despotism there has never been any freedom or equality, but 
in a herd there is bound to be equality - there's the Shigalyov doctrine 
for you! Ha, ha, ha! You think it strange? I am for the Shigalyov 
doctrine!' 

I VA N  THE CROWN-PRINCE 
Stavrogin tried to quicken his pace and get home as soon as possible. 
'If the fellow is drunk, where did he manage to get drunk ?' he won­
dered. ' Not the cognac, surely ?' 
' Listen, Stavrogin : to level the mountains is a good idea, not a ridi­
culous one. I'm for Shigalyov ! We don't want education. We have 
had enough of science. We have plenty of material without science to 
last us a thousand years. The thing we want is obedience. The only 
thing that's wanting in the world is obedience. The desire for educa­
tion is an aristocratic desire. The moment a man falls in love or has a 
family, he gets a desire for private property. We will destroy that de­
sire; we'll resort to drunkenness, slander, denunciations ; we'll resort 
to unheard-of depravity ; we shall smother every genius in infancy. 
We shall reduce everything to one common denominator. Full equal­
ity. " We've learned a trade and we are honest men - we want nothing 
more," that was the answer given recently by English workers. Only 
what is necessary is necessary ; that's the motto of the whole world 
henceforth. But a shock, too, is necessary ; we, the rulers, will take 
care of that. Slaves must have rulers. Complete obedience, complete 
loss of individuality, but once in thirty years Shigalyov resorts to a 
shock, and everyone at once starts devouring each other, up to a cer­
tain point, just as a measure against boredom. Boredom is an aristo­
cratic sensation ; in the Shigalyov system there will be no desires. De­
sire and suffering arc for us ; for the slaves - the Shigalyov system.' 
' You make an exception of yourself, do you ?' Stavrogin could not 
help asking again. 
'And of you. Do you know, I was thinking of delivering the world 
up to the Pope. Let him go out barefoot and show himself to the mob, 
saying " See what they have brought me to ! "  and they will all follow 
him, even the army. The Pope on top, we all round him, and below 
us - the Shigalyov order. All we need is that the Internationale should 
come to an agreement with the Pope ; this will come about. The old 
boy will agree at once. He can't do anything else. Mark my words. 
Ha, ha, ha ! Silly ? Tell me, is it silly or not ?' 
'That's enough,' Stavrogin muttered with annoyance. 
'Enough ! Listen, I'd give up the Pope ! To hell with the Shigalyov 
order ! To hell with the Pope ! What we want is something more im­
mediate, something more thrilling. We don't want the Shigalyov 
order, for that is something too exquisite. That's an ideal. That can 

420 
THE D EVILS · PART TWO 
only come to pass in the future. Shigalyov is an aesthete, and a fool 
like every philanthropist. What we want is hard work, manual labour; 
and Shigalyov despises manual labour. Listen, let the Pope rule in the 
West, and you shall rule over us, you shall rule over our country ! '  
' Leave me alone ; you're drunk ! '  Stavrogin muttered, quickening 
his pace. 
' Stavrogin, you're beautiful! ' Verkhovensky cried almost in ec­
stasy. ' Do you know that you are beautiful ? What is so fme about you 
is that sometimes you don't know it. Oh, I've made a thorough study 
of you ! I often watch you without your being aware of it. You're 
even simple-minded and naive - do you know that ? You are, you are ! 
I suppose you must be suffering, and suffering genuindy, too, because 
of your simple-mindedness. I love beauty. I am a nihilist, but I love 
beauty. Don't nihilists love beauty ? The only thing they do not love 
is idols, but I love an idol. You are my idol ! You don't insult anyone, 
and everyone hates you ; you look on everyone as your equal, and 
everyone is afraid of you. That's good. No one will ever come up to 
you to slap you on the shoulder. You're an awful aristocrat. An aristo­
crat who goes in for democracy is irresistible. To sacrifice life - yours 
and another man's - is nothing to you. You're just the sort of man we 
need. I - I, especially, need a man like you. I don't know of anyone 
but you. You're my leader, you're my sun, and I am your worm.' 
He suddenly kissed his hand. A shiver ran down Stavrogin's spine 
and he snatched his hand away in dismay. They stopped. 
' Mad ! '  Stavrogin whispered. 
'I may be raving, I may be raving,' Verkhovensky agreed, speaking 
rapidly, ' but it is I who have thought of the first step ! Shigalyov 
would never have thought of the first step. There are hundreds of 
Shigalyovs. But only one man, only one man in Russia hit on the 
first step, and only one man knows how to take it. I am that man. 
Why are you staring at me ? It is you I need - you! Without you I am 
nothing. Without you I am a fly, an idea in a bottle, Columbus with­
out America.' 
Stavrogin stood looking intently into his mad eyes. 
' Listen,' Verkhovensky spoke rapidly, as though in a great hurry, 
continually seizing Stavrogin by the left sleeve, ' to begin with, we'll 
stir up trouble. I've already told you: we'll go to the common people; 
we'll win them over to our side. Do you realize that we are very 

IVAN THE CROWN-PRINCE 
421 
powerful already? Our party consists not only of those who kill and 
burn, or fire off pistols in the classical manner or bite their superiors. 
Such people are only in our way. Without discipline nothing has any 
meaning for me. You see, I'm a rogue, and not a Socialist, ha, hal 
Listen, I've summed them all up : the teacher who laughs with the 
children at their God and at their cradle is ours already. The barrister 
who defends an educated murderer by pleading that, being more men­
tally developed than his victims, he could not help murdering for 
money, is already one of us. Schoolboys who kill a peasant for the 
sake of a thrill are ours. The juries who acquit all criminals without 
distinction are ours. A public prosecutor, who trembles in court be­
cause he is not sufficiently progressive, is ours, ours. Administrators, 
authors - oh, there are lots and lots of us, and they don't know it them­
selves. On the other hand, the docility of schoolboys and fools has 
reached the highest pitch; the schoolmasters are full of bile; every­
where we see vanity reaching inordinate proportions, enormous bes­
tial appetites . . . .  Do you realize how many converts we shall make by 
trite and ready-made ideas ? When I went abroad, Littre's theory that 
crime is insanity was the vogue ; when I returned, crime was no 
longer insanity, but just commonsense, indeed, almost a duty and, at 
any rate, a noble protest. " How can an educated man be expected to 
refrain from killing his victim if he must have money ?" But this is 
only a beginning. The Russian God has already capitulated to cheap 
vodka. The peasants are drunk, the mothers are drunk, the children 
are drunk, the churches are empty, and all one hears in the courts is : 
"Two hundred strokes of the birch or stand us a gallon of vodka." 
Oh, let the present generation only grow up ! A pity we can't afford 
to wait, or we might have let them get more dnmk. Oh, what a pity 
there's no proletariat! But there will be, there wiJJ be - all points to 
that.' 
' It is a pity, too, we've grown more stupid,' Stavrogin muttered 
and walked on towards home. 
' Listen, I once saw a child of six who was taking his drunken mother 
home while she swore at him with foul words. You think I'm glad of 
it ? When she gets into our hands we shall, I daresay, cure her. If it 
should be necessary, we'll drive them for forty years into the wilder­
ness. But one or two generations of vice are absolutely essential now. 
Monstrous, disgusting vice which turns man into an abject, cowardly, 

422 
THE D E V I L S · P A R T  T W O  
cruel, and selfish wretch - that's what we want ! And, on top of it, a 
little " fresh blood " to make them get used to it. What are you laugh­
ing at ? I'm not contradicting myself. I'm on I y contradicting the 
philanthropists and Shigalyov, not myself. I'm a rogue, and not a 
socialist. Ha, ha, ha ! A pity we haven't got much time, though. I pro­
mised Karmazinov to start in May and fmish by the first of October. 
Too soon ? Ha, ha ! Do you know what, Stavrogin ? Though Russian 
people use foul language, they have so far shown no trace of cynicism. 
Do you know that the peasant slave had more self-respect than Kar­
mazinov ? He was Hogged, but he preserved his gods, while Karma­
zinov hasn't.' 
' My dear Verkhovensky, I've listened to you for the first time, and 
it is with amazement that I'm listening to you,' said Stavrogin. 
' You're not a socialist at all, it seems, but some sort of - ambitious 
politician, aren't you ?' 
'A rogue, a rogue. Are you worried about what sort of man I am ? 
I'll tell you presently what I am. That's what I've been leading up to. 
It wasn't for nothing that I kissed your hand. But it is necessary that 
the common people, too, should believe that we know what we want 
and that the others are merely " waving their cudgels about and hitting 
their own men ". Oh, if only we had more time! The trouble is we 
have no time. We shall proclaim destruction - why ? why ? - well, 
because the idea is so fascinating ! But - we must get a little exercise. 
We'll have a few fires - we'll spread a few legends. Every mangy 
little group will be useful. I shall find you such keen fellows in each 
one of these groups that they'll be glad to do some shooting and will 
be grateful for the honour. Very well, then, so an upheaval will start. 
There's going to be such a to-do as the world has never seen. Russia 
will become shrouded in a fog, the earth will weep for its old gods. 
And it will be then that we shall let loose - whom ?' 
' Whom ?' 
' Ivan the Crown-prince.' 
' Who-om ? '  
' I  van the Crown-prince. You! You ! '  
Stavrogin thought for a moment. 
'A pretender ?' he asked suddenly, gazing at the madman in sheer 
amazement. ' Oh, so that's your plan, is it?' 
' We shall say that he is "in hiding",' Verkhovensky said quietly, in 

IVAN THE CRO WN-PR I N C E  
423 
1 sort of amorous whisper, as though he really were drunk. ' Do you 
mow what the expression "in hiding " means ? But he will appear. 
He will appear. We shall spread a legend which will be much better 
:han that of the sect of castrates. He exists, but no one has ever seen 
:Urn. Oh, what a wonderful legend one could spread! And the main 
thing is - a new force is coming. And that's what they want. That's 
what they are weeping for. After all, what does socialism amount to ? 
It has destroyed the old forces, but hasn't put any new ones in their 
place. But here we have a force, a tremendous force, something un­
neard of. We need only one lever to lift up the earth. Everything will 
rise up ! '  
' So you've been seriously counting on me, have you ?' Stavrogin 
asked, with a malicious laugh. 
' Why do you laugh, and so maliciously ? Don't frighten me. I'm 
like a little child now : I can be frightened to death by just one smile 
like that. Listen, I shan't show you to anyone, not to anyone : it must 
be so. He exists, but no one has seen him. He is in hiding. And, you 
know, I daresay one could show you to one man out of ten thousand, 
for instance. And the news will spread all over the face of the earth : 
"We've seen him! We've seen him! "  The leader of the flagellants, 
Ivan Filippovich, had been seen, too, ascending into heaven on a 
chariot in the presence of a multitude of people. They saw him with 
their " own" eyes. And you are not Ivan Filippovich ; you are beauti­
ful, you are proud as a god, you are seeking nothing for yourself, 
you are "in hiding" with the halo of a victim round your head. The 
main thing is the legend! You will conquer them. You will have only 
to look, and you will conquer them. He is bearing a new truth and he 
is " in hiding ". And he'll pass two or three judgements of Solomon. 
Our small groups, our small groups of five - we don't need news­
papers. If we grant only one petition out of ten thousand, all will 
come to us with petitions. In every country district every peasant will 
know that there is, as it were, somewhere a hollow tree where he can 
put his petition. And the whole earth will resound with the cry : "A 
new and righteous law is coming," and the sea will be in a turmoil 
and the whole trumpery show will crash to the ground, and then we 
shall consider how to erect an edif1ce of stone. For the first time; We 
shall build it, we, we alone ! ' 
' Madness,' said Stavrogin. 

THE DEVILS • PART TWO 
' Why, why don't you want to ? Are you afraid? But I seized on you 
just because you're afraid of nothing. Have I been unreasonable ? But 
so far I am only a Columbus without America. Can a Columbw 
without America be reasonable ?' 
Stavrogin said nothing. Meanwhile they had arrived at his house 
and stopped at the front door. 
' Listen,' Verkhovensky said, bending down to his ear, 'I'll do it for 
you without the money. I'll finish with Mary to-morrow - without 
the money, and I shall bring Lisa to you to-morrow. Do you want 
Lisa - to-morrow ?' 
' Has he really gone offhis head ?' Stavrogin thought, smiling. 
The front door was opened. 
' Stavrogin, is America ours ?' asked Verkhovensky, seizing him by 
the hand for the last time. 
'What for?' Stavrogin asked earnestly and sternly. 
'You don't want to - I knew it! '  Verkhovensky cried in a fit of 
furious anger. 'You're lying, you miserable, lecherous, stunted, pam­
pered little aristocrat. I don't believe you. You've a wolf's appetite. 
Understand that you've run up too big an account, and that I can't 
give you up now. There's no one like you in the whole world! I in­
vented you abroad; I invented it all while loolcing at you. Ifl had not 
watched you from a corner, nothing of all this would have occurred 
to me! '  
Stavrogin mounted the stairs without answering. 
' Stavrogin,' Verkhovensky shouted after him, 'I give you one day 
- two days - three - I can't give you more than three, and then I shall 
come for your answer! '  
9 
Stepan Verkhovensky is Raided 
1 N the meantime an incident occurred which surprised me and shocked 
Stepan Verkhovensky. At eight o'clock in.,the morning Nastasya came 
running to me from him with the news that her master was 'raided'. 
At first I could not understand what she was talking about; al I could 
make out was that officials had 'raided' Mr Verkhovensky's house 
and had taken away some papers, and that a soldier tied them up in a 

STEPAN VERKHOVENSKY I S  RAIDED 
425 
,undle and 'carried them off in a wheel-barrow'. The news struck me 
s absurd. I hastened at once to Mr Verkhovensky. 
I found him in a most remarkable state of mind : upset and greatly 
gitated, but at the same time decidedly triumphant. On the table in 
he middle of the room the samovar was boiling, and a glass of tea 
vas poured out, but untouched and forgotten. Mr Verkhovensky 
11as walking round the table, pacing the room from one corner to 
mother, without realizing what he was doing. He was dressed as usual 
n his red woollen sweater, but, on catching sight of me, he hastened 
o put on his coat and waistcoat, which he had never done before 
Nhen any of his intimate friends caught him wearing his red woollen 
:weater. He seized me warmly by the hand at once. 
'En.fin un ami!' he cried, heaving a deep sigh. 'Cher, I have sent for 
fOU only, and no one knows anything. I must tell Nastasya to lock the 
:loors and not let anyone in, except them, of course. Vous comprtnez?' 
He looked at me uneasily, as though expecting an answer. I natur­
llly enough began questioning him at once, and with some difficulty 
found out from his incoherent speech, interspersed with frequent 
pauses and digressions, that at seven o'clock in the morning an official 
'suddenly '  came to see him. 
· 'Pardon, J' ai oublie son nom. li n' est pas du pays, but I think Lembke 
must have brought him, quelque chose de f,fle et d'allemand dans Ia 
physionomie. II s' appelle Rosenthal.' 
'You're sure it wasn't Blum ? '  
'Blum. Yes, that's the name h e  gave me. Vous le connaissez? Quclque 
chose d'Jui/,Cte et de tres COI1fellt dans fa_fi_«IITI', pourtmlf (T£\S severe, roide et 
serieux. A police type, one of those who carry out orders, je m'y con­
nais. I was still asleep, and -just fancy - he asked me if he could " have 
a look " at my books and manuscripts, oui,je m' en souviens, il a employe 
ce mM. He didn't arrest me, but only the books . . . .  II se tenait a dis­
tance, and when he started explaining to me why he had come, he 
looked as if I - en.fin il avait 1' air de croire que je tomberai sur lui immMi­
atement et que je commencerai a le battre comme platre. To us ces gens du bas 
hage sont cornme ra, when they are dealing with a decent fellow. I need 
hardly say that I tmderstood everything at once. Voila vingt ans que 
je m'y prepare. I unlocked all my drawers for him and handed him all 
the keys ; gave them to him myself, gave him everything.]' eta is dignc 
et calme. From my books he took the foreign editions of Herzen's 

THE DEVILS • PART TWO 
works, the bonnd volume of The Bell, four copies of my poem, et 
enfin tout fa. Then my papers and my letters et quelques-unes de mes 
eba11ches historiques, critiq11es et politiques. They took it all :tway. Nas­
tasya tells me that a soldier carted it away in a wheel-barrow and that 
it was covered with an apron ; oui, c'est cela, an apron.' 
The whole thing seemed crazy. Who could make head or tail of it? 
I began firing questions at him again: did Blum come alone or with 
somebody else ? In whose name? By what right ? How had he dared? 
How did he explain it ? 
'II eta it seul, bien seul, but I think there was someone else dans I' anti­
chambre, oui,je m' en souviens, et puis - yes, there was someone else, too, 
I believe, and there was a guard in the passage. You'd better ask Nas­
tasya; she knows all about it better than I.]' eta is surexciti, voyez-vo11s. 
II parfait, il parfait - un tas de choses; however, he said very little, it was 
I who was talking all the time. I told him the story of my life, from 
that point of view only, of course. J'etais surexcite, mais digne,je vous 
/'assure. But I'm afraid I cried, I believe. They got the wheel-barrow 
from the shop next door.' 
'Good heavens ! how could it all have happened ? But for God's 
sake, sir, let me have some more details. What you tell me sounds like 
a dream! '  
'Cher, I feel as if l were in a dream still. Savez-vous! II a pronond le 
nom de Teliatnikof, and I'm thinking that it was he who was hiding in 
the passage. Yes, I remember he suggested calling the public prosecu­
tor and, I think, also Dmitry Mitrych 
- qui me doit encore quinze 
roubles de whist, soit dit en passant. But I got the better of them, and 
what do I care for Dmitry Mitrych ? I think I asked him to keep the 
whole thing dark. Yes, I begged him very much indeed, I'm afraid 
I've rather demeaned myself, comment croyez-vous? Enfin, il a consenti. 
Oh, yes, I remember, it was he, as a matter of fact, who asked me to 
keep it dark because he had merely come " to have a look round" et 
rien de plus, and nothing more, nothing - er - and that if they fonnd 
nothing, nothing was going to happen. So that we fmished it aJI en 
amis, je suis tout-21-Jait content.' 
' But, good heavens, sir, ' I cried with friendly indignation, 'he 
only offered you the usual guarantees and the usual procedure in such 
cases, and you yourself declined to take them.' 
'No, it's much better without any guarantees. What do we want a 

STEPAN VBRKHOVENSKY IS RAIDED 
427 
public scandal for? For the time being let it just be en amis. In our 
town, you know, if they get to know of it - mes ennemis - et puis a 
quoi bon ce procureur, ce cochon de notre procureur, qui deux fois m' a manque 
de politesse et qu' on a rosse a plaisir 1' autre annee chez cette charmante et 
belle Natalya Pavlovna, quand il ce cacha dans son boudoir. Et puis, mon 
ami, don't contradict me and don't please, don't, make me feel bad 
about it, because there's nothing more Wlbearable when a man is wor­
ried than for a hWidred friends to point out to him that he's behaved 
like a fool. But please sit down and have some tea. I confess, I'm aw­
fully tired - ought I not to lie down and put vinegar on my head -
what do you think?' 
'Yes, yes, of course,' I cried, 'and some ice, too. You look very up­
set. You're pale and your hands are trembling. Lie down, have a rest 
and tell me about it later. I'll sit beside you and wait.' 
He did not want to lie down, but I insisted. Nastasya brought a cup 
of vinegar; I wetted a towel and put it to his head. Then Nastasya 
stood on a chair and proceeded to light the little lamp in front of the 
icon in the corner. I noticed it with surprise; there had never been a 
little lamp there before, but now it had suddenly appeared. 
' I  told her to put it there this morning after they had gone,' Mr 
Verkhovensky muttered, giving me a cWlling look. 'Quand on a de ces 
choses dans Ia chambre et qu' on vient vous arreter, it makes an impression 
and they are boWid to report that they have seen it -' 
Having finished with the lamp, Nastasya stood in the doorway, put 
her right hand to her cheek, and began gazing at us with a tearful 
expression. 
'Eloignez-la on some excuse,' he said, nodding to me from the sofa. 
'Can't bear that Russian pity et puis fa m'embete.' 
But she went away herself. I noticed that he kept looking at the 
door and listening for any soWid in the passage. 
'II Jaut etre pret, voyez-vous,' he said, giving me a meaningful look, 
'chaque moment - they may come, take me away et foit - the man's 
vanished into thin air.' 
'Good Lord! Who will come ? Who's going to take you away ?' 
'Voyez-vous, mon cher, I asked him straight as he was going out what 
they would do with me now.' 
'You'd better have asked him where they were going to exile you 
to,' I cried with the same indignation. 

THE D EVILS · PART TWO 
' 
'That's what I had in mind when I asked him the question, but he] 
went away without answering. Voyez-vous, so far as tmderwear and' 
clothes are concerned, warm clothes, especially, that depe:nds entirely 
on them. If they tell me to take them - all right, but they're quite 
capable of sending me off in a soldier's greatcoat. But,' he went on, 
lowering his voice suddenly and glancing at the door through which 
Nastasya had just gone out, 'I've put thirty roubles quietly away in the 
lining of my waistcoat pocket- here, feel it, please. I don't think they'll 
make me take off my waistcoat, and I left seven roubles in my purse 
for appearance's sake - that's all I possess, as it were. You see, there on 
the table - some small change and a few coppers, so that it will never 
enter their heads that I've hidden the money. They'll think that's all 
I have. For goodness only knows where I shall have to sleep to-night.' 
I bowed my head at such madness. It was clear that no man coulcl 
be arrested or searched as he had described it, and, no doubt, he must 
have got it all mixed up. It is true it all happened before the latest laws 
had come into force. It was no less true that, according to his own 
words, he had been offered the choice of a more correct procedure, 
but he got the better of them and declined it. But, of course, in those days 
- that is, not so long ago - a governor could in extreme cases - but, 
again, what sort of an extreme case could this be ? That was what 
baffled me. 
' I  daresay they must have had a telegram from Petersburg,' Stepan 
Verkhovensky said suddenly. 
'A telegram ! About you ? You mean, because of Herzen' s works 
and that poetic drama of yours ? Have you gone mad ? They could 
never arrest you for that.' 
I simply got angry. He pulled a face and was evidently hurt - not 
because I had shouted at him, but because I had suggested that he 
might not be arrested. 
' Who can tell in these times what he might be arrested for ? '  he 
muttered enigmatically. 
A wild and preposterous idea flashed through my mind. 
'Tell me, sir, as your friend, as your real friend,' I cried, 'I shan't 
betray you : are you a member of some secret society or not ? '  
And, to m y  surprise, he did not seem himself to be sure whether he 
was or was not a member of some secret society. 
'It depends how you look at it, voyez-vous -' 

STEPAN VERKHOVENSKY I S  RAIDED 
429 
'What do you mean by " how you look at it" ?' 
'Well, if you are wholeheartedly for progress, you - er - you can't 
possibly tell for certain. You don't think you belong to such a society, 
but before you know where you are, you seem to belong to some­
tllng or other.' 
'How's that possible ? It's either yes or no.' 
'Cela date de Peters bourg when she and I intended to found a periodi­
cal there, Mrs Stavrogin and I. That's what's at the bottom of it. We 
gave them the slip then, they forgot all about us, but now they've 
remembered. Cher, cher, don't you know me ?' he cried in a pained 
voice. 'And so they're going to take u;, put us in a covered wagon, 
and march us off to Siberia for the rest of our lives, or they might for­
get us in some fortress prison.' 
And he suddenly burst out crying bitterly. The tears gushed out of 
bis eyes. He covered his face with his red silk handkerchief and sobbed, 
sobbed convulsively for five minutes. I felt awful. This was the man 
whom we had looked upon as a prophet for twenty years. A preacher, 
a teacher, a patriarch. The Kukolnik who had borne himself so grandly 
and majestically before us all, whom we regarded with such admira­
tion, thinking it an honour to do so - and suddenly this man was sob­
bing like a naughty little child who is waiting for his teacher's return 
with the cane. I felt awfully sorry for him. He obviously believed in 
the 'covered wagon' as fumly as that I was sitting beside him, and he 
was waiting for it to arrive that very morning, that very minute, and 
all because of Herzen's works and some poetic drama of his ! Such 
complete, utter ignorance of everyday reality was both touching and 
somehow repulsive. 
He stopped crying at last, got up from the sofa, and started pacing 
the room again, continuing his conversation with me, and every mo­
ment looking out of the window and listening for any sound in the 
entrance hall. Our talk went on disjointedly. All my assurances and all 
my efforts to calm him rebounded from him like peas from a wall. He 
hardly listened to me, but still he wanted me badly to calm him, and 
he spoke to me without stopping, with that idea at the back of his 
mind. I saw that he could not do without me now and that he would 
not let me go for anything in the world. I stayed, and we sat for over 
two hours together. While talking to me, he remembered that Blum 
had taken away with him two political leaflets he had found in his place. 

430 
THE D E VILS · PART TWO 
'Political leaflets?' I was foolish enough to look frightened. 'Why 
have you -' 
'Oh,' he replied irritably (one moment he spoke to me irritably an( 
haughtily, and another in a terribly plaintive and humble tone o 
voice), 'they put ten through my door, but I had got rid of eight 
Blum took only two away with him.' And he suddenly got red in th1 
face with indignation. 'Vous me mettez avec ces gens-la! Do you real!; 
think that I like the company of those scoundrels, those secret scat 
terers of illegal literature, that nUserable son of mine, ces esprits-fort 
de Ia lacheti! Dear Lord!' 
'Oh dear, they haven't mistaken you for someone else, have they 
However, it's all nonsense. It just can't be true! '  I observed. 
'Savez-vous,' he suddenly burst out, 'I feel at times que je ferai la-ba 
quelque esclandre. Oh, please don't go ! Ma ca"iere est .finie aujourd' hui, f 
le sens. You know, I will probably fling myself upon somebody ther1 
and bite him, like that second lieutenant.' 
He gave me a strange look, a look that was frightened and at th1 
same time one that seemed to be intended to frighten me. He reall1 
was getting more and more irritated with someone or something a 
time passed and the 'covered wagon' did not appear; he was even get­
ting angry. Suddenly Nastasya, who had gone for something to th1 
passage from her kitchen, brushed against the clothes-stand, whid 
fell to the floor. Mr Verkhovensky trembled all over and stood stil 
rooted to the ground; but when the accident was explained, he almos 
screamed at Nastasya and, stamping, drove her back to the kitchen 
A minute later he said, looking at me in despair: 
'I'm done for! Cher,' he went on, suddenly sitting down beside me 
and looking intently and with a miserable expression into my eyes 
'cher, I'm not afraid of Siberia, I swear to you, oh,je vousjure' (tear. 
even started in his eyes), 'I'm afraid of something else . . . .' 
I guessed from the way he looked that he wanted at last to tell me 
something of the utmost importance, which he must have kept bad 
till that moment. 
'I'm afraid of the disgrace,' he whispered mysteriously. 
'What disgrace? Why, it's just the contrary! Believe me, sir, all tiW 
will be satisfactorily explained to-day and it will all end in yom 
favour.' 
'Are you so sure that they will pardon me?' 

STEPAN VERKHOVENSKY IS RAIDED 
43 1 
'What have they got to "pardon" you for ?  What a way to talk! 
What crime have you committed ? I assure you, you have done 
nothing ! '  
'Qu'en savez-vous; all my life has been - cher - they'll remember 
everything, and - and if they fmd nothing, it'll be al the worse,' he 
suddenly added, unexpectedly. 
'Al the worse ?' 
'Yes.' 
'I don't understand.' 
'My friend, my friend, let them send me to Siberia or to Archangel 
- let them deprive me of my civil rights - if I am to perish, let me 
perish! But 
- I'm afraid of something else,' he repeated again in a 
whisper, looking frightened and mysterious. 
'What? What are you afraid of?' 
' Of being flogged,' he said and looked at me with a worried expres­
sion on his face. 
'Who's going to flog you ?  Where ? What for ?' I cried, afraid that 
he might be going mad. 
'Where ? Why, there - where it's done.' 
'But where is it done ?' 
' Oh, cher,' he whispered almost in my ear, ' the floor suddenly 
parts from under you, you drop half through - everybody knows 
that.' 
' Fairy tales,' I cried, guessing what he meant. ' 0  ld fairy tales. 
Surely you haven't really been believing in them till now?' I burst 
out laughing. 
' Fairy tales ? There must be some foundation for these fairy tales. 
The man who's been flogged won't tell. I've pictured it all in my 
imagination thousands of times.' 
'But why should they do that to you? You've done nothing.' 
'All the worse. They'll realize that I've done nothing, and they'll 
8og me.' 
'And you're quite certain that that's why they're going to take you 
to Petersburg, are you?' 
' My friend, I've told you already that I regret nothing, ma carriere 
estfinie. Ever since she said good-bye to me at Skvoreshniki life's lost 
all meaning for me - but the disgrace, the disgrace, que dira-t-elle if she 
finds out?' 
· 

43 2 
T H E  D E V I L S · PART TWO 
f Je looked at me in despair and, poor fellow, flushed crimson. I ,  too, 
lowered my eyes. 
· She won't find anything out, because nothing is going to happen 
to \'OU. I feel as though I were talking to you for the first time in my 
life, sir, so greatly have you surprised me this morning.' 
' M y  dear friend, it is not fear. Suppose they pardon me, suppose 
they bring me back here and do nothing to me, I'm still done for. 
Elle 111e soupƶonnera toute rna vie- me, me, the poet, the thinker, the man 
she worshipped for twenty-two years ! '  
' it'll never enter her head.' 
' It will,' he whispered with utter conviction. 'I've discussed it with 
her many times in Petersburg, in Lent before we left, when we were 
both afraid. Ellc me soupƶonnera toute rna vie - and how am I to dis­
abme her ? It'll sound improbable. And, besides, can you think of any­
one in this wretched town who will believe me ? C' est invraisemblable. 
Et puis les.femmes. She'll be glad of it. She will be very sorry, sincerely 
sorry, like a true friend, but at heart - she will be glad of it. I shall give 
her a weapon against me for the rest of my life. Oh, my life's ruined! 
Twenty years of such perfect happiness with her - and now ! '  
He buried his face in his hands. 
' Oughtn't you to let Mrs Stavrogin know of what has happened at 
once, sir ? '  I proposed. 
'The Lord forbid ! '  he cried with a start, jumping to his feet. ' Not 
for anything in the world after what we said to each other when we 
partrd at Skvoreshniki - never, never ! '  
His eyes flashed. 
We went on sitting together for at least an hour, if not more, all the 
time expecting something to happen - we just could not get rid of 
that notion. He lay down again, even closed his eyes, and lay for 
twcntv minutes without speaking a word, so that I thought that he 
was asleep or unconscious. Suddenly he sat up impetuously, tore the 
towel offhis head, jumped up from the sofa, rushed up to the looking­
glass, tied his cravat with trembling fingers, and shouted to Nastasya 
in a voice of thunder for his coat, his new hat and his walking-stick. 
' I  can't bear it any longer,' he said in a shaking voice. ' I  can't, I can't ! 
I'll go myself.' 
' Where ? '  I asked, also jumping up. 
'To Lembke. Cher, I must; it is my duty. I'm a citizen, a man, and 

STEPAN VERKHOVENSKY I S  RAIDED 
433 
not a piece of wood. I have rights. I want my rights. For twenty years 
I never demanded my rights. All my life I have criminally neglected 
them - but now I'm going to demand them. He must tdl me every­
thing, everything. He received a telegram. He has no right to torment 
me. Let him arrest me, if he likes. Let him arrest me ! Let him arrest 
me! '  he kept screaming with a strange shrill note in his voice and 
stamping his feet. 
'I think you're quite right,' I said in a deliberately calm tone of 
voice, though I was very much afraid for him. ' It certainly is much 
better than to sit here in such a state of mental anguish, but I'm sorry 
I canot approve of your present mood. See what you look like and 
in what an awful state you're going there. II faut etre digne et calme 
avec Lembke. You really might fling yourself upon somebody there 
and bite him.' 
' I'm giving myself up. I'm walking straight into the lion's den.' 
'I'll come with you.' 
'I didn't expect anything less from you. I accept your sacrifice, the 
sacrifice of a true friend. But I shan't let you come farther than the 
house, no farther than that: you mustn't, you have no right to com­
promise yourself by being in my company. 0, croyez moi, je serai 
calme! I feel at this moment a Ia hauteur de tout ce qu'il y a de plus 
sacre . . . . '  
'I might even go into the house with you,' I interrupted him. 'I 
heard from that stupid committee through Vysotsky yesterday that 
they were counting on me and had invited me to act at to-morrow's 
fete as one of the stewards, or whatever they're called - I mean one 
of i.he six young men who've been appointed to look after the re­
freshments, look after the ladies, take the guests to their seats, and wear 
a rosette of crimson-and-white ribbon on the left shoulder. I meant to 
refuse, but now there's no reason in the world why I should not go 
into the house on the excuse of discussing it with Mrs Lembke herself. 
So we'll go in together, you see.' 
He listened, nodding his head, but I don't think he understood a 
word. We were standing in the doorway. 
'Cher,' he said, stretching out his hand to the lamp before the icon, 
'cher, I never believed in it but - so be it, so be it! '  He crossed himself 
'Allons!' 
'Well, that's better,' I thought to myself as I went out on the front 

434 
THE DEVILS · PART T W O  
steps with him. 'The fresh air will d o  him good ; he'll calm down, go 
back homr and - so to bed.' 
But I was coLmting without my host. On the way we became in­
volved in an adventure which shocked Mr Verkhovensky even more 
and was responsible for his making up his mind fmally - so that, I 
confess, I never expected our friend to show such energy as he sud­
denly showed that morning. Poor old friend! Good old friend ! 
1.0 
Filibusters. A Fatal Morning 
T H E  incident in which we became involved on the way was very 
remarkable too. But I must tell everything in order. An hour be­
fore Mr Verkhovensky and I went out into the street, a crowd of 
people marched through the town and was watched by many curious 
spectators. They were the workers from Spigulin's factory, about 
seventy of them or more. They marched through the streets very 
quietly, almost in silence, in a carefully arranged order. It was claimed 
afterwards that the seventy workers were delegates representing all 
the workers of the factory, about nine hundred all told, who intended 
to go to the Governor and, in the absence of the factory owners, ask 
him to deal with the manager, who had impudently cheated them 
when he closed the factory and paid off the workers, a fact about 
which there can be no doubt whatever now. Others still refuse to be­
lieve that there was an election of delegates, and they base their claim 
on the fact that seventy was too large a delegation to choose. They 
assert that the crowd of workmen simply consisted of those who had 
been most unfairly treated and that they came to ask the Governor 
to intercede on their behalf, so there could be no question of a gen­
eral ' mutiny ' of factory workers, the news of which created such a 
sensation afterwards. Others still passionately maintained that the 
seventy men were not just mutineers, but positively political agitators 
- that is to say, that they were not only the unruliest of the lot, but 
were also stirred up by the revolutionary leaflets left in the factory. In 
short, it is impossible to say even now whether there had been any 
incitement or even any outside influence. My personal opinion, 

FILIBUSTERS · A FATAL MORNING 
43 5 
however, is that the workers had not read the revolutionary leaflets, and 
that even if they had read them, they would not have understood a 
word, if only because the authors of those leaflets wrote them too ob­
scurely, in spite of the crudeness of their style. But as the workers 
really were in great straits, and the police to whom they had applied 
for help had refused to have anything to do with their plight, nothing 
could be more natural than that they should have decided to go in a 
body to ' the general himself', if possible even with a petition, draw 
up respectfully before his house and, the moment he appeared, fall 
down on their knees and cry out to him as if to Providence itself In 
my view, that did not require either a mutiny or delegates, for it is an 
old, historic custom; from days immemorial the Russian people have 
been fond of having a talk with ' the general himself', for the mere 
pleasure of it, even if that talk had no other tangible result. 
And that is why I am absolutely convinced that though Peter Verk­
hovensky, Liputin, and perhaps someone else - even Fedka, perhaps -
had gone about among the workmen and talked to them (as indeed 
there is good evidence of this), they must have spoken to no more than 
two or three, or five at most, just by way of an experiment, and that 
nothing came of those talks. As for the mutiny, if the factory workers 
had understood anything of their propaganda, they would have 
stopped listening to them at once, since they would have considered 
it an utterly inappropriate and absurd business. Fedka was a different 
matter : he had apparently much better luck than Peter. It is pretty 
clear now from the collected evidence that Fedka and two factory 
workers did indeed take part in causing the fire in the town three days 
later, and two months after the fire three workers who had been em­
ployed at the factory were arrested on charges of robbery and arson. 
But if Fedka did succeed in inducing them to resort to direct action, 
it was only those five, for no similar charges were ever brought 
against the others. 
Be that as it may, the workers arrived at last in a crowd at the little 
square in front of the Governor's residence and drew up there soberly 
and silently. I am told that as soon as they stopped they took off their 
hats, that is, half an hour perhaps before the arrival of the Governor, 
who, as though on purpose, did not happen to be at home at the time. 
The police appeared immediately, firSt in small groups and then in full 
force. They began, of course, by ordering the workers in menacing 

THE D EVILS • PART TWO 
tones to disperse. But the workers refused to budge, like a flock o 
sheep at a fence, replying laconically that they had come to see ' the 
general himself '. There could be no doubt that they were firmlɦ 
determined to carry out their plan. The unnatural shouting of th 
police ceased ; it was quickly succeeded by quiet deliberations, mys 
terious orders issued in whispers, and stem, bustling anxiety, whicl 
furrowed the brows of the police officers. The Police Commissione 
preferred to wait for the arrival of Lembke himself. It is nonsense te 
say that he came galloping in a troika at breakneck speed and startee 
dealing out blows before he even had time to alight. He certainly wa 
fond of driving at breakneck speed through our town in his carriag' 
with a yellow back, and while the trace horses, utterly 'debauched 
by the fast driving, were driven more and more frantic, to the grea 
delight of all the shopkeepers of the arcade, he would rise in hi 
carriage, draw himself up to his full height, holding on to the stra] 
which had been fixed for that purpose at the side, and stretching forti 
his right hand like a figure on a monument, survey the town in tha 
posture. But in the present case he did not start hitting out right anc 
left, and though, as he got out of his carriage, he could not refrai.t 
from using strong language, he did it merely not to lose his popular 
ity. It is even greater nonsense to assert that soldiers with fixed bayo· 
nets had been drawn up and that a telegram had been sent somewhere 
demanding the dispatch of artillery and Cossacks : those are fairy tale 
in which their inventors themselves no longer believe now. The ro 
port that firemen had brought their water-barrels from which the] 
had drenched the people with water is also nonsense. All that happen 
ed was that the Police Commissioner shouted in his excitement tha 
he would not let one of them get off scot free and that he would le 
them have a taste of bread and water; that, no doubt, was the origin o 
the story of the water-barrels which afterwards found its way into the 
Moscow and Petersburg papers. The most accurate version was tha 
a police cordon was immediately formed round the crowd, and ; 
special messenger - the police inspector of the first district - was sent fo1 
Lembke and drove off in the Police Commissioner's open carriage 
on the road to Skvoreshniki, where he knew von Lembke had gone 
in his carriage about half an hour before. 
But, I must confess, I can't fmd an answer to the question hoVI 
an unimportant, that is, an ordinary crowd of petitioners, it is trlU 

FILIBUSTERS ' A FATAL MORNING 
437 
seventy men strong, was from the very outset transformed into a 
rebellion which threatened the safety of the State? Why was Lembke 
himself so quick to accept that idea when he arrived twenty minutes 
later with the messenger ? My theory is (and, again, it is only my 
private opinion, of course) that our Police Commissioner, who was a 
great friend of the factory manager's, fmd it to his advantage to re­
present the crowd in that light to von Lembke just because he did not 
want him to start a proper enquiry into the affair ; and it was Lembke 
himself who had given him the idea. During the last two days he had 
had two special and secret talks with him - very confused talks, it is 
true, but which suggested the idea to the Police Commissioner that 
the Governor was firmly of the opinion that the political leaflets were 
of great significance and that someone or other was inciting the Spigu­
lin workers to stage a socialist rising, and so firmly was he convinced 
of that, that he would quite possibly have been sorry had the story of 
the incitement proved to be a mare's nest. ' Wants to earn some re­
cognition in Petersburg,' our cunning Police Commissioner thought 
as he left Lembke. ' Well, why not? It won't do me any harm.' 
' But I'm convinced that poor Lembke would never have desired a 
rebellion even if it had brought him recognition. He was a most con­
scientious Civil Servant who had remained in a state of innocence up 
to the time of his marriage. And was he to blame that instead of being 
put in the inocent job of a buyer of fuel for Government departments 
and marrying an equally innocent Minchen, a forty-year-old princess 
had raised him to her social level ? I have it from an almost unimpeach­
able source that it was from that fatal morning that the first unmistak­
able symptoms of the mental condition began which, it is said, even­
tually brought poor Lembke to that notorious private nursing home 
in Switzerland where he is supposed to be recuperating now. But if 
we admit that the unmistakable symptoms of something came to light 
that morning, then it is also right to assume, in my opinion, that simi­
lar symptoms may have been in evidence the day before, though per­
haps not so clearly. I happen to know from the most intimate sources 
(well, assume that Mrs Lembke herself, not in triumph but almost in 
remorse - for a woman is never capable of complete remorse - had told 
me part of that story herself), I happen to know that Mr Lembke had 
gone to see his wife on the previous night - in the small hours, in tact, 
at about two o'clock in the morning - had wakened her and had 

THE DEVILS • PART TWO 
demanded that she should hear his ' ultimatum '. His demand was so in­
sistent that she was obliged to get out of bed, high! y indignant and in 
her curling papers, and, sitting down on a settee, had to listen to what 
her husband had to say, though with an expression of sardonic con­
tempt. It was only then that she realized for the firSt time how far gone 
her husband was, and she was secret! y appalled. She ought to have 
come to her senses and relented, but she concealed her horror and be­
came more stubborn than ever. She (like any other married woman, I 
suppose) had her own method of dealing with her husband, which she 
had tried many times a I ready and which had more than once driven him 
into a state of frenzy. Mrs Lembke's method consisted of remaining 
contemptuousl y silent for one hour, two hours, a whole day, and al­
most for three days ; keeping silent at all costs, whatever he said or did, 
evrn if he had attempted to throw himself out of a third-floor win­
dow -a method unbearable for a sensitive man ! Whether Mrs Lembke 
was punishing her husband for his blunders of the last few days and 
for his jealousy, as the Governor of a province, of her administrative 
abilities ; whether she was indignant at his criticism of her behaviour 
with the young people and our society as a whole and his utter lack of 
understanding of her subtle and far-sighted political aims ; or whether 
she was angry with him for his stupid and senseless jealousy of Peter 
Verkhovensky - whatever the reason, she made up her mind not to 
give in even now, notwithstanding the lateness of the hour and the 
fact that never before had she seen Mr Lembke in such a state of 
agit::tion. 
Pacing up and down and all over the rugs of her boudoir, he told 
her everything - everything, incoherently it is true, but everything 
that had accumulated in his heart, tor it was ' beyond endurance '. He 
began by asserting that everybody was laughing at him and that he 
was ' being led by the nose '. 'Damn the expression,' he cried shrilly at 
once, noticing her smile, ' let it be " by the nose", fur it's true ! No, 
madam, the time has come; please, understand it's not the time for 
laughter or female coquetry now. We're not in the boudoir of a 
mincing society lady, but, we are, as it were, two abstract creatures in 
a balloon who have met to speak the truth.' (He was, of course, get­
ting confused and could not find the right words in which to express 
his thoughts, correct though they were.) ' It is you - you, madam -
who were responsible for my giving up my old job. I took up my 

FILIBUSTERS • A FATAL MORNING 
439 
present one entirely for your sake, for the sake of your ambition. You 
smile sarcastically ? Don't look so triumphant, and don't be in such a 
hurry. I want you to know, madam, I want you to know that I could, 
that I should have been able to cope with t:h.:s job of mine, and not 
only with this job alone but with a dozen such jobs, because I've 
got the ability. But with you, madam, I can't cope with it, for when 
you are present I have no abilities. Two centres of administration can­
not co-exist, and you've created two such centres - one in my office 
and the other in your boudoir, two centres of power; and I won't 
allow it, I won't allow it! In the service, as in marriage, there must be 
only one centre, for two are impossible. How have you repaid me ?' he 
went on shouting. ' Our married life has consisted only in your demon­
strating to me all the time, every hour, that I'm a nonentity, that I'm 
a fool and even a villain, while I have been forced to prove to you all 
the time, every hour, and in a most humiliating way, that I was not a 
nonentity, that I was not at all such a fool and that I impress everybody 
with my honourable character. Well, don't you think it's humiliating 
for both of us ?' At this point he began stamping rapidly with both 
feet on the carpet, so that Mrs Lembke was obliged to draw herself up 
with a look of stern dignity. He calmed down quickly, but grew senti­
mental and began sobbing (yes, sobbing), smiting his breast for al­
most five minutes, getting more and more beside himself because of 
Mrs Lembke's profound silence. At length he made a fatal mistake and 
let out that he was jealous of Peter Verkhovensky. Realizing that he 
had made an utter fool ofhimself, he went olfthe deep end and began 
shouting that he would not allow anyone to deny God, that he would 
close down her 'impudent salon of unbelievers', that a governor was 
in duty bound to believe in God and ' hence his wife was, too ' ; that 
he would not put up with the young men; that ' you, madam, out of 
a sense of your own dignity, should have taken your husband's part 
and have stood up for his intelligence even if he had no abilities (and 
I'm not at all without abilities), and yet it is you who're realy respon­
sible for everyone here despising me, it is you who have put them 
all up to it! '  He shouted that he would put an end to the woman 
question, that he'd smoke it out, that he'd forbid and break up the 
idiotic fete in aid of the governesses (to hell with them !) to-morrow, 
and that the first governess he came across he'd throw out of the 
province to-morrow morning 'with a Cossack, madam! '  'Just ro 

440 
THE D E VILS · PART T W O  
spite you, just to spite you,' he screamed. 'Do you know,' he shoutedi 
- ' do you know that your blackguards are inciting the men at the 
factory and that I'm aware of it ? Do you know that they're scattering 
revolutionary leaflets deliberately, de-li-berately, madam ! Do you 
know that I know the names of four of these blackguards, and that 
I'm going off my head, going off my head completely, com-pletely ! '  
But at tlus point Mrs Lembke suddenly broke her silence and de­
dared sternly that she herself had long known about the criminal 
plans and that the whole thing was absurd, that he had taken too seri­
ous a view of it, and that as for the foolish boys, she knew not only 
four, but all of them (she told a lie) ; but that she had no intention 
whatever of going off her head because of it, but, on the contrary, 
trusted more than ever her own intelligence and had hopes of bring­
ing the whole affair to a peaceful conclusion : to encourage the young 
people, bring them back to their senses, prove to them suddenly and 
unexpectedly that their plots were known, and then point out new 
aims for more reasonable and more beneficial activity to them. 
Oh, what a shock that was to Mr Lembke ! Learning that Peter 
Verkhovensky had again deceived him and again made him look such 
a fool, that he had told her much more and much sooner than he had 
told him, and, fmally, that Peter Verkhovensky was quite likely the 
chief instigator of all these criminal plots, he flew into a rage. ' I  want 
you to know, you fatuous but poisonous woman,' he cried, snapping 
his bonds all at once, ' I  want you to know that I shall arrest your nn­
worthy lover at once, put him in chains and have him taken to a fort­
ress or - I shall jump out of the window this minute before your very 
eyes ! '  In reply to this tirade Mrs Lembke, turning green with rage, at 
once burst into prolonged and ringing laughter, going off into shrill 
peals, such as one can hear at a French play when a Parisian actress, 
imported at a salary of roo,ooo roubles and playing flirts, laughs in 
her husband's face for daring to be jealous of her. Von Lembke was 
about to rush to the window, but suddenly stopped dead and, folding 
his hands on his chest and pale as a corpse, looked at his laughing 
spouse with baleful eyes. 'Do you know, do you know, Julia,' he said 
in a breathless and imploring voice, ' do you know that I, too, can do 
something ?' But at the renewed outburst of even louder laughter 
which followed his last words, he clenched his teeth, groaned and 
rushed, not to the window, but at his wife with his raised fist! He did 

FILIBUSTERS · A FATAL MORNING 
441 
not bring it down - no, a hundred times no ; but it was the end. 
Oblivious of everything, he rushed to his study and, dressed as he was, 
flung himself face downwards on the bed, wrapped himself convul­
sively in a sheet, pulling it over his head, and lay like that for two 
hours - without falling asleep, without thinking of anything, with a 
heavy load on his heart and blank, stark despair in his soul. From time 
to time a violent, agonizing shudder shook his whole body feverishly. 
All sorts of incoherent images floated into his mind without any rela­
tion to anything : he would think, for instance, of the old clock which 
used to hang on the wall of his room in Petersburg about fifteen years 
ago and which had lost its minute-hand ; or of the high-spirited Civil 
Servant Millebois, with whom he had once caught a sparrow in 
Alexandrovsky Park and had laughed so that they could be heard all 
over the park, remembering that one of them had already reached the 
rank of collegiate assessor. I suppose he must have fallen asleep at about 
seven in the morning and, without being aware of it, slept soundly 
with pleasant dreams. Waking about ten o'clock, he suddenly jumped 
wildly out of bed, remembered everything in a flash, and gave himself 
a re֎ounding slap on the forehead : he had no breakfast and refused to 
receive Blum, or the Police Commissioner, or the official who came 
to remind him that the members of a certain committee were expect­
ing him to take the chair that morning ; he did not listen to anything 
and did not want to understand, but rushed like a madman to his wife's 
rooms. There Sofia Antonovna, an old gentlewoman who had lived 
with Mrs Lembke for many years, explained to him that his wife had 
left at ten o'clock with a large company in three carriages to pay a call 
on Mrs Stavrogin at Skvoreshniki, to inspect the house for the second 
fete that was planned to take place in a fortnight, and that the visit had 
been arranged with Mrs Stavrogin three days before. Stunned by the 
news, Lembke returned to his study and impetuously ordered the car­
riage. He could hardly wait for it to be brought. His soul was yearning 
for Julia - to look at her, to be near her for five minutes; perhaps she 
would glance at him, notice him, smile at him as she used to, forgive 
him - oh ! ' What's the matter with the carriage?' Mechanically he 
opened a thick book lying on the table (sometimes he liked to try his 
fortune by the book, opening it at random and reading the first three 
lines on the top of the right-hand page). What he read was : ' Tout est 
pour le mieux dans le meilleur des mondes possibles.' Voltaire, Ca11didc. He 

442 
THE DEVI LS · PART TWO 
snorted and ran out to get into his carriage : 'To Skvoreshniki ! '  The 
driver said afterwards that his master urged him on to drive faster all 
the way, but that as soon as they got near the mansion he suddenly! 
told him to turn round and drive back to town: ' Faster, please! 
Faster ! '  But before they reached the town ramparts, 'he told me to 
stop again, got out of the carriage, crossed the road and went into a 
field ; I thought he wanted to relieve himself, but he stopped and 
started looking at the flowers ; stood there for hours, he did; it was 
queer all right, it was ; made me wonder, I can tell you.' That was the 
driver's testimony. I remember the weather that morning: it was a 
bright, cold, but windy September day; before Lembke, as he had 
walked off the road, stretched the harsh landscape of bare fields from 
which the crops had long been gathered ; the howling wind tossed the 
wretched remnants of some dying yellow flowers. Did he want to 
compare himself and his fate to those stunted flowers battered by the 
autumn and the frost? I don't think so. Indeed, I can't help feeling 
that he did not do anything of the sort, and that he was not even aware 
of the existence of the flowers, in spite of the evidence of the driver 
and of the Police Inspector of the first district, who drove up at that 
moment in the Police Commissioner's carriage and who asserted after­
wards that he really did find the Governor standing with a bunch of 
yellow flowers in his hand. The Police Inspector - an ecstatically ad­
ministrative figure, Vassily Ivanovich Filibusterov by name - had only 
been in our town a short time, but had already distinguished himself 
and became known far and wide as a quite incredibly conscientious 
officer who was inordinately zealous in the execution of his duties and 
as an inveterate drunkard. Jumping out of the carriage, and not in the 
least surprised at the sight of the Governor's occupation, he rapped 
out his report with the cocksure air of a lunatic that ' disturbances 
have broken out in the town'. 
'What? What was that? '  Lembke turned round to him with a stem 
face, but without the slightest surprise or any recollection of his car­
riage and his driver, just as though he had been in his own study. 
'Police Inspector of the first district, Filibusterov, sir. There's rioting 
. 
, 
m town. 
' Filibusters ?' Lembke repeated thoughtfully. 
'Yes, sir. The Spigulin workmen are rioting.' 
'The Spigulin men ! '  

FILI BUSTERS · A FATAL M O R N I N G  
443 
The name ' Spigulin ' seemed to remind him of something. He even 
gave a start and put his fmger to his forehead : 'The Spigulin men ! '  
He went silently and without hurrying to his carriage, still deep in 
thought, took his seat and told the driver to drive to the town. The 
Police Inspector followed in the open carriage. 
I suppose many interesting things must have occurred to him 
vaguely during that drive, but I doubt whether he had any clear idea 
or any defmite intention as he drove into the square in front of the 
Governor's residence. But the moment he saw the crowd of ' rioters ' 
drawn up resolutely in orderly ranks, the police cordon, the helpless 
(and quite likely deliberately helpless) Police Commissioner, and the 
general expectation directed towards him, all the blood rushed to Ius 
heart. He got out of his carriage looking very pale. 
'Caps off! '  he said in a hardly audible voice, panting for breath. 
' On your knees ! '  he shrieked unexpectedly, unexpectedly for himself, 
too, and it was perhaps in that very unexpectedness that one must 
look for an explanation of what followed. It's just the sort of thing 
that happens on the snow-covered hills at Shrove-tide : is it possible 
for >. sledge to stop in the middle of a hill as it rushes headlong down 
the slope ? To his misfortune, Lembke had all his life been distinguish­
ed for the imperturbability of his character, and never shouted at any­
one or stamped his feet; and such people are much more dangerous if 
for some reason their sledge should happen to hurtle down a hillside 
suddenly. Everything was going round and round before his eyes. 
' Filibusters ! '  he screamed even more shrilly and more absurdly, and 
his voice broke. 
He stood there, still not knowing what he was going to do, but 
knowing and feeling with all his being that he would most certainly 
do something at once. 
' Lord ! '  someone cried in the crowd. A young fellow began to cross 
himself; three or four men were really about to kneel, but the rest 
moved forward three steps in one mass and, suddenly, all began to 
yell : ' Sir - we were engaged for the whole time - the manager -
you can't say -' and so on. It was impossible to make anything 
Out. 
Alas, Lembke was not in a condition to make anything out : the 
flowers were still in his hands. The riot was as real to him as the 
'covered wagons ' were to Stepan Verkhovensky a short while ago. 

44 
THE D EVILS ' PART TWO 
And in the crowd of ' rioters ' who were glaring at him he could se< 
Peter Verkhovensky going from one man to another and 'inciting 
them, Peter Verkhovensky, who had never left his mind for a momcn' 
since the day before, Peter Verkhovensky - the hated Peter Verkho­
vcnsky. 
' Birch-rods ! '  he shouted still more Wlexpected.ly. 
A dead silence ensued. 
That was what happened at the very beginrung, according to tlH 
most reliable accounts and my own conjectures. But the accounts o: 
what happened afterwards are not so exact, and the same is true of m) 
co1̺ectures. There are some facts, however. 
To begin with, the birch-rods materialized somehow too quickly 
they had obviously been got ready beforehand by the Commissione1 
of Police, just in case they might be needed. Only two men, or three 
at most, were flogged ; I am absolutely sure of that. The report tha1 
all the men or, at any rate, half of the men were flogged is sheer in· 
vention. The story that some poor gentlewoman who happened tc 
pass by at the time was seized and for some reason also flogged is pure 
nonsense; yet I myself read the report about this gentlewoman in om 
of the Petersburg papers a few days later. Many people in the towr 
talked of a woman called Avdotya Tarapygin, who was an inmate oi 
the worklwuse near the cemetery. She was said to have been on he1 
way back to the workhouse from a visit and, passing the square, tc 
have pushed her way through the crowd out of natural curiosity. 
Seeing what was going on, she cried out, ' What a shame ! '  and spat. 
For doing that, it is alleged, she had been seized and ' dealt with'. 
That incident was not only published in the papers, but even led to J 
subscription being raised on her behalf on the spur of the moment. l 
subscribed twenty copecks myself. And what do you think ? It ap­
pears now that no woman by the name ofTarapygin ever lived in the 
workhouse. I went to make inquiries at the workhouse near the ceme­
tery myself, and they had never heard of a woman called Tarapygin 
there ; what's more, they were quite offended when I told them about 
the rumour that was going round. But I mention this non-existent 
Avdotya Tarapygin because what happened to her (if she really 
existed) nearly happened to Mr Verkhovensky ; and indeed it is quite 
possible that the incident in which Mr Verkhovensky became in­
volved had given rise to the rumour - that is to say, in its passage 

FILIBUSTERS · A FATAL MORNING 
445 
from mouth to mouth he was simply transformed into a Mrs Tara­
pygin. The thing that puzzles me most was how he had succeeded in 
giving me the slip the moment we walked into the square. Anticipat­
ing some trouble, I meant to take him round the square straight to the 
entrance of the Governor's residence, but I am afraid my own curi­
osity was rather aroused and I stopped only for one minute to inquire 
what was happening from the first person I came across. Suddenly I 
realized that Mr Verkhovensky was no longer at my side. Instinct­
ively I ran olf immediately to look for him in the most dangerous 
place; for some reason, I had a premonition that his sledge, too, was 
hurtling down the hill. And, to be sure, I fotmd him in the very centre 
of things. I remember grasping him by the hand; but he gazed quietly 
and proudly at me with a look of immense authority? 
'Cher,' he said in a voice in which the quivering note of a man in 
anguish could be perceived, 'if they all settle things so unceremoni­
ously here in the square before us, what could we expect from that 
one - ifhe should happen to act on his own authority.' 
And trembling with indignation and with an irresistible desire to 
defy them, he pointed his stern, accusing finger at Filibusterov, who 
was standing and glaring at us only two paces away. 
'That one!' cried the policeman, blind with rage. 'Which that one ? 
And who are you ?' He rushed up to him, clenching his fist. 'Who 
are you ?' he roared furiously, hysterically and desperately (I may add 
that he knew perfectly well who Stepan Verkhovensky was). 
Another moment and he would, of course, have caught Mr Verk­
hovensky by the scrulf of the neck, but, fortunately, Lembke turned 
his head at his cry. He looked bewilderedly but intently at Mr Verkho­
vensky, as though wondering who he might be, and then suddenly 
waved his hand impatiently. Filibusterov stopped short. I dragged 
Mr Verkhovensky away from the crowd. However, he was probably 
glad himself to get away. 
'Home, home,' I insisted. 'It is no doubt thanks to Lembke that you 
were not beaten.' 
'You go, my friend. I'm to blame for exposing you to danger. You 
have a future and a career of some sort, but I - mon heure est sonnee.' 
He firmly mounted the steps of the Governor's residence. The por­
ter knew me, and I told him that we were both going to see Mrs 
Lembke. In the reception-room we sat down and waited. I did not 

T H E  D E V I L S · PART TWO 
want to leave my friend, but thought it unnecessary to say anything 
more to him. He looked like a man who had made up his mind to die 
for his country. We did not sit down side by side, but in different 
corners of the room, I nearer to the entrance door ; he facing me, in 
the far end of the room, his head lowered pensively, leaning lightly on 
his walking-stick. He held his wide-brimmed hat in his left hand. We 
sat like that for about ten minutes. 
2 
Lembke suddenly came in hurriedly in the company of the Police 
Commissioner, looked absent-mindedly at us and, paying no atten­
tion to us, was about to enter his study on the right. But Mr Verkho­
vensky got up and stopped before him, barring the way. The tall 
figure of Mr Verkhovensky, which was so unlike any other, made an 
impression ; Lembke stopped. 
'Who's this ?' he muttered, looking bewildered, as though address­
ing his question to the Police Commissioner, without, however, turn­
ing his head towards him, as he went on gazing at Mr Verkhovensky. 
' Retired collegiate assessor Stepan Verkhovensky, sir,' Stepan 
Verkhovensky replied with a dignified inclination of the head. 
The Governor went on gazing at him with a very blank expression, 
though. 
' What is it ?' he asked laconically, like a man in authority, turning 
his ear with fastidious impatience towards Mr Verkhovensky, having 
fmally taken him for an ordinary person with a written petition of 
some sort. 
'My house was to-day searched by an official who was acting in 
your name, sir. I should therefore like to -' 
' Name ? Name ?' Lembke asked impatiently, as though he suddenly 
remembered something. 
Mr V erkhovensky repeated his name with an even more dignified 
air. 
' Oh-h ! It's that - er - hotbed . . . .  You, sir, have shown yourself to 
be - er - you're a professor ? A professor ? '  
'I once had the honour of delivering some lectures to the young 
men of a certain tmiversity.' 
'The young men ! '  Lembke seemed to give a violent start, though I 

FILIB U S TERS • A FATAL MORNING 
447 
am ready to bet that he understood very little of what it was all about 
and not even with whom he was talking. 
' I  shan't permit it, sir ! '  he shouted, suddenly getting very angry. 
'I won't permit young men. It's all these revolutionary leaflets. It's an 
attack on society, sir, an attack by pirates - filibusters . . . .  What is it 
you want ?' 
' On the contrary, sir, it is your wife who wants me to read some­
thing to-morrow at her fete. I don't want anything. I merely carne to 
demand my rights.' 
'At the fete ? There will be no fete. I won't allow your fete, sir! 
Lectures ? Lectures ?' he screamed, beside himself. 
'I'd appreciate it, sir, if you would be so good as to talk to me more 
civilly, and not stamp and shout at me as if I were a boy.' 
'I don't suppose you realize who you're talking to, sir! '  cried 
Lembke, turning red in the face. 
' Perfectly, sir.' 
'I'm protecting society, sir, while you're destroymg it! Destroying ! 
You, sir - wait, though, I believe I know something about you. It was 
you who were employed as a tutor in Mrs Stavrogin's house, weren't 
you ? '  
'Yes, sir, I was - er - a  tutor in - er - Mrs Stavrogin's house.' 
'And for twenty years you've been forcing all the ideas that have 
now come to a head on people - the fruits of your teaching we're 
gathering now. It was you I saw just now in the square. Beware, sir, 
beware ! Th.e ideas you stand for are well known. You may be sure 
that I'm keeping an eye on you. I can't permit your lectures, sir. I 
can't, sir. Don't come with such requests to me. ' 
He was again about to pass on. 
'I repeat, sir, that you are mistaken : it was your wife who asked me 
to give - not a lecture, but a literary reading of some kind, at to­
morrow's fete. But I decline to do so myself now. My request to you, 
sir, is that you should explain to me, if you can, why my house was 
searched to-day - what was the reason for the search ? Some of my 
books and papers, and private letters, which I value for sentimental 
reasons, were taken away from me and trundled through the streets 
in a wheel-barrow -' 
'Who made the search ?' said Lembke, recollecting himself com­
pletely with a start and suddenly flushing crimson. 

THE DEVILS • PART TWO 
He turned quickly to the Police Commissioner. At that moment the 
tall, stooping, gawky figure of Blum appeared in the doorway. 
' That's the official who made it,' said Mr Verkhovensky, pointing 
to him. 
Blum stepped forward with a guilty, but far from contrite, look. 
'Vous ne faites que des betises,' Lembke remarked to him in a vexed 
and angry tone, and suddenly he was transformed and completely 
recovered his senses. 
' I'm sorry,' he murmured, overwhelmed with confusion and turn­
ing red in the face. ' It was all, I suppose, a blunder, a misunderstanding 
- just a misunderstanding.' 
'As a young man, sir,' Mr Verkhovensky observed, 'I happened to 
be the witness of a very characteristic incident. In the corridor of a 
theatre one evening, a man went up quickly to another and gave him 
a resounding slap in the face in the presence of a crowd of people. 
Noticing immediately, however, that his victim was not at all the per­
son he had intended to slap, but quite a different person who re­
sembled him slightly, he said spitefully and in a hurry, like a man who 
cannot afford to waste his time, just as you, sir, did just now: "I'm 
sorry, I've made a mistake ; it was a misunderstanding, just a mis­
understanding." And when the insulted man quite naturally went on 
protesting in a loud voice, he observed to him with great anoyance, 
" But I'm telling you that it was a misunderstanding, so what are you 
shouting for.?'" 
' Yes, of course, I see,' Lembke said with a wry smile; 'it's very amus­
ing, I'm sure; but - but can't you see how unhappy I am myself?' 
He almost screamed the last words and - and, I believe, he felt like 
hiding his face in his hands. 
This unexpectedly painful exclamation, almost a sob, was unbear­
able. That was probably the first moment since the previous day of his 
full and clear realization of all that had happened, and it was followed 
instantaneously by complete and humiliating despair that could not be 
concealed - another moment and he would perhaps have burst out 
sobbing. Mr Verkhovensky looked wildly at him at first, then he sud­
denly bowed his head. 
' Sir,' he said in a deeply sympathetic voice, ' do not trouble yourself 
with my peevish complaint any longer, and just tell them to return 
my books and letters . . . .' 

FILIBUSTER S .  A FATAL MORNING 
449 
He was interrupted. For at that very moment Mrs Lembke returned 
noisily with all the party that had accompanied her. But I should like 
at this point to describe what occurred in much greater detail. 
To begin with, all of them, from all the three carriages, entered the 
reception-room in a crowd. There was a separate entrance to Mrs 
Lembke's private rooms on the left hand of the entrance hall. This 
time, however, they all went through the large reception-room, and 
I think that was because Stepan Verkhovensky was there, and because 
Mrs Lembke had been told about everything that had happened to 
him, as well as the incident with the Spigulin men, as soon as she drove 
into the town. It was Lyamshin who had managed to tell her. He had 
been left behind for some misdemeanour, and did not take part in the 
trip to Skvoreshniki, so that he had learnt about it before anyone else. 
With malicious glee he galloped off on a hired Cossack nag along the 
road to Skvoreshniki, hoping to meet the returning cavalcade with 
the glad tidings. I expect Mrs Lembke, in spite of her great determina­
tion, must have felt a little embarrassed on hearing such extraordinary 
news - but only for an instant. The political aspect of the affair, for 
example, would hardly have worried her, for Peter Verkhovensky had 
impressed upon her three or four times that it would be a good thing 
to give the Spigulin rowdies a good flogging, and Peter had certainly 
for some time been regarded by her as a great authority. 'But,' she 
must have thought to herself, ' I  shall make him pay for it all the same,' 
the ' him', of course, referring to her husband. I may add in passing 
that this time Peter, as though on purpose, had not taken part in the 
expedition, and no one had seen him since early morning. I must also 
mention, by the way, that after having received her visitors, Mrs 
Stavrogin returned with them to the town (in the same carriage as 
Mrs Lembke} to be present at the last meeting of the committee which 
was arranging the fete next day. She, too, was of course highly inter­
ested, and perhaps even agitated by the news Lyamshin brought con­
cerning Mr Verkhovensky. 
The settling of accounts with Mr Lembke began at once. Alas, he 
felt it coming the moment he caught sight of his excellent spouse. 
Quite openly and with a most charming smile she went quickly up to 

450 
THE D EVILS • P'AR T  TWO 
Mr Verkhovensky, held out her delightfully gloved hand to him and 
overwhelmed him with most flattering compliments, as though the 
only thing in the world she wanted to do that morning was to rush up 
to Mr Verkhovensky and be extremely kind to him because at last she 
saw him in her house. Not a single hint of the search that morning, as 
though she knew nothing about it. Not a word to her husband, not one 
glance in his direction, as though he had not been there at all. What's 
more, she at once peremptorily confiscated Mr Verkhovensky and 
carried him off to the drawing-room, as though she had had no argu­
ments with Lembke and as though she did not think it worth her while 
to continue them if there had been any. Again let me repeat: it seems to 
me that notwithstanding her high and mighty tone, Julia Lembke made 
another bad mistake in this particular ins.ance. Karmazinov was par­
ticularly helpful to her at this juncture. (He had taken part in the visit 
to Mrs Stavrogin's country house at Julia Lembke's special request and 
in that way had paid his visit, though indirectly, to Mrs Stavrogin, 
which, low-spirited as she was, greatly delighted her.) On seeing Mr 
Verkhovensky, he called out to him while still in the doorway (he 
came in after the rest) and rushed up to embrace him, interrupting 
even Mrs Lembke. 
' Haven't seen yon for ages, my dear fellow! At last . . . .  Excellent 
ami.' 
He went through the ceremony of exchanging kisses, offering his 
cheek. Mr Verkhovensky was so flustered that he could not help 
imprinting a kiss on it. 
'Cher,' he said to me that evening, recalling the events of that day, 
' I  wondered at that moment which of us was more contemptible - he 
who was embracing me with the idea of humiliating me, or I who 
despised him and his cheek, but who was kissing it, though I might 
have turned away - horrible !' 
' Well, tell me, my dear fellow, tell me everything,' Karmazinov 
mumbled in his affected voice, as though Mr Verkhovensky could 
possibly tell him the story of his life during the last twenty-five years. 
But that stupid piece of frivolity was considered to be 'good form '. 
'Remember, the last time we met was at a diner in Moscow in 
honour of Professor Granovsky, twenty-four years ago,' Mr Verkho­
vensky began quite reasonably (and hence not at all according to 
'good form'). 

FILIB USTERS · A FATAL MORNING 
45I 
'Ce cher homme,' Karmazinov interrupted shrilly and familiarly, 
3queezing his shoulder a little too amicably, 'but, my dear Mrs 
· Lembke, do take us to your drawing-room. He'll sit down there and 
tell us everything.' 
'And yet,' Mr Verkhovensky went on complaining to me that 
evening, shaking with anger, 'I never was on intimate terms with that 
bad-tempered old baggage. At the time we were almost boys and 
I'd begWl to hate him even then - just as he had me, of course.' 
Mrs Lembke's salon filled up quickly. Mrs Stavrogin was particu­
larly excited, though she tried her best to appear indifferent, but I 
caught her once or twice glancing with hatred at Karmazinov and 
with anger at Mr Verkhovensky - she was angry with him in antici­
pation, angry with him out of jealousy, out of love: if Mr Verkho­
vensky had been guilty of some stupid biWlder this time and had 
alowed himself to be snubbed by Karmazinov in the presence of the 
whole company, she would, I can't help thinking, have immediately 
jumped up and thrashed him. I have forgotten to say that Lisa was 
also there, and I had never seen her more radiant, carelessly gay and 
happy. Mr Drozdov was there too, of course. In the crowd of young 
ladies and meretricious yoWig men, who composed Mrs Lembke's 
usual retinue and among whom this meretriciousness was taken for 
gaiety and cheap cynicism for wit, I noticed one or two new faces: a 
very obsequious Pole, who had just arrived in our town, a German 
doctor, a healthy-looking old man who kept laughing aloud and with 
enjoyment at his own jokes, and, lastly, a very yoWig princeling from 
Petersburg who looked like an automaton but had the grand manners 
of a statesman and wore a terribly high collar. But I could see that 
Julia Lembke thought greatly of this visitor and was even worried 
about the impression her salon was making on him. 
'Cher M. Karmazinov,' Me Verkhovensky began, assuming a very 
picturesque pose on the sofa and suddenly beginning to talk in a voice 
which was no less affected than Karmazinov's, ' cher M. Karmazinov, 
the life of a man of our time and of well-known convictions must 
appear very monotonous after an interval of twenty years.' 
The German burst out into a loud and abrupt laugh which sounded 
just as though he had neighed, Wider the impression that Mr Verkho­
vensky had said something terribly amusing. Mr Verkhovensky 
looked at him with studied surprise, without, however, producing the 

452 
THE D E V I L S · PART T W O  
slightest effect. The prince, too, glanced at the German, turning his 
head and collar to him and putting on his pince-nez without showing 
the slightest curiosity, though. 
' . . .  Must appear monotonous,' Mr Verkhovensky repeated on pur­
pose, drawling each word unblushingly. ' My life, too, has been like 
that during this quarter of a century, et comme on trouve partout plus de 
moines que de raison and as I'm entirely in agreement with this sentiment, 
it has turned out that during the whole of this quarter of a century -' 
'C'est charmant, les moines,' Mrs Lembke whispered, turning to Mrs 
Stavrogin who was sitting beside her. 
Mrs Stavrogin replied by a proud look. But Karmazinov could not 
bear the success of the French phrase and interrupted Mr Verkhoven­
sky quickly and shrilly. 
' For my part, I'm quite satisfied so far as that is concerned, and I've 
been living in Karlsruhe for the last seven years. And when last year 
the Town Council decided to lay down a new water-pipe, I felt in my 
heart that this question of water-pipes in Karlsruhe was much dearer 
to me than all the questions of my beloved mother-country - during 
the whole period of these so-called reforms.' 
' I  can't help sympathizing with you,' Mr Verkhovensky sighed, in­
clining his head impressively, ' much as it hurts my feelings.' 
Mrs Lembke was triumphant : the conversation was becoming both 
profound and political. 
'A sewage pipe ? '  the doctor inquired loudly. 
'A water-pipe, doctor, a water-pipe, and I even helped them to 
draw up the plan.' 
The doctor went off into a peal oflaughter. Many people also burst 
out laughing, this time in the doctor's face, who did not seem to be 
aware of it, but was very pleased that everyone was laughing. 
' I'm afraid I must disagree with you, Karmazinov,' Mrs Lembke 
hastened to put in. ' Karlsruhe is all very well, but you are fond of 
mystifications, and tlus time we shan't believe you. What Russian 
writer has created so many modern characters, has made us aware of 
so many modern problems, and has drawn our attention to these highly 
important modern points which make up the modern type of states­
man ? You, only you and no one else. You can assure us as much as 
you like of your indifference to your native country and your fright­
ful interest in the Karlsruhe water-pipes ! Ha, ha! '  

FILIBUSTERS · A FATAL MORNING 
453 
'Why, I don't deny,' Karmazinov declared in his mincing voice, 
' that I have shown up all the faults of the Slavophils in the character 
of Pogozhev and all the faults of the Westerners in the character of 
Nikodimov -' 
'Not all, surely,' Lyamshin whispered softly. 
'But I do tlus just by the way, to kill time which hangs on my hands 
and - to satisfy the persistent demands of my fellow countrymen.' 
' I  suppose you know, Mr Verkhovensky,' Mrs Lembke went on 
ecstatically, ' that to-morrow we shall have the joy of hearing the de­
lightful lines - one of the latest of Mr Karmazinov's most exquisite 
literary inspirations - it is called Mcrci. He declares in this piece that he 
will write no more, that nothing in the world will make him, even if 
an angel from heaven or, better still, our best society were to beg him 
to change his mind. In a word, he's laying down Ius pen for good, and 
this charming Merci is addressed to the public as a token of gratitude 
for the constant enthusiasm with which it has for so many years fol­
lowed his unremitting services to honest Russian thought.' 
Julia Lembke was quite blissfully happy. 
' Yes, I'm going to make my farewell. I shall say my Merci and de­
part, and there Ý in Karlsruhe - I shall close my eyes.' Karmazinov was 
gradually growing sentimental. 
Like many of our great writers (and we have so many great writers), 
he could not resist flattery and began to weaken at once, notwithstand­
ing his penetrating wit. But I cannot help thinking that this is excus­
able. I am told that one of our Shakespeares was careless enough to 
declare in a private conversation that ' we, great men, can't do other­
wise', etc., and did not even notice it. 
'There in Karlsruhe I shall close my eyes. All that is left for us great 
men after our work's done is to close our eyes as soon as possible 
without seeking a reward. I, too, shall do so.' 
' Let me have your address, sir, and I'll come to Karlsruhe to visit 
your grave,' said the German, going off into a peal of laughter. 
' Nowadays they even transport the dead by train,' one of the in­
significant young men said unexpectedly. 
Lyamshin squealed with delight. Julia Lembke frowned. Nicholas 
Stavrogin came in. 
'And I was told that you were dragged off to the police-station,' 
he said loudly, addressing himself first of all to Mr Verkhovensky. 

454 
THE D E VILS · PART . TWO 
' No, that was only a matter of private policy,' Mr Verkhovensky 
punned. 
' But I hope that it will not have the slightest influence on my re­
quest,' Mrs Lembke again put in quickly. ' I  hope that in spite of that 
unforttmate incident, which I can't for the life of me understand, you 
will not disappoint our eager expectations and rob us of the enjoy­
ment of hearing your reading at our literary matinee.' 
' I'm afraid I - er - I don't know - now -' 
' My dear Mrs Stavrogin, I really am so unlucky - and fancy just 
when I was so anxious to make the personal acquaintance of one of 
our most remarkable and independent Russian thinkers, ahd now Mr 
Verkhovensky suddenly expresses his intention of deserting us.' 
' Your compliment, madam, was uttered in so audible a voice that, 
of course, I couldn't help hearing it,' Mr Verkhovensky said with a 
flourish, emphasizing every word, ' but I cannot believe that my 
humble person is so indispensable at your fete to-morrow. However, 
I -' 
' You're spoiling him ! '  cried PeterVerkhovensky, bursting into the 
room. ' I've only just taken him in hand and suddenly - in one morn­
ing - a search, an arrest, a police officer seizes him by the collar, and 
now ladies are saying sweet nothings to him in the drawing-room of 
the Governor of our town! Why, every bone in his body must be 
aching with rapture; he never dreamt of such a triumph. Dear me, I 
expect he'll start denouncing the socialists now! '  
' Impossible, Peter ! Socialism is too great an idea for Mr Verkho­
vensky not to realize it' - Mrs Lembke took Mr Verkhovensky's part 
energetically. 
'A great idea, but tho5e who profess it are not always giants, et 
brisons-la, mon cher,' Mr Verkhovensky concluded, addressing his son 
and rising gracefully from his seat. 
But at this moment a most unexpected thing happened. Von 
Lembke had been in the drawing-room for some time, but no one 
seemed to have noticed him, though they had all seen him come in. 
In accordance with her old policy, Mrs Lembke continued to ignore 
him. He took up his position near the door and listened gloomily and 
with a stem face to the conversation. Hearing the thinly disguised 
references to the events of the morning, he began stirring agitatedly; 
first he stared at the Prince, evidently struck by the protruding comers 

FI LIBUSTERS • A FATAL MORNING 
455 
of his stifly starched collar ; then he seemed to give a sudden start 
on hearing the voice of Peter Verkhovensky and seeing him rushing 
in, and as soon as Mr Verkhovensky had finished his sentence about 
the socialists, he suddenly went up to him, pushing aside Lyamshin, 
who at once jumped back with an affected gesture of surprise, rubbing 
his shoulder and pretending to have been terribly hurt. 
'That's enough! '  said von Lembke, gripping the dismayed Mr 
Verkhovensky forcefully by the hand and squeezing it with all his 
might in his. 'Enough! The filibusters of our time have been fotmd 
out. Not another word. Measures have been taken.' 
He spoke in a loud voice which could be heard by all in the room, 
and concluded energetically. The impression he created was painful. 
They all felt that something was wrong. I saw Mrs Lembke tum pale. 
The effect was heightened by a stupid accident. After announcing that 
measures had been taken, Lembke turned sharply and walked quickly 
out of the room, but after taking a couple of steps, he tripped over a 
rug, lurched forward, and almost fell. He stood still for a moment, 
stared at the spot where he had tripped over, and saying aloud, ' Have 
it changed ! '  walked out of the room. Mrs Lembke ran after him. 
After she was gone, an uproar arose in which it was dificult to make 
anything out. Some said that he was 
• upset', others that he was 
'touched' ; still others tapped their foreheads; Lyamshin, in the corner, 
put his two fingers above his forehead. Hints were made at some 
domestic scenes - all in a whisper, of course. No one thought ofleav­
ing, for all were expecting something. I don't know what Mrs Lembke 
had managed to do, but five minutes later she came back, doing her 
best to appear calm. She replied evasively that Mr Lembke was a little 
excited, but that that was nothing, that he had been like that since 
childhood, that she knew 'much better', and that the fete next day 
would, of course, cheer him up. She then said a few more Battering 
words to Mr Verkhovensky, but simply out of politeness, and con­
cluded by a loud invitation to the members of the committee to open 
their meeting. At this point those who were not members of the com­
mittee began to prepare to go home ; but the painful incidents of this 
fatal day were not yet at an end. 
The moment Nicholas Stavrogin entered the room I noticed that 
Lisa threw a quick and penetrating glance at him and did not take her 
eyes off him for a long time afterwards. She stared at him so long that 

THE DEVILS · PART TWO 
at last i t  attracted attention. I saw M r  Drozdov leaning over to her 
from behind, evidently wishing to whisper something to her, but he 
apparently changed his mind and drew himself up quickly, looking 
round at everybody guiltily. Nicholas Stavrogin, too, aroused every­
body's curiosity : his face was paler than usual and he looked very 
absent-minded. Having flung his question at Mr Verkhovensky as 
soon as he entered the room, he seemed to forget about him at once, 
and I really think that he even forgot to go up to Mrs Lembke. He did 
not look once at Lisa, not because he did not want to, but, I maintain, 
because he did not notice her, either. And suddenly, after a short pause 
following Mrs Lembke's invitation to open the meeting without 
wasting any more time - Lisa spoke in a ringing and deliberately loud 
voice. She called to Nicholas Stavrogin. 
'Mr Stavrogin,' she said, ' a  certain captain, who calls himself your 
relation, the brother of your wife, and whose name is Lebyatkin, 
keeps writing improper letters to me in which he complains of you 
and promises to tell me some secrets about you. If he really is a rela­
tion of yours, I'd be grateful if you would forbid him to insult me 
and save me from lmpleasantness.' 
There was a fearful challenge in those words - everyone realized 
that. The accusation was unmistakable, though perhaps rather un­
expected even to her. I got the impression of a man who, screwing up 
his eyes, is about to throw himself off a roof. 
But Stavrogin's answer was even more extraordinary. 
To begin with, it was certainly very strange that he was not at all 
surprised, and listened to Lisa with unruffled attention. Neither con­
fusion nor anger was reflected on his face. He replied to the fatal ques­
tion simply, ftrmly, and with an air of absolute readiness. 
' Yes, I have the misfortlme to be a relation of that man. I have been 
the husband of his sister, nee Lebyatkin, for nearly five years. You 
may be sure I shall convey your demands to him as soon as possible 
and I promise you he will never trouble you again.' 
I shall never forget the horror on Mrs Stavrogin's face. She got up 
from her scat with a frenzied look, her right hand raised before her as 
though she were defending herself against an assailant. Stavrogin 
looked at her, at Lisa, at the spectators, and suddenly smiled with in­
fmite arrogance ; he walked out of the room unhurriedly. Everyone 
saw how Lisa jumped up from the sofa the moment Stavrogin turned 

FILI B U STERS • A FATAL MORNING 
457 
to go and quite plainly made a movement to run after him; but she 
recollected herself and did not run after him; she left the room quietly, 
without saying a word to anyone and without looking at anyone, 
accompanied, of course, by Mr Drozdov, who rushed after her. 
I shall say nothing of the uproar and the talks in the town that even­
ing. Mrs Stavrogin shut herself up in her town house and Stavrogin, 
I was told, drove straight to Skvoreshniki without seeing his mother. 
Mr Verkhovensky sent me that evening to cette chere amie to beg her 
to permit him to go to see her, but she would not receive me. He 
was terribly shocked; he wept. ' Such a marriage ! '  he kept repeating, 
'Such a marriage! Such a frightful thing to happen in the family ! '  
However, he remembered Karmazinov, too, and abused him terribly. 
He was getting himself ready energetically for next day's reading and 
- the artistic temperament - rehearsed it before a looking-glass, trying 
to memorize all the puns and jokes he had made in the course of his 
life and which he had carefully written down in a note-book, so as to 
insert them into his reading next day. 
'My friend,' he said to me, evidently wishing to justify himself, ' I  
do this for the sake of a great idea. Cher ami, for the first time in 
twenty years I've begun to move and suddenly I'm off - whither I 
know not - but I'm off. . .  . ' 

II 
-, 
,. : ,  
P A R T  T H R E E II,,. 
t 
I 
1 
The Fete. Part One 
THE FETE DID TAKE PLACE N O TWITHSTA N DING THE PERPLEXI­
ties of the previous ' Spigulin ' day. I can't help thinking that even if 
Lembke had died that very night, the fete would still have taken place 
next morning - so special was the significance Mrs Lembke ascribed 
to it. Alas, up to the last minute she remained completely blind and 
had no idea of the real state of public opinion. In the end no one be­
lieved that the festive day would pass without some distressing inci­
dent, without some 'catastrophe', as some people expressed it, rub­
bing their hands in anticipation. Many people, indeed, tried to assume 
a most gloomy and knowing air; but, generally speaking, every pub­
lic scandal cheers a Russian up no end. It is true that what we fdt was 
something much more serious than the mere longing for a scandal : 
there was a general sense of irritation, something implacably mali­
cious ; it seemed as though everyone were thoroughly sick of every­
thing. The prevalent public feeling was one of a vague, strained sort 
of cynicism, a forced cynicism, as it were. The ladies alone were not 
in the least vague, but that, too, only on one particular point: -
namely, their relentless hatred of Julia Lembke. The ladies of all poli­
tical opinions were agreed about that. And Mrs Lembke, poor thing, 
did not even suspect it ; up to the last hour she was convinced that she 
had a ' following ' and that all of them were still ' fanatically loyal ' to 
her. 
I have already hinted that all sorts oflow-class individuals had made 
an appearance among us. In troubled times of uncertainty or transition 

THE FETE · PART ONE 
459 
all sorts of low individuals always appear everywhere. I am not talk­
ing about the so-called ' progressives ', who are always in a greater 
hurry than everyone else (that is their chief concern) and whose aims, 
though mostly absurd, are more or less definite. No, I am speaking 
only of the rabble. This rabble, which you will fmd in any society, 
usually rises to the surface in every period of transition, and is not only 
without any aim, but also without an inkling of an idea, merely ex­
pressing with all its strength unrest and impatience. And yet this 
rabble, without realizing it itself, almost always finds itself under the 
command of tl1e small crowd of ' progrcssi ves ', who act with a de­
finite aim, and it is they who direct this scum where they like, pro­
vided they themselves are not composed of utter idiots, which, how­
ever, happens, too. It is said, for instance, in our town, now that it is 
all over, tl1at Peter Verkhovensky was controlled by the Internationale, 
Mrs Lembke by Peter Verkhovensky, while she, in turn, controlled, 
wtder his command, every kind of rabble. The most sound intellects 
among us are now surprised at themselves : how could they have been 
so stupid at the time ? What our troubled times were about or what 
the transition was we were passing through, I don't know, and I don't 
suppose anyone knows - except perhaps some of those visitors of ours. 
And yet the most worthless individuals suddenly gained a predomin­
ant influence and began loudly criticizing everything sacred, whereas 
before they had never dared open their mouths, while the foremost 
people among us, who had hitherto satisfactorily kept the upper hand, 
began suddenly listening to them, keeping silent themselves ; and 
some of them most shamelessly tittered their approval. People like 
Lyamshin, Telyatnikov, landowners like Gogol's Tentyotnikov, 
snivelling home-bred Radishchevs, wretched little Jews with a mourn­
ful but haughty smile, guffawing travellers, poets with political ten­
dencies from the capital, poets who made up for their lack of political 
tendencies or talent by wearing peasant coats and tarred boots, majors 
and colonels, who laughed at the senselessness of their profession and 
who for an extra rouble would be ready to take olf their swords and 
leave the army for a job as railway clerks ; generals who had left their 
posts to become lawyers ; educated arbitrators between the peasants 
and the landowners and little merchants who were still educating 
themselves, innumerable divinity students, women who were the em­
bodiment of the woman question - all iliese sudden! y gained the upper 

THE D EVILS · PART THREE 
hand among us, and over whom ? Over the club, over men who occu­
pied high positions in the Civil Service, over generals with wooden 
legs, and over the most strict and unapproachable ladies of our society. 
If Mrs Stavrogin herself, with her darling son, almost ran errands for 
all that rabble, right up to the time of the catastrophe, then our other 
local Minervas may to a certain extent be pardoned their temporary 
aberration. Now, as I have already mentioned, everything is laid at the 
door of the wretched Internationale. This idea is now so generally 
accepted that it is offered up as an explanation to visitors to our town. 
Quite recently Councillor Kubrikov, a man of sixty-two, wearing the 
order ofSt Stanislaus round his neck, came forward ofhis own accord 
and declared in an ecstatic voice that for fully three months he had 
been under the influence of the Internationale. But when, with due re­
gard to his advanced age and services, he was invited to be a little more 
specific, he stuck firmly to his statement, though he could bring no 
documentary evidence except that he 'had felt it with every fibre in 
his body', so that they did not even think it necessary to continue with 
his cross-examiD.ation. 
. 
Let me repeat again. Even among us there was a small group of 
sober-minded people who had held aloof from the very beginning 
and who even locked themselves up. But what lock can hold out 
against natural law ? There are marriageable girls in the most careful 
families, and they have to go to dances. And so these young ladies also 
ended up by subscribing to the governesses' fund. It was generally be­
lived that the ball was going to be a brilliant social occasion - some­
thing, indeed, quite terrific. All sorts of marvellous stories were told 
about it. There were rumours of princes with lorgnettes travelling. to 
the ball ; of ten stewards, all of them young bachelors, with ribbons on 
their left shoulders; of some Petersburg people who were the prime 
movers of the whole affair ; of Karmazinov, who had consented to 
read Merci in the costume of a governess of our province so as to in­
crease the subscriptions ; of a ' literary quadrille', also in fancy dress, 
each costume representing some literary movement. Finally, some 
'honest Russian thought' would also dance in costume, which was by 
itself alone a complete novelty. How was it possible not to subscribe ? 
Everyone subscribed. 

THE FETE · PART ONE 
2 
The programme of the festive day was divided into two parts : a liter­
ary matinǫe, from twelve to four o'clock, and a ball, from ten o'clock 
and through the night. But in this arrangement germs of disorder 
were concealed. To begin with, from the very start a rumour had 
gained grotmd among the public about a luncheon which was to be 
given immediately after the literary matinee, or even while it was go­
ing on, during a specially arranged interval. It was to be a free lun­
cheon, of course, which was to be part of the programme, and with 
champagne. The high price of the tickets (three roubles) gave sub­
stance to the rumour. ' Would I have subscribed for nothing ? The 
föte is supposed to go on for a whole day, so they jolly well have to 
provide food, or the people will be famished,' - that is how people 
reasoned. I must confess that Mrs Lembke herself had given rise to 
the disastrous rumour by her own thoughtlessness. A month earlier, 
tmder the first spell of her great plan, she discussed her fete with any­
one she met, and she even sent a report to one of the Petersburg papers 
in which she declared that there would be toasts offered in the course 
of it. She seemed to be quite fascinated by those toasts ; she meant to 
vropose them herself, and kept composing them in anticipation. They 
had to explain what our main purpose was (what was it ? - I bet the 
poor woman composed nothing after all), to be published in the form 
of reports in the Moscow and Petersburg newspapers, to charm and 
rmpress the highest authorities in the land and then spread all over the 
provinces in Russia, arousing surprise and imitation. But for toasts one 
had to have champagne, and as it was impossible to drink champagne 
on an empty stomach, it followed that a luncheon became indispen­
sable, too. Later on, when, thanks to her efforts, a committee had been 
formed and the whole thing had been tackled in a more business-like 
maner, it was immediately made clear to her that if they were going 
to dream of banquets there would be little left for the governesses, 
however much money the subscriptions brought in. The problem 
could, therefore, be solved in one of two ways: either Belshazzar's 
feast with toasts and about ninety roubles for the governesses, or a con­
siderable amount of money with the föte only, as it were, as a m:Jtter 
of form. The committee, however, only wanted to frighten her a 
little. It naturally devised a third solution, a compromise solution 

T H E  D E V I L S · PART THREE 
based on common sense - that is to say, quite a decent fete in every 
respect, but without champagne, thus leaving quite a respectable sum 
of money over for the governesses : much more than ninety roubles. 
But Mrs Lembke would not agree ; a paltry compromise was not in 
her character. She decided there and then that if her first idea could 
not be realized, they should rush to the opposite extreme - namely, 
raise so enormous a sum of money that they would be the envy of all 
the other provinces. ' The public must be made to realize,' she con­
cluded her fiery speech to the committee, ' that the attainment of ob­
jects which are of universal human interest is of incomparably greater 
importance than any transient bodily enjoyments, that the fete is 
essentially only a proclamation of a great idea, and that therefore 
people ought to be satisfied with the most economic German ball, 
merely as a symbol, if, that is, we can't do without this odious ball 
altogether ! '  - so much did she suddenly detest it. But they pacified 
her at last. It was then that the ' literary quadrille '  and all the other 
aesthetic items were invented and proposed as substitutes for the bodi­
ly delights. It was then, too, that Karmazinov finally gave his consent 
to read Merci (till then he had only mumbled and kept them on tenter­
hooks) and so eradicate the very idea of food from the minds of our 
incontinent public. So the ball was again to become a magnificent 
public occasion, though of a differe҅t sort. But to keep at least one 
foot firmly on the ground, it was decided that tea with lemon and 
round biscuits should be served at the beginning of the ball, followed 
by cold orgeat and lemonade, and at the end even ices, and that was all. 
But for those who are always and everywhere hungry and, above all, 
thirsty, they might arrange a special buffet in the farthest room on the 
same floor, which would be under the management of Prokhorych 
(the club chef), who would - under the strictest supervision of the 
committee, however - serve anything they might ask for a special 
charge, a notice to be displayed on the doors of the ballroom to the 
effect that the buffet was not included in the programme. But next 
morning it was decided not to open the buffet at all, for it was feared 
that it might interfere with the reading, in spite of the fact that the 
buffet was to have been five rooms away from the White Hall in 
which Karmazinov had agreed to read Merci. 
It is interesting that the committee, including the most practical of 
its members, should have attached so much importance to that event -

THE FETE · PART ONE 
that is, to the reading of Merci. As for the people who were poetically 
11clined, the wife of the marshal of nobility, for instance, told Kar­
!laZinov that after the reading she would at once have a white marble 
;lab put up on the wall of the White Hall with an inscription in gold 
letters, to the effect that on such and such a date the great Russian and 
European writer, on laying down his pen, had read his Merci there and 
;o had for the first time taken leave of his Russian public, represented 
by the leading citizens of our town, and that this inscription would be 
read by those invited to the ball - that is, only five hours after Merci 
had been read. I know for a fact that it was Karmazinov who had de­
manded that under no circumstances should there be a buffet during 
!tis reading in the morning, though some members of the committee 
had pointed out that this was not at all how we liked to do things in 
our town. 
That was the state of affairs .at a time when in the town people still 
believed in a Belshazzar's feast - that is, in free drinks and refresh­
ments ; they believed in it to the last hour. Even the young ladies were 
dreaming oflots and lots of sweets and preserves and something more 
wonderful still. Everyone knew that an enormous sum of money had 
been subscribed, that practicaly the whole town was anxious to be at 
the festival, that people were coming from the surrounding country 
districts, and that all the tickets had been sold. It was also common 
knowledge that, in addition to the price paid for the tickets, many 
contributions had been received: Mrs Stavrogin, for example, had 
paid 300 roubles for her ticket and given all the flowers from her con­
servatory for the decoration of the balroom. The Marshal's wife (a 
committee member) provided the house and the lighting ; the club -
the music, the attendants, and gave up Prokhorych for the whole day. 
There were other contributions, though not so big, so that the idea 
was even mooted of reducing the original price of the tickets from 
three roubles to two. Indeed, the committee were at first afraid that 
the young ladies might not come if they had to pay three roubles for a 
ticket, and suggested issuing special family tickets, so that each family 
should pay for one girl only, while the other young ladies of the 
family, even if there were a dozen specimens, should be admitted free. 
But al their apprehensions proved to be groundless: it was just the 
young ladies who did tum up. Even the poorest Civil Servants brought 
their girls with them, and it was al too evident that if they had had no 

THE D E V I LS · PART THREE 
girls, i t  would never have occurred to them to subscribe. One quite 
insignificant secretary brought all his seven daughters, not to mention 
his wife, and his niece too, and every one of these ladies had a ticket 
in her hand for which three roubles had been paid. 
It can be imagined what a commotion it created in the town. Take, 
for instance, the fact that, the fete being divided into two parts, every 
lady had to have two different costumes each - a morning dress for the 
reading and an evening dress for the dances. Many middle-class people, 
as it became known afterwards, had pawned everything they had for 
that day, even the family linen and sheets and almost the mattresses, 
with our local Jews, who, as though on purpose, had been settling in 
our town in great numbers for the last two years, and whose numbers 
grew as time went on. Almost all our Civil Servants had asked for 
their salary in advance, and some of the landowners had even to sell 
some of their cattle they could not spare, and all because they simply 
had to bring their daughters dressed like grand ladies, and be able to 
hold their own with the others. The magnificence of the dresses this 
time was something quite unheard of in our town, which for a fort­
night before the fete was full of comic stories at once conveyed to 
Mrs Lembke's court by our wits. Caricatures depicting the plight of 
some families began to pass from hand to hand. I myself have seen 
some drawings of that sort in Mrs Lembke's album. All this became 
known to the people who were the material of these jokes. That was 
why, I think, Mrs Lembke became the object of such hatred among 
the families in our town. They all abuse her now and, when they 
think of it, are consumed with rage. But it was obvious even be­
fore that if the committee failed to please them in anything, or if 
something untoward were to happen at the ball, the outburst of in­
dignation would be quite astonishing. That was why everybody was 
secretly expecting a public scandal ; and if they were expecting it so 
much, it could not possibly fail to come about. 
Ptmctually at twelve o'clock the band struck up. As one of the 
stewards - that is, one of the twelve ' young gentlemen with a 
rosette ' 
- I saw with my own eyes how this day of ignominious 
memory began. It began with an unimaginable crush at the doors. 
How did it happen that everything went wrong from the very first, 
beginning with the police ? I do not blame the genuine public: the 
fathers of families did not crowd nor did they push against anybody, 

THE FETE · PART ONE 
in spite o f  their social standing. On the contrary, I am told that they 
looked embarrassed, even in the street, at the sight of the unpre­
cedented crush of people besieging the entrance, trying to storm it, 
and not just going in. Meanwhile the carriages kept driving up, and at 
length blocked the whole street. Now, as I write this, I have good 
grounds for asserting that some of the lowest rabble in our town were 
brought in. without tickets by Lyamshin and Liputin, and quite pos­
sibly by someone else who was a steward like myself. At any rate, 
there were people there nobody knew who had arrived from the 
country districts and elsewhere. As soon as these savages entered the 
hall, they began asking where the buffet was (as though they had been 
put up to it) and, learning that there was no buffet, began swearing 
without the least constraint and with an arrogance which was quite 
unprecedented in our town till then. It is true, some of them arrived 
drunk. Others, like real savages, were struck dumb by the magni­
ficence of the ballroom of the Marshal's wife, never having seen any­
thing like it before, and as they went in they grew silent for a moment, 
gazing at it open-mouthed. The great White Hall was indeed magni­
ftcent, though the building was bad! y in need of repair: it was of enor­
mous size, with two rows of windows, with a ceiling painted in the 
old style and ornamented with gilt mouldings, with a gallery, with 
mirrors on the walls, red and white draperies, marble statues (horrible 
ones, but still statues), with heavy, antique furniture of the Napo­
leonic period, white and gold and upholstered in red velvet. At the 
moment I am describing, a high platform had been erected at the far 
end of the hall for the authors who were to read their works, and the 
entire hall was ftlled with chairs, like the stalls of a theatre, with wide 
gangways for the audience. But after the first moments of surprise, 
the most senseless questions and exclamations were heard. 'Perhaps 
we don't want any reading . . . .  We've paid our money . . . .  The public 
has been impudently swindled . . . .  We're the people who count, not 
the Lembkes . . . .' In a word, it was just as though they had been ad­
mitted for this purpose. I particular! y remember one clash in which 
tl1e princeling with the stiff collar and the face of a wooden doll, who 
was present in Mrs Lembke's drawing-room the morning before, dis­
tinguished himsel£ He, too, had, at her urgent request, agreed to pin 
a ribbon to his left shoulder and become one of our fellow stewards. 
Apparently this dumb wax figure on springs could, if not talk, at least 

THB DEVILS • PART THREE 
act in some sort of way of his own. When a huge, pockmarked retired 
army Captain, supported by a whole crowd of riff-raff at his heels, be­
gan pestering him by asking which was the way to the bufet, he gave 
a wink to a policeman. His injunction was promptly caried out: not­
withstanding the drunken Captain's abuse, he was dragged out of the 
hall. In the meantime the ' genuine' public began to make its appear­
ance at last and stretched in three long files along the three gangways 
between the chairs. The disorderly element began to quiet down, but 
the public, even the most 'immaculate ' among them, looked dissatis­
fied and perplexed ; some of the ladies, indeed, were simply fright­
ened. 
At last they were all in their seats ; the music, too, stopped. They 
began blowing their noses and looking round. They waited with too 
solemn an air, which is in itself always a bad sign. But the 'Lembkes' 
had not arrived yet. Silks, velvets, diamonds shimmered and glittered 
on all sides ; the air was full of the fragrance of expensive perfumes. 
The men were wearing all their decorations, and the old men were 
even in uniform. The Marshal's wife, accompanied by Lisa, arrived at 
last. Never before had Lisa been so dazzlingly beautiful as that morn­
ing, or in such a gorgeous dress. Her hair was done up in curls, her 
eyes sparkled, her face was radiant with a smile. She obviously created 
a sensation; people kept looking at her and whispering about her. I 
heard some say that she was searching for Stavrogin with her eyes, but 
neither Stavrogin nor his mother was there. I could not understand 
the expression on her face at the time: why was there so much happi­
ness, joy, energy, and strength in that face? I recalled the incident of 
the day before and was at a loss what to think. But still the 'Lembkes' 
did not arrive. This was undoubtedly a bad mistake. I learned after­
wards that Mrs Lembke had been waiting for Peter Verkhovensky till 
the last moment, for she could not take a step without him, though 
she never admitted it to herself. Let me add parenthetically that at the 
last committee meeting on the previous day Peter had refused to be 
one of the stewards, which distressed her greatly, even to the point of 
tears. To her surprise, and subsequently to her extreme embarrassment 
(I say this in anticipation of what happened later), he disappeared dur­
ing the whole of the morning, and did not make his appearance at the 
reading at all, so that no one saw him till the evening. At length the 
audience began to show signs of impatience. No one appeared on the 

THE FETE . PART O N E  
platform, either. In the back rows people began applauding as in a 
theatre. The old gentlemen and the ladies frowned : 'The Lembkes are 
֔vidently giving themselves airs.' Even among the more respectable 
iection of the audience an absurd whisper arose to the effect that per­
haps there· would be no fete at all, that Lembke himself was perhaps 
indisposed, and so on. But, thank God, Lembke appeared at last: his 
wife leaning on his arm. To tell the truth, I myself was beginning to 
fear that they might not come. But apparently the fairy-tales were 
false, and truth asserted itself. The audience seemed to breathe freely. 
Lembke himself seemed to be in excellent health, and that, I remem­
ber, was the general opinion of the audience, for it can be imagined 
how many eyes were turned on him. To give an idea of the state of 
mind of our society, I may observe that, generally speaking, very few 
of our people of quality were of the opinion that there was anything 
wrong with Lembke's state of health; his actions were considered to 
be perfectly normal, so much so that they even accepted with approval 
the events in the square the previous morning. 'That's the way he 
should have treated them from the first,' our higher officials said. ' For 
if they are philanthropists when they arrive, they are forced to take the 
same measures in the end, without realizing that such measures are 
necessary from the point of view of philanthropy itself.' That, at any 
rate, is what they thought of it at the club. He was only criticized 
for having lost his temper. ' Such a thing ought to be carried out 
much more coolly, but, after all, he is only a new man,' the experts 
said. 
All eyes turned with the same eagerness to Mrs Lembke. Of course, 
no one has a right to expect from me, as the narrator, too exact an 
account concerning one point: for we are dealing with a mystery 
here, we are dealing with a woman. But one thing I do know : on the 
previous evening she had gone into Mr Lembke's study and stayed 
with him there till long after midnight. Mr Lembke was forgiven and 
comforted. Husband and wife came to a complete understanding, 
everything was forgotten, and when towards the end of the interview 
von Lembke, in spite of everything, went down on his knees, recalling 
with horror the main and final incident of the previous night, his 
wife's exquisite little hand, and afterwards her lips, checked the pas­
sionate outpourings of penitent speeches of the chivalrously delicate 
gentleman, rendered powerless with emotion. Everyone could see by 

THE DEVILS · PART THREE 
her face that she was happy. She walked looking open-hearted and 
natural and wearing a magnificent dress. It seemed that she had 
reached the very pinnacle of her ambition : the fete - the goal and the 
crown of her political aspirations - was an accomplished fact. As they 
walked to their seats in front of the platform, both Lembkes bowed 
and acknowledged the greetings of the audience. They were immedi­
ately surrounded. The Marshal's wife got up to welcome them . . . .  
But at this point a most regrettable incident occurred : the band, with­
out the slightest excuse, struck up a flourish, not just a march, but 
simp! y the sort of flourish that is usual! y struck up at an official dinner 
at our club when people drink to someone's health. I know now that 
it was Lyamshin who was responsible for it as one of the stewards, the 
flourish being apparently meant in honour of the entrance of the 
' Lembkes '. He could, of course, always excuse himself by saying that 
he had done it from stupidity or from excessive zeal. Alas, at the time 
I had no idea that they were no longer bothering about any excuses 
and that they hoped to accomplish all their plans that very day. But 
the flourish was not the end of the matter: amid the smiles and the 
annoyed and perplexed looks of the audience cries of • hurrah ' were 
suddenly raised at the back of the hall and in the gallery, also as though 
in Lembke's honour. The cheers were few, but, I must confess, they 
went on for some time. Mrs Lembke blushed crimson and her eyes 
flashed. Lembke stopped dead at his seat and, turning towards the 
cheering people, cast a majestic and severe look over the audience. 
They made him sit down quickly. Again I noticed with apprehension 
the same dangerous smile on his face which he had worn in his wife's 
drawing-room the previous evening, when he looked at Mr Verkho­
vensky before going up to him. It seemed to me that now, too, 
there was an ominous expression on his face, and, what was worse, 
a rather comic one, too - the expression of a man who had made 
up his mind to sacrifice himself in order to humour his wife's higher 
aims. 
Mrs Lembke beckoned to me hurriedly and whispered to me to run 
to Karmazinov and implore him to begin. But I had scarcely time to 
turn round when anotl1er disgraceful incident, much more disgraceful 
than the first, occurred. 
On the platform - the empty platform on which til that moment 
the eyes and expectations of the audience were fixed, and where they 

THE FETE · PART ONE 
only saw an empty table, a chair in front of it and a glass of water on a 
silver tray on it - on this empty platform I suddenly caught sight of 
the gigantic figure of Captain Lebyatkin in a frock-coat and white tic. 
I was so astonished that I could not believe my eyes. The Captain 
apparently felt embarrassed, and he remained standing at the,back of 
the platform. Suddenly a shout was heard in the audience: ' Lebyat­
kin, is it you?' The Captain's stupid red face (he was dead drunk) ex­
panded in a broad, vacant grin at this cry. He raised his hand, wiped 
his forehead, shook his shaggy head and, as though making up his 
mind to go through witl1 it, took two steps forward and - all of a sud­
den burst out laughing, not loudly, but happily, his stout figure shak­
ing with prolonged, irrepressible laughter and his little eyes screwed 
up. This spectacle made almost half of the audience burst out laughing 
and about two dozen people began clapping. The more sedate section 
of the audience looked at each other gloomily ; all this, however, did 
not last more than half a minute. Liputin, wearing his steward's 
rosette, and two attendants suddenly rushed out on the platform ; 
they took me Captain carefully by both arms and Liputin whispered 
something to him. The Captain frowned, muttered, 'All right, if you 
insist,' waved his hand, turned his huge back on the audience and dis­
appeared with his escort. But a moment later Liputin jumped out on 
the platform again. His lips were distended in one of his sweetest 
smiles, which usually suggested vinegar and sugar. He had a sheet of 
note-paper in his hands. With short but quick steps he walked up to 
tire edge of me platform. 
'Ladies and gentlemen,' he said, addressing the audience, 'I'm very 
sorry for the comical misunderstanding which has occurred through 
an oversight and which, I'm glad to say, has now been removed. But 
I have, ladies and gentlemen, promised to convey to you, not witl10ut 
some hope of success, a most humble and respectful request from one 
of our local poets. Deeply touched by the humane and high purpose ­
in spite of his appearance - the same purpose which has brought us all 
together - er - to dry the tears of poor, educated girls of our province 
- this gentleman - I mean, tins local poet - who - er - wishes to re­
main incognito - would dearly like to have his poem read before the 
beginning of me ball - sorry, I mean, the literary reading. Though 
this poem is not in the programme and - er - couldn't have been in­
cluded in it because it only reached us half an hour ago, we ' (Who 

470 
THE DEVILS · PART T H R EE 
arc the we? I am quoting this incoherent and confused speech ver­
batim) ' thought that in view of the remarkably ingenuous feelings 
expressed in it, combined, too, with quite extraordinary gaiety, the 
poem ought to be read - I mean, not as something serious, but as 
something that is appropriate to to-day's great occasion - in a word, 
the whole idea of it - particularly as it only consists of a few lines - and 
I'd therefore like to ask for your kind permission to read it to you.' 
'Read it ! '  a voice roared at the back of the hall. 
' So I have your permission to read it ? '  
'Read it ! Read it ! '  many voices cried. 
' I  will read it, with your permission, ladies and gentlemen,' Liputin 
said in his affected voice and with the same sugary smile. 
He was still apparently undecided, and I could not help feeling that 
he was rather agitated. These people sometimes come a cropper for all 
their impudence. Still, a divinity student would not have come a 
cropper, and Liputin did, after all, belong to the older generation. 
' I  must warn you, I mean I have the honour of warning you with 
all due respect, ladies and gentlemen, that the poem I am about to read 
is not the kind of ode that used to be written in former times on the 
occasion of some festivity, but is almost a jest, as it were, though it 
certainly is full offeeling combined with playful gaiety and, as it were, 
most realistic truth.' 
'Read it ! Read it ! ' 
He unfolded the paper. No one, of course, had time to stop him. 
Besides, he appeared with his steward's rosette. He declaimed in a 
. 
. 
rmgmg voiCe : 
' To a local Russian governess from a poet at the fete : 
Fair governesses all, good morrow ! 
True Blue or true George Sander, 
Triumph now and banish sorrow, 
Now the world will be much kinder! 
'But it's Lcbyatkin's! It is Lebyatkin's ! '  a few voices cried. 
There was some laughter and applause, though not from many 
people. 
Teaching French to snivelly children, 
Over your grammar book you'd look 
To give the wink to catch a sexton, 
For him, too, you'd bait your hook. 

THE FETE · PART ONE 
'Hurrah ! Hurrah! '  
But in these days of great reformings 
Not a sexton e'en will marry you. 
Unless, my dear, you have ' the doings ' ­
That, you know, is sadly true. 
471 
'Quite right! Quite right! That's realism for you ! You can't do 
mch without " the doings ".' 
But now when, feasting, we've collected 
Gold and dowries for you all, 
You may go with hearts uplifted 
From this ball and festive hall, -
True Blue or true George Sander, 
Triumph now and banish care, 
Off you go with step much lighter, 
Damn 'em all and 'scape their snare ! 
I must confess I could not believe my ears. It was a piece of such 
mmistakable impudence that it was impossible to excuse Liputin 
ven on the grotmd of stupidity. Not that Liputin was so stupid, 
ither. His intention was clear, to me, at any rate : it looked as though 
hey were in a hurry to create disorder. Some of the lines of that 
diotic poem - the last ones, for instance - were of such a nature that 
to stupidity could possibly have let them pass. I believe Liputin him­
elf felt that he had gone too far ;  having accomplished his heroic deed, 
te was so overcome by his own impudence that he did not even leave 
he platform, but remained standing there, as though wishing to add 
omething. He must have expected quite a different effect ; but even 
he small crowd of rowdies who had applauded during the disgraceful 
lrank suddenly fell silent, as though they, too, were dumbfounded. 
['he really absurd thing about it was that many of them found the 
>oem very pathetic - that is to say, they did not realize that it was just 
t lampoon, but took it to be the truth about the governesses, took it 
:o be verses with a political tendency. But the excessive freedom of the 
rerses struck them, too, at last. As for the audience as a whole, they 
Nerc not only scandalized, but obviously offended. I am certain I'm 
lOt mistaken in thus describing the impression. Mrs Lembke said after­
Nards that another moment and she would have fainted. One of the 
most respectable old gentlemen helped his old lady on to her feet, and 

472 
THE DEVILS ' PART THREE 
they both walked out of the hall accompanied by the agitated glances 
of the audience. Who knows but others might have been induced to 
follow their example had not Karmazinov himself, in a frock-coat, a 
white tie, and with a manuscript in his hand, appeared on the plat­
form at that moment. Mrs Lembke turned her ecstatic gaze on him as 
on her deliverer . . . .  But I was already behind the scenes ; I had to get 
hold of Liputin. 
'You did it on purpose ! ' I said, seizing him indignantly by the 
arm. 
'I really didn't think - honestly, I didn't,' he said, cowering at once 
and beginning to lie and pretending to be very upset. 'They only just 
brought the verses, and I thought that since it was such a good joke -' 
' You didn't think anything of the sort. Do you really find that 
stupid rubbish a good joke ?' 
'Yes, sir, I do.' 
' You're simply lying, and it wasn't brought to you just now. You 
composed it yourself with Lebyatkin, perhaps yesterday, to create a 
row. The last verse is certainly yours and the line about the sexton, 
too. Why did he come dressed in a frock-coat ? You wanted him to 
read it, if he had not been drunk, didn't you ?' 
Liputin gave me a cold and malevolent look. 
' What business is it of yours ?' he suddenly a.űked with strange 
equanimity. 
'What do you mean ? You, too, are wearing the steward's rosette ­
where's Peter Verkhovensky ?' 
'Don't know. Here somewhere, I suppose. Why ?' 
'Because I see it all now. It's simply a plot against Mrs Lembke, an 
attempt to discredit the day. . . .  ' 
Liputin again looked askance at me. 
'What do you care ?' he grined, shrugged and walked away. 
I was stunned. All my suspicions had proved true. And I was still 
hoping that I might be wrong ! What was I to do now ? I thought of 
asking Mr Verkhovensky for his advice, but he was standing before 
the looking-glass, trying on different smiles and constantly consulting 
a piece of paper on which he had written down some notes. He had to 
go on immediately after Karmazinov, and he was no longer in a con­
dition to talk to me. Should I run to Mrs Lembke ? But it was too soon 
to talk to her: she had first to be taught a good leson to cure her of 

THE FETE . PART ONE 
473 
҆r idea of having a 'following ' and of the 'fanatic loyalty ' of all her 
ollowers. She would not have believed me. She would have thought 
tat I was seeing things. And, besides, what could she have done to 
!lp ? ' Good Lord,' I thought to myself, ' what business is it of mine ? 
II take off my steward's rosette and go home when it starts.' I actually 
id say : ' when it starts,' I remember that clearly. 
But I had to go and listen to Karmazinov. Taking a last look round 
҇hind the scenes, I noticed that a large number of people who had no 
llSiness there, among them even women, were walking about, going 
t and out. ' Behind the scenes ' was a rather narrow space, screened off 
om the audience by a curtain and communicating with the other 
>Oms at the back by means of a corridor. It was here our readers were 
raiting their turns. But I was particularly struck at that moment by 
te lecturer who had to follow Mr Verkhovensky. He, too, was some 
1rt of professor (even now I don't know exactly who he was) who 
ad voluntarily retired from an educational establishment after an 
tcident among the students and who had only arrived in our town 
n business a few days earlier. He, too, had been recommended to 
1rs Lembke, and she had received him with reverence. I know now 
tat he had seen her only once during the evening before the reading, 
tat he never uttered a word all that evening, smiling ambiguously at 
te jokes and the general tone of the company that surrounded Mrs 
embke and leaving an unpleasant impression on everybody by his air 
f disdain and, at the same time, his timorous susceptibility. It was 
1rs Lembke herself who had roped him in as a reader. Now he was 
dking from one corner to the other and, like Mr Verkhovcnsky, 
ias whispering to himself, but his eyes were fixed on the ground, and 
ot the looking-glass. He was not trying out any smiles, though he 
:rinned frequently and rapaciously. It was plain to me that it was im­
•ossible to talk to him, either. He was a short, bald man of about forty 
vith a greyish beard, and was decently dressed. But the most interest­
llg thing about him was that every time he turned round he raised his 
ight fist aloft, brandished it in the air above his head, and then sud­
lenly brought it down as though reducing an opponent to dust and 
shes. He went through this performance every minute. It made me 
eel ill at ease. I hurried away to listen to Karmazinov. 

474 
THE D EVILS · PART THREE 
3 
There was a feeling in the hall that something had gone wrong again. 
Let me say once and for all : I have the greatest admiration for genius, 
but why do our men of genius at the end of their illustrious careen 
sometimes behave exactly like little boys ? What did it matter if he 
was Karmazinov ancl strode on to the platform looking like five Court 
chamberlains rolled into one ? Is it possible to hold the attention of an 
audience like ours for a whole hour with one paper ? In my experience 
even a super genius could not possibly hope to keep the attention of an 
audience at a light literary reading for more than twenty minutes with 
impunity. It is true, the entrance of the great literary genius was re­
ceived with the utmost respect: even the most severe old gentlemen 
showed signs of approval and interest, and the ladies even displayed 
some enthusiasm. The applause, however, did not last long, and it was 
somehow not unanimous, but ragged. But there was not a single inter­
ruption from the back rows up to the very moment when Mr Kar­
mazinov began to speak, and even then nothing particularly bad hap­
pened, but just a little misunderstanding. I have mentioned already the 
fact that he had a rather shrill voice, a somewhat feminine voice even, 
and, to boot, the affected lisp of a hom gentleman. No sooner had he 
uttered a few words than someone permitted himself a loud laugh, 
no doubt some stupid little fool who had never come across a real 
gentleman and who was, besides, a bit of a wag. But there was no 
question of any hostile demonstration : on the contrary, the fool was 
hissed down, and he effaced himself completely. But Mr Karmazinov 
went on to declare, in his affected manner and in mincing tones, that 
'at first he would not agree to read ' (as though it was really necessary 
to say that!). 'There are,' he said, ' some things which come so straight 
from the heart that one hesitates to utter them aloud, so that so sacred 
a thing canot be exposed to the public gaze' (so why on earth ex­
pose them ?) ; but as he had been asked so much, he was going to ex­
pose it, and as, moreover, he was laying down his pen for good and 
had vowed never to write anything again, he had written this last 
thing of his; and as he had vowed 'never, not for anything in the 
world, to read anything in public', and so on and so forth, all in the 
same vein. 
But all that would not have mattered, for who does not know what 

THE FETE · PART ONB 
475 
n author's introduction is like ? Though I must say that taking the 
gnorance of our public and the irritability of the back rows into con­
ideration, all this may have had an influence. Would it not have been 
nuch better to have read some little story, one of those very short 
tories he used to write in the past - that is, a story which, though it 
vas highly polished and affected, was sometimes witty ? That would 
Ƿave saved the situation. But no ! Not a bit of it! Instead he read us a 
ll'hole edifying oration! Dear me, what wasn't there in it ? I can posi­
ivdy say that it would have reduced even a Petersburg audience to a 
;tate of stupor, let alone ours. Imagine over thirty printed pages of the 
nost pretentious and useless chatter; and, besides, this gentleman read 
t in a sort of mournfully condescending tone of voice, as though he 
Nere doing us a favour, so that it sounded rather like an insult to our 
)Ublic. The subject . . .  But who could make it out - that subject of 
lis? It was a sort of account of certain impressions and reminiscences. 
But of what? And about what? However much we knit our provin­
:ial brows during the first half of the reading, we could not make 
lead or tail of it, and we listened to the second part simply out of 
politeness. It is true, there was a lot of talk about love - the love of the 
genius for some lady - but, I confess, it produced rather an awkward 
impression on the audience. For the great genius to tell us about his 
first kiss, seemed to my mind somehow inconsistent with his short, 
fat little figure . . . .  And, again, it was a pity that those kisses were some­
bow diferent from the kisses of ordinary mortals. There were always 
some gorse-bushes about (it had to be gorse or some other plant which 
bas to be looked up in a botanical dictionary). And there had to be 
some violet tint in the sky, such as no mortal, of course, had ever ob­
served, or if he had seen it, he would not have taken any notice of it; 
but, you see, 'I jolly well did see it, and now I'm describing it to damn 
fools like you as if it were the most ordinary thing.' The tree under 
which the fascinating couple sat had naturally to be of an orange 
colour. They were sitting somewhere in Germany. Suddenly they 
behold Pompey or Cassius on the eve of the battle, and a chill of rap­
ture runs down their backs. Some water-nymph starts squeaking in 
the bushes. Gluck plays a fiddle in the rushes. The title of tl1e piece he 
was playing was given in full, but no one seemed to have heard of it, 
so that it would have to be looked up in a musical dictionary. Mean­
while a mist arises, which is more like a million pillows than a mist. 

476 
THE D E V I L S · PART THREE 
And suddenly everything vanishes, and the great genius is crossing the 
Volga in winter in a thaw. Two and a half pages of the crossing, but 
he still manages to fall through a hole in the ice. The genius is drown­
ing - did he get drowned, you think ? Good Lord, no ! All this is 
merely dragged in to show that when he was already on the point of 
drowning and yielding up the ghost, he caught sight of a little ice-floe, 
a tiny little ice-floe the size of a pea, but pure and transparent ' like a 
frozen tear ', and in that ice-floe the whole of Germany was reflected, 
or, to be more precise, the sky of Germany, and by its iridescent glitter 
recalled to his mind the very same tear, which ' you remember rolled 
down from your eyes when we sat beneath the emerald tree and you 
cried joyfully, " There is no crime! "  " No," I said, through my tears, 
" but if that is so, there are no saints, either." We burst into sobs and 
parted for ever.' She went off somewhere to the sea-coast, and he to 
some caves ; and then he descends and descends for three years in Mos­
cow beneath the Sukharev Tower, and suddenly in 'the very bowels of 
the earth, in a cave, he fmds a lamp burning before an icon, and 
before the lamp - a hermit. The hermit is saying his prayers. The 
genius puts his face close to the bars of a tiny window and suddenly 
hears a sigh. You think it was the hermit who sighed ? What does he 
care about your hermit! No, this sigh simply reminds him of her first 
sigh, thirty-seven years ago, when ' do you remember how we sat 
beneath an agate tree in Germany and you said to me, " Why love ? 
Look, ruddle is growing all ronnd, and I am in love, but when the 
ruddle ceases to grow, I shall fall out of love." Here a mist rises again, 
Hoffmann appears, the water-nymph whistles a tune from Chopin, 
and suddenly out of the mist Ancus Marcius appears over the roofs 
of Rome, wearing a laurel wreath. A shiver of rapture ran down our 
backs and we parted for ever,' and so on and so forth. In a word, 
I may not be reporting it correctly and, indeed, I may not even know 
how to report it, but the burden of the chatter was something of that 
sort. And, really, how disgraceful is this passion of great intellects for 
abstruse epigrams ! The great European philosopher, the great scholar, 
the inventor, the toiler, the martyr - all these who labour and are 
heavy laden are to our great Russian genius just like _so many cooks in 
his kitchen. He is the master, and they come to him with their tall chef 
hats in their hands and wait for his orders. It is true, he sneers con­
temptuously at Russia, too, and he likes nothing better than to pro-

THE FETE · PART ONE 
477 
!aim the bankruptcy of Russia in every respect before the great intel­
:cts of Europe, but so far as he himself is concerned - no, sir ! - he has 
isen higher than the great intellects of Europe ; they all are merely 
uterial for his epigrams. He takes someone else's idea, tacks its anti-
1esis on to it, and the epigram is ready. There is such a thing as crime, 
1ere are no such things as secrets ; there is no truth, there are no such 
1en as searchers for truth ; atheism, Darwinism, Moscow church­
dis . . . .  But, alas, he no longer believes in the Moscow church-bells ; 
lome, laurels . . . .  But he doesn't believe even in laurels . . . .  Here you 
;et a conventional attack of Byronic spleen, a grimace from Heine, 
omething of Pechorin - and off he goes full steam ahead, with his 
ngine emitting a shrill whistle. . . ' But do praise me, do praise me, 
or I like it awfully ; I'm only just saying that I'm laying down my 
•en ; you wait, I'm going to bore you three hundred times more, you'll 
;et tired of reading me . . . .  
' 
Of course, it did not go off so well. But the trouble was that it was 
tis own fault. People had for some time been shuffiing their feet, 
1lowing their noses, coughing, and doing everything people do when 
. writer, whoever he may be, keeps an audience for more than twenty 
ninutes at a literary reading. But the genius noticed nothing of all 
his. He went on lisping and mumbling, without paying any atten­
ion to the audience, so that everybody began to look bewildered. 
\nd then suddenly a solitary voice in the back rows exclaimed 
oudly : 
'Lord, what nonsense ! ' 
The interjection was quite involuntary and, I am sure, there was 
10 question of any demonstration. The man was simply worn out. 
But Mr Karmazinov stopped, looked ironically at the audience, 
md suddenly said in his highly affected voice and with the digni­
J.ed air of a Court chamberlain whose feelings had been badly 
1urt: 
'I'm afraid, ladies and gentlemen, I have been boring you awfully, 
!laven't I ? '  
His mistake, of course, was that he was the first to speak ; for by 
provoking a reply in this way, he presented every ruffian with the 
t>pporttmity of having his say, too, and quite legitimately, so to speak, 
while ifhe had controlled himself, they would have gone on blowing 
their noses, and it would have passed off somehow. Perhaps he 

THE DEVILS • PART THREE 
expected applause in reply to his question; but there was no applause; 
on the contrary, they all seemed to shrink within themselves, to get 
frightened and fall silent. 
' You never saw Ancus Marcius ; it's just your way of writing,' an 
irritated and apparently even hysterical voice cried suddenly. 
'That's right,' another voice echoed at once. 'There aren't an}' 
ghosts nowadays, only natural phenomena. Look it up in a book OD 
natural sciences.' 
' Ladies and gentlemen, I expected such objections least of all,' Kar­
mazinov said, looking terribly surprised. The great genius had com· 
pletely lost touch with his native country in Karlsruhe. 
' In our age it is shameful to say that the world stands on three 
fishes,' a young girl suddenly burst out. 'You could not possibly have 
gone down to the hermit's cave, Karmazinov. And, besides, who talk! 
of hermits nowadays ?' 
' Ladies and gentlemen, what surprises me most of all is that yotJ 
take it all so seriously. However - however, you're absolutely right. 
No one respects truth and realism more than I do.' 
Although he was smiling ironically, he was greatly startled. His face 
seemed to say : 'But I'm not at all the sort of person you take me for. 
Why, I'm on your side; only, please, praise me, praise me more, praise 
me as much as possible, I like it awfully . . . .' 
' Ladies and gentlemen,' he cried at last, stung to the quick, 'I can 
see that my poor poem is out of place here. And I am rather out ol 
place here myself, I'm afraid.' 
' You aimed at a crow and hit a cow,' some fool shouted at the top 
of his voice. He must have been drunk, and, of course, no notice 
should have been taken of him. It is true, though, that his words 
evoked some disrespectful laughter. 
'A cow, you say ?' Karmazinov echoed at once, his voice growing 
shriller and shriller. ' I'm afraid, ladies and gentlemen, I'd better sa}' 
nothing about crows and cows. I've too great a respect for an}' 
audience to permit myself any comparisons, however inocent. But 
I thought -' 
' Ifl were you sir, I'd be more careful,' someone from the back rows 
shouted. 
'But I imagined that, as I was laying down my pen and taking leave 
of my readers, I'd be given a fair hearing.' 

THE FETE · PART ONE 
479 
'Yes, yes, we want to hear, we want to hear,' a few voices at last 
•lucked up courage to cry from the first row. 
'Read! Read! '  a few ecstatic female voices echoed the cry, and, at 
ast, there was some applause, thin and feeble. it is true. 
Karmazinov smiled wrily and got up from his chair. 
'Believe me, Karmazinov, everybody thinks it an honour -' even 
he Marshal's wife could not refrain from saying. 
'Mr Karmazinov,' cried a fresh young voice from the back of the 
tall suddenly. It was the voice of a very young teacher from the dis­
rict school, an excellent young man, quiet and honourable, who had 
mly recently come to our town. 'Mr Karmazinov, if I were so lucky 
as to fall in love as you've described to us, I should never have put my 
ove in a story intended for public reading.' 
He even blushed to the roots of his hair. 
'Ladies and gentlemen,' Karmazinov cried, 'I have finished. I will 
eave the end out and go. But let me read the last six lines : 
"'Yes, dear reader, farewell ! " '  he began at once to read from the 
nanuscript without resuming his seat. "' Farewell, reader; I don't 
:ven insist on our parting friends : why, indeed, should I trouble you? 
ll'ou may even abuse me. Oh, abuse me as much as you like, if that 
Ƨves you any pleasure. But much better if we forget each other for 
:ver. And if all of you, readers, were suddenly so kind as to go down 
)n your knees and begin begging me with tears: 'Write, oh, write for 
tlS, Karmazinov - for the sake of your country, for the sake of pos­
terity, for the sake of laurel wreaths,' I'd reply to you, after thanking 
you, of course, very courteously, ' No, my dear fellow-countrymen, 
we've had quite enough of one another, merci! It is time we went our 
1everal ways! Merci, merci, me rei!"" 
Karmazinov bowed ceremoniously and bfushed red, as though he 
had been cooked, and was about to go off behind the scenes. 
'No one is going down on their knees - what ridiculous nonsense! '  
' Conceited, isn't he ?' 
'It's only his- humour,' someone more sensible corrected. 
'May the Lord save me from your humOLtr.' 
'But, really, it's damned cheek, ladies and gentlemen.' 
' Thank goodness he's finished.' 
'Dear me, what a dull programme!' 
But al these ignorant exclamations in the back rows (not only in 

T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  T H R E E  
the back rows, incidentally) were drowned in the applause from the 
other section of the audience. There were calls for Karmazinov. A 
number of ladies, headed by Mrs Lembke and the Marshal's wife, 
crowded round the platform. In Mrs Lembke's hands was a gorgeow 
laurel wreath, on a white velvet cushion, surrounding another wreath 
of roses. 
' La urcls ! '  said Karmazinov with a faint and somewhat caustic 
smile. ' I'm touched, of course, and I accept this wreath which has been 
prepared beforehand and which has not yet had time to wither, with 
deep emotion ; but I assure you, my dear ladies, that I have suddenly 
become so great a realist that I think laurels are in this age more 
appropriate in the hands of a skilful cook than in mine.' 
' Yes, a cook is more useful,' the divinity student who had been at 
the ' meeting ' in Virginsky's house cried. 
There was some disorder. In many rows people jumped up to 
watch the presentation of the laurel wreath. 
' I'd give another three roubles for a cook this instant,' another voice 
echoed loudly - too loudly, indeed : so loudly as to be insistent. 
' Me, too.' 
' Me, too.' 
' Is there real! y no buffet here ?' 
' Why, this is simply a swindle ! '  
However, it must be admitted that these unrulv fellows were still 
very much afraid of our high officials and the police inspector who 
was present in the hall. Ten minutes later they all, somehow or other, 
resumed their scats, but there was not the same good order as before. 
And it was tlus seething chaos that poor Mr Verkhovensky had to 
('ICC. 
4 
Still, i again ran out to see him behind the scenes, and I had just time 
to warn him excitedly that in my opinion the whole thing had fallen 
through and that he had better not come out, bur go home at once 
on the excuse of a sudden attack of his gastric catarrh, and that I 
would take off my badge and go with him. 
He was just about to walk on to the platform, but he stopped sud­
denly and, looking me up and down haughtily, said solemnly : 
'And why, sir, do you think me capable of such baseness ?' 

THE FBTB • PART ONB 
I let him alone. I was absolutely convinced that before he came back 
omething terrible WaS bound to happen. While I was standing there 
i:eling utterly depressed, I again caught sight of the figure of the un­
:nown professor, whose turn it was to appear after Mr Verkhoven­
ky, and who kept raising his fist and bringing it down with all his 
night. He was still walking up and down as before, absorbed in him­
df and muttering something under his breath with a malicious but 
riumphant grin. I walked up to him somehow almost unintention­
Jly. 
'I wonder if you realize, sir,' I said, ' that, judging from many ex­
mples, if a lecturer keeps his audience for more than twenty minutes, 
t will stop listening to him. Not even a celebrity can hold the atten­
ion of an audience for half an hour.' 
He stopped short suddenly, and seemed almost to shake with re-
entment. 
'Don't worry,' he muttered contemptuously and walked past me. 
At that moment I heard Mr Verkhovensky's voice in the hall. 
' Oh, to blazes with you all! '  I thought and rushed into the hall. 
Mr Verkhovensky sat down in his arm-chair even before the dis-
>rder had died down. He was greeted by the first rows with none too 
nendly looks. (People, somehow, had stopped liking him at the club 
:ecently and treated him with much less respect than before.) How­
:ver, thank goodness, they did not boo him. I had had a queer idea in 
my head ever since the previous day : I could not help feeling that he 
would be booed the moment he appeared. And yet because of the dis­
:>rder in the hall he was not even noticed at first. But what could that 
man hope for if they had treated Karmazinov in that way? He was 
pale; he had not faced an audience for ten years. Judging by his agita­
tion and everything I knew so well about him, it was clear to me that 
lle himself regarded his present appearance on the platform as the 
most decisive moment of his life, or something like that. That was just 
what I was afraid of. The man was dear to me. And I can't tell you 
what I felt when he opened his lips and I heard his first phrase! 
'Ladies and gentlemen,' he said suddenly, as though determined to 
go through with it, and in an almost shaking voice, too - 'Ladies and 
gentlemen, only this morning there lay before me one of the illegal 
leaflets that have been scattered lately in our town, and I asked myself 
for the hundredth rime, " Wherein lies its secret?" ' 

T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  T H R E E  
The entire hall fell silent suddenly, all eyes were turned on him, 
some looking at him with alarm. He certainly knew how to hold their 
interest from the very first word ! Even from behind the scenes heads 
were thrust out : Liputin and Lyamshin were listening avidly. Mrs 
Lembke again waved to me. 
' Stop him, stop him, for goodness sake ! '  she whispered in alarm. 
I merely shrugged ; how was one to stop a man who was determined 
to go through with it? Alas, I understood Mr Verkhovensky. 
' Oho, he's talking about the leaflets,' people whispered to one an­
other in the audience. 
The entire hall was stirred. 
' Ladies and gentlemen, I have solved the whole mystery. The whole 
secret of their effect lies in their stupidity ! ' (His eyes flashed.) ' Yes, ladies 
and gentlemen, if this stupidity had been intentional, if it had been a 
calculated stupidity - oh, that would have been a stroke of genius! 
But we must do them justice : they did not calculate anything. It is 
the most bare, the most ingenuous, the most silly little stupidity -
c' est Ia bhise dans son essence Ia plus pure, que/que chose com me un simple 
chimique. If they had put it just a little more cleverly, everyone would 
see at once the whole paltriness of this silly little stupidity. But now 
everyone looks perplexed ; no one can believe that it could be such 
elementary stupidity. " It's impossible that there's nothing more in it," 
everyone says to himself, and tries to discover the secret of it, sees a 
mystery in it, tries to read between the lines - the effect has been 
achieved ! Oh, never before has stupidity been so triumphantly re­
warded, in spite of the fact that it so often deserved it. For, en paren­
these, stupidity, like the greatest genius, is equally useful in shaping 
human destiny.' 
' Epigrams of the late forties,' a voice cried, though rather modestly, 
but it was followed by an uproar : people began shouting and yelling. 
' Ladies and gentlemen, hurrah ! I propose a toast to stupidity ! '  Mr 
Verkhovensky shouted, defying his audience in an absolute frenzy. 
I rushed up to him under the pretext of pouring out some water for 
him. 
'Please leave it alone, sir. Mrs Lembke begs you -' 
' No, you leave me alone. idle voung man,' he turned on me, shout­
ing at the top of his voice. 
I fled. 

THE FETE · PART ONE 
'Ladies and gentlemen,' he went on, ' why all this excitement, why 
111 these outcries of indignation I hear ? I have come to you with an 
:>live branch. I have brought you my last word - for in this business 
l have the last word - and we shall part friends.' 
'Down with him ! '  some shouted. 
'Order, order ! Let him speak. Let him say what he wants to say ! '  
others yelled. 
The young teacher was particularly excited, for, having once 
plucked up courage to speak, he could no longer stop himsel f. 
'Ladies and gentlemen, my last word in this business is universal 
forgiveness. I, an old man who expects nothing more from life, I 
rolemnl y declare that the spirit of life still breathes in us, and that the 
younger generation has not yet lost its living strength. The enthusi­
asm of our modern youth is as bright and pure as it was in our time. 
Only one thing has happened : a shift of aims, the substitution of one 
beauty for another ! The whole misunderstanding has arisen only 
rOLmd the question what is more beautiful : Shakespeare or a pair of 
boots, Raphael or petroleum ! '  
' Informer ! ' cried some. 
'Compromising questions ! '  
'Agent provocateur!' 
'And I maintain,' Mr Verkhovensky squealed, beside himself with 
excitement, ' and I maintain that Shakespeare and Raphael are higher 
than the emancipation of the serfs, higher than nationalism, higher 
than socialism, higher than the younger gzneration, higher than chem­
istry, higher even than almost all humanity, for they are the fruit of all 
mankind, and perhaps the highest fruition that can possibly exist. A 
form of beauty already attained, but for the attaining of which I 
should perhaps not consent to live. Oh, Lord,' he cried, throwing up 
his hands, ' ten years ago I said the same thing from the platform in 
Petersburg, in exactly the same words, and they did not understand 
it in exactly the same way, they laughed and booed as now ; you little 
men, what is it you lack still, that you don't tmderstand ? Why, do you 
realize, do you realize that mankind can get along without the Eng­
lishman, without Germany, too, and most certainly without the Rus­
sians - it can get on without science, without bread, but without 
beauty it cannot carry on, for then there will be nothing more to do 
in the world ! The whole mystery is there, the whole of history is 

THE D EVILS · PART THREE 
there ! Even science could not exist a moment without beauty - do 
you know that, you who are laughing at me ? It will sink into dark 
ignorance - you won't invent a nail even! I shan't give in! '  he shouted 
idiotically in conclusion, and banged his ftst on the table with all his 
might. 
But while he was screaming senselessly and incoherently the dis­
order in the hall increased. Many people jumped up from their seats, 
and some of them dashed forward, nearer to the platform. It all hap­
pened much more quickly than I describe it, and there was no time to 
take adequate measures. Quite likely they did not wish to, either. 
'It's all very well for you who have everything you want, you 
spoilt darlings ! '  the same divinity student bellowed at the foot of the 
platform, grinning with relish at Mr Verkhovensky, who noticed it 
and rushed up to the very edge of the platform. 
'Have I not just this minute declared that the enthusiasm of our 
younger generation is as pure and bright as it was, and that it was 
corning to grief because it was mistaken only in the forms of the beau­
tiful ? Isn't that enough for you? And if you take into consideration 
the fact that the man who says this is a crushed and insulted father, 
then surely - oh, you little men - surely, one can't rise higher than 
that in impartiality and fair play ! Ungrateful ones - unjust ones - why, 
oh why don't you want to be friends ?' 
And he suddenly burst into hysterical sobs. He wiped his streaming 
tears with his fingers. His shoulders and breast shook with sobbing. 
He was oblivious of everything in the world. 
The audience was in a real panic, and almost everyone got up from 
their seats. Mrs Lembke, too, jumped up quickly, seized her husband 
by the arm and pulled him up . . . .  The whole affair had degenerated 
into a veritable public scandal. 
'Mr Verkhovensky,' the divinity student bellowed gleefully, ' Fed­
ka, the convict, an escaped prisoner, is now roaming about tqe town 
and its outskirts. He robs people and has recently committed another 
murder. Let me put this question to you: If you had not sold him into 
the army fifteen years ago in payment of a debt you had incurred at 
cards - if, that is, you had not lost him at cards - would he have been 
sentenced to penal servitude? Tell me, please. Would he have been 
murdering people now in his struggle for existence ? What have you 
got to say to this, Mr Aesthete?' 

THE FETE · PART ONB 
I canot possibly describe the scene that followed. To begin with, 
there was a furious outburst of applause. Not everybody was applaud­
ing - only one-fifth of the audience, perhaps - but they applauded 
madly. The rest of the audience rushed to the exit, but as the applaud­
ing section of the audience kept pressing forward, a general melee en­
sued. The ladies screamed, a few girls began crying and asking to be 
taken home. Lembke, standing by his seat, kept gazing wildly about 
him. Mrs Lembke completely lost her head - for the first time during 
her career among us. As for Mr Verkhovensky, he seemed at fmt to 
be literally crushed by the divinity student's words; but suddenly he 
raised his arms, as though spreading them over the audience, and 
yelled : 
' I  shake the dust from off my feet and I curse you - it's the end, the 
end . . . . ' 
And, turning round, he ran behind the scenes, wavmg his hands 
menacingly. 
'He has insulted the audience ! . . .  Verkhovensky ! '  the furious mem­
bers of the audience roared. They ŝven wanted to rnn in pursuit after 
him. It was impossible to pacify them - not at the moment, at any rate 
- and suddenly the final catastrophe burst over the meeting like a 
bomb : the third reader, the maniac who had kept brandishing his fist 
behind the scenes, suddenly rushed out on to the platform. 
He looked quite mad. He gazed at the excited hall with a broad, 
triumphant smile, full of boundless self-confidence, and seemed to be 
glad at the disorder. He was not in the least perturbed at having to 
speak in such an uproar ; on the contrary, he was quite obviously de­
lighted. This was so obvious that it attracted attention at once. 
'What's this now ?' people could be heard asking each other. 
'Who on earth is this ? What has he got to say ?' 
'Ladies and gentlemen,' the maniac shouted at the top of his voice, 
standing at the very edge of the platform and in almost the same shrill 
feminine voice as Karmazinov's, though without the latter's affected 
tones of the born gentleman - 'Ladies and gentlemen, twenty years 
ago, on the eve of the war against half of Europe, Russia was looked 
upon as an ideal country by all State and Privy Councillors. Literature 
was the handmaiden of the censorship; in the universities they taught 
military drill; the army was tumed into a ballet, and the peasants paid 
their taxes and kept silent under the whip of serfdom. Patriotism 

T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  T H R E E  
meant the extortion ofbribes from the living and the dead. Those who 
refused to take bribes were looked upon as rebels, for they disturbed 
the harmony of the existing order. Birch-woods were destroyed to 
uphold law and order. Europe trembled . . .  But never in the thousand 
yeJrs of her senseless existence had Russia sunk to such infamy . . . . ' 
He raised his ftst and, brandishing it menacingly over his head, sud­
den! y brought it down as though crushing his opponent into dust. A 
furious roar arose from every side, followed by ear-splitting applause. 
Now almost half of the audience was applauding ; the most innocent 
people were carried away : Russia was being abused in public and be­
fore the whole people, so how were they not to roar with delight ? 
' That's the stuff! That's the real stuff to give 'em ! Hurrah ! Yes, sir, 
that's none of your aesthetics ! '  
The maniac went on enthusiastically: ' Twenty years have passed 
since then. The universities have been opened and multiplied. Milit҈ry 
drill has turned into a legend ; thousands of officers are wanted to 
complement the army. The railways have eaten up all the capital and 
have covered Russia like a spider's web, so that in about fifteen years 
one will perhaps be able to get somewhere. Bridges are set on ftre only 
occasionally, but the towns are burnt down regularly, according to a 
well-established order, each one in turn, during the ftre season. In our 
courts we get King Solomon's judgements, and jurymen only take 
bribes because of the struggle for existence, for otherwise they would 
be doomed to starvation. The serfs have been liberated, and belabour 
one another with staves, instead o fbeing flogged by their former land­
owners. Seas and oceans of vodka are consumed to support the budget, 
and in Novgorod, opposite the ancient and useless St Softa Cathedral, 
an enormous bronze globe has been put up as a memorial to the thou­
sand years of disorder and confusion. Europe frowns and begins to be 
uneasy again. Fifteen years of reforms ! And yet even in the most gro­
tesque epoch of her confused history Russian has never sunk -' 
His last words could not be heard in the roar of the crowd. He could 
be seen raising his hand once more and bringing it down triumph­
antly. The enthusiasm of the crowd was unimaginable : they yelled, 
they clapped their hands, and some of the ladies even shouted : 
'Enough ! You won't say anything better ! '  They were like drunkards. 
The orator looked at them all and seemed to melt with delight at his 
own triumph. I caught sight of Lembke, who was pointing something 

THE END O F  THE FETE 
out to someone in indescribable agitation. Mrs Lembke, pale as a 
sheet, was saying something hurriedly to the Prince, who had run up 
to her. But at that momeut about six men, some sort of officials, 
rushed from behind the scenes on to the platforr .• , grabbed the orator, 
and dragged him away behind the scenes. I can't understand how he 
could manage to tear himself away from them, but he did, and rush­
ing up to the edge of the platform again, he just had time to shout 
with all his might, brandishing his fist: 
' But never has Russia sunk so -' 
But he was finally dragged away again. I saw about fifteen men, 
perhaps, rush offbehind the scenes to set him free, not across the plat­
form, but from the side, breaking down the light partition so that it 
finally collapsed. Then, hardly believing my own eyes, I saw the girl 
student (Virginsky's relative)jump up on the platform with the same 
roll of paper under her arm, wearing the same dress, and looking as 
red and as plump as ever, surrounded by two or three other women 
and two or three other men and accompanied by her mortal enemy, 
the schoolboy. I even had time to make out the phrase: 
'Ladies and gentlemen, I have come here to tell you of the sufferings 
of the unhappy students and arouse them everywhere to protest.' 
But I fled. I hid my badge in my pocket and by devioll5 ways 
known only to myself got out of the house into the street. First of all, 
I ran, of course, to Mr Verkhovensky. 
The End of the Fete 
HE  would not see me. He had locked himself up and was writing. At 
my repeated knocks and calls, he replied through the door : 
'My friend, I've finished with everything. Who can ask anything 
more of me?' 
' You haven't fmished with anything, but have merely helped to 
make a mess of everything. For God's sake, no more epigrams, ,\1r 
Verkhovensky. Open the door. We must take steps. They may still 
come and insult you.' 
I considered myself entitled to be particularly severe, and even 

THE D E VILS · PART T H R EE 
exacting. I was afraid that he might do something still more crazy. 
But, to my surprise, I met with unusual firmness. 
' Don't you be the first to insult me, then. Thank you for all you've 
done ; but, I repeat, I have fmished with people, good and bad. I'm 
writing a letter to Miss Shatov, whom I have so unpardonably been 
overlooking till now. You can take it to her to-morrow if you wish, 
but now merci.' 
' I  assure you, sir, that the affair is much more serious than you think. 
You believe you knocked someone on the head there, don't you ? 
Well, you didn't.' (Oh, I was rude and discourteous, and I recall it 
now with regret !) 'There's no reason in the world why you should 
write to Miss Shatov. And - and what will become of you without 
me now ?  What do you know of practical life ?  You're hatching out 
some plan, aren't you ? If you are, you'll only find yourself in trouble 
again.' 
He got up and came up close to the door. 
' You haven't been long with them, but you've got infected with 
their tone and language, Dieu vous pardotme, mon ami, et Dieu vous 
garde. I've always noticed the rudiments of decency in you, and, I dare­
say, you'll change your mind, apres le temps, of course, like all of us 
Russians. As for your remarks about my being impractical, let me re­
mind you of an old idea of mine, namely that we have thousands and 
thousands of people in Russia whose only occupation in life is to 
attack other people for being impractical, with special fury and with 
the quite unbearable persistence of flies in summer, hurling accusations 
at all and sundry except themselves. Cher, please remember that I'm 
agitated, and don't torture me. Once again merci for everything, and 
let us part as Karmazinov parted from his public - that is to say, let us 
forget each other as generously as possible. He was talking with his 
tongue in his cheek when he begged his former readers to forget him ;  
q11mzt a moi, I a m  not so conceited, and I pin my hopes most o f  all on 
the youth of your inexperienced heart : why should you waste your 
time in remembering a useless old man ? " Live on," my friend, as 
Nastasya wished me at my last name-day (ces pauvres gens ont quelque 
Jois des mots charmants ct pleins de philosophie). I do not wish you much 
happiness - you'll get tired of it; I do not wish you trouble, either ; 
and, following the precept of the popular philosophy, I'll simply re­
peat: " Live on" and try somehow or other not to be bored too much ; 

THE END O F  THE FETE 
:his vain wish I add from myself. Well, farewell, and farewell in all 
eriousness. And don't stand there at my door. I shan't open it.' 
He went away, and I got nothing more out of him. In spite of his 
agitation' he spoke smoothly, unhurriedly, with weight and obvious­
y trying to impress me. No doubt, he was a little vexed with me and 
Nas avenging himself indirectly on me, perhaps for yesterday's 
covered wagons' and ' trap-doors '. His public tears this morning, in 
;pite of his having achieved a victory of sorts, had put him, he knew, 
n a somewhat absurd position, and there was no one who cared more 
1bout the beauty and severity of form in his relations with friends 
than Mr Verkhovensky. Oh, I don't blame him ! But it was this fas­
tidiousness and sarcasm, which still clung to him in spite of all shocks, 
that put my mind at rest at the time : a man who had apparently 
:hanged so little compared with what he had been, was most certainly 
not disposed at that moment to do anything tragic or untoward. That 
was how I reasoned at the time and, goodness me, how wrong I was ! 
I did not take enough into consideration . . . .  
Anticipating things, I shall quote the first few lines of his letter to 
Miss Shatov, which she really did receive the next morning. 
'Mon enfant, my hand is shaking, but I have done with everything. 
You were not present at my last encounter with the people, you did 
not come to that " reading" and you did well. But you will be told 
that in our Russia, which is so poor in men of character, one plucky 
man got up and, in spite of the dire threats hurled at him on every 
side, told those little fools the truth, that is, that they are little fools. 
0, ce sont - des pauvres petits vauriens et rie11 de plus, des petits fools - voila 
le mot! The die is cast ; I am going from this town for good, and I 
don't know whither I'm going. Everyone I loved has turned away 
from me. But you - you who are a pure and naive creature ; you who 
are so gentle, you whose destiny was nearly linked with mine at the 
bidding of a capricious and despotic heart ; you who perhaps looked 
at me with contempt when I shed cowardly tears on the eve of our 
abortive marriage; you who cannot, however good you may be, look 
on me except as a comic figure - oh, for you, for you is the last cry of 
my heart, for you my last duty, for you alone ! For I canuor leave you 
for ever with the thought that I am an ungrateful fool, a boor and an 
egoist, as, no doubt, a cruel and ungrateful heart, whom, alas, I cannot 
forget, assures you daily that I am . . . .' 

490 
T H E  D E V I L S  • PART THREE 
And so on and so forth, four closely written pages of large size. 
Having knocked three times with my fist on the door in reply to 
his 'I shan't open', and having shouted after him that I was sure he 
would send his Nastasya to me three times that day, but that I would 
not come, I left him and ran off to Mrs Lembke. 
2 
There I was the witness of an outrageous scene: the poor woman was 
being cheated to her face, and I could do nothing. And, indeed, what 
could I have told her? I had had time to come to my senses a little and 
to realize that al I had to go upon were some vague feelings, some 
suspicious premonitions, and nothing more. I found her in tears, al­
most in hysterics, dabbing her forehead with eau-de-Cologne and 
sipping cold water. Peter Verkhovensky stood before her, talking 
without stopping, and the Prince, who kept silent as though his lips 
had been sealed. She was reproaching Peter, in a shrill voice and with 
tears, for his ' apostasy '. I was at once struck by the fact that she 
ascribed the whole failure, the whole disgrace of that morning - in­
deed, everything - to Peter's absence. 
I noticed one important change in him : he looked as though he 
were a little too much worried about something; he was almost seri­
ous. As a rule, he never seemed serious ; he was always laughing, even 
when he was angry - and he was often angry. Oh, he was ;mgry even 
now; he spoke coarsely, carelessly, with vexation and impatience. He 
swore that he had been taken il with a sick headache at Gaganov's 
lodgings, where he had happened to go early in the morning. Alas, the 
poor woman wanted so badly to be deceived again ! The main ques­
tion which I found under discussion was whether the ball - that is, the 
second half of the fete - should take place or not. Mrs Lembke would 
not hear of appearing at the ball after ' the insults she had suffered in 
the morning', in other words, she simply longed to be compelled to 
go, and by him, by Peter Verkhovensky, most of all. She looked on 
him as an oracle, and I really believe that if he had gone away at once 
she would have taken to her bed. But he never thought of going away ; 
so far as he was concerned, it was absolutely essential that the ball 
should take place that evening and that Mrs Lembke should be there. 
' Good heavens, why cry ? Must you make a scene? Vent your spite 

THE END O F  T H E  FETE 
491 
m somebody ?  All right, vent it on me. Only hurry up, for goodness 
ake, because time's passing and you must make a decision. If the read­
ng was a failure, the ball will make up for it. The Prince, too, is of the 
arne opinion. A jolly good thing the Prince was there, or I don't 
mow how it would have ended.' 
The Prince had been against the ball at first (that is, against Mrs 
:.embke's appearance at the ball, for the ball had to take place, any­
.vay), but after two or three such references to his opinion he began 
ӽradually to grunt in sign of agreement. 
I was also surprised by the rather extraordinary discounesy of 
Peter's tone. Oh, I mdignantly reject the base story spread afterwards 
1bout some sort of liaison between Peter Verkhovensky and Mrs 
Lembke. There was no such thing, nor could there be. He got the 
11pper hand of her merely by supponing her with all his miglu from 
the very start in her dreams of exerting an influence on society and 
the Ministry. He entered into all her plans, made them up for her him­
self, worked on her with the grossest flattery, entangled her from head 
to foot, and became as indispensable to her as the air she breathed. 
Catching sight of me, she uttered a cry, her eyes flashing. 
' You'd better ask him,' she exclaimed. ' He never left me for a mo­
ment, just like the Prince. Tell me,' she addressed me, ' isn't it clear 
that it was a plot, a base, cunning plot to do as much harm as possible 
to me and Mr Lembke ? Oh, they had it all arranged ! It's a political 
movement, a regular movement ! '  
' You're going a bit too far as always. A whole romantic poem in 
your head, as usual. But I'm glad to see Mr - er -' (he pretended to 
have forgotten my name). ' He'll tell us what he thinks.' 
' I'm entirely in agreement with Mrs Lembke,' I hastened to declare. 
'It's quite obviously a plot. I've brought you back these badges, Mrs 
Lembke. Whether the ball is going to take place or not, is not my 
business, of course, because it's not in my power to decide ; but my 
role as steward is at an end. Forgive my excitement, but I can't act 
against the dictates of common sense and my own convictions.' 
' You hear ? You hear ?' she cried agitatedly. 
' I  hear, ma'am, and let me tell you this, sir,' he turned to me. 'J can 
only presume that you must have all eaten something that has mrned 
you into raving lunatics. So far as I can see, nothing has happened, 
absolutely nothing, that has not happened before and that could not 

492 
THE D E V I L S · PART THREE 
have happened at any time in this town. What plot? What happened 
was not nice ; indeed, the whole thing was disgracefUlly stupid ; but 
where's the plot? Is it a plot against Mrs Lembke who has spoiled 
them, protected them, and foolishly forgiven them all their childish 
pranks ? Mrs Lembke, what have I been telling you constantly for the 
last month ? What have I been warning you against ?  What on earth 
do you want all those people for ?  Why did you have to get mixed up 
with such a crew? Why ? Whatever for ?  To unite society? But will 
they ever be united, for goodness sake?' 
' When did you warn me ? Quite the contrary, you approved, you 
even demanded . . . .  I must say I'm so astonished - why, you brought 
many strange people to see me yourself.' 
' On  the contrary, I argued with you and I did not approve what 
you did. As for bringing them to see you, it's quite true I did, but only 
after they'd come to you themselves by the dozen, and that, too, only 
quite recently to form that " literary quadrille", for you could not 
have done it without tl10se blockheads. But I bet you anything you 
like that to-day they let in a dozen or more such blockheads without 
tickets ! '  
'I'm sure they did,' I confirmed. 
' Well, you see, you're agreeing already. Just try to remember the 
tone that has been prevalent here recently - I mean in this rotten little 
town. Why, it was just pure insolence and shameless impertinence ; 
it's been a crying shame all the time. And who's been encouraging it? 
Who covered it all up with her authority? Who's got them all con­
fused? Who's made all that small fry angry? Why, all tl1eir family 
secrets can be found in your album. Didn't you pat your poets and 
artists on tl1e head ? Didn't you let Lyamshin kis your hand? Wasn't 
it in your presence that a divinity student called a Regular State Coun­
cillor names and ruined his daughter's dresses with his tarred boots ? 
Why, then, are you so surprised that the public is incensed against 
you?' 
' But it was all your doing, yours and no one else's! Oh, my God ! '  
' No, madam, I kept warning you. We quarrelled about it. Do you 
bear? We quarrelled ! ' 
'Goodness, you're lying to my face! '  
'Well, naturally, you would say that. You must have a victim on 
whom you could vent your spite. Very well, vent it on me, as I've 

THE END O F  THE FETE 
493 
said already. I'd better ask you, Mr - er -' (He still could not remem­
ber my name.) 'Let's count on our fingers : I maintain that, with the 
exception of Liputin, there was no plot, no plot at all ! I'll prove it, 
but first let us analyse Liputin. He came out with that fool Lcbyatkin's 
verses - well, do you really believe that that was a plot ? Has it never 
occurred to you that all Liputin was after was to show how clever he 
was ? Seriously, seriously. He simply came out on to the platform with 
the aim of making everyone laugh and cheering them up, his patron­
es Mrs Lembke first of all. You don't believe me? But isn't that in 
keeping with all that has been going on here for the last month ? And 
shall I tell you the whole truth ? I'm sure that under other circumstances 
everything might have gone off without a hitch ! It was a crude sort 
of a joke, and, I admit, a bit strong perhaps, but it was funny, wasn't 
it?' 
'What? You think what Liputin did was witty ? '  Mrs Lembke cried 
in intense indignation. ' Such a stupid thing ! Such a tactless thing! So 
mean, so contemptible - why, it was done intentionally! Oh, you're 
saying this on purpose! You must be in the plot with them! '  
'To be sure. I was sitting behind them, hiding myself, setting the 
whole machinery going. But, good Lord, don't you see, ifl had had 
anything to do with the plot - it would not have ended with Liputin 
alone! Or do you think that I had also arranged with my dear father 
that he should cause such a scene on purpose? Well, who is responsible 
for letting Father address the meeting ? Who tried to stop you yester­
day, only yesterday ?' 
'Oh, hier il avait tant d'esprit, I was counting so much on him; and, 
besides, he has such fine manners : I thought that he and Karmazinov -
and then ! '  
'Yes, madam, and then ! But in spite of his tant d'esprit my dear 
father has let you down, and ifl had known beforehand that he would 
let you down so badly, then, being in the plot against your fete, I 
should certainly not have tried to persuade you yesterday not to let 
the goat into the kitchen garden, shouldn't I? And yet I did my best to 
dissuade you yesterday, and I did so because I had a feeling that this 
would happen. But, no doubt, I could not have foreseen everything: 
I daresay he did not know himself a minute before what he was going 
to blurt out. These neurotic old gentlemen aren't like other people. 
But the situation can still be saved : to satisfy the public, send two 

494 
T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  T H R E E  
doctors to him to-morrow by administrative order and with all the 
honours due to such a solemn occasion to find out what's wrong with 
him. You could do it even to-day, and get him off straight to the hos­
pital for a cold-water cure. It will at least make everyone laugh, and 
they'll realize that there was nothing to take offence at. I could make 
a public announcement about it this very evening at the ball, as I am 
his son. Karmazinov is a different matter. He showed himself to be a 
perfect ass, and dragged out his address for a whole hour - he must 
without any doubt have been in the plot with me ! " Why shouldn't I 
make an unholy mess of it, too, to injure Mrs Lembke ?" was what he 
probably said to himself- or did he ?' 
' Oh, Karmazinov, quelle ho111e! I nearly died with shame for our 
audience ! '  
' Well, I shouldn't have died, but I'd have grilled him instead. The 
audience was absolutely right. And who, again, is to blame for Kar­
mazinov ? Did I thrust him on you or not ? Did I take any part in 
worshipping him or not ? Well, to hell with him ! But what about 
the third maniac, the political one ? That's quite a different matter. 
Here we all made a bad slip. That wasn't only my plot.' 
' Oh, don't speak of it. It was dreadful, dreadful ! I alone am to 
blame for that ! '  
' Of course you are ; but there I'll acquit you of all blame. Good 
Lord, who can keep an eye on them, those open-hearted ones ! You 
can't guard against them even in Petersburg. He was recommended to 
you, wasn't he ? Excellent recommendations he had, too ! So you'll 
admit that you simply have to appear at the ball now. For that's a 
serious matter, since it was you who put him on the platform. Now it 
is your duty to declare publicly that you have nothing to do with that 
man, that the fellow is already in the hands of the police, and that you 
were deceived in a most inexplicable manner. You must state indig­
nantly that you were the victim of a madman. For he is, of course, a 
madman and nothing else. That's what you have to tell tl1e authorities 
about him. I can't stand fellows who bite. I say worse things, perhaps, 
but not from a public platform. And they are raising a clamour about 
a senator now.' 
' What senator ? Who's raising a clamour ?' 
'Well, you sec, I don't understand it myself. You don't know any­
thing about a senator, do you, Mrs Lembke ?' 

THE END O F  THE FETE 
495 
'A senator?' 
'You sec, they're all convinced that a senator has been appointed to 
be governor here and that you're being replaced from Petersburg. I've 
heard it from lots of people.' 
'I've heard it, too,' I confirmed. 
'Who said so ?' cried Mrs Lembke, flushing all over. 
'You mean, who said itfi. rst? I'm sure I don't know. But, there you 
are, people are talking. They were talking about i.t yesterday especi­
ally. They all seem to be very serious about it, though it's difficult to 
make anything out. Of course, those who're more intelligent and 
competent don't talk ; but some of them, too, listen.' 
'How despicable and - and how stupid ! '  
'That's why you simply must appear at the ball now, to show these 
fools.' 
' I  admit I feel myself that it is my duty to be there, but - what if 
another disgrace awaits us there ? What if they don't turn up ? No one 
will come, no one! ' 
' What excitement! They won't come ? And what about the new 
clothes they have made, and the girls' dresses ? I simply refuse to re­
gard you as a woman after that. What a judge of character ! '  
'The marshal's wife won't be there ! She won't be there ! '  
'But, after all, what has happened? Why shouldn't they come ?' he 
cried at last with angry impatience. 
'Dishonour, disgrace - that's what's happened. I can't tell you how 
frightful it was, and after that I simply can't go in there.' 
'Why not ? For goodness sake, you're not to blame for whatever 
has happened, are you ?  Why, then, do you take the blame on your­
self? Don't you think that it's the audience rather that is to blame ? 
Those venerable elderly gentlemen of yours, those heads of families of 
yours ? They should have kept those blackguards and good-for-noth­
ings in their place, for it's only a matter of blackguards and good-for­
nothings and nothing serious. You can't rely on the police alone in any 
society anywhere. Here everyone seems to ask for a special policeman 
to protect him wherever he goes. They don't seem to understand that 
society must protect itself. And what do our high officials, our heads 
of families and their wives and daughters do in such circumstances ? 
They hold their tongues and sulk. There is not enough social sense to 
control the mischief-makers.' 

THE D E V I LS · PART THREE 
'Oh, that's quite true. They hold their tongues, sulk and - look 
about them.' 
'And if it's true, then you have to tell them about it aloud, proudly, 
sternly. Indeed, you must show them that you're not beaten. Show 
those doddering old men and mothers of families. Oh, you can do 
it. You have the gift when your head is clear. You'll gather them 
round you and say it aloud, aloud. And afterwards a report to the 
Voice and Stock Exchange News. You wait, I'll do it myself. I'll arrange 
it all for you. And, of course, pay more attention to things, the buffet 
must be looked after; you must ask the Prince, you must ask this 
gentleman . . . .  You can't possibly leave us in the lurch, sir, when we 
have to start everything all over again. Well, and finally, Mr Lembke 
and you - arm in arm. How is Mr Lembke?' 
' Oh, how unjustly, how wrongly, how cruelly you've always 
judged that angehc man ! '  Mrs Lembke suddenly cried with quite un­
expected impulsiveness and almost with tears, putting her handkerchief 
to her eyes. 
At that moment Peter Verkhovensky was almost speechless with 
astonishment. 
' Why, good Lord, I - but what have I - I've always . .  .' 
' You never, never ! You have never done him justice ! '  
' You never can understand a woman ! ' Peter muttered with a wry 
smile. 
' He's the most truthful, the most considerate, the most angelic per­
son! He's kindness itself! '  
' But, good Lord, did I ever say he wasn't kind ? Why, I always - er 
- always said he was - er -' 
' Never ! But let's drop it. I'm afraid I haven't stuck up for him as I 
should. This morning that little Jesuit, the Marshal's wife, also dropped 
a few sarcastic hints about what happened yesterday.' 
'Oh, she has other fish to fry now - she has to-day's afair to worry 
about. And why are you so upset about her not corning to the ball ? 
Of course, she won't come, if she's got herself mixed up in such a 
scandal. Perhaps she had nothing to do with it, but still her reputation 
is at stake - her hands are soiled.' 
' What are you talking about? I don't understand. Why are her 
hands soiled ?' Mrs Lembke asked, looking bewildered. 
' I  mean to say I - I don't know anything realy, but the town is 

T H E  END O F  THE FETE 
497 
already ringing with the news that it was she who brought them 
together.' 
' What are you talking about ? llronght who together ? '  
'Good Lord, don't you really know ? '  he cried with well-simulated 
astonishment. ' Stavrogin and Lisa, of course ! '  
' What did you say ?' we all cried together. 
'Do you really mean to tell me that you don't know? Dear me ! 
Why, all sorts of tragic love aff.'lirs have been happening here : Lisa 
slipped out of the carriage of the Marshal's wife and got straight into 
Stavrogin's carriage and ran off with " the latter gentleman" to 
Skvoreshniki in broad daylight. Just an hour ago, hardly an hour.' 
We were dumbfounded. We, of course, began tiring questions at 
him ;  but, to our surprise, though he ' accidentally' witnessed the scene 
himself, he was not able to give us a circumstantial account of it. The 
whole thing apparently happened this way : when the Marshal's wife 
was driving Lisa and Mr Drozdov from the ' reading ' to the house of 
Lisa's mother (who was still confmed to bed with bad legs), they saw 
a carriage waiting not far from the entrance, about twenty-five paces 
away, just round the corner. When Lisa jumped out, she ran straight 
to that carriage ; the door was opened and quickly shut again; Lisa 
shouted to Drozdov : ' Spare me ! '  - and the carriage drove otf at fnll 
speed to Skvore;hniki. To our hurried question whether it had been 
all previously arranged anJ who was in the carriage, Peter replied 
that he knew nothing about it; no doubt the whole thing must have 
been arranged, but that he did not catch sight of Sta vrogin in the car­
riage ; possibly the old butler Alexey Yegorych was there. When 
asked how he happened to be there and how he was so certain that 
Lisa had gone to Skvoreslmiki, he replied that he was there because he 
had just happened to be passing and that, having caught sight of Lisa, 
he had rushed up to the carriage (and yet, for all his curiosity, he could 
not make out who was in it !), and that Mr Drozdov did not attempt 
to give chase, and did not even try to stop Lisa and, indeed, kept back 
the Marshal's wife, who was shouting at the top of her voice : ' She's 
going to Stavrogin ! She's going to Stavrogin ! '  But at this point I 
could no longer restrain lilyself, and shouted furiously at Peter Ver­
khovensky : 
' It's you who arranged it all, you blackguard! That's what kept 
you so busy this morning. You helped Stavrogin, you came in the 

T H E  D E V I LS • PART THREE 
carriage, you helped her into it - you, you, you! Mrs Lembke, he's 
your enemy ! He'll ruin you, too ! Take care! '  
And I ran headlong out of the house. 
To this day I can't understand how I could have brought myself to 
hurl those words at him. I can't help wondering at it myself. But I was 
right :  everything, as appeared afterwards, happened almost exactly as 
I had said it would. Above all, the equivocal way in which he broke 
the news was too obvious. He had not told us about it immediately on 
h.is arrival as a sensational piece of news, but pretended that we al­
ready knew it without his telling us - which was quite impossible in 
so short a time. And if we had known it, we shouldn't have been able 
to keep it to ourselves till he mentioned it. Nor could he have heard 
that the town was ' ringing' with the story about the marshal's wife in 
so short a time. Besides, while telling us the story he allowed himself 
a rather contemptible and self-satisfied smirk once or twice, no doubt 
considering that we were fools whom he had taken in completely. 
But I had other worries now. I was convinced of the truth of the 
main fact, and I rushed out of Mrs Lembke's drawing-room beside 
myself. The catastrophe had struck me to the very heart. I felt so upset 
that I could have cried, and perhaps I did cry. I did not know what to 
do. My first impulse was to go and see Mr Verkhovensky, but the dis­
agreeable fellow again refused to open the door. Nastasya assured me 
in a deferential whisper that he had gone to bed, but I did not believe 
it. At Lisa's house I succeeded in questioning the servants; they con­
firmed the report about her elopement, but knew nothing themselves. 
The house was in a turmoil ; Mrs Drozdov was having fainting fits and 
Maurice Drozdov was with her. I did not think it possible to ask for 
Drozdov. I asked them about Peter Verkhovensky, and they told me 
that he had been in and out of the house continually during the past 
few days, sometimes twice in one day. The servants looked sad, and 
spoke of Lisa with a special sort of respect; they were fond of her. 
That she was ruined, utterly ruined, I had no doubt, but I simply could 
not understand the psychological aspect of the affair, especially after 
her scene with Stavrogin the previous day. I did not relish the idea of 
runing about the town and making inquiries in the houses of our 
malicious acquaintances, who, of course, already knew the news ; for, 
apart from anything else, it was so humiliating for Lisa. But it was 
certainly strange that I should have run to see Mis Shatov. But I was 

THE END O F  THE FETE 
499 
not admitted (no one had been admitted to Mrs Stavrogin's house 
since the previous day) ; I don't know what I could have said to her 
and why I was so anxious to see her. from there I went to see her 
brother. Shatov listened gloomily and in silence. I may add that I 
found him looking quite unusually depressed; he seemed extra­
ordinarily self-absorbed, and apparently listened to me with an effort. 
He said practical! y nothing and began pacing his cubby-hole from one 
comer to the other, stamping more loudly than usual. But as I was de­
scending the stairs he shouted after me that I should go and see Lipu­
tin: 'You'll learn everything there.' But I did not go to see Liputin. 
Instead, I retraced my steps, though I had already gone a good way, 
and went back to Shatov's. I half opened the door of his room, and 
without going in asked him laconically and without any preliminaries 
whether he intended to go and see Mary that day. Shatov just swore 
at me, and I went away. I note here, so as not to forget, that he went 
specially to the other end of the town that very evening to see Mary, 
whom he had not seen for some time. He found her in excellent 
health and spirits, and Lebyatkin dead drunk, asleep on the sofa in the 
front room. That was exactly at nine o'clock. He told me so himself 
the following day when we met for a moment in the street. Before 
ten o'clock I made up my mind to go to the ball, no longer as 'a 
young steward' (I had left my badge at Mrs Lembke's, anyway), but 
because I was very curious to hear (without asking any questions) 
what the townspeople were saying about all those happenings in 
general. And, besides, I was rather anxious to have a look at Mrs 
Lembke, too, if only from a distance. I reproached myself a great deal 
for having rushed out of her house like that in the afternoon. 
3 
The whole of that night, with its almost grotesque happenings and the 
terrible denouement in the morning, still haunts me like some horrible 
nightmare, and forms (for me, at any rate) the most distressing part of 
my chronicle. Though I was too late for the ball, I did arrive towards 
its end - so rapidly was it destined to end. It was past ten o'clock when 
I reached the entrance of the Marshal's house, where the same White 
Hall, in which the reading had taken place, had, in spite of the short 
interval of time, been cleared and made ready as the chief ballroom 

500 
T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  T H R E E  
for (as was supposed) the whole town. But however much I had been 
against the ball in the morning, I had even then no idea of the whole 
truth ; not one family of quality appeared ; even the Civil Servants 
who occupied positions of any consequence were not there - and 
this was certain! y a most striking fact. As for the ladies and girls, Peter 
Verkhovensky's conjectures (the insidious nature of which was all 
too plain now) turned out to be utterly wrong : on! y a few people had 
come to the ball; there was scarcely one lady to four men, and what 
ladies ! Some "nondescript" wives of regimental officers, post office 
clerks and low-grade Civil Servants, and other small fry, three doc­
tors' wives with their daughters, two or three poor country gentle­
women, the seven daughters and the niece of the secretary I believe I 
have mentioned earlier, shopkeepers' wives - was this what Mrs 
Lembke expected? Half of the merchants of our town even had kept 
away. As for the men, there were great numbers of them, even though 
all the people of quality were conspicuous! y absent, but they made an 
ambiguous and suspicious impression. There were, of course, some 
very quiet and respectable army officers with their wives, a few very 
docile fathers, like that secretary, for instance, the father of seven 
daughters. All these humble, insignificant people had come because it 
was ' inevitable', as one of these gentlemen expressed it. On the other 
hand, the large number of ' smart' individuals and, besides, the large 
number of persons whom Peter Verkhovensky and myself had sus­
pected of having been admitted without tickets, seemed even bigger 
than in the morning. For the time being they were all sitting in the re­
freshment bar, and had gone straight there as soon as they had arrived, 
as though it were a prearranged meeting-place. So, at least, it seemed 
to me. The refreshment bar was in a large room at the end of a long 
succession of rooms. It was there Prokhorych installed himself with 
all the attractions of the club kitchen and with a tempting display of 
snacks and drinks. I noticed several individuals whose coats were al­
most in ratters and whose rig-out was certainly highly unsuited for a 
ball. It was clear that someone must have taken a great deal of trouble 
to bring them rhere in a stare of sobriety which would not last long; 
goodness only knows where they had come from, they were certainly 
not residents of our town. I knew, of course, that it was Mrs Lembke's 
idea that the ball should bear a democratic character, and that 'even 
artisans should not be refused admission if one of them should happen 

THE END O F  THE FETE 
501 
to pay for his ticket'. She could boldly utter those words at her 
committee meeting, for she knew perfectly well that it would never 
have occurred to any of our artisans, who were all extremely poor, 
to buy a ticket. But still I doubted very much whether the fel­
lows in the shabby and almost tattered clothes should have been ad­
mitted, in spite of the democratic sentiments of the committee. But 
who let them in and with what object? Liputin and Lyamshin had 
been deprived of their steward's badges (though they were present at 
the ball, as they were taking part in the ' literary quadrille'); but, to 
my surprise, Liputin's place was taken by the divinity student who 
had done more than anybody else to discredit the ' matinee ' by his 
brush with Mr Verkhovensky, and Lyamshin's place by Peter ; what 
was one therefore to expect in such circumstances ? I tried to listen to 
the conversations. Some of the opinions I heard expressed struck me 
by their utter grotesqueness. In one group, for instance, it was main­
tained that Lisa's elopement with Stavrogin had been arranged by Mrs 
Lembke, who had been paid for it by Stavrogin. Even the amount of 
money was mentioned. It was asserted that she had organised the fete 
with that aim in view, that that was the reason why half of the towns­
people, having got wind of what was on foot, had not come to the 
ball, and that Lembke himself was so shocked that he ' had gone off 
his head ', and she was now ' leading a madman on a string '. There was 
a great deal of laughter in the ballroom - hoarse, wild, and cunning. 
Everyone, too, was violently criticizing the ball and abusing Mrs 
Lembke without ceremony. Taken as a whole, it was a disorderly, 
i1coherent, drunken, and agitated babble, so that it was difficult to 
make head or tail of it or draw any conclusions from it. In the refresh­
ment bar there were people, too, who were simply enjoying them­
selves, as well as a number of highly obliging and gay ladies of the sort 
who were not surprised at, or frightened of, anything - mostly regi­
mental ladies and their husbands. They formed gay tea-parties at the 
little tables. The refreshment bar became the cosy refuge for almost 
half the guests. And yet in a little time all this mass of people would 
rush into the ballroom ;  it was a horrifying thought. 
Meanwhile three meagre quadri.lles were formed in the White Hall 
with the help of the Prince. The young ladies were dancing, while 
their parents were fondly watching them. But many of the more re­
spectable guests were beginning to wonder how they could, after 

502 
T H B  DEVILS ' PART THREB 
providing a little amusement for their girls, get away in good time be­
fore ' the trouble starts'. For absolutely everyone was convinced that 
the trouble would certainly start. I should have found it dificult to de­
scribe Mrs Lembke's state of mind. I did not attempt to speak to her, 
though I did go close up to her. She did not reply to my bow as I 
entered, for she did not notice me (she really did not notice). She had 
a worried look and a haughty and contemptuous, though restless and 
troubled, expression in her eyes. She controlled herself, though the 
whole thing was obviously an ordeal to her - who and what was she 
doing it for ?  She ought to have left and, above all, taken her husband 
away, but she remained! I could see from her face that her eyes were 
' fully opened' and that she had nothing more to expect. She_did not 
even ask Peter to come and talk to her (he seemed to avoid her himself; 
I saw him in the refreshment bar, and he looked extremely cheerful). 
But she remained at the ball nevertheless, and did not let Mr Lembke 
leave her side for a moment. Oh, up to the last moment she would 
have repudiated any hint about his health with genuine indignation, 
even that morning. But now her eyes were to be opened about that, 
too. For my part, I could not help thinking from the first glance that 
Mr Lembke looked worse than he had done in the morning. It seemed 
to me as though he were in a sort of coma and did not realize where 
he was. Sometimes he would suddenly look round him with un­
expected severity ; he did so, for instance, twice at me. Once he tried 
to say something. He began in a loud, resonant voice but did not finish 
the sentence, throwing a humble old Civil Servant who happened to 
be near him almost into a panic. But even this humble section of the 
public in the White Hall tried to get out of Mrs Lembke's way gloom­
ily and fearfully, at the same time throwing rather strange glances at 
her husband, glances that were too penetrating and frank to be in 
keeping with the timidity of these people. 
'It was that fact that sent a chill through my heart,' Mrs Lembke ad­
mitted later to me, ' and I suddenly began to suspect what was wrong 
with Mr Lembke.' 
Yes, she was to blame again! Probably when she decided with Peter 
Verkhovensky that the ball should take place and that she should be 
present, she must have gone again to the study of Mr Lembke, who 
had been completely 'shaken' at the 'reading', and had again used 
all her seductive arts and made him go with her. But how she must 

THB END OF THE FETB 
have suffered just now! And yet she did not leave! Whether it was her 
pride that tormented her or whether she simply lost her head - I don't 
know. In spite ofher haughtiness, she tried to say a few words to some 
of the ladies with humiliation and smiles, but they looked embarrassed, 
tried to shake her off with mistrustful monosyllabic 'Yes, ma'am,' and 
'No, ma'am,' and quite obviously avoided her. 
The only one of all the persons of high rank in our town to be pre­
sent at the ball was the pompous General whom I have already had 
occasion to describe before, and who at the party of the Marshal's wife 
after Stavrogin's duel with Gaganov 'opened the door to public im­
patience'. He walked importantly about the room, watched and list­
ened, trying to imply by his demeanour that he had come more for 
the sake of observing the proceedings than for his own indubitable 
pleasure. He finished up by attaching himself to Mrs Lembke and not 
moving away from her a step, obviously trying to cheer her up and 
reassure her. He undoubtedly was a most kind-hearted man, very dig­
nified, and so old that one could even put up with his compassion. But 
to admit to herself that this old windbag had the impudence to pity 
and almost to patronize her, knowing that he was honouring her by 
his presence, was extremely galling. The General, however, would 
not leave her and kept chattering without stopping. 
'They say a town canot exist without seven righteous men - seven, 
I believe, it is - can't remember the exact number. I don't know how 
many of these seven - er - unquestionably righteous men of our town 
-er -have had the honour of corning to your ball, rna' am, but in spite 
of their presence I'm beginning to feel rather - er - in danger. Vous 
me pardonnez, charmante dame, n' est-ce pas? I speak allegorically, but 
I've just been to the - er - refreshment bar and I'm glad to be back safe 
and sound. Our priceless Prokhorych, I'm afraid, ma'am, isn't quite in 
his element there and I shouldn't be surprised if - er - his tent dis­
appeared from over his head by the morning. I'm joking though. I'm 
only waiting to see what the "literary quadrille" is going to be like, 
then I'm off to bed. You must excuse a gouty old fellow, ma'am, but 
as a rule I go early to bed and you, too, ma'am, I'd advise you to go 
bye-bye, as they say aux enfants. Damme, ma'am, I've come here to 
have a look at some pretty girls whom - er - I can never hope to see 
jn such rich variety as in this place. They're all from the other side of 
the river, and I'm afraid I never drive down there. There's the wife of 

50-l 
T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  T HR E E  
an ofticer, ma'am, of the regiment of chasscurs, I believe - er - not at 
all bJd looking, rna "am, not bad looking at all and - er - knows it her­
sel L she does, too. I've had a few words with the little rogue - a for­
ward filly - and - er - the girls, too, are fresh, ma'am, fresh. Pity, 
though, there's nothing else but their freshness to - er - commend 
them. 1-Iowcvcr, one mustn't grumble, what ? Some of ' em are real 
pcaci1cs, except that their lips arc a little too thick. As a rule, rna' am, 
the beauty of Russian women's faces hasn't got that regularity and -
cr - I'm afraid they're more like pancakes than anything else. Vous me 
pardor111cz, n'est-ce pas - their eyes, though, are pretty - laughing eyes. 
These peaches arc very charming during the first two years of their 
youth - three years even, I darcsay - but after that I'm sorry to say, 
ma'am, they tend to - er - spread incontinently - er - producing in 
their husbands that sad indifferentism which - er - I'm afraid rather 
contributes to the development of the woman question - if I under­
stand it correctly. H'm ! The hall's nice ; the rooms aren't badly decor­
ated. Could be worse, I suppose. The music, too, could have been 
worse - I don't say should have been. It's the scarcity of ladies that 
makes such a bad effect. Afraid the clothes aren't worth mentioning. 
Disgusting the way that chap in the grey trousers is dancing the can­
can. No sense of decency. I shouldn't have minded if he did it because 
he was a bit merry, since he's our local chemist, but - er - it's a bit too 
early at eleven o'clock even for a chemist. Two fellows in the refresh­
ment bar had a fight, but they weren't thrown out. Fellows who start 
a fight at eleven o'clock should be thrown out whatever the cus­
toms of the public. It's different at three o'clock. One has to make 
allowances for public opinion then, if, that is, the ball lasts as long as 
that. I sec, ma'am, Mrs Stavrogin hasn't kept her word and hasn't sent 
flowers. Well, I suppose, pauvre mere, she's something else to worry 
about now besides flowers. And what about poor Lisa, eh ? You've 
heard, haven't you ?  I'm told the whole thing's rather mysterious and 
- cr - and that chap Stavrogin's again mixed up in it . . .  Well, well. 
I reall y  ought to go home to bed - afraid can't keep my eyes open. 
Dut what about that " literary quadrille" ?  When's that coming on ?' 
At last the ' literary quadrille ' began. Whenever during the past few 
days the forthcoming ball was being discussed in our town, the con­
versation was invariably and immediately switched over to the 'liter­
ary quadrille', and as no one had the faintest idea what it was all about, 

THB END OF THB FETE 
505 
it always aroused immense curipsity. There could be nothing more 
dangerous for its success - and what a terrible disappointment it turned 
out to be! 
The hitherto locked side-doors of the White Hall were suddenly 
thrown open and a few masked figures appeared. The public sur­
rounded them eagerly. All the people in the refreshment bar flocked 
to the last man into the ballroom. The masks took their places for the 
dance. I succeeded in squeezing my way through to the front, and I 
took up a position immediately behind Mrs Lembke, von Lembke, 
and the General. At that moment Peter Verkhovensky, who was not 
to be seen til then, hurried up to Mrs Lembke. 
'I've been in the refreshment room all the time keeping an eye on 
things,' he whispered with the expression of a guilty schoolboy, which 
he assumed on purpose to provoke her even more. 
She flushed with anger. 
'I wish you'd stop deceiving me now at least, you insolent man!' 
she blurted out almost aloud, so that it was distinctly heard by several 
people. 
Peter rushed off, looking extremely satisfied with himself. 
It would be difficult to imagine a more wretched, vulgar, tasteless, 
and insipid allegory than that 'literary quadrille'. Nothing less suitable 
for our public could have been devised; and yet, I am told, it was 
Karmazinov who had devised it. It is true it was Liputin who had 
arranged it in consultation with the lame teacher who had been at 
Virginsky's party. But, all the same, it was Karmazinov who had 
thought of the idea and, it was rumoured, even meant to dress up and 
take a special and principal part in it. The quadrille was made up of six 
miserable pairs of masks - not really masks even, for they al wore the 
same clothes as everyone else. Thus, for instance, one short, elderly 
gentleman in a frock-coat - in fact, dressed like everyone else - and a 
venerable grey beard (tied on - this constituted the whole of his fancy 
dress} was bobbing up and down on the same spot as he danced with a 
stolid expression on his face, working away as fast as he could with his 
feet without moving an inch. He emitted curious sorts of sounds in a 
soft but husky bass, and it was that huskiness of his voice that was 
meant to suggest one of the well-known newspapers. Opposite this 
mask danced two giants X and Z, and these letters were pinned on 
their frock-coats, but what the X and Z meant remained a mystery. 

506 
T H E  D E V I L S · PART T H R E E  
The 'honest Russian thought ' was represented by a middle-aged 
gentleman wearing spectacles, a frock-coat, gloves and - manacles 
(real manacles). Under the arm of this ' thought' was a brief-case con­
taining documents referring to some ' case'. An opened letter from 
abroad to convince the sceptics of the honesty of the 'honest Russian 
thought ' peeped out of his pocket. All this the stewards explained 
by word of mouth, since it was impossible to read the letter which 
protruded from his pocket. In his raised right hand ' the honest Russian 
thought ' held a wine-glass, as though he were about to propose 
a toast. Close at each side of him two short-haired nihilist girls 
capered and vis-a-vis danced another elderly gentleman in a frock­
coat, but with a heavy cudgel in his hand, apparently representing a 
very redoubtable periodical, though not a Petersburg one : ' I'll wipe 
you off the face of the earth ! '  But though armed with a cudgel, he just 
could not bear the spectacles of ' the honest Russian thought' fixed 
intently upon him and tried to look away, and when he did his pas de 
deux, he twisted and turned and did not know what to do with him­
self, so much, apparently, did his conscience prick him . . . .  However, 
I am afraid I cannot recall all those rather absurd inventions of theirs; 
it was all of the same kind, so that in the end I felt thoroughly ashamed. 
And it was the same feeling of shame that could be read on the faces 
of the audience, even on the most morose countenances of those who 
had come from the refreshment bar. When a man feels ashamed, he 
generally begins to get angry and is inclined to become cynical. Gradu­
ally, our audience, too, began to murmur. 
' What's all this about ?' a man in one group who came from the 
refreshment bar muttered. 
' Some stupid nonsense.' 
' Some sort of literature. They're criticizing The Voice.' 
' What do I care ? '  
From another group : 
' Donkeys ! '  
' No, they're not donkeys ; it's we who are the donkeys.' 
' Why arc you a donkey ?' 
' I'm not a donkey.' 
' Very well, if you're not a donkey, then I'm certainly not.' 
From a third group : 
' Kick them all in the behind and to hell with them ! '  

THE E N D  O F  THE FE TE 
'Pull the hall down ! '  
From a fourth group : 
'I wonder the Lembkes aren't ashamed to look on ! '  
'Why should they be ashamed ? You aren't, are you ?' 
'Of course I'm ashamed, but he's the Governor.' 
'And you're a pig ! '  
507 
'Never in my life have I seen such a dull and uninteresting ball,' a 
lady next to Mrs Lembke remarked viciously, quite obviously with 
the intention of being overheard. 
The lady was about forty, plump and painted, wearing a bright­
coloured silk dress ; almost everyone in town knew her, but no one 
received her. She was the widow of a State Councillor, who had left 
her a wooden house and a meagre pension, but she lived well and kept 
a carriage and horses. She had been the fmt to pay a visit to Mrs 
Lembke about two months before, but the Governor's wife had not 
received her. 
'I could have foretold that,' she added, looking insolently into Mrs 
Lembke's face. 
'If you could have foretold it, why did you come ? '  Mrs Lembke 
could not refrain from asking. 
'Because, madam, I was too simple,' the quick-witted lady snapped 
back in a flash in great agitation (she was spoiling for a fight) ;  but the 
General placed himself between them. 
'Chere dame,' he said, bending over Mrs Lembke, ' I  honestly think 
you ought to be going. We're only in their way, and they're sure to 
have a thoroughly good time without us. You've done your part, 
you've opened the ball for them, and now - er - you can leave them 
in peace. And - er - I  don't think, ma'am, Mr Lembke is quite at his 
best just now, is he? I only hope there won't be any trouble.' 
But it was too late. 
During the quadrille Mr Lembke was watching the dancers with a 
sort of wrathful perplexity, and when comments began to be made in 
the audience, he began to cast agitated glances round him. Then for 
the fmt time he caught sight of some of the individuals who had come 
from the refreshment-room; an expression of extreme surprise ap­
peared on his face. Suddenly there was loud laughter at some horse­
play in the quadrille: the editor of ' redoubtable periodical not pub­
lished in Petersburg', who was dancing with the cudgel in his hands, 

so !I 
THE D E V I L S · P A R T  T H R E I!  
feclmg that he could no longer endure the staring spectacles of' honest 
Russian thought ', and not knowing how to escape it, suddenly, in the 
last figure, walked upside down towards the spectacles, which, by the 
way, was meant to signify the continual upside-down distortion of 
common-sense in ' the redoubtable periodical not published in Peters­
burg '. As Lyamshin was the only one who could walk upside down, 
it was he who had volunteered to represent the editor with the cudgel. 
Mrs Lembke had no idea that anyone would be walking upside down. 
'They concealed it from me,' she kept repeating to me afterwards in 
indignation and despair. The loud laughter of the crowd greeted not 
the allegory, of course, for nobody cared anything about it, but simply 
the spectacle of a man walking upside down in a dress-suit with tails. 
Lembke flew into a rage and trembled all over. 
' Blackguard ! '  he cried, pointing to Lyamshin. ' Seize the villain and 
turn him over - turn his legs - his head - with his head up - up ! '  
Lyamshin jumped to his feet. The laughter grew louder. 
'Turn out all the villains who're laughing ! '  Lembke suddenly 
ordered. 
The crowd began to mutter and roar with laughter. 
'You can't do that, sir ! '  
'You mustn't abuse the public, sir ! '  
'You're a fool yourself! '  a voice cried from a corner. 
' Filibusters ! '  someone cried from another corner. 
Lembke turned round quickly at the cry and turned pale. A blank 
smile appeared on his face, as though he suddenly remembered and 
understood something. 
' Ladies and gentlemen,' Mrs Lembke addressed the crowd, which 
was pressing forward, drawing her husband after her at the same rime 
- ' Ladies and gentlemen, please excuse Mr Lembke. Mr Lembke is not 
feeling well - excuse - forgive him, ladies and gentlemen ! '  
I heard her distinctly say ' forgive '. The whole thing happened very 
quickly. But I distinctly remember that a section of the public, as 
though in alarm, made for the door just at that moment, immediately 
after those words ofhers. I also remember a woman's hysterical, tear­
ful cry: 
' Oh, the same thing again ! '  
And suddenly another bombshell burst in the midst of the crush 
that had started at the door, exact! y ' the same thing again' : 

THE END O F  THE FETE 
' Fire ! The suburb across the river is on fire ! '  
The only thing I cannot remember is where this cry first arose : 
whether it was uttered by someone in one of the rooms or, as it 
seems likely, by someone who came running in from the stairs leading 
to the entrance hall, but it was followed by such an uproar that I can't 
possibly describe it. More than half of the guests at the ball came from 
across the river - owners or occupiers of wooden houses in the suburb. 
They rushed to the windows, pulled back the curtains at once and 
tore down the blinds. The fire, it is true, had only just started, but it 
was burning fiercely in three separate places, and that was what had 
frightened them. 
'Arson! The Spigulin men ! '  people in the crowd yelled. 
I remember a few highly characteristic exclamations : 
' I  had a feeling that they'd set fire to the town - I've had a premoni­
tion that they'd do it for these last few days ! '  
'The Spigulin men, the Spigulin men ! No one else ! '  
'They got us all here on purpose so that they could set fire to the 
suburb! '  
This last most amazing cry came from a woman ; it was an un­
intentional and involuntary cry of some hard-fisted woman whose 
worldly goods were all on fire. They all now rushed to the exit. I shall 
not attempt to describe the crush in the entrance hall over the sorting 
out of fur coats, shawls, and cloaks, the shrieks of frightened women, 
and the crying of girls. I don't think there was any theft, but it would 
not surprise me if in such disorder some people went away without 
their warm clothes because they were unable to find them, which gave 
rise to all sorts oflegends, appropriately embellished, long afterwards. 
Mr and Mrs Lembke were almost crushed to death by the crowd in 
the doorway. 
' Stop 'em all !  Don't let anyone out ! '  Lembke shouted, stretching 
out his arms menacingly towards the people who pressed round him 
on all sides. ' Search everyone - everyone without exception - at once!' 
There was an outburst of loud and violent swearing in the ball­
room. 
'Andrey ! Andrey !' Mrs Lembke cried in utter despair. 
'Arrest her first ! '  Mr Lembke shouted, pointing a menacing finger 
at his wife. ' Search her first! The ball was arranged with the object of 
setting fire to the town! ' 

5 10 
T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  T H REE 
She uttered a cry and fainted ( oh, this time it was a real faint, of 
course !). The Prince, the General and I rushed to her aid ; there were 
others who came ro our help at that difficult moment, including some 
women. We carried the unhappy woman out of that hell to her car­
riage ; but she on I y recovered consciousness as she reached her house, 
and her first cry was again about her husband. With the destruction 
of all her illusions, only her husband remained to her. A doctor was 
sent for. I stayed at her place for a whole hour, and so did the Prince; 
the General, in a fit of generosity (though he had been very frightened 
himsel f), expressed the wish to remain 'at the bedside of the unhappy 
woman ' all night, but ten minut(;:S later he fell asleep in an arm-chair in 
the drawing-room while waiting for the doctor, and there we left him. 
The Police Commissioner; who had hastened from the ball to the 
fire, had succeeded in bringing Mr Lembke out of the hall after us. 
He tried to get him to join his wife in the carriage, doing his best to 
persuade His Excellency ' to rest '. I cannot understand why he did 
not succeed. Of course, Mr Lembke refused to hear of a rest, and was 
anxious to rush to the fire ; but that was no excuse. It ended in his 
taking him to the fire in his open carriage. He told us afterwards that 
Lembke was gesticulatmg all the way and ' gave expression ro ideas 
which were impossible to carry out because they were so extra­
ordinary '. It was officially stated later that His Excellency had at that 
time been in a delirious condition owing to ' sudden shock'. 
There is no need to describe how the ball ended. A few dozen 
revellers, and with them some ladies, remained. There were no police. 
The band was forced to stay behind, and the musicians who attempted 
ro leave were beaten black and blue. By the morning 'Prokhorych's 
tent ' was pulled down, they drank and danced with complete aban­
don, made a mess of the rooms, and only at daybreak some of the 
gang, drunk as lords, arrived at the fire in time for new disorders. The 
rest fell asleep in the rooms dead drunk on the velvet sofas and the 
floor. In the morning they were dragged out by their legs into the 
street. So ended the fete in aid of the governesses of our province. 
4 
The tire alarmed those guests at the ball who lived in the suburb across 
the river because it was a clear case of arson. It is remarkable that 

THE END OF THE FETE 
5 1 1  
the first cry of ' Fire ! '  was immediately followed by another shout: 
'The Spigulin men have set fire to the suburb.' Now it is, indeed, 
well known that three Spigulin men did in fact take part in setting 
fire to the suburb, but - that was all; the rest of the workmen of the 
factory were entirely exonerated both by public opinion and officially. 
Besides those three blackguards (one of whom has been caught and 
confessed, and the other two are still at large), there can be no doubt 
that Fedka the convict also took part in the incendiarism. That is all 
that is so far known for certain about the origin of the fire ; the theories 
of the fire are quite a different matter. What was the motive of the 
three blackguards ? Were they or were they not acting on instruc­
tions ? It is dificult to give an answer to all these questions even now. 
The fire, owing to the strong wind, the fact that practically all the 
houses of the suburb were wooden, and, finally, that they had been 
set alight from three sides, spread rapidly, and a whole quarter of the 
suburb was soon blazing fiercely (the suburb was actually set alight at 
two ends : the third fire was dealt with in time and extinguished al­
most as soon as it began, of which later). The Petersburg and Moscow 
papers, however, exaggerated our calamity : no more (and perhaps 
even less) than a quarter of the entire suburb, roughly speaking, was 
burnt down. Our fire brigade, though rather inadequate to the size 
and population of the town, acted, however, very efficiently and with 
great devotion. But it would not have been able to do much, even 
with the vigorous assistance of the inhabitants, if the wind, which sud­
denly abated at dawn, had not changed. When I reached the suburb, 
only one hour after our flight from the ball, the fire was already at its 
height. A whole street which ran parallel to the river was blazing. It 
was as light as day. I shall not attempt to describe the scene of the fire: 
who in Russia does not know what it is like ? The side-streets close to 
the burning street were teeming with bustling people. Expecting the 
fire to spread any moment, the inhabitants were dragging out their 
belongings, but still refused to leave their dwellings and were sitting, 
in expectation, on the trunks and feather beds they had dragged out, 
each under his own windows. Part of the male population were hard 
at work ruthlessly chopping down fences, and even taking to pieces 
whole hovels which were nearest the fire and on the windward side. 
Only the children who had been wakened were crying, and the 
women who had already dragged out their chattels were howling and 

5 12 
T H E  D E V I L S . P A R T  T H R EE 
I 
wailing. Those who had not managed to save their belongings got on 
with their work in silence and were busily hauling them out into thel 
street. Sparks and embers were flying in all directions, and people put 
them out as best they could. At the scene of the fire itself there were 
crowds of spectators who had come running from all over the town. 
Some of them helped to put out the flames, others stood gazing, 
fascinated by the sight. A big fire at night always produces an exciting 
and exhilarating effect; this explains the attraction of fireworks ; but 
in the case of fireworks, the graceful and regular shape of the flames 
and the complete immunity from danger produce a light and playful 
effect comparable to the effect of a glass of champagne. A real fire is 
quite another matter : there the horror and a certain sense of personal 
danger, combined with the well-known exhilarating effect of a fire at 
night, produce in the spectator (not, of course, in one whose house 
has burnt down) a certain shock to the brain and, as it were, a chal­
lenge to his own destructive instincts, which, alas, lie buried in the 
soul of even the meekest and most domesticated official of the lowest 
grade. This grim sensation is almost always delightful. ' I  really don't 
know if it is possible to watch a fire without some enjoyment ! '  This 
is word for word what Mr Verkhovensky said to me one night on 
returning from a ftre, at which he happened to be present by accident, 
and under the first impression of the· scene. Doubtless, the man who 
enjoys watching a fire at night will not hesitate to rush into the flames 
himself to save a child or an old woman; but that is an entirely differ­
ent matter. 
Following close behind the crowd of curious onlookers, I eventually 
came, without making any enquiries, to the main and most dangerous 
spot, where I at last caught sight of Lembke, whom I was looking for 
at the request of Mrs Lembke herself. His position was amazing and 
extraordinary. He was standing on the ruins of a fence; to the left, 
about thirty paces away, rose the blackened skeleton of a wooden 
two-storied house which had almost completely burnt down, with 
holes instead of windows in each story, with its roof fallen in, and 
with flames still creeping here and there among the charred beams. At 
the back of the courtyard, about twenty paces from the burnt house, 
a small cottage, also two stories high, was just beginning to blaze, and 
the firemen were doing their utmost to save it. To the right the fire­
men and a crowd of people were concentrating on a large wooden 

THE END O F  THE F ETE 
5 1 3 
building which was not burning, but which had caught fire several 
times already and which was quite certain to burn down presently. 
Lembke shouted and gesticulated, standing with his face to the cot­
tage, giving orders which nobody carried out. At fmt I tnought that 
he had been left standing there on purpose and that no one bothered 
about him any more. At least, though the large mixed crowd, which 
surrotmded him and among which were some gentlemen and even 
the cathedral priest, was listening to him with curiosity and astonish­
ment, no one attempted to speak to him or tried to get him away. Pale 
and with glittering eyes, Lembke was delivering himself of the most 
amazing things; and, to crown it all, he was bareheaded, having lost 
his hat long ago. 
' It's ;J1 incendiarism ! It's nihilism ! Whatever is burning, is nihil­
ism ! '  I heard almost with horror, and though there was nothing to be 
surprised at any longer, reality always has something shocking about 
it. 
' Your Excellency,' a policeman, who rushed up to him suddenly, 
said. ' hadn't you better go home and hav.e a rest ? It's dangerous for 
Your Excellency even to stand here.' 
This policeman, as I found out later, had been detailed by the Police 
Commissioner to watch over Lembke and to do his utmost to get him 
home, and in case of danger even to use force - a task evidently be­
yond his power. 
'They'll dry the tears of the victims of the fire, but they'll burn 
down the town. It's all those four blackguards, four and a half. Arrest 
the rascal! He insinuates himself into the honour of families. They 
used governesses to set fire to the houses. That's disgraceful, disgrace­
ful. Good Lord! what is he doing there ?' he shouted, suddenly notic­
ing a fireman on the top of the blazing cottage, under whom the roof 
had almost burnt away and round whom flames were flaring up. ' Pull 
him down! Pull him down! He'll fall through ! He'll catch fire ! Put 
him out! What is he doing there ? '  
'He's putting out the fire, sir.' 
' Not likely. The fire's in the minds of people, and not on the roofs 
of houses. Pull him down and give it up! Better give ir up ! Better give 
it up! Let it put itself out! Good heavens, who's crying there ? An old 
woman! An old woman is screaming ! Why have you forgotten the 
old woman ? '  

5 14 
THE DEVILS · PART THREE 
To be sure, on the ground floor of the blazing cottage an old 
woman was screaming, an eighty-year-old relative of the merchant 
who owned the burning house. But she had not been forgotten. She 
had gone back to the burning house herself, while it was still possible, 
with the insane idea of dragging out her feather-bed from a comer 
which was still untouched by the flames. Choking in the smoke and 
screaming with the heat, for the room had in the meantime caught 
fire, she was trying with all her might to push her feather-bed 
through a broken window-pane with her feeble hands. Lembke rushed 
to her assistance. They all saw him run up to the window, catch hold 
of one end of the feather-bed and pull it with all his strength through 
the window. As ill luck would have it, a rafter from the roof fell at 
that moment and hit the unhappy man; it did not kill him, merely 
grazing his neck as it fell, but Mr Lembke's career came to an end, in 
our province, at any rate; the blow knocked him off his feet and he 
fell down on the ground unconscious. 
Daybreak came at last, bleak and dismal. The fire abated; a calm 
descended suddenly after the wind, and then a drizling rain fell slow­
ly, as though through a sieve. By that time I was already in a different 
part of the suburb, far from the place where Lembke had collapsed, 
and there I heard strange things being said in the crowd. A very curi­
ous fact had come to light: at the very edge of the suburb, on a piece 
of waste land behind the kitchen gardens, not less than fifty yards from 
any other buildings, stood a small, newly built wooden house, and 
this solitary house caught fire at the very begining, almost before any 
other house. If it had burnt down, it could not have set any other 
building on fire because it was so far from any other house, and vice 
versa, if the whole of the suburb had burnt down, that house would 
have escaped even if a gale had been blowing. It therefore followed 
that it had caught fire quite independently and separately, and hence 
that there was something wrong about it. But the important thing 
was that it had not burnt down, and at daybreak astonishing things 
were discovered in it. The owner of the new house, an artisan who 
lived in a nearby suburb, rushed to his house as soon as he saw it on 
fire, and with the help of his neighbours he succeeded in saving it by 
scattering the heap oflogs which had been set on fire at one of the side 
walls. But there were lodgers in the house - a captain who was well 
known in the town, his sister, and an elderly maid, and the three of 

THE END O F  THE FETE 
chem, the captain, his sister and their maid, had been murdered during 
the night, and apparently robbed. (It was there that the Police Com­
missioner had gone when Lembke had been trying to salvage the 
feather-bed.) In the morning the news had spread, and a huge crowd 
of all sorts of people, including even victims of the fire, had rushed to 
the waste land and the new house. It was difficult to pass through so 
dense a crowd. I was at once told that the Captain had been found 
lying dressed on a bench with his throat cut, and that he had appar­
ently been dead drunk when murdered, so that he was not aware of 
anything, and that he had bled ' like a bull ' ;  that his sister, Maria 
Timofeyevna, had been ' pierced through and through' with a knife 
and was lying on the floor near the door, so that she must have been 
awake and had resisted and struggled with the murderer. The maid, 
who had also probably been awake, had her skull broken. According 
w the landlord, the Captain had been to see him the previous morn­
ing. He was drunk and boasted about his money, showing the land­
lord about 200 roubles. The Captain's old green wallet was found 
empty on the floor ; but his sister's trunk had not been touched, and 
che silver setting of the icon had not been touched either. The Cap­
tain's wardrobe, too, had not been tampered with. It was obvious that 
the robber had been in a hurry, that it was a man who was familiar 
with the Captain's private affairs, who had come only for the money, 
and that he knew where it was kept. If the landlord had not been in 
time, the burning logs would have set fire to the house and it would 
have been dificult to find out the truth from the charred bodies. 
This is how the story was related to me. Another piece of infornla­
tion was added : the house had been taken for the Captain and his sister 
by Stavrogin, the son of the General's widow, and he had come him­
self to arrange about the rent; that he had had a great deal of trouble 
in persuading the landlord to let it, because the latter had intended to 
use it as a public-house ; but Stavrogin was ready to pay any rent the 
landlord asked and had paid for six months in advance. 
'The fire was no accident,' people were saying to each other in the 
crowd. 
But the majority were silent. Their faces were sullen, but I did not 
notice any signs of great anger. They went on talking about Stavrogin, 
pointing out that the murdered woman was his wife and that on the 
previous day he had ' dishonour ably' abducted the daughter of Mrs 

THE D E V I L S · PART THREE 
Drozdov, a General's widow, a girl who belonged to one of the best 
families in the town, and that a complaint was to be lodged against 
him with the authorities in Petersburg. As for the motive of his wife's 
murder, it was clear enough that she had been killed to make it pos­
sible for him to marry Miss Lisa Tushin. 
Skvoreshniki was only about two miles away, and I remember 
wondering whether I ought not to let them know about it. However, 
I did not notice that anybody was trying to incite the crowd, though 
in it, to be quite honest, I did catch sight of two or three of the ruffians 
I had seen in the refreshment room at the ball, whom I recognized at 
once. But I particularly remember one thin, tall lad of the artisan 
class - a confirmed drunkard, by the look of him - and, as I found out 
later, a locksmith by trade, with a curly head and a face so grimy that 
it seemed to be covered with soot. He was not drunk, but seemed, in 
contrast to the sullen and motionless crowd, to be in a frenzy of ex­
citement. He kept addressing the people, though I do not remember 
the exact words he used. He did not say anything coherent that was 
longer than: ' I  say, fellows, this is terrible ! We can't just stand about 
and do nothing, can we ? '  and, as he spoke, he kept waving his arms 
about. 
-
1 
The End of a Love Affair 
FROM the large drawing-room at Skvoreshniki (the same in which the 
last interview between Mrs Stavrogin and Mr Verkhovensky had 
taken place) the f1re could be plainly seen. At daybreak, at about six 
o'clock in the morning, Lisa was standing at the farthest window on 
rhe right and watching the dying red glow in the sky. She was alone 
in the room. She was wearing the party dress she had worn at the 
reading the day before - light green, gorgeous, covered with lace, but 
already crumpled and put on carelessly and in haste. Noticing sud­
denly that her corsage was undone, she blushed, quickly put her dress 
to rights, snatched up the red shawl she had thrown down on an arm­
chair when she came in the day before, and put it round her neck. Her 
luxuriant hair fell in a disorderly disarray of curls on her right shoul-

THE END OF A LOVE AFFAIR 
517 
der from under the shawl. Her face looked tired and worried, but her 
eyes glowed under her knit brows. She went up to the window again 
and pressed her burning forehead against the cold pane. The door 
opened and Stavrogin came in. 
' I've sent a messenger on horseback,' he said. ' In ten minutes we 
shall know everything. Meanwhile all I could fmd out from the ser­
vants was that part of the suburb across the river has been burnt down, 
near the embankment on the right side of the bridge. The fire started 
about midnight. It is dying down now.' 
He did not go up to the window, but stopped three paces behind 
her; she did not turn round to him. 
' By the calendar it should have been daylight an hour ago, but it's 
still almost dark,' she said irritably. 
'All Galendars tell lies,' he observed with a polite smile, but, feeling 
ashamed, he hastened to add: ' It's boring to live by the calendar, 
Lisa.' 
And he fell silent, annoyed with himself for the platitude he had 
uttered. Lisa smiled wrily. 
'You are in such a melancholy mood that you can't even find words 
w speak to me. But don't worry : you were quite right : I do live by 
the calendar. Every step I take is according to the calendar. Does that 
surprise you ? '  
She turned away from the window quickly and sat down i n  an 
arm-chair. 
'Won't you, too, sit down, please ? We shall be only a short time 
together, and I want to speak my mind. Why shouldn't you do the 
same ?' 
Stavrogin sat down beside her and took her hand quietly, almost 
timidly. 
'What does this tone mean, Lisa? Where did you suddenly get it 
from ? What do you mean - we shall be only a short time together ? 
This is the second enigmatic phrase you have used, darling, since you 
woke up half an hour ago.' 
'Are you beginning to count my enigmatic phrases ?' she said, 
laughing. ' Do you remember I spoke of myself as a dead woman as I 
came in yesterday ? You thought it necessary to forget that. To forget 
or not to notice.' 
' I  don't remember, Lisa. Why a dead woman ? We must live . . . . ' 

T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  T H R E E  
'And is that all ? You've lost your eloquence completely. I've had 
my hour, and that's enough. Do you remember Christophor lvano­
vich ?' 
' No, I don't,' he said, frowning. 
' Christophor lvanovich at Lausanne ? You got awfully tired of him. 
He always used to open the door and say, " I've just dropped in for a 
minute," but he stayed the whole day. I don't want to be like Christo­
phor lvanovich and stay the whole day.' 
A pained look came into his face. 
' Lisa, I can't bear this morbid talk. This affectation must hurt you 
too. What do you want it for ?  What for ? '  His eyes glowed. ' Lisa,' 
he cried, ' I  swear to you I love you now more than I did yesterday 
when you came to me ! '  
' What a strange confession ! Why to-day and yesterday ? Why these 
two comparisons ?' 
'You won't leave me, will you ?' he went on almost in despair. 
' We'll go away together - to-day - won't we ? Won't we ?' 
' Ugh, don't squeeze my hand so ! It hurts. Where are we to go 
away together to ? To-day, too ? Somewhere where we should " rise 
from the dead " again ? No, I've had enough of experiments and, be­
sides, it takes too long for me. And I'm not fit for it, either. It's much 
too lofty for me. If we arc to go anywhere, it is to Moscow. To pay 
visits there and receive visitors. That's my ideal, you know. I haven't 
concealed the sort of person I am from you, even in Switzerland. But 
as it is quite impossible for us to go to Moscow and pay visits because 
you are a married man, it's no use talking about it.' 
' Lisa! Then what happened yesterday ?' 
' What happened, just happened.' 
'That's impossible ! That's cruel ! '  
'What i f  it is cruel ? You just have to put up with it, cruel as i t  is.' 
' You're avenging yourself on me for yesterday's whim,' he mut-
tered, grinning maliciously. 
Lisa flushed. 
' What a mean thought ! '  
' In  that case why did you make me a present of- " so much happi­
ness" ?  Have I the right to know ?' 
' No, I'm afraid you'll have to do without rights. Don't make the 
mearmess of your supposition worse by stupidity. You're not your 

THE END O F  A LOVE A FF A I R  
5 19 
sua! self to-day. You're not by any chance afraid of public opinion 
r that you'll be blamed for " so much happiness " ?  If that is so, then 
)r goodness sake don't worry. You're not responsible for whatԡver 
appened, and you haven't got to answer to anyone for it. When I 
pened your door yesterday, you did not even know who was com­
lg in. Yes, it was just a whim of mine, as you expressed it just now, 
nd nothing more. You. can look everyone boldly and triumphantly 
1 the face ! '  
'Darling, your words, this laugh of yours, have been making me 
urn cold with horror for the last hour. This " happiness " of which 
·ou talk with such frenzied fury means - everything to me. How can 
give you up now ? I swear to you I loved you less yesterday. Why 
lo you rob me of everything to-day? Do you know what it has cost 
nc - this new hope? I've paid for it with life.' 
'Your life or somebody else's ? '  
He got up quickly. 
'What do you mean ? '  he said, staring at her fixedly. 
' Have you paid for it with your life or mine - that's what I wanted 
o ask you. Or have you ceased to understand me altogether now ? '  
jsa flushed. ' Why did you jwnp u p  s o  suddenly ?  What arc you look­
ng at me like that for? You frighten me. What are you afraid of? 
've noticed for some time that you are afraid - that you are afraid at 
his very moment - yes, at this very moment. Goodness, how pale you 
Lre ! '  
')f you know something, Lisa, then I swear that I don't and - and 
:hat i wasn't talking of that at all when I said that I had paid with life.' 
'I - I don't understand you at all,' she faltered timidly. 
At last a slow, wistful smile appeared on his lips. He sat down 
;lowly, put his elbows on his knees, and buried his face in his hands. 
'A bad dream - a nightmare. We were talking of two different 
things.' 
' I  don't know what you were talking about. Didn't you know 
yesterday that I'd leave you to-day ? Did you or didn't you ? Don't lie. 
Did you or didn't you? '  
' I  did,' he said softly. 
'Well, ilien, what more do you want? You knew, and you reserved 
that "moment" for yourself. What else is there left for us to settle ? '  
' Tell me ilie whole truth,' he cried in great agony. ' When you 

po 
THE DEVILS · PART THREE 
opened the door of my room yesterday, did you know that you were 
opening it only for one hour?' 
She looked at him with hatred. 
' Realy, the most serious person can ask the most extraordinary i 
questions. And what are you so worried about? Is it because your 
vanity is hurt because a woman should be the first to throw you over ' 
and not you her? You know, Mr Stavrogin, since I've been here I've , 
happened to fmd out that you're awfully generous to me, and it's just 
that I can't put up with from you.' 
· 
He got up and took a few steps round the room. 
'All right, suppose it had to end like that. But how can it all have 
happened?' 
'What do you care? The main thing is that you know it perfectly 
well yourself and that you understand it better than anyone in the 
world, and that you were counting on it yourself. I am a young lady, 
and my heart has been brought up on the opera. That's how it all 
started. That's the whole explanation.' 
' No.' 
'There's nothing here to hurt your vanity, and it's al absolutely 
true. It all began with a beautiful moment which was too much for 
me to bear. The day before yesterday when I "insulted" you in pub- . 
lie and you replied to me like a real gentleman, I came home and reaJ.: 
ized at once that you were drawing away from me because you were 
married and not at all because you despised me, which, being a society 
girl, I dreaded most of all. I realized that by running away from me 
you were merely trying to save me, fool that I was. You see how 
greatly I value your generosity. Just then Peter turned up and ex­
plained it all to me at once. He revealed to me that you couldn't make 
up your mind about a great idea, before which he and I were as noth­
ing, but that I was in your way, all the same. He said he, too, was in .  
i t ;  he was determined that the three of us should keep together, and he' 
talked the most fantastic things, about a boat and maple oars from 
some Russian song. I complimented him and told him that he was a! 
poet, and he swalowed it all just as if I had meant it. And as I knew ' 
perfectly well anyhow that I should have the courage only for one 
moment, I made up my mind to go through with it. Well, that's al 
there is to it, and please no more explanations. We might end up by : 
quarrelling. Don't be afraid of anyone. I take the whole blame upon j: 

THE END O F  A LOVE AFFAIR 
521 
myself. I'm a bad, capricious girl. I was tempted by that operatic boat. 
I am a young lady. But, you know, I still thought that you were aw­
fully in love with me. Don't despise a foolish girl and don't laugh at 
this tear which just rolled down my cheek. I'm awfully fond of crying 
because I'm "sorry for myself". Well, all right. All right. I'm no good 
for anything, and you're no good for anything; my vanity has been 
hurt as wdl as yours; let that be our comfort. At least, it makes it 
easier for our vanity.' 
'A mad dream ! '  Stavrogin cried, wringing his hands and pacing 
the room. 'Lisa, my poor darling, what have you done to yourself?' 
'I've burnt my fingers, that's all. You're not crying, too, are you? 
Please behave more as becomes a gentleman; be more indifferent . . .  ' 
'Why, why did you come to me?' 
'But, really, I don't think you realize in what a ridiculous position 
you put yourself in the eyes of the world by such questions.' 
'Why did you have to ruin yourself so horribly and so stupidly ?  
And what's to be done now?' 
'And is this Stavrogin, the "vampire Stavrogin ", as a lady who is 
in love with you calls you? Look, I've told you already : I've ex­
changed my whole life for one hour, and I'm content. Do the same 
with yours - still, there's no reason why you should: you'll have 
plenty more "hours" and "moments".' 
'As many as you: I give you my solemn word. Not one hour more 
than ym:.' 
He was still pacing the room, and did not see her quick, penetrating 
glance, which seemed suddenly like a ray of hope. But the light went 
out instantly. 
' If you knew what my present impossible sincerity costs me, Lisa, if 
only I could reveal to you -' 
'Reveal? You want to reveal something to me ? May the Lord pre­
serve me from your revelations! '  she interrupted him almost in 
terror. 
He stopped and waited uneasily. 
' I  must tell you frankly that ever since those days in Switzerland I 
have been sure that there was something horrible, something loath­
some on your conscience, some blood - and - and at the same time 
something which makes you look awfully ridiculous. Beware of re­
vealing it to me, if it's true: I shall make a laughing-stock of you. I 

THE D EVILS · PART THRBB 
shall laugh at you all your life. Oh dear, so you've turned pale again? 
I won't, I won't, I'm going at once ! '  She jumped up from her chair 
with a disdainful and contemptuous movement. 
' Torture me, kill me, work off your spite on me,' he cried in des­
pair. ' You've the right to do so! I knew I did not love you, and I 
ruined you. Yes, "I've kept the moment for myself". I bad a hope ­
I've had it a long time - my last hope . . .  I could not resist the bright 
light that flooded my heart when you came to me yesterday of your 
own accord, alone, first. I suddenly believed that I loved you. Perhaps 
I believe it even now.' 
' Let me return such noble frankness by being as frank myself. I 
don't want to be a compassionate . hospital nurse for you. Perhaps I 
will really end up as a hospital nurse if I don't find a way of dying 
conveniently this very day ; but even if I do become a nurse, I won't 
be your nurse; though, of course, you need one more than any legless 
or armless man. I always imagined that you would take me to some 
place where there was a huge, wicked spider as big as a man, and we 
should spend the rest of our lives looking at it and being afraid of it. 
That's what our love would be wasted on. You'd better go to Dasha: 
she will go with you anywhere you like.' 
' You would think of her even now, wouldn't you ?' 
' The poor little lapdog ! Give her my regards. Does she know that 
even in Switzerland you'd decided to have her for your old age? 
What solicitude ! What foresight ! Oh dear, who's that? '  
A t  the far end of the room a door was opened; a bead was thrust in 
and quickly disappeared. 
' Is that you, Alexey Yegorych ? '  Stavrogin asked. 
' No, it's only me.' Peter Verkhovensky thrust himself half in again. 
' How do you do, Miss Tushin ? Anyway, good morning. I knew I'd 
find you both in the drawing-room. I've just come in for a moment. 
I'm sorry, Mr Stavrogin, but I simply must have a few words with 
you -just a few words!' 
Stavrogin went towards the door, but after taking three steps he 
returned to Lisa. 
'If you hear anything presently, Lisa, I want you to know that it's 
al my fault ! '  
She gave a start and looked timidly at him ; but he went out of tht' 
room hurriedly. 

THE END OF A LOVE AFFAIR 
523 
2 
The room from which Peter Verkhovensky had looked in was a large 
oval ante-room. The butler had been sitting there before he came in, 
but he sent him out. Stavrogin closed the drawing-room door behind 
him and stood waiting expectantly. Peter Verkhovensky gave him a 
quick and searching look. 
' Well ? '  
'I mean, if you know already,' Peter began hurriedly, as though 
wishing to dive into Stavrogin' s soul with his eyes, ' then none of us, 
of course, is to blame for anything, and you least of all, for it's - er ­
it's such a conjunction of - I mean, such a coincidence - I mean, 
legally there's no case against you, and I rushed here to tell you so 
beforehand.' 
'Burnt? Murdered? '  
'Murdered, but not burnt, worse luck; but I give you my word of 
honour that I had nothing to do with that, either, however much you 
may suspect me, because - er - you do suspect me, don't you ? Want 
me to tell you the whole truth? You see, the idea realy did cross my 
mind - you suggested it to me yourself, not seriously, but just to tease 
me (for you would never have suggested anything like that seriously), 
but I could not make up my mind, and I should never have done so 
for anything in the world, not for a hundred roubles; and besides 
there was nothing to be gained by it, for me, I mean, for me . . .  ' He 
was in a terrific hurry and was rattling away. ' But there's a coinci­
dence for you: I gave this drunken idiot Lebyatkin two hundred and 
thirty roubles out of my own pocket (you see, it was my money, 
there was not a rouble of yours and, the main thing is, you know that 
yourself). That was the day before yesterday, in the evening - you 
see, the day before yesterday, and not yesterday after the reading -
note that: it is an extremely important coincidence, for at that time 
I did not know for certain whether Miss Tushin would come to you 
or not; I gave him my own money solely because you excelled your­
self the day before yesterday by taking it into your head to reveal your 
secret to everybody. Well, of course, I don't want to go into that ­
it's your business - very chivalrous and so on - but I must confess that 
I was surprised. It was just as if you had hit me over the head with a 
cudgel. But as I was sick and tired of al these tragedies - and l'rn 

) 24 
T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  T H R E E  
qui(e serious, mind, though I may be using a colloquialism, since after 
.II it was interfering with my plans - I  vowed to get rid of the Lebyat­
k ins at all costs by sending them off to Petersburg without your know­
ledge, more particularly as he was very anxious to go there himself. 
! made one mistake, though : I gave the money in your name. Was it 
a mistake or not? Perhaps it wasn't, eh? Now, listen to me - please, 
:istcn how it all turned out -' 
In the excitement of his talk he walked close up to Stavrogin and 
was about to take hold of the lapel of his coat (quite likely deliber­
ately). Stavrogin struck him violently on the arm. 
'What on earth - I  mean, really - you'll break my arm, you know. 
The important thing is how it all turned out,' he rattled on, without 
apparently being in the least surprised at the blow. ' I  gave him the 
money in the evening so that he and his sister should set off as early 
next morning as possible. I entrusted this little business to that scoun­
drel Liputin. I instructed him to see them safely on the train himself. 
But that swine Liputin took it into his head to play a prank on the 
public at the reading - you've heard of it, I suppose, haven't you ? At 
the reading? Now, listen, listen : both of them had a few drinks, com­
posed verses, half of which arc Liputin's; Liputin got Lebyatkin into 
a dress suit, while he told me that he had sent him off in the morning. 
Uut he kept him hidden in a little room at the back with the intention 
of pushing him out on to the platform. Lebyatkin, however, got 
quickly and unexpectedly drunk. That was followed by the scan­
dalous scene. The Captain was then taken home more dead than :Uive, 
while Liputin took the two hundred roubles quietly out of his pocket, 
leaving some change there. But unfortunately it appears that the Cap­
rain had already taken the two hundred roubles out of his pocket that 
very morning to boast about them and show them where he shouldn't. 
And as that was what Fedka was waiting for and had overheard some­
thing at Kirilov's (remember, your hint?), he decided to take advan­
tage of it. That's the whole truth. I'm glad Fedka at least did not find 
the money, for the scoundrel was counting on a thousand! He was in 
a great hurry and seems to have got frightened by the fire. Believe 
me, that fire was a real blow to me. No, really, it's simply abomin­
able. It's mob-law. Now, you see, I expect so much of you that I 
wouldn't dream of concealing anything : I admit frankly that this 
idea of a fire has been maturing at the back of my mind for a long 

THE END O F  A LOVE A F FAIR 
time, for it has a strong popular appeal; but I was keeping it for a 
critical hour, for that precious moment when we shall all rise up 
and - But they suddenly took it into their heads to do it now on 
their own authority and without any orders, at a moment when we 
ought to be lying low and be as quiet as mice. I must say that is just 
mob-law ! In a word, I don't know anything for certain so far. I've 
heard people mention two Spigulin workmen - but if ours, too, are 
mixed up in it, if only one of them is in any way implicated-he'd better 
look out! You see what it means to let them get even a little bit out 
of hand! No, this democratic riff-raff with their groups of five is a 
poor support. What we want is one magnificent and despotic will, an 
idol of the people, resting on something solid and standing outside 
everything. Then the groups of five, too, will cringe obediently and 
obsequiously and he useful whenever the occasion should arise. But, 
anyway, though they may be trumpeting abroad that Stavrogin had 
to burn his wife and that's why the town was set on fire -' 
'Are they already trumpeting that abroad?' 
' I  mean, they arc not doing anything of the kind and, I must con­
fess, I haven't heard anything at all ; but what can you do with people, 
especially if their houses have been burnt down: vox populi, IJOX Dei? 
Would it take long for the most idiotic rum our to be spread abroad ? 
But, as a matter of fact, you have nothing at all to fear. Legally you 
are absolutely clear, and your conscience, too, is quite clear - you did 
not want it to happen, did you? Did you ? No evidence whatever. 
just a coincidence . . . .  Unless of course Fedka should remember your 
careless words at Kirilov's that night (and why did you have to say 
them ?), but that does not prove anything. As for Fedka, we shall stop 
his mouth. I shall deal with him to-day . . . .' 
'And weren't the bodies burnt at all ?' 
' Not a bit. That rascal could not manage anything properly. Bur 
I'm glad that you, at any rate, are so calm - because though you had 
nothing whatever to do with it, not even in thought, all the same, you 
know. And you must admit that all tllis does solve your problem 
beautifully : you suddenly become a free widower and you can at once 
marry a lovely girl with a lot of money, who is already yours as it is. 
That's the sort of thing that a simple, crude coincidence can do - eh ? '  
'Are you threatening me, you fool?' 
''Veil, well, realy, fool indeed; and what a tone to use! Another 

THE DEVILS · PART T H REE 
one in your place would be glad, but you - I rushed here on purpose 
to let you know in good time. And, besides, how could I threaten 
you ? What good would you be to me if I could only get you by 
threats ? What I want is your good wil. I don't want you to join me 
just because you're afraid of me. You're the light and the sun. It is I 
who am terrified of you, and not you of me. I'm not Drozdov. And ­
can you imagine it? - as I came flying here in a chaise I saw Drozdov 
standing by the fence at the back of your garden - in his greatcoat, 
drenched through, must have spent the whole night there ! Wonder 
of wonders ! It's extraordinary how mad people can be ! '  
' Drozdov ? Is it true?' 
' It's true all right. Sitting there by the fence. Oh, I should think not 
more than three hundred yards from here. I hurried past him, but he 
saw me. Didn't you know? In that case I'm very glad I didn't forget 
to tell you. A fellow like that can be really dangerous if he should 
happen to have a gun on him, and then there is the night, the slush, 
natural exasperation - for, after all, think ofhis position, ha, ha! Why 
do you think he is sitting there? '  
' Waiting for Lisa, naturally.' 
' Oh, I see ! But why ori earth should she go out to him? And - in 
such rain - what a damned fool he must be! '  
' She is going out to him presently.' 
' Oho ! That's news ! So that - But look here, her position has radi­
cally changed now : what does she want Drozdov for now? Why, 
you're free, a widower, and you can marry her to-morrow. She 
doesn't know yet, but leave it to me and I'll arrange everything in a 
jiffy. Where is she ? We must tell her the good news, too.' 
'The good news ? '  
' Rather! Let's go.' 
'And do you really think she won't put two and two together about 
those dead bodies ?' Stavrogin asked, screwing up his eyes in a peculiar 
way. 
' Of course she won't put two and two together,' said Peter quickly, 
just as if he were a real fool, ' because, you see, legally - Oh, you ! 
What if she did guess ? Women are so good at ignoring such things. 
I can see that you don't understand women at all ! Don't you realize 
that it's in her own interest to marry you now because, say what you 
like, she has compromised herself, and, besides, I talked to her nine-

THE END O F  A LOVE A FFAIR 
527 
teen to the dozen about the .. boat" :  for J could see that it was by the 
"boat" that I could make an effect on her, because that is the sort of a 
girl she is. Don't worry, she'll step over those dead bodies without 
hesitating for a moment, particularly as you are absolutely innocent, 
aren't you? She'll just keep them in cold storage to use them against 
you, say, after you've been married two or, perhaps, three years. 
Every woman saves up something of the kind from her husband's past 
as she is walking down the aisle with him to the altar, but by that time 
- what may not happen in a year ? Ha, ha, ha! '  
'If you've come in a chaise, take her to Drozdov now. She just told 
me that she couldn't stand me and that she was going to leave me, and 
I don't think she'll accept my carriage.' 
'Not really ? Is she actually leaving ? How did that happen ?' Peter 
asked, staring stupidly at him. 
' She has realized somehow during the night that I don't love her ­
which, of course, she has known all along.' 
' But don't you love her ?' Peter asked with a look of great surprise. 
' But if that is so, then why did you let her stay when she came to you 
yesterday ? Why didn't you tell her, like an honourable man, that you 
were not in love with her ? That was awfully mean of you. And how 
mean you make me appear in her eyes.' 
Stavrogin suddenly laughed. 
' I'm laughing at my monkey,' he explained at once. 
' Oh, I see, you realized that J was playing the fool,' Peter cried, 
laughing very gaily. ' I  did it to make you laugh! Do you know, I 
guessed at once from your face as you came in here that you'd been 
"unlucky". A complete fiasco, perhaps. Eh ? I bet,' he cried, almost 
breathless with delight, ' that you've been sitting side by side in the 
drawing-room all night, wasting your precious time in discussing 
some high and noble subject. Sorry ! Awfully sorry. I don't care. I was 
quite sure yesterday that the whole thing would end stupidly. I 
brought her to you simply to amuse you and to show you that you'll 
never be bored with me; you'll find me useful in that way a hundred 
times; I, generally speaking, like to please people. But if you don't 
want her now, which was what I was expecting when I came here just 
now, then -' 
' So you brought her just for my amusement, did you ?' 
' What else?' 

528 
T H E  D E V I L S · P A RT T H R E E  
'And not to make me kill my wife?' 
'Good Lord ! have you killed her ? What a tragic chap you 
arc 1 '  
' It makes no difference. You killed her.' 
' I  killed her ? Dut didn't I tell you that I had nothing whatever to do 
with it? I'm afraid you're beginning to worry me -' 
' Go on. You said that "if you don't want her" -' 
'Then let me deal with her, of course. I shall marry her offin a most 
excellent fashion to Drozdov, whom, by the way, I have not put in 
your garden - don't you go imagining that ! You see, I'm scared of 
him now. You say : take her in your chaise, but I just dashed by him ­
what if he really has a gun ? It's a good thing I've got mine on me. 
Here it is.' He took a revolver out of his pocket, showed it to Stavro­
gin, and put it back again. 'Took it with me as it was such a long way. 
However, I'll put it right for you in a jiffy :  I expect her little heart 
must be aching for Maurice just now - it should be, at any rate, and, 
you know, I - I'm really a little sorry for her. If I take her to Maurice, 
she'll start thinking of you at once - saying nice things about you to 
him and abusing him to his face - a woman's heart! Laughing again, 
are you? I'm awfully glad you're so cheerful now. Well, let's go. I'll 
start with Maurice at once. As for those - those who've been mur­
dered - don't you think it will be wiser to - er - say nothing about 
them now ? She's quite sure to find it out later.' 
' Find out what? Who's been murdered? What did you say just now 
abmn Mr Drozdov ?' Lisa asked, opening the door suddenly. 
' Oh! You've been eavesdropping ?' 
'What did you say just now about Mr Drozdov ? Has he been 
murdered ?' 
' Oh, so you didn't hear! Calm yourself. Mr Drozdov is alive and 
well, and you can ascertain that for yourself this minute; for he's just 
outside here, by the garden fence and - er - I believe he's been sitting 
there all night. He's drenched to the skin in his greatcoat. He saw me 
as I drove past.' 
'That's not true. You said "murdered". Who's been murdered?' 
she insisted with poignant mistrust. 
'The only people who have been murdered are my wife, her 
brother Lebyatki.n, and their maid,' Stavrogin declared firmly. 
Lisa gave a start and went terribly pale. 

THE END O F  A LOVE A fFAIR 
5-29 
'It's a brutal, strange case, Miss Tushin - a most stupid case of 
robbery: just robbery under cover of the fire,' Peter at once rattled 
off. 'It was that robber Fedka the convict who did it, and that fool 
Lebyatkin, too, was to blame, for he showed his money to everybody. 
I rushed down here to tell you about it - it was a terrible blow to me. 
Stavrogin was greatly shocked when I told him. We were just discuss­
ing whether to let you know at once or not.' 
' Nicholas, is he telling the truth?' Lisa just managed to ask. 
' No, he isn't.' 
' Not telling the truth?' Peter said with a start. ' What on earth do 
you mean?' 
'My God, I shal go mad! ' Lisa cried. 
' But please understand he's not in his right mind now! '  Peter 
shouted at the top of his voice. 'After al, it is his wife who's been 
murdered. You can see how pale he is. Why, he has been the whole 
night with you. He hasn't left you for a minute, has he? Well, so how 
can you suspect him?' 
' Nicholas, tell me as before God are you guilty or not, and I swear 
to you I'll believe your word as if it were the word of God, and I'll 
follow you to the end of the earth. Oh, yes, I will follow you like a 
dog . . . .' 
'Why are you tormenting her, you fantastic fellow?' Peter cried 
furiously. 'Miss Lisa, do anything you like to me, but I tell you he's 
innocent. On the contrary, he is, as you see, terribly upset himsel£ He 
isn't guilty of anything, not of anything in the world. Not even in 
thought. The murder has been committed by some robbers who 
will most certainly be caught within a week and flogged. It's Fedka 
the convict and the Spigulin men. The whole town is talking about it. 
That's why I'm convinced of it, too.' 
' Is it true? Is it true?' Lisa asked, trembling all over, as though wait­
ing for her final sentence. 
' I  did not kil them and I was against it, but I knew that they wĨre 
going to be killed and I did not stop the murderers. Leave me, Lisa,' 
Stavrogin said, and he walked into the drawing-room. 
Lisa covered her face with her hands and walked out of the house. 
Peter was about to run after her, but he changed his mind and went 
back into the drawing-room. 
' So that's your game! That's what you're doing ! You're not afraid 

530 
T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  T H R E E  
of all\·thing, arc you ?' He fl.ew at Stavrogin in an absolute frenzy, 
mmtcring incoherently, almost unable to fmd the right words and 
foaming at the mouth. 
Stavrogin stood in the middle of the room without uttering a word 
in repl y. He grasped a strand of his hair in his left hand and smiled 
forlornly. Peter pulled him violently by the sleeve. 
' Do you think you're done for? So that's your game? Inform the 
police on us all, and go to a monastery yourself or go to the devil. . . .  
Bur I shall kill you, though you may not be afraid of me! '  
' Oh, it's you chattering, is it?' said Stavrogin, becoming aware of 
ltis presence in the room at last. 'Run,' he said, recovering his senses 
suddenly, ' run after her, order the carriage; don't leave her. Run, run! 
See her home so that no one should know, and so that she shouldn't 
go there - to the dead bodies - to the dead bodies. Force her to get 
into the carriage. Alexey Y egorych! Alexey Yegorych! '  
' Wait; don't shout! She's already in Drozdov's arms now. Drozdov 
won't get into your carriage. Wait! Something much more important 
than your carriage is at stake! '  
He snatched out his revolver again; Stavrogin looked at him 
gravely. 
'You can kill me, if you like,' he said quietly, almost resignedly. 
' Damn it all, the lie a man will saddle himself with ! '  Peter cried, 
shaking with fury. 'Dy God, I ought to kill you ! She ought really to 
have spat on you ! What sort of" boat" are you ? You're just a leaky, 
wooden, useless old hulk. Why, you ought to come to your senses, if 
only out of spite! Oh-h! What difference does it make to you ? You 
don't seem to care ifi put a bullet through your head.' 
Stavrogin gave a strange laugh. 
' If you weren't such a clown, I might have said yes now. If only you 
had just a little more sense . .  .' 
' I  may be a clown; but I don't want you, my better half, to be a 
clown ! Do you understand me?' 
Stavrogin understood. Perhaps he was the only one to understand. 
Wasn't Shatov surprised when Stavrogin told him that Peter Verkho­
vensky had enthusiasm ? 
' Go to blazes now ! I may think of something to-morrow. Come 
to-Inorrow.' 
'You will ? You will ?' 

THE END O F  A LOVE A FFAIR 
'How do I know? To blazes with you! '  
And he walked out of the drawing-room. 
53 1 
'Well, perhaps it's all for the best,' Peter muttered to himself, put­
ting away his gun. 
He rushed off to overtake Lisa. She had not gone far, only a few yards 
from the house. The butler had detained her. He followed close be­
hind her, in his frock-coat and without a hat, his head bowed respect­
fully. He kept begging her to wait for the carriage; the old man was 
scared and he almost cried. 
'Go back; your master is asking for tea and there's no one to give 
it to him,' said Peter Verkhovensky, pushing him away and taking 
Lisa's arm. 
Lisa did not snatch her arm away, but she seemed not to know what 
she was doing, as she had not recovered from her shock. 
' In the first place, you're not going the right way,' Peter began, 
talking fast as usual. 'We have to go in that direction, and not past the 
garden; and, secondly, we can't possibly walk, for it's about three 
miles to your place and you're not even dressed for walking. Please 
wait a minute. I have my chaise here in the yard. I'll fetch it in a jiffy, 
put you in and drive you home so that no one will see us.' 
'How kind you are!' Lisa said sweetly. 
'Good Lord! in a case like that every humane man in my place 
would also -' 
Lisa glanced at him and was surprised. 
'My goodness, and I thought it was still that old man here.' 
'Listen, I'm awfully glad that you take it like this, for the whole 
thing is just stupid prejudice, and come to think of it, wouldn't it be 
better if I told the old man to get the carriage ready ? It'll only take ten 
minutes, and in the meantime we could go back and wait for it in the 
porch. Don't you think so ?' 
' First I want - where are those murdered people?' 
'Good Lord! what an idiotic notion is tlus ? I was afraid of that. No, 
we'd better leave those wretches alone. Besides, there's nothing there 
for you to see.' 
'I know where they are. I know that house.' 

5 32 
THE D E V I L S  • P A R T  THREE 
'Well, what if you do know it? Good Lord! it's raining and it's 
foggy. (What a damned nuisance this sacred duty is that I've taken on 
myself!) Listen, Miss Tushin, one of two things: either you come 
along with me in my chaise, in which case you'd better wait here and 
don't go a step further, for another twenty yards and Mr Drozdov is 
. 
sure to see us. 
'Mr Drozdov ? Where? Where?' 
' Well, if you want to go with him, I shall take you a little further, 
if you like, and show you where he is sitting, and then bid you good­
bye. I don't care to go near him now.' 
'He's waiting for me! Oh, God! '  she cried, suddenly stopping, her 
face suffused with colour. 
' But, good heavens, he's a man without prejudices! Look here, Miss 
Tushin, this is none of my business. I've nothing to do with it at all, 
and you know that yourself. But, still, I wish you well . . .  If our 
" boat" has proved a failure, if it turned out to be only a rotten old 
hulk -' 
'Oh, that's wonderful! '  
'Wonderful, and yet tears are streaming down your face. What you 
want is courage. You must be as good as any man in everything. In 
our age, when women - oh, hell! '  (Peter was almost on the point of 
spitting.) 'You see, the important thing is that there's nothing to re­
gret; perhaps it's turned out for the best. Mr Drozdov is - er - I mean, 
he's a man of sentiment, though he doesn't like to talk a lot, which, as 
a matter of fact, is a good thing, too, provided of course that he has no 
prejudices . . . .' 
'Wonderful, wonderful! '  Lisa laughed hysterically. 
' Oh, damn it all - Miss Tushin,' said Peter suddenly, feeling ex­
asperated, 'I'm really here just for your sake - it makes no difference 
to me. I did you a favour yesterday when you wanted it yourself, but 
to-day - Well, you can see Mr Drozdov from here. There he is - he 
doesn't see us. I wonder, Miss Tushin, if you've ever read Polinka 
Sachs?' · 
'What's that?' 
'There's a novel of that name - Polinka Sachs. I read it when I was a 
student. In it a Civil Servant by the name of Sachs - a very rich man ­
arrested his wife at his country house for infidelity. But damn it, it 
doesn't matter! You'll see that Mr Drozdov will make you a proposal 

THE END OF A LOVE A FFAIR 
5 3 3  
of marriage before you reach your house. He hasn't caught sight of us 
yet.' 
'Oh, don't let him see us ! '  Lisa suddenly cried like a crazed woman. 
'Let's go away, let's go away! Into the woodŦ ! Into the fields! '  
And she ran back. 
'Miss Tushin,' Peter cried, running after her, ' this is sheer coward­
ice! And why don't you want him to see you ? On the contrary, you 
must look him straight in the face - proudly . . . .  If you're worried 
about that - I mean that you're no longer a virgin - then it's such a 
stupid prejudice, such an out-of-date convention . . . .  But where are 
you going ? Where are you going ? Oh dear, she's running ! We'd bet:. 
ter go back to Stavrogin - let's take my chaise. Where are you going? 
That's the way to the fields. Now she's fallen down .. . '  
He stopped. Lisa was flying like a bird without any idea where she 
was going, and Peter was already fifty yards behind her. She stumbled 
over a mound and fell down. At that moment a heart-rending cry was 
heard from mmewhere behind. It was Drozdov who had seen her 
flight and fall and was running to her across the field. Peter at once 
retreated through the gates of the Stavrogin mansion to get into his 
chaise as quickly as possible. 
Meanwhile Drozdov was already standing in great alarm beside 
Lisa, who had sat up, bending over her and holding her hand in his. 
The wholly incredible circumstance of that meeting had given him a 
terrible shock, and tears were streaming down his cheeks. He saw the 
girl he worshipped running madly across a field at such an hour and 
in such weather, wearing only her dress, the gorgeous party dress she 
had worn the day before, now crumpled and covered with mud from 
her fall. He could not utter a word. He took off his greatcoat and with 
trembling hands put it round her shoulders. Suddenly he uttered a 
cry : he felt that she had touched his hand with her lips. 
' Lisa,' he cried, ' I  am not good for anything, but, please, don't drive 
me away from you ! '  
'Oh, let's go away from here quickly,' she said, clutching him by 
the hand and dragging him after her. ' Don't leave me, Maurice,' she 
said, suddenly lowering her voice timidly. 'Al the time I tried to be 
brave there, but now I'm afraid to die. I shall die, I shall die very soon, 
but I'm afraid, I'm afraid to die,' she whispered, squeezing his hand. 
' Oh, if only there was someone here ! '  he cried in despair, looking 

5 3 4  
T H E  D EV I L S · P A R T  T H REE 
round. ' Some passer-by ! You'll get your feet wet, you - you will lose 
1·our reason ! '  
' I'm all right, I'm all right,' she comforted him. 'With you I'm not 
so much afraid. Hold my hand, lead me. Where are we going now? 
Home? No, I want first to sec the people who have been murdered. 
They say his wife has been murdered, and he says he has killed her 
himself. It's not true, is it? I want to see the people who've been killed 
myself- for me - it's because of them that he stopped loving me last 
night. I shall see and find out everything. Quick, quick. I know the 
house - there's a fire there . . . .  Maurice, my dear friend, don't forgive 
me who have dishonoured myself! Why forgive me? Slap my face 
and kill me here in this field like a dog ! '  
' No one is your judge now,' Drozdov said firmly. 'May the Lord 
forgive you. I am your judge least of all! '  
Their conversation would sound strange if I tried to describe it. 
Meantime both walked arm in arm, quickly, hurrying along madly. 
They were going straight towards the fire. 
Drozdov still hoped to get a lift on a can at least, but no one came 
their way. A fine drizzle of rain enveloped the whole countryside, 
swallowing up every ray of light and every shade of colour and turn­
ing everything into one smoky, leaden, indistinguishable mass. It had 
long been daylight, but it seemed as though it were still dark. And 
suddenly a figure loomed out of this foggy, cold haze, a strange and 
absurd figure which was walking towards them. I can't help thinking 
now that I shouldn't have believed my eyes if I had been in Lisa's 
place, and yet she uttered a joyful cry and at once recognized the ap­
proaching man. It was Stepan Verkhovensky. How he had gone off 
and how the crazy idea of his flight could have come to pass - of that 
later. I shall merely memion the fact that he was in a fever that morn­
ing, but his illness did not stop him; he was walking firmly on the wet 
ground ; it was clear that he had thought out the enterprise a> carefully 
as he could, without any help and lacking practical experience. He 
was dressed ' for rra vel ' - that is, in a greatcoat with a wide patent­
leather belt, fastened with a buckle, and a pair of new top boots pulled 
over his trousers. He must have for some time past imagined a travel­
ler to look like that and a few days earlier he had got himself the belt 
and the high boots with shining tops like those of a hussar's, in which 
he could hardly walk. A broad-brimmed hat, a worsted yarn scarf, 

THE END OF A LOVE AFFAIR 
53 5 
wrapped tightly round his neck, a walking-stick in his right hand and 
a very small but extremely tightly packed travelling bag in his left 
completed his get-up. He had, besides, an open umbrella in his right 
hand. These three things - the umbrella, the walking-stick, and the 
travelling-bag - had been very awkward to carry for the first mile and 
rather heavy for the second. 
'Is it really you?' Lisa cried, looking at him with grief-stricken sur­
prise which followed on her first transport of unconscious joy. 
'Lise!' Mr Verkhovensky, too, cried, rushing to her almost deliri­
ously. 'Chere, chere, is it you - in such a fog? I can see, I can see, don't 
tell me, but don't ask me any questions, either. Nous sommes tous mal­
heureux, mais i1 Jaut les pardonner tous. Pardon nons, Lise, and let us be 
free for ever and ever. To be rid of the world and be completely free ­
il Jaut pardonner, pardontter, et pardonner!' 
'But why are you kneeling?' 
'Because in bidding a last farewell to the world, I'd like to take 
leave of al my past, too, in your person,' he replied, weeping and 
raising both his hands to his tear-stained eyes. ' I  kneel to everything 
that was beautiful in my life. I kiss and offer up thanks! Now I've torn 
myself in half: there is the madman who dreamed of soaring into the 
douds, vingt-deux ans! Here is a broken-down and shivering old man 
-a tutor - chez ce marchand, s' il existe pourtant ce marchand . . . .  But how 
drenched you are, Lise!' he cried, jumping to his feet, feeling that his 
knees, too, had got drenched on the wet ground. 'And how is it pos­
sible - you are in such a dress? - and on foot, and in this field ? You are 
crying? Vous etes malheureuse? Why, I did hear something . . .  But 
where have you come from now?' He fired his questions at her, un­
easily gazing in great bewilderment at Drozdov. 'Mais savez-vous 
I' heure qu' il est?' 
'Mr Verkhovensky, have you heard anything about people who 
have been murdered there ? Is it true? It is, isn't it?' 
' Oh, these people! I watched the glow of their evil deeds in the sky 
al night long. They couldn't end up otherwise . . . .' His eyes flashed 
again. ' I'm running away from a nightmare, from a delirious dream. 
I'm running away to find Russia, existe-t-elle Ia Russie? Bah, c'est vous, 
cher capitaine! I never doubted that I would come across you one day 
engaged on some high adventure . . . .  But take my umbrella and- why 
must you walk on foot? For God's sake, at least take my umbrella; I 

5 36 
T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  T H R EE 
shall hire a carriage somewhere, anyway. You see, I am on foot be­
cause Stasie (I mean Nastasya) would have screamed the street down 
if she'd found out that I was going away for good; that is why I 
slipped away as far as possible incognito. I don't know, in the Voice 
they print reports of robberies everywhere; but, stircly, I thought to 
myself, I couldn't possibly meet a robber the moment I came out on 
the road. Chere Lise, I believe you said that someone had murdered 
someone, didn't you ? Oh, mon Dieu, you are ill ! '  
'Come along, come along !' Lisa cried almost in hysterics, again 
dragging Drozdov after her. ' Wait a minute, Mr Verkhovensky,' she 
shouted, returning to him suddenly, 'wait, you poor darling; let me 
make the sign of the cross over you. Perhaps it would be better to tic 
you up, but I'd rather make the sign of the cross over you. Please, you, 
too, pray for your " poor" Lisa - just a little; don't trouble yourself 
too much. Mr Drozdov, give that baby back his umbrella. Please give 
it back to him !  So . . .  Now, come along ! Come along ! '  
They arrived at the fatal house at the very moment when the large 
crowd which had gathered round it had already heard a great deal 
about Stavrogin and about how much it was to his advantage to 
murder his wife. But, I repeat, the vast majority of the people con­
tinued to listen in silence and apathetically. The only people who lost 
control of themselves were the yelling drunkards and 'mentally un­
balanced' people- like the artisan who was waving his arms about. 
Everybody knew him to be a quiet man, but if anything struck him 
forcibly in a certain way, he was liable to lose control of himself and 
break out. I did not see Lisa and Drozdov arrive. I first noticed Lisa, 
to my amazement and utter stupefaction, when she was some con­
siderable distance away from me in the crowd, and I did not catch 
sight ofDrozdov at all at first. He seemed to have lagged a step or two 
behind her for a moment because of the crush or because he had been 
pushed back. Lisa, who was forcing her way through the crowd with­
out seeing anything or noticing anything around her, like one in a 
delirium, or like a patient escaped from a hospital, naturally very soon 
attracted everybody's attention : they began talking in loud voices 
and, suddenly, a clamour arose. Someone shouted : 'That's Stavro­
gin' s girl!' And on the other side : 'They're not satisfied with murder­
ing people, they come to look at them !' Suddenly I saw a hand rise 
and fall over her head from behind ;  Lisa fell to the ground. Drozdov 

THE L A S T  D E C I S I O N  
537 
uttered a terrible cry as he rushed forward to her assistance and struck 
with all his strength the man who stood between him and Lisa. But at 
that very moment the artisan seized him with both arms from behind. 
For some time it was impossible to see what was happening in the 
rough-and-tumble of the fight. I believe Lisa got up, but was knocked 
down by another blow. Suddenly the crowd parted and a small circle 
was formed round Lisa, who lay prostrate on the ground, while Droz­
dov, covered with blood and beside himself with grief, stood over her, 
wringing his hands, screaming and weeping. I can't remember exactly 
what happened afterwards; all I remember is seeing Lisa being carried 
away. I ran after her; she was still alive and, perhaps, even conscious. 
The artisan and three other men from the crowd were seized. These 
three men still deny having had any part in the murder, maintaining 
stubbornly that they were seized by mistake; perhaps they are right. 
The artisan, though caught in the act, but being feeble-minded, is still 
unable to give a detailed account of what happened. I, too, had to 
give evidence at the inquest, as one who was a witness of the crime, 
though from a distance. I declared that it had all happened entirely 
by accident through the action of people who, though perhaps 
evilly disposed, were hardly conscious of what they were doing, being 
drunk and not in the full possession of their senses. I am still of that 
opuuon. 
4 
The Last Decision 
T H A T  morning many people saw Peter Verkhovensky: those who 
saw him remembered that he was in a highly excited state. At two 
o'clock in the afternoon he went to sec Gaganov, who had arrived 
from the country the day before and whose house was full of visitors 
hotly discussing the recent events. Peter talked more than anybody, 
and made people listen to him. He was always considered in our town 
to be 'a talkative student with a screw loose', but now he was dis­
cussing Mrs Lembke and in the general excitement the subject was 
of absorbing interest. As one who had recently been her intirnatc 
and confidential friend, he disclosed many new and unexpected dctaib 

T H E  D E V I L S · PART T H R E E  
about her, incidentally (and, o f course, thoughtlessly), he disclosed 
several of her personal opinions of al the important personages in 
town and, by doing so, hurt their vanity. Whatever he said was not 
very clear and rather incoherent, like a man who was not very clever, 
but who found himself in the painful position of clearing up a whole 
mountain of misunderstandings and who, simple-minded and rather 
clumsy as he was, did not know himself how to begin and how to end 
his story. Quite indiscreetly, too, he let shp out the information that 
Mrs Lembke had known the whole of Stavrogin's secret and that it 
was she who had engineered the whole intrigue. She had taken him 
in, too, because he was in love with the unhappy Lisa himself, and yet 
he was so cleverly ' taken in ' that he had almost led her to Stavrogin in 
the carriage. 'Yes, yes, it's all very well for you to laugh, gentlemen, 
but ifl had only known, ifl' d only known how it would al end ! '  he 
concluded. In reply to several anxious inquiries about Stavrogin, he 
declared frankly that in his opinion the catastrophe with Lebyatkin 
was a pure coincidence and that it was al Lebyatkin's fault for having 
shown his money. He explained this particularly well. One of his 
listeners remarked that it was no good his ' pretending ', that he had 
eaten, drunk, and almost slept in Mrs Lembke's house, yet he was the 
fmt now to blacken her reputation, and that al this was not as nice 
as he seemed to think. But Peter immediately defended himself: 
' I  ate and drank there not because I had no money and it is not my 
f.1ult ifl was invited there. Let me judge for myself, sir, how much I 
have to be grateful to her for.' 
On the whole the impression was in his favour. ' Granted he is an 
absurd and, of course, an empty-headed fellow, but why should he be 
blamed for Mrs Lembke's stupidities ? It seems, on the contrary, that 
h(' was trying to stop her. . .  .' 
At about two o'clock the news suddenly came that Stavrogiu, 
about whom there was so much talk, had suddenly left for Petersburg 
by the midday train. This interested people very much; many of them 
frowned. Peter Verkhovensky was so astonished that it is said that he 
went pale and exclaimed strangely : ' But who could have let him 
out?' He at once hurried awav from Gaganov's. However he was 
seen in two or three other houes. 
, 
Towards dusk he found an opportunity of going in to see Mrs 
Lembke, though with the greatest difficulty, for she absolutely refused 

THE L A S T  D E C I S I O N  
5 3 9  
w receive him. I learnt about his visit three weeks later from Mrs 
Lembke herself before her departure for Petersburg. She did not tell 
me all the details, but observed with a shudder that he had astonished 
her on that occasion beyond all belief. I expect he must have simply 
frightened her by the threat of claiming her as his accomplice if she 
took it into her head ' to talk '. The necessity of frightening her was 
closely connected with his plans at the time, which she, of course, 
knew nothing about; and only afterwards, five days later, she realized 
why he was not so sure about her keeping silent and why he was so 
afraid of her outbursts of indignation. 
At about eight o'clock in the evening, when it was already quite 
dark, all the five members of our group gathered at the lodgings of the 
second lieutenant Erkel in a crooked little house in Fomin Lane at the 
end of the town. The meeting had been arranged by Peter Verkho­
vensky himself, but he was inexcusably late and the members waited 
an hour for him. The second lieutenant, Erkel, was the young officer, 
a stranger in our town, who had sat all the time at Virginsky's birth­
day party with a pencil in his hand and a notebook in front of him. 
He had arrived in our town only recently, rented a room in a lonely 
lane from rwo old ladies - sisters, of the artisan class - and was due to 
leave the town soon; a meeting at his room was least likely to attract 
attention. This strange boy was distinguished by unusual taciturnity: 
he could spend a dozen evenings in succession in a noisy company, 
with the most exciting conversations going on around him, without 
uttering a word himself, and yet watching the speakers with his child­
like eyes and listening to them with the greatest attention. He was very 
handsome, and even gave the impression of being clever. He was not 
a member of the group of five; he was supposed to have instructions 
from somewhere of an executive character. It is known now that he 
had been entrusted with no mission at all, and it is doubtful if he him­
self realized his position. He had merely fallen under the spell of Peter 
Verkhovensky, having met him only a short time before. Ifhe had met 
some prematurely depraved monster and had been persuaded by him 
on some socially romantic pretext to found a band of bandits and, as a 
test, had been ordered to rob and murder the fLrSt peasant he came 
across, he would most certainly have gone and done it. He had an in­
valid mother to whom he sent half ofhis precarious pay, and how she 
must have kissed that poor fair head of his! How she must have 

THE D EVILS • PART THREE 
trembled and prayed over it! I speak so much about him because I am 
very sorry for him. 
The members of the group were very excited. The events of the 
previous night had taken them by surprise and, I expect, they had be­
come scared. An ordinary, though systematically contrived, public 
scandal in which they had hitherto so zealously taken part had quite an 
unexpected ending for them. The fire of the previous night, the mur­
der of the Lebyatkins, the lynching of Lisa by the mob - had been sur­
prises they had not taken into account in their programme. They 
hotly accused the hand that had guided them of despotism and lack of 
frankness. In a word, while waiting for Peter Verkhovensky, they had 
worked themselves up into such a state that they decided again to de­
mand a fmal and categoric explanation from him, and if, as had hap­
pened before, he once more declined to give it, to dissolve the group 
of five and to fmmd in its place a new secret society for the ' propa­
gation of ideas ', and on their own initiative and in accordance with the 
principles of democracy and equal rights. Liputin, Shigalyov, and the 
authority on the peasants supported this plan; Lyamshin would not 
express an opinion, though he seemed to agree with it. Virginsky 
could not make up his mind, and wanted to hear what Peter Verkho­
vensky had to say first. They decided to hear Peter Verkhovensky, 
but he still did not show up, and such perfunctoriness added fuel to the 
flames. Erkel said nothing at all, and merely ordered tea, which he 
brought from his landladies in glasses on a tray, without bringing in 
the samovar or letting the maid into the room. 
Peter Verkhovensky came only at half-past eight. With rapid steps 
he went up to the round table in front of the sofa, at which the com­
pany was sitting, keeping his hat in his hands and refusing tea. He 
looked angry, stern, and overbearing. He must have at once noticed 
from the expression on their faces that they were ' rebellious'. 
' Before I open my mouth, you'd better tell me everything, for I can 
sec that you've got something on your minds,' he observed, gazing at 
each of them in turn with a malicious grin. 
Liputin began 'in the name of all those present ', and declared in a 
voice shaking with resentment that ' if we go on like this, we might 
break our own necks '. Not that they were afraid to break their 
necks. Indeed, they were quite ready to, but only for the good of the 
common cause (a general movement of approbation). And therefore 

THE LAST DECISION 
541 
they demanded that he should be frank with them, that he should let 
them know beforehand, ' or else what's going to happen? '  (Again a 
general stir and a few guttural sounds.) To behave like this was humi­
liating and dangerous. ' We are not demanding it because we are 
afraid, but if one acts and the rest are only pawns, then one may make 
a slip and all will be caught.' (Exclamations : ' Hear, hear ! '  and general 
approval.) 
'Damn it all, what do you want ?' 
'And what relation to our common cause have Stavrogin's silly 
little intrigues ? '  Liputin asked furiously. 'Even if he does in some 
mysterious way belong to the centre, if, that is, that fantastic centre 
really exists, but we have not the slightest wish to know anything 
about it. Meantime a murder has been committed, the police have 
been roused; by following one clue, they'll eventually get to us.' 
'If they catch you and Stavrogin, they'll catch us too,' the authority 
on the peasants added. 
'And it's of no use whatever to the common cause,' Virginsky con­
cluded despondently. 
' What nonsense is this! The murder was just an accident. It was 
committed by Fedka from motives of robbery.' 
'I see! A strange coincidence, though,' Liputin remarked, writhing. 
'And if you realy want to know, it's all through you.' 
'Through us ?  How do you mean?' 
'First of all, you, Liputin, took part in this intrigue yourself, and, 
secondly - and that is the main point - you were ordered to pack Leb­
yɹtkin off and you were given the money; but what did you do? If 
you had packed him off, nothing would have happened.' 
'But wasn't it you yourself who suggested that it would be a good 
thing if he were to be let out to read his verses ?' 
'An idea is not an order. Your orders were to pack him of£' 
'Orders ! Rather a curious word, don't you think? On the contrary, 
your orders were to stop his departure.' 
'You made a mistake and showed how foolish and self-willed you 
are. As for the murder, it is Fedka's doing. He acted on his own, and 
his motive was robbery. You have heard the stories they are spreading 
al over the town, and you believe them. You are scared. Stavrogin 
isn't so stupid, and the proof is that he left town at twelve o'clock to­
day after an interview with the vice-governor; if there were anything 

542 
T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  T H R E E  
in it, they wouldn't have let him go to Petersburg in broad day­
light.' 
' But we never asserted that Mr Stavrogin had committed the mur­
der himself,' Liputin put in maliciously and unceremoniously. ' He need 
not even have known about it, just like me. And you know perfectly 
well that I did not know anything, though I seem to have asked for 
trouble.' 
' Whom arc you accusing, then ?' Peter asked, looking grimly at 
him. 
'Those who fmd it necessary to burn down towns, sir.' 
' You make things worse by trying to wriggle out of it. However, 
won't you read this and show it to the others? It's for your infornia­
tion only.' 
He took out of his pocket Lebyatkin's anonymous letter to Lembke 
and gave it to Liputin. The latter read it, was evidently surprised, and 
handed it thoughtfully to his neighbour. The letter quickly went the 
round. 
' Is that really Lebyatkin' s handwriting? '  Shigalyov asked. 
'It is,' declared Liputin and Tolkachenko (that is, the authority on 
the peasants). 
' I've shown it to you only for your information and because I know 
how sentimental you feel about Lebyatkin,' Peter repeated, taking the 
letter back. ' So it seems, gentlemen, that Fedka quite accidentally got 
rid of a dangerous person for us. That's what an accident does for you 
sometimes! Instructive, isn't it?' 
The members of the group exchanged glances. 
'And now, gentlemen, it's my turn to ask questions,' Peter said, 
assuming a dignified air. ' Will you please tell me what on earth made 
you set fue to the town without permission?' 
' What are you talking about? We set fire to the town? Are you in 
your right mind ?' they all exclaimed. 
' I  realize that you've gone too far,' Peter went on stubbornly, 'bur 
that's not the same thing as playing some silly prank on Mrs Lembke. 
I've called you together, gentlemen, to explain to you how great the 
danger is in which you've so stupidly involved yourselves and which 
threatens much besides yourselves.' 
' But, if you don't mind my saying so, it is we who were about to 
point out the degree of despotism and lack of equality with which 

THE L A S T  D E C I S I O N  
543 
such a serious and strange step was taken without the knowledge of 
the members,' Virginsky, who had been silent till then, declared al­
most with indignation. 
' So you deny any complicity in it, do you ? But I maintain that you 
set fire to the town, you and no one else. Gentlemen, don't lie to me. 
My information is unimpeachable. By your self-will and by your 
action you put our common cause in jeopardy. You're only one link 
in the endless links of the chain, and you owe implicit obedience to the 
centre. And yet three of you suborned the Spigulin workmen to set 
fire to the town without receiving any orders, and the fuc has taken 
place.' 
'What three ? Which of us arc they ?' 
'The day before yesterday at about three o'clock in the morning 
you, Tolkachenko, were instigating Fomka Za vyalov at the " Forget­
me-not".' 
'Good Lord! '  Tolkachenko cried, jumping to his feet, ' I  hardly 
uttered a word, and that, too, without intention, simply because he 
had been flogged that morning, and I gave it up almost at once be­
cause I could see that he was dead drunk. If you had not reminded me 
of it, I shouldn't have remembered it at all. A word could not have set 
the town on fue.' 
'You remind me of a man who is surprised that one spark could 
blow up a gunpowder magazine.' 
'I spoke in a whisper in his car, in a corner of the pub, so how could 
you have got to know about it?' Tolkachenko said, looking surprised. 
'I was sitting there under the table. Don't worry, gentlemen, every 
step of yours is known to me. You smile spitefully, Mr Liputin? 
Well, I know, for instance, that four days ago you pinched your wife 
black and blue at midnight in your bedroom as you were going to 
bed.' 
Liputin gaped in astonishment and turned pale. 
(It became known afterwards that he learnt about Liputin's gallant 
act from Agafya, Liputin's maid, whom he had paid from the very 
beginning to act as his spy, a fact which came to light only later.) 
' May I state a tact?' Shigalyov asked, getting up suddenly. 
'Yes, do.' 
Shigalyov sat down and drew himself up. 
'As far as I can make out - and I can hardl v be wrong - you yourself, 

544 
THE D EVILS · PART THREE 
at the beginning and on another occasion later on, drew with great 
eloquence - though perhaps rather theoretically - a picture of Russia 
covered with an endless network of small groups. Each of these active 
groups, while enrolling new members and branching out endlessly, 
aims by systematic propaganda to expose the local authorities and to 
undermine their prestige, to throw the vilage population into con­
fusion, to promote cynicism and public scandals, utter disbelief in 
everything under the sun, a desire for better things and, finally, by 
means of fires, as a measure likely to have the greatest possible effect 
on the common people, to throw the country at a given moment, if 
necessary, into a mood of despair. Aren't those your very words 
which I have tried to remember verbatim? Isn't that the programe 
of action you communicated to us as one authorized by the central 
committee, about which we know nothing at all and which we have 
every right to regard as entirely mythical?' 
' Quite true; only you're taking a long time to say it.' 
'Every man has a right to express himself as he likes. In giving us 
to understand that there are at present several hundred separate knots 
of the network already covering the whole of Russia, and in pro-'­
pounding the theory that if everyone does his work successfully, the 
whole of Russia at a certain date and at a given signal -' 
' Hell, I've plenty to do without this ! ' cried Peter, turning in his 
chair. 
' Very well, I'll cut it short and I'll end by putting just one more 
question to you : we've witnessed the public scandals, we've seen the 
discontent of the people, we have been present at, and taken part in, 
the downfall of the local administration and, finally, we've seen with 
our own eyes the town on fire. Why are you dissatisfied ? Isn't that 
your programme? What can you accuse us of?' 
' Of self-will ! '  Peter cried furiously. ' While I'm here, you had no 
right to act without my permission. Enough. The man who is going 
to inform the police has everything ready, and to-morrow or perhaps 
even to-night you will all be arrested. So there you are. My informa­
tion is absolutely correct.' 
This time all of them gaped with astonishment. 
' You wil be arrested not only as the instigators of the fire, but as 
members of the group of five. The man knows al the secrets of the 
network. That's the sort of mess you've made of it! '  

T H E  L A S T  D E C I S I O N  
545 
' It is Stavrogin, isn't it?' Liputin cried. 
' What - why Stavrogin ?' Peter stopped short sudden I y. ' Oh, hell,' 
he cried, recollecting himself at once, ' it's Shatov ! I believe you all 
know now that at one time Shatov was an active member of the or­
ganization. I must disclose to you that, watching him through persons 
he does not susp::ct, I disco·vacd, to my amazement, that the organ­
ization of the network is no secret to him and that, in short, he knows 
evervthing. To save himself from being charged with active partici­
pation in it, he's going to inform the authorities against us all. Till 
now he S[ill could not make up his mind, and I have spared him. But 
now you've made up his mind for him by this fire : he is deeply 
shocked and will hesit:tte no longer. To-morrow we shall be arrested 
as incendi:tries and political criminals.' 
' Is it true ? How does Shatov know ? '  
' It's absolutely true. I have no right to disclose my sources o f  in­
formation and how I found it out, but this is what I can do tor you 
meanwhile : I can influence Shatov through a certain person so that, 
without suspecting anything, he will put olf sending his written de­
nunciation to the police, but only for twenty-four hours. I can't delay 
it any longer. So that you can consider vounelves safe till the day after 
to-ntorrow.' 
They were all silent. 
' Oh, let's send him to the- devil ! '  Tolkachenko was the first to cry. 
' We should have done it long ago ! '  L\·amshin put in spitefully, 
striking the table with his fist. 
' But how are we to do it ? '  Lipmin murmured. 
Peter at once took up the question and explained his plan. He pro­
posed that at nightfall on the following day Shatov should be lured to 
a lonely spot to hand over the illegal printing press which had been in 
his keeping and which was buried there and - ' deal with him there '. 
He went into many necessary details, which we will omit here, and 
explained circumstantially Shatov's present ambiguous relations with 
the central society, which are already known to the reader. 
' Seems all right,' Liputin observed doubtfully, ' but since it will be 
another - er - adventure of the same kind, it might - er - create too 
big a sensation.' 
' No doubt,' Peter agreed, • but that has been foreseen, roo. There is 
a way of averting suspicion completely.' 

THE D E V I L S · PART THREE 
And he told them about Kirilov with the same minute attention to 
Jetail, of his intention to shoot himself, of how he had promised to 
wait for the signal, and before he died, to leave a note behind taking 
on himself anything they dictated to him. (In a word, all that the 
reader knows already.) 
'His firm intention to take his life, a philosophic and, in my opinion, 
quite crazy decision, has become known there,' Peter went on to ex­
plain. ' Not a hair, not a speck of dust is overlooked. Everything thert 
is done for the good of the common cause. Realizing the advantage of 
such a decision, and convinced that he was quite determined to carry 
it out, they had offered him the means to come to Russia (for some 
reason he had expressed his firm intention to die in Russia), given him 
his instructions which he undertook to carry out (and he has carried 
them out), and, in addition, made him promise, as you know already, 
to take his life only when he was told to. Please note that he joined 
our organization for special reasons, and that he wants to be useful. 
More than that I cannot tell you. To-morrow, after we have dealt with 
Shatov, I shall dictate the note to him, in which I shall declare that he 
is responsible for Shatov's death. That will seem very plausible : they 
were friends and travelled together to America, they quarrelled there, 
and it will all be explained in the note and - and I daresay, if necessary, 
I could dictate something else to Kirilov - oh, something about the 
leaflets, for instance, and even perhaps something about the fire. I shal 
think it over, though. Don't worry, he has no prejudices ; he'll sign 
anything.' 
Doubts were voiced. The story seemed fantastic. They had all, 
however, heard something or other about Kirilov; Liputin more than 
the others. 
' What if he should suddenly change his mind and refuse?' said 
Shigalyov. 'After all, he is a madman, so that our hopes might be 
falsified.' 
' Don't worry, gentlemen; he will not refuse,' Peter snapped. 'Ac­
cording to our agreement, I have to warn him the day before - that 
is, to-day. I invite Liputin to go with me at once to his place to make 
quite sure, and he will let you know to-day, if necessary, whether I've 
told you the truth or not. However,' he broke off suddenly with in­
tense exasperation, as though feeling suddenly that he was doing 
people like them too great an honour by wasting his time in persuad-

THE LAST D E C I S I O N  
547 
ing them, 'do as you like. If you decide not to go on with it, then our 
union is broken up, but solely because of your insubordination and 
treachery. In that case, we shall from this moment go our separate 
ways. But I want you to know that, if that happens, you will, in addi­
tion to the unpleasantness of Shatov's denm1ciation and its conse­
quences, incur another little unpleasantness, of which you were clearly 
apprised at the rime of the formation of the milon. So far as I'm con­
cerned, gentlemen, I'm not very much afraid of you. Don't imagine 
that I'm in any way tied to you . . . .  However, that makes no differ-
' 
ence. 
'Al right, we'll do it,' declared Lyamshin. 
'There's no other solution,' Tolkachenko murmured. 'And pro­
vided Liputin confirms cl1e story about Kirilov, we -' 
' I'm against it,' Virginsky declared, getting up. 'I protest with all 
the power at my command against such a dastardly decision! '  
'But?' asked Peter. 
'But what?' 
'You said but - and I'm waiting.' 
'I don't think I said but. I only wanted to say that if such a decision 
is taken, then -' 
'Then?' 
Virginsky said nothing. 
'I think one can disregard the danger to one's own life,' Erkel said, 
suddenly opening his mouth, ' but if our common cause is at stake, then 
I think we have no right to disregard the danger .to our own lives.' 
He got confused and blushed. However much each of them was 
preoccupied with his own thoughts, they could not help glancing at 
him with surprise, so little did they expect that he, too, would speak. 
' I  an1 for the common cause,' Virginsky said suddenly. 
They al got up. It was decided to communicate again and make 
final arrangements at noon the next day. The place where the printing 
press was buried was disclosed, and each was given his part and assigned 
his post. Liputin and Peter at once set off to see Kirilov. 
z 
Al of them believed that Shatov was going to inform the police; but 
they also believed that Peter Verkhovensky was playing with them 

T H E  DEVI L S · P A R T  T HR E E  
like pawns - and yet they also knew that they would all be at the 
appointed place next day in spite of everything, and that Shatov's fate 
was scaled. They suddenly felt like flies caught in the web of a huge 
spider; they were furious, but they shook with fear. 
Peter had undoubtedly behaved unfairly to them; everything could 
have been arranged far more harmoniously and easily if he had cared 
to make the facts look a little more pleasant. Instead of presenting the 
facts in a more becoming light and putting them on the same footing 
as citizens of ancient Rome, or something of the sort, he merely ap­
pealed to their. animal fears and emphasized the danger to their own 
skins, which was simply not nice. No doubt everything had to be 
considered from the point of view of the struggle for existence and 
there was no other principle, they all knew that, but al the same -
But Peter had no time to bring up the Romans; he was dumb­
founded. Stavrogin's flight shocked and crushed him. He had lied 
when he said that Stavrogin had seen the vice-governor; the trouble 
was that he had gone off without seeing anyone, even his mother, and 
it really was strange that he had not even been questioned by the police. 
(Afterwards the authorities were called to account for it.) Peter had 
spent a whole day making inquiries, but so far he had discovered noth­
ing, and had never been so worried. And how could he be expected to 
give up Stavrogin all at once like that? That was why he could not be 
very tender with the members of the group of five. Besides, they had 
forced him to act quickly : he had already decided to run after Stavro­
gin, but Shatov kept him back. He had to make absolutely sure of the 
loyalty of the group of five, in case anything happened. 'Can't give 
it up; it may come in useful one day.' So, I suppose, he must have 
argued. 
As for Shatov, he was absolutely convinced that he would inform 
the police. He had told them a lie about having actually seen Shatov's 
letter of denunciation to the police: he had never seen it or heard of it, 
but he was as sure of it as that twice two makes four. It seemed to him 
that what had happened - the death of Lisa, the death of Mary - was 
bound to influence Shatov, and that he would make up his mind now. 
Who knows ? Perhaps he had a good reason for thinking like that. It 
is also known that he hated Shatov personally; they had had some 
quarrel, and Peter never forgave an insult. Indeed, I am convinced 
that that was his main reason. 

THE L A S T  D E C I S I O N  
549 
We have narrow brick pavements in our town, and in some streets 
they are made of wooden planks. Peter was striding along in the 
middle of the pavement, occupying it entirely and paying no atten­
tion to Liputin, who had no room to walk beside him and had either 
to run a step behind him or, ifhe wanted to speak to him, run off into 
the muddy road. Peter suddenly recalled that he, too, had had to splash 
through the mud the other day to keep pace with Stavrogin, who had 
walked, as he was doing now, in the middle of the pavement, occupy­
ing the whole of it. He remembered the whole scene, and nearly 
choked with rage. 
But Liputin, too, was choking with resentment. Peter might treat 
the others as he liked, but how dare he treat him like that? Didn't he 
know more than all the rest? Wasn't he in closer touch with the affairs 
of the organization? More intimately connected with it and continu­
ously active on its behalf, though perhaps only indirectly ?  Oh, he 
knew that even now Peter Verkhovensky could ruin him if matters 
came to a head. But he had long hated Peter, and not because he was 
afraid of him, but because he had treated him with such utter con­
tempt. Now that he had to make up his mind to do such a thing, he 
was more furious than all the rest put together. Alas, he knew that, 
'like a slave', he would be the first next day at the appointed place and 
that he would bring the rest with him, and if he could have killed 
Peter before to-morrow without in some way implicating himself, he 
would most certainly have killed him. 
Brooding over his sensations, he kept silent and hurried along after 
his tormentor. Peter seemed to have forgotten about him; only from 
time to time he pushed him aside rudely and carelessly with his elbow. 
Suddenly Peter stopped in one of our principal streets and went into a 
restaurant. 
'Where on earth are you going ?' Liputin cried, boiling over with 
rage. 'This is a restaurant.' 
' I  want a beefsteak.' 
' But, good Lord, this restaurant is always full of people.' 
'What about it?' 
' But - we shall be late. It's ten o'clock.' 
' We can't be too late there.' 
' But I shall be late. They are expecting me back.' 
"Let them. Only you'd be stupid to go back to them. With all this 

550 
THE D EVILS · PART THREE 
business of yours, I've had no dinner. And the later we go to Kirilov's, 
the surer we are to fmd him.' 
Peter took a private room. Liputin sat down in an easy-chair away 
from the table, looking angry and resentful, and watched him eating. 
Half an hour and more passed. Peter was in no hurry, ate with an 
appetite, rang for the waiter, asked for a different kind of mustard, 
then for beer, and still never uttered a word. He was absorbed in 
thought. He could do rwo things at once - eat with relish and ponder 
deeply. Liputin began to loathe him so much that he could not take 
his eyes off him. It was like an attack of madness. He counted every 
morsel of beefsteak Peter put into his mouth, he loathed him for the 
way he opened it, for the way he chewed, for the way he smacked his 
lips over the fatter morsels, he loathed the steak itsel£ At last, every­
thing began to swim before his eyes, he felt a little giddy, hot and cold 
flushes ran up and down his spine. 
'As you're not doing anything, read that,' Peter said, throwing him 
a piece of paper suddenly. 
Liputin went nearer to the candle. The paper was closely covered 
with bad handwriting and corrections in every line. By the time he 
had made out the writing, Peter had paid his bill and was ready to go. 
On the pavement Liputin handed him back the piece of paper. 
'Keep it. I'll tell you about it later. Still, what do you think of it?' 
Liputin shuddered all over. 
' In my opinion - such a leaflet is - er - just absurd nonsense.' 
His resentment broke though. He felt as though he had been caught 
up and carried along. 
' If we decide to distribute such leaflets,' he said, shaking as though 
in a palsy, ' we shall make people despise us for our stupidity and in­
competence.' 
'I see,' Peter said, striding firmly along. ' I'm afraid I don't think so.' 
'I don't think so, either. You didn't write it yourself, did you ?' 
' That's not your affair.' 
'I think, too, that silly poem "A Noble Character" is utter trash, 
and could never have been written by Herzen.' 
' You're wrong. It's an excellent poem.' 
'I am also surprised,' Liputin went on breathlessly, his words 
bounding and leaping along uncontrollably, ' that we are told to act 
in a way that can only end in disaster. It is natural that in Europe they 

THE LAST DECISION 
should wish everything to end in disaster, because they have a pro­
letariat there, while we're just amateurs here and, in my opinion, 
merely throwing dust in people's eyes.' 
'I thought you were a follower of Fourier.' 
'You will find nothing of the kind in Fourier, nothing of the kind.' 
'I know it's nonsense.' 
'No, Fourier is not nonsense . . . .  I'm sorry, but I just can't believe 
that a rising is possible in May.' 
Liputin even unbuttoned his coat, he was so hot. 
'Al right, that's enough ; and now, so as not to forget,' Peter 
changed the subject with quite amazing coolness, ' this leaflet you'll 
have to set up and print with your own hands. We shall dig up 
Shatov's printing press and you'll take it to-morrow. You must print 
as many copies as you can as quickly as possible and then distribute 
them all the winter. You'll be provided with the necessary funds. We 
must have as many copies as possible, for you'll get orders for them 
from other places.' 
'I'm sorry, but I'm afraid I cannot undertake such a - I refuse.' 
' You'll do it, all the same. I'm acting on the instructions of the cen­
tral committee, and you must obey.' 
'And I consider that our centres abroad have forgotten what Russia 
is like and have broken all connexions with her, and that's why they 
talk such nonsense. I even think that instead of many hundred groups 
of five in Russia, we're the only one in existence and that there is no 
network at all,' Liputin said, panting for breath. 
'Al the more contemptible of you to have embraced a cause with­
out believing in it and - you are running after me now like a mean 
little cur.' 
' No, sir, I am not running. We have a perfect right to leave you 
and form a new society.' 
' You damn fool ! '  Peter suddenly thundered menacingly, with 
flashing eyes. 
Both stood facing each other for some time. Peter turned and con­
tinued on his way confidently. 
The thought flashed through Liputin' s mind: ' I'll tum and go back 
- if l don't tum now I shall never go back.' He thought like that for 
exactly ten yards, but at the eleventh a new and desperate idea flashed 
into his mind: he did not tum and did not go back. 

5 52 
THE D E V I L S · P A R T  T H R E E  
Thq came to Filippov's house, but before reaching it they went 
down a little lane, or rather along a hardly discernible path by the side 
of a fence, so that for some time they had to make their way along a 
steep bank of a ditch and had to hold on to the fence to avoid slipping 
into it. In the darkest corner of the leaning fence, Peter removed a 
plank and crawled through the opening. Liputi.n looked surprised, but 
he, too, crawled through the gap in the fence; the plank was then re­
placed. This was the secret entrance by which Fedka used to visit 
Kirilov. 
' Shatov must not know that we are here,' Peter whispered sternly 
to Liputin. 
As usual at that hour of the night, Kirilov was sitting on his leather 
sofa and having tea. He did not get up to welcome them, but winced 
violently and looked at his visitors anxiously. 
' You're not mistaken,' said Peter Verkhovensky; ' that's what I've 
come about.' 
'To-day ?' 
' No, no, to-morrow - about this time.' 
And he quickly sat down at the table, watching Kirilov's agitation 
with some disquiet. Kirilov, however, had composed himself and 
looked as usual. 
'You sec, these people still refuse to believe. You're not angry with 
me for bringing Liputin, are you?' 
'To-day I'm not angry, but to-morrow I want to be alone.' 
' But not before I come, and therefore in my presence.' 
' I'd rather not in your presence.' 
' You remember you promised to write and sign everything 
dictated.' 
'Makes no difference to me. Arc you going to be long here 
_ ,  
now ৫ 
' I  must see a certain person and stay here for half an hour, so I'm 
afraid I'll stay here for half an hour whatever you say.' 
Kirilov said nothing. Meanwhile Liputin found a seat near the por­
trait of the bishop. The desperate idea that had occurred to him a few 
moments before took more and more possession of him. Kirilov 

THE LAST DECISION 
553 
hardly noticed him. Liputin had heard about K.irilov's theory before, 
and always laughed at him; but now he was silent and looked gloomi­
ly around him. 
'I'd like some tea, if you don't mind.' Peter moved closer to the 
table. 'I've just had a beefsteak, and I counted on being in time for tea 
at your place.' 
'Help yourself to some.' 
'You used to offer it to me yourselfbefore,' Peter remarked sourly. 
'Makes no diference. Liputin can have some, too.' 
'No, thanks. I - I can't.' 
'You can't or don't want to - which is it?' Peter asked, turning to 
him. 
'I'm not going to drink tea here,' Liputin said emphatically. 
Peter frowned. 
' Smells of mysticism. I'm damned if I can make out what sort of 
people you all are ! '  
No one answered; they were silent for a whole minute. 
' But one thing I do know,' he suddenly added sharply : ' that no 
prejudices wil stop each of us from doing his duty.' 
'Has Stavrogin gone?' asked Kirilov. 
'Yes.' 
'He's done well.' 
Peter's eyes flashed, but he restrained himsel£ 
' I  don't care what you think so long as every one of you keeps lus 
word.' 
'I shall keep mine.' 
'As a matter of fact, I always knew that you would do your duty 
like an independent and progressive man.' 
'You're funny.' 
' May be ; I'm very glad if I amuse you. I'm always glad to please 
people.' 
'You're very anxious I should shoot myself, and you're afraid 1 
might suddenly decide not to.' 
'Well, you see, it was your idea to carry out your plan when it 
should suit us. Counting on your plan, we've already done something, 
so that you couldn't possibly refuse now because otherwise you would 
let us down.' 
'You've no claim whatever.' 

554 
T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  T H R E E  
' J  understand, I understand; you're free to do as you like and we 
৬an' t force you ; but all we want is that you should carry out what 
you'd finally decided to do.' 
'And will I have to take upon myself all the disgusting things you've 
done ?' 
'Look here, Kirilov ; you're not afraid, are you? If you want to go 
back on your promise, you'd better say so at once.' 
'I'm not afraid.' 
' I'm merely saying this because you're asking too many questions.' 
'Are you going soon?' 
'Another question?' 
Kirilov looked at him with contempt. 
'You sec,' Peter went on, getting angric:r and angrier, feeling more 
and more worried, and unable to find the right tone, ' you want me 
to go so that you should be left alone and be able to concentrate, but 
all that is a dangerous sign in you - in you above all. You want to 
think a lot. In my opinion, it would be much better not to think at 
all, but just carry on. You really worry me.' 
'The only thing I don't like is that at that moment a reptile like you 
should be beside me.' 
' Well, that shouldn't make much difference. I could go out of the 
house at the time and wait on the front steps. You see, if you're 
so concerned about things when you're about to die - then it is a 
very dangerous sign. I'll go out on the front steps, and you can think 
that I understand nothing, and that I am a man infinitely beneath 
you.' 
' No, not infmitely. You're a man of ability, but you don't under­
stand many things because you're a mean fellow.' 
'Very much obliged indeed. I've already told you that I'm very 
glad to provide entertainment - at such a moment.' 
' You don't understand anything.' 
' I  mean I - I listen with respect, at any rate.' 
'You can't do anything; even now you cannot conceal your petty 
spite, though it doesn't pay you to show it. Yon may make me angry, 
and then I may want another six months.' 
Peter looked at his watch. 
' J  never did understand anything about your theory, but I know 
rhat you didn't invent it for our sake, and that you will therefore 

THE L A S T  D E C I S I O N  
555 
carry it out without us. I know, too. that you haven't swallowed the 
idea, but that the idea has swallowed you and that, therefore, you 
won't put it off.' 
' What? The idea has swallowed me ?' 
'Yes.' 
'And it is not I who have swallowed the idea? That's capital. You 
have some sense. Only you tease me, and I'm proud.' 
'That's good, very good. That's what you need - to be proud.' 
'All right. You've had your tea, now go.' 
'Damn it, I suppose I'll have to,' said Peter, getting up. ' But it's still 
too soon. Listen, Kirilov, shall I find the man I want at Myasnichi­
kha's? You know whom I mean, don't you ? Or has she been telling 
me lies?' 
'You won't find him there, because he's here. ' 
'Here? Damnation - where?' 
'In the kitchen, eating and drinking.' 
'But how did he dare come here?' Peter cried, reddening angrily. 
'He had to wait - what nonsense! He has neither money nor a pass­
port.' 
'Don't know. He came to say good-bye. He's dressed and ready. 
He's going away and won't come back. He said you were a scoundrel 
and that he did not want to wait for your money.' 
'Oh! He's afraid that I - well, I suppose I could even now, if- where 
is he? In the kitchen?' 
Kirilov opened the side door into a tiny dark room; from this room 
three steps led down straight into the partitioned-olflittle room in the 
kitchen where the cook's bed usually stood. It was there that Fedka 
was now sitting in a corner under the icons before a plain deal table. 
On the table before him stood a pint bottle of vodka, a plate with 
bread, and some cold beef witl1 potatoes in an earthenware dish. He 
was eating apathetically and was already half tipsy, but he sat in his 
sheepskin, and was apparently ready to leave on his journey at any 
moment. Behind the partition the samovar was beginning to boil, but 
it was not for Fedka, who had every night for about a week or more 
blown up the coals in it for Kirilov, ' for Mr Kirilov is very partial to 
tea at night, that he is.' I am strongly of the opinion that, as he had no 
cook, Kirilov himself had cooked the beef and potatoes for Fedka that 
morning. 

THE D E VILS · PART THREE 
' What do you mean by being here ?' Peter cried, sweeping into the 
room. ' Why didn't you wait where you were told ? '  
And raising his fist he brought i t  down with a thud on the table. 
Fcclka sat up with an air of dignity. 
' Wait a bit, sir, wait a bit,' he said, rolling out each word smartly. 
' You ought to realize first of all that you're a-visiting Mr Kirilov, 
whose boots you don't deserve to clean, for compared with you he's 
a man of eddication, he is, and as for you, sir, why, you're jest this -' 
And, turning his head, he pretended to spit smartly. There was un­
mistakable haughtiness and determination in lll5 manner and a certain 
very dangerous assumed desire for engaging in a calm argument be­
fore the explosion. But Peter was in no mood to notice the danger, 
and, besides, this did not suit his way of looking at things. The inci­
dents and disasters of the day had completely turned his head. Liputi.J1 
was watching the scene with curiosity from the little dark room, at the 
rop of the three steps. 
' Do you or don't you want to have a real passport and good money 
ro take you where you've been told to go ? Yes or no ?' 
' Now, look here, sir, seeing as how you've been deceiving me from 
the very beginning, al I have to say is that you've treated me like a 
regular scoundrel. You're just a filthy human louse - that is what I 
thinks of you. You promised me piles of money for shedding ino­
cent blood and you swore it was for Mr Stavrogin, though as it 
turned out it was just your bad manners. I ain't got a brass farthing 
out of it, let alone fifteen hundred, and Mr Stavrogin punched you on 
the nose good and proper, he did, and I heard of it al right. Now 
you're threatening me again and promising money, but you ain't 
mentioned what for. But I have a good notion that you're sending me 
to Petersburg to get your own back on Mr Stavrogin, you're that 
spiteful, thinking to take advantag.e of my trusting nature. And that 
proves that you are the real murderer. And do you know what you 
deserves to get for not believing in the iniquity of your heart in God 
himself, the true Creator ? You're nothing but an idol worshipper, 
that's what you are, and you're the same as a Tartar or a Mordva. Mr 
Kirilov, what is a real philosopher, has many times explained the true 
God and the true Creator to you, and he told you about the creation 
of the world, and what's to be our fate in future and the transforma­
tion of every creature and every beast from the book of Revelation. 

THE LAST DECISION 
557 
But, like a senseless idol, you've persisted in your deafuess and your 
dumbness, and you've brought Lieutenant Erkel to the same, just like 
that villainous seducer, called the atheist . .  .' 
' Oh, you drunken rascal ! Robs icons himself and then preaches 
about God ! '  
'Now, you see, sir, I never made any bones about robbing them 
icons ; but I jest took out the pearls, and how do you know, maybe 
my tear, too, was at that moment turned into a pearl in the furnace of 
the Most High for the trials I've suffered in this world, seeing as how 
I'm just an orphan child what has no proper place or refuge. You must 
know from the books that in the old days a merchant with just the 
same tearful lamentations and prayers stole a pearl from the halo of 
the Blessed Virgin and then laid the whole price at her feet, falling on 
his knees before all the people, and that the Holy Mother of God pro­
tected him with her cloak before al the people, so that even then it 
was  proclaimed a miracle, and the Government ordered it to be writ­
ten down in the official books exactly as it happened. And you let a 
mouse in, so you insulted the very hand of God. And if you was not 
my natural master, whom I carried in my arms when I was only a lad, 
I'd have killed you this minute without budging from my place ! '  
'Tell me, have you seen Stavrogin to-day ? '  Peter asked, flying into 
a rage. 
'This you ain't got no right to ask me. Mr Stavrogin, I'll warrant, 
is surprised at you, and he had no hand in it at all. He ain't wished it to 
happen, nor ordered it, nor given no money for it. It's you what dared 
m;: do it.' 
' You'll get your money, and you'll get another two thousand in 
Petersburg, when you get there, the whole lot, and more.' 
' You're lying, my good man. I can't help laughing when I see how 
gullible you are. Why, put beside you, Mr Stavrogin stands on the 
very top of the ladder, and you bark at him from the ground like a 
silly little cur, and he'd think he was doing you a great honour even to 
spit at you from above.' 
' You don't seem to realize that I won't let a blackguard like you 
take a step out of here and that I'll hand you straight over to rhc 
police,' Peter cried in a rage. 
Fedka leapt to his feet, his eyes flashing furiously. Peter pulled out 
his gun. There followed a rapid and horrible scene : before Peter could 

T H E  D E V I L S · PART T H R EE 
take aim, Fedka swung round and struck him across the face with all 
his might. The fmt blow was followed immediately by another ter­
rible blow, then a third and a fourth, all across the face. Peter was 
dazed, his eyes started out of his head; he muttered something and 
suddenly crashed full length to the ground. 
'There you are - take him! '  Fedka cried, with a triumphant twist 
of the body, and, snatching up his cap and his bundle from under the 
bench, was gone. 
Peter was unconscious and breathing heavily. Liputin even thought 
that he had been murdered. Kirilov rushed headlong into the kitchen. 
' Water ! '  he cried, and filling an iron jug from a bucket, he poured 
the water on his head. 
Peter stirred, raised his head, sat up and stared senselessly before 
llilll. 
' Well, how do you feel?' asked Kirilov. 
Peter stared at him, still without recognizing him ; but catching 
sight of Liputin, who was leaning forward from the kitchen, he 
smiled his ugly smile and suddenly jumped to his feet, snatching up 
the revolver from the floor. 
' If you try to run away to-morrow like that scoundrel Stavrogin,' 
he cried, pouncing furiously on Kirilov, pale and stammering as 
though he could not enunciate the words, ' I'll get you on the other 
side of the world - hang you - swat you like a fly - understand?' 
And he pur his revolver to Kirilov's head; but almost at the same 
moment, recollecting himself, he put the revolver in his pocket and, 
without uttering another word, rushed out of the house. Liputin ran 
out after him. They crawled through the same gap in the fence and 
again walked along the slope, holding on to the fence. Peter strode 
rapidly along the lane, so that Liputin could scarcely keep pace with 
him. At the fmt crossroads he suddenly stopped. 
'Well ?' He turned challengingly to Liputin. 
Liputin remembered the revolver and was still trembling after the 
scene in the kitchcn ; but his answer slipped off his tongue somehow 
suddenly and irresistibly : 
' I  don't think - I don't think they're waiting for the "srudent" with 
such impatience " from Smolcnsk to far Tashkent".' 
'And did you sec what Fedka was drinking in the kitchen?' 
'What he was drinking ? He was drinking vodka.' 

THE LAST D ECISION 
559 
'Well, let me tell you that it was the last time in his life that he will 
be drinking vodka. I suggest you keep that in mind. And now go to 
hell. You're not wanted till to-morrow. But look out: don't do any-
thing foolish! ' 
-
Liputin ran home as fast as his legs would carry him. 
4 
He had long before procured himself a passport made out in a false 
name. It seems absurd that this punctilious little man, this petty family 
tyrant, who clung to his job in the Civil Service (though a Fourierist), 
and who was, above all, a capitalist and moneylender, should long 
before have conceived the fantastic idea of getting that passport ready 
in case of emergency so as to be able to escape abroad if- he therefore 
must have entertained the possibility of this if, though, of course, he 
himself would have found it very difficult to formulate what this if 
might mean . . . .  
But now it suddenly formulated itself, and in a most unexpected 
manner. That desperate idea with which he had gone to K.irilov's 
after Peter Verkhovensky had called him a ' fool ' in the street was 
that he would abandon everything early next morning and emigrate 
abroad! Those who do not believe that such fantastic things are hap­
pening every day in Russia, should consult the biographies of all our 
real emigres. Not one of them ran off for a more intelligent and realistic 
reason. It has always been the same unrestrained kingdom of phan­
toms and nothing more. 
On his arrival home, Liputin began by locking himself in, getting 
out his suitcase, and beginning to pack. His main preoccupation was 
money and how much of it he would have time to raise. Yes, to raise, 
for according to his ideas he had not an hour to spare, because as soon 
as it got light he would have to be on his way. Nor did he know how \ 
he would manage to get into the train; he vaguely decided to take it 
at the second or third big station from our town and make his way 
there on foot if necessary. It was thus that he busied himself instinc­
tively and mechanically with his suitcase, his head in a whirl of ideas, 
when - suddenly he stopped short, relinquished everything, and with 
a deep groan stretched himself on the sofa. 
He perceived clearly and in a flash that he might run away all right, 

T H E  D E V I L S ' P A R T  T H R E E  
bm that he was absolutely incapable of deciding now whether he 
should run away before or after Shatov had been disposed of; that now 
he was just a gross, impassive body, an inert mass; that he was entirely 
in the power of a terrible external force; and that though he had a 
passport and though he could run away from Shatov (otherwise what 
was his hurry?), he would run away not before Shatov had been dis­
posed of and not from Shatov, but most certainly after Shatov, and 
that all that had already been decided, signed, and sealed. In unbear­
able anguish, trembling every moment, and surprised at himself, 
groaning and holding his breath in turn, he somehow managed to 
carry on, locked up in his room, and lying on the sofa, till eleven 
o'clock the following morning. It was then that the shock came which 
he was expecting and which steeled him for what was to happen that 
day. No sooner had he unlocked his room and gone out to his house­
hold at eleven o'clock than he was told that the escaped convict Fedka, 
who was terrorizing the town, the robber of churches, who had only 
the day before committed murder and arson and whom our pohce 
were looking for but could not catch, had been found murdered early 
that morning seven miles from the town at the spot where the high­
road turned towards the village of Zakharyino, and that the whole 
town was talking of it already. He at once rushed out of the house to 
find out the particulars of the murder. He learnt first of all that Fedka, 
who was found with his skull smashed in, had apparently been robbed 
and, secondly, that the pohce had good reason to suspect, and even 
good grounds for believing, that his murderer was the Spiguhn work­
man Fomka, the same man who had been his accomplice in killing the 
Lebyatkins and setting fire to their house, and that they had apparently 
quarrelled on the road about a large sum of money Fedka had stolen 
from Lebyatkin and was supposed to have hidden . . . .  Liputin rushed 
to Peter's lodgings and succeeded in learning at the back door, in 
secret, that though Peter had not returned home before one o'clock in 
the morning, he had been peacefully asleep up to eight o'clock. There 
could be no doubt whatever that there was nothing unusual in Fedka's 
death and that people ofFedka's occupation quite often came to such 
an end; but the coincidence of the fatal words uttered by Peter, name­
ly that 'it was the last time Fedka would be drinking vodka' with the 
prompt fulfilment of the prophecy was so significant that Liputin 
suddenly gave up hesitating. The shock had been administered; it was 

THE G L O B E  TROTTER 
as though a huge boulder had fallen on him and crushed him for ever. 
Returning home, he silently pushed his suitcase back under the bed 
with his foot, and at the appointed hour in the evening he was the 
first to arrive at the place fixed for the meeting with Shatov, still with 
his passport in his pocket, it is true . . . .  
The Globe Trotter 
THE catastrophe with Lisa and Mary's death made an overwhelming 
impression on Shatov. I have already mentioned the fact that I had 
met him for a moment that morning and that he looked to me like a 
man who was not in his right mind. He told me, incidentally, that on 
the previous evening at about nine o'clock (that is, about three hours 
before the fire) he had called on Maria Timofeyevna. In the morning 
he went to have a look at the bodies but, as far as I know, he made no 
statement to the police that morning. Mean while towards the end of 
the day a veritable storm arose in his mind and - and I think I can say 
with some certainty that there was a moment at dusk when he felt like 
getting up and - telling everything. What that everything was, he 
could not say himself. He would, of course, have achieved nothing, 
but would have simply betrayed himself. He had no proof of any kind 
that might have brought about the conviction of the criminals. Be­
sides, his own theories about it were of the vaguest nature and carried 
full conviction only for himself. But he was prepared to ruin himself 
if only he could ' crush the blackguards ' - his own words. Peter Verk­
hovensky had guessed fairly correctly this impulse of his and he real­
ized himself that he was running a great risk in postponing the exe­
cution of his terrible new plan till next day. What made him do it 
was, as usual, his great self-confidence and contempt for all these 
'wretches ', and for Shatov in particular. He had long despised Shatov 
for his 'whining idiocy ', as he had expressed himself concerning him 
when both of them were still abroad, and he was quite confident of 
being able to deal with such a simple-minded man, that is to say, by not 
letting him out of his sight all that day and by intercepting him at the 
first sign of danger. What saved ' the blackguards ' for a short time, 

THE D EVILS · PART THREE 
however, was quite an unexpected circumstance, which none of them 
had foreseen. 
At about eight o'clock in the evening (just at the time when the 
group of five had gathered at Erkel's and were waiting in indignation 
and excitement for Peter Verkhovensky ) , Shatov was lying stretched 
out on his bed in the darkness, without a candle. He had a headache 
and was slightly feverish; he was tormented by uncertainty, he was 
angry, kept making up his mind but was rmable to make it up finally, 
and, cursing himself, felt that nothing would come of it, anyway. 
Gradually, he fell for a short time into a light slumber and had some­
thing like a nightmare. He dreamt that he was lying on his bed tied up 
with ropes and could not move, while someone was knocking furi­
ously at the fence, at the gates, at his own door, at Kirilov's cottage, 
so that the whole house was shaking, and some faint and familiar voice 
that awoke poignant memories was calling to him piteously. He sud­
denly woke up and raised himself on his bed. To his surprise, the 
knocking at the gates went on, though not nearly so violently as in his 
dream. The knocks followed upon each other without interruption 
and the strange voice that brought back those ' poignant' memories 
could be heard, though not at all piteously, but, on the contrary, im­
patiently and irritably, caling to him from downstairs at the gates, 
interrupted now and again by a more restrained and ordinary voice. 
He jumped up from his bed, opened the little ventilation window, and 
put out his head. 
' Who's there ?' he shouted, literally petrified with terror. 
' If you are Shatov ,' someone answered him from below in a firm 
and harsh voice, ' then please would you mind telling me frankly and 
honestly whether you want to let me in or not?' 
He was right: he recognized the voice. 
' Marie! Is that you ?' 
'Yes, I am Mary Shatov, and I assure you I can't keep the driver 
waiting a minute longer.' 
' One moment - let me light a candle,' Shatov cried faintly. 
Then he dashed off to look for matches. The matches, as usually 
happens on such occasions, could not be formd. He dropped the 
candlestick and the candle on the floor, and as soon as the impatient 
voice was heard again downstairs, he left everything and rushed head­
long down the steep stairs to open the gate. 

THE G L O B E  TROTTER 
'Would you mind holding my bag till I get rid of this blockhead?' 
Mrs Shatov welcomed him downstairs, thrusting into his hand a rather 
light, cheap canvas bag studded with brass nails, made in Dresden. 
Meanwhile she pounced on the cabby with exasperation. 
'May I point out to you that you're charging me too much. If 
you've dragged me for an extra hour all through these filthy streets, 
that's your own fault, for it shows that you did not know yourself 
where to find this idiotic street and this silly house. Please be so good 
as to accept your thirty copecks and be sure you won't gc:t any more.' 
'But, madam, you kept telling me yourself Voznesenskaya Street, 
and this here street is Bogoyavlenskaya : Voznesensky lane is miles 
from here. Look at my poor gelding, madam. It's steaming! '  
'Voznesenskaya, Bogoyavlenskaya, you ought to know all those 
silly names better than I do, for you're one of the local inhabitants. 
Besides, you're unfair: the first thing I told you was Filippov's house, 
and you said you knew it. Anyway, you can issue a summons against 
me to-morrow, if you like, and now I'd thank you not to bother me.' 
'Here, take another five copecks,' Shatov said, impetuously pulling 
a five-copeck piece out of his pocket and giving it to the cabby. 
'I beg you not to do it! '  Mrs Shatov cried, flaring up, but the cabby 
had started his 'gelding' and driven off, while Shatov, grasping her 
hand, drew her through the gate. 
'Quick, Mary, quick - all this doesn't matter and you're wet 
through. Mind, we have to go up here - pity there's no light - the 
staircase is steep, hold tight, hold tight ·- well, here's my little room. 
I'm sorry, I have no light. One moment! '  
He picked up the candlestick, but he could not find the matches for 
a long time. Mrs Shatov stood waiting in the middle of the room 
without uttering a word and without moving. 
'Thank goodness, at last! '  he cried joyfully, lighting up the room. 
Mary made a cursory inspection of the room. 
' I  was told you lived atrociously, but I didn't expect it to be like 
this,' she said querulously, going towards the bed. 
'Oh, I'm fagged out!' she said, sitting down with an exhausted air 
on the hard bed. ' Please put down my bag and sit down on the chair 
yourself. But, of course, just as you like. It worries me to see you 
>tanding there. I shall only spend a short time here, till I can fmd some 
work, for I don't know anything of this town and I have no money. 

THE D E V I L S  • PART THREE 
.But if I'm in your way, please tell me at once, I beg you, as indeed 
you're obliged to do if you're an honest man. I've still got something 
I could sell to-morrow to pay for a room at an hotel, but you'll have 
to take me to the hotel yourself. Oh, I'm so tired! '  
Shatov trembled all over. 
' You mustn't go to an hotel, Mary, you musm't! What hotel? 
Why ? Why ?' 
He clasped his hands imploringly. 
' Well, ifl necdn' t go to an hotel, I have still to explain the position. 
You remember, Shatov, how we lived in Geneva as man and wife 
for just over a fortnight and how it's now almost three years since we 
parted, without any particular quarrel, though . .But don't run away 
with the idea that I've come back to start al that silly business over 
again. I've come back to look for work, and if I've come straight to 
this town, it's only because it makes no difference to me. I haven't 
come to say that I'm sorry for anything. Please don't go imagining 
anything as silly as that.' 
'Oh, Mary ! You shouldn't have said that! You shouldn't have said 
that! '  
' V  cry well, if you're so civilized as to be able to understand that, I 
don't mind confessing that ifl have turned to you now and have come 
to your lodgings, it's partly because I've always thought you were not 
really a scow1drel and that you were perhaps much better than other ­
blackguards! ' 
Her eyes flashed. She must have suffered a great deal at the hands of 
some ' blackguard' or other. 
'And please understand that I never dreamed of laughing at you 
just now when I said that you were good. I spoke plainly, without fine 
phrases, which I can't stand. However, that's al nonsense. I always 
hoped that you would have sense enough not to be a nuisance. Well, 
that's all, I think. Oh, I'm so tired! '  
And she gazed at him with harassed and weary eyes. Shatov was 
standing about five paces away from her at the other end of the room 
and listened to her timidly, but looking just as if he had been reborn, 
and with an unwonted radiance on his face. This strong and uncouth 
man, al bristles on the surface, suddenly became all softened and trans­
figured. Something extraordinary, something entirely unexpected 
stirred in his soul. Three years of separation, three years of the broken 

THE G L O B E  TROTTER 
marriage had not banished anything from his heart. And perhaps 
every day during these three years he had dreamed of her, of that 
being who was so dear to him, who had once said to him : ' I  love 
you.' Knowing Shatov, I can say with certainty that he could never 
have allowed himself even to dream that a woman might say to him: 
'I love you.' He was quite absurdly modest and chaste, he regarded 
himself as a veritable monster, he hated his own face and his character, 
comparing himself to some freak only fit to be exhibited at a fair. Be­
cause of this he valued honesty above everything in the world and was 
fanatically devoted to his convictions. He was gloomy, proud, prone 
to anger, and taciturn. But now this single human being who had 
loved him for a fortnight (he always, always believed that) - a  being 
he always regarded as immeasurably above him in spite of his per­
fectly sober estimation of her mistakes ; a being whom he could for­
give everything, absolutely everything (there could be no question of 
that, and indeed it should have been the other way round, so that it 
followed that he held himself entirely responsible for everything) - this 
woman, this Maria Shatov, was al of a sudden again in his house, again 
there in front of him - oh, that was almost inconceivable ! He was so 
overcome: this event meant something so terrifying to him and at the 
same time so much happiness, that he could not, of course, and per­
haps would not, perhaps he was afraid to, take a sensible view of the 
situation. It was a dream. But when she looked at him with those 
harassed eyes of hers, he suddenly realized that the woman he loved so 
much was suffering and perhaps had been wronged. His heart froze. 
He gazed at her features with pain : the first bloom of youth had long 
vanished from this exhausted face. It is true she was stil good-looking 
- in his eyes she was as beautiful as ever. (In reality she was a woman 
of twenty-five, ratl1er strongly built, above medium height, taller 
than Shatov, with luxuriant dark brown hair, a pale oval face, and 
large dark eyes which now glittered with feverish brilliance.) But the 
light-hearted, naive, and good-natured energy so familiar to him in 
the past was replaced now by sullen irritability, disappointment, a sort 
of cynicism to which she had not yet got used and which she herself 
resented. But the chief tiling was that she was ill - that he clearly per­
ceived. In spite of all his fear of her, he suddenly went up to her and 
grasped her by both hands. 
' Mary - you know - I think you must be very tired - for God's 

T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  T H R E E  
sake, don't be angry. Won't you have some tea - eh ? Tea is very 
strengthening - ch ;; Oh, if only you'd have some tea ! '  
' Whv ask me if I'll have some tea ? O f  course I will. What a child 
you arc! You haven' r changed a bit. If you can get me some tea, 
please let me have ir. How tiny your room is ! How cold! '  
' Oh, I'll get some logs at once - some logs - I've got logs! '  Shatov 
began pacing the room excited) y. 'Logs - I mean - but - however, I'll 
get the tea at once,' he said with a wave of his hand, as though with 
desperate determination, and grabbed his cap. 
' Where are you going ? So you haven't any tea in the house, have 
you ? '  
' Y  cs, yes, yes, I'll get everything at once - I -' 
He snatched up his revolver from the shdf. 
' I  shall sell this revolver at once - or pawn it -' 
' Don't be silly, and, besides, it'll take such a long rime ! Here, take 
my money if you have nothing. There's eighty copecks here, I think. 
That's all I have. It's like a madhouse here.' 
'I don't want your money, don't want it. I'll be back directly. I can 
get it without the revolver.' 
And he rushed off straight to Kirilov's. This must probably have 
been two hours before the visit of Peter Verkhovensky and Liputin to 
Kirilov. Shatov and Kirilov, who lived in the same yard, hardly ever 
saw each other, and when they did meet, they did not speak or greet 
each other; they had been 'lying side by side' too long in America. 
' Kirilov, you always have tea. Have you got tea and a samovar?' 
Kirilov who was pacing the room {as he was wont to do all night 
from one corner to the other), suddenly stopped and looked intently 
at Shatov, who had rushed into his room, without, however, betray­
ing any particular surprise. 
' I  have tea and sugar, and I've also got a samovar. But you don't 
wanr a sa111ovar. The tea's hot. Sit down and just drink it.' 
'Kirilov, we lay side by side in America. My wife's come back to 
me. I - let me have the rea. I must have the samovar.' 
'If it's for your wife, then you need the samovar. But the samovar 
will wait. Now take the teapot from the table. It's hot - boiling hot. 
Take everything. Take the sugar - all of it. Bread. I've got lots or 
bread. Take it al. I've got some veal. I've a rouble.' 
'Give it me, friend ; I'll pav it back to-morrow. Oh, Kirilov! '  

THE G L O B E  T R OTTER 
'Is it the same wife who was in Switzerland? That's good. And your 
1nning in like that, that's good too.' 
'Kirilov,' cried Shatov, taking the teapot under his arm and carry­
lg the sugar and bread in both hands, ' Kirilov, if only - if only you'd 
ive up your dreadful delusions and get rid of your atheistic madness -
h, what a man you'd be, Kirilov ! '  
'I can see that you love your wife after Switzerland. That's good, if 
's after Switzerland. When you want more tea, come again. Come 
ll night; I don't sleep at all. There'll be a samovar. Take the rouble. 
ere! Go to your wife; I'll stay here and think about you and your 
;if e.' 
Maria Shatov was obviously pleased at his haste and fell upon the 
৭a almost greedily, but there was no need to run for the samovar; 
ile drank only half a cup and swallowed a tiny morsel of bread. The 
eal she refused irritably and with disgust. 
'You're il, Marie; all dlis is just a sign that you are,' Shatov ob­
৮rved timidly, as he waited, timidly, on her. 
'Of course I'm ill. Please sir down. Where did you get the tea, if 
·ou haven't any?' 
Shatov told her about Kirilov in a few brief sentences. She had 
teard something about him. 
'I know he's mad. Don't tell me any more. There are lots of fools 
n the world. So you've been in America? I heard, you wrote.' 
'Yes, I - I wrote to you in Paris.' 
' Enough, and please talk of something else. Are you a Slavopllil b1· 
:onviction?' 
'I'm - I'm not really - since I cannot be a Russian, I became a Slavo­
>hil.' he said, with a wry smile. with the effort of a man who feels that 
1is joke is strained and inappropriate. 
'Aren't you a Russian?' 
'No, I'm not a Russian.' 
'Oh, well, that's al nonsense. Please sit down, will you? Why are 
you rushing about all over the room? You think I'm delirious? Well. 
perhaps I soon shall be delirious. You say there are only two of you in 
:he house?' 
'Two - downstairs -' 
'And both of them so clever. \Vhat's there downstairs? You said 
downstairs?' 

THE DEVILS · PART T HREE 
' Oh, nothing.' 
'What nothing ? I want to know.' 
' I  only wanted to say that there are only the two of us in the house 
but that before the Lebyatkins lived downstairs.' 
' You mean the woman who was murdered last night?' she sudden 
ly asked excitedly. 'I heard of it. I heard of it as soon as I arrived 
There was a fire here, wasn't there?' 
'Yes, Marie, and I daresay I'm behaving like a scoundrel just no 
in forgiving the swine,' he declared, getting up suddenly and begin 
ning to pace the room, throwing up his arms as though in a frenzy. 
But Marie had not quite understood him. She listened to his repli 
absent-mindedly. She asked questions, but did not listen. 
' Fine things are happening here, I must say! Oh, how disgusting i 
al is ! What disgusting people they all are! But do sit down, for good 
ness sake! Oh, how you exasperate me! '  and, so saying, she fell bac¾ 
exhausted on the pillow. 
'Marie, I won't - perhaps you'll lie down, Marie?' 
She did not reply and closed her eyes, feeling utterly exhausted 
Her pale face looked death-like. She fell asleep almost irnmediatel}'l 
Shatov looked round, snuffed the candle, looked uneasily at her face 
again, clasped his hands tightly in front of him and tiptoed out of the 
room into the passage. On the landing he pressed his face against the 
wall in the comer and stood like that for ten minutes without utterin@ 
a sound or making a movement. He would have stood there longer, 
but he suddenly became aware of the sound of soft, cautious step! 
downstairs. Someone was coming up the stairs. Shatov remembered 
that he had forgotten to lock the gate. 
'Who's there?' he asked in a whisper. 
The unknown visitor went on mounting the steps without haste 
and without answering. On reaching the top landing, he stopped; i1 
was impossible to see him in the dark. Suddenly Shatcv heard his 
cautious question : 
'Ivan Shatov ?' 
Shatov gave his name, and at once stretched out his hand to stop 
him; but the visitor himself grasped his hand and - Shatov shuddered 
as though he had touched some horrible snake. 
' Stay here,' he whispered quickly. 'Don't go in; I can't receive you 
now. My wife has come back. I'll fetch a candle.' 

THE G L O B E  TROTTER 
When he returned with the candle, he saw a very young army 
lliccr standing there; he did not know his name, but he had seen him 
1mcwhcre before. 
'Erkel,' the officer introduced himself. 'You've seen me at Vir­
insky's.' 
'I remember. You sat there taking notes. Look here,' Shatov said, 
yi.ng suddenly into a rage and walking angrily up to him, but still 
)caking in a whisper, ' you gave me a sign with your hand when you 
,ok mine. But I want you to know that I don't care a damn for your 
gns! I don't acknowledge them - don't want to. I can throw you 
ownstairs this minute - do you know that?' 
'No, I know nothing about that and I don't know what you arc so 
:tgry about,' the visitor replied without resentment and almost good­
aturcdly. ' I've only come to give you a message, being very anxious 
ot to lose time. You have a printing press that docs not belong to 
ou and that you're obliged to account for, as you know yourself. 
ve been instructed to ask you to hand it over to Liputin to-morrow 
t seven o'clock sharp in the evening. I've further been instructed to 
:ll you that nothing more will be required of you.' 
' Nothing?' 
'Absolutely nothing. Your request has been granted, and you're no 
)nger a member of the society. I was instructed to tell you that 
!efinitely.' 
'Who instructed you to te II me?' 
'Those who told me the sign.' 
'I-Iave you come from abroad?' 
'I don't think that has anything to do with you.' 
'Oh, hell ! And why didn't you come before if you were instructed 
? ' 
0 .  
' I  followed certain instrunions, and was not alone.' 
'I understand, I understand that you were not alone. Oh - hell ! Bm 
.vhy didn't Liputin come himself?' 
' So I'll come for you to-morrow evening at exactly six o'clock 
md we shall go there on foot. There'll only be the three of us 
:here.' 
'Won't Verkhovensky be there?' 
'No, he won't. Verkhovcnsky is leaving the town at eleven o'clock 
to-morrow morning.' 

THE DEVILS · PART THREE 
' I  thought so,' Shatov whispered furiously and he smote his hit 
with his fist. 'He's run off, the swine! '  
He was thinking it over agitatedly. Erkel looked intently at him 
saying nothing and waiting. 
' How wil you carry it ? You can't possibly pick it up in your hand: 
and carry it away.' 
' We won't have to. You'll just point out the place, and we'll make 
sure it really is buried there. We only know the whereabouts of the 
place. We don't know the exact spot. Have you shown it to anyom 
else? '  
Shatov looked a t  him. 
' You, too, a young fellow like you, a sily boy like you - you, too 
are up to your neck in it ? But, good Lord, it's just young blood like 
you they want! Well, go along ! Oh, dear, that scoundrel has cheated 
you al and run away.' 
. 
Erkel looked at him serenely and calmly, but did not seem to 
understand. 
' Verkhovensky ran away, Verkhovensky ! '  Shatov cried, grinding 
his teeth furiously. 
' But he's still here,' Erkel observed softly and persuasively. 'He 
hasn't left yet. He's not going til to-morrow. I particularly asked 
him to be present as a witness. My instructions al concerned him,' he 
con£ded frankly like a very young and inexperienced boy. ' But I'm 
sorry to say he did not agree on the ground that he was leaving to­
morrow. I must say he is in rather a hurry.' 
Shatov glanced pityingly at the simpleton again, but suddenly gave 
it up with an impatient wave of the hand, as though he thought thaÒ 
he was not worth pitying. 
'All right, I'll come,' he pur an end to their conversation suddenly. 
'And now get out!' 
' So I'll be here at six o'clock precisely,' Erkel said, bowing politely, 
and without hurrying walked downstairs. 
'Little fool ! '  Shatov could not restrain himself from shouting aftci 
him from the landing. 
'What did you say, sir ?' Erkel asked from below. 
'Nothing ; you can go.' 
'I thought you said something.' 

THE GLOBE TROTTER 
S7I 
2 
Brkel belonged to that type of ' little fools ' who lack only the higher 
:Orms of reasoning powers; but he had plenty of the other, the lesser, 
:easoning powers, even to the point of cunning. Fanatically, child­
shly devoted to ' the common cause ', but really to Peter- Verkhoven­
dt.y, he acted on the instructions he had received at the meeting of the 
ıroup of five when the parts each of them had to play next day had 
)een arranged and distributed. When Peter gave Erkel the part of 
iJlessenger, he had managed to take him aside and talk to him for ten 
minutes. To carry out orders was an absolute necessity for his petty, 
Lmieasoning nature, which always yearned to submit itself to someone 
::lse's wil - oh, of course, only for the sake of the 'common ' or 
'great' cause. But even that would not have mattered greatly, for 
little fanatics like Erkel cannot understand the service to an idea unless 
they identify it in their minds with the person who gives expression 
to it. The sensitive, tender-hearted, and good-natured Erkel was per­
haps the most callous of murderers who planned to kil Shatov and 
was quite ready to be present at his kiling without a trace of any per­
sonal hatred and without batting an eyelid. He was told, for instance, 
to have a good look at Shatov's surroundings while carrying out his 
instructions, and when Shatov incautiously let slip the information 
(probably without being aware of it himself) that his wife had come 
back to him, Erkel was suficiently cunning not to show any curiosity, 
in spite of the fact that the thought flashed through his mind that the 
fact of the return ofShatov's wife was of great importance to the suc­
cess of their enterprise. 
And so it really was : it was that fact alone that saved ' the black­
guards' and prevented Shatov from carrying out his intention and, at 
the same time, helped them to 'get rid of him'. To begin with, it 
B.ustered Shatov, put him off his stride, deprived him of his habitual 
foresight and caution. Any thought for his own safety would be the 
last thing to enter his head now that he was preoccupied with some­
thing else. On the contrary, he was only too eager to believe that 
Peter Verkhovensky was going to run away next day : that seemed to 
prove that he was right in his suspicions! Returning to his room, he 
aat down in a comer again, put his elbows on his knees and covered his 
face with his hands. Bitter thoughts tormented him . . . .  

572 
T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  T H R E E  
I 
Presently he raised his head again, got up and went on tiptoe to 
have a look at her : ' Oh, God, she will be in a fever to-morrow morn­
ing - she may be running a high temperature already ! She must have 
caught a cold. She is not used to this terrible climate, and she had to 
travel third class in her thin coat and without any warm clothes at all. 
And to leave her here, abandon her without any help at all ! Her bag ­
such a tiny little bag, so flimsy, so crumpled - must weigh no more 
than ten pounds! Poor thing, she is so fagged out! How she must have 
suffered! She is proud. That's why she doesn't complain. It's her ill­
ness. Even an angel would be irritable in illness. How dry and hot her 
forehead must be - what dark circles under her eyes and - and yet how 
beautiful the oval of her face is, and that luxuriant hair - how -' 
And he quickly turned his eyes away. He made has_te to walk away, 
as though afraid of the very idea that he might see in her something 
different from an unhappy, exhausted creature who had to be helped. 
' What sort of hope could he have ! Oh, how mean, how contemptible 
a man is! '  
' Oh, I'm so tired, so tired! '  He recalled her cries, her weak, broken 
voice. ' Good God! to abandon her now, when she has only eighty 
co pecks left - she had offered him her purse; such a tiny, old purse! 
She came to look for a job - what does she know about jobs? - what 
do they know about Russia? Why, they arc al just silly children; all 
they have are their fantastic ideas made up by themselves. And she is 
angry, poor thing, that Russia is not like their foreign dreams! Oh, the 
unhappy, the innocent creatures! But - it's really freezing cold in 
here ! '  
He remembered that she had complained of the cold and that he had 
promised to heat the stove. 'There arc logs in the house; I can fetch 
them, but I must not wake her. However, I'll chance it. But what am 
l to do about the veal ? She may be hungry when she gets up. Well, 
that can wait. Kirilov does not go to bed all night. What could I cover 
her with? She's fast asleep, but she must be cold - oh, she must be 
cold! '  
And he went up to have another look at her; her dress was a little 
turned up and her right leg was half uncovered to the knee. He turned 
away suddenly, almost in dismay, took off his warm overcoat, and 
remaining in his threadbare old coat, covered her bare leg, trying not 
to look at it. 

THE G L O B E  T R O TTER 
573 
The lighting of the logs, the walking about on tiptoe, the examina­
tion of his sleeping wife, the dreams in his corner, then another look 
at the sleeping young woman took up a lot of time. Two or three 
hours passed. During that time Verkhovensky and Liputin had man­
aged to pay a visit to Kirilov. At last he, too, dozed off in the corner. 
He heard her groan; she had wakened and was calling for him. He 
jumped to his feet like a criminal. 
'Marie, I'm afraid I fell asleep. Oh, what a scoundrel I am, Marie ! '  
She raised herself a little, looking round the room in surprise, as 
though she did not know where she was, and suddenly she became 
very agitated. She was angry and indignant with herself. 
' I've taken your bed - I fell asleep dead with exhaustion. Why 
didn't you wake me? What made you think that I meant to be a bur­
den to you?' 
'But I could not p0৯sibl y waken you, Marie, could I?' 
'You could - you should have done it! You have no other bed here, 
and I've taken yours. You shouldn't have put me in a false position. 
Or do you think I came here to take advantage of your charity ? Get 
into your bed at once, please, and I'll lie down on some chairs in the 
' 
corner. 
'But, Marie, I haven't so many chairs and, besides, I have nothing 
to put on them.' 
'Well, in that case I'll lie on the floor. Otherwise you'll have to lie 
on the floor - now - now ! '  
She got up and tried to take a step, but suddenly a spasm of agoniz­
ing pain deprived her of all strength and resolution and she fell back 
on the bed again with a loud groan. Shatov ran up, but Marie, hiding 
her face in the pilows, grabbed his hand and started squeezing it with 
al her might. This went on for a minute. 
'Marie, darling, there's a doctor Frenzel - a friend of mine - if you 
think I ought to call him in - I could run out and fetch him.' 
'Nonsense! '  
'Nonsense? Not at all. Tell me, Marie, what is hurting you? We 
could try fomentations - on your stomach, for instance. I could do 
that without the doctor. Or a mustard plaster -' 
'What is tins ?' she asked strangely, raising her head and looking at 
him in dismay. 
'What is what, Marie?' Shatov asked, not understanding. ' What 

574 
THE DEVILS • PART THREE 
an: you asking about ? Oh dear, I'm quite at a loss, Marie. I'm sorry, 
I don't understand anything.' 
' Oh, leave me alone. It's not your business to understand. And it 
would have been funny if you had,' she added, with a bitter laugh. 
' Speak to me about something. Just walk up and down the room and 
talk. Don't stand beside me and don't look at me. I ask you particu­
lar(}' not to do it, please.' 
Shatov started pacing the room, looking at the floor and doing his 
utmost not to glance at her. 
' Don't be angry with me, Marie, please don't; but there's some veal 
I can get you - and there's tea not far off. You had so little before . . . .' 
She waved him away spitefully and with disgust. Shatov held his 
tongue in despair. 
' Listen, I intend to open a bookbinding business on rational com­
petitive principles. Since you live here, what's your opinion: would 
it be successful or not ?' 
' Good heavens, Marie, people don't read books here, and there 
aren't any at all. Why should they start binding them ?' 
' Who are " they " ? '  
'The local reader and the local inhabitant, in general, Marie.' 
' Why don't you speak more clearly, then ? They - and who they 
are one doesn't know. You don't know grammar.' 
' It's in the spirit of the language, Marie,' Shatov murmured. 
' Oh, leave me alone, with your spirit. I'm sick and tired of you. 
Why shouldn't the local reader or inhabitants have his books bound?' 
' Because to read a· book and have it bound are two stages in de­
velopment, and enormously different stages too. At first he gets slowly 
used to reading. That takes him ages, of course, but he doesn't take 
care of his book and throws it about. Doesn't take it seriously. To 
have a book bound, on the other hand, implies a respect for the book ; 
it implies that they not only like to read it, but regard it as something 
essential. Russia has not yet reached that period. Europe has been bind­
ing books for a long time.' 
' Well, that may be expressed pedantically, but at least it is not silly. 
It reminds me of you three years ago : you were sometimes quite witty 
three years ago.' 
She said this in the same disdainful voice as all her other capricious 
remarks. 

THE GLOBE TROTTER 
575 
'Marie, Marie,' Shatov addressed her, deeply moved, ' oh, Marie, 
if only you knew how much I have been through during the last three 
years. I heard afterwards that you seemed to despise me for the change 
in my opinions. But who are the people I gave up ? They are the ene­
mies of life, old-fashioned liberals, who are afraid of their own inde­
pendence, flunkeys of thought, enemies of individuality and freedom, 
flabby preachers of dead and rotten ideas. What is it they have to 
offer? Senility, the golden mean, horrible middle-class mediocrity, 
envious equality, equality without self-esteem, equality such as a 
flunkey understands it, or as the Frenchman of 1793 understood it. 
And the worst of it is that everywhere there are scoundrels, scoundrels, 
scoundrels ! ' 
' Yes, there are lots of scoundrels,' she said, abruptly and painfully. 
She lay stretched out on the bed, without moving and as though 
afraid to move, her head thrown back on the pillow a little on one 
side, gazing at the ceiling with tired but feverish eyes. Her face waО 
pale, her lips dry and parched. 
' You realize it, Marie, you realize it! '  Shatov cried. 
She wanted to shake her head in sign of disagreement, but sud­
denly she was again writhing with pain. She buried her face in the 
pillow again, and again for a whole minute she gripped with all her 
might the hand of Shatov, who had rushed up to her, beside himself 
with fear. 
'Marie, Marie, but this may be very serious ! Marie! '  
' Shut up. I won't have it, I won't have it, I won't have it,' she cried, 
almost in a frenzy, turning her face upwards again. ' Don't you dare 
look at me like that! I can't bear your pity ! Walk about the room -
talk about something -;talk- ' 
Shatov, like one distraught, started muttering something again. 
' What exactly are you doing here?' she asked, interrupting him 
with disdainful impatience. 
' I've got a job at a merchant's office. I could earn a good wage, 
Marie, if I really put my mind to it.' 
' So much the better for you.' 
' Oh, don't misunderstand me, Marie, I merelv said it aП -' 
'And what do you do besides? What are you preaching ?  You can't 
help preaching, can you? That's your character.' 
' I'm preaching God, Marie.' 

T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  T H REE 
' In whom you don't believe yourself. That idea I never could 
understand.' 
' Lcr's drop it, Marie. We'll discuss it later.' 
' What sort of person was that Miss Mary Lebyatkin ? '  
' That, too, we'll discuss later, Marie.' 
' Don't keep on saying such things to me ! Is it true that her death 
was caused by - the wickedness - of thoǣe men ? '  
' Tl1ere's no doubt about it,' Shatov replied, grinding his teeth. 
Marie suddenly raised her head and cried hysterically : ' Don't speak 
to me of that again - never - never ! '  
And she fell back on the bed again, in the throes of the same writh­
ing pain. This was the third time, and this time her groans had become 
louder and rose to screams. 
' Oh, you insufferable man ! Oh, vou loathsome man ! '  she cried, 
tossing about and no longer sparing herself. and pushing away 
Shatov, who bent over her. 
' Marie, I'll do anything you like - I'll walk about, I'll talk -' 
' Um can't you see that it's begun ? '  
' What has begun, Marie ? '  
' How d o  I know ? D o  I know any thing about it ? Oh, damn ! Damn 
it all from the beginning ! '  
' Marie, if you'd just tell me what is beginning - otherwise hnw am 
I to know ? '  
' You're a useless, chattering theoretician ! Oh, damn, damn every­
thing in the world ! ' 
' Marie ! Marie ! '  He serious) y thought that she was beginning to go 
mad. 
' Uut, goodness, can't you see that I'm in labour ? '  she said, raising 
herself a little and looking at him with a terrible, hysterical bitterness 
which distorted her whole face. ' Mav he be damned beforehand - this 
child ! '  
' Marie,' Shatov cried, having at last realized what was the matter 
with her. ' Maril' ! But why didn't you tell me before ? '  He suddenly 
pulled himself together and grabbed his cap with purposeful deter­
mination. 
' How was I to know when I came in here ? Would I have come to 
you ? I was told it would be in another ten days ! Where are you go­
ing ? Where are you going ? Don't! '  

THE GLOBE T ROTTER 
577 
' I'm going for a midwife! I'll sell my revolver. We must get money 
before everything else now! ' 
' Don't dare to do anything of the sort! Don't dare to fetch a mid­
wife! Get some peasant woman, an old woman - I have eighty co­
pecks in my purse. Peasant women have babies without midwives, 
don't they ? And if i die, so much the better ! '  
'I'll fetch a midwife and an old woman - only how am I to leave 
you alone, Marie?' 
But realizing that it was better to leave her alone now in spite of her 
frantic state than leave her without help later, he refused to listen to 
her groans or angry screams and ran downstairs as fast as he could. 
3 
first of al he went to Kirilov. It was about one o'clock in the morn­
ing. Kirilov was standing in the middle of the room. 
' Kirilov, my wife's having a baby ! '  
'What do you mean?' 
' She's giving birth to a baby - a baby ! '  
'Are you sure ?' 
' Of course I am sure ! She's in agony. I want a woman, any old 
woman, at once - I must have her. Do you think I could get one now? 
You used to have lots of women in the house.' 
'What a pity I don't know how to give birth to a baby,' Kirilov re­
plied thoughtfully. ' I  mean, it isn't I who could give birth to a baby, 
but that I don't know what to do to give birth to a baby - oh, dear, 
I don't know how to say it.' 
' You mean you can't deliver a baby. But it wasn't that I was think­
ing of. I want an old woman, a peasant woman, a nurse, a servant.' 
'I'll fmd you an old woman, but not immediately, perhaps. If you 
like, I'll come instead -' 
' No, no, that's quite impossible. I'll go and fetch Mrs Virginsky, 
the midwife, now.' 
'That horrible woman! '  
' Oh yes, Kirilov, that's true, but she is the best midwife of them all. 
Oh, I know, it will be all without reverence, with disdain, with abuse, 
with blasphemy - at such a great mystery, at the birth of a new human 
being! Oh, she is already cursing it!' 

T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  THREE 
'If you like, I'll -' 
'No, no, but while I'm running about (oh, I shall fetch that Virgin­
sky woman!), I'd be glad if you would go up my staircase and listen 
quietly. Only don't for goodness sake go in. You'll frighten her. Don't 
go in on any account - just listen, in case of emergency. If anything 
happens, then go in.' 
'I understand. I've another rouble. Here. I was thinking of getting 
a chicken to-morrow, but I don't want it now. Run quickly - run as 
fast as you can ! There's a samovar all the night.' 
Kirilov knew nothing about the decision to murder Shatov, nor 
had he any idea of the great danger that threatened him. All he knew 
was that he had some accounts to settle with ' those fellows', and 
though he was partly implicated in the business himself by the instruc­
tions he had received from abroad (they were of a general nature, 
however, for he had never taken any active part in anything), he had 
given it all up lately - all the instructions, having completely disso­
ciated himself from everything, indeed, from the entire 'common 
cause', devoting himself wholly to a life of contemplation. Although 
at the meeting Verkhovensky had invited Liputin to go with him to 
Kirilov' s to make sure that the engineer would take upon himself the 
responsibility for the ' Shatov business', he never said a word in his 
talk with Kirilov about Shatov, nor alluded to him, probably because 
he did not think it politic to do so and because he did not think Kirilov 
sufficiently reliable. He put it off till next day, when it would be all 
over and, therefore, would make no difference to Kirilov. That at 
least was what Verkhovensky thought of Kirilov. Nor did it escape 
Liputin's notice that, in spite of Peter's promise, not a word had been 
said about Shatov, but Liputin was too agitated to protest. 
Shatov rushed off to Virginsky's house, cursing the distance and 
seeing no end to it. He had to knock a long time at Virginsky's: 
they had all been sound asleep for hours. But Shatov started banging 
on the shutter unceremoniously and with all his might. The dog 
on a chain in the yard was dashing about and barking furiously. The 
dogs in the street caught it up and a veritable bedlam of barking 
arose. 
'Why are you knocking and what do you want?' Virginsky him­
self asked at last from a window in a very gentle voice which wৰs not 
at all what one would have expected in the circumstances. 

THE G L O B E  T R O TTER 
579 
The shuttr.r was pushed back a little and the ventilating window 
was opened. 
'Who's there? What scoundrel is this ?' the old maid, Virginsky's 
relative, shrieked angrily in a voice that was more like what one 
would have expected. 
' I'm Shatov. My wife's come back and she is just going to have a 
baby . . . . ' 
'Well, let her. Go away ! '  
'I've come for Mrs Virginsky, and I won't go without her! '  
' She can't attend any confinement, especially at such short notice. 
Go to Maksheyeva's, and stop making a row! '  the angry female voice 
rattled on. 
Shatov could hear how Virginsky was trying to stop her, but she 
pushed him aside and would not give in. 
'I shan't go away ! '  Shatov cried again. 
'Wait, wait a little! '  Virginsky cried at last, overpowering the old 
maid. 'I beg you to wait five minutes, Shatov, I'll wake Mrs Virgin­
sky. Please don't knock and don't shout . . .  Oh, this is terrible! '  
Ati:er five minutes which lasted an eternity Mrs Virginsky ap-
peared. 
'Your wife has come back to you ?' he heard her voice through the 
small ventilating window. 
To Shatov's surprise her voice did not sound angry at all, but just 
peremptory as usual. But, then, Mrs Virginsky could not speak other­
WISe. 
'Yes, and she's having a baby.' 
' Marie?' 
'Yes, Marie. Of course it's Marie! '  
A pause followed. Shatov waited. They were whispering to each 
other inside. 
'How long has she been with you ?' Mrs Virginsky asked again. 
' Since this evening. She arrived at eight o'clock. Please make haste.' 
They whispered again. They seemed to be consulting each other. 
'Look here, you're not making a mistake, are you? She has sent you 
for me herself?' 
'No, she hasn't sent me for you. She wants a peasant woman be­
cause she doesn't want to burden me with the expense, but don't 
worry, I'll pay you.' 

sBo 
THE DEVILS · PART THREE 
'All right, I'll come whether you pay me or not. I have always had
' 
a high opinion of Marie's independent principles, though I don't 
think she remembers me. Have you got the most necessary things?' 
' I  have got nothing, but shal get them. I shall - I shall.' 
' So these people possess some generosity after all,' Shatov thought 
as he set off to Lyamshin's. 'A man and his convictions are two 
different things. Perhaps I haven't been fair to them ! We are al to 
blame, we are all to blame and - if only we were all convinced of 
that ! '  
He did not have to knock long at Lyamshin's; to his surprise, 
Lyamshin opened the little ventilating window at once, having 
jumped out of bed barefoot and in his night-clothes at the risk of 
catching cold. He was very concerned about his health, and was con­
tinualy worried about it. But there was a special reason for such alert­
ness and precipitancy : Lyamshin had been in a state of nerves al the 
evening, and had not been able to sleep for excitement as a result of 
the meeting of the group of five. He was all the time haunted by the 
fear of a visit of uninvited and unwished-for guests. The news that 
Shatov was an informer worried him most of all. And, as ill-luck 
would have it, somebody was suddenly knocking so dreadfully loudly 
at the window. 
He was so frightened at the sight of Shatov that he immediately 
slammed the window and rushed back to bed. Shatov began shouting 
and knocking furiously. 
' What do you mean by knocking like that in the middle of the 
night? '  Lyamshin shouted menacingly, but almost dead with fear, 
having at last, two minutes later, made up his mind to open the win­
dow again to satisfy himself that Shatov had come alone. 
' Here's your revolver - take it back and give me fifteen roubles.' 
' What's the matter with you? Are you drunk ? I'm going to catch 
a cold. Wait a minute; I'll throw a blanket over me.' 
' Let me have the fifteen roubles at once. If you won't give it me, 
I'll knock and shout til daybreak. I'll break your window for you.' 
' I'll shout for help and they'll take you off to the lock-up.' 
' Well, I'm not drunk, either. I'll start shouting for help, too! 
Which of us has more reason to be afraid of the police - you or I?' 
'And to think that you can hold such rotten opinions! I know what 
you're hinting at. Wait, wait. Don't knock, for goodness sake! Good 

THE GLOBE TROTTER 
heavens! who can raise money at night? Well, what do you want 
money for if you're not drunk ?' 
' My wife has come back. I'm letting you have it back for ten 
roubles less than what I paid for it, and I haven't fired it once. Take 
your revolver - take it at once.' 
Lyamshin put his hand mechanically out of the window and took 
the revolver. He waited a little, and then he thrust his head quickly out 
of the window and said as though beside himself with a shiver rwming 
down his spine: 
' You're lying. Your wife hasn't come back to you at al. You - you 
simply want to run away.' 
' You're a fool. Where am i to run away to ? Let your Verkhovensky 
run away - not I. I've just come from the midwife, Mrs Virginsky, 
and she has agreed to come to me at once. Ask them. My wife's in 
agony. I must have money. Give me the money.' 
A regular firework of ideas burst in Lyamshin' s shifty mind. Every­
thing suddenly appeared in quite a different light, but his panic still 
prevented him from thinking clearly. 
'But how is this possible ? You don't live with your wife, do 
you ?' 
' I'll knock your head off for asking me such questions.' 
'Oh, dear, I'm sorry. I understand - I'm afraid I was taken by sur­
prise. But I understand - I understand. But - but wil Mrs Virginsky 
really come to you ? You said just now that she was already on the 
way. You know, I don't believe you. You see, you see, you see you're 
telling fibs, fibs, fibs! . .  .' 
' She is probably with my wife by now - don't keep me waiting. 
It's not my fault that you're a fool.' 
' That's not true. I'm not a fool. I'm sorry, but I just can't -' 
And, completely at a loss, he began closing the little window for a 
third time, but Shatov raised such a clamour that he at once thrust his 
head out again. 
' But that's a damned infringement of my rights as a citizen! What 
are you demanding of me ? What? Just try to formulate your de­
mands. And in the middle of the night, too ! ' 
' I'm demanding fifteen roubles, you fathead! '  
' But for al you know I may not want my revolver back. You have 
no right to make any demands on me. You bought the thing, and 

T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  T HR E E  
that's the end of it - you have no right to demand it. Besides, I can't 
possibly raise such a sum at night. Where can I get it?' 
' You've always got money. I've taken off ten roubles, and you're 
known to be a damned miser ! '  
' Come the day after to-morrow - you hear ? - the day after to­
morrow at twelve o'clock and I'll give you the lot - that's fair, isn't 
it ? '  
Shatov knocked furiously at the window for the third time. 
' Give me ten roubles, and early to-morrow another five.' 
' No, the day after to-morrow the other ftve. I swear I shan't have 
it to-morrow. You'd better not come - you'd better not come.' 
'All right, let me have the ten. Oh, you swine ! '  
' Why call me names ? Wait a minute, I must light a candle. You've 
broken the window. Good Lord, nobody swears like that at night. 
Here ! '  He held out a note to him through the window. 
Shatov grabbed it: it was a five-rouble note. 
' I  tell you I can't give you more. I just haven't got it. I shall be able 
to let you have it all the day after to-morrow, but I can do nothing 
more now.' 
' I  shan't go ! '  Shatov roared. 
' Oh, all right, here's something more for you. You see, here's some 
more. But I won't give you any more. You can scream the street 
down, but I won't give any more. Do what you damned well like, 
you won't get more. I won't give it you, I won't.' 
He was in a frenzy, in despair, in a cold sweat. The two notes he had 
given him were one rouble notes. Shatov had seven roubles altogether 
now. 
' Oh, to hell with you ! I'll come to-morrow. I'll break every bone 
in your body, Lyamshin, if you haven't the eight roubles ready for 
rne.' 
'And I shan't be at home, you fool,' Lyamshin thought quickly to 
himself. 
' Wait, wait ! '  Lyamshin shouted frantically after Shatov, who was 
already running off ' Wait, come back. Tell me, please, is it true that 
your wife has come back ? '  
' Damn fool ! '  Shatov spat and ran home as fast as his legs would 
carry him. 

THE G L O B E  T R OTTER 
4 
è may mention that Mrs Virginsky knew nothing of the decision 
taken at the meeting of the group of five the day before. Virginsky, 
who carne back home feeling weak and stunned, did not dare to tell 
her of the decision that had been taken, but he could not restrain him­
self, and told her half - that is to say, the news Verkhovensky con­
fided to them about Shatov's unmistakable intention to inform the 
police. But he added at once that he was not quite sure that it was true. 
Mrs Virginsky was terribly frightened. That is why she decided to go 
at once when Shatov came to fetch her, in spite of the fact that she was 
very tired, having spent the whole of the previous night at a dificult 
confinement, She had always been of the opinion that ' such trash as 
Shatov are capable of any mean political trick ' ;  but the arrival of Mrs 
Shatov put things in a different light. Shatov's panic, the desperate 
tone of his entreaties, the whole manner in which he implored help, 
showed a change of heart in the traitor : a man who had decided to 
betray himself merely for the sake of ruining others would, she could 
not help thinking, have looked and spoken differently. In short, Mrs 
Virginsky decided to look into the matter herself. Virginsky remained 
satisfied with her decision - he felt as if a heavy load had been taken 
off his mind ! He even began to feel more hopeful : the way Shatov 
behaved seemed to him incompatible with Verkhovensky's tl1eory. 
Shatov had not been mistaken ; when he came back, he found 
Mrs Virginsky already with Marie. She had only just arrived, had 
scc.mfuly dismissed Kirilov, who was keeping watch at the bottom 
of the stairs, had hastily introduced herself to Marie, who had not 
recognized her as an old acquaintance. She had found Marie in '  a very 
bad way ', that is, distraught, spiteful, and 'in a state of the most abject 
despair', and in about five minutes overcame al her protests. 
'Why do you go on saying that you don't want an expensive mid­
wife ?' she was saying at the moment when Shatov came in. ' Absolute 
nonsense! It's just the sort of thing you would say in your abnormal 
condition. It's a fifty-fifty chance that you would end up badly if you 
had got just any old woman, some peasant midwife. That would cost 
you much more than an expensive midwife - not to mention the 
trouble you might let yourself in for. How do you know I am au ex­
pensive midwife ? You can pay me afterwards, and I won't charge you 

T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  T H REE 
more than necessary, and I answer for my success. With me here, you 
won't die. I've seen worse cases. And I'll place your baby in a found­
ling home to-morrow, if you like, and then send him to be brought 
up in the country, and that'll be the end of that. Meantime you'll get 
well again, you'll take up some rational work, and in less than no time 
you'll have paid Shatov for the room and expenses, which won't be 
so great at all.' 
'I don't mean that. I have no right to be a burden -' 
' Your enlightened civic feelings do you credit, but believe me, 
Shatov will spend scarcely anything if only he is willing to transform 
himself from an eccentric into a man whose ideas are even just a little 
bit normal All he has to do is to refrain from making a fool of him­
ৱelf, beating the drum, and rushing about the town gasping for breath. 
If we don't keep him under control, he'll rouse all the doctors in 
town before morning - he roused all the dogs in our street. But we 
don't want any doctors. I've said already that I'll answer for every­
thing. I daresay you could hire an old woman as a help, it won't cost 
you anything. But I think he'll be of some usc himself, and not 
only for doing al sorts of silly things. He's got hands and feet, he can 
run to the chemist's without offending your feelings by his charity. 
Charity indeed! Wasn't he responsible for bringing you into this 
position? Didn't he make mischief between you and the family in 
which you were a governess with the selfish object of marrying you ? 
We've heard about it, you know. However, he just came running to 
me like a madman and raised din enough to wake the whole street. I 
am not forcing myself on anyone and have come only for your sake, 
on principle, for we are all bound to stand up for each other. I told 
him so before I left the house. If you think I'm not wanted here, then 
good-bye. I only hope there won't be any trouble that can't be easily 
averted.' 
And she even got up from her chair. 
Marie was so helpless, she was in such pain, and, to tell the truth, 
she was so frightened of what might happen to her, that she did not 
have the heart to let her go. But that woman suddenly became hateful 
to her: she'd got it all wrong; it was not at all what Marie had in 
mind. Yet the prediction that she might die in the hands of an in­
competent midwife overcame her repugnance. But then she became 
more exacting and more ruthless to Shatov from that moment. In the 

THE G LO B E  TRO TTER 
end she forbade him not only to look at her, but even to stand facing 
her. Her pains became fiercer. Her cursing and even blaspheming 
grew more frantic. 
'Oh, I think we'd better send him out of the room,' Mrs Virginsky 
rapped out. 'He looks ghastly. He's only frightening you. White as a 
sheet. Why, you funny man, what is it to you? What a comedy! '  
Shatov made no answer. He had made up his mind to say nothing. 
'I've seen many a foolish father in such cases. They, too, go off 
their heads. But they at least -' 
' Stop it or leave me alone to die ! Don't say another word! I won't 
have it! I can't stand it! '  
'It's quite impossible not to say another word, unless you're out of 
your mind. That's what I think you are in your condition. We have 
to talk of the things you want. Tell me, have you got anything ready? 
You'd better answer, Shatov. She's not in a position to.' 
'Tell me what is needed.' 
'Which means that you've nothing ready?' 
She told him the things she had to have, those which were neces­
sary, and, to do her justice, she asked only for those that were abso­
lutely indispensable, the necessities. Shatov had some of them. Marie 
took out her key and held it out to him, for him to look in her bag. 
As his hands shook, he took a little longer than was necessary to open 
the unfamiliar lock. Marie flew into a rage, but when Mrs Virginsky 
went up to take the key from him, she would not let her look into her 
bag and insisted, screaming and weeping like one demented,- that 
Shatov alone should open her bag. 
For some things he had to run down to Kirilov. But no sooner had 
Shatov turned to go than she began calling him back furiously, and 
only calmed down when Shatov, who rushed back headlong from the 
stairs, told her that he was going away only for a minute to fetch the 
most necessary things and that he would be back at once. 
'Well, it seems it is difficult to please your ladyship,' Mrs Virginsky 
said with a laugh. ' One minute it is, " Stand with your face to the wall 
and don't dare to look at me", and another, "Don't dare to leave me 
for a minute or I shall start crying." You'll only give him all sorts of 
ideas if you go on like this. All right, all right, don't be silly and don't 
frown; I'm only joking.' 
'He won't dare to get any ideas.' 

ss6 
THE D EVILS • PART THREE 
'Dear, dear, I daresay he wouldn't if he were not head over heels in 
love with you, if he did not run about the streets with his tongue out 
and if he did not rouse al the dogs in the town. He broke one of my 
windows.' 
s 
Shatov found Kirilov still pacing up and down his room and so pre­
occupied with his own thoughts that he had even forgotten about the 
arrival of Shatov' s wife, and listened without understanding. 
' Oh yes,' he suddenly remembered, as though tearing himself away 
with an effort and only for a minute from some absorbing idea. 'Yes -
an old woman. A married woman or just any old woman? Wait, an 
old married woman - is it? I remember - I've been - the old woman 
will come, but not just now. Take the pilow. What else? Oh, yes. 
Wait a minute. Have you ever had moments of eternal harmony, 
Shatov ?' 
' You know, Kirilov, you must get some sleep at night.' 
Kirilov came out of his dream and - strange to say - spoke more 
coherently than he usually did. It was evident that he had formulated 
it all in his head long ago and had, perhaps, written it down, too. 
'There are seconds - they come five or six at a time - when you 
suddenly feel the presence of eternal harmony in all its fulness. It is 
nothing earthly. I don't mean that it is heavenly, but a man in his 
earthly semblance can't endure it. He has to undergo a physical change 
or die. This feeling is clear and unmistakable. It is as though you sud­
denly apprehended all nature and suddenly said: '' Yes, it is true - it is 
good." God, when He created the world, said at the end of each day 
of creation: "Yes, it is true, it is good." It is not rapture, but just glad­
ness. You forgive nothing because there is nothing to forgive. Nor do 
you really love anything - oh, it is much higher than love! What is so 
terrifying about it is that it is so terribly clear and such gladness. If it 
went on for more than frve seconds, the soul could not endure it and 
must perish. In those five seconds I live through a lifetime, and I am 
ready to-give my life for them, for it's worth it. To be able to endure 
it for ten seconds, you would have to undergo a physical change. I 
think man ought to stop begetting children. What do you want chil­
dren for, what do you want mental development, if your goal has 

T H E  G L O B E  T R O T T E R  
)een attained? It is said in the gospel that in the resurrection they neither 
narry nor are given in marriage, but are as dtc angels of God in 
teaven. It's a hint. Is your wife giving birth to a baby?' 
'Kirilov, does this often happen? '  
'Once in three days, once a week.' 
'You're not an epileptic?' 
'No.' 
'You will be one. Take care, Kirilov. I've heard that's just how an 
:pileptic fit begins. An epileptic described to me exactly that pre­
iminary sensation before a fit, exactly as you've done. He, too, said it 
,asted five seconds and that it was impossible to endure it longer than 
:hat. Remember Mohammed's pitcher from which no drop of water 
was spilt while he flew round paradise on his horse. The pitcher - that's 
your five seconds. It's too much like your eternal harmony, and 
Mohammed was an epileptic. Be careful, Kirilov - it's epilepsy! '  
'There won't be time,' Kirilov laughed softly. 
6 
The night was passing. Shatov was sent on errands, he was abused, he 
was called back. Marie was reduced to the extremity of fear for her 
life. She cried that she wanted to live, that she must, must live, and 
was afraid to die. ' I  don't want to, I don't want to ! '  she kept repeat­
ing. But for Mrs Virginsky things would have gone badly. Gradually 
she gained complete control over her patient. Marie began obeying 
every word she uttered, every order from her, like a chilLI. Mrs Vir­
ginsky got her way by sternness, not by kindness, but she worked 
wonders. It was beginning to get light. Mrs Virginsk)' suddenly 
imagined that Shatov had run out on to the stairs to say his prayers, and 
she started laughing. Marie also began to laugh, spitefully, venom­
ously, as though that laughter made her feel better. At last, Shatov 
was ·driven out altogether. It was a damp, cold morning. He pressed 
his face against the wall, just as he had done on the previous evening 
when Erkel had come. He was shaking like a leaf, was afraid to think, 
but his mind was already clinging to every image that came into his 
head, as it docs in dreams. He was incessantly caught up by his fancies 
which incessantly snapped off short like a rotten thread. At last the 
groans that were corning from the room turned into dreadful animal 

Ǿ88 
THE DEVILS · PART THREE 
cries, nnbearable, incredible. He wanted to stop his ears but couldn't, 
and he fell on his knees, repeating unconsciously, ' Marie, Marie!' 
Then, at last, there came the sound of a cry, a new cry, which made 
Shatov shudder and jump up from his knees - the cry of an infant 
child, weak and discordant. He crossed himself and rushed into the 
room. A tiny, red, crumpled human being screamed and moved its 
tiny arms and legs in Mrs Virginsky' s hands. It was dreadfully help­
less and, like a speck of dust, was at the mercy of the slightest puff of 
wind, but it was screaming and asserting itself as though it also had 
every right to live. 
Marie lay as though she were unconscious, but a minute later she 
opened her eyes and gave Shatov a strange look: it was quite a new 
kind of look, though he was still quite nnable to wtderstand what it 
meant, but never before had he known or remembered her looking at 
him like that. 
'A boy? A boy ?' she asked Mrs Yirginsky in a feeble voice. 
'A boy! 1 Mrs Virginsky shouted in reply, as she swaddled the 
baby. 
After she had swaddled it and before she laid it across the bed be­
tween two pillows, she gave it to Shatov to hold for a moment. 
Marie, as though afraid of Mrs Virginsky, signed to him on the sly. 
He understood at once and brought the baby to show her. 
' He's so - pretty! '  she whispered weakly with a smile. 
' Look at him! '  the triumphant Mrs Virginsky laughed gaily as she 
glanced at Shatov's face. 'What a silly face he has! '  
'Rejoice, Mrs Virginsky,' Shatov, radiant at the few words Marie 
had uttered about the child, murmured with an idioticaly blissful 
expression. ' It's a great joy!' 
'What great joy are you babbling about?' Mrs Virginsky said 
merrily, bustling about, clearing away and working like a Trojan. 
· The mystery of the coming of a new human being is a great and 
incomprehensible mystery, Mrs. Virginsky, and what a pity it is you 
don't understand it! 1 
Shatov muttered incoherently, dazed and entranced. It was as 
though something were swaying about in his head and pouring out of 
his soul involuntarily, in spite ofhimsel£ 
'There were two, and now there's a third human being, a new 
spirit, whole and complete, which no human hands can fashion - a 

THE GLOBE TROTTER 
new thought and a new love - it makes me feel frightened. And 
there's nothing bigger in the world! '  
'The things the man says ! It's simply a further development o f  the 
organism, and there's no mystery whatever here,' Mrs Virginsky said 
with a sincere and merry laugh. ' If you were right, every fly would 
be a mystery. But let me tell you tllis :  superfluous people ought not 
to be born. First change everything so that there shouldn't be any 
superfluous people and then bring them into the world. As it is, we 
shall have to take him to the home for foundlings to-morrow. Still, I 
suppose that can't be helped.' 
' I'll never let him go to a home,' Shatov declared firmly, staring at 
the floor. 
' You're going to adopt him as your son ? '  
' He is my son.' 
'Of course, he's a Shatov, legally he is a Shatov; you needn't pre­
tend to be a benefactor of the human race. You don't seem to be able 
to get on without fine phrases. There, there, it's all right; only I'm 
afraid, ladies and gentlemen,' she said, having at last finished tidying 
up, ' I  must go now. I'll look in again this mortling, and in the even­
ing, if necessary; but now, since everything has gone off so well, I 
have to go and see my other patients. They've been waiting for me 
for a long time. You've got an old woman somewhere, Shatov, I be­
lieve. Well, the old woman's all right; only don't you leave her for 
long. Don't forget you're her husband, and sit beside her, perhaps you 
may be of some use. I don't think Marie will drive you away - there, 
there, I was only laughing . . . .' 
At the gate, to which Shatov had seen her off, she added to him 
alone: 
'You've given me something to laugh at for the rest of my life. I 
shan't charge you anything. I shall be laughing at you in my sleep. 
I've never seen anything funnier than you last night in all my 
life.' 
She went away completely satisfied. From Shatov's appearance and 
his talk it was as clear as daylight that the man was ' getting ready to 
be a father and was an absolute nincompoop '. She ran back home on 
purpose to tell Virginsky about it, although it would have been much 
quicker to go straight to her patient. 
' Marie,' Shatov began timidly, 'she told you not to go to sleep for 

590 
T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  T H R E E  
a little time, though I can see how hard it is for you. I'll sit down by 
the window and take care of you, shall I?' 
And he sat down by the window behind the sofa where she could 
not see him. But a minute later she called him and asked him queru­
lously to adjust the pillow. 
' No, that's not right - oh dear - what clumsy hands you've got!' 
Shatov did it again. 
'Bend over to me,' she suddenly said wildly, doing her best not to 
look at him. 
He gave a start, but bem over. 
'A little more - not like that - nearer,' and suddenly she put her left 
arm round his neck and he felt on his forehead her ardent, moist 
kiss. 
' Marie ! '  
Her lips twitched, she was trying to restrain herself, but suddenly 
she raised herself a little and said with flashing eyes: 
' Nicholas Stavrogin is a cad! '  
And she fell back on the bed helplessly, as though she had been 
struck down, with her face buried in the pillow, sobbing hysterically 
and squeezing Shatov's hand in hers. 
From that moment she would not let him leave her side. She in­
sisted that he should sit by her bedside. She could only talk a little, but 
she gazed at him and smiled happily at him. She seemed suddenly to 
have been transformed into a silly girl. Everything seemed to be dif­
ferent. Shatov kept crying like a little boy or talking goodness knows 
what, in a wild, entranced, and inspired way. He kissed her hands. She 
listened to him enraptured, perhaps not understanding him, but strok­
ing his hair caressingly with her weak hand, smoothing it and admir­
ing it. He spoke to her of Kirilov, of how they would now begin a 
'new life' and ' for ever', and of the existence of God, of how good 
everybody was . . . .  In their excitement they took out the child again 
to have a look at it. 
'Marie,' he cried, holding the child in his arms, ' the old nightmare 
is over - the disgrace and all that dead stuff! Let us work hard and be­
gin a new life, the three of us - yes, yes! Oh, yes, and whar shall we 
call him, Marie?' 
' Him? What shall we call him ?' she repeated witl1 surprise, and a 
look of terrible grief came suddenly into her face. 

THE G L O B E  T R O TTER 
591 
She clasped her hands, looked reproachfully at Shatov and buried 
her face in the pillow. 
'Marie, what's the matter ? '  he cried with grief-stricken dismay. 
'And you - you could - oh, you ungrateful man ! '  
'Marie, forgive me, Marie. I only asked what we should call him. 
I don't know -' 
' Ivan, Ivan,' she said, raising her flushed, tear-stained face. ' Surely 
you didn't think we could call him any other horrible name ? '  
'Marie, calm yourself. Oh, how upset you arc ! '  
' It's silly of you to think that I'm upset because o f  that. I bet if I'd 
proposed to call him by that - horrible name, you would have agreed 
at once. You wouldn't have noticed it even. Oh, you're all so un­
grateful, so mean - all of you, all ! '  
A minute later, of course, they made it up. Shatov persuaded her to 
go to sleep. She fell asleep, but still kept his hands in hers. She woke 
frequently and looked at him as though afraid he would go away, and 
went to sleep again. 
K.irilov sent up the old woman with his ' congratulations ' and, in 
addition, fried cutlets and made some soup with white bread for 
Mrs Shatov. The patient drank the soup greedily. The old woman 
swaddled the baby again. Marie made Shatov have the cutlets. 
Time was passing. Shatov, worn out, fell asleep in the chair, with 
his head on Marie's pillow. So they were found by Mrs Virginsky, 
who kept her word. She wakened them gaily, had a chat with Marie 
about her condition, examined the baby, and again told Shatov not to 
leave his wife. Then, after a few bantering remarks about ' the happy 
couple ', which were not without a shade of contempt and super­
ciliousness, she went away as well satisfied as before. 
When Shatov awoke it was already quite dark. He hastened to 
light a candle and rushed to fetch the old woman. But as soon as 
he had gone downstairs, he was struck by the sound of the soft, 
unhurried steps of a man who was coming to meet him. Erkel came 
in. 
' Don't come in,' Shatov whispered and, seizing his hand impetu­
ously, he dragged him back to the gate. ' Wait for me here. I'll be back 
directly. I'd completely forgotten about you ! Oh, how you brought 
it all back to me! ' 
He was in such a hurry that he did not even run in to see Kirilov. 

592 
THE DEVILS · PART THREE 
but only called the old woman. Marie was indignant and in despai 
that he could dream of ' leaving her alone'. 
' But,' he cried rapturously, 'this is the very last step! And then : 
new life and we'll never, never think of the old horrors again ! '  
He succeeded in appeasing her somehow and promised to be bad 
punctually at nine. He kissed her affectionately, kissed the baby, and 
ran down quickly to Erkel. 
Both set off to Stavrogin's park at Skvoreshniki, where eighteen 
months before he had buried the printing press, which had been en· 
trusted to him, in a secluded place at the very edge of the park adjoin­
ing the pine-wood. It was a wild and deserted spot, quite hidden and 
at some distance from the Skvoreshniki mansion. They had to walk 
two or perhaps three miles from Filippov's house. 
'Are we going to walk there? I'll take a cab.' 
' Please don't,' Erkel replied. 'They insisted on that. A cabman 
could be a wimess.' 
' Oh - damn ! All right, all I want is to make an end of it! '  
They walked very fast. 
'Erkel, you darling little boy ! '  Shatov cried. ' Have you ever been: 
happy ? '  
' You seem to be very happy now,' Erkel observed with curiosity. 
A Very Busy Night 
V I R G I N S K Y  spent two hours during that day in runing round to sec 
all the members of the group of five to tell them that Shatov would 
not inform the police because his wife had come back and given birth 
to a child. Anyone who 'had any knowledge of the human heart', he 
declared, could not possibly suppose that he could be dangerous at this 
moment. But, to his embarrassment, he found no one at home except 
Erkel and Lyamshin. Erkel listened to him in silence, looking placidly 
into his eyes, and in answer to Virginsky's question whether he would 
go at six o'clock or not, replied with a very candid smile that, of 
course, he would go. 
Lyamshin was in bed, apparently seriously il, with his head covered 

A VERY B U S Y  N I G H T  
593 
with a blanket. He got frightened at the sight of Virginsky, and the 
moment the latter opened his mouth, he waved him away frantically, 
imploring him to leave him alone. Still, he listened to all Virginsky had 
to say about Shatov, and seemed to be for some reason surprised at the 
news that Virginsky had found no one at home. It seemed that he 
knew already (through Liputin) of Fedka's death, and told Virginsky 
about it hurriedly and incoheremly, which, in turn, greatly surprised 
the latter. In answer to Virginsky's straight question whether they 
ought to go or not, he suddenly began brandishing his arms about and 
begging Virginsky to remember that he (Lyamshin) had nothing to 
do with it, that he knew nothing about it, and that he wished to be 
left alone. 
Virginsky came back home feeling depressed and greatly perturbed. 
What made things worse for him was that he had to conceal it from 
his family. He was accustomed to disclosing all his secrets to his wife, 
and but for the fact that a new idea took hold of his feverish brain at 
that moment - some new plan of action which might reconcile him 
to whatever happened in future - he would have taken to his bed like 
Lyamshin. But the new idea gave him courage and, what was more, 
he began waiting impatiently for the appointed time, and set off for 
the meeting-place earlier than was necessary. 
It was a very gloomy spot at the end of the huge Stavrogin park. 
Afterwards I went purposely to look at it. How forlorn it must have 
appeared on that grim autumn evening. The old Crown pine-forest 
began just there. Huge, century-old pines were silhouetted in the 
darkness as vague and sombre shapes. It was so dark that they could 
hardly see each other two feet away, but Peter Verkhovensky, Lipu­
tin, and later Erkel brought lanterns with them. For some unknown 
reason and at some unknown time long ago, a rather absurd-looking 
grotto had been built there of rough hewn stones. The tables and 
benches inside the grotto had long decayed and crumbled into dust. 
About a hundred feet to the right was the third pond of the park. 
These three ponds, starting from the very house, stretched, one after 
the other, for about a mile to the very end of the park. It was hard to 
believe that any noise, shout, or even shot could reach the inhabitants 
of the deserted Stavrogin mansion. With the departure of Nicholas on 
the previous day and the butler's absence in town, there remained 
only five or six people, most of them old servants. In any case, it was 

594 
T H E  D E V I L S . PART THREE 
I 
quitl" safe to assume that even if some of the retired servants had heard 
shouts or cries for help, they would only have aroused a feeling of! 
panic and that none of them would have stirred from the warm stoves I 
or cosy benches to offer assistance. 
By twenty past six almost al of them except Erkel, who had been
' 
sent to fetch Shatov, were there. This time Peter was not late; he came 
with Tolkachenko, who looked worried and was frowning. Al his 
assumed arrogance and boastful determination had disappeared. He 
scarcely left Peter's side and, it would seem, had suddenly become 
greatly devoted to him. He frequently rushed up to whisper some­
thing to him fussily, but Peter hardly even bothered to answer him, or 
muttered something irritably just to get rid of him. 
Shigalyov and Virginsky had arrived even before Peter, and as he 
came they withdrew a little in profonnd and obviously deliberate 
silence. Peter raised his lantern and examined them with nnceremoni­
ous and insulting care. 'They want to talk,' flashed through his mind. 
' Isn't Lyamshin here? '  he asked Virginsky. ' Who said he was ill?' 
' I'm here,' Lyamshin replied, appearing suddenly from behind a 
tree. 
He wore a warm overcoat and was closely wrapped in a rug, so that 
it was difficult to make out his face even with a lantern. 
' So Liputin is the only one not here?' 
Liputin, too, silently came out of the grotto. Peter raised his lantern 
a gam. 
' Why did you hide there? Why didn't you come out?' 
' I  suppose we al still keep the right of the freedom - of our move­
ments,' Liputin murmured, without apparently knowing himself 
what he really meant by that. 
' Gentlemen,' Peter said, raising his voice for the first time above a 
whisper, which produced an effect, ' I  think you realize full well that 
now is not the time for diƼussions. We have said and thoroughly dis­
cussed everything yesterday, frankly and explicitly. But - as I see from 
your faces - maybe someone would like to make some statement. In 
that case, let him hurry up. Damn it, we have very little time. Erkel 
may bring him any moment.' 
' He's quite sure to bring him,' Tolkachenko for some reason 
thought it necessary to add. 
' If I am not mistaken, the printing press wil be handed over in the 

A VERY B L' SY N I G H T  
595 
6.rst place, won't it ?' Liputin inquired, again without really under­
standing why he asked the question. 
'Naturally, we're not going to lose the thing,' said Peter, raising the 
lantern to his face. ' But I believe we all agreed yesterday that it was 
not necessary actually to take it. Let him only show us the spot where 
it's buried. We shall dig it up afterwards ourselves. I know that it is 
somewhere within ten feet of one of the corners of this grotto. But, 
damn it, Liputin, how could you have forgotten it ? We agreed that 
you should meet him alone and that we'd only come out afterwards. 
It's strange that you should. be asking al the questions - or are you just 
doing it to while away the time ?' 
Liputin remained gloomily silent. All were silent. The wind stirred 
the tops of the pine-trees. 
' I  hope, though, gentlemen, that every one of us will do his duty,' 
Peter snapped impatiently. 
'I know that Shatov's wife came back to him and gave birth to a 
child,' Virgiusky suddenly spoke up, agitatedly and hurriedly, bring­
ing out the words with dificulty and gesticulating. ' Knowing what 
the human heart is like, I think we could al safely assume that - er -
that he won't inform the police because - because he's so happy. As I 
went to see everyone this morning and found no one at home - I - er ­
suggest that perhaps we needn't do anything now . .  .' 
He stopped short: his breath failed him. 
' If you suddenly became happy, Mr Virginsky,' Peter said, taking 
a step towards him, 'would you have put off - not informing the 
police, there could be no question of that - but some risky public 
action requiring a certain amount of pluck which you had planned 
before you were happy and which you would have considered it your 
sacred duty to carry out in spite of the risk and loss of happiness ? .  
'No, I shouldn't have put i t  off! I shouldn't have just put i t  off for 
anything in the world,' Virginsky said with a sort of terribly absurd 
warmth, gesticulating violently. 
'You'd rather become unhappy again than be a scoundrel ?' 
'Yes, yes - I'd rather be an absolute - er - I mean, I'd be willing to 
be an absolute scoundrel - I'm sorry, I didn't mean that - not really a 
scoundrel, but, on the contrary, absolutely unhappy than be a scoun­
drel.' 
' Well, in that case you'd better know that Shatov considers it his 

T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  T H R E E  
public duty to inform the police, that he regards it as a matter of the 
highest pnnciplc, and the proof of it is that to a certain extent he runs 
a risk himself, though the Government would forgive him a lot for 
the information. Such a man as he will never give up the idea. No 
happiness will deflect him from doing what he thinks is his duty. In 
another day he will reproach himself for forgetting it and go to the 
police and do it. Besides, I can't for the life of me see why he should 
be so happy that his wife had come back to him after three years to 
give birth to Stavrogin's child.' 
' But no one has seen Shatov' s written statement to the police,' 
Shigalyov suddenly said emphatically. 
' I've seen it,' Peter cried. ' It does exist, and all this is awfully stupid, 
gentlemen.' 
'And I,' Virgi.nsky suddenly flew into a rage, 'I protest - I protest 
with all the force at my command. I want - this is what I want: I want 
that when he arrives we should all come out and ask him whether it 
is true. If it is, we ought to make him repent, and if he gives us his 
word of honour, we ought to let him go. At all events, there ought 
to be a trial, and we ought to act accordingly, but not hide ourselves 
and then fall upon him.' 
'To put our whole cause in jeopardy on a word of honour would 
be the height of folly !  Damn it all, how stupid it all is now, gentle­
men! And what sort of a part do you choose to play in the hour of 
danger ?' 
' I  protest, I protest,' Virginsky kept repeating. 
' Don't yell, anyway, or we shan't hear the signal. Shatov, gentle­
men - (Damn it, how stupid it all is now !) - I've told you already that 
Shatov is a Slavophil - that is, one of the stupidest of people. Bur, 
damn it, this is neither here nor there. It's of no importance whatever. 
You're only confusing me. Shatov, gentlemen, is a man with a grudge 
against the world; since he, willy-nilly, belonged to the society, I had 
hoped till the last minute that he might be of some usc to the common 
cause and that I might usc him as a man with a grudge. I watched over 
him and spared him in spite of the most exact instructions . . . .  I spared 
him a hm1drcd times more than he deserved! Bur he ended up by in­
forming the police. However, damn it, I don't care! And I shouldn't 
advise any one of you to try to do a bunk now! Not one of you has 
any right to leave our cause in the lurch! You can embrace him, if you 

A V E R Y  B U S Y  N I G HT 
597 
like, but you have no right to stake our common cause on his word 
of honour! Only swine and people in the pay of the Government 
would do such a tiling! '  
' Who's in the pay of the Government here ?' Liputin brought om 
slowly. 
'You, perhaps. You'd better hold your tongue, Liputin. You go on 
talking like that just from habit. Traitors, gentlemen, are all those who 
take fright in the hour of danger. There'll always be some fool who'll 
run to the police at the last minute because he's frightened and shout: 
"Oh, please, forgive me and I'll betray them all ! "  But you may as 
well know, gentlemen, that they'll never pardon you now, whatever 
you may choose to tell them. Even if they acquit you on two counts, 
it'll still mean Siberia for every one of you, and you won't escape 
nemesis of a different kind. And that sword is sharper than the 
Government's ! '  
Peter was furious, and said more than he should. Shigalyov rook 
three steps towards him resolutely. 
' Since yesterday evening I've thought it all over carefully,' he began 
confidently and methodically (and I can't help feeling that if the ground 
were to have given way under him, he would even then not have 
raised his voice or changed a single note of his methodical exposition), 
'having thought it all over, I have come to the conclusion that the 
projected murder is not only a waste of precious time, which could 
have been employed in a more suitable and more pressing business, 
but presents, besides, that pernicious deviation from the normal 
method which has always been most harmful to our cause and has 
deiayed its success for scores of years by subjecting it ro the influence 
of shallow-minded and mostly political men, instead of convinced and 
unadulterated socialists. I've come here for the sole purpose of pro­
testing against the projected enterprise so that it should be a lesson ro 
you all, and then shall have nothing whatever to do with this actual 
moment which, I don't know for what reason, I regard as a moment 
of peril to you. I am going - not because I am afraid of this peril or 
because I am sorry for Shatov, whom I certainly do not intend ro kiss, 
but solely because the whole of tllis business - from beginning to end ­
is literally a contradiction of my programme. As for my informing the 
police or being in the pay of the Government, you can set your minds 
completely at rest: I shall not inform the police.' 

THE D EV I L S · PART THREE 
He turned and walked away. 
'Damn it, he'll meet them and warn Shatov ! '  cried Peter, pulling 
out his revolver. 
They heard him raise the cock of his gun. 
' You may be sure,' Shigalyov said, turning round, ' that if I meet 
Shatov on the way, I may exchange greetings with him, but I shall not 
warn him.' 
'And do you know that you may have to pay dearly for this, Mr 
Fourier? '  
' I  should like t o  point out to you that I am not Fourier. B y  mixing 
me up with that sentimental, theoretical mumbler, you merely show 
that though my manuscript has been in your hands, you have no 
idea what it is about. As for your threat of revenge, let me tell you that 
you've cocked your gun for no reason at all. At this moment it is en­
tirely against your interests to shoot. But even if you threaten to shoot 
me to-morrow or the day after, you won't gain anything by it except 
unnecessary trouble: you may kil me, but sooner or later you'll come 
to my system all the same. Good-bye.' 
At that moment a whistle was heard about a hundred yards away 
from the direction of the pond. Liputin at once answered by another 
whistle, as had been arranged the evening before (as he practically had 
no teeth in his head and was not sure that he could manage to whistle, 
he had bought a cheap child's clay whistle in the market that morn­
ing). Erkel had warned Shatov on the way that they had arranged to 
whistle as a signal, so as not to arouse any suspicion in his mind. 
' Don't worry, I'll go the other way round, and they won't notice 
me at all,' Shigalyov said in an impressive whisper, and then walked 
home through the dark park without hurrying and without showing 
the slightest concern. 
Now everything, to the last detail, is known of this dreadful affair. 
At first Liputin met Erkel and Shatov at the entrance to the grotto. 
Shatov neitl1er bowed to him nor offered him his hand, but at once 
declared hastily and in a low voice : 
' Well, where's your spade, and haven't you got another lantern? 
And don't be afraid, there's no one here, and they'll never hear you in 
Skvoreshniki even if you fired a cannon here! This is the place, just 
here, on this very spot . . . .' 
And he stamped with his foot nearly ten paces from the back comer 

A V ERY BUSY N I GHT 
599 
of the grotto towards the wood. At that very moment Tolkachenko, 
who was hiding behind a tree, sprang upon him, and Erkel seized him 
from behind by the elbows. Liputin attacked him from the front. The 
three of them at once knocked him down and pinned him to the 
ground. It was then that Peter rushed up with his revolver. It is said 
that Shatov had time to tum his head and was able to recognize him. 
Three lanterns lighted up the scene. Shatov suddenly gave a short and 
desperate yell. But Peter did not let him go on yelling : he put his 
revolver firmly and accurately to Shatov's forehead, pressed it hard, 
and - pulled the trigger. The report did not seem to be very loud, at 
least they heard nothing in Skvoreshniki. Shigalyov of course heard 
it, for he had scarcely had time to walk three hundred paces - he heard 
the shout and the shot, but, according to his own testimony after­
wards, he did not turn round or even stop. Death was almost instan­
taneous. Peter alone kept his head - I don't think he kept quite cool. 
Squatting down, he went through the pockets of the murdered man 
with a quick but firm hand. He found no money (Shatov's purse re­
mained under Marie's pillow). He did find two or three scraps of 
paper, though, but nothing of importance : a note from the office, the 
title of some book, and an old bill from a restaurant from abroad, 
which, goodness only knows why, he had kept in his pocket for two 
years. Peter transferred the scraps of paper to his own pocket and, 
suddenly noticing that they had all crowded round him and were 
looking at the corpse, he started cursing them angrily and discourt­
eously and telling them to get on with their work. Tolkachenko and 
Erkel, recollecting themselves, ran off and instantly brought from the 
grotto two stones, weighing twenry pounds each, which they had got 
ready in the morning. These stones had already been prepared - that 
is, they were securely tied with ropes. As they intended to take the 
body to the nearest (the third) pond and dump it there, they began 
tying the stones to the legs and the neck. Peter fastened the stones, Tol­
kachenko and Erkel holding them and passing them one after the 
other. Erkel was the first to pass his stone, and while Peter, grumbling 
and cursing, tied it to the legs of the body with the rope, Tolka­
chenko stood holding up the other stone in his hands for a consider­
able time, his whole body bending forward, as it were, reverentially, 
to hand it over without delay as soon as he was told to, and it never 
ocurred to him to put it down on the ground in the meantime. 

6oo 
T H E  D E V I L S ' P A R T  T H REE 
When the two stones were at last tied on and Peter got up from the 
ground and looked at the faces of his companions, something rather 
strange happened suddenly, something quite unexpected that took 
everyone by surprise. 
As I have said already, all except Tolkachenko and Erkel were 
standing round doing nothing. Though Virginsky had rushed up to 
ShaLov with the others, he had not got hold of him or helped to hold 
him. Lyamshin, on the other hand, had only joined the others after 
the shot. Then, while the stones were being tied to the body - which 
took perhaps ten minutes - all of them seemed to have lost control of 
their mental faculties. They crowded round, and at first seemed to 
have felt surprised rather than upset or alarmed. Liputin was standing 
in front of the group close to the dead body. Virginsky, who stood 
behind him, peeped over his shoulder with a kind of special and, as it 
were, detached curiosity, even standing on tiptoe to get a better view. 
Lyamshin hid behind Virginsky, only from time to time giving an 
apprehensive glance at the body, and at once disappearing behind 
him. 
But when the stones had been tied on and Peter stood up, Virginsky 
suddenly began trembling nervously and, throwing up his hands in 
grief and despair, shouted at the top of his voice: 
'That's wrong, wrong! That's all wrong ! '  
He would have perhaps added something more to his belated ex­
clamation, but Lyamshin did not let him finish. He suddenly seized 
him from behind, squeezed him with all his might and let out an in­
human scream. There are moments of violent panic when a man, for 
instance, suddenly utters an unnatural scream, unlike anything that 
could have been expected from him before, and this sometimes 
sounds very terrifying. Lyamshin uttered not a human, but a sort of 
animal scream. Squeezing Virginsky from behind more and more 
tightly and convulsively, he went on screaming without stopping and 
without a pause, his eyes popping out of his head and his mouth wide 
open, stamping rapidly, as though beating a tattoo with his feet. Vir­
ginsky was so frightened that he, too, began screaming like a mad­
man, and with a ferocity so vindictive that one could never have ex­
pected it from him. He tried to free himself from Lyamshin's grip, 
scratching and punching him with his hand behind him. Erkel at last 
helped rum to drag Lyamshin away. But when Virginsky jumped in 

A VERY B U S Y  NIGHT 
601 
dismay ten paces away from him, Lyamshin, catching sight of Peter 
Verkhovensky, suddenly started yelling again, and was about to 
spring at him. Tripping over the body, he fell across it on Peter and 
gripped him so tightly in his arms, pressing his head against Peter's 
breast, that Peter, Tolkachenko, and Liputin could do nothing at first. 
Peter shouted, swore, hit him over the head with his fists; at last he 
managed to tear himself away, and pulling out his revolver, he put it 
straight in the open mouth of Lyamshin, who was still screaming, 
though he was by now tightly held by Tolkachenko, Erkel, and Lipu­
tin; but Lyamshin went on screaming in spite of the revolver. At last 
Erkel, crumpling his lawn handkerchief, succeeded in gagging him 
deftly, and he stopped screaming. Meanwhile Tolkachenko tied his 
hands with the remaining length of rope. 
' It's very strange,' observed Peter, looking at the madman with 
uneasy astonishment. 
He was obviously taken aback. 
'I had quite a different idea of him,' he added reflectively. 
For the time being they left Erkel to keep an eye on him. They had 
to hurry up with the disposal of the body : there had been so much 
shouting that someone might have heard. Tolkachenko and Peter 
picked up the lanterns and lifted the body by the hands, while Liputin 
and Virginsky took the feet, and so they carried it away. The two 
stones added greatly to its weight and the distance was more than 200 
feet. Tolkachenko was the strongest of them al. He advised them to 
keep in step, but no one answered him, and they walked just anyhow. 
Peter walked on the right, and, bending double, carried the head.of 
the corpse on his shoulder, holding up the stone with his left hand. As 
it never occurred to Tolkachenko to help him with the stone til they 
had covered half the distance to the pond, Peter, at last, swore at him. 
It was a sudden, solitary cry. They al continued carrying the body in 
silence, and only when they reached the pond did Virginsky, bent 
under the heavy load and apparently tired of carrying it, suddenly cry 
again in the same loud and plaintive voice: 
' It's wrong, wrong! It's al wrong ! '  
The place where the third and rather large Skvoreshniki pond came 
to an end, and to which they carried the murdered man, was one of 
the most deserted and least-frequented spots in the park, especially at 
that late season of the year. The pond, at that end, was overgrown 

602 
T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  T H REE 
with reeds near the bank. They put down the lantern, swung the 
corpse, and threw it into the water. There was a big, sharp splash. 
Peter raised the lantern, and they all peered after him curiously, 
anxious to see how the dead body would sink, but there was nothing 
to be seen any more: the body with the two stones sank at once. The 
big ripples, which spread over the surface of the water, quickly dis­
appeared. It was all over. 
'Gentlemen,' Peter said, addressing them, 'now we can disperse. I 
have no doubt that you must all now be full of that unconstrained 
feeling of pride which is inseparable from the fulfilment of a duty 
undertaken without compulsion. If, however, you are unhappily too 
upset for such feelings, you wil, I have no doubt, feel them to-mor­
row, when you would be ashamed not to feel them. I am quite willing 
to regard Lyamshin' s disgraceful outburst as an attack of nerves, par­
ticularly as I am told he has been really il all day. As for you, Virgin­
sky, I believe that a moment of quiet reflection will show you that in 
view of the interests of our common cause we could not rely on a 
word of honour, but had to act as we did. Subsequent events wil con­
vince you, I'm sure, that he was an informer. I agree to overlook your 
exclamations. As for danger, I cannot foresee any. It would never 
occur to anyone to suspect any of you, particularly if you don't do 
anything sily. The main thing therefore depends on you alone and on 
the conviction in which, I hope, you wil be fully confirmed to-mor­
row. The main reason, by the way, why you al joined an indepen­
dent organization of free men who think alike was to share your 
common action together at any given moment and, if necessary, to 
watch and observe each other. Every one of you is bound to give a 
full account of your actions. You're called upon to bring new life into 
the organization which has grown decrepit and stinking from stagna­
tion. Keep it always in mind to give you courage. At present all your 
actions must be animated by one aim - namely, to bring everything 
down with a crash: the State as well as its moral standards. We alone 
will be left, we who have prepared ourselves beforehand to take over 
the government: the intelligent we shall bring over to our side, and 
the fools we shall usc to carry us on their shoulders. You must not be 
shy of that. We must re-educate a generation to make it worthy of 
freedom. We shall have many thousand Shatovs to deal with. We 
shall organize ourselves to become the leaders of our movement. It 

A VERY B U S Y  N I G H T  
would be shameful not to take what lies idle and is gaping at us. I'm 
going at once to Kirilov, and by the morning there ought to be a 
document ready in which he will take it all on himself before dying 
by way of an explanation to the Government. Nothing can be more 
probable than such a combination of murder and suicide. To begin 
with, he was on bad terms with Shatov ; they had lived together in 
America, so that they had time to quarrel. It was well known that 
Shatov had changed his views, which means that their hostility was 
caused by their differences of opinion and their fear that one of them 
might turn informer - a most implacable hostility. All this will be 
stated in writing. Finally, it will be mentioned that Fedka lodged in 
his flat in Filippov's house. All this will completely remove all sus­
picion from you, because it will throw those fatheads into utter con­
fusion. To-morrow we shall not meet, gentlemen; I shall go into the 
country for a short time. But you will hear from me the day after to­
morrow. I'd advise you to spend to-morrow at home. Now we will 
all go home by different routes, two at a time. You, Tolkachenko, had 
better look after Lyamshin and take him home. You may be able to 
influence him and, above all, make it quite clear to him that he will be 
the first to suffer ifhe lets his cowardice get the better of him. I have 
no more wish to doubt your relative Shigalyov, Mr Virginsky, than I 
have you; he won't inform the police. I can only regret his action, but 
as he has not yet tendered his resignation from the society, it is too soon 
to bury him. Well, hurry up, gentlemen. The police may be fatheads, 
but there's no harm in being careful.' 
Virginsky went off with Erkel. Before handing over Lyamshin to 
Tolkachenko, Erkel had time to take him to Peter and tell him that 
Lyamshin had recovered his senses, that he was sorry, and wanted to 
be forgiven, and that he didn't even remember what had happened to 
him. Peter went off alone, making a detour, skirting the park on the 
other side of the ponds. It was the longest way. To his surprise, he was 
overtaken by Liputin when he was already half-way home. 
' I  say, V erkhovensky, Lyamshin is sure to inform the police.' 
' No, he'll come to his sei)ses and realize that he'll be the first to go 
to Siberia if he does. No one will inform the police now. You won't, 
either.' 
'And you?' 
'I shall most certainly get you all put out of the way the moment 

604 
THE D E V I L S · P A R T  T H R EE 
you make a move to betray me, and you know it. But you won't turn 
traitors. Did you run two miles after me to tell me that? '  
' But, my dear Verkhovensky, we may never meet again ! '  
' Why do you say that ?' 
' Tell me one thing, please.' 
' What is it? I must say, though, I wish you'd clear off.' 
' One thing ;  only tell me the truth. Is there only one group of five 
in the world, or is it true that there are several hundreds of them ? I ask 
you this because I consider it of the utmost importance.' 
'I can see that from your excitement. But do you know who is 
more dangerous than Lyamshin, Liputin ?' 
' I  know - I know ; but the answer, please, your answer ! '  
' You're a fool, Liputin. What difference could it make to you now 
whether there's only one or a thousand ?' 
' Which means that there is only one. I knew it! '  Liputin exclaimed. 
' I  knew al the time that there was only one. I knew it al along ! '  
And without waiting for another reply, he turned and quickly 
vanished in the darkness. 
Peter reflected a little. 
' No, no one will inform the police,' he said firmly. ' But the group 
must remain a group and do what they are told, or else - What trash 
they are, though ! '  
2 
He first went home and packed his trunk, carefully and without haste. 
An express train was leaving at six o'clock in the morning. This early 
express train ran only once a week and had been put on quite recently 
as an experiment. Although Peter warned the members of the group 
that he would be going away to the country for a while, his intentions, 
as appeared afterwards, were quite different. Having finished packing. 
he settled with his landlady, whom he had told of his departure 
earlier, and drove in a cab to Erkel's lodgings, which were near the 
station. And then, about one o'clock in the morning, he went to Kiri­
lov's, entering again by Fedka's secret way. 
Peter was in an awful state of mind. Apart from other very grave 
reasons for feeling dissatisfied (he still could fmd out nothing about 
Stavrogin), he, it would seem - for I can't say for certain - received in 

A VERY B U S Y  N I G HT 
me course of the day some secret information from somewhere (most 
probably from Petersburg) of a danger that was threatening him in 
me near future. There are, no doubt, many legends going round 
our town relating to that particular time; but if anything were known 
for certain, it was only to those directly concerned. For my part, 
I can only express my own opinion that Peter Verkhovensky may 
have been involved in all sorts of affairs somewhere else, and not only 
in our town, so that he really could have received such a warning. I 
am also convinced, in spite ofLiputin's cynical and despairing doubts, 
!hat he may have had two or three groups of five in addition to ours ­
in Moscow and Petersburg, for instance. And if not such groups, then 
al sorts of c01mexions and friends, and quite possibly very curious 
ones, too. Not more than three days after he had left we received an 
order from Petersburg to arrest him immediately, but whether it was 
for the things he had done in our town or elsewhere, I don't know. 
This order arrived just in time to strengthen the shattering impression 
of the almost mystical panic which suddenly took hold of our authori­
ties and our hitherto so persistently frivolous society after the dis­
covery of the mysterious and highly signiftcant murder of the student 
Shatov - a murder which was the culmination of all the senseless hap­
penings in our town - and the most enigmatic circumstances that ae:­
companied it. But the order came too late: Peter Verkhovensky was 
already in Petersburg, living under a false name, and having got wind 
of what was going on, he at once slipped away abroad. However, I am 
rather anticipating events, I'm afraid. 
He went to Kirilov, looking angry and deftant. Apart from his chief 
business, he seemed bent on getting his own back on him personally 
for something, to revenge himself on him for something. K.irilov 
seemed to be glad to see him; it was evident that he had been expect­
ing him a long time with painful impatience. His face was paler than 
usual and his black eyes had a fixed and dull look. 
' I  thought you were not coming,' he said in a dull voice from the 
comer of the sofa, from which he had not, however, stirred to greet 
him. 
Peter stood before him and, before uttering a word, looked fixe(Uy 
at his face. 
' So everything's in order and we shan't go back on our promise ­
good chap! '  he said, smiling with an offensively patronizing air. 

6o6 
T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  T H R EE 
' Well,' he added with odious jocularity, 'after all, if I am late, you've 
nothing to complain about: I made you a present of three hours.' 
'I don't want any presents of extra hours from you, and you can't 
give me any presents - you fool ! ' 
' What?' Peter gave a start, but at once controlled himself. ' Touchy, 
arcn' t you ? Oh, I see, we are furious, are we?' he added with slow 
deliberation and with the same oflcnsively supercilious air. 'At such a 
time it is composure you need most of all. It is best of all that you 
should consider yourself a Columbus and look on me as a mouse, and 
not take oflence at anything I say. I gave you that advice yesterday.' 
'I don't want to look on you as a mouse.' 
' Why not? Is it a compliment ? Oh dear, your tea's cold, too, and 
that means that everything is upside down. I fear something funny is 
going on here. Good Lord! what's that on a plate on the window­
sill ?' He walked up to the window. 'Aha, boiled chicken with rice! 
But why haven't you had any of it yet? I see, we are in such a state 
of mind that even chicken -' 
' I've had a meal, and it's not your business. Shut up! '  
'Oh, of course; and, besides, it doesn't make any difference, does 
it? But it does make a difference so far as I'm concerned. Fancy, I had 
scarcely any dinner, and so if, as I suppose, this chicken is no longer 
wanted - eh?' 
' Eat if you can.' 
'Thank you very much, and then I'll have tea, if I may.' 
He at once settled himself at the table at the other end of the sofa 
and fell on the food with extraordinary greediness; but at the same 
time he never let his victim out of his sight for a moment. Kirilov 
looked at him fixedly and with angry aversion, as though unable to 
tear himself away. 
'By the way,' Peter suddenly burst out, while going on eating, 
'what about our business ? We're not going to back out, are we? And 
the document ? ' 
' I've decided to-night that it's all one to me. I'll write it. About the 
leaflets?' 
'Yes, about the leaflets, too. I'll dictate it, though. It's all one to you, 
isn't it? Surely you're not going to bother yom head about what's in 
it, are you?' 
'That's not your business.' 

A VBRY BUSY NIGHT 
607 
'It isn't mine, of course. However, it'll only be a few lines: that you 
and Shatov distributed the leaflets with; incidentally, the help of 
Fcdka, who hid in your flat. This last point about Fedka and your flat 
is very important - the most important of al, in fact. You see, I'm 
very frank with you.' 
' Shatov ? Why Shatov ? Not for anything in the world about 
Shatov.' 
'Good heavens, what do you care ? You can't do him any harm 
now.' 
, ' His wife came back to him. She has woken up and has sent to ask 
me where he is·.' 
'She has sent to ask you where he is? I see. That's not so good. She 
may send again. No one must know that I'm here.' 
Peter looked worried. 
' She won't find out. She's asleep again. The midwife is with her ­
Mrs Virginsky.' 
'I see - so she won't hear anything, I suppose? You know, you'd 
better lock the front door.' 
' She won't hear anything. And if Shatov comes, I'll hide you in the 
other room.' 
' Shatov won't come. And you must write that you quarrelled with 
him because he had turned traitor and informer - this evening - and 
caused his death.' 
'He's dead ! '  Kirilov cried, jumping up from the sofa. 
'He died shortly after seven o'clock this evening, or rather yester­
day after seven o'clock in the evening, for it's one o'clock in the morn­
ing already.' 
'You have killed him! And I foresaw it yesterday ! '  
' I  should think you did! Here, with this revolver.' He took out his 
revolver as though to show it, but he did not put it back, but kept it 
in his right hand as though in readiness. ' You're a funy blighter, 
Kirilov, though you knew yourself that the stupid fellow was bound 
to come to such an end. What was there to foresee ? And, besides, you, 
too, had instructions to keep him under observation. You told me so 
yourself three weeks ago.' 
' Shut up ! You've done this to him because he spat in your face in 
Geneva! '  
' For that and for something else, too. For lots of things. Without 

6o8 
THE DEVILS · PART THREE 
any hard feelings, though. What are you jumping up for ?  Why pull 
such faces ? Oho, so that's it, is it? '  
He leapt t o  his feet an d  raised his revolver. What happened was that 
Kirilov suddenly snatched up from the window his revolver which 
had been loaded and ready since the morning. Peter took up his posi­
tion and aimed his weapon at Kirilov. The latter laughed harshly. 
' Confess, you swine, that you took your revolver with you because 
I might shoot you. But I won't shoot you - though - though -' 
And he again aimed his revolver at Peter, as though trying it on, as 
though he could not resist the temptation of denying himself the 
pleasure of imagining how he would shoot him. Peter, still taking up 
his position, waited - waited till the last moment, without pulling the 
trigger, at the risk of being the firSt to get a bullet in the head : he 
could expect anything from that ' maniac '. But the ' maniac ' at last 
dropped his hand, gasping for breath and trembling, and unable to 
speak. 
'You've had your little bit of fun and that's enough,' Peter said, 
putting down his weapon. ' I  knew that you were just having me on. 
Only, you know, you ran a risk : I might have pulled the trigger.' 
And he quite calmly sat down on the sofa and poured himself out 
some tea, though his hand trembled a little. Kirilov put his revolver on 
the table and began pacing the room. 
' I  won't write that I killed Shatov and - I won't write anything 
now. There won't be any document! '  
' No ? '  
' No.' 
' How mean and how stupid ! '  Peter said, going green with resent­
ment. ' I  had a feeling you wouldn't, though. I want you to know 
that you've not taken me by surprise. However, do as you pleaseȠ Ifl 
could have forced you to do it, I would. But you are a scoundrel,' 
Peter declared, less and less able to restrain himself. 'You asked us for 
money that time and promised all sorts of things. I won't go away 
with nothing, however. I want at least to see how you will blow your 
brains out.' 
'You will clear out of here at once,' Kirilov said, standing resolutely 
before him. 
' No, sir, I won't do that,' Peter said, snatching up his revolver again. 
' I  shouldn't be surprised if out of malice and cowardice you'd decided 

A VERY B U S Y  N I G H T  
609 
to put it all off and go to the police to-morrow to get some more 
money. They'll pay you for that, you know. To hell with you ! Only 
don't be afraid, I've foreseen everything, and I shan't go before I've 
blown your brains out with this revolver, as I did that swine Shatov's, 
if you get frightened and decide to put it off, damn you ! '  
' So you have to see my blood, too, have you ? '  
'I'm not doing it out o f  malice - understand that. I'm doing it to be 
certain that our cause won't suffer. It's impossible to rely on a man. 
You can see that for yourself. I don't understand what gave you the 
fantastic idea of doing away with yourself. I never suggested it to you. 
It was you yourself who thought of it long before, and you told the 
members of the committee abroad about it before you said anything 
to me. And don't forget that they did not extort it from you ; they did 
not even know of your existence. You came to them yourself and told 
them all about it out of a feeling of sentimentality. Well, what's to be 
done if a certain plan of action, which cannot possibly be altered now, 
was founded upon that with your consent and at your own suggestion 
(your suggestion, mind you !)? You've put yourself in a position in 
which you knew too much. If you should happen to say something 
stupid and go to the police to-morrow, it might not be to our advan­
tage. What do you think ? No, sir. You can't do that. You've pledged 
yourself, you've given your word, you've taken money. That you 
can't possibly deny.' 
Peter got very excited, but Kirilov had long stopped listening to 
him. He was again pacing the room, lost in thought. 
' I'm sorry for Shatov,' he said, stopping before Peter again. 
'I suppose I am sorry for him, too, but surely -' 
' Shut up, you swine! '  Kirilov roared, making a terrible and un­
ambiguous movement. ' I'll kill you ! '  
'All right, all right! I told a lie. I'm not sorry for him at all. There, 
enough of this! '  Peter jumped up apprehensive! y, putting out his hand. 
Kirilov suddenly quieted down and began pacing the room again. 
'I won't put it off. It is now that I want to kill myself: they are all 
scoundrels ! ' 
'Well, that's an idea! Of course they are all scoundrels, and since to 
a decent fellow life's a loathsome business -' 
' Fool, I'm as big a scoundrel as you, as all, and not a decent fellow. 
There's never been a decent fellow anywhere.' 

610 
T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  THREE 
' So you've got it at last. How could you, Kirilov, with your in­
telligence, have failed to realize till now that all men are alike, that 
there aren't any better or worse, but that some men are more intelli­
gent and others more stupid, and that if all are scoundrels (which, 
incidentally, is nonsense) there can be no people who are not scoun­
drels ? '  
' Oh, so you really mean it? '  Kirilov said, looking at him with some 
surprise. ' You speak with heat and simply . . .  Can fellows like you 
have convictions ? '  
' Kirilov, I never could understand why you wanted to kil your­
self. Al I know is that you do it from conviction - firm conviction. 
But if you feel the need of, as it were, pouring out your heart, I'm at 
your service. Only you must think of the time.' 
' What's the time?' 
' Good Lord! two o'clock precisely,' Peter said, looking at his watch 
and lighting a cigarette. 
' It seems we can still come to an arrangement,' he thought to him­
self 
' I  have nothing to say to you,' Kirilov muttered. 
' I  remember there was something about God there - you explained 
to me once, even twice. If you shoot yourself, you'll become a god ­
that's it, isn't it? '  
'Yes, I'll become a god.' 
Peter did not even smile; he waited. Kirilov looked shrewdly at 
him. 
' You're a political humbug and intriguer. You want me to start a 
philosophical discussion and become carried away with enthusiasm, 
don't you ? You want to bring about a reconciliation so as to allay my 
anger and, when I'm reconciled with you, get me to write a note to 
say that I killed Shatov.' 
Peter replied with almost natural good-humour : 
'All right, suppose I am such a scoundrel, what difference does it 
make to you in your last moments, Kirilov ? What are we quarrelling 
about, for goodness sake? You're this sort of a man and I'm that sort 
of a man - what about it? And, moreover, both of us are -' 
' Scoundrels.' 
'Yes, scoundrels, if you like. You know perfectly well that that's 
only words.' 

A VERY B U S Y  N I G H T  
61 1 
'All my life I didn't want it to be only words. I went on living just 
because I didn't want it so. Now, too, I want it every day not to be 
words.' 
'Well, every one of us tries to find a place where it will be best for 
him. A fish - I  mean, every one seeks his own kind of comfort. That's 
al. That's been known for ages.' 
'Did you say comfort?' 
' Don't let's quarrel over words.' 
' No, you said well. Let it be comfort. God is necessary, and so must 
exist.' 
'Well, that's all right, then.' 
'But I know that He doesn't exist and can't exist.' 
'That's more likely.' 
'But don't you understand that a man with two such ideas cannot 
go on living?' 
'Has to shoot himself, you mean?' 
' Don't you understand that he might shoot himself for that alone? 
You don't understand that there mav be such a man, one man out of 
your thousands of millions, one who won't put up with it and who 
will not want to?' 
'All I understand is that you seem to be in two minds about it. 
That's very bad.' 
' Stavrogin, too, was eatm up by an idea,' Kirilov said, pacing the 
room gloomily and without noticing Peter's remark. 
'What?' Peter pricked up his ears. ' What idea? Did he tell you 
anything yourself?' 
'No, I guessed it myself. If Stavrogin believes in God, then he 
doesn't believe that he believes. And if he doesn't believe, then he 
doesn't believe that he doesn't believe.' 
'Well, Stavrogin has something else much wiser than that,' Peter 
muttered peevishly, following uneasily the new turn the conversation 
had taken and watching Kirilov's pale face. 
' Damn it, he won't shoot himself,' he thought. ' I  always knew it. 
A kink in his brain and nothing more. What a rabble!' 
'You're the last man to be with me: I shouldn't like to part on bad 
terms with you.' Kirilov suddenly made him a present. 
Peter did not reply at once. 'Damn it, what now?' he thought 
again. 

612 
THE DEVILS · PART THREE 
' Believe me, Kirilov, I have nothing against you personaly as a 
man, and I always -' 
' You're a scoundrel and a sophist. But I'm just as bad as you, and I 
shall shoot myself, but you will remain alive.' 
' You mean to say that I'm so mean that I want to go on being 
alive.' 
He could not yet make up his mind whether or not it would pay 
him to continue such a conversation at such a moment, and decided 
to ' be guided by circumstances'. But IGrilov's superior tone and his 
undisguised contempt for him had always irritated him, and now for 
some reason irritated him more than ever. That was perhaps because 
Kirilov, who was going to die in about an hour (Peter still counted on 
it), seemed to him, as it were, something like half a man, a sort of man 
who could not possibly be allowed to be aqogant. 
' You seem to be boasting to me because you are going to shoot 
yourself.' 
' It always surprises me that everybody goes on living,' IGrilov said, 
not hearing his remark. 
' Well, I suppose, it is an idea, but -' 
' You ape, you agreed with me because you want to get the better 
of me. Shut up ! you won't understand anything. If there is no god, 
then I am a god.' 
' I  could never understand that particular point of yours: why arc 
you a god?' 
' If there is a God, then it is always His will, and I can do nothing 
against His will. If there isn't, then it is my will, and I am bound to 
express my self-will.' 
' Self-will ? And why are you bound?' 
' Because all will has become mine. Is there no man on this planet 
who, having fmished with God and believing in his own will, will 
have enough courage to express his self-will in its most important 
point? It's like a beggar who has inherited a fortune and is afraid of it 
and does not dare to go near his bag of gold, thinking himself too 
weak to own it. I want to express my self-will. I may be the only one, 
but I'm going to do it.' 
' Do it! '  
' I'm bound to shoot myself, because the most important point of 
my self-will is to kil mysel£' 

A VERY B U S Y  N I G HT 
61 3 
'But you're not the only one to kill yourself. There are lots of 
suicides.' 
'Those have a motive. I'm the only one to do it without any 
motive, but simply of my own free will.' 
' He won't shoot himself,' the thought flashed through Peter's 
mind again. 
'You know what,' he observed irritably, ' to show my self-will, I 
should in your place have killed somebody else, and not myself. 
You'd be very useful to us then. I could tell you whom, if you're not 
afraid. Then you needn't shoot yourself to-day. We could come to 
terms.' 
'To kill someone else would be the least important point of my self­
will. Such a suggestion could only have come from a man like you. I 
am not you : I want the most important point, and I will kill myself.' 
'Got there at last without prompting,' Peter muttered spitefully. 
'I am bound to express my unbelief,' Kirilov went on, pacing the 
room. ' No higher idea than that there is no god exists for me. Man­
kind's history is for me. Al man did was to invent God so as to live 
without kiling himsel£ That's the essence of universal history till 
now. I am the only man in universal history who for the first time 
refused to invent God. Let them know it once for all.' 
' He won't shoot himself,' Peter thought uneasily. 
'Who's going to know it ?' he egged him on. 'There are only you 
and me here. Is it Liputin ?' 
' Let them all know; al will know. There is no secret that will not 
be made known. He said so.' 
And he pointed with feverish excitement at the icon of the Re­
<leemer, before which a lamp was burning. Peter got angry in good 
tamest. 
' So you still believe in Him, and you've even lighted the lamp. Not 
" in case" by any chance ?' 
Kirilov made no answer. 
' You know what ? I think that you believe perhaps more than any 
priest.' 
' In  whom? In Him ? Listen,' Kirilov went on, standing still and 
gazing before him with a motionless and frenzied look. ' Listen to a 
great idea: there was a day on earth, and in the middle of the earth 
were three crosses. One on the cross has such faith that He said to 

614 
T H E  D E V I L S  • P A R T  T H R EE 
another, "To-day thou shalt be with me in paradise." The day came 
to an end, both died, and they went, but found neither paradise nor 
resurrection. The saying did not come true. Listen : that man was the 
highest of all on earth, He was that for which it was created. The 
whole planet, with all that is on it, is sheer madness without that man. 
There has never been anyone like Him before or since, and never will 
be, not even by a miracle. For that is the miracle that there never was 
and never will be such a man as He. And if that is so, if the laws of 
nature did not spare even Him, if they did not spare their own miracle, 
and made even Him live in the midst oflies and die for a lie, then the 
whole planet is a lie and is based on a lie and a stupid mockery. So the 
very laws of the planet are a lie and a farce of the devil. What, then, is 
there to live for ?  Reply, if you're a man.' 
'That's a different matter. I can't help thinking that you've mixed 
up two different causes, and that's a dangerous thing to do. But, look 
here, what if you arc god? If the lie is no more, and you realized that 
the lie was merely because of your belief in that former god.' 
' So at last you understand ! '  Kirilov cried rapturously. ' So it can be 
understood if a man like you understands ! You understand now -
don't you ? - that the only salvation for all is to prove this idea to 
everyone. Who will prove it ? I! I cannot understand how an atheist 
could know that there is no god and not kill himself at once ! To real­
ize that there is no god and not to realize at the same instant that you 
have become god yourself - is an absurdity, for else you would cer­
tainly kill yourself. If you do realize it, you are a king and you will 
never kill yourself, but will live in the greatest glory. But he who is 
the first to realize it is bound to kill himself, for otherwise who will 
begin and prove it ? It is I who will most certainly kill myself to begin 
with and prove it. I am still only a god against my own will, and I am 
unhappy because I am bound to express my self-will. All are unhappy, 
because all arc afraid to express their self-will. The reason why man 
has hitherto been so unl1appy and poor is because he was afraid to ex­
press the main point of his self-will, but has expressed it only in little 
things, like a schoolboy. J am terribly unhappy because I'm terribly 
afraid. Fear is the curse of mankind. But I shall proclaim my self-will. 
I am bound to believe that I do not believe. I shall begin and end, and 
open the door. And I shall save. Only this will save mankind and will 
transform it physically in the next generation. For in his present 

A VERY B U S Y  N I G H T  
61 5 
tysical condition man cannot - as far as I can see - get along without 
s former God. For three years I've been searching for the attribute 
Р my divinity, and I've found it: the attribute of my divinity is -
:If-Will ! That's all I can do to prove in the main point my defiance 
td my new terrible freedom. For it is very terrible. I am killing my­
If to show my defiance and my new terrible freedom.' 
His face was unnaturally pale and his look unendurably mclan­
IOly. He was like a man in a high fever. For a moment Peter thought 
tat he would collapse. 
'Give me the pen ! '  K.irilov cried unexpectedly in a sudden onrush 
f inspiration. ' Dictate ! I'll sign everything. I'll sign that I killed 
natov, too. Dictate while I'm amused. I'm not afraid of the thoughts 
f supercilious slaves ! You'll see for yourself that al that is secret will 
e made plain. And you'll be crushed. I believe! I believe ! '  
Peter jumped up from his seat, in a trice put ink and paper before 
im, and began to dictate, seizing the right moment and trembling for 
1e success of his plan. 
'I, Alexey K.irilov, declare -' 
'Wait! Don't want to. Who am I declaring to? '  Kirilov shook as 
1ough he were in a fever. This declaration and some special, sudden 
lea about it seemed suddenly to have absorbed him entirely, as 
.10ugh it were some outlet which his tormented spirit had impctu­
·usly sought, if only for a moment. 
'Who am I declaring to ? I want to know to whom?' 
'To no one, to everyone, ilie fust man who reads it. Why be de­
[nitt about it ? To the whole world! '  
'To the whole world? Bravo ! And J don't want any repentance. I 
lon't want to repent. And I don't want it for ilie authorities.' 
'Of course not. That's not necessary. To hell with the authorities ! 
Jut go on, write, if you're in earnest! '  Peter cried hysterically. 
'Wait! I want a face with the tongue out on the top.' 
'Oh, what nonsense! '  Peter cried angrily. ' You can express it all 
llithout a picture by the tone alone.' 
· 'By ilie tone? That's good. Yes, by ilie tone. By the tone ! Dictate 
with the tone! ' 
'I, Alexey K.irilov,' Peter dictated in a firm and imperious voice, 
>ending over K.irilov's shoulder and following every letter which he 
:Ormed wiili a hand trembling wiili excitement, ' I, K.irilov, declare 

616 
THB DEVILS • PART THREE 
that to-day, the -th October, at about seven o'clock in the evening, 
killed the student Shatov in the park for turning traitor and giving iD 
formation about the political leafl.ets and Fedka, who has been lodgin; 
with us for ten days in Filippov's house, where he also spent the night 
I am shooting myself to-day with my revolver, not because I reped 
and am afraid of you, but because I made up my mind abroad to tak 
my life.' 
' Is  that al?' Kirilov cried, with surprise and indignation. 
'Not another word!' Peter declared, with a w:i.ve of the hand, cry 
ing to snatch the document from him. 
'Wait! '  Kirilov cried, putting his hand firmly on the paper. 'Wai1 
This is nonsense I I want to say with whom I kiled him. Why Fedka 
And what about the fire? I want everything, and I want to tell then 
off properly with the tone, the tone! '  
'It's quite enough, Kirilov,' Peter almost implored him, tremblinķ 
that he might tear the paper. 'I assure you that it is quite enough. Tĸ 
make them believe you, you must put it obscurely,just like that,jusl 
by hints. You must only give them the faintest hint of the truth, jus 
enough to whet their appetite. They will always tell a much talle1 
story than ours, and they wil of course believe themselves more that 
they would us. And that's much better. Much better! Come on, let' 
have ir: It's excellent as it is. Give it to me! Give it to me! '  
And he kept trying to snatch away the paper. Kirilov listened witl 
his eyes starting out of his head and apparently trying to make som1 
sense out of Peter's words, but he seemed incapable of understandinĹ 
anything. 
' Oh, damn it! '  Peter suddenly cried angrily. 'He hasn't signed i 
yet! What are you staring at me for? Sign !' 
' I  want to tell them off! '  Kirilov muttered, taking the pen, how 
ever, and signing. 'I want to tell them off.' 
'Write "Vive Ia republique ". That will be enough.' 
' Bravo! '  Kirilov almost roared with delight. ' " Vive Ia republiquν 
Jemocratique, sociale et universelle ou Ia mort!" No, no, that's wrong 
"Liberti, egalite,Jraternite ou Ia mort!" That's better, that's better! '  He 
wrote it with pleasure under his signature. 
'Enough, enough,' Peter repeated. 
'Wait, a little more. I'll sign again in French, you know. "J1 
Kiriloff, gentilhomme _russe et citoyen Ju monde." Ha, ha, hal' He burs; 

A VERY BUSY N I G H T  
617 
ut laughing. ' No, no, no. Wait! I've found something better . 
. ureka ! "Gentilhomme seminariste russe et citoyen du monde civilise!" 
'hat's better than any -' 
He jumped up quickly from the sofa and suddenly snatched up his 
̊volver from the window with a quick gesture, ran out with it to the 
ther room and shut the door tightly behind him. Peter stood still 
1oughrfully looking at the door. 
'If he does it now, he will shoot himself, but if he starts thinking, 
othing will come of it.' 
Meanwhile he picked up the paper, sat down, and read it over 
gain. The wording of the confession pleased him again. 
'What is it I want now ? I want to throw them into utter confusion 
Jr the rime, and so divert their attention. The park ? There is no park 
1 the town, so they'll soon guess it's Skvoreshniki. Till they get as far 
s that, time will pass, till they look for the body - more time will 
•ass, and when they find it, it will mean that the story is true, and 
hat, of course, means that everything is true and that it's true about 
;edka, too. And what does Fedka stand for? Why, Fedka stands 
or the fire, the Lebyatkins. This means that everything originated 
tere, at Filippov's house, and they knew nothing about it, they 
,verlooked it all - thar will throw them off the scent altogether! 
t will never occur to them to look for the group of five - Shatov 
md Kirilov, and Fedka, and Lebyatkin - and why they killed each 
)ther : that's another little mystery for them. Oh, damn, I don't hear 
he shot ! '  
Though he had been reading and admiring the wording, he had 
Jeen listening every moment with excruciating anxiety and - sud­
lenly he flew into a rage. He glanced at his watch uneasily. It was get­
:ing rather late, and that fellow had been gone for ten minutes. 
5eizing the candle, he went to the door of the room in which Kirilov 
nad shut himself up. As he reached rhe door, it suddenly occurred to 
h.im that the candle had practically burnt out and that it would go out 
in twenty minutes, and that there was no other candle in rhe room. 
He took hold of the door-handle and listened cautiously, but there 
was nor a sound to be heard. He suddenly opened the door and raised 
the candle: something uttered a roar and rushed at him. He slammed 
the door with all his might and put his shoulder against it, bur every­
thing was quiet - dead silence again. 

618 
THE DEVILS • PART THREE 
He stood for a long time with the candle in his hand, wonderin1 
what to do. In the second that he held the door open, he had heel 
able to see very little. He had, however, caught a glimpse of the fao 
of Kirilov, who stood by the window at the back of the room, and h 
remembered the savage fury with which Kirilov had suddenly rushc:l 
at him. Peter started, hastily put down the candle on the table, got hi 
revolver ready, and went on tiptoe to the farthest corner of the room 
so that if Kirilov opened the door and rushed up to the table witl1 th 
revolver, he would have time to take aim and pull the trigger befor 
Kirilov. 
By now Peter no longer believed that Kirilov would commi 
suicide. ' Standing in-the middle of the room, thinking,' it flashed Jik, 
a whirlwind through Peter's mind. 'The room, besides, was so darl 
and terrifying. . . .  He roared and rushed at me. There are two possi 
bilities: eimer I interfered with him at the moment when he wa 
about to pull the trigger or - or he was standing there planing hov 
to kill me. Yes, that's so. He was planning it. He knows that I won' 
go away before kiling him, if he is too cowardly to do it himselJ 
which means that he must kill me before I kill him. And again - aga.U 
mere is silence there! I feel really frightened: what if he should sud 
denly open the door? What is so beastly is that he believes in Goc 
more than a priest. He won't shoot himself for anything! There ar' 
hw1dreds of people like him "who have come to it by their OWl 
reason ". The swine ! Damnation ! The candle, the candle! It will mos 
certainly go out in a quarter of an hour. I must finish it! Must finish i 
at all costs. Well, I suppose he could be killed now. With that docu 
ment no one will think that I killļd him. I can put him in such a posi 
tion on the floor with the unloaded revolver in his hand that mey wil 
most certainly think that he did it himself. Damn it, how am I to kil 
him ?  Ifl open the door, he'll rush at me again and fire first. Hell, he' 
sure to miss ! ' 
So he thought, tormenting himself and trembling at the inevita· 
bility of his plan and at his own indecision. At last he took the candle 
and once more went up to me door, raising and getting ready his re· 
volver. With his left hand, in which he held the candle, he pressed or 
the handle. But he did it clumsily : the handle clicked, there was : 
noise and a creak. ' He'll fire straight away ! '  flashed through Peter': 
head. He flung the door open with his foot, raised me candle, and helc 

A VERY BUSY NIGHT 
619 
JUt the revolver. But there was no shot, nor cry. There was no one in 
:he room . .  
He gave a start. There was no other door in the room, no way of 
:scape. He raised the candle higher and examined the room more care­
idly: there was no one there. He called Kirilov softly, then louder, 
Jut there was no reply. 
'Has he escaped through the window ?' 
And, to be sure, the little ventilating window was open. 'It's ridi­
:ulous ! He couldn't have escaped through the little window.' Peter 
walked across the room straight to the window. ' He couldn't pos­
libly! '  Suddenly he turned round quickly, and something extraordin­
ary froze the blood in his veins. 
A cupboard stood against the wall opposite the windows to the 
right of the door. On the right of the cupboard, in the corner formed 
by the wal and the cupboard, stood Kirilov, and he was standing in a 
very curious attitude - rigid, erect, with his arms held stifly at his 
sides, his head raised and pressed hard against the wal in the very 
comer, as though he wanted to hide and efface himself. Everything 
seemed to show that he was hiding, but, somehow, it was difficult to 
believe it! Peter was standing a little sideways to the comer, and he 
could see only the protruding parts of the figure. He still could not 
make up his mind to move a little to the left to get a full view ofK.iri­
lov and solve the mystery. His head began throbbing violently. And 
suddenly he was overcome by a blind rage : he made a sudden dash 
and, shouting and stamping his feet, he rushed furiously to the horrible 
place. 
But before he reached it, he again stopped short, rooted to the 
ground, still more frozen with horror. What struck him most was 
tlut the figure never moved, in spite of his shout and mad rush: It 
never stirred a single limb, as though it were of stone or of wax. The 
pallor of its face was unnatural, its black eyes were quite motionless, 
staring fixedly at some point in the distance. Peter moved his candle 
up and down and up again, lighting the figure from every point and 
scrutinizing its face. Suddenly he noticed that though Kirilov was 
looking straight before him, he saw him out of the comer of his eyes 
and was perhaps even watching him. It then occurred to him to hold 
the candle right up to the face of ' the blackguard', to burn it and see 
what he would do. Suddenly he fancied that Kirilov's chin twitched 

620 
T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  T H R EE 
and that a mocking smile passed across his lips - as though he had 
guessed his thought. He shuddered and, beside himself gripped Kirilov 
by the shoulder. 
Then something so horrible happened, and so quickly, too, thal 
Peter could never afterwards get a coherent picture of it. As soon aˎ 
he touched Kirilov, the latter quickly lowered his head and knocked 
the candle out of Peter's hands. The candlestick fell on the floor with 
a clang and the candle went out. At the same moment he felt a terrible 
pain in the little finger of his left hand. He screamed, and all he could 
remember was that in his fury he had struck three resounding blows 
with his revolver on the head ofKirilov, who had bent down and bit­
ten his finger. At last he tore his fmger away and rushed headlong out 
of the house, groping his way in the dark. He was pursued by terrible 
shouts from the room : 
' Now, now, now, now ! . .  . '  
Ten times. But he was still running, and as he ran into the entrancˏ 
hall, he suddenly heard a loud shot. He stopped there in the darkness 
and stood thinking for five minutes; at last he went back into the 
room. But he had to get a candle. All he had to do was to look on the 
floor on the right of the cupboard for the candlestick which had been 
knocked out of his hand. But what was he going to light the candle­
end with? Then sudden) y a vague recollection flashed through his 
mind : he remembered that when he had run down into the kitchen 
to attack Fedka the day before, he had caught sight of a large red 
matchbox. He groped his way to the kitchen door on the left, went 
through the passage and down the steps. On the shelf, in the very 
place where he had just remembered seeing it, he felt in the dark a full, 
unopened box of matches. Without striking a light, he hurriedly went 
up the steps, and it was only when he reached the cupboard, at the 
spot where he had struck Kirilov with the revolver and had been bit­
ten by him, that he suddenly remembered his bitten finger and at the 
same moment felt that it hurt terribly. Clenching his teeth, he man­
aged to light the candle-end, put it back in the candlestick, and look 
round; Kirilov's body lay with its feet towards the right-hand corner 
of the room, near the open ventilation window. The shot had been 
fired at the right temple, and the bullet had come out at the top on the 
left side, piercing the skull. He saw splashes of blood and brains. The 
revolver was srill in the suicide's hand on the floor. Death must have 

A VERY B U S Y  N I G H T  
621 
=en instantaneous. Having examined everything with great care. 
eter got up and went out on tiptoe, closed the door, put the candle 
1 the table in the front room, thought it over, and decided not to put 
out, reflecting that it could not set the place on fire. Glancing once 
tore at the document on the table, he grinned mechanically, and only 
ten left the house, still for some reason walking on tiptoe. He crept 
trough Fedka's passage again and carefully covered it up behind 
im. 
3 
xactly at ten minutes to six Peter Verkhovensky and Erkel walked 
p and down the platform of the railway station beside a rather long 
:ain. Peter was leaving, and Erkel was seeing him off. The luggage 
ad been given in, his suit-case was taken to a second-class compare­
tent and placed on his reserved scat. The first bell had rung already, 
ad they were waiting for the second. Peter was looking round quite 
nabashed, watching the passengers getting into the train. There were 
o people he knew well among them ; only twice did he have to nod 
greeting, to a merchant he knew slightly and to a young country 
lergyman who was going back to his parish two stations away. Erkel 
vidently wanted to discuss a rather important matter with him during 
ile few remaining minutes, though perhaps he did not know himself 
vhat it was exactly; but he did not have the courage to begin. He felt 
ll the time that Peter Verkhovensky was fmding his company rather 
veari.some and was waiting impatiently for the last two bells. 
'You look at everyone so unabashed,' Erkel remarked a little 
imidly, as though wishing to warn him. 
'Why shouldn't I ?  The time hasn't come for me to go into hiding. 
roo soon. Don't worry. The only thing I'm afraid of is that the devil 
hould bring Liputin here. If he finds out, he'll be here in no time.' 
'None of them is reliable, sir,' Erkel declared firmly. 
'Liputin ?' 
'None of them.' 
'Nonsense! They are all bound by what happened yesterday. Not 
me of them would betray us. Who will run the risk of utter ruin 
mless he's lost his reason?' 
'But they will lose their reason, sir.' 

622 
THE DEVILS · PART THREE 
The idea had evidently already occurred to Peter, too, and that w 
why Erkel's remark angered him the more. 
'You're not getting cold feet, too, Erkel, are you? I rely on yc 
more than on any of them. I've seen now what each of them is wprǆ 
Give them my instructions by word of mouth to-day. I leave them a 
in your charge. Make a point of seeing them this morning. You ca 
read my written instructions to them to-morrow or the day aftǇ 
when you meet and when they are capable of listening - but, belie' 
me, they will be quite amenable by to-morrow because they'll be in 
terrible funk and become malleable as wax. Above all, don't you lo: 
courage.' 
' Oh, if only you weren't going away, sir ! '  
'But I'm only going away for a few days. I shall be back in n 
time.' 
' I  wouldn't mind,' Erkel said cautiously but resolutely, 'if you wei 
going to Petersburg. For, of course, I know that you are only dom: 
what is necessary for the common cause.' 
' I  didn't expect anything less from you, Erkel. If you've guesso 
that I'm going to Petersburg, you can understand that I couldn't poǈ 
sibly have told them yesterday, at that moment, that I was going so 
far for fear of frightening them. But you understand that I'm goin1 
for the cause, for a good and highly important reason, for our com 
mon cause, and not to do a bunk, as a fellow like Liputin rna: 
imagine.' 
'Why, even if you went abroad, I'd understand, sir. I should under 
stand that you have to take good care of yourself, because you'r, 
everything and we are nothing. I should understand, sir.' 
The poor boy's voice trembled. 
'Thank you, Erkel. Oh, you've touched my bad finger.' (Erkel ha< 
pressed his hand clumsily; the bad finger was conspicuously rice 
round with black silk.) 'But I'm telling you positively that I'm goin 
to Petersburg only to spy out the lay of the land, and that I shall prob­
ably be there only one day, after which I shall come back here at once 
For the sake of appearances, I shall stay at Gaganov's country house 
If they think that there is any danger, I shall be the first to share it witt 
mem. If, however, I have to stay longer in Petersburg, I shall let yol 
know at once - in the way you know, and you'll tell them.' 
The second bell rang. 

A VERY B U S Y  NIGHT 
623 
'Oh, that means there's only five minutes left before the train starts. 
shouldn't like your local group to break up, you know. Not that 
'm afraid of anything. You needn't worry about me. I've lots of such 
tnks in the chain, and I don't regard it as of any importance. But an 
dditional link can do no harm. However, I'm not worrying about 
·ou, though I'm leaving you almost alone with those horrors. Don't 
•e afraid. They won't go to the police. They won't dare. Hullo, 
•ou're going away, too, to-day? ' he cried suddenly in quite a diferent, 
heerful voice to a very young man who came up gaily to greet him. 
I didn't know you were going by the express, too. Where ? To your 
nother ?' 
The mother of the young man was a very wealthy landowner in a 
1eighbouring province, and the young man was a distant relative of 
ulia Lembke's who had been staying about a fortnight in our town. 
'No, I'm going farther than that. I'm olf to R-. I shall have to 
;pend eight hours in the train. Olf to Petersburg ?' the young man 
1sked with a laugh. 
'What made you think that I was going to Petersburg of all 
Jlaces ?' Peter asked, laughing even more openly. 
The young man wagged a gloved finger at him. 
'Well, yes, you've guessed right,' Peter whispered to him mysteri­
Jusly. ' I've got letters from Mrs Lembke, and I shall have to call on 
three or four influential gentlemen - you know whom I mean - damn 
'em, to be quite frank. A devilish job ! '  
'But why, tell me, is she in such a blue funk?' the young man 
whispered too. ' She wouldn't see me yesterday. I don't think she need 
worry about her husband. On the contrary, he collapsed so conspicu­
ously at the fire, as it were, ready to sacrifice his own life.' 
'Well, there it is,' Peter said with a laugh. ' You see, she's afraid that 
some people may have written from here already - I mean, certain 
gentlemen. In short, Stavrogin is at the bottom of it, or rather Prince 
K. Oh, it's a long story. I may be able to tell you something about it 
on the journey - as far as my chivalrous feelings wil allow, at least. 
This is a relative of mine, Second-Lieutenant Erkel, who is stationed 
in the country not far from here.' 
The young man, who had been squinting at Erkel, touched his hat. 
Erkel bowed. 
' But. really, Verkhovensky, eight hours in the train is an awful bore, 

T H E  D E V I L S · PART T H R EE 
you know. Colonel Berestov, an awfully amusing chap, owns the 
place next to ours, is travelling with me in the first class. Married a 
Garin (nee de Carine), and, you know, he is an awfully decent fellow. 
Got ideas, too. Been here only a couple of days. A terrible whist ad­
dict. We could get up a game, couldn't we? I've already got a fourth. 
Pripukhlov, our merchant from T-, big beard and all, a millionaire. 
I mean, a real millionaire. Take my word for it. I'll introduce him to 
you - a most interesting money-bag. We shall have a good laugh.' 
' With the greatest of pleasure. I'm very fond of a game of cards in 
the train, but I'm afraid I'm travelling second-class.' 
'That's easily arranged, my dear chap. Get in with us. I'll tell them 
to uke your things to the first class. The chief guard eats out of my 
hand. What have you got? A suit-case? A rug?' 
' Excellent, let's go.' 
Peter took his suit-case, his rug, and his book, and moved into the 
first-class compartment at once with the utmost enthusiasm. Erkel 
helped him. The third bell rang. 
' Well, Erkel,' Peter said, holding out his hand to him from the 
window for the last time, ' I'm sorry, but I have to sit down to cards 
with them. ' 
' Why bother to explain it to me, sir? I understand. I understand 
everything, sir.' 
' Well, in that case, so long,' Peter said, turning away suddenly on 
hearing himself addressed by the young man, who wanted to intro­
duce him to his partners. 
And Erkel never saw his Peter Verkhovensky again. 
He returned home very sad. Not that he was alarmed at being left 
so suddenly by Peter, but - but he had turned away from him so 
quickly when that young dandy had called him, and - and he could 
have said something different to him, and not just 'so long' or - he 
could at least have pressed his hand more cordially. 
It was the last thing that rankled. Something else was beginrung to 
gnaw at his poor hc:1rt - something he could not yet understand him­
self, something that was connected with the evening before. 

STEPAN VERKHO VENSKY ' s LAST PILGRIMAGE 
625 
7 
Stepan Verkhovensky' s Last Pilgrimage 
1 AM convinced that Stepan Verkhovensky was very much afraid 
when he realized that the time he had fixed for his mad enterprise was 
approaching. I am convinced that he suffered greatly from fear, especi­
ally on the night before he had set off- that terrible night. Nastasya 
mentioned to me afterwards that he had gone to bed late and that he 
had slept. But that does not prove anything; people sentenced to 
death, it is said, sleep very soundly even on the eve of their execution. 
Though he had left his house in daylight, when a nervous man is al­
ways more courageous {and the Major, Virginsky's relative, stopped 
believing in God as soon as the night was over), I am convinced that 
he could never have imagined himself alone on the highway without 
horror, and in such a condition, too. No doubt a certain feeling of des­
peration at first softened the blow of that terrible sensation of solitude 
in which he suddenly found himself as soon as he had left Stasie and 
the comfortable home in which he had spent twenty years. But that 
made no diference: however clearly he realized the horrors awaiting 
him, he would have gone out and taken to the road! There was a feel­
ing of pride in what he had undertaken that fascinated him in spite of 
everything. Oh, he could have accepted Mrs Stavrogin's magnificent 
conditions and have remained dependent on her charity 'comme un 
ordinary hanger-on! '  But he had not accepted her charity and had not 
remained. And now he left her himself and raised ' the baner of the 
great idea', and was going to die for it on the highway ! That is what 
he must have been feeling ; that was how his action must have appeared 
to him. 
Another question presented itself to me more than once: why did 
he have to run away - that is, literally run away on foot, and not 
simply drive away in a carriage? At first I explained it by the imprac­
ticability of fifty years and by the fantastic bent of his mind under the 
influence of strong emotion. I could not help feeling that the idea of 
ordering fresh post-horses and carriages (even if they had harness­
bells) would have appeared too simple and prosaic to him; a pilgrim­
age, on the other hand, albeit with an umbrella, was much more 

626 
T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  T H R E E  
picturesque and much more expressive o f  love and revenge. But now 
that everything is at an end, I can only suppose that it all happened 
much more simply. To begin with, he was afraid to hire horses be­
cause Mrs Stavrogin might have got wind of it and kept him back by 
force, which she would most certainly have done, and he would have 
certainly complied and then - farewell the great idea for ever! Again, 
to give an order for post-horses one has at least to know where one is 
going. But the thing that worried him most at that moment was that 
he had not the faintest idea where he was going. For if he had made up 
his mind to go to a certain city, his enterprise would have appeared 
both absurd and impossible in his eyes. He had a strong feeling that it 
would be so. For what on earth would he do in that particular city, 
and why not another ?  To look for ce marchand? But what marchand? 
Here again the second and most terrible question cropped up. For, as 
a matter of fact, there was nothing he dreaded more than ce marchand, 
whom he set off to fmd so suddenly and in such haste and whom he 
was in reality very terrified of finding. No, the highway was much 
better. Simply walk along it without thinking of anything for as long 
as he could refrain from thinking. The highway is something that goes 
on for miles and miles and miles, stretching endlessly ahead, like a 
man's life, like a man's dream. There is an idea in the open road ; but 
what sort of idea is there in an order for post-horses ? An order for 
post-horses is the end of an idea. Vive Ia grande route, and what happens 
then is in the lap of the gods. 
After the sudden and unexpected meeting with Lisa which I have 
described, he walked on in greater self-oblivion than ever. The road 
passed within half a mile ofSkvoreshniki, and - strange to say - at fmt 
he did not even notice how he had got on it. At that moment he 
could not bear to think rationally or to give himself a full account of 
his actions. A fine rain kept falling, stopping, and falling again; but he 
did not even notice the rain. Nor did he notice how he threw his bag 
over his shoulder, and how much easier it was to walk like that. After 
walking a mile or so, he suddenly stopped and looked round. The old 
road, black and full of deep ruts left by wheels and planted with wil­
lows on each side, stretched before him like an endless thread; on the 
right were bare fields covered with stubble after the harvest, on the 
left there were bushes, and beyond them a wood. And in the distance 
- in the distance was the scarcely perceptible line of the railway run-

S T E P A N  V E R K H O VE N S KY ' S L A S T  P I L G R I M A G E  
627 
ng slantwise, and on it the smoke of a train, but no sound was heard. 
lr Verkhovensky felt a little afraid, but only for a moment. He sighed 
1guely, put down his bag beside a willow, and sat down to rest. As 
: was sitting down, he felt shivery and wrapped himself in his rug; 
:coming aware of the rain, he put up his umbrella. He sat like that 
1r some time, occasionally muttering to himself, and grasping tl1e 
andle of the umbrella firmly in his hand. Various images passed in a 
:verish file before him, quickly succeeding each other in his mind. 
Jse, Lise,' he thought, 'and with her ce Maurice .
. . .  Strange people . 
. But what was that strange fire there, and what were they talking 
bout, and who were murdered? I expect Stasie has not yet had time 
) fmd out and is still waiting for me with my coffee . . . .  At cards? 
>id I really lose men at cards? Well - in Russia during the so-called 
eriod of serfd01:n . . . .  Dear me, and Fedka?' 
He gave a violent start wim terror and looked round him: 'What 
৲mat Fedka is crouching somewhere behind those bushes? They say 
te has a whole band of robbers on the highway. Oh dear, I shall then ­
shall then tell him the whole truth - I shall tell him that I was to 
,lame and - and that I was greatly distressed for ten years on his ac­
:ount, much more than he was as a soldier and - and I shall give him 
ny purse. H'm !  j'ai en tout quarante roubles; il prendra les roubles et il 
ne tuera tout de me me.' 
In his panic he shut his umbrella for some unknown reason and 
)Ut it down beside him. A cart appeared in the distance on the road 
rom the town; he began watching it in dismay. 
'Grace a Dieu, it's a cart, and it's coming slowly. That can't be dan­
৳erous. Those arc local foundered horses. I always said that breed -
[t was Peter Uyich, though, who talked at the club about horse-breed­
ng and I mulcted him, et puis, but there is something behind that cart 
and - yes - I believe mere's a peasant woman in it. A peasant woman 
and a peasant - cela commence a hre rassurant. The woman behind and 
me peasant in front, c' est rassuraut au plus haul degre.' 
The cart came alongside; it was a fairly well-built and decent-look­
ing peasant cart. The woman was sitting on a well-stuffed sack, and 
the peasant on the seat in front of the cart with his feet hanging down 
sideways towards Mr V erkhovensky. A red cow was indeed jogging 
along behind, tied by the horns to the cart. The peasant and the woman 
stared at Mr Verkhovensky, and Mr Verkhovensky stared back at 

THE D EVILS · PART THRBB 
them, but after they had gone on twenty paces, he suddenly got UJ 
hurriedly and tried to overtake them. 
I 
It looked safer to him in the proximity of the cart, but having ovet 
taken it, he again forgot al about it and became once more absorbe1 
in the fragments of thoughts and images which floated through hi 
mind. He walked on without suspecting, of course, that to the twc 
people in the cart he presented at that moment as mysterious anc 
interesting an object as one could meet on the road. 
'Who might you be, sir, if you don't mind my asking ?' the wornĽ 
could not resist saying at last, when Mr Verkhovensky suddenl) 
looked up at her absent-mindedly. 
The peasant woman was about twenty-seven, black-browed anc 
red-cheeked, with a friendly smile ou her red lips, between whicl 
gleamed two rows of white even teeth. 
'Are you - are you addressing me ?' Mr Verkhovensky murmureľ 
with mournful surprise. 
'A merchant, I daresay,' the peasant remarked confidently. 
He was a tall, well-built man of forty, with a broad and intelligen1 
face and with a large reddish beard. 
'No, I'm not really a merchant - I - I - moi c'est d'autre chose,' Ml 
Verkhovensky parried the question somehow, and, to be on the safĿ 
side, lagged behind a little to the back of the cart so that he was walk­
ing alongside the cow. 
' Must be a gentleman, then,' the peasant decided, hearing words in 
a foreign language, and gave a tug at the horse. 
' No wonder we was looking at you, sir. Are you out for a walk?' 
the young peasant woman asked, unable to suppress her curiosity. 
'Are you - are you asking me?' 
' Foreigners sometimes come here by train, and your boots, sir, 
don't seem to be from our local shops.' 
'Army boots those be,' the peasant put in complacently and 
gravely. 
'No, not really army boots, I'm -' 
'What an inquisitive female,' Mr Verkhovensky reflected irritably. 
'And how they stare at me - mais enfin. In a word, it is strange that I 
should feel as if I'd done something wroug to them, while I've done 
them no harm.' 
The woman began whispering something to the man. 

S TEPAN VERKHOVENSKY ' s L A S T  P I L G R I M A G E  
629 
'Excuse me, sir, but if you'd like we'd give you a lift.' 
Mr Verkhovensky suddenly recollected himself. 
'Thank you, thank you, my friend. I'd be very glad of a lift because 
am very tired, but how am I to get in ?' 
'How strange it is,' he thought to himself, ' that I've been walking 
;o long beside that cow and it never occurred to me to ask them for a 
ift. This " real life" has something very characteristic about it.' 
The peasant, however, did not pull up the horse at once. 
'And where are you going to, sir ?' he asked, a little mistrustfully. 
Mr Verkhovensky did not get his meaning at once. 
'To Khatovo, I suppose ?' 
'To Khatov ? No, not really to Khatov. I don't think I know him 
very well, though I have heard of him.' 
'The village of Khatovo, sir. Seven miles from here.' 
'A village? C' est charm ant. Yes, I've heard of it, of course.' 
Mr Verkhovensky was still walking, and they stil did not put him 
on the cart. A wonderful idea flashed through his mind. 
' You don't think I am - er - I've got a passport and I'm a professor 
- I mean, a teacher, if you like. A head teacher. Oui, c'est comme ra 
qu' on peut traduire. I'd be very glad of a lift and - er - I'll buy you - I'll 
buy you a pint of vodka for it.' 
- ' It'll be fifty copecks, sir. It's a bad road.' 
' Or it wouldn't be fair to ourselves, would it, sir ?' the woman put in. 
' Fifty copecks ? Oh, all right, fifty copecks. C' est eucore mieux, j' ai 
en tout quarante roubles, mais -' 
The peasant pulled up, and Mr Verkhovensky was dragged into the 
cart by their joint efforts and seated on a sack beside the young woman. 
His head was still in a whirl. At times he felt himself that he was ter­
ribly absent-minded and was not thinking of what he ought to be 
thinking, and he was amazed at it. This consciousness of the morbid 
weakness of his mind became very painful to him and even hurt his 
feelings. 
'What - what's this behind? A cow ?' he suddenly asked the young 
woman. 
'Why, sir, haven't you ever seen one?' laughed the woman. 
' Bought it in the town,' the peasant interposed. ' Our own cattle 
died in the spring, you see, sir. The plague. All of 'em went down 
with it. Not half of them left. Enough to make you cry, sir.' 

630 
THE D E V I L S · P A R T  T H R E E  
And he whipped the horse, which got stuck in a rut again. 
' Yes, that's the sort of thing that happens in Russia - and, generally, 
we Russians - well, yes, that's what happens,' Mr Verkhovensky 
broke off 
' If you're a teacher, sir, then what are you going to Khatovo for? 
Or arc you thinking of going farther?' 
' I  - I mean, I'm not particularly anxious to go any farther - c
' est a 
dire - I'm going to a merchant's.' 
' To Spasov, is it?' 
' Yes, yes, that's right. To Spasov. But it doesn't matter, really.' 
' If you're going to Spasov, sir, and on foot, too, it would take you 
a week in them boots of yours,' laughed the young woman. 
' That's right, and it doesn't really matter, mes amis, it doesn't mat­
ter,' Mr Verkhovensky broke off impatiently. 
' Frightfully inquisitive people ! '  he thought. 'The young woman, 
though, speaks better than he does, and I notice that since their eman­
cipation of February 19th their language has changed a little and - and 
what does it matter to me whether I'm in Spasov or not in Spasov ? 
However, I'll pay them, so why do they pester me ?' 
' If it's Spasov, sir, you want, you'll have to go by the steamer,' the 
peasant persisted. 
' That's quite true, sir,' the yowtg woman put in animatedly. ' If you 
go by carriage along the bank, It's twenty-five miles more.' 
' Forty more likely.' 
' You'll just be in time to catch the steamer in Ustyevo at two 
o'clock to-morrow,' the young woman clinched the matter. 
But Mr Verkhovensky fell silent obstinately. His questioners fell 
silent, too. The peasant tugged at the horse; the woman exchanged 
short remarks with him from time to time. Mr Verkhovensky dozed 
off He was very surprised when the young woman, laughing, woke 
him by shaking him vigorously and he found himself in a rather large 
village at the entrance of a cottage with three windows. 
' Have you had a nap, sir?' 
' What's that? Where am I ?  Oh well, never mind,' sighed Mr Verk­
hovensky and got off the cart. 
He gazed round him sorrowfully. The village looked strange and 
terribly outlandish to him. 
' I've quite forgotten the fifty copecks,' he addressed the peasant 

STEPAN VERKHOVENSKY ' s LAST PILGR I M A GE 
63 I 
Nith a sort of incongruously hurried gesture; he was evidently afraid 
>f parting from them. 
'We'll settle indoors, sir. Come in, please,' the peasant invited him. 
'It's nice inside,' the young woman encouraged him. 
Mr. Verkhovensky walked up the rickety steps. 
'But how is it possible?' he whispered in great and apprehensive 
?erplexity, going into the cottage, however. 'Elle 1' a voulu.' Some­
thing seemed to stab at his heart, and he again suddenly forgot every­
thing, even the fact that he had gone into the cottage. 
It was a light and fairly clean peasant's cottage, with three windows 
and two rooms. It was not an in, but just a cottage at which people 
familiar with the place stopped when passing through the village. Mr 
Verkhovensky went straight to the comer of the room reserved for 
visitors without showing any embarrassment. He forgot to greet the 
people, sat down and fell into a reverie. Meanwhile an extremely 
pleasant sensation of warmth after spending three hours in the damp 
air suddenly spread al over his body. Even the feverish chill which 
ran in shivery spasms down his spine, as always happens in a fever, 
especially with nervous people, suddenly became agreeable to him as 
he came into a warm room from the cold. He raised his head, and the 
delicious smell of hot pancakes with which the woman of the house 
was busy at the stove tickled his nostrils. He smiled a child-like smile 
and leaned over to the woman. 
'What's that?' he suddenly murmured. ' It is pancakes ? Mais - c'esl 
charmant.' 
'Would you like some, sir ? '  the woman politely offered him some 
at once. 
'I would, indeed I would,' Mr V erkhovensky said, brightening up. 
'And - and I'd like some tea, too, ifl may.' 
' Shall I put on the .!amovar, sir ? With pleasure, sir.' 
The pancakes were served on a large plate with a big blue pattern -
the famous country pancakes, thin, made half of wheat-flour, covered 
with fresh hot butter - most delicious pancakes! Mr Verkhovcnsky 
tasted them with relish. 
'How rich and how nice they are! And if only I could have u11 doigt 
d' eau de vie.' 
'I beg your pardon, sir ? Is it vodka you'd like?' 
'Yes, yes, just a drop. Un tout petit rien.' 

6p 
T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  T H R E E  
' Five copecks' worth, sir ? '  
' Yes, just five, five, five, un tout petit rien,' Mr Verkhovensky 
assented with a blissful little smile. 
Ask a man of the lower classes to do something for you, and, if he 
can only do so, he will do it conscientiously and with great cordiality; 
but ask him to fetch some vodka, and his customary serene cordiality 
is suddenly transformed into a sort of hurrierl and joyful desire to 
oblige you, almost into a warm-hearted solicitude for you. The man 
who goes to fetch your vodka - though it is only you who are going 
to drink it and not he, and he knows it beforehand - seems to feel as 
though he were to share in your gratification. In less than three or 
four minutes (the pub was only a few yards away) a half-pint bottle 
with a large greenish glass stood before Mr Verkhovensky. 
' Is all that for me ? '  he cried in great surprise. ' I've always had vod­
ka, but I never knew that you could get such a lot for five copecks.' 
He filled his glass, got up and with a certain solemnity, crossed the 
room to the other corner where his companion on the sack, the black­
browed peasant woman, whose questions had annoyed him so much, 
had seated herself. The young woman looked embarrassed and would 
not accept it at first, but having said al that was required of her by 
custom, she stood up and drank it decorously in three sips, as women 
do, and gave back the glass and bowed to Mr Verkhovensky with an 
expression of extreme suffering on her face. He returned the bow 
solemnly and went back to the table looking very proud. 
All this took place on the spur of the moment; a second before he 
did not know himself that he would go and treat the young peasant 
woman to a glass of vodka. 
' I  have a real genius for dealing with the common people, and I've 
always told them so,' he thought complacently, pouring out the 
vodka that was left in the bottle; though there was less than a glass, 
the vodka revived and warmed him and even went to his head a 
little. 
'je suis malade tout a fait, mais ce n' est pas trop mauvais d' etre malade.' 
'Would you care to buy, sir ?' a gentle woman's voice asked beside 
him. 
He raised his eyes, and to his surprise saw a lady standing before 
him - une dame et elle e11 avait /'air - a lady of over thirty, very modest 
in appearance, dressed like a townswoman in a darkish gown with a 

S TE P A N V E R K H O VE N S KY ' S L A S T  P I L G R I M A GE 
63 3  
large grey shawl on her shoulders. There was something very friendly 
in her face which at once appealed to Mr Verkhovensky. She had only 
just this minute come back to the cottage, in which she had left her 
things on a bench close by the place where Mr Verkhovensky was sit­
ting. Among them was a brief-case, at which, he recalled, he had 
glanced curiously, and a not very large bag of American cloth. From 
this bag she took out two beautifully bound books with a cross en­
graved on the covers and offered them to Mr Verkhovensky. 
'Eh - mais je crois que c' est I' Evangile - with the greatest of pleasure . 
. . . Oh, I understand now. Vous etes ce qu' 011 appelle a gospel woman. 
I've read about it more than once. Fifty copecks ? '  
'Thirty-five copecks,' replied the gospel woman. 
'With the greatest of pleasure. Je n' ai riett contre l'Evaugile et - I've 
been wanting to read it again for a long time.' 
The thought flashed through his mind at that moment that he had 
not read the gospel for thirty years at least ancl that perhaps only seven 
years before he had recalled a little from it when reading Renan's Vie 
de ]fsus. As he had no small change on him, he pulled out his four ten­
rouble notes - all that he had. The landlady undertook to get change, 
and it was only then that he noticed, as he looked round the room, 
that a good many people had come into the cottage and that all of 
them had been watching him for some time and, he thought, talking 
about him. They were also discussing the fire in the town, most of all 
the owner of the cow, for he had only just returned from there. They 
were talking of arson and the Spigulin workmen. 
' He never said a word to me about the fire when he was bringing 
me herl", and yet he talked of everything,' it occurred to Mr Verkho­
vensky for some reason. 
' Stepan Trofnnovich, sir, is it you I see? I'd never have expected to 
meet you here! Don't you know me, sir ? '  cried an elderly man, who 
looked like an old serf servant, with a shaven beard and wearing a 
greatcoat with a long reversible collar. 
Mr Verkhovensky got frightened when he heard his name. 
'I'm sorry,' he murmured, ' I'm afraid I don't quite remember 
you.' 
'You must have forgotten, sir. Why, I'm Anisim - Anisim Ivanov. 
I used to be in the service of the late Mr Gaganov, and I've seen you, 
sir, and Mrs Stavrogin many times at the late Mrs Gaganov's. I used 

634 
THE DEVILS . PART THREE 
I 
to go to you with books from her and I brought Petersburg sweets! 
twice from her to you, sir.' 
' Oh, yes, I remember you, Anisim,' smiled Mr Verkhovensky. 'Do 
you live here?' 
'I live near Spasov, sir, in the vilage close to the V- monastery. 
I'm in the service of the late Mrs Gaganov's sister, Marfa Sergeyevna. 
Perhaps you remember her, sir. She broke a leg jwnping out of her 
carriage on the way to a ball. Now she lives near the monastery, and 
I'm in her service. And I'm on my way to the town now, you see, sir, 
to visit my relations.' 
' Oh, yes, yes.' 
'I was very pleased to see you, sir. You were always so kind to me,' 
Anisim declared, smiling happily. 'And where are you going toĽ sir, 
like that all by yourself, it seems ? I don't think you've ever gone on a 
journey alone before, have you, sir?' 
Mr Verkhovensky looked at him timidly. 
' Not to us by any chance, sir? To Spasov ?' 
' Yes, I'm going to Spasov. II me semble que tout le monde va a 
Spasof .. .' 
' Not to Fyodor Matveyevich's, sir? He will be pleased to see you. 
He used to respect you very much in the old days, sir. Often speaks of 
you now,. he does.' 
' Yes, yes, to Fyodor Matveyevich's.' 
'I see, sir. So that's why the peasants here are wondering about you, 
sir. They seem to think they saw you walking on the road. A stupid 
lot they are, sir.' 
' You see, Anisim, I - I wagered, like the Englishmen do, that I 
would walk on foot and I -' 
Beads of perspiration stood out on his forehead. 
' I  sec, sir, I see.' Anisim listened to him with pitiless curiosity. 
But Mr Verkhovensky could bear it no longer. He was so embar­
rassed that he felt like getting up and walking out of the cottage. But 
they brought the samovar, and at that moment the gospel woman, who 
had gone out for something, came back. Anisim gave in and walked 
away. 
The peasants were indeed greatly puzzled: ' What. sort of person is 
he? Found walking on the highway, says he is a teacher, dresses like a 
foreigner, and has no more sense than a little child, gives funny an-

STE P A N  V E R K H O VE N S KY ' s L A S T  P I L G RI M A GE 
63 5  
.wers, as though he has run away from someone, and he has got 
noney ! '  They were even proposing to inform the police, particularly 
ts things were not very quiet in the town. But Anisim put things right 
n a moment. He went into the passage and told everyone who cared 
:o listen that Mr Verkhovensky was not just a teacher but ' a  great 
;cholar engaged in learned studies, and he used to be a local land­
:>wner himself, and has been living for the last twenty-two years in 
the house of Mrs Stavrogin, the wife of an army general, and was the 
most important person there, and greatly respected by everybody in 
the town. He used to lose fifty- and hundred-rouble notes at the 
Gentlemen's Club in one evening, and he was a Councillor by rank, 
which is the same as a lieutenant-colonel in the army, only one rank 
lower than a full colonel. As for his having money, he gets lots of 
money through Mrs Stavrogin,' etc., etc. 
'Mais c'est rme dame et tres comme ilfaut,' Mr Verkhovensky thought, 
resting after Anisim' s attack and watching with agreeable curiosity the 
gospel woman, who was, however, drinking her tea in not quite a 
lady-like fashion from a saucer and with a lump of sugar in her mouth. 
'Ce petit morceau du sucre, ce n' est rien. There is something noble and in­
dependent and, at the same time, gentle about her. Le comme il faut 
tout pur, but rather of a different sort.' 
He soon found out from her that her name was Sophia Matveyevna 
Ulitin and that she really lived at K-, where she had a sister, a widow, 
who had been married to an artisan; she was a widow too, and her 
husband, a second-lieutenant who had been a sergeant before he re­
ceived his commission, had been killed at Sebastopol. 
' But you're still so young, vous n' avez pas trente ans.' 
'Thirty-four,' Mrs Ulitin said with a smile. 
' Do you understand French? '  
' A  little. After my husband's death I lived for four years in a gentle­
man's house and picked it up from the children.' 
She told him that she was only eighteen when her husband was 
killed, that she was for some time in Sebastopol as a nurse, and that 
after that she lived in different places, and was now travelling about 
selling the gospel. 
'Mais mon Dieu, wasn't it with you that that queer, that very queer 
story happened in our town?' 
She blushed; it turned out that it was she. 

THE DEVILS • PART THRBB 
'Ces vauriens, ces malhereux!' he began in a voice trembling with 
indignation; the painful and hateful recollection sent a pang through 
his heart. For a moment he seemed lost in thought. 
' Good Lord! she's gone away again,' he thought, recollecting him­
self with a start and noticing that she was no longer sitting beside him. 
' She keeps going in and out, and seems to be busy with something. I 
can see that she seems to be worried, too. Bah,je deviens egoiste!' 
He raised his eyes and saw Anisim, but this time in most threatening 
surroundings. The cottage was full of peasants, and it was evidently 
Anisim who had brought them there. The owner of the cottage was 
there, too, and the peasant who owned the cow, rwo other peasants 
(they turned out to be coachmen), another little man, half drunk, and 
dressed like a peasant, though clean-shaven, who looked like an artisan 
ruined by drink and who talked more than any of them. And al of 
them were talking about him, Stepan Verkhovensky. The peasant 
with the cow persisted that to go by road would mean a journey of 
more than thirty-five miles, and that he most certainly must go by 
steamer. The half-drunk artisan and the master of the house contested 
his point warmly. 
"Cause, you see, if the gentleman goes by steamer across the lake, 
it'll be nearer all right. There ain't nobody saying nothing against it. 
But the trouble is the steamer don't go there, not at this time of the 
year - see ?' 
' It does, it does, it does go there for another week,' cried Anisim, 
who seemed to be more excited than any of them. 
'Aye, so it does. But it don't come punctual like, seeing as how it 
is so late in the season. It has to wait three days in Ustyevo some­
times.' 
'It will be here to-morrow, at rwo o'clock sharp. You'll be in 
Spasov before evening, sir,' Anisim raged. 
'Mais qr/est ce qu'il a, cet homme?' Mr Verkhovensky cried in trepida­
tion, waiting in terror for what they were going to do with him. 
It was now the coachmen's turn to join in the argument. They be­
gan to bargain with him. They demanded three roubles to Ustyevo. 
The others shouted that that was the right fare, and that they had been 
driving to Ustyevo all summer for that price. 
' But - er - it's nice here, too,' Mr Verkhovensky mumbled. 'And 
I don't want to -' 

STEPAN VBRKHOVENSKY ' s LAST PILGRIMAGE 
6 37 
'Aye, sir, you're quite right. It's very nice in Spasov, and Fyodor 
Matveyevich will be pleased to see you.' 
'Mon Dieu, mes amis, this is such a surprise to me.' 
At last Mrs Ulitin came back. But she sat down on the bench look­
ing sad and dejected. 
' I  will never get to Spasov ,' she said to the woman of the house. 
' Why, are you going to Spasov, too ? '  Mr Verkhovensky asked 
with a start. 
It turned out that a lady had told her the day before to wait for her 
in Khatovo, promising to drive her to Spasov, but she had not come. 
' What am I going to do now ? '  Mrs Ulitin kept repeating. 
'Mais, ma chere et nouvelle amie, I can take you there just as well as 
that lady of yours, to that village, whatever it is, to which I've hired a 
carriage, and to-morrow - why, to-morrow we'll go on to Spasov 
together.' 
'Are you going to Spasov too ?' 
'Mais, que Jaire, et je suis enchante! I shall be delighted to take you 
there. They want to take me, and I have already hired them. Which 
of you have I hired ?' Mr Verkhovensky asked, suddenly overcome by 
an intense desire to go to Spasov. 
A quarter of an hour later they got into a covered cart; he very 
lively and completely satisfied, she with her pack and a grateful smile 
beside him. Anisim helped them in. 
'A good journey to you, sir,' he said, bustling round the cart. ' It's 
been a great pleasure to see you, sir.' 
'Good-bye, my friend, good-bye, good-bye!' 
'You'll see Fyodor Matveyevich, sir.' 
'Yes, my friend, yes - Fyodor Matveyevich - good-bye now.' 
2 
'You see, my friend - you will let me call you my friend, n' est-ce pas? ' 
Mr Verkhovensky began hurriedly the moment the cart started. 'You 
see, I -]' aime le peuple, c' est indispensable, mais il me semble que je ne 
I' avais jamais vu de pres. Stasie - cela va sans dire qu' elle est aussi le 
peuple - mais le vrai peuple, the true ones, I mean, the ones you meet 
on the road, it seems to me that all they are interested in is where 
exactly I am going. But let's drop all this unpleasant business. I 

T H E  D E V I LS · P A R T  T H R EE 
believe I'm talking nonsense, but that's only because I'm talking so 
fast.' 
' You seem to be ill, sir,' Mrs Ulitin said, watching him narrowly 
but respectfully. 
' No, no. I must only wrap myself up, and, besides, there's a fresh 
wind blowing, a very fresh wind ; but never mind that. That's not 
what I meant to say really. Chere et incomparable amie, I think I'm al­
most happy, and you're the cause of it. Happiness doesn't pay me, 
because I start at once forgiving all my enemies . . . .' 
'Why, that's very good, sir.' 
' Not always, chere innocente. L'Evangile - Vous voyez, desormais nous 
le precherons ensemble, and I shall gladly sell your beautiful little books. 
Yes, I must say it is rather an idea, que/que chose de tres nouveau dans ce 
genre. The common people are religious, c'est admis, but they don't yet 
know the gospel. I will expound it to them. By expounding it to 
them verbally it is possible to correct the errors of that remarkable 
book, which, of course, I shall treat with the utmost respect. I will be 
useful to you even on the road. I've always been useful. I always told 
them that et a cette chere ingrate. Oh, let us forgive, let us forgive ; first 
of all let us forgive all and always. Let us hope that we, too, shall be 
forgiven. Yes, because all, every one of us, have wronged one an­
other. We are all guilty ! '  
' That, I think, you said that very well, sir.' 
'Yes, yes. I feel that I'm speaking well. I shall speak to them very 
well, but - what was it I was going to say ? It was something impor­
tant. I keep losing the thread and I cannot remember. You won't let 
me part from you, will you ? I feel that the way you look at me and ­
and I can't help being surprised at your manners : you're so simple­
hearted, you call me " sir", and you pour your tea from the cup into 
the saucer, and - and that horrid lump of sugar. But there is some­
thing delightful about you, and I can see from your features - Oh, 
don't blush, and don't be afraid of me as a man. Chere et incomparable, 
pour moi unefemme c'est tout. I can't live without a woman at my side, 
but only at my side . . . .  Oh, I'm afraid, I'm awfully confused. I can't 
remember what I was going to say. Oh, blessed is he to whom God 
always sends a woman and - and, I think, indeed, that I am a little too 
excited. And there's a great idea in the open road, too ! That's - that's 
what I was going to say - about the idea. I've remembered it now, but 

S T E P A N  V E R K H O V E N S K Y ' s L A S T  P I L G R I M A GE 
639 
I kept losing it. And why have they taken us farther? It was very nice 
there too, but here - cela devient trop froid. A propos,}' ai en tout quarante 
roubles et voila cet argent. Take it. Please, take it. I don't know how to 
take care of it. I'm sure to lose it. It will be taken away from me and ­
I think I'm going to fall asleep. My head's swimming. It's going 
round and round and round. Oh, how kind you are ! What is it you're 
wrapping me up with ?' 
'I'm afraid, sir, you're feverish, and I've covered you with my 
blanket. Only about the money, sir, I'd rather -' 
' Oh, for heaven's sake, n'en parlons plus, parce que cela me fait mal. 
Oh, how kind you are ! '  
He stopped talking rather abruptly and very soon fell into a feverish, 
shivery sleep. The country road by which they travelled the twelve 
miles was far from smooth, and the carriage jolted terribly. Mr Verk­
hovensky woke up frequently, raised his head quickly from the little 
pillow which Mrs Ulitin had slipped under it, and asked, 'Are you 
here ?' as though he were afraid that she would leave him. He also told 
her that he dreamt of gaping jaws full of teeth and that it made him 
feel very horrid. Mrs Ulitin was greatly worried about him. 
The coachmen brought them straight to a large cottage with fom 
windows and other small cottages in the courtyard. Mr Verkhoven­
sky woke up and went straight into the second room, the best and 
most spacious room of the house. His sleepy face assumed a most fussy 
expression. He at once explained to the woman of the house, a tall and 
thick-set woman of forty with very black hair and almost with a 
moustache, that he required the whole room for h.imsel£ 
' Shut the door, please,' he ordered, ' and don't let anyone in, parce 
que tlOUS avons a parler. Oui,j' ai beaucoup a vous dire, chere amie. I'll pay 
you, I'll pay you ! '  He waved his arms at the woman. 
Though he was in a hurry, he seemed to speak with difficulty. The 
woman listened with an ungracious air, but was silent to signify assent, 
but there was a feeling of something menacing in her silence. He did 
not notice anything, however, and demanded hurriedly (he seemed to 
be in an awful hurry) that she should leave them and get some dinner 
ready for them, ' without a moment's delay'. 
At that point the woman with the moustache could restrain herself 
no longer. 
'This isn't an in. sir. and we don't serve dinners for travellers. I 

T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  T HREE 
could boil some crayfish for you or put on the samovar, but we have 
nothing else. There won't be fresh fish till to-morrow.' 
But Mr Verkhovensky waved his hands, repeating with angry im­
patience, ' I'll pay you ; only be quick, be quick ! '  They settled on ftsh 
soup and roast chicken. The woman declared that there was not a 
chicken to be had in the whole village, but she agreed to go and see if 
she could find one, though with an air as if she were doing him a great 
favour. 
As soon as she had gone, Mr Verkhovensky sat down on the sofa 
and made Mrs Ulitin sit down beside him. There were arm-chairs and 
a sofa in the room, but they were in a most dreadful condition. The 
whole room, which was rather large (it had a partition with a bed be­
hind it) and covered with old, tattered yellow paper, and horrible 
lithographs of mythological subjects on the walls, and a long row of 
icons and sets of copper ones in the nearest corner, presented, with its 
strange assortment of furniture, an unsightly mixture of urban and 
traditional peasant life. But he did not even look at it. He didn't even 
look tluough the window at the huge lake, the shore of which was 
only about twenty yards from the cottage. 
'At last we are alone, and we shan't let anyone in !  I want to tell you 
everything from the very beginning.' 
Mrs Ulitin stopped him with a look of great uneasiness. 
' Do you realize, Mr Verkhovensky -' 
'Comment, vous savez dija mon nom ?' he asked with a happy smile. 
'I heard it this morning from Anisim when you were talking to 
him. What I'd like to tell you is -' and she began whispering to him 
rapidly, looking nervously at the closed door, for fear that anyone 
might overhear her, '- that the village isn't safe, sir. Al the local peas­
ants, though they are fishermen, make their living chiefly by charging 
visitors every summer what they think fit. The village is not on the 
highway, but is miles from anywhere, and people only come here be­
cause steamers stop here, and when the steamer does not call - for if 
the weather is bad it never does - lots of travellers are stranded here 
for several days and all the cottages are full, and this is just what the 
villagers are waiting for. They charge tluee times its value for every­
thing, and the landlord here is very proud and high-handed because he 
is rich, according to the local ideas of wealth. His net alone is worth a 
thousand roubles.' 

STEPAN V E R K H O V E N S K Y ' s L A S T  P I L G R I M A G E  641 
Mr Verkhovensky looked almost reproachfully at Mrs Ulitin's ex­
tremely animated face and tried to stop her several times. But she per­
sisted and said all she had to say. According to her, she had been there 
once before in the summer with 'a very genteel lady ' from the town. 
They had had to spend two days there waiting for the arrival of the 
steamer, and he could not imagine what they had to put up with. 
'You, sir, have asked for this room for yourself. I only mention it to 
warn you. They already have travellers in the other room - an elderly 
gentleman, and a young gentleman, and a lady with children - and 
to-morrow the house will be full of people who will be staying here 
till rwo o'clock; for the steamer hasn't called for two days and is quite 
certain to call to-morrow. So for a special room and for ordering din­
ner and for keeping other travellers out they will charge you much 
more than they would dream of charging anyone in Petersburg or 
Moscow.' 
But he was suffering. He was truly suffering. 
'Assez, mon enfant, I beg you, nous avons notre argent et apres - et apres 
e bo11 Dieu. And I'm really surprised that a person like you, a person 
with your high ideals - assez, assez, vous me tourmentez,' he cried hys­
terically. 'We have all our future before us, and you - you are trying 
to frighten me by what might happen to-morrow.' 
He at once began to tell her the story of his life in such a hurry that 
at first it was difficult to understand. It went on for a long time. The 
fish soup was served, followed by the chicken, and at last the samovar 
was brought in, but he was still talking. It all sounded rather strange 
and neurotic, but, then, he was ill. It was a sudden exertion of all his 
mental faculties which, of course - and Mrs Ulitin foresaw it anxiously 
all the time he was talking - in the present state of his health was 
bound to result immediately afterwards in extreme exhaustion. He 
began almost with his childhood days, when ' with a high heart he 
raced through the fields' ;  only an hour later did he reach the story of 
his two marriages and his life in Berlin. I should not dream oflaughing 
at him, however. There was really some high spiritual significance in 
it for him and, in modern parlance, almost a question of the struggle 
for existence. He saw before him the woman he had chosen to share 
his future life and he was, as it were, in a hurry to initiate her. The fact 
that he was a genius must no longer remain a secret to her. Maybe he 
formed a rather exaggerated opinion of Mrs Ulitin, but he had already 

T H E  D E V I L S · PART THREE 
chosen her. He could not live without a woman. He could see clearly 
from her face that she scarcely understood him, and that she could not 
even grasp the essential point of his story. 
'Ce n'est rien, nous attendrons, and meanwhile her intuition will tell 
her what I mean.' 
' My friend, all I want is your heart! '  he exclaimed, interrupting the 
story of his life, ' and this charming, this entrancing look with which 
you're gazing at me now. Oh, don't blush, I've told you already -' 
Poor, trapped Mrs Ulitin found it particularly hard to follow Mr 
Verkhovensky when his story developed almost into a whole disserta­
tion on how no one ever had been able to understand him and how 
' men of genius go to rack and ruin in Russia'. It was al ' much too 
clever ', she used to say afterwards dejectedly. She listened to him with 
undisguised distress, a little open-eyed. When Mr Verkhovensky 
plunged into humour and began delivering himself of witty pin­
pricks at the expense of ' our progressive and governing classes', she 
made two desperate attempts to laugh in response to his laughter. But 
the effect she produced was worse than if she had burst into tears, so 
that Mr Verkhovensky was at last embarrassed himself and launched 
out into a passionate and spiteful attack on the nihilists and the 'new' 
men. At this point he simply frightened her, and she only breathed 
more freely, though not for long, when he embarked on the story of 
the great romance of his life. A woman is always a woman, even if she 
is a nun. She smiled, shook her head, and then blushed and lowered 
her eyes, which threw Mr Verkhovensky into a state of absolute rap­
ture and inspiration, so that he even told a few lies. Mrs Stavrogin 
appeared in his story as a ravishing brunette (' who was the admiration 
of Petersburg and many more European capitals '), and her husband 
had died, 'struck down by a bullet at Sebastopol ', simply because he 
did not deem himself worthy of her love and yielded her to his rival, 
that is, to Mr Verkhovensky, of course. ' Do not be shocked, my 
gentle one, my Christian! '  he exclaimed to Mrs Ulitin, almost him­
self believing in the story he was telling her; 'it was something spiri­
tual, something so fine that we never spoke of it to one another all 
our lives.' The cause of this extraordinary state of affairs appeared to 
be a blonde (if not Miss Shatov, then I don't know whom Mr Ver­
khovensky was thinking of). Tlus blonde owed everything to the 
brunette, in whose house she grew up as a distant relative. The brun-

STEPA N VBRKHOVENSKY ' s L A S T  P I L G R I M A G E  
643 
ette, having become aware at last that the blonde was in love with 
Mr Verkhovensky, locked her secret up in her breast. The blonde, for 
her part, becoming aware that the brunette was in love with Mr Ver­
khovensky, also locked her secret up in her breast. And so the three of 
them, pining away with magnanimity towards each other, kept silent 
for twenty years, locking their secrets in their breasts. ' Oh, what a 
passion that was! What a passion that was ! '  he exclaimed, whimper­
ing with genuine emotion. ' I  saw the full bloom of the brunette's 
beauty, watched her passing by me heart-brokenly every day, as 
though ashamed of her beauty.' (Once he said, ' ashamed of her stout­
ness '.) At last he had run away, abandoning all this feverish dream of 
twenty years - vingt ans! - and now he had taken to the open road. 
Then, in a sort of overwrought condition of his brain, he began to 
explain to Mrs Ulitin the real meaning of their 'so accidental and yet 
so fateful meeting' that day, a meeting that had joined their lives ' for 
ever and aye'. Mrs Ulitin, looking terribly embarrassed, got up from 
the sofa at last. He even made an attempt to go down on his knees 
before her, which made her cry. 
h was getting dark: they had spent a few hours locked up in the room. 
'You'd better let me go to the other room, sir,' she murmured, ' or 
what will people say?' 
She tore herself away at last; he let her go, promising her to go to 
bed at once. As he bade her good night, he complained that he had a 
bad headache. Mrs Utilin had left her pack and her things in the front 
room, intending to spend the night with the people of the house; but 
sh.;: got no rest. 
At night Mr Verkhovensky had an attack of his gastric catarrh, so 
familiar to me and to all his friends - the inevitable result of all his 
nervous and spiritual shocks. Poor Mrs Ulitin did not sleep all night. 
While nursing the invalid, she had to go in and out of the cottage 
through the landlady's room several times during the night, which 
made the landlady and the travellers who were sleeping there grumble 
and even swear at her when she started getting the samovar ready early 
in the morning. Mr Verkhovensky was in a state of semi-conscious­
ness during the whole of his attack; sometimes he was dimly aware 
that the samovar was brought in, that he was given something to 
drink (raspberry tea), and that hot fomentations were being applied to 
his stomach and chest. But every moment he felt that she was there 

T H E  D E V I U  · PA R T  T H R EE 
beside him ; that it was she who was going in and out of the room, 
lifting him off the bed and laying him down again. At about three 
o'clock in the morning he felt better ; he sat up, put his legs out of the 
bed and, without warning, fell on the floor before her. This was no 
longer a question ofkneeling before her ; he simply fell at her feet and 
kissed the hem of her dress. 
1 Please don't do it, sir. I'm not worthy of it,' she murmured, trying 
to lift him on to the bed. 
' My saviour,' he cried, folding his hands reverently before her. 
'Vous etes noble comme une marquise! I - I am a blackguard ! Oh, all my 
life I've been dishonest ! '  
' Please calm yourself !' Mrs Ulitin implored him. 
1 I told you awful lies last evening -just for the sake of self-glorifica­
tion, self-indulgence, and self-conceit. All, all, every word of it - oh, 
what a blackguard, what a blackguard ! '  
His gastric attack thus passed into another attack - an attack of 
hysterical self-reproach. I mentioned these attacks when I spoke of his 
letters to Mrs Stavrogin. 
He suddenly remembered Lise and his meeting with her the pre­
vious morning. ' It was so awful, and I'm sure something terrible must 
have happened, and I never asked her - I never found out! I was only 
thinking of myself! Oh, I wonder what happened to her. Do you 
know what happened to her ?' he besought Mrs Ulitin. 
Then he vowed that he would never ' betray ' her, that he would re­
turn to her (he meant Mrs Stavrogin). ' We shall walk up to her house 
every morning ' (he and Mrs Ulitin, that is), ' when she is getting into 
her carriage for her morning drive, and will watch her very quietly . 
. . . Oh, I'd like her to strike me on the other cheek ! I long for her to 
do it. I will turn my other cheek to her comme dans votre livre! Only 
now I understand for the first time what is meant by turning the other 
check. I never understood it before.' 
The following two days were the most dreadful days in Mrs Ulitin's 
life. She remembers them with a shudder to this day. Mr Verkhoven­
sky became so seriously ill that he could not go on board the steamer, 
which this time arrived punctually at two o'clock in the afternoon. 
She, for her part, could not bring herself to leave him alone, and she 
did not leave for Spasov, either. According to her, he was very pleased 
when the steamer had sailed. 

S T E P A N  V E R K H O VENSKY ' s L A S T  P I L G R I M A G E  
645 
'Well, that's fine, that's excellent! '  he murmured in his bed. 'And 
I was all the time afraid that we would have to go. It's so nice here. 
Better than anywhere else. Yon won't leave me, will you? Oh, yon 
haven't left me! '  
It was not so ' nice', however. He did not want to know anything 
of her difficulties: His head was full of all sorts of fancies. He did not 
take his illness serious! y at all, thinking that it would soon pass. He 
did not worry about it at all. He only thought of how they would go 
and sell ' those books'. He asked her to read him the gospel. 
'I haven't read it for a long time - in the original. Someone might 
ask me about it, and I shall make a mistake. I must after all prepare 
myself.' 
She sat down beside him and opened the book. 
'Yon read beautifully,' he interrupted her after the fmt sentence. ' I  
can see, I can see that I was not mistaken! '  he added vaguely, but 
rapturously. 
He was, generally, in a continuous state of great excitement. She 
read the Sermon on the Mount. 
'Assez, assez, mon enfant, enough. Don't you think that is enough?' 
And he felt so exhausted that he closed his eyes. He was very weak, 
but he did not lose consciousness. Mrs Ulitin got up, thinking that he 
wanted to sleep. But he stopped her. 
' My friend, all my life I've been lying. Even when I spoke the 
truth. I never spoke for the sake of the truth, but for my own sake. I 
knew it before, bnt it is only now that I see it. Oh, where are my 
friends whom I have insulted with my friendship all my life? And all, 
al! Savez-vous, perhaps I'm lying even now. The trouble is that I 
believe myself when I am lying. The hardest thing in life is to live 
and not to lie, and - and not believe your own lie. Yes, yes, that's it! 
Bur wait a little; I'll tell yon about it later. We're together, we're 
together! '  he added with enthusiasm. 
' Don't you think, Mr Verkhovensky,' she asked timidly, ' we ouglu 
to send to the town for a doctor?' 
He was taken aback greatly. 
' Whatever for? Est-ce que je suis si malade? Mais rien de serieux. And 
what do we want strangers for? They might find om - and what's 
going to happen then? No, no. We don't want any stranger. We're 
together, we're together!' 

THE D EVILS ' PART THREE 
' You know,' he said after a short pause, 'read me something more. 
Anything you like. Anything that strikes your eye.' 
She opened the book again and began to read. 
' He that openeth, and no man shutteth ; and shutteth, and no man 
opencth,' he repeated. 
'And unto the angel of the church of the Laodiceans write -' 
' What's that? What? Where is it from ?' 
' It is from Revelation.' 
'Oh, je m' en souviens, oui, I' Apocalypse. Lisez, lisez! I am trying to 
tell our future by the book. I want to know what has turned up. Read 
on from the angel, the angel . .  . ' 
'And unto the angel of the church of the Laodiceans write : These 
things saith the Amen, the faithful and true witness, the begining of 
the creation of God. I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor 
hot: I would thou wert cold or hot. So then because thou art luke­
warm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee out of my mouth. 
Because thou sayest, I am rich, and increased with goods, and have 
need of nothing ; and knowest not that thou art wretched and miser­
able, and poor, and blind, and naked.' 
'This - and this is in your book ! ' he cried, flashing his eyes and 
raising his head from the pillow. ' I  never knew that grand passage! 
You hear, better be cold than lukewarm, than only lukewarm! Oh, 
I'll prove it. Only don't leave me, don't leave me alone! We shall 
prove it! We shall prove it! ' 
'But I won't leave you, Mr Verkhovensky; I won't ever leave 
you ! '  she cried, seizing his hand and, pressing it in hers, put it to her 
heart, looking at him with tears in her eyes. (' I was terribly sorry for 
him at that moment,' she told me, describing this scene.) 
His lips twitched, as though spasmodicaly. 
' But, Mr Verkhovensky, what arc we to do ? Ought we not to let 
your friends, or your relations, perhaps, know ?' 
But he grew so alarmed at her suggestion that she was sorry she had 
mentioned it again. Shaking and trembling, he besought her not to 
fetch anyone and not to do anything. He made her give him her word. 
' No one, no one! '  he urged her. 'Just we two, we two, nous partirons 
ensemble.' 
v;That made things worse was that the people of the house, too, 
were begining to be uneasy ; they grumbled and kept pestering Mrs 

STEPAN VERK H O VENSKY ' S LAST PILGRI M A GE 
647 
Ulitin. She paid them and did her best to let them see that they had 
money. That quieted them for a time. But the landlord demanded to 
se Mr Verkhovensky's ' papers '. The sick man motioned to his bag 
with a disdainful smile. Mrs Ulitin found in it the certificate of his re­
signation from the university, which had served him as a passport all 
his life. The landlord was not satisfied and said that ' he'd better be 
taken away somewhere, because this isn't a hospital, and if he dies, we 
shall as likely as not get into trouble'. Mrs Ulitin spoke to him about 
getting a doctor, but it seemed that if they were to send to the town 
for one, it would cost so much that the whole idea had to be given up as 
impractical. She went back in anguish to her patient. Mr Verkhoven­
sky was getting weaker and weaker. 
' Now read me another passage - about the swine,' he said suddenly. 
'What did you say, sir ?' she asked in great alarm. 
'About the swine - it's also there - ces cochons. I remember the devil 
entered the swine and they were all drowned. You must read it to me. 
I'll tell you why afterwards. I want to remember it literally - word for 
word.' 
Mrs Ulitin knew the gospel weli, and at once found the passage in 
St Luke, which I used for an epigraph to my chronicle. I'll quote it 
here again. 
'And there was there an herd of many swine feeding on the moun­
tain: and they besought him that he would suffer them to enter into 
them. And he suffered them. Then went the devils out of the man, and 
entered into the swine : and the herd ran violently down a steep place 
into the lake, and were choked. When they that fed them saw what 
was done, they fled, and went and told it in the city and in the country. 
Then they went out to see what was done; and came to Jesus, and 
found the man, out of whom the devils were departed, sitting at the 
feet of Jesus, clothed, and in his right mind : and they were afraid. 
They also which saw it told them by what means he that was pos­
sessed of the devils was healed.' 
' My friend,' said Mr Verkhovensky in great excitement, 'savez­
vous, this wonderful and - extraordinary passage has been a stumbling­
block to me all my life - dans ce livre - so that I remembered that pas­
sage from childhood. But now an idea has occurred to me; une com­
paraison. An awful lot of ideas keep occurring to me now. You see, 
that's just like our Russia. These devils who go out of the sick man and 

THE D E V I L S  • P A R T  TH REE 
enter the swine - those are all the sores, all the poisonous exhalations, 
all the impurities, all the big and little devils, that have accumulated 
in our great and beloved invalid, in our Russia, for centuries, for cen­
mries ! Oui, cette Russie, que j'aimais toujours. But a great idea and a 
great Will shield her from on high, as with that madman possessed of 
the devils, and all those devils, all those impurities, all those abomina­
tiom that were festering on the surface - all of them will themselves 
ask to enter into swine. And, indeed, they may have entered into them 
already ! They are we, we and them, and Peter - et les autres avec lui, 
and perhaps I at the head of them all, and we shall cast ourselves down, 
the raving and the possessed, from the cliff into the sea and shall all be 
drowned, and serves us right, for that is all we are good for. But the 
sick man will be healed, and " will sit at the feet of Jesus", and all will 
look at him and be amazed. My dear, vous comprendrez apres. Nous 
co11prendrons ensemble.' 
He became delirious, .. nd at last lost consciousness. So it went on 
for the whole of the next day. Mrs Ulitin sat beside him and wept. 
She had had practically no sleep for three nights, and avoided meeting 
the people of the house, who, she felt, were beginning to take some 
steps. Deliverance only came on the third day. In the morning Mr 
Verkhovensky recovered consciousness, recognized her, and held out 
his hand to her. He wanted to look out of the window: 'Tiens, un 
lac,' he said. ' Good Lord, I hadn't seen it till now.' At that moment a 
carriage rumbled along the road and stopped at the door of the cot­
tage. A hubbub arose in the house. 
3 
It was Mrs Stavrogin herself. She arrived in a four-seater carriage 
drawn by four horses, with two servants and Dasha. The miracle had 
happened very simply : Anisim, full of his meeting with Mr Verkho­
vensky, arrived in the town, and on the following day went to Mrs 
Stavrogin's and told the servants that he had met Mr Verkhovensky 
in a village, that he had been seen by some peasants walking on the 
highway alone, and that he had gone to Spasov by way of Ustyevo 
together with Sophia Ulitin. As Mrs Stavrogin, for her part, was 
greatly worried and had done her best to find her runaway friend, she 
was at once told of Anisim. When she had heard his story, and above 

STEPAN VBRKHOVEN SKY ' S LAST P I LGRI M A GE 
649 
al, the details of his departure to Ustyevo, together with a certain 
Sophia Ulitin in the same carriage, she immediately got ready for the 
journey and, following the hot trail, arrived in Ustyevo herself. 
Her stem and imperious voice resounded throughout the house; 
even the landlord and his wife quailed. She had only stopped to make 
inquiries, being convinced that Mr Verkhovensky had reached Spasov 
long before. Having learnt, however, that he was in the cottage and 
il, she went into the cottage in a state of great agitation. 
' But where is he ? Where is he ?' she cried, seeing Mrs Ulitin, who 
at that moment appeared in the doorway of the next room. ' I  can see 
from your shameless face that you're the woman. Get out, you slut! 
Don't let me see you in the house again! Tum her out, or else, my 
good woman, I'll have you locked up in jail for the rest of your life. 
See that she is kept in one of your cottages in the yard, landlord. She's 
been in jail once before in the town, and she'll go there again. And see 
to it, landlord, that while I'm here no one is allowed to stay in your 
house. I'm Mrs Stavrogin, the widow of a general, and I'll take the 
whole house. As for you, my good woman, you'll have to give me a 
full account of everything.' 
The familiar voice horrified Mr Verkhovensky. He began to 
tremble. But she had already stepped behind the partition. With flash­
ing eyes she drew up a chair with her foot, and leaning against the 
back, shouted to Dasha : 
'You'd better leave the room. Stay with the landlady for a while. 
Why this curiosity ? And close the door behind you properly! '  
She looked at his frightened face in silence for some time with a sort 
of predatory gaze. 
' Well, how arc you, Mr Verkhovensky ? Did you have a nice time? '  
The words escaped her suddenly with furious irony. 
'Chtre,' he cried, beside himself, ' I  have found out what real Russian 
life is like. Et je precherai I' Evangile . . . .' 
' Oh, you shameless, ungrateful man!' she cried suddenly in a loud 
voice, throwing up her hands. ' Haven't you disgraced me enough al­
ready, and now you've got yourself attached to - Oh, you shameless 
old roue ! '  
'Chere -' 
His voice failed him and he could not utter a word, but just stared 
at her in terror. 

650 
T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  T HREE 
' Who is she?' 
'C'est rm ange. C'etait plus qu'un ange pour moi. Oh, don't shout at 
her ! Don't frighten her, please ! Chere, chere . . . . ' 
Mrs Stavrogin suddenly jumped up from her chair with a loud 
noise. ' Water ! water ! '  she cried in a frightened voice. And though he 
had come to, she was still shaking with terror and, mrning white as a 
sheet, looked at his distorted face. It was at this point that she realized 
for the first time how gravely il he was. 
' Dasha,' she suddenly whispered to the girl, 'send for the doctor at 
once, for Salzfisch. Let Y egorych go at once. Let him hire horses here 
and get another carriage in town. Tell him he must be here before it's 
dark.' 
Dasha rushed out co carry out her order. Mr Verkhovensky still 
looked at her with the same wide-opened, frightened eyes. His lips 
had gone white and quivered. 
' Wait, my dear, wait ! '  she said, coaxing him like a child. 'There, 
there, wait a little. Dasha wil be back presently and - Heavens, 
landlady, landlady, come here, my good woman ! '  
In her impatience she ran to the landlady herself. 
' Bring that woman back at once ! Bring her back ! Bring her 
back ! '  
Luckily, Sophia Ulitin had not yet had time to leave the house, and 
was only just going om of the gate with her pack and her bundle. She 
was brought back. She was so frightened that her hands and legs were 
shaking. Mrs Stavrogin seized her by the hand, as a vulture seizes a 
chick, and dragged her impetuously to Mr Verkhovensky. 
'Well, here she is. I haven't eaten her up. You thought I had eaten 
her, didn't you ?' 
Mr Verkhovensky seized Mrs Stavrogin's hand and pm it to his 
lips, and burst into tears, sobbing loudly, hysterically, convulsively. 
'There, calm yourself, my dear, calm yoursel£ There, there. Good­
ness me, calm yourself, won't you ? '  she shouted furiously. ' Oh, you 
torturer! You torturer !  All my life you've tortured me ! '  
'My dear,' Mr Verkhovcnsky murmured at last, addressing Mrs 
Ulitin, ' won't you go to the other room, my dear? I have something 
to say here.' 
Mrs Ulitin hurried out of the room at once. 
'Cherie, chirie,' he gasped. 

STEPAN VERKHOVENSKY ' s L A S T  PI L G R I M A GE 
65 1 
'Wait a little. Don't talk before you've had a rest. Here's some 
vater. Wait a little, won't you ? '  
She sat down on the chair again. Mr Verkhovensky clasped her 
tand firmly. She would not let him speak for a long time. He raised 
ter hand to his lips and began kissing it. She clenched her teeth and 
ooked away into the corner of the room. 
'je vous aimais!' escaped him at last. 
She had never heard such an avowal from him, uttered in such a 
IOICe. 
' H'm,' she growled in reply. 
'je vous aimais toute ma vie - vingt ans!' 
She still said nothing - two minutes - three. 
' But when you came wooing Dasha, you sprinkled yourself with 
.cent,' she said suddenly in a terrible whisper. 
Mr Verkhovensky gazed speechlessly at her in utter amazement. 
' Put on a new cravat -' 
Again silence for two minutes. 
'Remember the cigar ?' 
' My friend,' he mumbled, horrified. 
'Your cigar - in the evening - by the window - the moon was 
>hining - after the summer-house - in Skvoreshniki ? Do you remem­
ber it? Do you remember it? '  she cried, jumping up from her chair, 
>eizing his pillow by the two corners and shaking it together with his 
ltead. ' Do you remember, you futile man, you futile, disgraceful, 
coward! y, always, always futile man ?' she hissed in her ferocious 
whisper, barely restraining herselffrom screaming. At last she let him 
go and sank in the chair, covering her face in her hands. ' Enough ! '  
she snapped out, drawing herself up. 'The twenty years have gone. 
We can't bring them back. I, too, was a fool.' 
'je vous aimais,' he cried, folding his hands again. 
'Aimais, aimais, aimais! You keep on repeating it, don't you ? 
Enough ! '  She jumped up again. ' If you don't go to sleep at once, 
I'll - You must rest. Go to sleep ! Go to sleep at once ! Shut your eyes ! 
Oh dear, he probably wants his lunch. What do you have ? What does 
he have ? Oh dear, where's that woman ? Where is she ?' 
She would have started a commotion, but Mr Verkl10vensky mur­
mured in a weak voice that he would really like to go to sleep for unt 
heure, and then un bouilon, un the - bzfin il itait si heureux. 

652 
THE DEVILS · PART THREE 
He lay down and really seemed to go to sleep (he probably pre­
tended to). Mrs Sravrogin waited a little, and then she went out on 
tiptoe from behind the partition. 
She settled herself in the landlady's room, turned out the landlady 
and her husband, and told Dasha to fetch that woman. A serious cross­
examination began. 
' Tell me! my dear, everything in detail. Sit down beside me - so. 
WelP' 
' I met Mr Verkhovensky -' 
' Wait a moment. Be quiet. I warn you that if you conceal anything 
from me or tell me a lie, I shall get you from the other end of the 
earth. Well?' 
'Mr Verkhovensky and I 
- As soon as I arrived in Khatovo, 
rna' am -' Mrs Ulitin was almost breathless. 
' One moment. Be quiet. Wait a little. What are you gabbling away 
like that for? First of al, what sort of person are you ? '  
She told her something about herself, as briefly as possible, begin­
ning with Sebastopol. Mrs Stavrogin listened to her in silence, sitting 
erect in her chair and looking sternly straight into the woman's eyes. 
'Why are you so frightened ? Why do you lower your eyes ? I like 
people to look straight at me and to answer me back. Go on.' 
She told of their meeting, of her books, and of how Mr Verkho-
vensky treated the peasant woman to vodka. 
-
'That's right. Don't leave out the smallest detail,' Mrs Stavrogin 
encouraged her. 
At last she told her how they had left in the cart and how Mr Ver­
khovensky kept on talking, though he was ' quite il ', and how he had 
told her the whole story of his life from the very beginning, talking 
for several hours. 
'Tell me about his life.' 
Mrs Ulitin suddenly stopped, completely at a loss. 
' I  can't tell you anything about that, ma'am,' she said, almost cry­
ing. 'And, besides, I hardly understood a word of it.' 
' You're lying ! You must have understood something.' 
' He told me about a lady of high rank with black hair,' Mrs Ulitin 
said, blushing crimson, noticing, however, Mrs Stavrogin's fair hair 
and that she was quite unlike the ' brunette'. 
' Black hair? What did he say ? Come on, speak! '  

STEPAN VERKH O V E N S KY ' S L A S T  P I L G R I M A G E  
653 
' How this lady was deeply in love with him, all her life, for twenty 
years, but never dared to tell him about it, and how she was ashamed 
before him because she was fat.' 
' The fool ! '  Mrs Stavrogin said reflectively, but resolutely. 
Mrs Ulitin had burst into tears by then. 
' I'm sorry, ma'am, but I don't know how to tell you about it pro­
perly because I myself was so terrified for him and I couldn't really 
understand him, as he is such an intellectual person.' 
' It isn't for a niny like you to judge of his intellect. Did he offer 
you his hand in marriage ?' 
The poor woman trembled. 
'Did he fall in love with you ? Go on, tell me ! Did he offer you his 
ha..rtd ?' Mrs Stavrogin shouted at her. 
'It was almost like that, rna' am,' she whimpered. ' Only I did not 
take it seriously because I could see how ill he was,' she added firmly, 
r.tising her eyes. 
' What's your name? Your Christian name and patronymic ?' 
' Sophia Matveyevna, ma'am.' 
' Well, Sophia Matveyevna, I want you to know that he is a most 
worthless and a most wretched little man. Good Lord ! who do you 
take me for ?  A wicked old woman ?' 
Sophia stared at her open-eyed. 
'A wicked old woman ? A tyrant ? A woman who has ruined his 
life?' 
' How can that be, ma'am, when you're crying yourself?' 
Mrs Stavrogin really had tears in her eyes. 
'All right, sit down. Sit down. Don't be afraid. Look at me again. 
Straight in the eyes. What are you blushing for ?  Dasha, come here. 
Have a look at her. What do you think ? Her heart is pure . . . .  
' 
And to Mrs Ulitin's surprise and perhaps also to her great con­
·sternation, Mrs Stavrogin suddenly patted her on the cheek. 
'A pity you're a fool, though. Too great a fool for your age. All 
right, my dear, I'll look after you. I can see that it's al nonsense. Stay 
near here for the time being. I'll see that a room is provided for you 
and you'll get food and everything from me, till I ask for you.' 
Mrs Ulitin murmured fearfully that she was rather anxious to 
go. 
' There's no hurry. I'll buy all your books, and you can stay here. 

T H E  D E V I L S · PART T H R E E  
Hold your tongue, and no excuses, please. If I had not come, you 
wouldn't have left him, would you ?' 
' I  wouldn't have left him for anything in the world,' Mrs Ulitin 
said quietly and firmly, drying her tears. 
Dr Salzftsch was brought late at night. He was a very respectable 
old man and a fairly experienced medical practitioner, who had re­
cently lost his post in the service because of some quarrel with his 
superiors over some imagined slight. Mrs Stavrogin at once took him 
under her wing. He subjected the patient to a painstaking examination, 
questioned him, and cautiously informed Mrs Stavrogin that the con­
dition of' the sufferer' was extremely dubious in consequence of com­
plications and that she had better prepare herself for ' the worst'. Mrs 
Stavrogin, who had become accustomed during twenty years to ex­
pect nothing serious or decisive from Mr Verkhovensky personally, 
was profoundly shocked and even turned pale. 
' Is there no hope at all ?' 
' It is quite impossible to say that there is no hope at all, but -' 
She did not go to bed all night, and could scarcely wait for the 
morning to come. As soon as the patient opened his eyes and regained 
consciousness (so far he had remained conscious, though he was 
losing strength every hour), she approached him with a most reso­
lute air. 
' Mr Verkhovcnsky, we have to be prepared for everything. I've 
sent for a priest. You must do your duty . . . . ' 
Knowing his convictions, she was very much afraid of a refusal. He 
looked at her in surprise. 
' N  onsensc, nonsense! '  she cried, thinking that he was already re­
fusing. ' There's no time for any of your whimsies now. You've 
played the fool long enough.' 
' But - am I really so very ill ?' 
He agreed thoughtfully. And indeed I was very surprised to learn 
from Mrs Stavrogin afterwards, that he was not afraid of death at all. 
Perhaps he simply did not believe her, and still regarded his ilness as a 
trifling one. 
He confessed and took the sacrament very readily. All of them, even 
Mrs Ulitin and the servants, came to congratnlate him on receiving 
the sacrament. Al of them wept softly as they looked at his thin and 
haggard face and his twitching lips. 

STEPAN VERKHOVENSKY ' s L A S T  P I L G RI M A G E  
655 
'Oui, mes amis, I'm surprised that you - take so much trouble. To­
morrow I shall most probably get up and we'll set off. Toute cette 
cbemonie - to which of course I pay due respect - was -' 
' Please, Father, I want you to stay with the invalid,' Mrs Stavrogin 
said, quickly stopping the priest, who was about to take off his sur­
plice. 'As soon as tea is served, I want you to talk to him about some 
religious subject to sustain his faith.' 
The priest began to speak; all of them were standing or sitting 
round the sick-bed. 
Mr Verkhovensky seemed to come to life suddenly; a sly smile 
passed over his lips. 
'Mon pere,je vous remercie, et vous etes bien bon, mais -· 
' There's no mais about it, no mais at all ! '  Mrs Stavrogin cried, jump­
ing up from her chair. ' Father,' she addressed the priest, ' he's such a 
man - such a man that in an hour you'd have to give him absolution 
again! That's the sort of man he is! '  
Mr Verkhovensky smiled quietly. 
' My friends,' he said, ' God is necessary to me if only because he is 
the only being whom one can love eternally.' 
And indeed he was converted, perhaps because of the majestic cere­
mony of the administration of the sacrament which moved him deeply 
and awoke the artistic sensibilities of his nature, but, I am told, he 
uttered with great feeling some words which were in direct contra­
diction to his former convictions. 
'My imortality is necessary if only because God would not do 
anything unjust to extinguish completely the flame of love for him 
once kindled in my heart. And what is more precious than love? Love 
is higher than existence. Love is the crown of existence. And how is it 
possible that existence should not be subjected to it? If I have come to 
love Him and rejoice in my love - is it possible that He should extin­
guish both me and my joy and turn us into nothingness ? If God exists, 
then I, too, am immortal! Voila ma profession defoi!' 
'There is a God, Mr Verkhovensky, I assure you, there is a God,' 
Mrs Stavrogin implored him. ' Renounce your beliefs, give up your 
foolishness for once in your life.' (I don't think she quite under­
stood his profession de foi.) 
' My friend,' he murmured, growing more and more inspired, 
though his voice broke frequently, ' my friend, when I grasped the 

T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  T H R E E  
meaning o f  that - turning of the cheek, I - a t  once understood some­
thing else.]' ai menti toute ma vie, all, all my life ! I'd have liked - how­
ever, to-morrow - to-morrow we shall all set off-' 
Mrs Stavrogin burst into tears. He was looking for someone with 
his eyes. 
' Here she is - she is here ! '  Mrs Sta vrogin took Sophia by the hand 
and led her to him. 
He smiled tenderly. 
' Oh, I'd like to live my life again ! '  he cried in a great access of 
energy. ' Every minute, every second of life ought to be a blessing to 
man - they ought to be - they must be! It is the duty of every man to 
make it so. This is the law that is hidden deep down in his nature, a 
law that most certainly exists. Oh, I wish I could see my son Peter -
and all of them - Shatov ! '  
I may add that no one as yet knew o f  Shatov's death, neither Mrs 
Stavrogin, nor Dr Salzfisch, who was the last to arrive from the town. 
Mr Verkhovensky was growing more and more agitated, morbidly 
so, beyond his strength. 
' The mere presence of the everlasting idea of the existence of some­
thing infinitely more just and happy than I, already fills me with abid­
ing tenderness and - glory - oh, whoever I may be and whatever I 
may have done! To know every moment, and to believe that some­
where there exists perfect peace and happiness for everyone and for 
everything, is much more important to a man than his own happiness. 
The whole law of human existence consists merely of making it pos­
sible for every man to bow down before what is infinitely great. If 
man were to be deprived of the infinitely great, he would refuse to go 
on living, and die of despair. The infinite and the immeasurable is as 
necessary to man as the little planet which he inhabits. My friends - all, 
all my friends : long live the Great Idea! The eternal, immeasurable 
Idea! Every man, whosoever he may be, must bow down before what 
is the Great Idea. Even the most stupid man must have something 
great. Peter, my boy - Oh, how I wish I could see them al again! 
They do not know - they do not know that the same eternal Great 
Idea dwells in them too ! '  
Dr Salzfisch was not present at the ceremony. Coming in sud­
denly, he was horri£ed, and ordered them all out of the sick-room, 
insisting that his patient must not be excited. 

C O N C L U S I O N  
Mr Verkhovensky died three days later, but by then h e  was com­
pletely unconscious. He seemed to have passed away quietly, like a 
candle that is burnt out. Mrs Stavrogin, after having the funeral ser­
vice performed at the cottage, took the body of her poor friend to 
Skvoreslmiki. The grave in the churchyard is already covered with a 
marble slab. The inscription and the railing have been left till the 
autumn. 
Mrs Stavrogin had been away from the town for eight days. Sophia 
Ulitin arrived with her in her carriage, and seems to have settled with 
her for good. I may add that as soon as Mr Verkhovensky lost con­
sciousness (the same morning), Mrs Stavrogin had Mrs Ulitin re­
moved from the cottage again and nursed the sick man herself to the 
end; but the moment he had breathed his last, she sent for her at once. 
She refused to listen to any objections to her proposal (or rather com­
mand) to settle at Skvoreshniki for good. Mrs Ulitin was terribly 
frightened by it. 
' That's al nonsense ! I'll go with you myself to sell gospels. I have 
no one left in the world.' 
' But you have a son,' Dr Salzfisch observed. 
' I  have no son ! '  Mrs Stavrogin cut him short - and it was almost as 
though she had uttered a prophecy. 
8 
Conclusion 
ALL the knaveries and crimes that had been perpetrated came to light 
with extraordinary rapidity, much more quickly than Peter Verkho­
vensky had anticipated. To begin with, the unhappy Marie Shatov 
awoke before daybreak on the night of her husband's murder, missed 
him, and became greatly agitated when she did not see him beside her. 
A woman hired by Mrs Virginsky had spent the night with her. Un­
able to calm her, she ran to Mrs Virginsky's as soon as it was light, 
h.aving told Mrs Shatov that the midwife knew where her husband 
was and when he would return. Meanwhile, Mrs Virginsky, roo, was 
beginning to be worried: she had already found out from her husband 
about the gallant deed at Skvoreslmiki. He had returned home about 
deven o'clock in a terrible state, wringing his hands; he flung himself 

THE DEVILS · PART THREE 
on the bed face downwards, and kept repeating, shaking with con­
vulsive sobs: 'That wasn't right! That wasn't right! That wasn't right 
at all ! '  It goes without saying that he ended by confessing everything 
to his wife, though to her alone in the house. She left him lying on the 
bed, having sternly impressed on him that if he wanted to whine, he'd 
better do it in his pillow, so that no one should hear, and that he'd be 
a fool if he showed any traces of it next day. She became rather 
thoughtful, however, and began at once clearing away things, just in 
case anything happened : she succeeded in hiding or completely de­
stroying all suspicious papers, books, and perhaps even political leaf­
lets. At the same time she realized that she, her sister, her aunt, the 
girl sntdent, and her lop-eared brother had nothing much to be afraid 
of. When the nurse came for her in the morning, she went to Mrs 
Shatov's without giving it another thought. She was very anxious, 
too, to find out whether it was true what her husband had told her 
in a frightened and frenzied whisper that night - namely, whether 
Peter V erkhovensky was right in thinking that Kirilov would shoot 
himself for their general benefit. 
But she arrived at Mrs Shatov's too late: having sent off the maid 
and having remained alone in the house, Marie could not bear the sus­
pense any longer. She got out of bed and, throwing the first piece of 
clothing she could find - something very light and unsuitable for the 
weather - round her, went down herself to Kirilov's cottage, thinking 
that he would be the most likely person to tell her something about 
the whereabouts of her husband. One can easily imagine the effect on 
the woman who had been so recently confined of what she saw there. 
It is remarkable that she did not read Kirilov's note, which lay con­
spicuously on the table, having, no doubt, overlooked it in her panic. 
She rushed back to her room, snatched up the baby, and walked out 
of the house with it into the street. It was a damp, misty morning. She 
met no passers-by in such a deserted street. She kept runing breath­
lessly through the cold, wet mud, and at last began knocking at the 
doors of houses. In one house they would not open the door, in an­
other house they were so long in opening it that she gave it up im­
patiently and began knocking at a third door. That was the house of 
our merchant Titov. Here she raised a terrible din, wailing and de­
claring incoherently that her husband was murdered. Something was 
known of Shatov and his story in the Titov household: they were 

C O N C L U S I O N  
horror-stricken that, having been confined the day before, as she her­
self had told them, she should be running about the streets so scantily 
dressed and in such cold, with her baby scarcely covered in her arms. 
At first they thought that she might be delirious, particularly as they 
could not make out whether it was Kirilov or her husband who was 
murdered. Realizing that they did not believe her, she was about to 
run out of the house, but she was restrained by force and, I am told, 
she screamed and struggled terribly. They went to Filippov' s, and two 
hours later Kirilov's suicide, and the note he had left before his death, 
were known to the whole town. The police questioned Marie Shatov, 
who was still conscious. It was then discovered that she had not read 
Kirilov's note. But they could not fmd out from her why she should 
have jumped to the conclusion that her husband, too, had been mur­
dered. She just kept screaming that ifKirilov had been murdered, then 
her husband was murdered, because they were together ! By midday 
she sank into unconsciousness, from which she never recovered, and 
she died three days later. The baby had caught cold and died before 
her. 
Not fmding Marie and her baby in her room, and realizing that 
things had come to a head, Mrs Virginsky was about to run home. But 
she stopped at the gate and sent the nurse to ask the gentleman in the 
cottage whether Mrs Shatov was not there and whether he knew any­
thing about her. The woman returned screaming at the top of her 
voice. Having persuaded her not to scream and not to breathe a word 
about what she had seen to anyone by the famous argument that she 
would ' get into trouble', Mrs Virginsky stole out of the yard. 
Needless to say, the police came to question her that morning, as 
Mrs Shatov's midwife. But they did not get much out ofher. She told 
them very coolly and in a most business-like manner everything she 
had seen and heard at Shatov's, but as to what had happened, she said 
that she knew nothing whatever and could not make head or tail of it. 
One can imagine the uproar that arose in the town. A new ' sensa­
tion ', another murder ! But there was something else, too : it became 
clear that there really was a secret society of assassins, revolutionary in­
cendiaries, and rebels. Lisa's terrible death, the murder of Stavrogin's 
wife, Stavrogin himself, the fire, the ball for the governesses, the dis­
soluteness of the people round Mrs Lembke . . . .  People insisted on see­
ing a mystery even in Stepan Verkhovensky' s disappearance. Al sorts 

660 
THE D EVILS • PART THREE 
of stories were going around about Nicholas Stavrogin. Towards the 
evening Peter Verkhovensky's absence, too, became known. But, 
strange to say, he was talked about least of al. What people were dis­
cussing most was the 'senator'. There was a crowd almost al morning 
at Filippov's house. The police were, in fact, led astray by Kirilov's 
note. They believed that K.irilov had murdered Shatov and then com­
mitted suicide. However, though the police were at a loss, they were 
not altogether deceived. The word ' park', for instance, so vaguely in­
serted in Kirilov' s note, did not baffie them, as Peter had expected it 
would. They rushed off at once to Skvoreshniki, and that not only be­
cause there was no other park within miles of our town, but also by a 
sort of instinct. For all the horrors of the last few days were directly 
or indirectly connected with Skvoreshniki. That, at any rate, is my 
theory. (I may add that Mrs Stavrogin had left early that morning in 
pursuit of Mr Verkhovensky without any knowledge of what had 
happened in the town.) 
The body was found in the pond towards the evening of the same 
day as a result of certain clues left by the murderers. On the scene of 
the murder the police found Shatov's cap, which the murderers had 
very carelessly forgotten to pick up. The police investigation and the 
post-mortem evidence and certain deductions made from it at once 
aroused the suspicion that K.irilov must have had accomplices. It be­
came clear that a secret society, of which Kirilov and Shatov were 
members, did exist, and that it was connected with the political leaflets. 
But who were these accomplices? No one had the slightest suspicion 
of the group of five that day. It was discovered that K.irilov lived like 
a hermit and led so solitary a life that, as was explained in the note, 
Fedka had found it possible to live with him for so many days while 
the police were looking for him everywhere. What puzled every­
body was that not a single fact in al that confusing mass of evidence 
pointed to anyclling that might lead to a satisfactory solution of the 
mystery. It is hard to say what conclusions and absurdities our panic­
stricken society would have reached if the whole mystery had not 
been suddenly solved next day, thanks to Lyamshin. 
He broke down completely. What happened to him was what 
Peter Verkhovensky had in the end begun to suspect would happen. 
Left in the charge of Tolkachenko, and later of Erkel, he spent the 
whole of the next day in bed, apparently calm, with his face turned 

CON CLUSION 
661 
to the wall, almost refusing to say anything when spoken to. He 
therefore knew nothing of what was happening in the town that day. 
But Tolkachenko, who knew very well what was going on, took it 
into his head by the evening to throw up the role ofLyamshin's guard 
with which Peter Verkhovensky had entrusted him, and left the town 
for the country - that is, simply ran away. In fact, he lost his head, as 
Erkel had suspected that they all would. I may add, incidentally, that 
Liputin, too, disappeared from the town before noon on the same day. 
But it so happened that the police discovered his disappearance only 
in the evening of the following day, when they came to question the 
members of his family, who had been thrown into a panic by his ab­
sence, and were too frightened to say anything. But to continue about 
Lyamshin. As soon as he was left alone (relying on Tolkachenko, Er­
kel had gone home earlier), Lyamshin at once rushed out ofhis house 
and, of course, very soon learnt the position of affairs. Without even 
going hack home, he, too, attempted to escape. But the night was so 
dark, and what he had to do was so terrible and so difficult to carry 
out, that after walking through two or three streets, he went hack 
home and locked himself up in his room, where he stayed all night. 
In the morning he seemed to have attempted to commit suicide, but 
had not succeeded. He stayed locked up in his room till aLnost twelve 
o'clock, and then, suddenly, rushed off to the police. I am told he 
crawled on his knees, sobbed and shrieked, kissed the floor, crying 
that he was not worthy to kiss the boots of the high officials who 
stood before him. They caLned him and spoke nicely to him. His ex­
amination is said to have lasted three hours. He told them everything ­
absolutely everything: all the facts, all he knew, anticipating their 
questions, giving them information about things they were not inter­
ested in and they would never have thought of asking him. It turned 
out that he knew enough, and gave quite a satisfactory explanation of 
the whole affair; the tragedy of Shatov and Kirilov, the fire, the death 
of the Lehyatkins, and so on, all receded to the background. The first 
place was taken by Peter V erkhovensky, the secret society, the organ­
ization, and the network. Asked why so many murders, scandals, and 
vilainies had been perpetrated, he replied with feverish haste that it 
was all done ' for the systematic destruction of society and the prin­
ciples on which it was based, with the object of throwing everybody 
into a state of hopeless despair and of bringing about a state of general 

662 
T H E  D E V I L S  • P A R T  T H R E E  
confusion : so that when society - sick, depressed, cynical, and godless, 
though with an intense yearning for some guiding idea and for self:. 
preservation - had been brought to a point of collapse, they could 
suddenly seize power, raising the banner of revolt and supported by a 
whole network of groups of five, which were in the meantime re­
cruiting new members and discovering the best methods of attacking 
the weak spots. He concluded by declaring that in our town Peter had 
made the first attempt to bring about such a systematic disorder, 
which was to serve as the programme for further activities and for all 
the groups of five. That, he added, was his own idea, his own theory, 
and he hoped that they would remember it and bear in mind how 
frankly and satisfactorily he had explained everything, for he might be 
of great service to the authorities in future. When he was asked to say 
definitely how many groups of five there were, he replied that there 
were thousands of them, and that all Russia was covered with a net­
work of them, and though he could give no proof of his statement, I 
believe his answer was perfectly sincere. He produced only the pro­
gramme of the society, printed abroad, and the plan for the develop­
ment of a system of further activities, a draft document written in 
Peter Verkhovensky's hand. It appeared that Lyamshin had quoted the 
sentence about the ' undermining of the foundations' word for word 
from this document, without leaving out a single stop or comma, 
though he insisted that it was only a conjecture of his. So far as Mrs 
Lembke was concerned, he expressed himself very amusingly and even 
without being asked, and in anticipation of any further questions, to 
the effect that ' she is innocent' and that ' she has been made a fool of'. 
But the remarkable thing was that he exonerated Nicholas Stavrogin 
from every share in the secret sociery and from every collaboration 
with Peter Verkhovensky. (Lyamshin knew nothing about the secret 
and rather absurd hopes which Peter Verkhovensky reposed in Stav­
rogin.) The murder of the Lebyatkins, according to his evidence, had 
been planned only by Peter Verkhovensky, with the astute aim of in­
volving Stavrogin, who had nothing to do with it, in the crime, and 
thus obtain a hold over him; but instead of the gratitude on which he 
had so rashly and so confidently counted, he had aroused only indigna­
tion and even despair in the ' noble-minded' Nicholas Stavrogin. He 
concluded his evidence about Stavrogin by declaring - again hurriedly 
and without being asked, though evidently as an intentional hint -

C O N C L U S I O N  
663 
at he was a very important personage, but that there seemed to be 
me mystery about his real position; that he had been living in our 
·wn, as it were, incognito, that he had been entrusted with some mis­
Jn or other, and that it was highly probable that he would come 
tck to us from Petersburg (Lyamshin was convinced that Stavrogin 
as in Petersburg), but in quite a different capacity and in quite differ­
It surroundings and attended by persons of whom perhaps we, too, 
ould soon hear, and that all this he had heard from Peter Verkho­
:nsky, ' the secret enemy of Stavrogin'. 
I'd better explain here that two months later Lyamshin confessed 
at he had exonerated Stavrogin on purpose, hoping that he would 
:lp him and would obtain a mitigation of his sentence in Petersburg 
td secure his acquittal on two counts and supply him with money 
td letters of introduction in Siberia. It can be gathered from his con­
ssion that he really had an exaggerated idea of Stavrogin's social 
Jsition. 
Virginsky was, of course, arrested on the same day and, in their 
:citement, the police arrested his whole family as well. (Mrs Virgin­
y, her sister, her aunt, and even the girl student were released long 
:o: I am told that Shigalyov, too, will most certainly be released in 
.e near future because, unlike the other prisoners, he cannot be 
targed under any of the articles of the legal code; but all that is just 
lk so far.) Virginsky at once pleaded guilty ; he was lying il in bed 
ith a high temperature when arrested. I am told that he seemed al­
.ost glad. ' It's a weight off my mind,' he is reported to have re­
,arked. It is rumoured about him that he is giving his evidence with­
lt demur, but with a certain dignity, and that he has not given up a 
:1.gle one of his ' bright hopes', though at the same time cursing the 
llitical method (as opposed to the Socialist one) which he had been 
d so unwittingly and so stupidly to follow by ' the whirlwind of 
>mbined circumstances'. It seems that a favourable view is taken of 
's conduct at the time of the murder and that he can expect a mitiga­
on of his sentence. So, at least, it is asserted in our town. 
But I think it is extremely unlikely that anything can be done to 
Litigate Erkel's sentence. Ever since his arrest he has persisted in his 
:fusal to give evidence and has misrepresented the truth as much as 
Ճ could. So far not one word of regret could be got out of him. And 
Մt he has aroused the pity of the severest judges - by his youth, by his 

THE DEVILS • PART THREE 
helplessness, and by the obvious fact that he was only a fanatical victim 
of a political seducer, and, most of all, by his conduct to his mother, to 
whom he sent almost half of his scanty pay. His mother is now in our 
town; she is a delicate and ailing woman, prematurely aged; she weepi 
and literally grovels, imploring mercy for her son. But whatever hap­
pens, many people in our town are sorry for Erkel. 
Lipurin was arrested in Petersburg, where he had been living for a 
fortnight. A most extraordinary thing happened to him - something 
that is difficult to explain. It is said that he had a passport in a false 
name, that he could have very easily escaped abroad, and that he had 
a considerable sum of money on him, and yet he remained in Peters­
burg and did not attempt to go anywhere. He spent some time trying 
to find Stavrogin and Peter Verkhovensky, and then he suddenly took 
to drinking and began leading a life of wild dissipation, like a man 
who had lost all common sense and understanding of his position. He 
was arrested drunk in a Petersburg brothel. It is rumoured that he 
does not look down-hearted at all, that he tells lies in his evidence, and 
that he is getting ready for his approaching trial with a certain solemn­
ity and hope(?). He even intends to make a speech at the trial. Tol-' 
kachenko, who was arrested in the country within ten days of his 
flight, conducts himself with incomparably more decorum. He does 
not lie or prevaricate, tells all he knows, does not try to justify himself, 
puts the blame on himself with all modesty, but is also inclined to be­
come rhetorical; he speaks readily and a great deal, and when the sub­
ject of the peasants and their revolutionary(?) elements is touched 
upon, he even starts showing off and striking attitudes, eager to pro­
duce an effect. He, too, I understand, intends to make a speech at the 
trial. On the whole, neither he nor Lipurin seem to be very much 
afraid, which is strange. 
I repeat, the case is not by any means over. Now, three months 
afterwards, our local society has had time to rest, to recover, to rally, 
to formulate its own opinions, so much so that some even regard 
Peter Verkhovensky almost as a genius, or ' at least' as a man 'with 
the abilities of a genius '. ' Organization, sir ! '  they say at the club, 
raising a finger aloft. However, all this is very innocent, and there are 
not many people who talk like that. Others, on the other hand, do not 
deny that he possesses a certain acuteness of perception, but they claim 
that he is totally ignorant of life and is inclined to be terribly abstract 

C O N C L U S I O N  
n his judgements, grotesquely and obtusely one-sided, and, as a re­
;ult, extremely wrong-headed. About his moral qualities all are 
tgreed; about that there are no two opinions. 
I really don't know whom to mention so as not to forget anyone. 
Maurice Drozdov has gone away somewhere for good. Old Mrs Droz­
lov has sunk into senility. However, there still remains some very 
;ombre story to tell. I will confme myself to the bare facts. 
On her return to the town, Mrs Stavrogin stayed in her town house. 
W the accumulated news broke on her at once and gave her a terrible 
;hock. She shut herself up in her room. It was evening ; they were all 
ired, and went to bed early. 
In the morning a maid handed Dasha a letter with a mysterious air. 
fhe letter, according to her, arrived the night before when everyone 
ud gone to bed, and she dared not waken her. It did not come by 
Jost, but by an unknown man who had given it to Alexey Y egoro­
•ich in Skvoreshni.ki. The butler had at once taken it to town and put 
.t into her hands, and immediately gone back to Skvoreshni.ki. 
Dasha looked at the letter for a long time with a beating heart, not 
faring to open it. She knew who it was from : it had been written by 
"l"icholas Stavrogin. She read the address on the envelope : ' To Alexey 
Yegorovich, to be handed to Miss Shatov secretly.' 
Here is the letter, word for word, without the correction of a single 
nistake, in the style ofa Russian landed gentleman who has never 
nastered Russian grammar in spite of his European education : 
DEAR D ASHA, 
'At one time you wanted to come to me as my nurse and made me 
Jromise to send for you when necessary. I am going away in two 
lays and I am not coming back. Last year, like Herzen, I took out 
Iaturalization papers in the canton of Uri, and no one knows about it. 
: have bought a little house there. I have still got twelve thousand 
:oubles; we shall go and live there. I do not want to go anywhere else 
:ver. 
' The place is very dull, a narrow valley, the mountains constrict both 
lision and thought. It is very gloomy. I chose it because there was a 
ittle house for sale. If you don't like it, I shall sell it and buy another 
louse in some other place. 
' I  am not well, but I hope to get rid of my hallucinations with the 
1elp of that air. This is the physical aspect; as for the moral one, you 
mow all about it, don't you ? 

666 
THE DEVILS • PART THREE 
'I have told you a great deal of my life. But not everything. I didn't : 
tell everything even to you ! By the way, I admit that in my conscience 
I regard myself as guilty of the death of my wife. I have not seen you 
since then, and that is why I make this admission. I am to blame for 
Lisa, too. But that you know; you predicted almost all that. 
' Perhaps you'd better not come. It is awfully mean of me to ask you 
to come. And why, indeed, should you bury your life with rnfne ? You 
are dear to me, and when I was depressed, I felt all right beside you; to 
you alone I could speak of myself aloud. That proves nothing. It was you 
who offered yourself as my " nurse" - it is your own expression. But why 
sacrifice so much ? Also understand that I am not sorry for you, since I 
call you, and I do not respect you, since I expect you to come. And yet 
I do call you and I do expect you. In any case, I need your answer, be­
cause I shall have to go very soon. In that case, I shall go alone. 
' I  don't hope for anything in Uri ; I am simply going there. I have not 
chosen a gloomy place on purpose. I have nothing to keep me in Russia 
- everything is as foreign to me there as anywhere else. It is true I dis­
liked life there more than anywhere else; but even there I can't hate any­
thing! 
' I've tried my strength everywhere. You advised me to do that so as 
to learn " to know myself". When I tried it for my own sake and for 
the sake of self-display, it seemed infinite, as it has before in my life. Be­
fore your eyes I put up with a blow in the face from your brother; I 
acknowledged my marriage in public. But what to apply my strength to 
- that's what I've never seen and don't see now in spite of your words of 
approval in Switzerland which I believed. I can still wish to do some­
thing good, as I always could, and that gives me a feeling of pleasure. 
But the one and the other feelings are, as before, too petty, and strong 
they never are. My desires are never strong enough. They cannot guide 
me. You can cross a river on a tree-trunk, but not on a chip. I say this 
that you may not think that I am going to Uri with any sort of 
hopes. 
'As always, I do not blame anyone. I tried wild debauchery and 
wasted my strength in it : but I do not like debauchery and I had no de­
sire for it. You have been watching me lately. Do you know that I 
looked even upon our iconoclasts with envy and spite because I was 
jealous of their hopes ? But you need not have been afraid. I could not 
possibly be their comrade, for I shared nothing with them. And I could 
not do it for fear or from spite, and not because I was afraid of the ridicu­
lous - I cannot possibly be afraid of the ridiculous - but because I have, 
after all, the habits of a decent man, and it nauseated me. But if I had felt 
more envious or spiteful towards them, I might perhaps have gone with 

CONCLUSION 
667 
tem. You judge for yourself how easy it has been for me and how I 
ave been tossed about. 
'Dear friend, tender and generous soul which I have divined! Perhaps 
ou dream of giving me so much love and lavishing upon me so much 
1at is beautiful in your beautiful soul that you hope at last to set up 
>me aim for me by it ? No - you'd better be more careful: my love wil 
e as petty as I am myself, and you will be unhappy. Your brother told 
a.e that he who loses his ties with his native soil, loses his gods - that is, 
11 his aims. One can go on arguing about anything for ever, but from 
1e nothing has come but negation, with no magnanimity and no force . 
. ven negation has not come from me. Everything has always been 
etty and lifeless. Kirilov, in his magnanimity, could not compromise 
lith an idea and - shot himsel£ But I can see that he was so magnani­
tous because he was insane. I can never lose my reason and I can never 
elieve in an idea to the same extent as he did. I cannot even be inter­
lted in an idea to the same extent. I can never, never shoot myself! 
'I know that I ought to kil myself, to brush myself off the earth, like 
>me loathsome insect; but I am afraid of suicide, because I am afraid 
f showing magnanimity. 
'I know that it wil be another delusion again, a delusion in an infinite 
:quence of delusions. What is the use of deluding oneself merely in 
rder to play at magnanimity ? Indignation and shame I can never feel, 
1erefore not despair, either. 
'Forgive me for writing so much. I have come to my senses now, and 
lis has happened by accident. A hundred pages would be too little and 
m lines are enough. Ten lines would be enough to ask you to be my 
nurse". 
'Since I left Skvoreshniki I have been living at the stationmaster's at 
!J.e sixth station from the town. I met him at a drinking party in Peters­
•urg five years ago. No one knows I am living here. Write to me in his 
.arne. I am enclosing the address. 
'NICHOLAS STAVROG IN.' 
Dasha immediately went to Mrs Stavrogin and showed her the let­
cr. She read it and asked Dasha to go out of the room so that she 
night read it again; but she called her back very quickly. 
' Will you go ?' she asked almost timidly. 
' I  will,' Dasha replied. 
' Get ready. We'll go together.' 
Dasha looked questioningly at her. 
'What is there left for me to do here? What diference does it make? 

668 
T H E  D E V I L S · P A R T  T H R E E  
I, too, will become a citizen of Uri and end my days in a narrow val­
ley. Don't worry, I won't be in your way.' 
They began packing quickly to catch the midday train. But about 
half an hour later Alexey Y egorovich arrived from Skvoreshniki. He 
announced that Stavrogin had come back in the morning ' suddenly' 
by the early train and was at present in Skvoreshniki ' in such a state 
that he did not answer any questions ; he walked through all the rooms 
and shut himself up in his own part of the house '. 
'I decided to come and tell you about it, rna' am, without asking 
master's permission,' the butler added, with a very significant 
look. 
Mrs Stavrogin gave him a piercing look and did not put any ques­
tions to him. The carriage was got ready immediately. She took 
Dasha with her. I am told that all the way to Skvoreshniki she kept 
crossing herself. 
In Stavrogin' s ' part of the house' all the doors were open and he 
was nowhere to be found. 
' He isn't in the attic, is he? '  Foma ventured to suggest cautiously. 
It was remarkable that several servants followed Mrs Stavrogin to 
her son's rooms, while the others all waited in the large drawing­
room. Never before would they have dared to permit themselves 
such a breach of etiquette. Mrs Stavrogin saw it and said nothing. 
They went up to the attic. There were three rooms there: but he 
was not in any of them. 
' Would Master have gone up there ?' a servant asked, pointing at 
the door of the little room in the loft. 
Indeed, the door of the loft, which was always closed, was wide 
open. The little room, practically under the roof, was reached by a 
long, terribly steep, and very narrow woodea staircase. 
' I  won't go there,' Mrs Stavrogin said, looking at the servants and 
turning terribly pale. ' Why should he go up there?' 
The servants looked at her and said nothing. Dasha was trembling. 
Mrs Stavrogin dashed up the narrow staircase ; Dasha after her. But 
the moment she entered the little room, she uttered a scream and col­
lapsed on the floor in a faint. 
The citizen of the canton of Uri was hanging there behind the door. 
On the table lay a scrap of paper with the words : ' No one is to blame, 
I did it mysel£' Beside it on the table lay a hammer, a piece of soap, 

C O N C L U S I O N  
669 
md a large nail, evidently prepared in case of need. The strong silk 
:ord with which Stavrogin had hanged himself had evidently also 
>een prepared and chosen beforehand. It was thickly smeared with 
oap. All this was evidence of premeditation and consciousness to the 
ast minute. 
The verdict of our doctors after the post-mortem was that it was 
nost definitely not a case of insanity. 


+ 
Appendix 
+ 
STAVR OGIN ' S  CONFE S SION 
At Tikhon's* 
I 
STAVROGIN did not sleep all that night. He sat on the sofa, his eyes 
6xed on one point in the comer by the chest of drawers. All night 
long the lamp burnt in his room. At about seven o'clock in the 
morning he fell asleep where he sat and when his valet Alexey 
Yegorovich, according to the once and for al established routine, 
entered his room at exactly half past nine with his morning cup of 
coffee, he opened his eyes and seemed unpleasantly surprised that he 
should have been asleep so long and that it was so late. He hastily 
drank his coffee, hastily dressed himself and hurriedly left the house. 
To his valet's timid question, 'Any orders, sir?' he made no reply. 
He walked along the street, his eyes fixed on the ground, deep in 
thought, and only when he occasionally raised his head did he sud­
denly show a certain vague but intense anxiety. At one crossing not 
far from his house a crowd of peasants, about fifty or more, crossed 
the road; they walked sedately, almost in silence, with calm delibera­
tion. At a little shop, where he had to wait a moment, he heard some­
one say that they were ' Shpigulin's workmen'. He hardly paid any 
attention to them. At last, at about half past ten, he reached the gates 
of our St Yefimyev Monastery of Our Lady, on the outskirts of the 
town, by the river. It was only there that he seemed to remember 
something that troubled and worried him. He stopped, hastily felt 
*This chapter should have followed Chapter Eight of the Second Part (Ivan 
the Crown-Prince). The Editor of the Russian Messenger refused to publish it 
when the novel was being serialized in his journal. Dostoyevsky later tried to 
revise it, but finaly decided to omit it from the first edition of the novel in 
1873. It was discovered in 1921 among the papers left by Dostoyevsky's wife 
and first published separately in 1922. 

T H E  D E V I L S  
something in his side pocket and - smiled. O n  entering the enclosure, 
he asked the first novice who happened to cross his path where he 
could fmd Bishop Tikhon, who was living in retirement in the 
monastery. The novice began bowing and immediately took him to 
see the bishop. Near the front steps at the end of the long two-storied 
monastery building a fat, greyhaired monk took him over authori­
tatively and promptly from the novice and led him along a long, 
narrow corridor, also bowing all the time, although because of his 
corpulence he could not bend low, but merely jerked his head 
frequently and abruptly. He went on begging him to follow, though 
Stavrogin was following him anyhow. The monk kept asking all 
sorts of questions and speaking of the Father Archimandrite, but, 
receiving no answer, became more and more deferential. Stavrogin 
could not help noticing that he was known here, although so far as 
he could remember he had only been there as a child. When they 
reached the door at the very end of the corridor, the monk opened it 
as though he were fully authorized to do so, inquired familiarly of 
the monk who looked after the bishop's rooms and who had rushed 
up to him whether they could go in, and without bothering to wait 
for a reply, flung the door wide open and, bending down, let the 
' dear' visitor pass. On receiving a gratuity, he quickly disappeared, 
as though in flight. Stavrogin entered a small room and almost at 
that very moment a tall, lean man appeared at the door of the 
adjoining room. He was about fifty-five, was wearing a simple 
indoor cassock and looked a little ill. He smiled rather vaguely and 
had a strange, somewhat shy expression. This was Tikhon himself, 
the same Tikhon of whom Stavrogin had heard for the first time 
from Shatov and about whom he had since managed to pick up 
certain bits of information. 
The information he had picked up was contradictory and of a 
rather varied nature, but it also seemed to have something in com­
mon, to wit, that those who liked and those who disliked Tikhon (and 
there were quite a few of those) were somehow not too keen to 
talk about him, those who disliked him probably because they did 
not think much of him, and those who were his supporters and even 
admirers out of a kind of considerateness, as though they were 
anxious to conceal something about him, some kind of weakness or 
even aberration. Stavrogin had found out that Tikhon had been 

APPENDIX 
living in the monastery for about six years and that the people who 
came to see him were ordinary peasants as well as persons of high 
social standing. Indeed, even in faraway Petersburg he had ardent 
admirers, though mostly among women. On the other hand, a 
portly elderly member of our club, a very pious one at that, expressed 
m opinion to the effect that 'that Tikhon was practically insane and 
quite certainly fond of the bottle'. Let me add here, although in 
anticipation, that the last statement was utter nonsense, but that the 
bishop did suffer &om a chronic rheumatic affliction in the legs and 
was at times subject to some nervous spasms. Stavrogin also learnt 
that Tikhon had not been able to inspire any particular respect in the 
monastery itself either through weakness of character or 'because of 
his absent-mindedness which was unforgivable and quite unnatural 
in a person of his rank'. 
It was said that the Father Archimandrite, a stem man who was 
very strict in regard to carying out his duties as Father Superior 
and who was, besides, a well-known scholar, even seemed to feel 
a sort of hostility towards Tikhon and condenmed ·him (not to his 
face, but indirectly) for his casual mode of life, and almost accused 
him of heresy. The attitude of the monks towards the saintly bishop 
was also, if not a little too casual, then at least, as it were, familiar. 
The two rooms which composed Tikhon's cell were also rather 
strangely furnished. Side by side with the heavy old bits of furniture, 
covered in worn leather, were three or four quite elegant pieces: a 
most expensive armchair, a large writing desk of excellent craftsman­
ship, an elegant carved bookcase, little tables, bookstands, al of 
which of course he had received as presents. There was a magnificent 
Bokhara carpet and next to it straw mats. There were engravings 
depicting scenes of 'fashionable society' and mythological subjects, 
and near them, in the comer, a large icon case, glitterhlg with silver 
and gold icons, one of which was of a very ancient date and con­
tained relics. His library, too, it was said, was of too contradictory 
and diverse a character: next to the works of the great Christian 
saints and martyrs were 'works of the stage and of fiction and, 
perhaps, even something much worse'. 
After the first greetings, exchanged for some reason with un­
disguised awkwardness on both sides, as well as hurriedly and even 
mumblingly, Tikhon led his visitor to his study and, still as it were 

T H E  D E V I L S  
in a hurry, made him sit on the sofa in front of the table, while 
sitting dO\vn himself nearby in a wicker armchair. At that moment 
Stavrogin, to his own surprise, got completely flustered. It looked as 
though he were trying with all his might to do something extra­
ordinary and unavoidable and, at the same time, something that he 
found almost impossible to do. For a moment or two he looked 
round the study quite obviously unaware of anything he was looking 
at ; he fell into thought, but perhaps he hardly knew what he was 
thinking about. It was the stillness in the room that roused him 
from his stupor and it seemed to him suddenly that Tikhon cast 
down his eyes shyly and with a smile that was quite out of place. 
This at once aroused in him a feeling of disgust and revolt ; he felt 
like getting up and going away; in his view, Tikhon was quite 
decidedly drunk. But at that moment Tikhon raised his eyes and 
looked at him with a gaze so firm and full of thought and, at the 
same time, with so unexpected and enigmatic an expression, that he 
nearly gave a start. Then all of a sudden something quite different 
occurred to him: he felt that Tikhon already knew why he had come, 
that he had already been forewarned about it (though no one in the 
whole world could have known the reason) and, if he did not speak 
firSt, it was because he was sorry for him and fearful of his 
humiliation. 
'Do you know who I am?' he suddenly asked abruptly. 'Did I 
introduce myself when I came in or not? I'm sorry, I am so absent­
minded . .  .' 
' You did not introduce yourself, but I had the pleasure of seeing 
you once four years ago, here in the monastery - by chance.' 
Tikhon spoke very slowly and evenly, in a soft voice, enunciating 
his words clearly and distinctly. 
' I  wasn't in this monastery four years ago,' Stavrogin replied with 
what seemed like unnecessary discourtesy. 'I was here only as a child 
long before you were here.' 
'Are you sure you haven't forgotten?' Tikhon asked guardedly 
and without insisting. 
' No, I haven't forgotten,' Stavrogin insisted for his part rather 
obstinately. 'Why, it would be ridiculous not to remember. You 
must have just heard about me and formed some idea and that's 
why you imagined that you had seen me.' 

A P PE N D I X  
Tikhon said nothing. I t  was just then that Stavrogin noticed that 
fikhon's face sometimes twitched nervously, a reminder of his 
1reakdown some years before. ' But I can see,' he said, ' that you are 
tot well today. Perhaps it would be better ifl went.' 
He was even about to get up from his chair. 
'Yes, I had violent pains in my legs yesterday and today and I slept 
ittle during the night.' 
Tikhon stopped short. His visitor had suddenly sunk into a kind of 
trange reverie. The silence lasted for quite a long time, for two whole 
ninutes. 
'Why are you staring at me?' Stavrogin asked suddenly in alarm 
md suspiciously. 
'J was looking at you and remembering what your mother looked 
ike. You don't resemble one another, but there is a great deal of 
nner spiritual resemblance.' 
'No resemblance at all, certainly no spiritual - none whatever! '  
Ǝtavrogin declared, looking worried and insisting again without 
:cason and without knowing himself why. ' You're just saying it out 
)f - out of pity for my state of mind,' he suddenly blurted out. 
'Good Lord, it must be my mother who visits you ! '  
' She does.' 
'I didn't know. She never said anything about it to me. Often?' 
'Nearly every month. More often sometimes.' 
' She never, never told me. Never told me,' he repeated, looking 
for some reason terribly alarmed by that fact. 'I suppose you must 
h.ave heard from her that I am insane,' he blurted out again. 
' No, not that you are insane. Still, I have heard that said, but by 
others.' 
'You must have an excellent memory if you can remember such 
trifles. Did you hear about that slap in the face too?' 
'I did hear something about it.' 
'You've heard everything then. You must have had plenty of time 
to listen to all that. About the duel too? '  
'About the duel too.' 
'You don't need newspapers here, do you? Did Shatov warn you 
about me?' 
' No. I do know Mr Shatov, though, but I haven't seen him for a 
long time.' 

THE DEVILS 
'I see . . .  What's that map you've got there? Ah, a map of the 
last war! What on earth do you want that for?' 
'I was looking it up while reading this book. A most interesting 
description.' 
' Show me. Yes, not at all bad. A curious kind of reading for you, 
though.' 
He pulled the book towards him and cast a perfunctory glance at it. 
It was a lengthy and talented account of the circumstances of the last 
war,not so much from the military as from the literary point of view. 
Mter turning over a few pages, he suddenly threw the book down 
impatiently. 
'I simply don't know what I've come here for,' he said with ·an 
expression of disgust on his face, looking straight into Tikhon's eyes 
as though expecting an answer from him . 
'You don't seem to be very well, either.' 
'Yes, I daresay.' 
And suddenly he told him , although rather briefly and abruptly, 
so that some of what he was saying was difficult to understand, that 
he was subject, especially at nights, to some kind of hallucinations, 
that he sometimes said or felt beside him the presence of some kind of 
malignant creature, mocking and 'rational', 'in all sorts of guises 
and in different characters, but it is the same, and it always makes me 
angry'. 
These revelations were wild . and confused and really seemed to 
come from a madman. But at the same time Stavrogin spoke with 
such strange frankness, never seen in him before, with such simple­
heartedness, which was so out of character as far as he was concerned, 
that one could not help feeling that his former self had suddenly and 
quite unaccountably completely disappeared. He was not at all 
ashamed of revealing the fear with which he talked about his appari­
tion. But it was all a matter of a moment and it was gone as suddenly 
as it had come. 
' It's all a lot of nonsense,' he said quickly and with an awkward 
feeling of vexation, recollecting himsel£ 'I must go and see a doctor.' 
'You certainly must,' Tikhon agreed. 
'You speak with such conviction. Have you met anyone like me 
with the same kind of apparitions?' 
'I have, but very rarely. I remember only one man like that in my 

APPENDIX 
life. He was an army officer. I met him after he had lost his wife 
whom he badly missed. I've only heard of one other case like it. 
Both of them afterwards went abroad for medical treatment. How 
long have you suffered from this?' 
'For about a year, but it's all a lot of nonsense. I shall go and see a 
doctor. It's all nonsense, utter nonsense. It's myself, different aspects 
of myself. Nothing more. You don't think, do you, that because 
I've just added that - er - phrase I'm still doubtful and not sure that 
it's me and not in fact the devil.' 
Tikhon looked up questioningly. 
'Do you - do you really se him?' he asked in a tone of voice that 
implied that he did not doubt for a moment that it was nothing but an 
imagined, morbid hallucination. 'Do you actually see some kind of 
image?' 
'It's funny you should harp on it after I've already told you that I 
see it,' Stavrogin said, growing more and more irritated with every 
word he uttered. 'Of course I see it. I see it as plainly as I see you. 
Sometimes, though, I see it and yet I'm not sure that I see it, and 
sometimes I don't know which of us is real - me or him. It's all a lot 
of nonsense. Surely, you couldn't possibly have imagined that it 
really was the devil, could you?' he asked, laughing and passing a 
little too abruptly into a derisive tone of voice. 'Well, I suppose it 
would be more in keeping with your profession, wouldn't it?' 
'Most probably it is an illness, although . .  .' 
'Although what?' 
'Devils most certainly exist, but one's idea of them may vary 
considerably.' 
'You lowered your eyes just now,' Stavrogin interjected with an 
iritable laugh, 'because you feel ashamed that while believing in the 
devil I should pretend not to believe in him and cuningly confront 
you with the question: does he or does he not really exist?' 
Tikhon smiled vaguely. 
' Well, I want you to know that I am not at al ashamed, and to 
make amends for my rudeness to you I'll tell you seriously and 1m­
ashamedly: I do believe in the devil, I believe canonically, in a personal 
devil, not an allegory, and I have not the slightest desire to try to 
elicit an answer from anyone. That's all I want to make clear to 
you.' 

THE DEVILS 
He gave an unnatural, nervous laugh. Tikhon looked a t  him 
with curiosity, but also, as it were, rather timidly and gently. 
'Do you believe in God?' Stavrogin suddenly blurted out. 
'I do.' 
' It is said, isn't it, that if you have faith and tell a mountain to 
move, it will move . . . .  However, forgive me for all this nonsense. 
All the same I'm rather curious to know : will you 01 will you not 
move a mountain?' 
' If God commands, I will,' Tikhon said quietly and calmly, again 
dropping his eyes. 
' Oh well, that's just the same as saying that God himself will move 
it. No, no. What about you, you yourself? As a reward for your 
belief in God.' 
'Perhaps I won't move it.' 
'Perhaps? Well, that's not bad, either. However, you're still 
doubtful, aren't you?' 
' I'm doubtful because of the imperfection of my belie£' 
'Good Lord, so you, too, don't believe absolutely?' 
' Well, no. Perhaps I do not altogether believe absolutely,' replied 
Tikhon. 
'That I would never have suspected, looking at you,' Stavrogin 
declared, glancing at him suddenly with some surprise, quite genuine 
surprise, which did not at all harmonize with the sarcastic tone of his 
preceding questions. 
' Still, you at least believe that with God's assistance you will move, 
which is something. At any rate, you wish to believe. And you take 
the mountain literally too. It's an excellent principle. I have observed 
that the most advanced of our Levites show a strong inclination 
towards Lutheranism. All the same, this is better than the tres peu of 
one of our archbishops, under the threat of the sword, it is true. I 
assume, of course, that you are also a Christian.' 
Stavrogin spoke rapidly, his words pouring out uninterruptedly, 
now seriously, now derisively. 
' Of thy Cross, 0 Lord, may I not be ashamed,' Tikhon almost 
whispered with a kind of passionate intensity, bowing his head stil 
lower. 
'But can one believe in the devil without believing in God?' 
Stavrogin said with a laugh. 

APPENDIX 
'Oh, very much so,' said Tikhon, raising his eyes and smiling. 
'You come across it everywhere.' 
'I'm sure you find such a belief more acceptable than complete 
disbelief,' Stavrogin said, laughing loudly. 
'On the contrary,' Tikhon replied with unconcealed gaiety and 
good humour, 'complete atheism is much more acceptable than 
worldly indifference.' 
'Oh, I see, so that's what you really think ! '  
'The absolute atheist stands on the last rung but one before most 
absolute faith (whether he steps higher or not), while an indiferent 
man has no faith at all, nothing but dismal fear, and that, too, only 
occasionally, ifhe is a sensitive man.' 
'I see . . .  Have you read the Apocalypse?' 
'I have.' 
'Do you remember: "Write to the Angel of the Laodicean 
Church"?' 
'I do.' 
'Where's the book?' Stavrogin asked, thrown into a strange hurry 
and anxiety and searching with his eyes for the book on the table. 
'I'd like to read you . . .  You have a Russian translation, haven't 
you?' 
'I know the passage, I remember it,' said Tikhon. 
'You know it by heart? Let me hear it.' 
He lowered his eyes quickly, rested both his hands on his knees 
and impatiently prepared to listen. Tikhon recited it word for word. 
'And unto the angel of the church of the Laodicean write: Those 
things saith the Amen, the faithful and true Witness, the beginning 
of the creation of God. I know thy works, that thou art neither cold 
nor hot: I would thou wert cold or hot. So that because thou art 
lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I wil spue thee out of my 
mouth. Because thou sayest, I am rich and increased with goods, and 
have need of nothing; and knowest not that thou art wretched, and 
miserable and poor, and blind and naked . .  .' 
'Enough,' Stavrogin cut him short. 'I love you very much, you 
know.' 
'I love you too,' Tikhon replied in a low voice. 
Stavrogin fell silent and suddenly lapsed again into his old 
reverie. The same thing had happened fitfully before. This was the 

680 
T H E  DEVILS 
third time. He said 'I love ' to Tikhon as though in a trance. A t  least 
he never expected it himself. Over a minute passed. 
' Don't be angry with me,' whispered Tikhon, touching his 
elbow lightly with a finger and as though not really daring to do it. 
Stavrogin started and frowned angrily. 
' How did you know that I was angry?' he said quickly. 
Tikhon was about to say something, but Stavrogin suddenly 
interrupted him in inexplicable alarm. 
'Why did you assume that I simply had to be angry? Yes, I was 
furious. You are quite right. Just because I had said to you "I love". 
You are right, but you're a coarse cynic, you have a very low opinion 
of human nature. I might not have been furious, if I had not been 
myself but someone else. However, it is not a question of anyone else, 
but of me. All the same, you're an eccentric and quite crazy.' 
He was getting more and more irritated and, strangely, did not 
seem to care what he said. 
'Listen, I don't like spies and psychologists, at least not those who 
creep into my soul. I don't invite anyone into my soul. I have no 
need of anyone. I can look after myself. You think I'm afraid of you,' 
he went on, raising his voice and looking up defiantly. 'You're quite 
convinced that I came to tell you some "terrible secret", and you 
are waiting for it with the monkish curiosity you are capable of. 
Well, then, I want you to know that I shall not reveal anything to 
you, no secret, for I can perfectly well do without you.' 
Tikhon looked at him firmly. 
'You were surprised that the Lamb should love a cold man more 
than a merely lukewarm one,' he said. 'You don't want to be merely 
lukewarm. I can't help feeling that you are about to take an extreme, 
perhaps even a terrible, decision. I beg you not to torture yourself 
and to tell me everything.' 
' So you are quite sure that I have come with something.' 
'I . . .  I guessed it,' said Tikhon, lowering his eyes. 
Stavrogin was rather pale, his hands trembled a little. For a few 
seconds he stared fixedly and in silence, as though on the point of 
taking a final decision. At last he took some printed sheets out of 
his side pocket and put them on the table. 
'These are the sheets which are meant to be distributed,' he said in 
a faltering voice. 'I want you to know that if one man reads them I 

APPEN DlX 
6 8 1  
;hall not conceal them any longer and they will be read by everyone. 
That's settled. I don't need you at all because my mind is made up. 
But do read them. Don't say anything while you're reading them. 
Tell me everything after you've read them.' 
' Shall I read?' Tikhon asked hesitantly. 
'Yes, read. I don't mind.' 
'I'm afraid I shall not be able to read without my glasses. The print 
is very small. Foreign.' 
'Here are your glasses,' Stavrogin said, handing him the glasses 
from the table and leaning against the back of the sofa. Tikhon did 
not look at hin1 and became absorbed in the reading. 
2 
The print really was foreign: three sheets of ordinary notepaper 
printed and stitched together. It must have been printed secretly on 
some foreign press abroad. At the first glance the sheets of paper 
looked like some political pamphlet. The heading read : From 
Stavrogin. 
I insert this document verbatim in my chronicle. I have aliowed 
myself to correct some numerous spelling mistakes which rather 
surprised me, for the author was after all an educated and even well­
read man (relatively speaking, of course). I made no alterations in the 
style in spite of its irregularities. It is in any case clear that the writel 
was, above all, not a literary man. 
I shall allow myself one more remark, though I am anticipating. 
In my opinion, this document is a morbid work, the work of the 
devil who took possession of that man. It reminds me of a man who 
is suffering from an acute pain and is tossing about in bed trying to 
fmd a position to relieve his pain even for a moment. And not even 
to relieve his pain, but to change it, if only for a moment, for another 
kind of suffering. In a situation like that there can be, of course, 
no question of the position being either beautiful or rational. The 
basic idea of the document is an undisguised, terrible need for 
retribution, the need for the cross, for a public execution. And yet 
this need for the cross in a man who docs not believe in the cross is 
in itself an 'idea', as Stepan Trofunovich put it once, though on a 
different occasion. On the other hand, the whole of this document is 

682 
THE DEVILS 
something wild and reckless, though apparently written with a 
different intention. The author declares that he could not help writing 
it, that he was 'forced' to write it, and that seems quite likely to 
have been the case. He would have been glad to have that cup pass 
from him, if only he could, but it seems he. really could not do so and 
jumped at the first favourable opportunity for indulging in a new act 
of violence. Yes, indeed, a sick man tosses about in bed and wishes to 
change one kind of suffering for another, and now the fight against 
society seems to him to be the easiest position and he throws out a 
challenge to it. 
Indeed, the very fact of such a document presupposes the existence 
of a new and unpardonable challenge to society. 
But who knows, perhaps all this, that is to say, all these sheets of 
paper and their intended publication, is again nothing but the 
governor's bitten ear, only in a different form. Why this should 
even occur to me now when so many things have already been ex­
plained is something I can't understand. I adduce no proof and I 
certainly do not maintain that the document is false, that is to say, 
that it has been completely made up and invented. More likely, 
the truth ought to be sought somewhere midway. However, I've 
already run on too far ahead: I'd better turn to the document itself. 
This is what Tikhon read: 
From Stavrogin. 
I, Nikolai Stavrogin, a retired army officer, lived in Petersburg in 
1 86 .
. . , leading a life of dissipation in which I found no pleasure. 
At that time I had three lodgings during a certain period. In one of 
them I lived myself, in furnished rooms with board and service. 
Maria Lebyatkin, my lawful wife, also lived there at the time. My 
other two lodgings I rented by the month to accommodate my two 
mistresses : in one I received a high society woman who was in love 
with me and in the other her maid, and for some time I toyed with 
the idea of bringing the two of them together, so that the society 
woman and her servant girl should meet each other in my rooms. 
Knowing the character ofboth, I anticipated a great deal of fun from 
that amusing encounter. 
While secretly making al the necessary arrangements for that 
meeting, I had to visit more often one of the two lodgings in a large 

APPENDIX 
h.ouse in Gorokhovaya Street, for that was the place where I and the 
maid used to meet. I had only one room there on the fourth floor, 
which I rented from some Russian working class people. They them­
selves lived in the next room, which was much smaller, so much so 
that the door dividing the two rooms was always open, which was 
what I wanted. The husband, who was working at some office, was 
away from morning till night. His wife, a woman of about forty, 
used to cut up old clothes and refashion them into new, and she used 
to leave the house quite often to deliver her sewing. I remained alone 
with her daughter, quite a child in appearance. Her name was 
Matryosha. Her mother loved her, but often chastised her and, as is 
customary with these people, shouted at her a lot. This little girl 
waited on me and made up my bed behind the screen. I declare that 
I have forgotten the number of the house. Having made some 
inquiries recently, I now know that the old house was pulled 
down and a new and very large house built on the site of two or 
three houses. I have also forgotten the name of my landlord (I may 
never have known it even at the time). I remember that the woman 
was called Stepanida and I believe her patronymic was Mikhailovna. 
I do not remember him. I suppose if one were seriously to make some 
inquiries at the Petersburg police stations, one might be able to trace 
them. Their flat was in the courtyard, in the corner. It all happened in 
June. The house was painted a light blue colour. 
One day I missed my penknife from the table. I did not want it at 
all. It was just lying about there. I told my landlady about it without 
th.l.k.ing that she would thrash her daughter for it. But she had been 
screaming at her daughter for the loss of some rag and had even 
pulled her hair. But when that rag was found under the tablecloth, 
the little girl did not utter a word of complaint but just looked on in 
silence. I noticed that and it was then that I saw for the first time the 
little girl's face, which until that moment I had not particularly 
noticed. She had flaxen hair and a freckled face, quite an ordinary face, 
but it had a great deal of childishness in it, and it was very gentle, 
quite extraordinarily gentle. Her mother resented the fact that her 
daughter did not complain for having been beaten for nothing and 
she made as if to strike her with her fist, but stopped herself in time. 
It was just then that the subject of my penknife came up. There was 
no one in the flat besides the three of us. The little girl was the only 

THE DEVILS 
one to go behind the screen in my room. The woman flew into a 
rage for having the first time ptmished the girl unjustly, rushed up to 
the besom, pulled some twigs out of it, and gave the girl a thrashing 
in front of me until her body was covered in weals, and that in spite 
of the fact that the girl was already in her twelfth year. Matryosha 
did not scream while she was being flogged, probably because I 
was there, but she gave a funny sort of sob at each blow. Afterwards 
the sobbed bitterly for a whole hour. 
But before that happened something else caught my eye: at the 
very moment my landlady was rushing up to the besom to pull out 
the twigs, I saw my penknife on my bed where it must have fallen 
from the table. It occurred to me at once not to tell them about it so 
that she should be thrashed. I made my decision instantly ; at such 
moments I always begin to breathe heavily. But I am determined to 
tell everything without flinching so that nothing should remain 
concealed any longer. 
Every extraordinarily disgraceful, infinitely humiliating, vile and, 
above all, ridiculous situation in which I happened to find myself in 
my life, invariably aroused in me not only intense anger, but also a 
feeling of intense pleasure. It was the same in moments when I was 
committing a crime and in moments when my life was in danger. 
If I were to steal something, I should at the time of committing the 
theft have felt like dancing with pleasure at the thought of the 
depth of my villainy. It was not the villainy that I loved (here my 
mind was absolutely clear). What I liked was the feeling of rapture 
caused by the agonizing consciousness of my baseness. I felt just the 
same when, standing at the barrier, I waited for my opponent to 
fire: I experienced the same shameful and frenzied feeling, and on one 
occasion I did so with quite extraordinary force. I admit that I often 
sought it myself, for to me it was the strongest of any sensation of that 
kind. Whenever I received a slap in the face (and I received two in my 
life), it was there, too, in spite of my terrible anger. But I controlled 
my anger at the time, my feeling of pleasure exceeding anything 
that could be imagined. I never spoke to anyone about it, not even 
hinted at it, concealing it as something shameful and disgraceful. 
I did not experience that sensation but merely intense anger when I 
was once beaten up in a pub in Petersburg and dragged by the hair. 
Not being drunk, I merely put up a fight. But if I had been seized by 

APPENDIX 
685 
the hair and forced down by the French vicomte who, when I was 
abroad, slapped me on the cheek and whose lower jaw I shot off for 
it, I should have experienced the same feeling of ecstasy and most 
likely have felt no anger at al. So it seemed to me then. 
I am saying al this so that everyone should know that that feeling 
never got hold of me entirely, but that I always remained in control 
of my mental faculties (indeed, everything depends on that). 
Although it would take possession of me to a point of madness, to a 
point when it became an obsession, it would never be to a point when 
I lost control of myself entirely. When I was about to explode, I 
was able to overcome it entirely before it reached its climax. But I 
never wanted to stop it mysel£ I'm convinced that I could have lived 
all my life like a monk in spite of the brutish voluptuousness with 
which I have been endowed and which I always evoked. I am always 
master of myself when I want to be. And so I should like it to be 
known that I do not want to plead irresponsibility for my crimes 
either on the ground of my background or on the ground of 
Umf'SS. 
The thrashing over, I put the penknife in my waistcoat pocket 
and, without uttering a word, left the house and threw it away in the 
street, having first walked a long way so that no one should ever find 
out. Then I waited two days. Having had a good cry, the little 
girl became even more taciturn ; but I am sure she felt no resentment 
against me. I cannot help feeling, though, that she must have felt 
somewhat ashamed to have been punished in such a way in front of 
me. But I am sure that she blamed only herself for feeling ashamed, 
as any child would. 
It was during those two days that I put to myself the question 
whether I should not go away and give up the plan I had devised. I 
felt immediately that I could, that I could give it up any time and at 
any moment. About that time I contemplated kiling myself, for I 
was suffering from the disease of indifference, though I am not sure 
that that was the real reason. But during those two or three days (for 
I had to wait til the little girl had forgotten all about it) I committed 
a theft probably as a diversion from my pbscssion or maybe just for 
the fun of it. That was the only theft in my life. 
A large number of people lived in those rooms. Among them was 
a civil servant with his family, who lived in two furnished rooms. 

686 
T H E  D E V I L S  
He was about forty, not altogether a fool, of decent appearance, but 
poor. I did not become friends with him and he was afraid of the 
company that surrounded me there. He had only just drawn his 
salary of thirty-five roubles. What chiefly made me think of it was 
that at that particular moment I really needed money (though four 
days later I received money by post), so that I seemingly stole out of 
want and not for fun. It was done impudently and without any 
attempt at concealment. I simply entered his flat when he and his 
wife and children were having their diner in the other little room. 
His folded uniform lay on a chair near the door. The idea occurred 
to me suddenly when I was still in the corridor. I put my hand into 
the pocket of his uniform and took out the purse. But the civil 
servant must have heard a slight movement, for he looked out ofllis 
room. I believe he did see at least something, but as he did not see it 
all, he did not, of course, believe his eyes. I said that I was passing 
down the corridor and had come to see the time by Ins clock. 'I'm 
afraid it has stopped,' he said, I went out. 
I was drinking a great deal at the time and I always had a crowd of 
people in my rooms, Lebyatkin among them. I threw away the 
purse with the small change and kept the notes. There were thirty­
two roubles, three red notes and two yellow. I changed the red note 
at once and sent out for champagne ; then I sent the second red note 
and the third. Four hours later, in the evening, the civil servant was 
waiting for me in the corridor. 
' You did not accidentally throw my uniform from the chair when 
you came in a few hours ago?' he asked. 'I found it lying on the 
floor.' 
'I'm sorry I don't remember. Was your uniform there?' 
' Yes, sir, it was.' 
' On the floor?' 
' First on the chair, then on the floor.' 
' Did you pick it up?' 
'I did.' 
' Well, so what more do you want?' 
' Well, sir, in that case it's all right.' 
He dared not speak out and he dared not say anything to anybody 
in the house, so timid are these people. Anyhow, they were all 
terribly afraid of me in that house and respected me. Later I enjoyed 

APPENDIX 
exchanging glances with him in the corridor once or twice. Soon I got 
bored with it. 
Three days later I returned to Gorokhovaya Street. The mother 
was going out somewhere with a bundle ; her husband, of course, was 
not at home. Matryosha and I were alone in the flat. The windows 
were open. The house was full of workmen and all day long the 
sound ofhammers and singing could be heard from all the floors. We 
had already been there for an hour. Matryosha sat in her small room 
on a little bench with her back to me and was busy with her needle. 
At last she suddenly began to sing softly, as she often did. I took out 
my watch and saw that it was two o'clock. My heart began to pound. 
I got up and began stealing towards her. On their window-sill were 
many pots of geranium and the sun was shining very brightly. I sat 
down quietly on the floor beside her. She gave a start and at first 
looked terribly frightened and jumped up. I took her hand and kissed 
it quietly, forced her down on the bench again and began looking 
into her eyes. The fact that I kissed her hand suddenly amused her 
like a child, but only for one second, for she jumped up precipitately 
the next moment, this time looking so frightened that a spasm passed 
across her face. Her eyes were motionless with terror and her lips 
began to quiver as though she were on the verge of tears, but she did 
not scream all the same. I kissed her hand again and put her on my 
knee. Then she suddenly grew back and smiled as if ashamed, but 
with a kind of wry smile. Her face flushed with shame. I was 
whispering to her all the time, as though drunk. At last a most 
str:mge thing happened, something I shall never forget, something 
that quite amazed me : the little girl flung her arms ronnd my neck 
1nd all of a sudden began to kiss me frenziedly. Her face expressed 
complete rapture. I nearly got up and went away, so shocked was I 
to find this sort of thing in a little creature for whom I suddenly felt 
pity. 
When all was over, she looked embarrassed. I did not try to 
reassure her and no longer caressed her. She looked at me, smiling 
timidly. Her face suddenly appeared stupid to me. She was getting 
more and more embarrassed with every minute that passed. At last 
she covered her face with her hands and stood motionless in a corner 
with her face to the wall. I was afraid she might be frightened again 
as she had been a short while earlier, and silently left the house. 

688 
THE D EVILS 
I can only imagine that all that had happened to her must have 
seemed utterly hideous, a deathlike horror. In spite of the Russian 
swearwords which she must have heard from her very cradle and al 
sorts of strange conversations, I am quite convinced that she did not 
yet understand anything. I am sure that in the end it must have 
seemed to her that she had committed a terrible crime and was guilty 
of a mortal sin. ' She had killed God.' 
That night I had that punch up in the pub which I have mentioned 
in passing. But I woke up in my rooms in the morning : Lebyatkin had 
taken me home. On awakening my first thought was : had she told 
them or not? It was a moment of real fear, though as yet not very 
intense. I was very gay that morning and terribly kind to everybody, 
and the whole gang was very pleased with me. But I left them all and 
went to Gorokhovaya Street. I met her downstairs in the entrance 
hall. She was coming from the shop where she had been sent for 
chicory. On catching sight of me, she looked terribly frightened and 
ran off upstairs. When I entered, her mother had already bashed her 
for rushing in like mad, which helped to conceal the real reason for 
her fright. So far then everything was all right. She seemed to have 
hidden herself away somewhere and did not come in while I was 
there. I stayed there for an hour and then went away. 
Towards evening I was again overcome by fear, this time incom­
parably more intense. No doubt I could have denied it al, but I 
might be found out and I could already see myself as a convict in a 
Siberian prison. I had never felt fear and, except for this incident in 
my life, I never before or after was afraid of anything. Certainly not 
of Siberia, though I might have been sent there more than once. 
But this time I was frightened and really felt fear, I don't know why, 
for the first time in my life - a very painfu 1 feeling. Besides, I con­
ceived such a hatred for her that evening in my room that I decided 
to kil her. The recollection of her smile was the chief reason for my 
hatred. I began to feel contempt and intense loathing for her because 
after it was all over she had rushed off to a corner of the room and 
covered her face with her hands. I was seized with an inexplicable 
rage, then I became feverish, and when towards morning I began to 
feel that I had a temperature, I was again overcome by panic which 
became so intense that I never experienced a torment more violent. 
But I no longer hated the little girl, at least my hatred did not reach 

APPE N D I X  
689 
such a paroxysm as on the previous evening. I perceived that intense 
fear completely ousts hatred and the feeling of revenge. 
I woke about mid-day feeling well and was surprised at the force 
of yesterday's sensations. However, I was in a bad mood and again 
felt compelled to go to Gorokhovaya Street in spite of all my 
aversion. I remember that I wanted terribly to have a quarrel with 
someone on the way, a real violent quarrel. But on arriving at 
Gorokhovaya Street I unexpectedly found there Nina Savelyevna, 
the maid, who had been waiting for me for an hour. I did not love 
that girl at all and she was afraid that I might be angry with her for 
coming unasked. But I suddenly felt very glad to see her. She was not 
bad-looking, modest and with the manners the lower middle classes 
set such store by, so that my landlady had been telling me for a long 
time what a nice girl she was. I found them both having coffee to­
gether and my landlady highly pleased with their pleasant conversa­
tion. In the corner of their small room I caught sight of Matryosha. 
She stood gazing motionless at her mother and the visitor. When I 
came in she did not hide herself as before and did not run away. I 
could not help observing that she had grown very thin and that she 
had a temperature. I was nice to Nina and locked the door leading into 
the landlady's room, which I had not done for a long time, so that 
Nina left looking very happy. I saw her off myself and did not return 
to Gorokhovaya Street for two days. I was bored with the whole 
business. I decided to put an end to it all by giving up my rooms and 
leaving Petersburg. 
I3ut when I came to give notice I found my landlady greatly 
worried and upset : Matryosha had been ill for three days, she had a 
high temperature and was delirious at night. I asked of course what 
she said in her delirium (we were talking in whispers in my room), 
and she whispered that her daughter was saying ' terrible things ', 
such as 'I killed God'. I offered to call a doctor at my own expense, 
but she would not hear of it. ' God willing, it will pass, she isn't in 
bed all the time, she goes out during the day, she has just run round 
to the shop.' I made up my mind to see Matryosha alone and, as the 
landlady informed me in passing that she had to go to the Petersburg 
suburb about five o'clock, I decided to come back in the evening. 
I had lunch in a pub. Exactly at a quarter past five I returned. I 
always let myself in with my key. There was no one there except 

THE DEVILS 
Matryosha. She was lying in the small room on her mother's bed 
behind the screen and I saw her looking out. But I pretended not to 
have noticed. All the windows were open. The air was warm, even 
hot. I paced the room for a while and then sat down on the sofa. I 
remember everything to the last moment. It positively gave me 
pleasure not to talk to Matryosha but to keep her in suspense. I don't 
know why. I waited for a whole hour when she suddenly rushed 
out from behind the screen herself. I heard both her feet hit the floor 
when she jumped out of bed, then her fairly quick steps, and presently 
she stood on the threshold of my room. She stood and gazed in 
silence. I was so mean that my heart missed a beat with joy : I was so 
glad that I had not given in and waited for her to come out first. 
During the days that I had not seen her even once so close since our 
last meeting, she really had grown very thin. Her face had shrunk 
and her head, I was quite certain, was hot. 
Her eyes had grown large and she gazed at me without blinking 
with a dull curiosity, as I thought at first. I sat still, looked and did 
not move. Then suddenly I again felt that I hated her. But very soon 
I realized that she was not a bit afraid of me, though she was per­
haps still delirious. But she was not delirious at all. She suddenly 
began shaking her head at me, as ingenuous and unmannered people 
do when they disapprove of someone. Then suddenly she raised her 
tiny fist and began shaking it at me from where she stood. At first 
this gesture seemed ridiculous to me, but soon I could stand it no 
longer. Her face was full of such despair which was quite Wlbearable 
to see on the face of a child. She was still shaking her fist at me 
threateningly and shaking her head reproachfully. I got up, took a 
few steps towards her in fear, and began speaking cautiously to her, 
quietly and kindly, but I realized that she wouldn't Wlderstand. 
Then suddenly she covered her face impulsively with both hands as 
she had done at that time, moved off and stood at the window with 
her back to me. I went back to my room and also sat down at the 
window. I simply cannot understand why I did not leave then, but 
remained as though waiting for something. Soon I again heard her 
quick steps. She went out through the door on to the wooden landing 
at the top of the stairs. I ran up to my door at once, opened it a 
little and was just in time to see Matryosha go into the tiny box-room, 
which was like a hen-coop, next to the lavatory. A very curious 

APPENDIX 
691 
thought flashed through my mind. To this day I cannot understand 
why it should have come into my head so suddenly. So it would 
sem that it was at the back of my mind all the time. I left the door 
ajar and again sat down by the window. Of course it was still 
impossible to believe in the thought that had flashed through my 
mind, 'but still . .  .' (I remember everything, and my heart beat 
violently). 
A minute later I looked at my watch and made a note of the time 
with absolute accuracy. Why I had to know the time so exactly I 
can't tell, but I seem to have been able to do so and, anyway, at that 
moment I wanted to make a note of everything. So that I remember 
now what I observed and I can see it as if it were happening at this 
moment. The evening was drawing in. A fly was buzzing over my 
head and kept settling on my face. I caught it, held it in my fingers, 
and put it out of the window. Very loudly a cart drove into the yard. 
Very loudly (and for some time before) a tailor, sitting at a window 
in the comer of the yard, sang a song. He sat at his work and I could 
se him. It occurred to me that since no one had seen me when I 
walked through the gates and went upstairs, it was quite unnecessary 
for anyone to see me when I should be going downstairs. I moved my 
chair quietly ttom the window so that I could not be seen by the 
lodgers. I picked up a book, but put it down again and began looking 
at a tiny red spider on the leaf of a geranium and lost count of the 
time. I remember everything to the very last moment. 
Suddenly I whipped out my watch. Twenty minutes had passed 
since she went out of the room. My guess was assuming the aspect of 
reality. But I decided to wait for exactly another quarter of an hour. 
It had also crossed my mind that she might have returned and that 
I might have failed to hear her. But that was impossible : there was 
dead silence and I could hear the whirr of every midge. Suddenly my 
heart started pounding again. I took out my watch: there were three 
minutes to go; I sat them out, though my heart was pounding pain­
fully. Then I got up, put on my hat, buttoned my overcoat and 
looked round the room to make sure that I had left no trace of my 
presence there. I moved the chair nearer to the window just as it had 
stood there before. At last I opened the door quietly, locked it with 
my key and went up to the little box-room. It was closed, but not 
bolted. I knew that it was never bolted, but I did not want to open it. 

THE D E V I L S  
I stood on tiptoe and began looking through the chink. A t  that very 
moment, just as I raised myself on my toes, I recalled that when I 
sat at the window and looked at the little red spider and then lost 
count of the time, I had been thinking how I should stand on tiptoe 
and look through this chink. In putting in this trifling detail I want to 
prove without a shadow of doubt to what an extent I was quite 
clearly in the full possession of my mental faculties and how much I 
am responsible for everything. I looked through the chink a long 
time, for it was very dark there, but not so dark as to prevent me at 
last from seeing what I wanted. . . .  
At last I decided to leave. I came across no one on the stairs. Three 
hours later we were all drinking tea in our shirtsleeves in our rooms 
and playing with a pack of old cards. Lebyatkin recited poems. We 
were telling lots of stories, all of them, as it happened, clever and 
amusing and not as foolish as usual. No one was drunk, though there 
was a bottle of rum on the table, Lebyatkin alone helping himself to 
it. 
Prokhor Malov once observed that ' when Stavrogin is contented 
and not depressed, all our lads are cheerful and talk cleverly '. I 
remembered it at that time which shows that I was cheerful and 
contented and not depressed. This was what it looked like from the 
outside. But I remember that I was conscious of being a low and 
despicable coward simply because I was glad of having escaped and 
that I should never again be an honourable man (neither here, nor 
after death, nor ever). And something else happened to me at the 
time : it seems that the Jewish saying : ' The thing you do may be bad, 
but it doesn't smell', just fitted me. For although I felt that I was a 
scoundrel, I was not ashamed of it and not in the least upset. When 
sitting at the tea table and chattering away with them, I formulated 
for the first time in my life what appeared to be the rule of my life, 
namely, that I neither know nor feel good or evil and that I 
have not only lost any sense of it, but that there is neither good nor 
evil (which pleased me), and that it is just a prejudice : that I can be 
free from any prejudice, but that once I attain that degree of freedom 
I am done for. This I formulated for the first time at that very 
moment when we were all having tea, when I laughed so much and 
talked such a lot of nonsense with them. But that is also why I 
remember it all. Old ideas which everyone knows often suddenly 

APPENDIX 
appear as if they were quite new, sometimes even after one has lived 
for fifty years. 
But all the time I was waiting for something. So it came about 
that at eleven o'clock the houseporter's little daughter came running 
from my landlady in Gorokhovaya Street with the news that 
Matryosha had hanged herself. I went with the little girl and saw 
that the landlady herself did not know why she had sent for me. She 
wailed and screamed hysterically, there were lots of people and 
policemen. I remained there for a while and then went away. 
The police scarcely troubled me, though I had to answer the usual 
questions. But except that the girl was ill and at times delirious and 
that I had offered to call a doctor at my expense, I said nothing that 
might have been taken down in evidence. They did question me about 
myself and the penknife. I told them that my landlady had given the 
girl a beating, but that that was nothing. No one knew of my having 
been there that evening. 
For about a week I did not call round there. I went there long after 
the fnneral to give notice. The landlady was still crying, although she 
was already busying herself as usual with her rags and her sewing. 
'You see, sir,' she said to me, 'I hurt her feelings because of your pen­
knife.' But she did not seem to blame me particularly. I settled my 
account and gave as my excuse for leaving that I could not possibly 
receive Nina Savelyevna after what had happened in the house. She 
said again a few nice things about Nina Savelyevna at parting. Before 
leaving, I gave her ftve roubles over and above what I owed her. 
The main thing was that I was bored with life, sick and tired to 
death of it. I should have completely forgotten the incident in 
Gorokhovaya Street after the danger had passed just as I had forgotten 
everything else that happened at the time, ifl had not kept remember­
ing angrily what a coward I had been. 
I vented my anger on anyone I could. It was at that time, but not 
for any particular reason, that I took it into my head to ruin my life 
somehow or other, but only in as disgusting a way as possible. A year 
earlier I had been thinking of shooting myself: however, something 
better turned up. 
One day, looking at Maria Lebyatkin, who occasionally did some 
charring in my rooms and who in those days had not yet gone mad 
but was just an ecstatic idiot who was madly in love with me in 

694 
THE DEVILS 
secret (which my friends had foWld out), I suddenly decided to mary 
her. The idea of the marriage of Stavrogin to a low creature like that 
excited my nerves. One could not imagine anything more out­
rageous. At all events I did not marry her merely because of' a bet for 
a bottle of wine after a drunken dinner'. Kirilov and Peter Verkho­
vensky, who happened to be in Petersburg at the time, as well as 
Lebyatkin and Prokhor Malov (now dead) acted as witnesses. No one 
else ever knew anything about it, and they gave me their word to 
say nothing about it. The silence always seemed to me rather dis­
gusting, but it has not been broken till now, though I did intend to 
make it public. I do so now together with the rest. 
After the wedding I left for the coWitry to stay with my mother. 
I left because I wanted some distraction. In our town I left behind me 
the idea that I was mad, an idea that still persists and that Wldoubtedly 
does me hann, as I shall explain later. Then I went abroad and spent 
four years there. 
I went to the East, to MoWlt Athos, where I stood through mid­
night masses which went on for eight hours, I went to Egypt, lived 
in Switzerland, went even to Iceland; I spent a whole year in Goet­
tingen University. During the last year I struck up an acquaintance 
with an aristocratic Russian family in Paris and two yoWig Russian 
girls in Switzerland. About two years ago, passing a stationer's shop 
in Frankfort, I noticed among the photographs for sale a portrait of 
a little girl, wearing an elegant dress but looking very like Matryosha. 
I bought the photograph at once and, on returning to my hotel 
room, I placed it on the mantelpiece. There it lay Wltouched for a 
whole week. I never once looked at it and when I left Frankfort 
I forgot to take it with me. 
I mention it only to show to what an extent I could get the better 
of my memories and how indiferent I had become to them. I repudi­
ated them all en masse and the whole pile of them obediently dis­
appeared every time I wanted it to disappear. I always foWld my 
memories of the past boring and I never could discuss the past as 
almost everybody does, particularly as it was so hateful to me, like 
everything else that concerned me. As for Matryosha, I even forgot 
her photograph on the mantelpiece. One spring, travelling through 
Germany a year ago, I absentmindedly went on past the station where 
I had to change trains and foWld myself on the wrong line. I got out 

APPENDIX 
at the next station. It was past two o'clock in the afternoon, a bright, 
lovely day. It was a tiny German town. I was shown to a hotel. I 
had to wait, for the next train was not due before eleven o'clock at 
night. I was quite glad of my adventure, for I was not in any par­
ticular hurry to go anywhere. The hotel was very small and rather 
shabby, but it was all covered in greenery and surrounded with 
flower-beds. I was given a very small room. I had an excellent meal 
and as I had been travelling all night I soon fell sound asleep at four 
o'clock in the afternoon. 
I had quite an extraordinary dream. I had never had one like it 
before. In the Dresden gallery there is a picture by Claude Lorraine, 
called, I think, 'Acis and Galatea' in the catalogue. I always called it 
The Golden Age. I don't know why. I had seen it before, but now, 
three days before, as I passed through Dresden, I saw it again. I went 
specially to the gallery to have a look at it and for all I know I must 
have stopped at Dresden for the sole purpose of seeing it again. It 
was that picture that I saw in my dream, not as a painting, but as a 
fact. 
A comer of the Greek archipelago ; blue, caressing waves, islands 
and rocks, a foreshore covered in lush vegetation, a magic vista in 
the distance, a spell-binding sunset - it is impossible to describe it in 
words. Here was the cradle of European civilization, here were the 
first scenes from mythology, man's paradise on earth. Here a beautiful 
race of men had lived. They rose and went to sleep happy and ino­
cent; the woods were :filled with their joyous songs, the great over­
flow of their untapped energies passed into love and W1Sophisticated 
gaiety. The sun shed its rays on these islands and that sea, rejoicing 
in its beautiful children. A wonderful dream, a sublime illusion! The 
most incredible dream that has ever been dreamed, but to which all 
mankind has devoted all its powers during the whole of its existence, 
for which it has sacrificed everything, for which it has died on the 
cross and for which its prophets have been killed, without which 
nations will not live and cannot even die. I seem to have lived through 
all these sensations in my dream; I do not know what exactly I 
dreamed about, but the rocks and the sea and the slanting rays of the 
setting sun-1 still seemed to see them all when I woke and opened my 
eyes, which were literally wet with tears for the :first time in my life. 
A sensation of happiness that I had never experienced before went 

T H E  D E V I L S  
right through my heart till it hurt. I t  was already evening; through 
the window of my little room, through the green leaves of the 
flowers on the windowsill, a whole bunch of bright slanting rays of 
the setting sun poured upon me and bathed me in light. I shut my 
eyes quickly once more as though panting to bring back the vanished 
dream, but suddenly in the centre of that bright, bright light I 
beheld a tiny point. Suddenly the point began to take on a kind of 
shape, and all at once I could clearly see a tiny red spider. I im­
mediately remembered the red spider on the leaf of the geranium 
which was also bathed in the rays of the setting sun. I felt as if some­
thing had gone right through me. I raised myself and sat on my 
bed . . . .  
(That is all how it happened then !) 
I saw before me (Oh, not really ! Oh, if it had only been a real 
phantom !) Matryosha, emaciated and with feverish eyes, exactly as 
she was when she stood on the threshold of my room and, shaking her 
head, shook her tiny fist at me. Nothing has ever been so distressing 
to me ! The pathetic despair of a helpless creature with an unformed 
mind threatening me (with what? what could she do to me, 0 Lord?), 
but blaming of course only herself! Nothing like that has ever 
happened to me. I sat there till nightfall without moving and forgetful 
of the time. I do not know and I cannot tell to this day whether this 
is what is called remorse or repentance. But what I fmd so unbearable 
is the image of her standing on the threshold and threatening me 
with her small raised fist, just the way she looked at me then, just 
that shaking of her head. It is this that I cannot stand, for since then it 
has appeared to me almost every day. It doesn't come itself. I myself 
summon it up and I cannot help summoning it up though I cannot 
live with it. Oh, if only I could ever see her real self, even if it were 
were a hallucination ! 
Why then does not any memory of my life arouse in me anything 
like this? Have I not had many memories, some of them perhaps 
much worse in the judgment of men? Why only one hatred and that 
one, too, stirred up by my present state, for before I forgot it cold­
bloodedly and dismissed it out of hand? 
I wandered about after that for almost a whole year and tried to 
find some occupation. I know that I can dismiss Matryosha from my 
mind any time I wish. I am as much in command of my will as ever. 

APPEND IX 
But the whole point is that I never wanted to do so, I do not want to 
myself and never shall want to. It will go on like that till I lapse into 
madness. 
Two months later in Switzerland I had an outburst of the same 
kind of passion accompanied by the same kind of uncontrollable 
impulses as I used to have in the past before. I felt a terrible temptation 
to commit a new crime, namely to enter into a bigamous marriage 
(for I was akeady married) ; but I fled on the advice of another girl 
whom I told almost everything, even that I was not at all in love with 
the girl whom I desired so much and that I could never love anyone. 
Besides, that new crime would not have rid me of Matryosha. 
I therefore decided to have these pages printed and take three 
hundred copies of them to Russia; when the time comes I shall send 
some of them to the police and the local authorities; simultaneously 
I shall send them to the editors of all the newspapers with a request 
to publish them, and to many persons in Petersburg and in Russia 
who know me. It wil also be published abroad in translation. I 
re1lize that legally I have nothing to fear, not to any considerable 
extent at any rate. It is I alone who am informing against myself, for 
I have no accuser; besides, there is no evidence agaimt me, or what 
there is is extremely slight. There is, finally, the prevailing idea that I 
am not in my right mind, an idea which I am quite sure my family 
wil make use of in their efforts to quash any legal prosecution that 
might be dangerous to me. I make this statement, incidentally, in 
order to prove that I am in full possession of my mental faculties 
and realize my position. So far as I am concerned, there will remain 
those who wil know everything and they will look at me and I at 
them. I want everyone to look at me. Whether it wil make things 
easier for me I do not know. I fall back on it as my last resource. 
Once more: if a thorough search were made in the records of the 
Petersburg police something might perhaps be discovered. Matryo­
sha's parents may still be living in Petersburg. The house, of course, 
wil be remembered. It was painted a light blue colour. As for me, I 
shall not go anywhere and for some time (for a year or two) I shall 
always be found at Skvoreshniki, my mother's estate. If summoned, 
I wil appear anywhere. 
NIKOLAI S T  A VROGIN. 
' 

THE DEVILS 
3 
The reading went on for about an hour. Tikhon read slowly and, 
perhaps, read some passages twice over. All that time Stavrogin 
sat silent and motionless. Strangely enough, the trace of impatience, 
absentmindedness and even delirium that had been on his face all the 
morning, had almost disappeared, being replaced by calmness and a 
kind of sincerity that gave him an air almost of dignity. Tikhon took 
off his glasses and began to speak, at fmt rather guardedly. 
'Don't you think certain corrections could be made in this 
document?' 
'Why?' asked Stavrogin. 'I wrote sincerely.' 
'In the style perhaps a little?' 
'I forgot to warn you,' Stavrogin said quickly and sharply with a 
forward thrust of his body, ' that all you say would be useless. I shall 
not give up my intention. Don't try to dissuade me. I shall publish 
. ' 
lt. 
'You did not forget to warn me about it before I began to read.' 
' Never mind,' Stavrogin interrupted harshly. 'Let me repeat 
again : however strong your objections may be, I shall not give up my 
intention. Please note that by this happy or unhappy phrase - think 
of it what you like - I am not at all trying to suggest you should start 
at once objecting or attempt to persuade me.' 
'I could hardly raise any objections or try to persuade you to give 
up your intentions. The idea of yours is a great idea, nor could a 
Christian idea be expressed more perfectly. Further than the won­
derful act of heroism you have conceived repentance cannot go 
unless . .  .' 
' Unless what?' 
' Unless it was in fact repentance and in fact a Christian idea.' 
'I wrote sincerely.' 
'You seem to wish to make yourself out to be worse than your 
heart would desire,' said Tikhon, gradually growing bolder : the 
' document' had evidently made a strong impression on him. 
' Make myself out to be? I repeat : I did not "make myself out to 
be" and I certainly did not try to "show off".' 
Tikhon quickly cast his eyes down. 
'This document comes straight from a heart which has been 

APPENDIX 
mortally wounded - d o  I understand you right?' he said emphatically 
and with extraordinary warmth. 'Yes, this is repentance and the 
natural need for it that has got the better of you, and you have taken 
the great road, a miraculous road. But you seem already to hate and 
despise beforehand all those who will read what you have described 
here and to challenge them to battle. You were not ashamed to 
confess your crime, why are you ashamed of repentance?' 
'Ashamed?' 
'Yes, ashamed and afraid.' 
'Afraid?' 
'Terribly. Let them look at me, you say. But what about you? 
How will you look at them? Some passages in your statement are 
overstressed. You seem to be admiring your psychology and clutch­
ing at every detail merely with the intention of surprising your 
reader by a callousness which is not in you. What else is this but a 
proud challenge by an accused to the judge?' 
'Where' s the challenge? I eliminated all personal discussions.' 
Tikhon made no answer. His pale cheeks flushed. 
'Let's drop it,' Stavrogin dismissed it sharply. ' Let me now ask 
you a question. We've been talking for ftve minutes since you read 
that (he nodded in the direction of the sheets of paper) and I cannot 
detect any expression of shame or aversion in you. You're not very 
squeamish, are you?' 
He did not finish. 
'I shall conceal nothing from you : what horrified me was the vast 
Wlused energy that was deliberately spent on some abomination. 
As for the crime itself, many people sin like that, but they live in 
peace and quiet with their conscience, even considering it the un­
avoidable misdemeanours of youth. There are also old men who sin 
the same way, not taking it seriously and regarding it as innocent 
amusement. The whole world is full of these horrors. But you felt 
the whole depth of your degradation which is extremely rare.' 
'You haven't begWl respecting me after what you've been reading, 
have you?' Stavrogin said with a wry smile. 
'I'm not going to give you a straight answer to this. But there 
certainly is not, nor can there be, any greater or more terrible crime 
than what you did to that girl.' 
'Let's stop judging people by our own yardstick. Perhaps I do not 

700 
THE DEVILS 
suffer as much as I've written and perhaps I really have told a lot of 
lies about myself,' he added unexpectedly. 
Tikhon again made no comment. 
'And what about the girl with whom you broke off in Switzer­
land?' Tikhon began again. 'Where, may I ask, is she at this 
moment?' 
' She's here.' 
Again there was silence. 
'Perhaps I did tell you a lot of lies about myself,' Stavrogin re­
peated insistently. ' Still, what does it matter ifl do challenge them by 
the coarseness of my confession, seeing that you have noticed the 
challenge? I shall make them hate me even more, that's all. That 
ought to make things easier for me.' 
'You mean spite in you will rouse spite in others and, hating them, 
you will feel happier than if you had accepted their pity.' 
'You're right. You know,' he laughed suddenly, ' they may per­
haps call me a jesuit and a sanctimonious hypocrite after the docu­
ment. Ha, ha, ha! Don't you think so?' 
'Why, of course, there's sure to be such an opinion. And how soon 
do you hope to carry out your intention? '  
'Today, tomorrow, the day after tomorrow, how do I know? 
Very soon, though. You're right. I think it will indeed happen like 
that : I shall make it public suddenly and indeed in some revengeful 
and hateful moment when I hate them most.' 
· 
'Answer me one question, but sincerely, me alone, only me,' 
Tikhon said in quite a different tone of voice. 'If anyone forgave you 
for this [Tikhon pointed at the sheets of paper] not anyone whom you 
respect or fear, but a complete stranger, someone you wil never 
know, who, reading your terrible confession, forgave you inwardly, 
in silence, would that make you feel better or would it make no 
diference to you?' 
'Better,' replied Stavrogin in an undertone. 'If you forgave me,' 
he added, lowering his eyes, 'I'd feel much better too.' 
' On condition that you forgave me also,' Tikhon said in a voice 
full of emotion. 
'False humility! These monastic formulas, you know, are not at al 
elegant. Let me tell you the whole truth: I want you to forgive me 
and one, two or three others with you, but not everybody else - I'd 

APPENDIX 
701 
rather everybody else hated me. I want this so that I should be able 
to bear it with humility . . .  .' 
'And what about universal pity for you? Would you not be able 
to bear that with the same kind of humility?' 
'Perhaps I could not. But why do you . .  
. '  
'I feel the extent of your sincerity and I am, of course, much to 
blame for not being able to approach people. I've always felt it to 
be a great fault in myself,' Tikhon said with great sincerity, looking 
straight into Stavrogin's eyes. 'I'm saying this only because I'm 
terribly afraid for you,' he added. 'There's almost an impassable abyss 
before you.' 
'You don't think I shall be able to stand it? That I shan't be able to 
bear their hatred? '  Stavrogin said with a start. 
'Not only hatred.' 
'What else?' 
'Their laughter,' Tikhon almost forced himself to say in a very 
soft whisper. 
Stavrogin looked embarrassed; his face expressed alarm. 
'I knew you'd say that,' he said. ' So you thought me a very 
comical person after reading my "document ", did you? Don't 
worry and don't look so disconcerted. I expected it.' 
'The horror will be general and, needless to say, more false than 
sincere. People fear only what directly threatens their interests. I'm 
not talking of pure souls: they will be horrified inwardly and accuse 
themselves, but they will not be noticed, for they wil be silent. 
But the laughter will be universal.' 
'I'm surprised what a low opinion you have of people, how loath­
somely you regard them,' Stavrogin said with some bitterness. 
'I know you won't believe me,' cried Tikhon, 'but I judged more 
by myself than by other people.' 
'Did you? Is there also something deep inside you that makes you 
amused at my rnisfortWle?' 
'Who knows? Perhaps there is. Oh, perhaps there is ! '  
'Enough. Show me what it is exactly that strikes you as ridiculous 
in my manuscript? I know what it is myself, but I want you to put 
your finger on it. And say it as cynically as possible. Indeed, say it 
with all the sincerity of which you are capable. And let me tell you 
again that you are a terrible eccentric.' 

702 
THE DEVILS 
' Why, even in the form o f  this great penance there is something 
ridiculous. Oh, don't try to persuade yourself that you won't emerge 
victorious from it,' he cried suddenly, almost beside himself. 'Even 
this form [he pointed to the manuscript] will triumph provided you 
sincerely accept the contumely and the vituperation. It always ended 
in the most ignominious cross becoming a great glory and a great 
force, if the humility of the great deed was sincere. It is quite possible 
that you will be comforted even in your lifetime.' 
' So you think there's something ridiculous perhaps in the form 
alone, do you?' Stavrogin insisted. 
'And in the substance. The ugliness will kill it,' Tikhon whispered, 
lowering his eyes. 
' Ugliness? What ugliness?' 
' Of the crimes. There are crimes that are truly ugly. Crimes, 
whatever their nature, are more impressive, more, as it were, pic­
turesque, the more blood and the more horror. But there are crimes 
that are shameful and disgraceful quite apart from the horror, crimes 
that are, as it were, a little too inelegant . . .  .' 
Tikhon stopped short. 
'You mean,' Stavrogin broke in excitedly, 'you fmd that I cut a 
rather ridiculous figure when I kissed the hand of a dirty little girl. 
I understand you very well. You despair of me just because it is so 
ugly, so loathsome. No, I don't mean that it is loathsome, but that 
it is shameful and ridiculous. You think it is this that I shall be able 
to bear least of all.' 
Tikhon was silent. 
' Now I understand why you asked me about the girl from 
Switzerland. I mean, whether she was here.' 
'You're not prepared, not hardened,' Tikhon whispered timidly. 
'You're uprooted, you do not believe.' 
'Listen, Father Tikhon : I want to forgive myself. That is my chief 
purpose, my only purpose ! '  Stavrogin said suddenly, with gloomy 
rapture in his eyes. ' I  know that only then will the apparition vanish. 
That is why I seek boundless suffering. Seek it myself. Don't try to 
frighten me or spite will kill me.' 
The sincerity ofhis outburst was so unexpected that Tikhon got up. 
'If you believe,' Tikhon exclaimed rapturously, 'that you can 
forgive yourself and obtain that forgiveness for yourself in this world 

APPENDIX 
through suffering, if you set that purpose before you with faith, then 
you believe in everything already. Why, then, did you say that you 
did not believe in God?' 
Stavrogin made no answer. 
'God wil forgive you for your unbelief, for you respect the Holy 
Spirit without knowing him.' 
. 
'By the way, Christ wil forgive, won't He?' asked Stavrogin 
with a wry smile, quickly changing his tone, and there was an un­
mistakable touch of irony in the tone of his question. 
'It says in the Book, "And whosoever shall offend one of these 
little ones" - remember. According to the Gospel, there is no 
greater crime.' 
'You simply don't want a good old row and you're laying a trap 
for me, dear old Father Tikhon,' Stavrogin mumbled casually and 
with annoyance, trying to get up. 'In short, what you want is that I 
should settle down, get married and end my days as a membe_r of our 
club, visiting your monastery on every church festival. Real to good­
ness church penance ! hn't that so? Still, as an expert in the human 
heart you foresee, no doubt, that it will certainly be so and that all 
that remains to be done now is to ask me nicely, just as a matter of 
form, for I am only waiting to be asked, isn't that so?' 
He chuckled affectedly. 
'No, it isn't that kind of penance,' Tikhon cried warmly, without 
taking any notice of Stavrogin's laugh and remark. 'I'm getting 
quite another one ready for you. I know an elder, not here, but 
not far from here, a hermit and an ascetic, a man of such great 
Christian wisdom as is beyond your or my understanding. He 
wil listen to my entreaties. I'll tell him everything about you. Go 
to him, share his retreat as a novice, stay under his guidance for five 
or seven years, for as long as you may find necessary yoursel£ Take a 
vow and by this great sacrifice you wil acquire everything you 
crave for and even what you do not expect, for you cannot possible 
conceive now what you will obtain.' 
Stavrogin heard him out gravely. 
'You propose that I enter that monastery as a monk.' 
'You need not live in the monastery, you need not take your vows 
as a monk, you can be just a novice, a secret, not an open one. It 
can be arranged for you to go on living in society . . . .' 

THE D E V I L S  
'leave me alone, Father Tikhon,' Stavrogin interrupted him, look­
ing disgusted and getting up. Tikhon also got up. 
'What's the matter with you?' Stavrogin suddenly cried, looking 
intently at Tikhon almost in fear. 
Tikhon stood before him, his hands clasped in front of him, a 
painful spasm passing for a moment across his face as though from 
a terrible fright. 
' What's the matter with you? What's the matter? '  Stavrogin kept 
repeating, rushing forward to support him . He thought that Tikhon 
was going to fall. 
'I see, I see, just as if it were happening in front of me now,' 
Tikhon cried in a voice that penetrated the soul and with an expres­
sion of great sadness, 'that you, poor, lost youth, have never been so 
near another and still greater crime as you are at this moment.' 
' Calm yourself,' pleaded Stavrogin, who was really alarmed for 
him. 'Perhaps I shall still postpone it . . .  You're quite right . . .  .' 
' No, not after the publication, but before it. A day, an hour 
perhaps before the great step, you will commit a new crime as a way 
out, and you will commit it solely in order to avoid the publication 
of these pages.' 
Stavrogin was shaking with anger and almost with fear. 
'You damned psychologist ! '  he cut him short suddenly in a rage 
and, without looking back, left the cell. 


