A Writer's 
Diary 
FYO D O R  D OST OE VSKY 
Volume One I 873- I 876 
Translated and Annotated by 
KENNETH LANTZ 
With an Introductory Study by 
GARY SAUL MORSON 
Northwestern Univcrsitv Press 
· Evanston, Illinois 

Northwestern University Press 
Evanston, Illinois 6o2o8-4210 
This translation was funded with the assistance of the National Endowment fur the 
Humanities. 
Copyright :9 1993 by Northwestern University Press 
All rights reserved. Published 1993 
Printed in the United States of America 
ISBN o-8t01-1094-6 
The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of the 
American National Standard for Information Sciences-Permanence of Paper fur 
Printed Library Materials, ANSI Z39·48-1984. 

Contents 
Translator's Preface 
XIH 
Introductory Study by Gary Saul Morson 
I 
I 8 7 3 
I 
Introduction 
I 2 I 
2 
Old People 
126 
3 
Environment 
I32 
4 
Something Personal 
I46 
5 
VIas 
I 56 
6 
Bobok 
I70 
7 
A Troubled Countenance 
I86 
8 
A Half- Letter from "A Certain Person" 
I95 
9 
Apropos of the Exhibition 
205 
IO An Impersonator 2I7 
I I  Dreams and Musings 234 
I2 Apropos of a New Play 24I 
I3 
Little Pictures 253 
v 

VI 
Contents 
I4 To a Teacher 263 
I 5 
Something about Lying 269 
I6 One of Today's Falsehoods 279 
I 8 7 6 
[A N N OU N C E M E N T] 
January 
CHAPTER ONE 
I 
In Place of a Foreword. On the Great and Small 
Bears, on Great Goethe's Prayer, and, Generally, on 
Bad Habits 
299 
2 
A Future Novel. Another "Accidental Family" 
30I 
3 The Christmas Party at the Artists' Club. Children 
Who Think and Children Who Are Helped Along. 
A "Gluttonous Boy." "Oui" Girls. Jostling Raw 
Youths. A Moscow Captain in a Hurry 
303 
4 The Golden Age in Your Pocket 
307 
CHAPTER TWO 
I 
The Boy with His Hand Out 
309 
2 
The Boy at Christ's Christmas Party 
3IO 
3 
A Colony of Young Offenders. Dark Individuals. 
The Transformation of Blemished Souls into 
Immaculate Ones. Measures Acknowledged as Most 
Expedient Thereto. Little and Bold Friends of 
Mankind 
3I4 
CHAPTER THREE 
I 
The Russian Society for the Protection of Animals. 
The Government Courier. Demon-Vodka. The Itch 
for Debauch and Vorobev. From the End or from 
the Beginning? 
325 
2 
Spirirualism. Something about Devils. The 
Extraordinary Cleverness of Devils, If Only These 
Are Devils 
332 

Contents 
3 A Word Apropos of My Biography 
4 A Turkish Proverb 
February 
CHAPTER ONE 
1 
On the Fact That We Are All Good People. How 
Vll 
339 
340 
Russian Society Resembles Marshal MacMahon 
343 
2 On Love of the People. An Essential Contract with 
the People 
34 7 
3 The Peasant Marey 
3 5 1 
CHAPTER TWO 
1 Apropos of the Kroneberg Case 
356 
2 
Something on Lawyers in General. My Naive and 
Hasty Assumptions. Something on Talented People 
in General and in Particular 
359 
3 Mr. Spasovich's Speech. Clever Tactics 
365 
4 The Berries 
373 
5 The Pillars of Hercules 
378 
6 The Family and Our Sacred Ideals. A Concluding 
Note about a Certain Modern School 
383 
March 
CHAPTER ONE 
1 
How True Is the Notion That "The Ideals May Be 
Base So Long As The Reality Is Good"? 
387 
2 A Hundred-Year-Old Woman 
389 
3 
Dissociation 
394 
4 Musings about Europe 
399 
5 
An Expired Force and the Forces of the Future 
404 
CHAPTER TWO 
1 
Don Carlos and Sir Watkin. More Signs of "The 
Beginning of the End" 
41 o 
2 Lord Radstock 
418 
3 A Word or Two about the Report of the Scholarly 
Commission on Spiritualistic Phenomena 
420 

Vlll 
4 Isolated Phenomena 
5 
On Y ury Samarin 
April 
CHAPTER ONE 
I 
The Ideals of a Stagnant, Vegetative Life. Kulaks 
and Bloodsuckers. Superior People Who Drive 
Contents 
422 
423 
Russia Forward 
427 
2 Minor Culrural Types. Damaged People 
429 
3 Confusion and Inaccuracy in the Points at Issue 
435 
4 The Beneficent Swiss Who Liberates a Russian 
Peasant 
440 
CHAPTER TWO 
I 
Something on Political Questions 
449 
2 A Paradoxicalist 
452 
3 Just a Bit More about Spiritualism 
457 
4 On Behalf of One Deceased 
464 
May 
CHAPTER ONE 
I 
From a Private Lener 
2 A New Regional Voice 
3 The Court and Mrs. Kairova 
4 The Defense Anorney and Kairova 
5 The Defense Anorney and Velikanova 
CHAPTER TWO 
I 
Something about a Certain Building. Some 
Appropriate Thoughts 
2 One Inappropriate Thought 
3 A Democratic Spirit, for Certain. Women 
47I 
472 
474 
479 
485 
49I 
496 
500 

Contents 
June 
CHAPTER ONE 
I The Death of George Sand 
2 A Few Words about George Sand 
CHAPTER TWO 
I My Paradox 
2 
Deduction from My Paradox 
3 The Eastern Question 
4 The Utopian Conception of History 
s 
About Women Again 
July and August 
CHAPTER ONE 
I Going Abroad. Something about Russians in 
Railway Carriages 
2 
Something on Petersburg Baden-Badenism 
3 On the Pugnacity of the Germans 
4 The Very Last Word of Civilization 
CHAPTER TWO 
lX 
sos 
S07 
SIS 
S2I 
S22 
S2S 
S3I 
S37 
S4I 
S43 
S46 
I Idealist-Cynics 
sso 
2 
Should One Be Ashamed of Being an Idealist? 
SS4 
3 The Germans and Labor. Inexplicable Tricks. On 
Wit 
SS9 
CHAPTER THREE 
I Russian or French? 
2 What Language Should a Future Person of 
Consequence Speak? 
CHAPTER FOUR 
I What Effects the Cure When Taking the Waters: 
s6s 
S7I 
The Water or the Bon Ton? 
S77 
2 One on Whom Modern Woman Has Shown Favor 
sSI 
3 Children's Secrets 
sss 
4 The Land and Children 
S89 
s 
An Odd Summer for Russia 
S94 
6 
Postscript 
S97 

X 
September 
CHAPTER ONE 
I Piccola Bestia 
2 Words, Words, Words! 
3 Schemes and More Schemes 
4 Dressing Gowns and Soap 
CHAPTER TWO 
I Outmoded People 
2 Kifomokievism 
3 Continuation of the Preceding 
4 Fears and Apprehensions 
5 Postscript 
October 
CHAPTER ONE 
Contents 
6os 
611 
6I3 
6I8 
I A Case That Is Not as Simple as It Seems 
64I 
2 A Few Remarks about Simplicity and Simplification 
64 7 
3 Two Suicides 
6so 
4 The Sentence 
653 
CHAPTER TWO 
I A New Phase in the Eastern Question 
2 Cherniaev 
3 The Best People 
4 On the Same Topic 
November 
CHAPTER ONE 
THE MEEK ONE: A FANTASTIC STORY 
Author's Foreword 
677 
I Who Was I and Who Was She? 
678 
2 A Proposal of Marriage 
683 
3 The N'oblest of Men, but I Don't Believe It Myself 
687 
4 Plans and 1\˙ore Plans 
690 
5 The Meek One Rebels 
693 

Contents 
6 A Dreadful Recollection 
CHAPTER TWO 
I A Dream of Pride 
2 Suddenly the Shroud Fell Away 
3 I Understand All Too Well 
4 I Was Only Five Minutes Late 
December 
CHAPTER ONE 
I More about a Case That Is Not as Simple as It 
Seems 
2 A Belated Moral 
3 Unsubstantiated Statements 
4 A Few Words about Young People 
5 On Suicide and Arrogance 
CHAPTER TWO 
XI 
701 
706 
7IO 
7I4 
72I 
729 
732 
737 
740 
I A Story from the Lives of Children 
743 
2 An Explanation Regarding My Participation in the 
Forthcoming Publication of the Magazine Light 
748 
3 Where Does the Maner Stand at the Moment? 
749 
4 A Short Comment on "Pondering Peter" 
753 
NOTES 
755 


Translator's Preface 
The eminent Soviet scholar Dmitry Likhachev, in an article sig­
nificantly entitled '"Stylistic Negligence' in Dostoevsky," remarked 
that "Dostoevsky flaunts before the reader the rawness of his style 
and the seemingly improvised narure of his narrative; at the same 
time he does not conceal his quest for general and maximum ac­
curacy, despite the deliberate and even shocking inaccuracy in 
specific details. He lays bare the strucrures of his works and his 
behind-the-scenes techniques."' Likhachev is speaking of Dos­
toevsky the novelist, but the observation holds true for Dostoevsky's 
writing generally. His prose is not elegant: it is often convoluted, 
frequently repetitious, and is full of qualifications such as "per­
haps," "rather," "somewhat," "as if," "partly," "a certain," "some 
sort of," "evidently." Certain favorite phrases-"the main thing," 
"the most important thing," "above all," "on the contrary," and, 
of course, "suddenly" -recur with dismaying regularity. Some of 
these traits may derive from the tradition of nineteenth-century 
Russian journalistic writing: all journalists wrote with the censor 
looking over their shoulders, so circumlocutions and qualifications 
were safer than simple and unambiguous statements. And the 
weight of an article was, I suspect, often equated with its length. 
But it would be quite wrong to dismiss Dostoevsky's expository 
prose as merely a product of a journalistic milieu; it is powerful 
and distinctive, a deliberately chosen vehicle to convey his sense 
of life, as Likhachev argues. 
Another discerning critic, P. M. Bitsilli, has noted that Dos­
toevsky's style reveals his "awareness ofthe impossibility of finding 
any comprehensive formula to express all the complexity and inner 
contradictions of this or that element of reality."2 The truth, in 
other words, is elusive and incredibly complex; Dostoevsky does 
xw 

xiv 
Translator's Preface 
not capture it, but circles around it and approximates it. He himself 
often commented on the difficulty of transferring his own insights 
into words. "We all know," he wrote, "that entire trains of thought 
can sometimes pass through our heads in an instant, like sensations 
of some sort, without being translated into human language, never 
mind into literary language."3 "Your idea, even though it may be 
a bad one, is always more profound when it is within you, but 
when you put it into words it is more ridiculous and less hon­
est. . . .  "' At the same time, he was wary of making himself too 
clear: in July 1876, he complained that his June Diary, which 
contained a fairly unambiguous statement of his views on Russia's 
mission, had been a mistake: 
In my wr it ings I had never yet perm itted myself to b ring certain 
of my convict ions to their conc lus ion, to say rhe very last word . . . .  
Set forth any paradox you please, but do not bring it to a conclus ion, 
and you '11 have someth ing w itty and subtle and camme il faur, but 
br ing some very speculat ive statement to a conclus ion . . .  d irectly and 
not merely by suggest ion, and no one w ill bel ieve you, prec isely 
because of your na ivete, precisely because you have brought it to its 
conclus ion and sa id your final word . On the other h and, however, if 
many of the most famous w its- Volta ire, for instance-had, instead 
of g ibes, h ints, innuendos and ins inuations, sudde nly resol ved to state 
everyth ing they bel ieved in and revealed all the ir innermost reality, 
the ir essence-then, bel ieve me, they would never have ga ined a tenth 
of the e ffect they d id. Even more: people would o nly have laughed 
at them . Indeed, people in general somehow do not l ike the last word 
in anyth ing, the "expressed " thought; they say that "the thought 
expressed is a lie.'" 
I have tried, therefore, to respect Dostoevsky's text, to preserve 
the oddities, the complexities, the ambiguities, and even the "sud­
denlys." Although they may be grammatically and logically su­
perfluous, they convey the contradictions and complexities of his 
view of life and of his own personality. If one hopes to understand 
or, more accurately, to experience that personality (and I think that 
Dostoevsky's personality is revealed more fully in the Diary than 
 his novels and stories), the rawness and rough edges of his prose 
must be preserved. This also means anempting to preserve his 
long and torturous sentences. Russian can, without any violation 
of stylistic norms, create "run-on" sentences, and many of Dos­
toevsky's fall into this category. English is not so tolerant, so I 

Translator's Preface 
XV 
have often resorted to stringing his clauses together with semico­
lons. I have also retained Dostoevsky's paragraphing, even though 
this means that the reader must confront some formidably long 
blocks of prose. 
--
As he makes clear in the very first article of the Diary, Dostoevsky 
is speaking to his readers; he encourages a dialogue, not only by 
replying to letters and to critics of his Diary, but by anticipating 
a reply or a reaction or providing one himself. The ellipses, cir­
cumlocutions, and hesitations in his prose create an effect that is 
often closer to the spoken rather than the written language. The 
emotional tone of his dialogues shifts from solemn prophecy to 
whimsical playfulness, from bitter sarcasm to petty pique, from 
heartfelt compassion to sputtering outrage. But all the while he is 
concerned to engage his reader and pass on his meaning: hence 
the "most imponant thing," "the main thing," the repetitions, 
and the italics (both literal and figurative). 
A few terms Dostoevsky uses present panicular problems. The 
word narod is perhaps adequately rendered by "people," but the 
Russian word has many connotations that are lacking in English; 
for Dostoevsky, the Russian people-the long-suffering, unlettered, 
unwashed, often brutish and drunken peasants little more than a 
decade removed from virtual slavery-were the repository of the 
great "Russian idea" that was destined to redeem the world. If 
only to remind the English-speaking reader of the reverential con­
notations of the word as used by Dostoevsky, I have capitalized it 
throughout the translation. Other peoples not endowed with qual­
ities Dostoevsky found in the Russian peasants must be content 
here with a small p. Obosoblenie is another concept that recurs 
throughout the Diary. The dictionary meanings of "isolation" or 
"setting apan" are not q1;ite adequate, since Dostoevsky had in 
mind the fragmentation of Russian society, the alienation and sep­
arateness, which he saw as the product of the loss of common 
beliefs and the resulting fraying of the social fabric. I have translated 
this word as "dissociation."6 Kosnost' is used less often, but again 
the dictionary meanings of "stagnation" or "inertness" do not 
convey th˚ full sense of the word as he uses it, which is often to 
suggest the brute facts of life, that which refuses to change; it 
belongs, I think, in the same category as the Underground Man's 
"laws of nature," or Meier's wall in The Idiot. For example, in his 
"Notebook" of 1863-64 Dostoevsky remarked, "The doctrine of 
the materialists is universal kosnost' and the mechanism of things-

XVl 
Translator's Preface 
death, in other words."7 In most contexts I have translated the 
word as "immutability." Finally, Dostoevsky usually chooses the 
word zhid-in contemporary Russian a pejorative for "Jew"-over 
the standard evrei. Although zhid was acceptable in pre-nineteenth­
cenrury standard Russian (as are its cognates in contemporary Po­
lish and Ukrainian), by the mid-nineteenth cenrury it was certainly 
offensive; although it was perhaps not quite so strong as "Yid" or 
"Kike" in modern English, I have used the former to translate 
it. 8 
Some of the work on this translation was completed while I was 
on a research leave sponsored by the Centre for Russian and East 
European Studies of the University of Toronto; I gratefully ac­
knowledge the Centre's support. I am also indebted to the Uni­
versity of Toronto for a grant-in-aid of this project. 
Notes 
1 .  D. S. Likhachev, "'Ne brezhenie slovom' u Dostoevskogo," Izbrannye 
raboty (Leningrad: Khudozhestvennaia literatura, 1987), 3:273. 
2. P. M. Bits illi, " K  voprosu o vnutrennei forme ro rnana Dostoevskogo," 
Sofia Universitet. lstorikofilologicheski fakultet. Godishnik 42 (1945-
46): 6. 
3 - F. M. Dostoevsky, Polnoe sobranie sochinenii (Len ingrad: Nauka, 1972-
88), s: 12. 
4· Quoted in L. P. Grossman, Seminarii po Dostoevskomu: material)\ bib­
liograjiia i kommentarii (Moscow and Petrograd, 1922), p. 7 1. 
5 ·  Le ner to Vsevolod Solovev, July 16, 1876, in Polnoe sobranie sochinenii, 
vol. 29, bk. 2, pp. 101 -2. The last line of the le ner is a quotation from 
F. I. Tiutchev's poem "S ilentium." 
6. I am inde bted to Gary Saul Morson for this suggestion. 
7. Literaturnoe nasledstvo 83: Neizdannyi Dostoevskii: zapisnye knizhki i te­
tradi, I86o-I88I (Leningrad: Nauka, 1971), p. 175. 
8. Dostoevsky's use of the word zhid, and his anti-Semitism generally, are 
discussed in detai l by David Goldstein, Dostoevsky and the Jews (Austin 
and London: University of Texas Press, 1981). 

Introductory Study: 
Dostoevsky's Great Experiment 
Gary Saul Morson 
Part 1 :  Origin of an Anomaly 
Instead of a Preface on Loose and Baggy Monsters, 
on Clausewitzian Poetics, and on the "Herzenification" 
of Russian Literature 
Dostoevsky's Writer's Diary immediately strikes the reader as one 
of the strangest works of world literature.' In the Russian tradition 
of "loose baggy monsters," the Diary may be the loosest and 
baggiest-as if it were designed to test the limits of the Russian lit­
erary mania for formally anomalous works.2 In issue after issue of 
the Diary, Dostoevsky stresses that Russian history is and must be 
different from that of any other country, and his strange work seems 
to match this Slavophile sense of history with a radical "Slavo­
philism" of literary form. 
Nineteenth-cenrury Russian writers and critics of all camps never 
tired of stressing the distinctiveness of Russian history and the 
formal anomaly of Russian literature. Near the beginning of Rus­
sian literarure's great flowering, the epoch's most revered critic, 
Vissarion Belinsky, insisted that Russianness was to be found in 
the denial of all "European" culrural norms and panerns. "It is 
precisely one of the greatest intellectual achievements of our age," 
Belinsky proclaimed, 
that we have at last begun to realize that Russia had a history of her 

2 
A Writer's Diary 
own that in no way resembled the history of a single European state, 
and that it should be s tudied and judged on its own merits and not 
in the light of the history of European nat ions, with which it has 
nothing in common. The same app lies to the history of Russian 
litera ture . . . .  It has been in existence for a mere hundred and seven 
years, yet it already possesses several works whose only interest for 
foreigners is that they strike them as being unlike the works of their 
own litera ture, hence, as being original, independent, i.e., nationally 
Russian. ' 
This passage, which voiced what was to become a cliche of Russian 
criticism, expresses a number of notewonhy ideas. Most obviously, 
Belinsky denies that all nations follow the same historical steps; 
here, he is evidently responding to the Hegelian view of history as 
one grand unfolding story, to which Russia is incidental. Instead 
of History, Belinsky insists on histories, from which it follows that 
one can recognize an event or artifact as Russian, rather than as 
a mere imitation, to the extent that it departs from European norms. 
Note also Belinsky's keen sense of the belatedness of Russian 
literature.' Which other major European country's literature began 
a century ago, and which one could acrually date, to the year, its 
literature's origin? For Belinsky and others, this sense of belat­
edness, and therefore of cultural inferiority that must be overcome 
even more rapidly than economic backwardness, lent a tone of 
urgency. Criticism was expected to monitor year by year, perhaps 
even month by month, Russian progress in producing timeless 
masterpieces. Russian literature, focused on its "thick journals," 
became a periodical quest for cultural immortality. 
No less characteristic of the Russian tradition is the assumption 
that it is in literature, rather than any other of the arts, sciences, or 
industries, that Russia's genius is to be expressed. We sense these 
same assumptions operating when, in A Writer's Diary, Dostoevsky 
praises Anna Karenina, the last installment of which had just ap­
peared, as not just a literary event but a historical "fact of special 
significance" (7-8/77, 2.3). It is, he declared, the justification of 
Russia's existence and the proof of its special character: "If the Rus­
sian genius could give birth to this fact, then it is not doomed to 
impotence and can create; it can provide something of its own, it 
can begin its 0".:.1J1 and finish uttering it when the times and seasons 
come to pass." The very need to point to a great writer-to Tolstoy­
as the justification of a whole people is itself characteristic of Rus­
sian culture. With his familiar tone of wistful doubt, Dostoevsky 

Intn>ductory Sowdy 
3 
concludes that perhaps Russians can someday contribute to some 
other cultural field as well: "It would be absurd simply to suppose 
that nature has endowed us only with literary talents." 
Tolstoy himself wrote the most famous description of Russian 
literature's distinctiveness, which he identified explicitly with its 
tradition of formal anomaly. Responding to critics who were mys­
tified by the aberrant shape of War and Peace and to readers who 
could not recognize the genre to which it belonged, Tolstoy boldly 
answered that his book was, like all Russian masterpieces, sui 
generis. "What Is War and Peace?" he asked, and then answered 
by specifying what it is not: 
It is not a novel, still less a poema, still less a historic al chronicle. 
War and Peace is wh at the author wished to express and w as able to 
express in th at form in which it is expressed. Such a st atement of the 
author's disreg ard for the convention al forms of an artistic prose work 
might seem presumptuous if it were not deliber ate and if there were 
no precedents for it. But the history of Russi an liter ature since the 
time of Pushkin not only affords many ex amples of such a dep arture 
from Europe an form, but does not offer so much as one ex ample to 
the contr ary. From Gogol's Dead Sauls to Dostoevsky's Dead Hause, 
in the recent period of Russi an liter ature there is not a single work 
of artistic prose, at all rising above mediocrity, th at quite fits the form 
of a novel, a poem, or a story. ' 
Tolstoy was no doubt exaggerating in stating that all Russian master­
pieces were formally defiant, but this exaggeration itself both typ­
ified and influenced the tradition it described. In A Writer's Diary 
Dostoevsky went so far as to criticize War and Peace as too con­
servative-as not formally daring enough. 6 
In the twentieth century the great Russian Formalist critic Victor 
Shklovsky echoed the many descriptions of Russian literature as 
an antitradition when he described War and Peace as not only the 
greatest but also the most typical (because atypical) work of Russian 
literature. With the exaggeration so familiar in Russian criticism, 
Shklovsky warned that Tolstoy's masterpiece will never be under­
stood so long as it is read according to the thoroughly alien laws 
of European art: 
The novel War and Peace is founded on its own l aws, the l aws of the 
Russi an novel, which were being worked out for dec ades in Russi an 
art. The novels of Tolstoy will be incomprehensible if we come to 
judge them according to the norms of old poetics, which would be 

4 
A Writer's Diary 
like judging Kuruzov's actions according to Clausewitz's rules of 
war .
.
.
.
 His novel has been compared with West European novels of 
the first half of the nineteenth century. But the frames of these novels 
had long become (too] narow for Russian artistic thought.' 
Like so many of his predecessors, Shklovsky then sketches a 
history of Russian literature to justify this description. "Great Rus­
sian prose was belated in its appearance when compared to West 
European," Shklovsky argues, "but, having appeared, it conceived 
of itself and of the world in its own way."8 What most fascinates 
Shklovsky is the Russian tendency to combine within a single work 
fiction and nonfiction, novel and essay, or story and polemical 
article. Such combinations were for Shklovsky the hallmark of 
Russian literature and constituted the most radical anomaly of War 
and Peace. 
Shklovsky suggests that the origin of Tolstoy's experiment is to 
be found in Gogol's Arabesques, a collection of essays and stories 
that, Shklovsky believes, should be read not merely as an anthology 
of Gogol's writings but as an integral literary work. Shklovsky 
also stresses the importance of Alexander Herzen's From the Other 
Shore, which juxtaposed essays to fictional dialogues; Shklovsky 
calls this whole combinatory trend the "Herzeni.fication" of Rus­
sian literature. "The inclusion of philosophy in a great new form­
this was the concern not only of Gogo! and Herzen but also of 
Tolstoy, in such a work as War and Peace .... Toward the middle 
of the nineteenth century, elements of 'science' and art converged 
in Russian prose" (Pooesti o proze, 6). Shklovsky himself combined 
scholarship and art in his own works (most notably Zoo), and his 
colleague Boris Eichenbaum actually produced one issue of a lit­
erary work in periodical form that is eerily reminiscent of A Writer's 
Diary.• 
By the 192os A Writer's Diary, which was infamous for its re­
actionary politics, could not be seriously praised in Bolshevik Rus­
sia. But as Shklovsky and Eichenbaum were doubtless aware, it, 
even more than War and Peace, exemplified "Herzenification." 
Indeed, the opening essay of the 1873 Diary explicitly cites Herzen's 
success in From the Other Shore as a key inspiration for the Diary 
itself. 
Turning the Periodical into Literature; 
Plan of the Present Essay 
Considered as a daring experiment in form, A Writer̋ Diary seems 
even more extreme than War and Peace. It resembles most literature 

Introductory Study 
5 
so little that many readers have not recognized it as a literary work 
at all. The Diary has usually been treated as a mere anthology, a 
random collection of Dostoevsky's writings during a given period, 
with no integrity of its own. It is commonplace to analyze the 
stories that appear in the Diary as if they had originally been 
published as entirely independent works, whereas no serious scholar 
would think of interpreting (or anthologizing) his Grand Inquisitor 
legend without acknowledging how its meaning is conditioned by 
its place in The Brothers Karamazuv. Many parts of the Diary are 
quite well known, but not as parts of the Diary. Only recently have 
scholars and readers begun to be fascinated by the Diary itself. 
The relative neglect of the Diary (as opposed to its most famous 
sections) apparently resulted from three causes. First, the Diary is 
so remarkably odd, and so unlike other works, that it is hard to 
recognize as an integral work. Second, large portions of it are deeply 
offensive, and so a method that allows for excerpting has obvious 
advantages. Third, and perhaps most important, Dostoevsky did 
not always keep to the plan of this already difficult work. If it is 
hard to limn the outlines of a radically new structure when realized 
according to plan, it is even harder to do so when the plan is set 
aside and the structure obscured. One might say that however bold 
and interesting the experiment of the Diary, the work itself may 
perhaps be regarded as Dostoevsky's most brilliant and intriguing 
failure. 
What was the intended design of the Diary? In the work itself 
irritated "readers" occasionally interrupt the author with this very 
question, only to receive wry, ambiguous answers. Nevertheless, a 
number of key characteristics were evidently central to Dostoevsky's 
plan. I should like to devote the remainder of this introduction's first 
part to one strange feature of the Diary, its periodical format. Part 
2 will explore its other most remarkable anomaly, its combination 
of dramatically diverse literary genres. In the course of describing 
the work's makeup, I shall also discuss its most significant parts. 
Part 3 will examine how these diverse elements, published in a 
periodical form, were designed to cohere as an integral work of art. 
The fourth part of my introduction will then explain how the ideo­
logical changes Dostoevsky underwent while publishing the Diary 
led him to neglect its original plan, which had been designed to ex­
press views evidently irreconcilable with his new convictions. In 
this way, we will see what the Diary was supposed to be, how it 
works when it fulfills that design, and what happened to obscure the 
already odd shape of Dostoevsky's great experiment. 

6 
A Writer's Diary 
An Author Gives a Valuable Idea to a Character, 
and Then Places Himself in the Position of a Character 
One is struck first of all by a literary work that takes the form of 
a monthly journal. In contrast to most nineteenth-century novels 
that were published in periodicals, the Diary in its mature form 
was itself a periodical. Readers were invited to subscribe to a one­
person publication for which Dostoevsky served as editor, publisher, 
and sole contributor. They received monthly (or occasionally double 
bimonthly) issues, in which the author updated readers on his 
impressions of public events since the last issue. In his anounce­
ment of the Diary, Dostoevsky indicated that at the end of each 
year a book would be made from the monthly issues, which were 
designed to have lasting, rather than ephemeral, interest. Never­
theless, even in book form the monthly format was to be main­
tained. Sections would still be labeled "January 1876," "February 
1876," and so on. So essential was this format to Dostoevsky's 
design that he maintained it even when, in 1 88o, only a single 
issue appeared. Thus we have the "August" number, even though 
there was none for any other month. 
Dostoevsky's plan was evidently to make the topical timeless. 
The author would comment on current events but in such a way 
as to reveal what was of general, artistic significance in them. This 
was, after all, not a newspaper but an an work, not a diary but 
a writer's diary. 
Periodical timelessness presented quite a challenge. Because the 
author evidently could not know in advance what public events 
might occur in any given month, he placed himself in the position 
of having to improvise an out of material he could not fully 
control-something like the improvisatore in Pushkin's Egyptian 
Nights. 10 The other form on which Dostoevsky's work draws-the 
diary-also suggests this continual openness to whatever might 
happen. But unlike literary works that merely imitate the form of 
diaries, this one really places its author in the position of a character 
not knowing what is to come. 
The idea of publishing a work as a periodical sems to have 
occurred to Dostoevsky long before he found the opportunity to 
realize it. His earliest reference to the project occurs in a letter of 
1865 that he wrote to Baron A. E. Wrangel. Sensitive from the 
outset to the commercial possibilities of his venture, Dostoevsky 
confided, "I have in mind a cenain periodical publication, though 

Introductory Srudy 
7 
not a journal. Both useful and profitable. It could come into ex­
istence in a year."11 Two years later he wrote from abroad to his 
niece S. A. lvanova, "When I return [to Russia] I would certainly 
like to publish something like a newspaper (I even recall mentioning 
it to you in passing, but here both the form and the purpose have 
now become completely clear). But for this it is necessary to be at 
home and to see and hear everything with my own eyes" (Pis'ma 
2:44). After another two weeks he wrote to his brother's widow, 
"I dream of beginning to publish a weekly journal of my own 
type, which I have invented. I hope for success, only for God's 
sake don't tell anyone anything about it in advance" (Pis'ma 2:53). 
The idea continued to evolve. He wrote again to lvanova in 1869 
to tell her that he intended to produce a new, special kind of 
"enormous useful annual ... to be issued without fail in a large 
number of copies and to appear without fail every year in January." 
This annual would require compilatory and "editorial" work, but 
this would be an active, creative editorship "with an idea, with 
great study " (Pis'ma 2:161-62). We see here Dostoevsky trying to 
base a new work on openness to whatever events might occur in 
a given time period, from which he would-with "great study "­
discover something of general import and lasting significance. At 
this stage of his thinking, creativity would be less a maner of 
composition than of selection and vision. 
Despite his fear that someone might steal this profitable idea, 
Dostoevsky actually gave a version of it to one of his characters in 
The Possessed, thereby, of course, revealing it to his readers as well. 
Near the beginning of the novel, Liza Nikola;vna asks Shatov's 
help in publishing an annual that would distill the key events in 
Russian culture. Such a compilation, she contends, "might reflect 
the characteristics of Russian life for the whole year, even though 
the facts published are only a small fraction of the events that take 
place."" Shatov at first voices skepticism: "Instead of a number 
of newspapers there would be a few fat books, that's all," he 
observes (Possessed, 127). 
But when Liza explains further, Shatov changes his mind. She 
stresses that this would be no simple chronicle, for "the great point 
would be the plan and character of the presentation of facts" (Pos­
sessed, 127). The idea is not to publish everything, nor even every­
thing striking ar:d newsworthy, but instead those incidents that are 
more or less characteristic of the moral life of the people, of the 

8 
A Writer's Diary 
personal character of the Russian people at the present moment .... 
everything would be put in with a certain view, a special significance 
and intention, with an idea that would illumiriate the facts looked at 
in the aggregate, as a whole. And finaly the bok ought to be in­
teresting even for light reading, apart from its value as a work of 
reference. It ought to be, so to say, a presentation of the spirirual, 
moral, inner life of Russia for a whole year. (Possessed, 127-28) 
Shatov assumes that Liza wants the selection to be guided by a 
political tendency, but Liza replies that "we must not select with 
a particular bias . ... Nothing but impartiality-that will be the only 
tendency" (Possessed, 128). She does not deny, however, that the 
very selection of the facts will necessarily reflect some point of 
view, even if not an articulated political program. Shatov concludes 
that the work could and should be done, but that it will prove 
much more difficult than Liza understands. "One can't work it out 
on the spur of the moment. We need experience. And when we 
do publish the book I doubt whether we shall find out how to do 
it. Perhaps after many trials; but the thought is alluring" (Possessed, 
128). 
Monitoring the Spiritual Life of Russia, 
Month by Month, and a Compromise 
Like Liza's proposed publication, Dostoevsky's Diary evidently was 
also designed to monitor the moral life of the Russian people as it 
evolved, though not year by year but month by month. Missing 
from Liza and Shatov's plan was another defining feature of the 
Diary: the personal imprint of the author. 13 That is what makes it 
truly a diary, Dostoevsky wrote to Vsevolod Soloviev: "I am not 
a chronicler: this, on the contrary will be a perfect diary in the 
full sense of the word, that is, an account of what has most interested 
me personally-here there will even be caprice" (Pis'ma 3:20 1-2). 
Thus the Diary had the double and apparently contradictory task 
of discovering the real moral development of Russia and yet ca­
priciously indulging whatever happened to strike the author's fancy. 
How were these two purposes to be realized together? 
Dostoevsky's wife informs us how he first got the chance to try 
out his idea, albeit with some compromises. After he finished The 
Possessed, she writes, 
Fyodor Mikhailovich was very undecided for a while as to what to 
take up next. He was so exhausted by his work on the novel that it 

Introductory Study 
9 
seemed impossible to him to set to work right away on a new one. 
And yet, the realization of the idea conceived while we were still 
living abroad-namely, the publication of a monthly journal, A Writer's 
Diary-presented problems. Quite substantial means were needed for 
putting out a journal and maintaining a family, not to mention the 
settlement of our debts. And there was also the question of whether 
such a journal would have much success, since it was scmtething entirely 
new in Russian literature at that rim£, both in fonn and in content. 1' 
Evidently Dostoevsky had decided by this point that the Diary 
should be a monthly and was excited by its "entirely new" character 
"both in form and in content." Dostoevsky's wife reports that it 
was at just this time that Prince Meshchersky offered Dostoevsky 
the editorship of the conservative journal The Citizen. He would 
be able to include a version of the Diary as a column within The 
Citizen, and so, without assuming financial risk, be paid separately 
and generously as both editor and contributor. In exchange for 
these advantages, he would have to surrender temporarily the idea 
of a one-person publication as well as the monthly format. As 
Dostoevsky's wife paraphrased his conclusion, "The idea of A 
Writer's Diary might be realized in the pages of The Citizen, even 
though in a different format from the one given it subsequently" 
(Anna Dostoevsky, 213). 
This first trial of Dostoevsky's new genre contains the columns 
for The Citizen written during 1873 under the title A Writer's Diary. 
In 1874 Dostoevsky gave up his editorship and turned his attention 
to his next novel, A Raw Youth. When he finished that book, he 
at last established A Writer's Diary in the form he had intended. 
Toward the end of 1875 he published an "announcement," invited 
subscriptions, and added a subtitle to the new work: A Writer's 
Diary: A Monthly Publication. 
Part 2: An Encyclopedia of Genres 
The Announcement: All That I Have "Seen, Heard, 
and Read" 
The "announcement" of the Diary turned out to be an integral 
part of it. A sort of contract with the reader, it was often cited, 
sometimes seriously but usually ironically, in the text itself. It 
purports to outline the rules governing the work, but, like the rules 
of Rabelais's Abbey of Theleme, the announcement's provisions 

10 
A Writer's Diary 
seem so expansive as to exclude nothing. Nevertheless, it is typically 
mentioned when the author "apologizes" for violating it. 
Although several passages in the Diary depend on the reader's 
awareness of the announcement, the present edition is the first to 
include it as part of the text.15 Earlier editions therefore render 
unintelligible several self-referential discussions of the work's odd 
form. 
The "contract" specifies price, monthly appearance, Dostoev­
sky's sole authorship, and, with ostentatious vagueness, the kind 
of material to be included: "It will be a diary in the literal sense 
of the word, an account of impressions actually experienced each 
month, an account of what was seen, heard, and read. Of course, 
some stories and tales may be included, but preeminently it will 
be about actual events." Despite the loophole he had left himself, 
when Dostoevsky included the 1876 Diary's first story, he begged 
the readers' forgiveness for including something other than "actual 
events." 
Everything the writer experienced each month in all possible 
genres and modes: this seems to be the puzzling format of the new 
work. The Diary in fact constitutes an ency clopedia of fictional 
and nonfictional genres. As we have seen, it is this diversity of 
material that apparently fascinated Victor Shklovsky. For most read­
ers, it has obscured any sense of the work's integrity. What whole 
could possibly embrace such heterogeneous parts? 
To answer this question, it would be helpful to consider first the 
particular kinds of writing included in the Diary. Although lines 
are fluid, we may identify five broad classes of material: fiction 
(short stories), what I call "semifiction," autobiography, journalism, 
and self-referential articles. The journalism itself includes a variety 
of genres. After surveying these forms and considering their con­
nection with each other, we may then inquire into the struclure of 
the whole. How were these radically heterogeneous parts designed 
to cohere into something other than a mere anthology, and how 
does one make a generic encyclopedia into an integral work of art? 
The Four Short Stories: An Author on the 
Verge of Insanity 
Most famously, the Diary contains Dostoevsky's greatest short sto­
ries. In the 1873 Diary we find "Bobok" (73.6), a weird tale in 
which a narrator overhears corpses talking to each other in their 

Introductory Study 
I I 
graves; they indulge in scandal, peny spite, and fantasies of se­
pulchral debauchery. Mikhail Bakhtin has described this story and 
"The Dream of a Ridiculous Man" (from the 1877 Diary) as almost 
perfect realizations of an ancient literary genre, the menippean 
satire. "We would hardly be mistaken," Bakhtin declares, "in 
saying that 'Bobok,' in all its depth and boldness, is one of the 
greatest menippea [menippean satires] in all world literature."16 
One need not accept Bakhtin's characterization of this story as the 
key to Dostoevsky's work as a whole to recognize its great literary 
power. 
The story begins with a few lines from Dostoevsky: "On this 
occasion I shall include 'The Notes of a Cenain Person.' That 
person is not I, but someone else entirely." But as this hint suggests, 
the "cenain person" does resemble Dostoevsky in some interesting 
ways, to the point where he may be taken as a peculiar exercise 
in self-parody. 
Almost immediately, the "cenain person" relates how someone 
flanered him, as a "literary man,'' into posing for a portrait. "And 
now I read: 'Go and look at this sickly face that seems to border 
on insanity."' Kenneth Lantz's notes to the present edition make 
clear that these lines allude to comments in a rival publication, The 
Voice, about Perov's ponrait of Dostoevsky himself, which was 
then being exhibited. After comparing the author of A Writer's 
Diary to the insane narrator of Gogol's "Diary of a Madman,'' the 
commentator in The Voice suggested that Perov's "is a ponrait of 
a man exhausted by a serious ailment."17 
Moreover, many of the "cenain person's" comments-on the 
degradation of realism, on aesthetics, on materialism, on the spir­
itual poveny of intellectuals so sure of their theories that they cannot 
experience surprise-echo Dostoevsky's own articles in the Diary. 
Much as the narrator of Notes from Underground spitefully exag­
gerates some of Dostoevsky's favorite philosophical views, so the 
"certain person" gathers the Diary's own repeated concerns into 
a mad meditation. Dostoevsky employs his favorite technique of 
placing his own ideas in the mouth of a distinctly unappealing 
character. Along with this character's other contribution, "A Half­
Lener from 'A Cenain Person"' (73.8), the story becomes a com­
plex parodic focus of the 1873 Diary's recurrent themes. 
The "Half-Lener" begins with Dostoevsky's account of his con­
versations with its author, whose work Dostoevsky publishes simply 

12 
A Writer's Diary 
to get rid of him. The contribution, a viruperative attack on vi­
ruperative journalism, itself goes so far beyond the bounds of de­
cency that Dostoevsky cuts off the first half of it, and so it begins 
in mid-sentence. Of course, the Diary itself was engaged in fierce 
exchanges with other publications, and Dostoevsky adds a footnote 
to the certain person's text in which he takes some of its criticisms 
personally. In effect, he writes himself into his character's text as 
his character becomes part of his. 
Apparently, it is Dostoevsky's portrait that has brought these 
two suffering literary men together. At the end of "Bobok," the 
certain person declares that he "will bring this [account] to The 
Citizen. One of the editors there has also had his portrait exhibited. 
Perhaps he'll print this" (73.6). "Bobok" usually appears in an­
thologies of Dostoevsky's fiction, but it is difficult to see what 
readers unaware of the larger context of the Diary could make of 
this concluding sentence. 
The Stories: Joints 
The January 1876 issue of the Diary features a brief but well-known 
story, "The Boy at Christ's Christmas Party" (1/76, 2.2). Following 
a sketch about Russian street urchins, Dostoevsky offers this tale 
of a boy whose mother has died, leaving him to wander the streets. 
The boy finds himself at a Christmas party that (we know from 
an earlier sketch in the same issue of the Diary) Dostoevsky at­
tended; but the freezing child is not admitted. Rerurning to the 
street, he begins to look for a warm place to stay. He evenrually 
freezes to death and goes to the other world, where Christ has his 
own Christmas party for all such orphans.18 
This tale, too, changes when read in the context of the Diary. 
Readers of the story in translation know it from anthologies of 
Dostoevsky's fiction, but even to print "The Boy" separately it 
was necessary to round off the opening, which proceeds directly 
from the preceding sketch. That is why in the Diary (though not 
in most translations) the story begins on a conjunction. 
A wild creature such as this [street urchin] sometimes knows nothing 
at all-neither where he lives, nor what nation he comes from; whether 
God exists, or the tsar. There are even stories told about them that 
are hard to believe, yet they are facts. 
2. The Boy at Christ's Christmas Party 

Introductory Study 
1 3 
But I am a novelist and one "story," it seems, I made up myself. 
Why do I say "it seems" when I know very well that I made it up? 
Yet I keep imagining that it really happened somewhere, sometime, 
and happened precisely on Christmas Eve in a certain huge city during 
a terrible cold spell." 
This opening stands as a particularly clear example of how Dos­
toevsky exhibits the "joints" of the Diary, the connections where 
the nonfiction shades into the fiction. These are the moments where 
the Diary 's own strange poetics, which merge discrepant kinds of 
material, comes to the center of our attention. Such moments fade 
from view when the story is read separately. The end of "The 
Boy" once again brings us back to the context of the Diary as a 
whole: 
So why did I make up a story like that, so little in keeping with 
the usual spirit of a sober-minded diary, and a writer's diary at that? 
Al the more since I promised stories preeminently about actual events! 
But that's just the point: I keep imagining that all this could really 
have happened-I mean the things that happened in the cellar and 
behind the woodpile; as for Christ's Christmas pany-well, I really 
don't know what to say: could that have happened? That's just why 
I am a novelist-to invent things. 
This frame, of course, alludes to the "announcement," with its 
promise to write "preeminently about actual events." The story 
thereby both draws upon and sheds light upon the surrounding 
text. I do not wish to say that it cannot be read with profit on its 
own, only that it functions rather differently within the Diary, whose 
narrator and techniques we gradually come to know. 
The Stories: Reading Horizontally and Vertically 
Perhaps the greatest short story Dostoevsky ever wrote occupies 
the November 1876 issue of the Diary. In "The Meek One: A 
Fantastic Story," a pawnbroker, whose wife has just committed 
suicide, reflects on their history in order to "focus his thoughts" 
and understand why her corpse is now before him. The events he 
recounts, though he only intermittently realizes it, constitute a tale 
of psychological torture of a poor, meek, and Christian soul-one 
of those who, as the reader ofthe Diary 's many millenarian passages 
may understand, will "inherit the earth" at the world's finale.20 
The story's "fantastic" element, which Dostoevsky explains in the 

A Writer's Diary 
"Author's Foreword" to this issue, lies in its stream of conscious­
ness form, its rough-edged meditation, filed with emotional and 
logical contradictions that we watch unfolding moment by moment. 
With its structure of chapters and subchapters perfectly fining the 
format of other monthly issues, the story sems to accelerate and 
concentrate the "spontaneous" meditations of the work's diaristic 
form. 
The reader of the Diary will also trace numerous other links 
between the story and the surounding articles. The pawnbroker's 
thoughts about feminism and the abilities of women allude to Dos­
toevsky's several articles on the topic; his ethic of self-sufficiency 
seems to incarnate the moral sin of "dissociation" that the diarist 
elsewhere describes at length; and the heroine's suicide with an 
icon in her hand necessarily recalls a similar, real suicide that 
Dostoevsky reports earlier in the Diary. 21 
Here, as so often in the Diary, our anention is focused not only 
on the tale itself but also on the story of its making. Readers of 
the Diary often witness a characteristic sequence of steps. First 
Dostoevsky retells a story from the Russian press, then muses upon 
it, returns to it in a later issue, and perhaps imagines how it might 
be developed into a story. At last, a finished story may follow. Part 
of the excitement of A Writer's Diary is to be found in this self­
conscious, rather stylized, and yet undeniably riveting dramatiza­
tion of the creative process, with its fits and starts, its multiple 
possibilities realized or unrealized, and its occasional, unexpected 
conclusion in a polished narative. We read these finished stories 
not just "horizontally," for their internal plot, but also "vertically," 
as the denouement of a second story, the account of their own 
creation. That "second story" depends entirely on the context of 
the work as a whole. 
The Stories: An Epitome 
"The Dream of a Ridiculous Man" (4/77, 2. 1), which appears in 
the April 1877 issue, reads like a response-a counterstory-to 
"Bobok." In the earlier menippean satire, a journey to the under­
world (a classic menippean theme) leads to a sense of total despair; 
in "The Dream," a voyage through space, guided by an angel, 
results in a belief in salvationY As if echoing the Diary's several 
articles on suicide out of indifference and materialism, the narator 
of "The Dream" recalls how he decided to kil himself because 
"absolutely nothing maners." Shortly after making this decision, 

Introductory Study 
I S 
he is accosted on the street by a young girl-a son of sister to 
the boy at Christ's Christmas pany?-who begs him in despair 
for help. Although he rebuffs her, he is both surprised and annoyed 
to discover that he feels ashamed. Why should he have such 
feelings, he asks himself, when he is about to commit suicide and 
therefore knows there can be no consequences of his callous act? 
He soon finds himself wondering whether he would feel shame if 
he had committed a heinous crime on the moon that no one could 
ever know about. 23 These paradoxical questions in effect make the 
point so often argued by Dostoevsky elsewhere in the Diary : that 
morality can never be reduced to mere self-interest, and that an 
inborn sense of transcendent right and wrong-of "imonality"­
is essential to being human. 
Instead of actually killing himself, the ridiculous man falls asleep 
and dreams he has done so. The dreamer is taken from the grave 
by an angel who flies him through infinite space to a world that 
is an exact geographical duplicate of our own. But that other world 
has a diferent temporality: its people live before the fall, in par­
adise. This vision of perfect communion gives the ridiculous man 
the "living image" of a meaningful life, the reason for living that 
he has missed. After sharing the joy of these prelapsarian people, 
he himself corrupts them all by his mere presence and so comes 
to learn his responsibility for all human suffering. When he awakes, 
he resolves to preach the ideal, even though he knows it may never 
be realized and that people will laugh at him; and he finds the 
little girl who has unwittingly saved him. 
Critics have disputed whether this tale should be regarded as 
utopian or anti-utopian.24 Is the hero's claim to have discovered 
"the truth" at a precise moment to be taken as a sign of his madness 
or as an example of a true conversion, recommended to Dostoev­
sky's readers? The Diary itself contains numerous utopian sketches 
as well as a few anti-utopian ones; we find both essays in praise 
of that other ridiculous idealist, Don Quixote, and ironic portrayals 
of dreamers who indulge such mad hopes. From this perspective, 
the ambiguities of "The Dream" seem to epitomize those of the 
Diary as whole. 
Semifiction: Liminal Poetics 
The Diary seems constantly concerned with moments of transi­
tion, uncertain boundaries in life and between life and an. Its 
most characteristic material, therefore, may be its many pieces of 

16 
A Writer's Diary 
"semifiction" -that is, works that somehow seem to lie between 
fact and fiction or between reportage and finished stories. "Reality 
is transfigured, passing through arr, " Dostoevsky once wrote. 25 
These sketches seem designed to dramatize the liminal moment 
of "passing through." 
The semifictions vary considerably in technique, but all work by 
straddling and calling attention to the boundary between fiction 
and nonfiction. Quite characteristic is "A Hundred-Year-Old Wom­
an," which appears in the March 1876 issue (3/76, 1.2). Dostoevsky 
begins this entry with a real incident from daily life, recounted to 
him by a "lady" (it was in fact his wife). The lady has described 
meeting a woman of a hundred and four who was slowly making her 
way to her grandchildren. Meditating dreamily on the character of 
the old woman, Dostoevsky "sketched in an ending to the story of 
how she reached her own folks to have dinner: there emerged an­
other, perhaps quite plausible little scene." As in other semifictions 
of Diary, a real incident shades into a "plausible" continuation, and 
so a story is made by drawing "dotted lines" from an "actual event." 
We have here yet another interpretation of the contract ambiguously 
outlined in the "announcement." 
The story itself culminates in a liminal moment between life and 
death, as the lady, who has reached her relations, dies in mid­
sentence and mid-action, with the precise moment of her passing 
between two worlds left uncertain. Focusing on the experience of 
the old lady's great-grandson, the author draws a moral crucial to 
the Diary's thematics: 
No matter how long Misha lives he will always remember the old 
woman and how she died, forgetting her hand on his shoulder. And 
when he dies not a single person on the whole earth will remember 
or will realize that once upon a time there was such an old woman 
who lived out her hundred and four years, how and why no one 
knows. Why remember any way? It doesn't matter. Milions of people 
pass away like this: they live unoticed and they die unoticed . . .. 
May God bless the lives and deaths of simple, good people! 
The diarist notices what would otherwise go unnoticed but which 
is supremely important--what the Diary elsewhere calls the "iso­
lated cases" of familial closeness and ordinary kindness that, taken 
together, shape good lives. As we shall see in sections 3 and 4, 
Dostoevsky frequently contends that it is ordinary families and the 
simple goodness of unremarkable people that alone can save a 

Introductory Study 
1 7  
society. Bedeviled by theories and abstractions, the intelligentsia 
never notices what is always before its eyes. That is one reason that 
the Diary is needed. 
In later issues Dostoevsky often pauses on such prosaic scenes, 
which he has heard about, and then, as in this case, extended by 
an act of imagination. He stresses that these linle narratives are 
anything but grand: "In short, with our People the result will never 
be an epic poem, will it? They are the most prosaic people in the 
world, so that one is almost ashamed of them in that respect" (Io/ 
76, 1. I). After describing one such prosaic family, Dostoevsky 
wonders why it is that "our novelists have to go off looking for 
material . . . .  Why not just describe the whole [prosaic] truth, step 
by step? And yet, it seems, I forgot the old rule: what matters is 
not the subject but the eye" ( Io/76, 1 .  I). The truths hidden in 
plain view are the hardest ones to see. In "A Hundred-Year-Old 
Woman" and many later pieces, the diarist's eye discerns the mean­
ingfulness that is always there for the seeing. 
In such passages Dostoevsky seems to suggest a viewpoint often 
associated with Tolstoy: that it is ordinary people living prosaic 
lives, rather than heroes or dramatic "historical" figures known to 
all, who are truly important. As Dostoevsky hints at the end of 
"A Hundred-Year-Old Woman," what makes a good life does not 
usually make a good story. But somehow these trivial incidents, 
when discerned correctly, might "well turn out better than any of 
our poems and novels with heroes 'with deep insight and lives torn 
asunder'" (Io/76, I. I). Here, in effect, is the answer to the Ras­
kolnikovism of the intelligentsia. What truly shapes life, what 
makes it meaningful, is always taking place unnoticed before us. 
The Diary is designed to teach a special kind of prosaic vision. 
To this prosaic, Tolstoyan moral, repeated often in the Diary, 
Dostoevsky adds a motif marked with his own inimitable signature: 
the importance of childhood memories in shaping a life. We learn 
the most important moral lessons through glowing memories of 
early childhood, which guide us through a lifetime. As the author 
of the Diary often explains, morality can never be formalized, and 
no theory spun from the brain of an intellectual will ever be ad­
equate to the complexities of ethical decisions; but good childhood 
memories represent the surest guide we have. 
Elsewhere in the Diary Dostoevsky often reflects on the quite 
different memories developed by troubled children from "accidental 
families." When he reports on narcissistic suicides (for example, 

18 
A Writer's Diary 
in his article on Herzen's daughter), he traces them to childhood 
homes infected with materialism and fashionable skepticism, homes 
incapable of producing the good memories· necessary for later life 
(10/76, 1.3). This theme was, of course, to become central to The 
Brothers Karamaz(!lJ. Guided by his memory of his mother holding 
him before the icon, Alyosha tries, in the novel's conclusion, to 
create good if unremarkable memories in "the boys." As he has 
learned from Father Zosima and from his own experience, good 
memories work better than the best of theories. 
The final paragraph of "A Hundred-Year-Old Woman" therefore 
wryly comments on the utterly prosaic and ordinary nature of its 
events. Ironically, the author regrets that he has not told a good 
story. Judged by the usual dramatic standards, his account has 
failed. As the ppening of "The Boy at Christ's Christmas Party" 
emerges from the preceding article, so the ending of "A Hundred­
Year-Old Woman" shades into the next piece of nonfiction. Pausing 
on the boundary, the author again mentions his contract with the 
reader: 
Well, still, this is just an inconsequential little scene without a story. 
True enough, one sets out to recount something with a bit of interest 
in it from the things heard in the course of a month, but when you 
sit down to write it turns out to be quite impossible to retell or is 
irrelevant, or it's simply a case of "not telling everything you know," 
and so in the end you're left with only little things such as this with 
no story to them . .. 
3· Dissociation 
But still, I'm supposed to be writing about "the things I have seen, 
heard, and read." At least it's a good thing that I didn't limit myself 
with a promise to write about everything I have "seen, heard, and 
read." And I keep hearing things that are stranger and stranger. 
How can I convey them, when they all go off on their separate ways 
and simply refuse to arrange themselves into one neat bundle! In­
deed, I keep thinking that we have begun the epoch of universal 
"dissociation." 
Dostoevsky's point is that such inconsequential events of or­
dinary private life do indeed contain the "vital forces" by which 
both individuals and societies live. By contrast, public life seems 
increasingly riven by "stranger and stranger" new forces, worlds 

Introductory Study 
1 9 
away from the prosaic family of the story. Thus we have the diarist's 
paradox, about which he also remarks elsewhere: the real world 
has become more fantastic than the author's fiction. In a world 
torn from the soil and the family, the ordinary is becoming in­
creasingly extraordinary. 
One purpose of the Diary, as we have seen, was to find some 
guiding thread, something approaching a unifying theme, in the 
immense diversity of Russian life. But how is that to be done if 
individuals and social forces are so "dissociated" from each other 
that "they all go off in their own separate ways"? Could the unifying 
theme be "dissociation" itself? But what sort of unity is that, and 
how can the Diary achieve any wholeness on the basis of uner 
fragmentation? The ending of "A Hundred-Year-Old Woman" 
turns into another meditation on the Diary's own poetics. 
Semifiction: A Field of Plots 
In "Vias" (73-S), Dostoevsky intertwines fact and fiction with 
amazing complexity as he attempts to probe the spirirual state of 
the Russian people at the present moment. He begins by para­
phrasing Nekrasov 's poem "Vias," which describes the conversion 
of a peasant criminal into a godly figure, and then reports that he 
has recently heard a quite similar story from real life. In this second 
narrative, one peasant accepts a dare from another to do the most 
shocking thing possible. Without revealing his plan, the "tempter" 
instructs the first peasant to steal the Eucharist. The victim, it 
turns out, is to shoot the Eucharist, thereby becoming Christ's 
murderer. At the last possible moment, however, the peasant pre­
paring for deicide sees a vision of Christ on the cross and relents. 
Swearing he is damned forever, he goes crawling on his knees to 
the monk who has told Dostoevsky the story. 
Dostoevsky swears that the story is true and that its whole interest 
depends on its truth, because, he claims, it distills the essence of 
the Russian people's life at the present transitional moment after 
the liberation of the serfs. Read in this allegorical fashion, the story 
describes the current crisis of the people: like the peasant, they 
may be saved or damned, may either yield finally to the terrible 
"urge for negation," as they at present seem to be doing, or else 
experience an "impulse backward . . . to restore and save oneself' 
at the last possible moment. It appears that this true story contains 
the key to Russia's future. The real incident thereby achieves the 
starus of myth. 

20 
A Writer's Diary 
And which end will the story of the Russian people have, repen­
tance or damnation? To answer this question,_ Dostoevsky probes the 
psychology of the two peasants, "VIas" and "Mephistopheles." 
Imagining the prehistory of the story, Dostoevsky sketches several 
possible paths that may have led to the temptation. Adding details 
between the known events, he retells the monk's tale in various ways, 
each of which allow for different endings. Is it possible that VIas 
might not have repented? And what happens to Mephistopheles? 
Each version could be the story of Russian history. 
Thus Nekrasov's poem, which has found a real-life echo, bifur­
cates into a multitude of related stories, a field of possibilities all 
shadowing each other. This sideshadowing, as it might be called, 
becomes quite characteristic of the diarist's method of narration: 
as we shall see, he often views reality not as a single story but as 
a field of possibilities with multiple paths to multiple conceivable 
outcomes.26 "VIas" concludes without choosing a single ending: 
"long ago we entered into a period of complete uncertainty." 
Semifiction: A Plan That Is Not a Plan 
The semifictional "Plan for a Satirical Novel of Contemporary Life" 
Cs-6/77, 1.3) works by a quite different method. Here Dostoevsky 
offers a story in the form of a plan for a story that he might someday 
write. He canot actually write the story because, he concedes, 
Gogol would be needed to do it justice. At crucial moments of the 
narrative, which he appears to be making up on the spot, he turns 
to Gogol's tales to inspire him with events for his plot in progress. 
The story constantly denies that it is a story, and it concludes with 
the wish that even though he is not Gogol, Dostoevsky might 
someday actually write this story. 
This "plan" may be understood in two distinct ways. We may 
regard it as it explicitly offers itself, as an outline for a possible 
story not yet composed, or we may see it as a finished story that 
happens to take the form of a plan. The idea of a "plan" may be 
a mere narrative convention, as, in fact, it typically was in the 
genre of the sketch (ocherk). That genre was quite well developed 
in Russia, and Dostoevsky was one of its best-known practitioners. 
The sketch played on its dual status as draft and finished work, 
which is why Gorky was later to stress the derivation of ocherk 
from chertit' (to draw) and from ochertit' (to outline). The literary 
sketch therefore resembles a pictorial one, Gorky reasoned, because 
both present an outline that is paradoxically a completed work. 

Introductory Study 
2 1  
Korolenko made much the same point when he observed that, by 
convention, the reader of a sketch is asked to live with the author 
through his search for a finished work that turns out to be the 
repon of the search itself, "as if apanments were let out when the 
wood for their construction had not yet been gathered."27 
It is wonh noting that not only Dostoevsky but also his character 
Ivan Karamazov was to use this technique. "The Legend of the 
Grand Inquisitor," Ivan tells Alyosha, is merely the idea for a poem 
that has not been versified or even written down. As he narrates 
his new legend, Ivan repeatedly calls attention to its status as a 
mere plan: "Well, my poem would have been of that kind if it 
had appeared at that time."28 When Jesus appears to the people, 
they instantly recognize him: "That might be one of the best 
passages in the poem. I mean, why they recognized Him" (BK, 
295). As this example illustrates, Ivan uses the technique of the 
plan to achieve a powerful literary effect. In this case, it hints at 
ineffability, at the impossibility of describing moral beauty that is 
beyond human words. 
The ambivalent status of the "Plan for a Satirical Novel" should 
illustrate why it is ultimately impossible to count the number of 
shon stories in the Diary, for many of them simultaneously claim 
and deny that they are stories. Indeed, we have already seen some­
thing similar with "The Boy at Christ's Christmas Party," which, 
if paired with the preceding article (as in some anthologies), re­
sembles one of the Diary's semifictional sketches. It begins with 
reponage, shades into possibility, and then wryly reflects on its 
own ambiguous status. With their great diversity of forms that 
straddle fictional boundaries and of frames that represent the author 
as both reporter and creative writer, the Diary's semifictions seem 
to define the essential moments of this work's peculiarly liminal 
poetics. 
Autobiography: The Text's Penumbra 
By the time he embarked on A Writer's Diary, Dostoevsky's biǓ 
ography was already a legend, a "literary fact" in its own right.29 
He exploited it practically and aesthetically. In the early I 86os he 
counted on it to afford him protection against attacks from the 
radical left, which hesitated to criticize someone who had suffered 
mock execution and Siberian exile for his political activities. And 
any reader of his work soon becomes aware that he exploited his 

22 
A Writer's Diary 
biography for considerable literary power. The shadow of his amaz­
ingly dramatic experiences formed a special background to his 
fiction, and Dostoevsky took considerable pains to let the aura of 
his life lend vibrancy to his art. The reader becomes aware of a 
region beyond the novel's story where the work seems to extend 
into a penumbra of textuality. In that penumbra, autobiographical 
events, though not mentioned as such and so requiring the reader's 
external knowledge, nevertheless operate as part of the work. 
One thinks not only of the quasi fictionalization of his Siberian 
experiences in Noce> from the House of the Dead but also of the 
frequent descriptions of the last moments of a person condemned 
to execution. When Raskolnikov experiences a sensation that 
"might be compared to that of a man condemned to death who 
has suddenly been pardoned," readers of Crime and Punishment 
respond, and were evidently intended to respond, as they would 
not if another author had written this passage. We cannot help 
thinking that this author knows what he is talking about. Prince 
Myshkin's severa! detailed descriptions of executions characterize 
both himself and his creator, and the two together form a peculiar 
double character. Dostoevsky is sometimes close to explicit about 
this doubling. In describing an execution he has seen, Myshkin 
muses: "Perhaps there is some man who has been sentenced to 
death, been exposed to this torture and has been told 'you can go, 
you are pardoned.' Perhaps such a man could tell us.'' Of course, 
as readers knew, that man is telling us. 30 
Encountering such passages, readers almost inevitably wonder 
about the degree and kind of self-revelation involved, as they also 
do when following the remarkable accounts of Myshkin's epileptic 
fits (Dostoevsky was himself an epileptic). There can be little doubt 
that Dostoevsky meant to exploit this almost voyeuristic interest 
for his writer's diary, a title that intimates confidential recollections. 
In fact, the Diary's autobiographical sections compel attention and 
form an intrinsic part of its mix of genres. 
The classic versions of many famous stories about Dostoevsky's 
life can be traced to the Diary's autobiographical articles. He pro­
vides what became the canonical account of his "discovery" by the 
poet and publisher Nekrasov and the critic Belinsky, several al­
lusions to his mock execution, and, in an article on the psychology 
of political subversives, an analysis of his state of mind as a member 
of the radical Petrashevsky circle. Many of these reminiscences are 
offered with polemical intent: my liberal opponents like to blather 

Introductory Study 
23 
on about their love for "the people," Dostoevsky observes, but it 
is I, not they, who have lived with criminals and peasants, eaten 
with them, labored with them, and slept alongside them in close 
quarters for years. The radicals, who wish the Russian people 
resembled a revolutionary Parisian mob, regard them as an inert 
mass to be civilized by the intelligentsia, but I know from direct 
experience that the people are, if anything, morally superior to their 
would-be saviors. There is no doubt that Dostoevsky was entirely 
sincere in expressing these views, and that they represent the prin­
cipal legacy and constitute the most lasting effect of his time in 
Siberia. 31 But it is equally clear that he assiduously used his life 
to literary as well as polemical effect. 
The tone of the Diary's autobiographical passages varies consid­
erably. In a voice of intimacy, Dostoevsky confides his most cher­
ished memories of the experiences that have made him the person 
and writer he is. Such passages, which Konstantin Mochulsky aptly 
describes as "half-confession, half-diary," combine well with those 
in which the reader is apparently initiated into the mysteries of the 
creative process. 32 Dostoevsky tells us events from his life that he 
has never before revealed and invites us into the ostensibly private 
world of the author at his desk. Much of the extraordinary popular 
(and financial) success of the Diary was doubtless due to this special 
and unusual relation to the readers. Such confidentiality was sug­
gested by the work's status as a diary, that is, a personal document 
made available only to intimates. 
Of course, readers are not really initiated into the writer's lab­
oratory; one need only compare the published Writer's Diary with 
its notebooks to see how much processing was necessary to present 
the illusion of spontaneity. 33 When the diarist is for some reason 
suddenly struck by a recollection, twentieth-century readers of his 
truly private notebooks can trace the careful preparation, often 
extending over months, for the introduction of an "unplanned" 
reminiscence or revealing digression. 
Nevertheless, I do not mean to cast doubt on the sincerity of 
these reminiscences. On the contrary, they seem to reflect Dos­
toevsky's deepest beliefs, as well as his understanding that their 
considerable power as literature depends precisely on their truth­
fulness. In the Diary and elsewhere, Dostoevsky often stresses-it 
was one of his favorite insights-that it is often much harder to tell 
the truth convincingly than to invent an effective fiction. The author 
of War and Peace also never tired of making the same point, and 

24 
A Writer's Diary 
this shared sense of the near impossibility of sincerity and truth­
fulness constitutes one of the most important connections between 
the two Russian geniuses. Dostoevsky's novels are filled with char­
acters' apparently true but actually false confessions, in which the 
very spirit of the revelation conflicts with its ostensible purpose. 
Those novels repeatedly dramatize the ways in which the dynamics 
of self-deceit and self-justification distort efforts at self-knowledge. 
In the Diary, these dynamics create the shape of the story "The 
Meek One." So dificult are they to anain that truthfulness and 
sincerity, when actualy achieved, can therefore exhibit considerable 
literary power. This insight underlies several passages in the Diary. 
Autobiography: The Imitation of Dostoevsky 
The Diary's best-known autobiographical account, "The Peasant 
Marey" (2/76, 1.3), is so well crafted that it is often included in 
collections of Dostoevsky's fiction. With it anthologized in this 
way, its author becomes a fictional narrator, which of course changes 
the story considerably. Readers who encounter it in collections of 
Dostoevsky's fiction may be surprised to learn that it has been 
taken, with good reason, as a generally accurate account of Dos­
toevsky's conversion experience.l4 
In fact, "The Peasant Marey" seems deliberately to invite both 
readings. Such double encoding was not unique in Dostoevsky 's 
work: The House of the Dead also invites reading as both a novel 
and a memoir. Whichever way it is taken, not everything fits. 35 
Thus it is first offered as an account from the memoirs of a fictional 
character, Goryanchikov, who has been sent to Siberia for mur­
dering his wife; but in the course of the story the narator is also 
described as a political prisoner, which was Dostoevsky's, but not 
Goryanchikov's, status. So glaring is this contradiction that it seems 
inconceivable to attribute it to mere carelessness. Although diffi­
culties with the censorship led several authors to use a dispensable 
fictional cover for actual recollections, that does not seem to be the 
whole story in this case. 36 
Rather, The House of the Dead seems to play quite deliberately 
on its double status. Depending on how we take it, the parts fit 
into two different wholes, and the two readings conflict with each 
other. If we read the book as Goryanchikov's memoirs, we will 
focus on the editor's opening account of Goryanchikov's life after 
prison, a life of tortured isolation and perhaps madness. The shad­
ow of that later life is cast over the narrative as a whole and seems 

Introductory Study 
25 
to deprive the tale of any sense of redemption. But if we read the 
story as Dostoevsky's memoirs, attention focuses on the optimistic 
conclusion, on fredom and the symbolic promise of resurrection. 
Two novels subsist within the same covers, and the reader is given 
a choice, as are we all, between despair and hope, between the 
suffering that deforms and the suffering that ennobles: "Except a 
com of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone; but 
if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit."37 
"The Peasant Marey" directly alludes to the earlier work's in­
terpretive difficulties: "Many people supposed and are even now 
quite firmly convinced that I was sent to hard labor for the murder 
of my wife." This teasing passage is perhaps designed to call 
attention to this story's own complex encoding. That complexity 
seems to derive from Dostoevsky's purpose, here as elsewhere in 
the Diary, to transform his real experiences into a collective myth 
of the Russian people as he is simultaneously transforming jour­
nalism into art. 38 
Like "The Boy at Christ's Christmas Party" in the preceding 
issue, "The Peasant Marey" follows directly from a nonfictional 
article with which it is closely linked (2/76, 1. 2). That article had 
begun with a "riddle," a "contradiction" demanding reconciliation. 
I wrote, for instance, in the January issue of the Diary that our People 
are coarse and ignorant, devoted to darkness and depravity, "bar­
barians, awaiting the light." Meanwhile, I've only just read . . .  in an 
article by the late and unforgettable [Slavophile] Konstantin Aksakov, 
a man dear to every Russian-that the Russian people have long been 
enlightened and "educated." What can I say? Was I troubled by my 
apparent disagreement with the opinion of Konstantin Aksakov? Not 
in the least; I completely share that view, and have had warm sympathy 
for it for a long time. So how can I reconcile such a contradiction? 
Dostoevsky initially solves this contradiction with another, no less 
perplexing one: that "diamonds" may be found in the "filth" of 
the people. His initial resolution of these antithetical statements is 
itself antithetical: "Judge the Russian People, not by the abomi­
nations they so frequently commit, but by those great and sacred 
things for which, even in their abominations, they constantly 
yearn." In advancing these puzzles, Dostoevsky stresses that his 
readers will deem them untenable paradoxes, riddles that cannot 
be answered. 
After a series of digressions whose significance becomes clear 

A Writer's Diary 
only later, Dostoevsky begins "The Peasant Marey" with a self­
deprecating opening: "But reading all tqese professions de foi is a 
bore, I think, and so I'll tell you a story; actually, it's not even a 
story, but only a reminiscence of something that happened long 
ago and that, for some reason, I would very much like to recount 
here and now." The narrative, which is offered as both a story and 
a reminiscence, turns out to be the solution to the initial riddle. 
"Now tell me," he asks near the narrative's end, "is this not what 
Konstantin Aksakov had in mind when he spoke of the advanced 
level of development of our Russian People?" When "The Peasant 
Marey" is published separately, the meaning of this key sentence 
is necessarily obscured, as is the underlying riddle structure of 
which "Marey" forms an intrinsic part.39 
The story begins in Siberia, where Dostoevsky finds it impossible 
to endure the other convicts' hideous depravity, which "had worn 
me out to the point of illness." The coarseness, drunkenness, and 
violence of these former peasants leads Dostoevsky to appreciate 
the judgment of a Polish prisoner: "Je hais ces brigands! "  Thinking 
of these words, the author lies down and loses himself in memories, 
which come to him without effort of will. "For some reason" he 
suddenly remembers an incident from his childhood that has never 
crossed his mind since it happened. He recalls how one sumer, 
as a nine-year-old child on his father's estate, he regretted having 
to return soon to Moscow for his tedious French lessons and went 
for a walk. Suddenly he hears (or rather imagines he hears) someone 
cry out that a wolf is on the loose, and, without thinking, he runs 
to a peasant in terror. In his kindly, almost womanly way, with 
his "almost maternal smile," the coarse serf Marey, who like all 
serfs has no reason to love his master, comforts the master's boy, 
even though no one will ever find out about it. And now, twenty 
years later in Siberia, Dostoevsky remembers the incident, which 
comes as an answer to the Pole's terrible words. "I remembered 
that encounter so vividly, right to the last detail. That means it 
had settled unnoticed in my heart, all by itself with no will of 
mine, and had suddenly come back to me at a time when it was 
needed." 
As we have seen, this is in fact how childhood memories are 
supposed to work: in the Diary (as later in Karamazc.v), they acquire 
the power and significance of myth, of a fundamental story capable 
of resolving tormenting questions that are unresolvable in any other 
way. In the Republic, Plato also uses story to resolve problems that 

Inttoductory Study 
27 
exceed rational solution, and within the structure of the Diary the 
recollection resolves much more than autobiographical problems. 
It is at this point in the story that Dostoevsky reframes his account 
not as a mere story, or even as just a reminiscence, but, in a third 
characterization, as the solution to Aksakov's riddle. And in fact 
it solves much more than that. 
As we read further in the Diary, the story and preceding article 
turn out nõt only to contain the solution to a riddle and the key 
transforming event of the author's life but also to embody the central 
myth of Russian history. "The Peasant Marey" tells the story of 
an intellectual who has been torn from the native soil but then 
recovers his connection to his people, their past, and his own true 
identity as one of them; this pattern is revealed as the fundamental 
story of Russian history and the key to the country's salvation. In 
an account constantly repeated in the Diary, the Russian educated 
classes were "divorced from the native soil" and from the people 
by Peter the Great's reforms; they have lived in European isolation 
from the people ever since; and they now face a total drying up 
of all vital forces. As Dostoevsky the prisoner found himself in 
despair, so the Russian educated classes are experiencing an epi­
demic of suicides, a key motif of the Diary. In one of the Diary's 
most cited lines, Dostoevsky observes apocalyptically that "the 
Russian land seems to have lost the capacity to hold people on it" 
(5/76, 2.2). These suicides are in fact a symptom of a fatal choice 
facing Russia: either its educated classes will return to the People, 
as Dostoevsky did, or the country will quickly perish. 
Dostoevsky makes the hidden pattern-to him no mere allegory­
explicit. The story of his own life and of Russian history is the 
parable of the prodigal son. "We must bow down before the 
People's truth," he writes in the article preceding "Marey." "We 
must bow down like prodigal children who have been away from 
home for two hundred years but who, however, have returned still 
Russians." 
The Diary offers several applications of this story. In a number 
of articles, Dostoevsky writes that not just the educated but even 
some of the Russian people are being torn from their roots; that 
is his explanation for the rise of Protestant sects in the countryside. 
But the Russian people, like VIas, will soon return to their Or­
thodox roots. Retrospectively, we recognize that the plot of the 
tempted peasant in "VIas" also repeats the pattern of the prodigal 
son parable. We repeatedly encounter versions of the same story 

28 
A Writer's Diary 
throughout the Diary. Not just Russian but all world history repeats 
the plot. Here Russia plays the role of home, and Europe, which 
has abandoned true Christianity for the pursuit of materialism and 
earthly power, becomes the prodigal son. Having reached the nadir 
of despair (the iminent threat of proletarian revolution and world 
war), Europe may return to the true Christianity of Russia. 
"The Peasant Marey" achieves mythic power by offering a so­
lution to all the world's most pressing problems. The story of the 
author's conversion is also the story of the world's salvation. Hu­
manity will be saved by the imitation of Dostoevsky. 
Journalism: The Prophetic Articles 
Most of the Diary consists of journalistic articles, but they too 
exhibit great variety. We encounter a diversity of genres, tones, 
and themes. Among these articles, the greatest number of pages 
is devoted to political pieces concerned with foreign policy. This 
weighting toward war and diplomacy appears all the more striking 
when we consider that such articles are entirely absent from the 
1873 Diary and appear infrequently during the first issues of 1876. 
By June of that year, however, readers witnessed Dostoevsky in the 
process of changing the Diary quite substantially. What had been 
at most only one of several elements at the beginning of 1876 soon 
became the dmninant theme. 
Evidently, the catalyst for change was the intensification of the 
"Eastern Question"-the complex of issues surrounding the revolt 
of Slavic nationalities in the Balkans against Turkish rule. Russian 
volunteers joined the Serbs, who gave command of their army to 
the Russian general Cherniaev. When Cherniaev was defeated, the 
Diary's emphasis on foreign policy temporarily diminished. But 
Dostoevsky's enthusiasm was rekindled when Russia herself en­
tered the war in 1877 (an event breathlessly reported in the April 
1877 issue). 
Through the ups and downs of the Balkan conflict, Dostoevsky's 
new literary genre was often transformed into a mere mouthpiece 
for the Pan-Slavist cause. It was doubtless this change, which Dos­
toevsky was never able to reconcile with the initial idea of the 
Diary, that led to its literary failings and the not entirely unjustified 
dismissal of the work (or large parts of it) as jingoistic propaganda. 
For a time, Dostoevsky managed to find a place for these articles 
within the original frame of the Diary, but if the outlines of the 

Introductory Study 
29 
work were at first merely obscured they eventually disappeared 
completely. 
The foreign-policy polemics exhibit a special narrative voice, 
quite different from most of the work's journalism. When Dos­
toevsky speaks of the Eastern Question, he usually adopts the 
voice of the prophet. Citing several passages from the Book of 
Revelation and even an obscure sixteenth-century book of proph­
ecies, Dostoevsky forecasts destruction for Europe and calls upon 
all faithful Russians to adhere to "the Russian idea" of universal 
salvation based on Russian Orthodoxy.ƪ Dostoevsky believed that 
the prophecy of Moscow as the Third Rome destined to establish 
true brotherhood on earth was about to be fulfilled, if only various 
enemies could be defeated. 
The registers of Dostoevsky's prophetic voice contrast markedly 
with the gentle, intimate tone of many other Diary articles. In 1 873 
and the first part of 1 876, Dostoevsky spoke as someone seeking 
some sort of guiding thread amid the chaos of Russian life. It was 
evidently this tone of perplexed wonder that originally was intended 
to define the whole. By contrast, the speaker in the prophetic 
articles no longer seeks because he has already found the inner 
story of world and Russian history. 
Confidently tracing that story from the ancients to the present, 
Dostoevsky explains even the most trivial current events. He pos­
sesses the key to history. Where others see merely local political 
conflicts, he reads the latest chapter in a drama lasting from the 
beginning of history to the "final denouement" now at hand. 
To prove the power of his method, Dostoevsky "risks" making 
predictions for the immediate future, and so an assessment of his 
earlier predictions soon became a regular feature of the Diary. 
They are, of course, usually confirmed, albeit by "facts" that (as 
Dostoevsky is well aware) are such only to those who accept 
Dostoevsky's interpretive schema to begin with. He predicts that 
the Jesuits will seize control of France, and then some speech by 
a French leader "proves" that they have in fact gained power; 
but, of course, Dostoevsky's critics regard his interpretation of 
the speech as no less "ecstatic" than his initial prediction. Re­
peatedly, "wiseacres," skeptics, and "caustic voices" "interrupt" 
these articles to mock Dostoevsky's use of evidence, and some of 
the most interesting articles in these sections of the Diary are 
devoted to dialogues about verification. The influence of these 

A Writer's Diary 
articles may easily be found in Karamazav, which devotes consider­
able attention to the nature of evidence and belief.<' 
The Prophetic Journalism: Menernich and Don Quixote 
In contending with real and imagined opponents, Dostoevsky ar­
gues most forcefully against those who appeal to calm reason and 
common sense. The real question for him is not whether this or 
that interpretation is correct but whether prophecy itself is viable. 
Dostoevsky explains repeatedly that his own ability to read the 
inner story of history (evidently based on his novelist's eye) makes 
his commentary more reliable than those based on conventional 
methods and considerations, which must be regarded as mere sub­
stitutes for real insight. Moreover, whatever value such methods 
might have had in the past, they cannot work at a time when the 
apocalypse is upon us. Dostoevsky insists that the closer the end 
of history draws, the less reliable traditional political analysis 
becomes. 
In normal historical periods, Dostoevsky explains, past events 
are the best guide to current events. But at moments of catastrophe, 
when "the past is split in two," conventional analyses will necessarily 
mislead. Revelation tells us that in one instant riches will come to 
naught, so how can the relative health of European economies 
be relevant to assessing their power in an apocalyptic age? At 
such times, Dostoevsky repeats, it is not "Metternich" but "Don 
Quixote" who turns out to be the supreme political realist.42 
Dostoevsky asks us to imagine some wily diplomat just before 
the French revolution using "common sense" to plan for the future. 
Basing his views on experience, he would see none of the un­
precedented cataclysms to come. It is periods like these, Dostoev­
sky insists, that reveal the shortcomings of "Diplomacy Facing 
World Problems" Cs-6/77, 2.2) and of ordinary practicality at mo­
ments of sudden universal upheaval. "If you make it a rule to 
judge all world events, even those that the most superficial view 
can see as being of the greatest importance, according to the prin­
ciple: 'today as yesterday, and tomorrow as today'-then isn't it 
clear that this rule goes utterly contrary to the history of nations 
and of humanity?" (9/77, 1 . 5). In the great nineteenth-century 
controversy between uniformitarianism and catastrophism, Dos­
toevsky makes an explicit plea for the catastrophist view of time. 
For Dostoevsky, the proper way to understand history, at least 
current history, is mythically. Beyond his specific predictions and 

Introductory Study 
3 1 
political solutions, Dostoevsky urges and exemplifies a particular 
kind of thinking in these articles. In this respect the Diary resem­
bles its great utopian predecessor, The Republic, which apart from 
its political prescriptions praises the philosophical process by which 
Socrates arrives at them-a process, Socrates maintains, "which 
anyone who is to gain happiness must value both for itself and for 
its results."43 in the Diary's utopian articles, Dostoevsky-as-Socrates 
instructs readers placed in the role of Glaucon. 
It cannot be denied that a large number of these articles are 
eminently forgettable. Dostoevsky as Don Quixote tortures fact and 
logic to turn windmills into giants. We read endless attempts to 
discover the hidden pattern of world history in the twists of French 
politics, the machinations of German diplomacy, and the shifting 
allegiances of the Russian intelligentsia. In most cases, the very 
events to which Dostoevsky attributes such timeless significance 
proved to be of fleeting interest, known now only to the specialist 
historian. But a few articles in which Dostoevsky outlines his mythic 
and quixotic approach in general terms remain of abiding interest, 
if only as a concentrated sample of this kind of thinking. 
Chapter 2 of June 1 876 offers the Diary's first comprehensive 
reading of history. Dostoevsky begins, characteristically, by posing 
a "paradox" (6/76, 2. r): why is it that Russian Westernizers, when 
they go abroad, immediately identify with Western radicals, that 
is, with those who want to destroy European civilization? As Wes­
ternizers, after all, they might be expected to want to preserve 
European civilization. Dostoevsky's answer is that these Russian 
radicals are unconsciously expressing their own Russianness. In 
fact, they are even displaying their unwitting Slavophilism. "In 
short, we are revolutionaries, so to say, out of some internal ne­
cessity, even out of conservatism" (6/76, 2.2). Had the radical critic 
Belinsky lived longer, Dostoevsky opines, he would have become 
a Slavophile. If only today's radical intelligentsia could become 
aware of this unconscious impulse, he pleads, the rifts between 
Slavophiles and Westernizers and between the intelligentsia and 
the people would be healed. That development would in turn allow 
all other Russian "questions" to be solved once and for all. One 
reason the Eastern Question is so significant, Dostoevsky argues, 
is that it may lead to just such healing by bringing the radicals' 
unconscious Russianness into plain view. 
Dostoevsky then supplemen:s this utopian hope with a fully de­
veloped "Utopian Conception of History" (6/76, 2.4). Before Peter 

32 
A Writer's Diary 
the Great's reforms, he instructs, "the Russian idea"-Orthodoxy­
remained unsulied. Russia was the only remaining Christian coun­
try in the world, and so Russia preferred to ·isolate herself from the 
West. Had this isolation continued, however, Russia would not have 
preserved but ultimately betrayed its Christianity, the meaning of 
which lies precisely in its universality. Thus Peter's reforms, despite 
their apparently secular motivation, were in fact providential. 
By bringing Russia into its two-cenrury contact with Europe, 
Dostoevsky reasons, Peter created an immeasurable "broadening of 
outlook" among Russians. As a result of this broadening, Russians 
came to develop "something characteristic of the Russian People 
alone . . . .  it is our acquired capacity to discover the truth contained 
in each of the civilizations of Europe or, more correctly, in each of 
the personalities of Europe." From here on, Dostoevsky was to re­
peat constantly his idea that whereas other nations possess a specific 
personality and carry a particular, local "idea," a true Russian is 
"pan-human" in that he or she can inruitively understand and em­
brace the personalities and ideas of all peoples. That is why the capa­
cious and all-reconciling Russian idea is destined to contain all others 
and resolve their contradictions once and for all. 
If the first step of Russian history was the period of Orthodox 
isolation, and the second was Russia's "broadening," then the third 
and final stage is now upon us. 44 The world will soon witness the 
utopian solution to all its problems and the advent of universal 
brotherhood. Collapsing Europe, doomed to extinction, will be 
saved at the last possible moment by the Russian idea. The first 
step toward this utopian solution-"the beginning of the end"­
will be Russia's liberation of the Slavic peoples under Turkish rule. 
Russia will undertake this mission utterly selflessly, without any 
motives of territorial seizure of the sort that always motivates Eng­
land and Austria. The liberation of the Slavs will lead immediately 
to the Russian occupation of Constantinople, the traditional center 
of Eastern Christianity; and with true Christianity at last made 
whole, it will "speak its word" to the rest of the world and solve 
all world problems forever. 
It follows that the skeptics are mistaken in regarding the Balkan 
conflict as just another war. It does not in the least resemble all 
those peny European wars of the last century. As Dostoevsky writes 
in a later article, the Eastern Question pertains not just "to the 
seas and the straits, access and egress" but also to something "much 

Introductory Study 
33 
deeper, more fundamental, more elemental, more necessary, more 
primary" Cs-6/77, 2.2). 
At a number of points in the June 1876 Diary, Dostoevsky imag­
ines what some ironic European, some two-bit Metternich, would 
reply: "Heavens, what a mocking smile would appear on the face 
of some Austrian or Englishman if he had the opportunity to read 
all these daydreams I have just written down" (6/76, 2.4). Later in 
the Diary he will state that not counterargurnents but events will 
best answer these mocking Europeans: "If not we, then our chil­
dren will see how England ends. Now, for everyone in the world 
'the time is at hand.' And it's about time, too" (4/77, 1 .3; citation 
from Revelation 1 :3). 
Adopting another tactic, Dostoevsky replies in the June 1876 
Diary by exposing the skeptics' questions as self-implicating, as 
revealing the naivete and moral corruption of those who pose them. 
In their habitual turpitude, the skeptics can only conceive of a 
mere political union, like the North American states. They lack 
the nobility to appreciate that in Russia's union with the other Slavs 
"there truly will be something special and unprecedented" (6/76, 
2.4), just as they cannot believe that anyone could take real Chris­
tianity seriously. Questions have presuppositions, and the presup­
positions of these "Austrians" demonstrate atheism and selfishness. 
The culminating passage of "The Utopian Conception of His­
tory" contains Dostoevsky's best-known statement of his apoca­
lyptic hopes. Whatever the "Austrians" think, the Russian mission 
has nothing to do with the usual political goal of empire or seizure 
of territory. 
No, it will be a true exaltation of the truth of Christ, which has been 
preserved in the East, a true, new exaltation of the cross of Christ 
and the ultimate word of Orthodoxy, at whose head Russia has long 
been standing. It will be a temptation for all the mighty of this world 
who have been triumphant until now and who have always regarded 
all such "expectations" with scorn and derision and who do not even 
comprehend that one can seriously believe in human brotherhood, in 
the universal reconciliation of nations, in a union founded on principles 
of universal service to humanity and regeneration of people through 
the true principles of Christ. And if believing in this "new word," 
which Russia at the head of a united Orthodoxy can utter to the 
world-if believing in this is a "utopia" worthy only of derision, then 

34 
A Writer's Diary 
you may number me among these utopians, and leave the ridicule to 
me. (6/76, 2.4) 
The Diary's utopian passages typically unfold dialogically because 
they are usually addressed to a scornful opponent. The essential 
stance of these articles is that of the prophet ridiculed, both at 
home and abroad, even though he speaks the timeless truth. 
The Prophetic Journalism: Nineteen Hundred Years of 
Protestantism and the Principle of Simultaneity 
Dostoevsky offers his next comprehensive myth of world history 
in the opening essay of I877. The article "Three Ideas" (I/77, I/ 
I), on which he expands throughout the year, describes European 
history since its beginnings as a conflict among three fundamental 
principles, each associated with a particular people and its corre­
sponding type of personality. In this way, the fate of nations is 
transformed into ideomachia and psychomachia. 
"Three ideas rise up before the world and, it seems, are already 
in their final stage of formulation," Dostoevsky proclaims. The 
first idea is Catholicism, by which Dostoevsky means not merely 
"the Catholic religion alone but the entire Catholic idea." As he 
explains in this article and elsewhere, this idea was first formulated 
by the Romans. Fusing a materialist view of mankind with the 
concept of universality, the Romans arrived at the idea of world 
rule, of universal earthly power. 
Before it could realize this idea, however, the Roman Empire 
encountered Christianity with its nonmaterialist view of humanity: 
"The man-god encountered the God-man, Apollo Belvedere en­
countered Christ" (8/8o, 3.3). A compromise was worked out, in 
which the empire accepted Christianity and the church (the Western 
church) accepted the Roman idea of universal rule. Ever since, the 
pope has tried to put this idea into practice. He has anempted to 
assert earthly power by deposing emperors and by ruling states. 
The Catholic idea belongs to the Latin peoples, and its principal 
representative today is France. 
In addition to the Roman church, the modem world has generated 
another form of the Catholic idea: socialism, whose home, appro­
priately, is also France. However much it might seem to superficial 
observers that socialism and Catholicism are antithetical, and how­
ever much these two ideologies may curently be at odds, they 
maintain essentially the same ideal: "the compulsory union of hu­
IT'.1nity" (I/77, 1 .  I). One of two things will happen: either the 

Introductory Study 
35 
Jesuits will succeed in gaining control of France in order to launch 
a final war against Germany (this is the point of Dostoevsky's 
endless articles on French politics) or, having failed, they, with the 
pope at their head, will join the socialists and proclaim to the world 
what has always been true, that the two are the same. That is why 
Bismarck, whom Dostoevsky imagines to be the only person in 
the world to view politics just as he does, recognizes France, so­
cialism, and the Catholic church not just as annoyances or political 
rivals but as mortal enemies fighting until the end of the world. 
Dostoevsky regards Bismarck as the present pope of the second 
world idea, Protestantism. Again, by Protestantism he does not 
mean the ecclesiastical movement that began with Luther but an 
idea that for nineteen centuries has been "protesting" against Rome 
and her idea. He speaks of "Protestantism . . .  protesting since the 
time of Arminius and the Teutoburger Wald. This is the German, 
believing blindly that the renewal of humanity is to be found only 
in him and not in Catholic civilization." The Reformation did not 
initiate but expressed the Protestant idea. 
This Protestant idea, unlike its timeless opponent, contains not 
a substantial promise but a fundamental void. It is the embodiment 
of pure emptiness. It therefore lives parasitically, by protesting 
against its enemy, so that if Catholicism should be defeated once 
and for all, Protestantism too would soon die because "she would 
have nothing to protest against. " This idea tends to atheism and 
nihilism, that is, to pure negation. 
Of course, Russia carries the third idea, the "Slavic idea." In 
article after article Dostoevsky repeats his "pan-human" thesis and 
defends the apocalyptic significance of the Eastern War, which 
would unite all Orthodox Slavs. (Dostoevsky never mentions that 
not all Balkan Slavs are Orthodox.) 
The conspicuous presence of these three ideas before the world 
leads to an inevitable question: 
What is awaiting the world, not only in the remaining quarter of this 
century but even (who can tell?) in the current year, perhaps? Europe 
is restless, of this there is no doubt. But is this restlessness only 
temporary, a thing of the moment? Certainly not: it is evident that 
the time is at hand for the fulfillment of something eternal, something 
millenarian, something that has been in preparation in the world since 
the very beginning of its civilization. 
But how can we be sure that the final conflict, which has been in 

A Writer's Diary 
the making for millennia, is at last at hand? The answer is to be 
found in another principle of mythic analysis that Dostoevsky in­
troduces in "Three Ideas" although he names it only later: syn­
chronism (the principle of "simultaneity"). 
Dostoevsky observes that each of the three ideas is just now 
achieving its "final formulation" at precisely the same moment. 
This simultaneity cannot be explained by any direct causal inter­
action. No, separate causal lines are each governed by the same 
clock, which has led each of them to its concluding form and to 
a final conflict with the others. 
Thus, within a few short years the pope proclaimed infallibility, 
Bismarck planned to interfere in the election of the next pope, and 
the Eastern Question reached a critical stage. To understand these 
events, we must solve "one riddle . . . .  why does it always happen, 
and particularly lately . . .  that the moment some issue in the world 
touches on something general and universal, all the other world 
problems at once come up parallel to it?" (5-6/77, 2.2). Dostoev­
sky's solution is that history manifests a well-plotted story; when 
Dostoevsky refers to a "denouement" he is not speaking merely 
metaphorically. History is shaped like a novel, which is preswnably 
why only a novelist, not a diplomat, could discover its hidden plot 
and foresee the coming first of catastrophe and then of utopia. 
In September 1877 Dostoevsky feels confident enough to outline 
the precise steps leading to Armageddon. In an article entitled 
"Who's Knocking at the Door? Who Will Come In? Inescapable 
Fate" (9/77, 1 . 5), he offers a list-"for the record so that it may 
later be verified" -of four predictions. First, "the road begins at 
Rome, in the Vatican," where the pope, whose Jesuits have covertly 
seized control of France, will order the final war against Germany­
"this last banle for survival that papal Catholicism in its ultimate 
death throes will certainly offer to the whole world in the very near 
future." 
Second, although this battle might be postponed briefly, it "is 
inevitable and near at hand. " Third, the banle will instantly become 
an "all-European" one and will include the apparently separate 
Eastern Question. Thus Roman Catholicism will be over as "by 
the will of Providence a reborn Eastern Christianity will take its 
place." It will be revealed once and for all why the Eastern Question 
is "a world-wide, universal question with an extraordinary, pre­
ordained significance, even though this preordination may occur 
before eyes that . . .  are incapable until the last minute of seeing the 

Introductory Study 
37 
obvious and comprehending the meaning of what has been pre­
ordained." Finally-"and you may call this the most hypothetical 
and fantastic of all my predictions, I'll adtnit that beforehand"­
Russia will win this final war: "Now again someone is knocking; 
someone, a new man, with a new word, wants to open the door 
and come in . . .  But who will come in? That's the question. Will it 
be an entirely new man, or will it once more be someone like all 
of us, the old homunculi?" 
Perhaps the most revealing foreign policy essays occur when 
Dostoevsky attempts to explain why Russian artnies did not in fact 
succeed in occupying Constantinople. An unforeseeable accident­
it was not a "tnistake," Dostoevsky insists-intervened. The Turks' 
use of a new rifle, it seems, made Russia's assault tactics ineffective. 
What is noteworthy about this explanation is that here Dostoevsky 
abandons his mythic style of argument in an attempt to counter 
the obvious fact of its failure in practice. For what has new tnilitary 
technology to do with the timeless conflict of eternal principles or 
with patterns revealed in apocalyptic writing? Concern with better 
rifles figures in the analyses of traditional diplomats and historians. 
It is, so to speak, an "Austrian" explanation. But Dostoevsky never 
explicitly acknowledges this self-contradiction. 
The Prophetic Journalism: Dostoevsky's Moral Nadir 
The danger of mythic politics like Dostoevsky's becomes especially 
clear in several articles that must be taken as the moral nadir of 
his career. The constant reference to "the universal Catholic con­
spiracy" (a phrase repeated like a mantra) leads to abhorrent essays 
accusing Poles in the Russian empire of being secret agents of the 
Vatican conspiracy. It also leads to anti-Setnitic articles that were, 
even by Russian standards of the day, particularly poisonous. Once 
Dostoevsky sees history in terms of a single story he adopts con­
spiracy logic to explain all resistance to his utopian dreams. And 
so it appears that the Jews, too, work behind the scenes to impede 
the progress of Christian Russia. Carrying their own secret idea of 
world domination, the Jews already rule over all of Europe, and 
"they are all faithfully awaiting the Messiah, every one of them, 
from the very lowest Yid to the very highest and most learned 
among them, the philosopher and cabalist-rabbi . . .  they all believe 
that the Messiah will gather them together in Jerusalem once more 
and will use his sword to bring down all the other peoples to sit 
at their feet" (3/77, 2. 3). 

A Writer's Diary 
Dostoevsky thus advances a second apocalyptic myth: the final 
conflict will be between Jews (representing materialism) and Chris­
tians (representing brotherhood). That is the real reason that Dis­
raeli, directing British foreign policy in part from the perspective 
of a "Spanish Yid," opposes Russian anempts to liberate the Bal­
kans. This perfidy is only the first terrible plot of the Jews: "Their 
reign, their complete reign is drawing nigh! Coming soon is the 
complete triumph of ideas before which feelings of love for hu­
manity, the longing for truth, Christian feelings, the feelings of 
nationhood and even the national pride of European peoples must 
give way. What lies ahead, on the contrary, is materialism, a blind, 
carnivorous lust for persanal material security" (3l77, 2.3). If the 
Jews ruled Russia, Dostoevsky contends, we could expect them to 
enslave everyone, to skin them, or to "massacre them altogether, 
exterminate them completely, as they did more than once with alien 
peoples in times of old in their ancient history" (3l77, 2. 2). How 
this myth of a final conflict of Jews and Christians is to be reconciled 
with the battle of three ideas, none of which is Jewish, is something 
that Dostoevsky never explains. 
Earlier in his career the Jews never occupied much of a place in 
Dostoevsky's thinking, and as editor of Time he anacked the Slav­
ophile journal Day precisely for its anti-Semitic tirades. It seems 
to me the fanatic anti-Semitism of the 1877 Writer'S Diary may 
serve as an excellent illustration of Norman Cohn's celebrated thesis 
that fanatic anti-Semitic thought in Europe is closely linked to 
millenarianism. 45 Cohn's point is that utopian and millenarian 
thought should be regarded as highly dangerous. For all his sins, 
Menernich makes a bener ruler than Don Quixote. 
Journalism: Literary Criticism and the Pushkin Speech 
The Diary also contains a good deal of literary criticism, which 
varies in tone and purpose. The death of George Sand occasions 
an appreciative, almost sentimental, account of her importance to 
Dostoevsky's generation. Dostoevsky responds to the death of Nek­
rasov with a psychological explanation of the contradiction between 
the poet's business sense and his verse about human suffering. The 
most interesting essays consider the work of Tolstoy and Pushkin. 
Later in this introduction I shall consider the Tolstoy essays, in 
which Dostoevsky's assessments of that writer reflect the inner 
conflicts of the Diary itself. The most important Pushkin criticism 
forms the pivot of the August 1880 issue, which includes the text 

Introductory Study 
39 
of Dostoevsky's famous Pushkin speech. This issue of the Diary 
transforms literary criticism into yet another form of apocalyptic 
politics. 
Strictly speaking, the August 1880 Diary is devoted not to the 
speech itself but to the occasion of its delivery and the nature of 
its reception. Its purpose is not just to reprint the text of the speech 
but to tell a story about a key event in Russian culture. It just so 
happens that the hero of that story is Dostoevsky himself. 
The issue therefore has a plot, consisting of three incidents. The 
earliest is the delivery of the speech, the text of which is given in 
the second chapter. The speech attributes to Pushkin Dostoevsky's 
own diagnosis of Russian society, the tragic contradictions between 
the intelligentsia and the people and between Slavophiles and Wes­
ternizers. Dostoevsky's Pushkin also foresaw what would resolve 
the split, an appreciation of the Russian spirit as "pan-human." 
Unique among the great poets of the world, Pushkin could describe 
Englishmen as Englishmen and Italians as Italians, whereas Shake­
speare's or Goethe's foreigners were nothing more than Englishmen 
or Germans with foreign names. 46 Thus Pushkin was the first to 
embody the universality that is the distinguishing mark of Russians. 
In this respect he was both Slavophile (understanding the Russian 
spirit) and Westernizer (able to include Western peoples within 
Russianness). If only our intelligentsia could accept Pushkin's idea 
of Russians as a universal people, all their conflicts would be 
resolved and brotherhood would reign. 
The story's second incident, described in the issue's first chapter 
(and a part of the third), consists of the audience's immediate 
response to the speech. The audience's enthusiasm seems to confirm 
Dostoevsky's hope that his speech could be the catalyst for utopia. 
With breathless excitement, Dostoevsky informs his readers that 
the speech inspired the audience to join hands, set aside old quar­
rels, and serve the Russian cause of universal reconciliation. 
I'm not recalling this to earn praise, and not out of pride: I'm merely 
recording the seriousness of the moment . . . .  this single, ardent sug­
gestion united everyone in a single thought and a single feeling. 
Strangers embraced each other and swore to be better in the future. 
Two old men came up to me and said: "We have been enemies for 
twenty years and have done much harm to one another, but hearing 
your words we have mad.., peace." (8/So, 3.4) 
Dostoevsky wonders whether this promising beginning will in fact 

40 
A Writer's Diary 
lead to utopia. The issue's first chapter therefore sketches out two 
possibilities: either the Westemizers will resP.ond with mockery or 
they will in fact accept Dostoevsky's recipe for reconciliation. On 
this note of suspense, the chapter ends. This was supposed to be 
the last event recorded in the August 188o Diary. 
Unexpectedly, however, Dostoevsky adds a third chapter, which 
contains the third incident of the story. It appears that after the 
first two chapters were written but before the issue could be pub­
lished, imponant responses to the speech appeared in rival 
publications. "I was about to conclude my Diary, having limited 
it to the speech ! gave in Moscow on June 8 and the foreword that 
I wrote to it, foreseeing the row that was, in fact, raised . . . .  But 
after reading your criticism, Mr. Gradovsky, I stopped the printing 
of the Diary so as to append to it a reply to your attacks" (8/8o, 
3· 1). Like others reporting on the speech, Gradovsky mocked Dos­
toevsky's appeal, just as Dostoevsky had feared some would. Dos­
toevsky therefore devotes the issue's final pages to an angry reply. 
It appears that his hopes for the speech, no less than his earlier 
expectations about the Eastern War, were disappointed. 
Carefully dated, each chapter of this issue appears (or is said to 
appear) as written, that is, without benefit of the knowledge re­
corded in chapters composed later. The August 188o Diary does 
not just describe a sequence of events but enacts a story. It is this 
temporal layering that gives the issue its dramatic quality and allows 
it, in miniature, to reproduce the periodical quality of earlier years. 
It repeats the drama of utopian hope and disappointment that in 
1877 was focused on the Eastern War. 
Journalism: Crime and the Environment, 
Suicides and Trials 
Dostoevsky sought to trace the spiritual development of Russia by 
reponing on sensational events, such as suicides and trials. These 
two themes each led to a sequence of articles that were closely 
connected with the Diary's stories. As we have seen, "The Dream 
of a Ridiculous Man" begins with a contemplated suicide, which 
is then enacted in a dream. "The Meek One" combines both 
motifs, as the narrator addresses an imagined court to explain why 
his wife has killed herself. 
Dostoevsky selects suicides that, in his view, reveal fundamental 
spiritual crises in Russian life. In Notes from Underground, Dos­
toevsky's narrator observes, "I have only, after all, in my life carried 

Introductory Study 
41 
to an extreme what you have not dared to carry halfway."47 The 
suicide cases of the Diary also carry to an extreme the despair 
facing all educated Russians. 
Typically, Dostoevsky focuses on the suicide note (or some spoken 
substitute), which he first examines stylistically. As Tikhon, the 
holy man of The Possessed, deduces Stavrogin's state of mind from 
the way he writes his confession, Dostoevsky applies his special 
stylistics to the last words of those who have condemned themselves. 
Under his analysis, style betrays psychology, which in turn reveals 
ideology. The suicide's ideology then serves as a key to the "un­
conscious" spiritual conflicts of millions. Because many of the cases 
were already widely known, Dostoevsky's revelation of new mean­
ing 
in 
apparently 
exhausted 
incidents 
proved 
particularly 
compelling. 
Eventually, Dostoevsky felt confident enough that his guesses 
were correct to offer his "formula" of a materialist's suicide note 
(in his sketch "The Sentence" [10/76, L4)). Here again we witness 
how a process of research, guesswork, and correction have even­
tually led to a short "semifiction," which in turn provided the basis 
for the finished story, "The Dream of a Ridiculous Man." 
The new Russian law courts, reformed along Western lines and 
open to the public, also allowed Dostoevsky to examine crimes as 
symptoms of Russia's moral state. Because he is interested not only 
in the criminal but also in the public, Dostoevsky reports on trials 
as public events. As in Karamazoo, they are a form of unwitting 
theater in which the audience may be the most important actors. 
As Dostoevsky covers these cases, not only the defendant is on 
trial, but so are the other actors in the judicial process. He calls 
attention to the approving response of the press when clever lawyers 
get obviously guilty people acquitted, inquires into the motivation 
of juries that turn in unjust verdicts, and focuses on the sentiments 
that lead audiences at trials to cheer the release of child abusers. 
Above all, Dostoevsky dwells on the often tacit ideas that "float 
about in the air" (73.3) and guide public thought about crime and 
about right and wrong. "Some ideas exist that are unexpressed arid 
unconscious but that simply are strongly felt" (73-3), he remarks, 
and one purpose of the Diary is to make those ideas explicit and 
so available to scrutiny. 
The 1873 Diary initiates the sequence of articles on crime with 
one of Dostoevsky's best-known essays, "Environment" (73-3). 
Justly praised for its profundity and rhetorical power, this essay 

42 
A Writer's Diary 
employs methods central to the Diary's basic conception. It begins 
with reflections about why the new Russian juries let the guilty go 
free, whereas in England, which invented this institution, jurors 
generally do not yield to sentimentality or the intoxication of power. 
In Russia, however, a particular idea seems to have "seized all 
Russian jurors," not just peasants but "even those from the up­
permost classes such as noblemen and university professors." This 
idea is "the environment": the theory that all crime is caused not 
by morally responsible people but by social evils. It follows that 
"there is no crime whatsoever" and so how can anyone be convicted 
of anything? Proponents of "the environment" demand: first re­
form society, and then ask people to behave properly! It is evident 
that such an idea contradicts the very basis of trials, for it makes 
everyone automatically innocent. 
In the first half of the article, Dostoevsky argues "inefficiently." 
Digressing into numerous apparently irrelevant issues, he is re­
peatedly interrupted by various voices representing distinct currents 
of Russian thought. 48 They force Dostoevsky to explain his own 
outmoded sense of morality, which, he acknowledges, is not only 
passe but also somewhat inconsistent. When the voices argue with 
each other, Dostoevsky seems to lose control of his own article. 
This technique in fact characterizes many Diary articles, which 
alternate exposition with a sort of eccentric drama. 
In this indirect manner Dostoevsky first deepens our understand­
ing of the issues. No less important, he also reveals the character, 
not just the logic, of positions-the way ideas feel and are lived. 
Along the way he manages to state, if not to defend, key points, 
which will turn out to be essential to his refutation of the "envi­
ronmental" doctrine. He lays the groundwork, too, for examining 
the doctrine's effects. What sort of moral environment does the envi­
ronmental doctrine itself create? Throughout the Diary, Dostoevsky 
turns the environmental doctrine against itself. For example, he 
questions what sort of families are produced by parents who believe 
not in individual responsibility but in social determinism. 
In "Environment," Dostoevsky suggests that this "progressive" 
view of crime and responsibility takes away our very humanity by 
denying human freedom. It turns us into what the underground 
man calls "piano keys" and "organ stops." "In making the in­
dividual dependent on every flaw in the social structure, however, 
the doctrine of the environment reduces him to an absolute non­
entity, exempts him totally from every personal moral duty and 

Introductory Study 
43 
from all independence, reduces him to the lowest form of slavery 
imaginable." The doctrine of freedom liberates, the idea of deter­
minism enslaves. But Dostoevsky does not proceed to deny the 
environmental doctrine altogether, as some less than careful readers 
have assumed. He argues rather that the truly Christian perspective 
is to acknowledge that corrupting environment does play a role and 
may indeed be a mitigating factor, provided that this reasoning is 
not pushed too far. The problem with the environmental doctrine 
lies in its categorical formulation. For Christianity, which both 
allows for mercy and makes people responsible, the question be­
comes one of locating "the line where the environment ends and 
duty begins." However, if everything is entirely determined by 
social conditions, then no line need be drawn. 
This question of "the line" suggests a second argument that is 
central to the 1873 Diary: one must be suspicious of Theory, of 
categorical reasoning, per se. Any ethical theory, not just the doc­
trine of the environment, will produce grotesque results when for­
mulated as a universal law. Real moral judgment demands fine 
discrimination among apparently similar cases, and in such a pro­
cess of judgment generalities play their proper role not as laws but 
as maxims, as reminders of earlier cases that may or may not be 
applicable to the one under consideration. The complexities of 
concrete cases are too numerous, too fine, and too unpredictable 
for any theory to encompass in advance. For Dostoevsky, it is a 
characteristic mistake of the intelligentsia (the principal target of 
the 1873 Diary) to yield to fashionable generalities of this sort. 
In advancing these arguments, Dostoevsky develops the "pro­
saic" idea typically associated with Tolstoy. Like Pierre in War and 
Peace (and later Levin in Anna Karenina), Dostoevsky defends a 
casuistical approach to ethics in the root sense of that term: morality 
is not reducible to a theory but depends on sensitivity to particular 
cases. •• The questions of whether and to what degree a set of 
circumstances might mitigate a given crime are ones that must 
always be raised but never answered either way in advance or by 
a theory. Later in the Diary, Dostoevsky himself will discover 
grounds to attribute diminished responsibility to a convicted crim­
inal. Accused by a rival publication of contradicting himself, he 
will insist (correctly) that his argument against "the environmental 
doctrine" was never advanced categorically but, precisely the op­
posite, as an attack on categorical thinking where only sensitivity 
to particulars will do. What is needed is training in drawing fine 

44 
A Writer's Diary 
distinctions and in noting telling particulars, which is the sort of 
education that A Writer's Diary repeatedly attempts to provide.50 
Dostoevsky illustrates the complexity of these moral questions 
and the need to be suspicious of general theories "in the air" with 
yet another consideration. What if the environmental theory, which 
now "floats in the air," should itself come to figure in the delib­
erations of a person contemplating crime? "The criminal and the 
person planning to commit a crime are two different people, but 
they belong to the same category. What if the criminal, consciously 
preparing to commit a crime, says to himself: 'There is no crime!"' 
Here again, intellectuals invoke their theories as a way of explaining 
events, but they fail to consider the possibility that theories may 
also cause them. Precisely because the environment does contribute 
to crime, they should not forget that ideas themselves form a part 
of the environment. Here Dostoevsky sharpens his paradox: the 
grain of truth in this theory itself constitutes a reason to reject it. 
What the environmental theory should lead us to do is not to 
excuse crime-at least not categorically-but bit by bit, effort by 
small effort, to improve the environment. We should recognize that 
the criminal is indeed responsible for his crime, but we should not 
forget that we have the responsibility for changing the environment 
that contributed to it, even if our individual efforts at improvement 
only change the environment a small amount. It is this prosaic 
concept of responsibility for small improvements, and not its per­
version into the "environmental doctrine," that the Russian people, 
when left uncorrupted by fashionable ideas, truly believe: 
No, the People do not deny there is crime, and they know that the 
criminal is guilty. The People know that they also share the guilt in 
every crime. But by accusing themselves, they prove that they do not 
believe in "environment"; they believe, on the contrary, that the 
environment depends completely on them . . . .  Energy, work, and 
struggle-these are the means through which the environment is im­
proved. Only by work and struggle do we attain independence and 
a sense of our own dignity. "Let us become better, and the environ­
ment will be better." This is what the Russian People sense so strongly 
but do not express in their concealed idea of the criminal as an 
unfortunate. 
Later in the Diary, Dostoevsky discusses how, in Anna Karenina, 
Levin arrives after long and futile theorizing at a pretheoretical 
understanding of ethics. Dostoevsky's praise for this scene (and 

Introductory Study 
45 
for some similar passages in Tolstoy's novel) probably reflects his 
awareness of the sense of prosaic and casuistical morality he shares 
with his great rival. 
Dostoevsky's article does not develop any of these arguments 
rigorously; they appear briefly, only to be laughed down by "sar­
castic voices." The author is on the defensive when he at last 
switches tactics and, as if following his own advice, considers a 
particular case. It seems that a peasant beat his wife over a period 
of many years. Treating her worse than a dog, he drove her, already 
scarcely in her right mind, to seek refuge in a village court, which 
sent her away with the recommendation: "Learn to live together." 
We al read in the papers what happened next, Dostoevsky reminds 
his readers: "Plainly and simply, the wife who suffered from her 
husband's beatings hanged herself; the husband was tried and found 
deserving of mercy." As for me, Dostoevsky writes, I kept thinking 
about the case and "fancied I could see all the circumstances . . .  
I see them even now." 
What follows is an imaginative reconstruction of the woman's life, 
a piece of semifiction (in this respect) similar to "A Hundred-Year­
Old Woman." "I keep imagining his figure . . . .  I would add another 
touch": Dostoevsky weaves an admittedly imaginary story around 
the known facts of the case. He then asks the reader to consider 
whether his story is plausible and, if so, whether the jury's rec­
ommendation of mercy based on the doctrine of the environment 
makes moral sense. Here is the novelist as casuist (in the positive 
sense), using his psychological sensitivity to understand people and 
their actions. And here is A Writer's Diary in its essential mode of 
combining fiction and nonfiction, of projecting, interrogating, and 
imagining real events in order to arrive at their spiritual meaning. 
The story that Dostoevsky constructs, like the most horrifying 
incidents in his novels, remains unforgettable for its stark terror, 
all the more so because it is probably true. In this respect, it resembles 
the most compelling narratives in The House of the Dead. "Have 
you seen how a peasant beats his wife?" Dostoevsky asks his 
readers. "I have." As in the novel, and as in the Diary's autobi­
ographical sketches, Dostoevsky relies on his own legendary and 
true biography to lend his account greater plausibility than mere 
fiction would have. 
Based on some generally overlooked incidents that emerged in 
the trial, Dostoevsky imagines how the peasant would thrust the 
woman into a hole in the floor and beat her for hours, with their 

A Writer's Diary 
ten-year-old child watching. Here as elsewhere in Dostoevsky, wit­
nessing becomes a second torture and the compulsion to witness 
becomes a second crime. What has been approached as a case of 
cruelty to the wife was also child abuse. 
The peasant would leave food out but forbid the wife and child 
to eat it, so they would go begging to neighbors and, upon re­
turning, the wife would be beaten again. And remember, Dos­
toevsky muses, since people are born in various circumstances, 
this woman "might have been some Juliet or Beatrice from Shake­
speare, or Gretchen from Faust" or at least "something no worse, 
perhaps, than what could be found in a woman of noble birth." 
From this point on, his narrative describes how "Beatrice or 
Gretchen" begs inhumanly for her husband to stop the beating, 
again with her daughter looking on. "The little girl, all atremble 
and huddled on the stove, would steal a wild glance at her mother 
hanging by her heels and try to hide again." 
It is here that Dostoevsky returns to the bare facts with which 
he began the story: that the woman at last went to the village court, 
which told her to learn to live together, and then hanged herself, 
on "a bright spring day, probably." He imagines the child watching 
the hanging body for hours, and then repeats the jury's verdict of 
"Guilty, but with recommmdation for clemmcy. " Dostoevsky then 
makes explicit the implications of his second story, the child abuse 
case, which the jury and press had not even considered. Dostoevsky 
asks: what happens to the child, who testified against her father, 
when, because of "clemency," she goes back to live with him in 
a few months? "Clemency to whom, and for what? You feel as if 
you are in some sort of whirlwind that's caught you up and twists 
and turns you around." 
Dostoevsky then adds another story. It appears from the press 
that a woman used to torture her noisy child by pouring scalding 
water on her. Well, let us imagine this case in court, Dostoevsky 
suggests; and he reconstructs the defense attorney's argument and 
the jury's "recommendation for clemency." But that's just a fiction! 
the "sarcastic voice" interrupts. Perhaps, Dostoevsky answers, but 
the woman who hanged herself and the girl who witnessed it, those 
are not fictions. "'Backwardness, ignorance, the environment­
have some pity,' the peasant's lawyer insisted . . . .  Enough contor· 
tions, gentlemen of the bar. Enough of your 'environment.' " 
If this fourteen-page essay had appeared when the Diary was a 
monthly, Dostoevsky would probably have made it one of an issue's 

Introductory Study 
47 
two chapters and divided it into two or three articles; there is a 
break in the text as it is. Much as "The Boy at Christ's Christmas 
Party" follows a nonfictional article, so the reconstruction of the 
wife's story follows the purely factual account that precedes it. This 
is precisely how Dostoevsky uses fiction and semifiction within the 
Diary, to illuminate the moral meaning of well-known facts. These 
stories and sketches depend on their ambiguous status as fictions 
that may very well not be fictions at all. For that matter, one could 
easily excerpt the account of the peasant's wife in "Environment" 
and publish it as a separate story; it would in fact work quite well, 
much as "The Boy" and "The Peasant Marey" can stand on their 
own. But in both of those cases, although we have a powerful story, 
it is-even if verbally identical-nevertheless a different story from 
the one that appears in A Writer's Diary. 
Journalism about Trials: Child Abuse and 
a Case Not As Simple As It Seems 
The Kroneberg trial, a notorious child abuse case, occupies the 
second chapter of the February 1876 issue. Concerned above all 
with the social implications of the case, Dostoevsky focuses less 
on Kroneberg than on his talented liberal lawyer, Spasovich, and 
on the arguments used to gain acquittal. To be sure, lawyers are 
supposed to use all available means in defense of their clients, but 
that is precisely the problem. The court turns into theater, while 
jury, audience, and the press respond primarily to performance. 
(Dostoevsky later reworked these themes in Karamazov, where Spa­
sovich served as the model for the lawyer Fetyukovich.) 
One case in which Dostoevsky became involved extends for over 
a year. The Kornilova case-" A Case That Is Not as Simple as It 
Seems" (10/76, ! . I)-concerned a young stepmother who was re­
proached by her stern husband for not measuring up to his first 
wife. One day when he was out, she threw his daughter out a 
fourth-story window; miraculously, the child was unharmed. Kor­
nilova immediately turned herself in, was tried, convicted, and 
sentenced to Siberia. By Russian law, the sentence also dissolved 
her mariage. 
Dostoevsky first mentions the case in passing in his May 1876 
issue. Imagining how some "talented" lawyer would argue for this 
attempted murderer's acquittal, Dostoevsky then observes, rather 
cryptically, that this case is indeed "truly bizarre; perhaps it really 
should be given a detailed and deep analysis that might even serve 

A Writer's Diary 
to lighten the case against this criminal woman" (5/76, 1 .  5). In 
the October 1876 issue, Dostoevsky does just that. 
As in his articles on other cases, Dostoevsky argues that the 
available evidence sustains another story that ·others have not de­
tected. In contrast to the Kroneberg case, though, this time the 
other story exonerates the accused. Focusing on the "bizare" as­
pects of the story, Dostoevsky at last concludes that while throwing 
the girl out the window Kornilova sufered from "an affect of 
pregnancy"; she was conscious and sane, but she did something 
she would not have done otherwise and that she would never repeat. 
Dostoevsky's articles proved instrumental in getting the verdict 
reexamined and set aside on a technicality. Kornilova was then 
retried and acquitted on the grounds Dostoevsky had suggested. 
In his most fascinating pieces on the case, Dostoevsky employs 
the techniques we have seen elsewhere to reconstruct the prior life 
of the family, the incidents leading to the crime, and the likely 
outcome of them. Moreover, he visits the Kornilovs in order to 
evaluate his own predictions about them, which prove generally 
correct. In the December 1877 issue, the last before the publication 
was suspended, Dostoevsky describes the family as faring well, 
much as he had expected. Explaining that he in fact delayed this 
article, which might have appeared earlier, he evidently placed it 
to provide the Diary with something like closure. 
As Dostoevsky was obviously well aware, the Kornilova case in 
effect constitutes a little novella within the Diary. He evidently used 
it to create a unifying narrative thread and genuine suspense within 
the periodical. In this respect, it serves as a structural parallel to 
the story of the Eastern War: both extend over the better pan of 
the 1876-77 Diary, contain enough twists and turns to create sus­
pense, and conclude more or less when the Diary is suspended. 
Moreover, although the author takes an active role in both stories, 
his exhortations cannot determine either outcome. Both stories in­
volve the special excitement, different from that of a novel, created 
by an author's intermittent attempts to shape events in which he 
himself is involved and whose outcome is still undecided. Dos­
toevsky figures as both character and author. That, of course, is 
true in all genuine diaries, the potentials of which are exploited in 
this new genre of A Writer's Diary. 
Journalism: Feuilletons and Chapter Titles 
Before prophetic journalism begins to dominate the Diary, Dos­
toevsky positioned the feuilleton as the work's central journalistic 

Introductory Study 
49 
genre. Indeed, he appears to have invented the form of the monthly 
Diary by radically expanding and adapting the feuilleton. "Without 
doubt, A Writer's Diary will resemble a feuilleton," he wrote to 
Vsevolod Soloviev, "with the difference that a monthly feuilleton, 
naturally, cannot resemble a weekly feuilleton."51 In the course of 
the Diary, he refers to it a few times as a sort of feuilleton.52 What 
precisely was this form for Dostoevsky, and how did he exploit it 
in his new publication? 
By the 1 84os the feuilleton had emerged as a major literary genre 
practiced by many of Russia's most talented writers, including 
Turgenev, Goncharov, Druzhinin, and Dostoevsky himself. His­
torically, it began as a mere journalistic miscellany listing discon­
nected bits of information in a single sheet (hence the term 
feuilleton). Gradually, the custom evolved of linking the separate 
items as the haphazard observations of a particular narrator, who 
wandered digressively from topic to topic and sometimes, in the 
conventional role of the flaneur, from place to place as well. 
Thus we see at the core of this form, both historically and po­
etically, the problem of finding some sort of connection berween 
radically diverse pieces. For this reason, the feuilleton lent itself 
to the design of Dostoevsky's new genre, which was to dramatize 
the search for some kind of underlying trends amid the amazing 
variety of Russian life. Dostoevsky's notebooks confirm that he 
planned to use feuilletons often within the Diary, where they would 
enable him to include heterogeneous observations and topics. The 
Diary as a whole would be a sort of feuilleton squared. 
Small feuilletons were to be embedded in some sort of large 
feuilleton. And as the traditional feuilleton included an endless 
variety of topics, the new monthly version would include a wide 
variety of genres. By including material other than feuilletons, there­
fore, the Diary would be paradoxically true to the genre that inspired 
it. In this way, and as the pivot of each issue, the feuilleton would 
set the tone for the whole. 
Traditionally, a conventional narrator figured in the feuilleton, 
as Dostoevsky's own earlier efforts in the genre illustrate. Dreamy, 
capricious, digressive-originally to justify the diversity of included 
topics-the feuilletonistic narrator typically finds it hard to con­
centrate on his announced theme because he is perpetually dis­
tracted by stray incidents that cross his path. Yorick in Sterne's 
Sentimental Journey evidently influenced Russian feuilletons, and 
so we witness in them a speaker occasionally indulging in epigrams 

so 
A Writer's Diary 
or stinging insinuations within a generally lightheaned discourse 
governed by the spirit of whimsical parody. "I began my remarks 
about the feuilleton seriously enough," wmte the feuilletonist I. 
Panaev, "but then I saw that there is no way to talk seriously about 
the Russian feuilleton."53 In his notebooks for the first monthly 
issue of the Diary, Dostoevsky reminds himself to maintain this 
playful tone. Criticizing unsuccessful feuilletonists, he remarks that 
"they want to talk playfully and simply . . .  but then, to our sur­
prise, no playfulness is visible . . . .  Some resemble Mr. Turgenev, 
who has been writing himself out for the last ten years and who 
keeps . . .  milking the humble cow of his wit, with its dried up 
teats."54 
One generic formula that rapidly emerged (for example, in Dru­
zhinin's "Dramatic Feuilleton about the Feuilleton and about Feuil­
letonists ") was metaliterary play on the conventions of feuilletons 
themselves. For example, the narrator would confide to the reader 
his inability to honor the genre's conventions, including the con­
vention of such confidences. This formula figures prominently in 
Dostoevsky's feuilletons. Inasmuch as the feuilleton was supposed 
to tie together the most diverse topics, mock apologies for including 
irrelevant or inappropriate material became standard. The Diary's 
announcement, which promises to talk about everything the author 
has "seen, heard, and read," is clearly indebted to the feuilleton, 
as are Dostoevsky's "apologies" for violating this almost inviolable 
promise. 
The reader who can mentally bracket the later issues of the Diary 
and focus on 1873 or the first numbers of 1876 will immediately 
become aware that the feuilletonistic tone extends far beyond the 
feuilletons proper. We have already seen how the frame of "The 
Boy at Christ's Chrisunas Party" whimsically calls attention to its 
own "inappropriateness"; no less feuilletonistic is its whole pres­
entation as a dreamer's fancy. A similar, though more serious, 
combination of wistfulness and self-reference characterizes both 
"The Peasant Marey" (as we have seen, an "unexpected" remi­
niscence of an unexpected reminiscence of a nonexistent threat) 
and "A Hundred-Year-Old Woman" (with its conclusion dismiss­
ing the account as "inconsequential" and "not even a story"). 
These two narratives fill the same structural place in the February 
and March issues that "The Boy" fills in January. Before prophecy 
comes to dominate the Diary, indeed, virtually all its genres-

Introductory Study 
5 1  
fiction, semifiction, autobiography, and journalism-continue the 
tone and method of the feuilleton. 
It seems to me that another trademark of the Diary also derives 
from the feuilleton. Anyone who reads the monthly issues will be 
struck by the long and perplexing chapter titles. In January 1876, 
for instance, we encounter headings that, whatever else they do, 
do not help the reader understand in advance the article he or she 
is about to read: 
1 .3: The Christmas Party at the Artists' Club. Children Who Think 
and Children Who Are Helped Along. A "Gluttonous Boy." "Oui" 
Girls. Jostling Raw Youths. A Moscow Captain in a Hurry. 
3· 1 :  The Russian Society for the Protection of Animals. The Gov­
ernment Courier. Demon-Vodka. The Itch for Debauch and Vorobev. 
From the End or from the Beginning? 
Almost miniature feuilletons themselves, these titles seem to con­
tinue the genre's impulse to diversity and spontaneity. They call 
attention to a narrator unable to stick to the topic or even, retro­
spectively, to describe concisely and coherently what he has been 
talking about. The titles evidently are written-and could only be 
written-after the article they introduce, and they are comprehen­
sible only after it has been read. They pose problems for the reader 
to solve, and many of their elements are riddles: one may guess, 
but there is no way to know what a "'Oui' Girl" is until one reads 
the article. Composed of several puzzling parts, the title as a whole, 
tracing a perplexing sequence of thoughts, also works like a riddle. 
The reader is implicitly asked to ascertain what the different ele­
ments have to do with each other. (They are, in fact, thematically 
connected, so there is a special pleasure in solving the more in­
teresting titles.) We have seen that in "The Peasant Marey" the 
diarist casts himself as a riddle solver, and that the author contin­
ually tries to solve puzzles of Russian life. In effect, the chapter 
titles encourage the reader to repeat the author's defining activity 
of discovering unity within a perplexing diversity. 
Self-Referential Material and the 1 873 Diary: A Periodical 
Has No Readers, So It Hires One 
The metaliterary aspects of the feuilleton, its tendency to parody 
and self-parody, also lead to another sort of material in the Diary: 

52 
A Writer's Diary 
self-referential essays discussing the Diary's own form and its re­
lations with readers. Whimsical chapter titles composed in this 
mode refer to what the author has not been able to do, and intro­
ductory paragraphs announce in advance that the Diary will make 
promises as a mere cover for their violation. The January 1881 
issue, which was to revive the monthly Diary after a three-year 
intermission, begins with such a self-canceling promise: 
1. Finances. A Citizen as an Offended Thersites. Cruwing from be/QW 
and the Musicians. A Refuge for Windbags and the Windbags. 
Good Lord! Can it be that after three years of silence I now resume 
my Diary with an article on economics? What sort of an economist 
and financial expert am I? I've never been either of these things. 
Despite the current epidemic, I have not been infected with the virus 
of economism, yet here I am, following all the others, and coming 
out with an article on economics. That there is a regular epidemic of 
economism these days is beyond doubt. (I /81, 1.1) 
Of course, the author immediately digresses into other topics (as 
the chapter title intimates he will). The chapter's next article begins 
with the reader demanding that the author return to his topic, at 
which point, in true metaliterary spirit, Dostoevsky "bares the 
device":55 
2. Can We Expect European Finances in Russia? 
"So what about finances? Where's your article on finances?" I'll 
be asked. But, again, what sort of an economist am I? What kind of 
an expert on financial maners? In fact, I don't think I even have the 
nerve to write about finances. So why, then, did I embark on such 
a venture and start writing such an article? I did so precisely because 
I'm sure that once I've begun to talk of finances I'll change the subject 
to something else entirely and the result will be an article not about 
finances but something altogether different. That's the only thing that 
encourages me. (I /8 I , 1 .  2) 
In the third and fourth articles, self-reference has been removed 
to the title: 
I ·3 · Forget Immediate Problems So That the Rots Can Be Re­
stored. Through Lack of Ability I Enter into Something Spiritual. 
1 .4. The First Rot. Instead of an Authoritative Financial Tone I 
Lapse into Old Words . . . .  
The opening articles of 1873 and 1876 employ this technique to 

Introductory Study 
5 3 
introduce A Writer's Diary. In so doing, they intimate the work's 
central themes and methods while denying the author's competence 
to accomplish any defined purpose. Thus the Diary's feuilletonistic 
tone is heard from the very start. 
"Introduction" (73· I) begins by contrasting the informal pro­
cedure by which Dostoevsky was named editor of The Citizen with 
the formality, governed by "two hundred volumes of ceremonial," 
developed over a thousand years, of the Chinese emperor's recent 
wedding. How delightful it would be to publish The Citizen in 
China, Dostoevsky muses, because there everything would be spec­
ified in advance. Why, in China absolutely no inventiveness would 
be needed inasmuch as every idea would have been specified long 
ago! But how am I to publish articles in Russia, Dostoevsky asks, 
where, on the one hand, there is no volume of ceremonial, but, 
on the other, the intelligentsia has such a rigid code of beliefs on 
every conceivable subject that independent thought is impossible? 
For example, Dostoevsky confides, I would like to engage in 
sober reflection, but instead the leaders of the intelligentsia expect 
me to employ "a few very simplified and purely scientific tech­
niques," preeminently those of a nihilistic sort: 
Formerly, for instance, the words "I don't understand a thing" meant 
only that the person who uttered them was ignorant; now they bring 
great honor. One need only say, proudly and with a frank air, "I don't 
understand religion; I don't understand anything about Russia; I don't 
understand anything about an," and immediately you place yourself 
above the crowd. And it's especially good if you really don't understand 
anything. 
Members of the intelligentsia now identify themselves as such by 
sharing "ready-made ideas. They are sold everywhere, and even 
given away; but the ones that come free of charge prove to be even 
more expensive." And so "woe to the writer and publisher who 
in our time begins to think soberly . . .  and to understand things 
on his own." 
This, then, is what makes it impossible to publish The Citizen: 
to be a true citizen, one must endeavor to think independently, but 
then one will have no readers, and what is a publication without 
readers? 
The only thing he [the publisher] can do is to seek out some suitable 
individual, or even hire one, and simply talk to him and to him alone. 

54 
A Writer's Diary 
Perhaps he could publish a magazine for that one individual. It's a 
loathsome situation, because it amounts to talking to yourself and 
publishing a magazine only for your own amusement. I strongly sus­
pect that for a long time yet The Citizen will have to talk to itself and 
appear only for its own amusement. Remember that medical science 
considers talking to oneself a sign of predisposition to insanity. The 
Citizen certainly must speak to citizens, and that is precisely the whole 
dilemma! 
We see here why Dostoevsky's column is a diary: a diary does not 
require any readers. "I shall talk to myself and for my own amuse­
ment, in the form of this diary, whatever may come of it."s6 
In this wry way, the opening article defines the I873 Diary's key 
motifs. The idea of madness and conversations with oneself reap­
pears most dramatically in the two contributions of the "certain 
person," "Bobok" (73.6) and "A Half-Lener from 'A Certain 
Person"' (73. 8). As we have seen, these works filter several of the 
Diary's favorite themes-about art, about materialism-through the 
thought of a madman. In "Dreams and Musings" (73. I I), Dos­
toevsky compares himself to the mad diarist Poprishchin, the nar­
rator of Gogol's "Diary of a Madman." 
The "Introduction" also introduces what turns out to be the 
central theme of the I873 Diary, the mentality of the intelligentsia. 
From a variety of angles and in a diversity of genres, Dostoevsky 
evokes the intelligentsia's shallow conformity, its adherence to a 
rigid code that makes real exchange of ideas impossible, its belief 
that it has at last found the final truth, its smug superiority to all 
the wisdom of the past, and, above all, the danger that it may 
someday achieve the power it seeks. As the author wanders from 
topic to topic, he finds unexpected opportunities to contrast the 
close-mindedness of the intelligentsia with the openness of genuine 
thought. 
For example, the second article, "Old People," presents a com­
plex picture of the generation of Belinsky and Herzen, which was 
far more appealing than the one that followed. On the one hand, 
Dostoevsky conveys their serious concern for ideas and their interest 
in thinking problems through without the aid of ready-made for­
mulas. On the other hand, he dwells on the danger of the ideas 
they often embraced, such as the purely materialist interpretation 
of human nature. 
The qualified hero of this essay is Herzen, who, unlike the 

Introductory Study 
5 5  
intelligentsia of the 187os, maintained a sense of self-irony and 
therefore a capacity for real dialogue: "Self-reflection-the ability 
to make of his own deepest feelings an object which he could set 
before him, pay it tribute and, in the next breath perhaps, ridicule 
it-was a thing he had developed to the highest degree" (73.2). 
Self-reflection of this sort characterizes the Diary itself. 57 Belinsky, 
however, tended to be more dogmatic, and the discussion of his 
materialism leads directly into "Environment," with its attack on 
the intelligentsia's dangerous "ideas in the air." 
In "Something Personal" (73-4), Dostoevsky describes a com­
monly held opinion among radicals that his story "The Crocodile" 
was intended to be a vicious allegory on the fate of their hero, 
Chernyshevsky. This article therefore focuses on this very way of 
reading, the impoverishing habit among the politically committed 
of turning art into a narrow-minded or tendentious statement. Of 
course, one can make any work into whatever allegory one wishes 
if one is only sufficiently determined and single-minded. This com­
mon interpretive method not only reflects a lack of literary sen­
sitivity but also entirely distons the works under analysis. 
After all, Dostoevsky asks, what happens to an if it is read, and 
still worse, written, as a mere political allegory? According to "Ap­
ropos of the Exhibition" (73.9), real art cannot be produced by 
applying a tendency. What is more, even the tendency will then 
be debased.58 In this article Dostoevsky criticizes art produced by 
people "wearing a uniform." He regrets the waste of talent that 
inevitably takes place when young writers who might produce real 
an succumb instead to mouthing the pieties of "common, official, 
liberal, and social opinion." The fear of being independent, and 
of being called reactionary or out of step with the times, is mistaken 
for a sense of social responsibility, a mistake that turns fledgling 
artists into hacks. 
Even mature artists often fall victim to such tendentiousness. In 
"Vias" (73. 5), Dostoevsky ascribes the flaws of that poem, both 
aesthetic and moral, to Nekrasov's fear of independently pursuing 
his subject. As if dramatizing the deadening effect of the intelli­
gentsia's dogmas, the corpses in "Bobok" become especially gro­
tesque when they preen themselves on currently fashionable ideas. 
Real writers seek artistic immortality, but here the dead themselves 
hunger to be up-to-date-an ultimate horror later repeated by Ivan 
Karamazov's devil, who describes the other world as just another 

A Writer's Diary 
fashionable salon. In "Bobok," the newly dead at last formulate a 
progressive plan "to organize our life here, so to say, on new and 
rational principles." 
Returning to the 1873 Diary's theme of the intelligentsia, the 
article "Something about Lying" (73. 1 5) explores how educated 
Russians, devoured by ressentimenr and demanding the respect that 
only real scientific knowledge could provide, adopt spurious all­
purpose theories as shortcuts. With a few general nihilist maxims 
at their disposal, they talk smugly about sciences they have not 
studied. In the article's most memorable passage, Dostoevsky imag­
ines one such Russian, who knows nothing about chemistry, ex­
plaining the science to its greatest living representative, the German 
scientist Liebig. 59 
The year's final essay, "One of Today's Falsehoods" (73· 16), 
contains the most extended, and most remarkable, critique of the 
intelligentsia mentality. It therefore completes the trajectory begun 
in the "Introduction." Dostoevsky replies to another publication 
that, guided by an "accepted rule" of "our pseudoliberal times," 
offered a highly dubious argument about student revolutionaries. 
It argued that such radicals include only a few lazy students, not 
serious ones devoted to their work and to high ideals. Thus they 
cannot be used to impugn the ethos of Russian students in general. 
Making frequent reference to his own revolutionary past, Dos­
toevsky describes this defense as in reality something like slander 
and as, in any case, unerly false. It is precisely the best and most 
idealistic students who are seduced by dangerous revolutionary 
ideas, Dostoevsky contends. "I myself am an old 'Nechaevist'; I 
also stood on the scaffold condemned to death, and I assure you 
I stood in the company of educated people." Such youths adopt 
heinous beliefs and commit crimes not because of any moral lapses 
but because of the "environment"-not poverty but the "cycle of 
ideas" propagated by liberal and radical publications. 
There is something about the Russian intellectual milieu that 
corrupts even the best ideas. That "something" is what Dostoevsky, 
in his article's most memorable passage, calls "the Russian aspect" 
of the problem. He explains that among Russians, who in this 
respect are unerly unlike Europeans, ideas are inevitably taken to 
their most radical conclusions, and so Europeans would not rec­
ognize their favorite theories after they have been reprocessed by 
the Russian intelligentsia: 

Introductory Study 
57 
Please allow me this funny phrase "the Russian aspect of their teach­
ings" because a Russian aspect of their teachings really does exist. 
It consists of those conclusions drawn from their teachings that take 
on the form of an invincible axiom, conclusions that are drawn only 
in Russia; in Europe, as people say, the possibility of these conclusions 
is not even suspected . . . .  [And so) obvious, brazen villainy of the 
crudest sort can be considered no more than greatness of soul, no 
more than the noble courage of humanity tearing itself free from its 
chains."' 
If we are to save Russian youth from dangerous ideas and wasted 
lives, Dostoevsky suggests, the leaders of the intelligentsia must 
become more responsible. It is necessary to change the very men­
tality of the Russian intelligentsia. In passages like these, the Diary 
looks forward to that great sociological and psychological critique 
of the intelligentsia, Landmarks: A Collection of Essays on the Rus­
sian Intelligentsia (1909). This article, and thus the 1873 Diary, 
ends self-referentially, with a plea "not to be ashamed when some­
one calls us on occasion a citizen and . . .  once in a while to tell the 
truth, even though, to your way of thinking, it may be insufficiently 
liberal." 
The theme of the intelligentsia provided a loose thematic center 
for the articles of 1873. In 1876 Dostoevsky was able to publish 
the Diary in the form he intended, and because that form was much 
more complex, a much more sophisticated design was needed to 
create the unity of an art work. What was the design Dostoevsky 
had in mind? 
Part 3: The New Design 
Two Approaches to the Diary 
There are at least two ways to approach the problem of the Diary's 
unity. First of all, in accord with the tenets of numerous critical 
schools, one might treat the text as a whole from its beginnings in 
1873 (or 1876) to its last issue in 1881. One would then inquire 
into the principle that was supposed to tie together such discrepant 
material over so many years. Any such interpretation would have 
to discover the place of the prophetic articles, which occupy so 
large and conspicuous a position, and explain their relation to the 
numerous, apparently antithetical, anti-utopian sketches in the 
work. Numerous questions of literary theory (such as the poetics 

ss 
A Writer's Diary 
of encyclopedic works) and literary history (the genres to which 
the Diary might belong) would prove important. This approach 
was the one I followed in my earlier study of the Diary, The Bound­
aries of Genre, which concluded that the Diary belonged to a long 
tradition of "meta-utopian" literature-works in which utopia and 
anti-utopia were designed to enter into an ultimately inconclusive 
dialogue. 
The second approach, which I follow in the present analysis, 
differs considerably. Instead of assuming that al parts fit the whole 
as it was designed, one takes seriously the possibility that the work 
may have essentially changed in the course of publication. In the 
first approach, the years of publication simply realized the initial 
design, whereas in the second approach, time becomes an active 
force. It may both cause and record the abandonment of the original 
design. In this case, one would seek to discover the Diary's original 
design and then to explore how and why Dostoevsky's new concerns 
and purposes conflicted with it. Thus, only some parts of the text 
reveal the plan with which the author began. The prophetic articles, 
which are absent from the early issues and which seem so inartistic 
to many readers, might be part of the deviation rather than of the 
design. 
Both approaches need to explain why relatively few people have 
perceived the Diary as an integral work of art. The first attributes 
this misreading to the complexity of the Diary's design, to its failure 
to inspire many imitators, and, perhaps, to the fact that the Diary, 
though immensely interesting in its conception, was much less so 
in its execution. The second approach acknowledges al these rea­
sons-and adds one more: the work as a whole does not reflect 
Dostoevsky's design, and it is therefore not surprising that careful 
readers should have failed to discern it. 
Following the second approach, I will sketch the Diary's initial 
design (part 3) and then explain the new philosophical convictions 
that proved incompatible with it (part 4). 61 
The Diary's First Unifying Principle: 
Synchronic Structure and Frozen Time 
Dostoevsky once wrote to his friend Stefan Yanovsky that "the 
Diary luis at last developed to the point where even the slightest 
change in its form is impossible" (Pis'ma 3:284)-a remarkable 
claim for a work that to many readers has seemed formless. 62 We 
know from Dostoevsky's leners and notebooks that the proper use 

Introductory Study 
59 
of the periodical form and the preservation of a great diversity of 
genres were both essential to the new genre's design. He worried 
about his tendency to become so concerned with a single topic that 
"the issue suffers and becomes insufficiently heterogeneous" 
(Pis'ma 3:206). And he was also concerned that readers would not 
discern anything to unify that heterogeneity. 
We have seen that the Diary contains fiction, many kinds of 
semifiction, autobiography, self-referential material, and diverse 
forms of journalism. How were these genres to be integrated? To 
comprehend Dostoevsky's idea for A Writer's Diary is to identify 
the design that was supposed to make a whole out of unprecedented 
heterogeneity. Dostoevsky's experiment depends on a special kind 
of unity. 
In order to create an artistic whole, Dostoevsky developed two 
key methods, one to assure unity in each monthly issue and one 
to create a sense of the whole as the publication evolved month by 
month. Let us examine these two methods in turn before consid­
ering (in part 4) how and why Dostoevsky's design eventually 
failed. A brilliant experiment eventually lost its focus, to the point 
where readers were generally unable to perceive anything more 
than an anthology, brilliant in many of its pieces but lacking in 
any sense of a whole. 
If readers were to concentrate on the Diary's first few monthly 
issues, they would have much less difficulty in detecting the work's 
intended unity. In these months, Dostoevsky had the time to realize 
his design. Moreover, the considerations that eventually led him to 
modify his plan beyond recognition had not yet emerged. It would 
be helpful to consider the January 1876 Diary-his first opportunity 
to use the form to which he had devoted so much thought. 
Just as this issue was about to appear, Dostoevsky wrote his 
revealing lener about it to Vsevolod Soloviev: 
In issue No. 1 there will be, first of all, the very littlest preface, then 
something or other about children-about children in general, about 
children with fathers, especially about children without fathers, about 
children at Christmas parties, without Christmas parties, about child 
criminals .. . . .  Of course, these will not be strict studies or accounts, 
but only some hot words and indications. Then about what has been 
heard or read-anything and everything that strikes me each month. 
Without doubt, A Writer's Diary will resemble a feuilleton, with the 
difference that a monthly feuilleton naturally cannot resemble a weekly 
feuilleton. Here the account will be not so much about events or news 

6o 
A Writer's Diary 
as about what from an event remains most constantly, most connected 
with the general, whole idea. Finally, I .  do not at al want to bind 
myself with the task of rendering an account. I am not a chronicler: 
this, on the contrary, wil be a perfect diary in the full sense of the 
word, that is, an account of what has most interested me personally­
here there will even be caprice. (Pis'ma 3:201-2) 
When we compare this remarkable document with the notebooks 
for the January issue and with the issue itself, Dostoevsky's idea 
becomes considerably clearer. As we have seen, the Diary was to 
exhibit feuilletonistic qualities: a light and personal tone, a dreamy 
and capricious narrator, digressions around a set of loosely related 
themes, and discussions of current events not in the objective form 
of a chronicle but as they strike the author personally. And yet 
from these personal impressions the reader should be able to tease 
out something beyond ephemera, something "most connected with 
the general, whole idea" of the present moment. This general idea 
will not be stated directly but will emerge whimsically, capriciously, 
through "hot words" subject to a complex, feuilletonistic layering 
of ironies. Everything that this idiosyncratic author has seen, heard, 
and read-the allusion is of course to the Diary's "announce­
ment" -will, for all its apparent formlessness, adumbrate a special 
poetics of the :apical. The result will be an art work that (to use 
the words of one of Dostoevsky's characters) finds an image in 
what apparently has no image. 63 
As Dostoevsky's letter suggests, each article of the January 1876 
issue does indeed resemble a brief, weekly feuilleton. A diversity 
of topics is tied together by a common tone and implicit idea. But 
a longer monthly feuileton demands a structure more complex than 
that of a traditional weekly one. Thus Dostoevsky organizes a 
hierarchy that extends the principle of the parts to the whole. Each 
article loosely unites a diversity into a whole, and, in the same 
way, the separate articles form chapters with a common focus. The 
three chapters in turn join to form an issue."' The reader practiced 
in discerning a thematic core in an apparently wandering feuilleton 
will be able to use the same technique to understand each monthly 
issue of the Diary. 
If written as Dostoevsky intended, each month of the Diary would 
engage the reader in the author's project of discovering some sort 
of "guiding thread" in the vast diversities and possibilities of on­
going Russian life. The experience of interpreting each issue would 

Introductory Study 
61 
teach the readers the skills the author used to "form an image" of 
the moment. Readers would be enriched both aesthetically and 
sociologically. 
Separate monthly issues therefore did not depend on a common 
plot or plots to achieve unity. In this respect, the Diary differs from 
Dostoevsky's novels. To be sure, the Diary includes some narratives 
and, in a loose sense, one may regard the narrator's wanderings 
as tracing a kind of story. Nevertheless, the "clamps" holding an 
issue together are not narrative but essentially synchronic. 65 The 
reader understands an issue by attending to the resonances-of 
themes, images, motifs, and tones-among the parts. The diverse 
elements within and among articles are not chosen at random. They 
interact, comment on each other, and invite diverse perspectives 
on the same set of issues, much as the Christmas party that the 
narrator attends is then seen by the freezing boy shut out of it. 
Something like a genre painting (a form that Dostoevsky discusses 
at length), the Diary seizes on a moment out of the flux and 
"unexpectedly" finds an image in it. 
Not just the boy, but time itself is frozen at one of those revealing 
moments when the world is most like itself. It takes a poetic eye 
to find and describe such moments, Dostoevsky often observes. A 
synchronic structure of resonances, each monthly issue of the Diary 
creates a sort of poem out of the most unlikely elȎents. The subtle 
wit of the Diary depends on this shaping of apparently recalcitrant 
material. 
Taken this way, an issue yields not so much a social "tendency" 
(annoyed "readers" often interrupt the author to demand just that) 
but a set of open-ended questions. The author gives us some key 
themes to consider; in the January 1 876 issue, children are obvi­
ously a central focus. But instead of specific recommendations or 
programs, we are. presented with a field of possibilities, an inter­
action of perspectives, and the beginnings of inconclusive dialogues. 
A diversity of perspectives is created by treating the same theme 
or events in diverse genres, each of which yields a different vision. 
The narrator's own voice contributes to this open-endedness 
through its complex play of tonalities. Views are advanced both 
seriously and as the idle comments of an impractical, unsociable 
dreamer, perhaps even a madman. The author may say something 
"sublime," which is somehow also so naive as to invite readers' 
well-deserved skepticism or irony; but that irony may turn back 
on itself, as it seems to reflect a desiccated heart. Statement, parody 

62 
A Writer's Diary 
of statement, and parody of parody play off each other interminably. 
The intelligentsia demands a simple tendency or program, but 
readers of the Diary receive an education in moral complexity. 
The Unity of the January 1876 Issue: Porcelain Utopia 
The "very littlest preface" that opens chapter I of the January I876 
issue is, as Dostoevsky's lener to Soloviev intimates, a wry and 
feuiletonistic one, resembling the "Introduction" of I873· The 
author begins in mid thought: Nowadays young people seem eaten 
up with vanity and boredom, a combination that derives from a 
belief in nothing at all, and so they lie, brag, and sometimes shoot 
themselves out of unsatisfied pride. Some suicides derive from an 
even more explicit materialism, as young men despair simply be­
cause they have no money for a mistress. The newspapers assure 
us that such deaths come from "thinking too much" and so find 
something liberal in all this waste, but there is nothing liberal at 
all, Dostoevsky opines. In this way, the Diary returns us to the 
key themes of I 873· The present moment is much more complex 
than the intelligentsia allows, which is implicitly why A Writer's 
Diary is needed. 
Do you remember, Dostoevsky then asks his readers, that when 
Goethe's young Werther killed himself, he regrened that he would 
never again see his favorite constellation, the Great Bear? This 
sublime thought expressed his appreciation of "his image as a human 
being" (I/76, 1 .  I) fashioned by God. But our up-to-date young 
suicides would probably not even bid farewell to the Smal Bear, 
because that would be "too embarrassing" (that is, somehow reac­
tionary). 
By this point, the "astonished reader" from the intelligentsia has 
become sufficiently provoked to invade the text and inquire just 
what the author is aiming at: 
"You'd bener make clear what your tendency is and what your con­
victions are. Explain: what sort of man are you, and how did you 
make so bold as to announce this Writer'S Diary?" 
But that's very difficult, and I can see that I'm not much of a hand 
at writing forewords . . . .  As far as liberalism is concerned (instead of 
the word "tendency" I'll simply use the word "liberalism") . . .  our 
[Russian] liberalism lately has been transformed everywhere into either 
a trade or a bad habit. 
Because most liberalism comes from habit, perhaps the greatest 

Introductory Study 
liberals are those who do not profess liberalism at all. Dostoevsky's 
rivals in the intelligentsia have "bound themselves up with liber­
alism as with ropes," and so he may be more liberal (in the sense 
of open-minded) than they. Thus we arrive at the first of the issue's 
several paradoxes, illiberal liberals and liberal antagonists of 
liberalism. 
Of course, Dostoevsky concedes, readers are bound to find this 
foreword unsatisfying, not only because it violates current wisdom 
but also because it does not conform to conventional forewords for 
new publications. Only too true, Dostoevsky concedes, but that is 
all I am capable of doing. And "with that I finish my foreword. 
I only wrote it for the sake of form, anyway." This metaliterary 
ending, of course, draws on a different set of conventions, those 
of the feuilleton, in which playfulness predominates and ideas are 
qualified by a complex, self-deprecating irony. If we turn from this 
inconclusive conclusion to the article's title, we will be able to solve 
the riddle of its separate parts and of the whole uniting them: 
"In Place of a Foreword. On the Great and Small Bears, on Great 
Goethe's Prayer, and, Generally, on Bad Habits." 
In the next article Dostoevsky informs us that he went to the 
Christmas party at the artists' club in order "to have a look at the 
children" (1/76, 1.2). He immediately digresses to tell us of his 
fascination with children, the theme of his recent novel A Raw 
Youth and of a "future novel" as well. What interests Dostoevsky 
is children today, the ones who grow up in broken, "accidental 
families" and who may eventually commit murder or suicide out 
of emptiness. 
The author arrives at the Christmas party in the third article, 
which he describes explicitly as a feuilleton. 66 As is conventional 
for that form, the author presents himself as a dreamer who, 
before this party, "had not been to a single social event anywhere 
for far too long and had been leading a solitary life for a consid­
erable time" (1/76, 1.3). Because he is apt to become overstimu­
lated by this otherwise ordinary experience, the author warns us 
that he may say something eccentric. In this way, we are both 
prepared for some sort of visionary experience and given grounds 
to treat it ironically. Indeed, after offering several impressions of 
the party, the author yields to two quite contradictory waking 
dreams. The first projects the hdlish possibility perceptible beyond 
the celebration's ordered forms: suddenly all of this European 
civilization will be cast to the winds and a good old Russian 

A Writer's Diary 
brawl will begin, because that is what the essence of our lives, 
and ourselves, really is. 
The second vision occupies the chapter's final article, "The Gold­
en Age in Your Pocket" (1/76, 1 .4). At the parents' ball following 
the children's party, the author, reflecting on the vain artifice of 
the entertainment, has a vision of utopia that might be realized at 
any moment if only people believed it possible. With dreamy en­
thusiasm, perhaps traceable to his unaccustomed presence in so­
ciety, the author exclaims to himself: "Oh, dear guests, I swear 
that each lady and gentleman among you is cleverer than Voltaire, 
more sensitive than Rousseau, incomparably more alluring than 
Alcibiades or Don Juan, or any Lucretia, Juliet, or Beatrice! "  If 
you only could believe and wish it, you all have the power to make 
everyone happy. "Do you really think that the golden age exists 
only on porcelain teacups?" 
Of course, the author realizes that everyone will laugh at this 
"paradox," and they are right to do so. On the other hand, perhaps 
their scorn is as mistaken as his hope: "Don't frown at the words 
golden age, Your Excellency: I give you my word of honor that you 
won't be compelled to walk around in the costume of the golden 
age wearing only a fig leaf." On this ambiguous utopian note, the 
chapter ends. It has moved from images of despair (suicide, ac­
cidental families, brawls) to probably impossible hopes, and, in a 
half-serious tone, it has sketched out a dialogue of responses to 
ultimate questions as they arise at present. 
The issue's second chapter focuses entirely on the suffering of 
children, a theme that (as in Karamazov) comes to stand for all 
evil. We have already considered the opening sketch about child 
beggars and the following story, "The Boy at Christ's Christmas 
Party." In the chapter's third article the author visits a colony of 
abandoned delinquent children and reports in some detail on the 
experiments for reforming them. He considers their psychology 
and wonders about their prospects and future sense of themselves. 
The article's crucial passage concerns the author's reflections on 
such experimental institutions, which are so unlike the radical re­
forms proposed by the intelligentsia. For charity of this sort is 
routinely held in contempt by those who, guided by a theory, 
demand nothing less than total, revolutionary change. In response, 
Dostoevsky suggests that, on the contrary, improvements can only 
be accomplished prosaically, bit by tiny bit. 
To illustrate his point, he tells a story that is key to the argument 

Introductory Study 
6s 
of the early Diary. In the days of serfdom, a certain "humble and 
quiet little fellow," deeply affected by the evil of serfdom, devoted 
a lifetime to saving every penny so that, after many years, he could 
buy a single serfs freedom. By the end of his life he had liberated 
perhaps three or four people. A member of today's intelligentsia 
would doubtless dismiss this quixotic project as nonsensical, if not 
positively harmful: "He's 'an idealist of the forties' and nothing 
more; perhaps even ridiculous and not very skillful, because he 
thought that he could struggle against all this evil with only his 
own petty, individual effort" (1/76, 2.3). But in his feuilletonistic 
voice Dostoevsky asks us to entertain the opposite possibility, that 
perhaps this "ridiculous" method for combating evil may, for all 
its shoncomings, prove more effective than the intelligentsia's rad­
ical alternative: 
Yet these are the sort of people we need! I am terribly fond of this 
ridiculous type of peny official who seriously imagines that he, with 
his microscopic efforts and stubborn persistence, is capable of aiding 
the common cause without waiting for some widespread campaign 
and general initiative. That's the sort of little man who might be very 
useful in a colony of young offenders as well . . .  
We note the characteristic play of tones in which Dostoevsky praises 
an idea he calls "ridiculous."67 The last article of the second chapter 
deepens the "paradox" that concludes the first: Is the way to radical 
change perhaps not radical at all, but prosaic? Is utopia to be 
achieved by entirely ordinary means, and is "nowhere" to be found 
right here-"in your pocket"-as the closing article of chapter r 
suggests? The contrast between grand plans and "microscopic ef­
fons" resonates throughout this issue (and later ones). 
Unity of the January 1876 Issue: Crafty Devils 
and Their Advocate 
The first two chapters, therefore, both begin with an image of 
despair and end with a debate about utopia. The issue's third 
chapter reverses this order and, beginning with utopian speculation, 
ends where the issue began, on the sterile quarreling of the intel­
ligentsia. Taken as a whole, the January 1876 Diary describes a 
circle, as the reader, having returned to the starting point, has come 
to understand the present moment more profoundly, if not 
conclusively. 
The first article of chapter 3 contains a series of short vignettes. 

66 
A Writer's Diary 
They describe cruelty and the current "itch for debauchery" in­
spired by various materialistic "ideas in the air." Some passages 
comment on recent institutions (the Russian Society for the Pro­
tection of Animals), others draw on Dostoevsky's childhood mem­
ories of idealistic dreaming shattered by horrible brutality enacted 
before his eyes. He at last confides his own utopian hopes: "I do 
not wish to think and live in any other way than with the belief 
that all our ninety million Russians (or however many will sub­
sequently be born) will all someday be educated, humanized, and 
happy" (1/76, 3. 1). 
The author stresses "someday," not immediately, because the 
process that could lead to such a result must be gradual. No in­
telligentsia theory will do it: what is needed is "microscopic ef­
forts." Or, as this article phrases the hope, it will happen bit by 
bit as each person learns to "image himself' (obrazit), a folk 
expression meaning to establish the human shape in oneself. •• Im­
plicitly, we must learn to do what the Diary does, examine chaos 
(bezobrazie) and humanely shape ourselves by countless tiny efforts. 
The last item in this article's long title asks, "From the End or 
from the Beginning?" This question turns out to refer to the need 
"to begin taking action not always from the end but, partly at 
least, from the beginning." That is, it is best not to work backward 
from the theorist's utopia but forward from prosaic efforts at self­
improvement and "self-imaging." 
The chapter's second article may well be considered the Diary's 
most interesting piece of semifiction: "Spiritualism. Something 
about Devils. The Extraordinary Cleverness of Devils, If Only 
These Are Devils." Anticipating the devil chapter in Karamaz(Jl), 
this article employs a dizzying range of tones to recast the monthly 
issue's key themes-belief and skepticism, utopia and despair, lost 
children, open time-and numerous other echoes of earlier motifs. 
Characteristically for the Diary, an ostensible topic, the aristocratic 
craze for table turning, becomes a superb starting point for un­
derstanding the driving concerns of the present moment. 
So many people seem to believe in spiritualism nowadays that 
there must be something to it, Dostoevsky muses; why, "Gogo! 
writes to Moscow from the next world and states positively that 
devils exist. I read the letter, and the style is his" (1/76, 3.2). At 
least, something vital must be at stake, or why would a whole 
scientific committee, headed by the chemist Dmitri Mendeleev, 
have been established to di2credit spiritualism? This committee is 

Introductory Study 
itself paradoxical, Dostoevsky observes, because if its method were 
truly empirical it would have to be able to keep an open mind 
about the question while investigating it, or else its members would 
be as prejudiced and unscientific as the spiritualists themselves. 
Yet it is unlikely that even a single member of the committee could 
even entertain the possibility that devils exist, "despite the fact 
that a terrific number of people who do not believe in God still 
believe in the Devil, readily and happily."69 
As for me, Dostoevsky observes with irony upon irony, I cannot 
believe in the spirits, but, at the same time, I have developed a 
wonderful and convincing theory in defense of them. With this 
ambiguous introduction, Dostoevsky embraces the traditionally 
paradoxical role of devil's (or devils') advocate. According to Dos­
toevsky, who assures us too often that he is only joking, the an­
tispiritualists place great weight on the fact that these supposed 
spirits never seem to reveal anything not known before, whereas 
real devils, they say, would prove their existence by imparting some 
great discovery. And so, the antispiritualists conclude, there cannot 
be spirits, just some sort of fraud, because any spirits who did not 
prove their existence would have to be awfully stupid. But this 
conclusion, Dostoevsky observes, depends on a significant mistake. 
It is precisely out of great intelligence that shrewd devils would 
confine themselves to trivialities. The poor devils are being abused 
for nothing! 
For what if the devils were to tell us where to dig for coal­
"firewood, incidentally, is such a price these days"-or reveal to 
humanity every conceivable great invention? What if they were to 
make possible the most utopian dreams? At first, of course, every­
one would be in raptures and bless the devils, for we would have 
everything that "our Russian socialists" dream of. "Corrupting 
environment" would be at an end, and with it, all misery and all 
crime. Alas, these raptures would rapidly turn into bitterness. 
People would realize that with everything given to them, with 
nothing produced by their own efforts, and with no uncertainty 
left in the world, life itself would have been taken away. Without 
freedom, people would have lost their "human image": 
People would realize that there is n o  happiness in inactivity, that the 
mind which does not labor will wither, that it is not possible to love 
one's neighbor without sacrificing something to him of one's own 
labor, that it is vile to live at the expense of another, and that happiness 
lies IWI in happiness bur only in rhe auempr ro achieve ir. 

68 
A Writer's Diary 
Even if we could have it, utopia provided from above-from the 
end-would resemble hell. Whatever our socialists or skeptics say, 
an improved society must come, if at all, '"from the beginning," 
by our own gradual effort. What is more, time must remain open. 
There must be genuine uncertainty for freedom to exist, for work 
to be meaningful, and for people to live a human existence. Dos­
toevsky's anti-utopian article here returns to the issue's key themes. 
It follows for Dostoevsky that people provided with such a utopia 
sooner or later would rebel (like Dostoevsky's underground man) 
and would renounce the baneful gift. The devils would at last be 
rejected, this time forever. Foreseeing all this, the extraordinarily 
crafty spirits will not make such a grave tactical error. Instead, they 
perform just a few trivial tricks. By inducing some to believe and 
others to ridicule the believers, the devils set people at odds with 
each other, for nothing so advances their plan as discord. The more 
people are mocked (by Mendeleev and his kind) for believing in 
devils, the more they will insist on believing in them. 
Returning to the theme of children, Dostoevsky then tells a story 
about a person who would not accept definitive proof that pictures 
of his dead children's spirits were frauds, because, the disconsolate 
parent explains, these are the only pictures of them that he has. 
The more he is ridiculed, the more irrational things he will say, 
Dostoevsky observes. It is a strange psychological fact, which the 
devils understand, that nothing inclines one to belief more than 
public scorn or persecution. "Every such persecuted idea is like 
that petroleum which the arsonists poured over the floors and walls 
of the Tuileries before the fire . . . .  Oh, the devils know the force 
of a forbidden faith . . .  ! " 
Here Dostoevsky delineates another implicit theme of the issue, 
one that lies behind all approaches to evil: what is it that compels 
belief? For the most fundamental beliefs-what inclines people to 
atheism or religion, socialist change "from the end" or prosaic 
reform "from the beginning"-have nothing to do with evidence, 
nothing that a Mendeleev could address. Whatever shapes our way 
of seeing the world, it resists argument. Indeed, Dostoevsky muses, 
that is true of Mendeleev's own faith in materialist science, too. In 
one of his most whimsical musings, the author wonders what would 
happen if, for instance, the devils were to levitate Mendeleev him­
self? How would he then maintain his prior beliefs? The empiricist 
would be confronted by an actual fact and on scientific grounds 
would be called upon to renounce science itself, a sort of version 

Introductory Study 
of the Cretan liar's paradox. The implication, of course, is that 
Mendeleev would find some way to deny the fact and maintain his 
irrational faith in the rational. · 
Throughout this entire sequence of paradoxes, Dostoevsky keeps 
insisting that he is joking in every word, only to concede that, 
perhaps, there may be something serious here. After all, if people's 
basic ideas cannot be changed by argument, then what is the point 
of a monthly, or any other publication? Immune to disconfirmation, 
are all beliefs, perhaps, unreliable? As if to illustrate this point, 
the chapter's third article points out a series of egregious errors in 
a recent biographical account of Dostoevsky composed by one of 
his radical opponents. 
The chapter's fourth article, which concludes the January 1 876 
issue, mirrors the opening. The foreword that is no foreword is 
answered by a concluding promise that is no promise, as the author 
once again "fails" to define his publication: 
4· A Turkish Proverb 
Just in passing, I will insert a Turkish proverb (a real one-I haven't 
made it up): If you set off to a certain goal and keep stopping along 
the way to throw stones at every dog that barks at you, you will never 
reach your destination. 
As far as possible, I'll follow the advice of that wise proverb in my 
Diary, although I wouldn't want to tie myself down with promises 
beforehand. (1/76, 3.4) 
In short, the first monthly issue of the Diary creates complex 
resonances among a number of themes, which are refracted through 
the sensibilities of diverse genres. Children are treated in feuilleton, 
reportage, and story. Utopian and anti-utopian sketches enter into 
dialogue with each other. Through an array of voices and across a 
variety of topics, author and "readers" frame a complex debate 
about evil and its cures. No sooner do we identify the author's 
position than he qualifies and requalifies it with unexpected ap­
plications or unstable ironies. Cross-references and thematic e_choes 
interact with a hierarchical structure to produce a complex poetic 
artifact. A set of questions is defined and a field of possibilities 
evoked; we sense a direction, but no conclusive answers. 
It appears that, as originally designed, the Diary was to produce 
such an odd unity of heterogeneous tones and forms in each monthly 
issue. The February Diary creates a similar structure, in which 
"The Peasant Marey" corresponds to "The Boy," while an opening 

70 
A Writer's Diary 
article, which comments on the reception of the January issue, 
introduces the author's inconclusive, self-referenPaJ narative voice. 
The first chapter, in which the reminiscence of "Marey" solves 
Aksakov 's riddle, contrasts theories about the people with Dos­
toevsky's own experience of them; in the second chapter, on the 
Kroneberg case, a lawyer's all-purpose rhetoric obscures the truth 
about a particular child. On the whole, the February issue traces 
a complex dialogue abo11t theories, abstractions, and their all-too­
frequent abuse. In the March Diary a series of variations on "dis­
sociation" defines the thematic dialogue, while "A Hundred-Year­
Old Woman" provides the fictional pivot. All thre issues filter 
related concerns through a diversity of genres, held together in a 
hierarchical structure and a series of often surprising resonances. 
The Brothers Karamazuv 
= A Writer's Diary + Plot 
When Dostoevsky suspended the Diary to write the promised "fu­
ture novel," Karamazuv, he brought his new way of organizing 
heterogeneous material with him. In many respects, Karamazuv 
may be viewed as a combination of the plotting techniques devel­
oped in his earlier novels with the Diary's essentially poetic hi­
erarchy of resonances. Like the Diary, Dostoevsky's last novel 
explicitly includes a great diversity of genres, often labeled by their 
traditional names in the tab1e of contents. As in the Diary, each 
theme is filtered through radically divergent traditional forms, 
which are all linked together and set in dialogue with each other. 
And as in the Diary, it is not just people but whole genres, each 
conveying a distinct sense of the world, that speak to each other. 
Each traditional form, understood as a view of experience and a 
particular way of speaking, enters into the novel's ideological 
symposium. 
Thus Karamazuv includes a fonnal disputation ("The Contro­
versy"), a sermon, a family chronicle, various kinds of speeches, 
a parable ("An Onion"), "confessions" in verse and in anecdote, 
"exhortations," a dream vision, and a menippean satire (Ivan's 
conversation with the devil), to name just a few of the most obvious 
examples. The Grand Inquisitor story, as we have seen, begins 
with a lengthy "preface" about the various genres to which it might 
belong. The novel's foreword, "From the Author," which apologizes 
for its failure as a proper foreword, recalls the feuilletonistic anti­
prefaces of the Diary's opening articles of 1 873 and 1 876. "Well, 
there is the whole foreword," the narrator of Karamazuv concludes. 

Introductory Study 
7 1  
" I  completely agree that it is needless, but since it has already been 
written, let it stand" (BK, xviii). 
KaramazCfV resembles A Writer's Diary with a plot. If one turns 
to the novel's table of contents, one will see four "parts," each 
divided into three "books," which are in turn broken into several 
separately titled chapters. As in the Diary, this hierarchical organ­
ization encourages the reader to find thematic connections among 
the particular chapters that make up a book, and then among the 
books. Each book resembles an issue (or chapter) of thǝ Diary, as 
various incidents, often told in distinct tones or genres, develop 
resonances among a common theme or set of motifs. 
For example, Book 4, "Lacerations," invites us to trace the sym­
bolic parallels among diverse kinds of wounds: physical lacerations 
(Alyosha's bitten finger, Father Ferapont's mortified flesh) echo 
with diverse psychological "lacerations" (proud, self-destructive 
self-indulgence). The fourth book of KaramazCfV creates a kind of 
prose poem about the wounded human body and spirit. As we have 
seen, this organizational method, which is used in no earlier novel 
of Dostoevsky's, was developed in A Writer's Diary. 70 
To link its twelve books with each other, KaramazO'V relies on a 
carefully paced plot. That option was not available for A Writer's 
Diary, which, designed as a periodical, was supposed to be open 
to whatever might happen in the real world. Dostoevsky surren­
dered his control over the future of his publication to genuine 
contingency, a kind of openness that in fact constituted part of the 
work's appeal. What, then, was to take the place of a preplanned 
plot in ensuring unity among the issues? 
The Diary's Second Unifying Principle: Literature As 
Heuristic, or Why Success Requires Failure 
Across issues, the unity of the Diary was to be ensured in a quite 
different way. Because a poetic design clearly could not work across 
time on unpredictable material, the synchronic unity of each issue 
was to be combined with a different principle, which might best 
be understood as a unity of procedure. It was a set of techniques 
that was to remain constant, and the reader would witness the 
author trying to apply those techniques to the world's contingency. 
As the author tried to build a coherent structure out of unpre­
dictable events, he would adapt the devices exhibited in the opening 
issues to new material drawn from the changing current of Russian 
life. Time would provide challenges for the author, and the reader 

72 
A Writer's Diary 
would be admined to a sort of contest between art and time. 
Contingency would set problems, and the Diary would be the record 
of their anempted solution. Considerable excitement would be gen­
erated by the uncertainty of the contest itself, inasmuch as it was 
by no means guaranteed that the author would always win. 
I once called this technique "literature as algorithm," but I now 
regard that terminological choice as less than optimal.71 Strictly 
speaking, an algorithm is a method guaranteed to yield a correct 
solution, but no such guarantee exists for the author of the Diary. 
On the contrary, a kind of suspense results from the resistance that 
reality offers to the artist's methods. Perhaps a bener term for the 
work's procedural regularity would be literature as heuristic. (A 
heuristic is a method well adapted to solving a problem but not 
certain to do so. It is, like Dostoevsky's set of techniques, a shrewd 
guess based on experience.) 
It follows that not every issue of the Diary had to be perfect for 
the work to fulfill its design. Suspense, indeed, requires some 
imperfection, or where is the contest? This, then, is another oddity 
of A Writer's Diary: to succeed it had to fail sometimes. Unlike 
other literary forms, the Diary not only could tolerate occasional 
failures but demanded them. They provide the excitement that 
makes the author's successes all the more interesting. I know of 
no Russian work whose design incorporates flaws in this way. Of 
course, the failures would have to be interesting in their own right. 
Moreover, they would have had to be flaws of a certain sort, spec­
ified by the design itself. Still more important, they could not occur 
too frequently, or the design itself would be obscured. 
This, then, is the formal radicalism of A Writer's Diary: it was 
designed to be a real, not merely a represented, series of difficult 
encounters of artistic insight with genuine contingency. 
Part 4: How and Why Dostoevsky Abandoned His Design 
Time as a Field: The Extraordinary Variety of Events, If 
Only They Are Events 
The Diary was designed to accommodate only a certain kind of 
"failure," which its design would lead one to expect. But it could 
not succeed if readers were unable to perceive the design itself, 
and, unfortunately, they usually did not. As we have seen, it is a 

Intn>ductory Study 
73 
lot easier to perceive the lineaments of Dostoevsky's new genre if 
one does not read too far beyond the first half dozen issues or so. 
After that, the Diary does indeed often look less like an integral 
literary work than a record of its author's obsessions. Readers, 
therefore, understandably have treated it as a grab bag and, ex­
tracting its best parts, have read them out of the context of the 
work. Although these parts are compelling, the Diary as a whole 
turned out to be a failure. Why? 
The main reason, I think, is that Dostoevsky himself did not 
keep to his original plan. He abandoned it because he came to 
reject the very ideas that gave rise to it. The Diary's design was 
not fulfilled because of a change in Dostoevsky's philosophy. What 
remained was the empty shell of the work as originally conceived. 
A Writer's Diary grew out of a quite specific sense of time and 
of social experience. To use Bakhtin's phrase, it was shaped by a 
complex "form-shaping ideology."72 But in the course of 1876 and 
1877, Dostoevsky came to reject the outlook for whose expression 
the Diary was invented. He accepted in its place a sense of time 
and social experience radically incompatible with the work's orig­
inal design, and he was apparently unable to adapt the Diary's 
form to alien purposes. It is no wonder, then, that even perceptive 
readers have been unable to read the work as a coherent whole. 
Bakhtin calls such an unresolvable conflict between an author's 
purposes and a genre's form-shaping ideology the "tragedy of a 
genre."73 As the term tragedy implies, such a defeat is itself both 
riveting and instructive. 
Let us consider in turn the two core ideas of the Diary that 
Dostoevsky came to abandon. Neither sideshadowing (a way of 
imagining time as open) nor the prosaic (a particular vision of 
everyday experience) could be accommodated to the apocalyptic 
mentality that gripped Dostoevsky when the Eastern Question in­
tensified. Both these ideas run counter to apocalypticism in every 
important respect. 74 
We have seen that the January 1876 issue, which first realized 
Dostoevsky's design, displays an encyclopedia of genres and tones. 
But one voice that is notably absent from it is that of the convinced 
prophet, seriously predicting the historical future and the end of 
history. Inasmuch as the Diary embraces so many voices, it might 
have included some element of prophecy, so long as the prophetic 
remained but one element among many and was conditioned by 

74 
A Writer's Diary 
the larger ironies of the whole. But when the prophetic voice came 
to predominate, the Diary as originally designed disappeared from 
view. 
Let us first consider sideshadowing and the Diary's original con­
ception of time. The temporality that shaped the Diary's design 
was above all open. Time was understood as rich in diverse po­
tentials and as allowing for many possible outcomes. Of course, 
not just anything could happen in the world or to particular people. 
But it is clear that at least several possibilities always present them­
selves. To understand a moment is to recognize a multiplicity of 
trajectories. 
In Dostoevsky's view, the intelligentsia commits a grave mistake 
when it imagines time as singular (having only one path) and linear 
(leading directly to its inevitable outcome). By "linearity," a term 
of reproach that appears often in the Diary, Dostoevsky means the 
sort of determinism or fatalism so brilliantly mocked by the narrator 
of Notes from Underground. Like the diarist in the spiritualism 
sketch, the underground man maintains that if all-explanatory his­
torical laws do exist, as his fashionable opponents contend, then 
meaningful human life becomes impossible. True life depends on 
choice and real effort demands uncertainty, but deterministic li­
nearity leaves no room for either. If the underlying laws of time 
should ever be discovered, then people will foresee the inevitable 
future, and if that happens, events to come will in effect have 
already happened. If the linear thinkers should prove correct, then 
what lies in our future is no future at all: "All human actions will 
then, of course, be tabulated according to these laws, mathemati­
cally, like tables of logarithms up to 108,oo, and entered in a 
table; or, bener still, there would be published certain edifying 
works like the present encyclopedic lexicons, in which everything 
will be so clearly calculated and designated that there will be no 
more incidents or adventures in the world" (NFU, 22). "Loga­
rithmic" time necessarily destroys human responsibility and free­
dom. Whether reflected in the 
theory of "the corrupting 
environment" or in the dreams of the socialists, the denial of time's 
openness takes away our "human image." 
The underground man and the author of the Diary also argue 
that the image of "one possibility" grossly oversimplifies the world 
we actually experience. "One may say anything about the history 
of the world-anything that might enter the most disordered imag­
ination," declares the underground man. "The only thing one can­
not say is that it is rational" (NFU, 27). The assumption that 

Intn)ductory Study 
75 
history is rational leads people to overlook whatever does not fit a 
preconceived pattern and so to misconstrue the world in front of 
them. Though ostensibly derived from "science," linearity leads 
one to overlook crucial empirical facts. For this reason, Dostoevsky 
characteristically constructs Diary articles about perplexing social 
events by first providing the received "linear" description favored 
by the intelligentsia and then offering a contrasting, infinitely richer, 
"nonlinear" account. Dostoevsky's description, as he frequently 
observes, depends on seeing multiple possibilities. 
As previously noted, the January 1876 issue begins by raising 
the question of suicide in this contrasting way. In his articles on 
specific suicide cases, crimes, and ongoing trials, Dostoevsky typ­
ically argues that all the important facts, whether psychological, 
moral, or social, become visible only when one sees time and people 
as open to multiple possible developments. 
Between the concepts of sheer randomness and of pure linearity 
lies a sense of time as allowing for many, though not all, outcomes. 
To comprehend a moment is to discern the fudd of possibilities it 
contains. It is to see the multiple potentials that may or may not be 
developed. The future will develop some potentials but not others, 
and it is impossible to know in advance which direction time will 
take. Indeed, it is exceedingly difficult even to perceive the set of 
possible directions. But that is the defining purpose of A Writer's 
Diary. 
The Diary enacts a process of temporal discernment practiced 
monthly. Its status as a periodical (and as a diary) derives from its 
central concern with time. The author assumes the role of inves­
tigator into the potentials of each present moment. He therefore 
locates telling phenomena, passes them through diverse genres, and 
imagines possible continuations. He explores the "might-have­
beens" and "might-bes": that is the role of fictions and semific­
tions, which describe other possibilities. In his commentary on recent 
events, Dostoevsky explicitly stresses the conceivability of multiple 
stories that could emerge from the same set of incidents. 
This method, first imagined by Shatov and Liza Nikolaevna in 
The Possessed and at last realized in the complex form of the Diary, 
makes sense only if time is in fact genuinely open. To be mean­
ingful, the Diary's method also presupposes that reality is so elusive 
and chaotic that discernment of the moment's potentials must be 
difficult. Temporal astuteness demands keen insight and the ability 
to take risks. The Diary therefore dramatizes a form of shrewd 
guesswork. 

A Writer's Diary 
Longing for the Present 
Dostoevsky defends this view of the present. in several Diary ar­
ticles. In fact, it was of central concern to him more generally. 
The idea of time as an elusive field of possibilities appears in his 
notebooks and surfaces prominently in his novel A Raw Youth, 
which was written between the 1873 and 1876 portions of the Diary. 
Dostoevsky thought of his willingness to tackle the unformed pres­
ent, where lines of development had not set, as the distinguishing 
mark of his work. 
While Dostoevsky was publishing the Diary, he responded to a 
lener that accused him of wasting his gifts on mere trifles from 
current life (Pis'ma 3:205). Dostoevsky replied that such "trifles" 
were essential to his activity as a writer, both in the novel he was 
planning (Karamazuv) and in the Diary itself. He then digresses 
to describe a recent meeting with Goncharov, in which that writer 
disclaimed any interest in "current reality" because great art, ac­
cording to Goncharov, canot be made out of what is still formless. 
But that is precisely what Dostoevsky tried to do. 75 
In Dostoevsky's view, the reason that present reality is likely to 
appear formless is that it is open: one does not know which of its 
possibilities will be realized, and what social forms will emerge 
from this multiplicity. For such knowledge, one needs to contem­
plate a moment from a temporal distance. That is one reason that 
the tutor to whom Arkady, the hero of A Raw Youth, sends his 
narrative advises him to write on historical themes, especially the 
life of the Russian nobility. Aristocratic forms of life have long been 
set, the tutor points out, and it is consequently easy to write beau­
tiful or edifying descriptions of them. But if one focuses on a current 
hero, who may come from an "accidental family," then the narrative 
can have no beauty of form. Moreover, these types are in any case 
transitory, and so a novel about them cannot have artistic finish. One 
may make serious mistakes, exaggerations, misjudgments. In any case 
one would have to guess too much. But what is the writer to do who 
doesn't want to confine himself to the historical form, and is possessed 
by a longing for the present? To guess . . .  and make mistakes." 
This passage, and Dostoevsky's dialogue with Goncharov, are often 
interpreted as Dostoevsky's defense of his favorite subject maner: 
characters from classes other than the nobility who display a pre­
carious sociopsychological identity. Robert Louis Jackson has also 

Introductory Study 
77 
brilliantly pointed to Dostoevsky's project of creating a special 
"kind of beauty" out of the "image of imagelessness," which led 
to a quintessentially Dostoevskian aesthetics of the ugly and "po­
etics of the underground." These readings are surely correct, but 
they do not exhaust the maner. In speaking of the transitional and 
the historical, Dostoevsky was concerned as well with temporality 
itself-with the "guesses" necessarily involved in comprehending 
the present moment. 
The writer "possessed by a longing for the present" must un­
derstand presentness. He must grasp the moment in all its openness 
and formlessness, without imposing an "inevitable" future or sub­
stituting a finished picture from the past. In the Diary's article 
"The Boy Celebrating His Saint's Day" (1/77, 2. 5), Dostoevsky 
contrasts a scene from Tolstoy's Boyhood, in which a child contem­
plates suicide, with a recent case in which a boy actually killed 
himself. After dismissing the usual sort of linear and liberal in­
terpretation of the recent incident, Dostoevsky focuses on the dif­
ference between the present and the time described by Tolstoy. In 
Tolstoy's world, actually committing suicide did not belong to a 
young person's set of possibilities, but for today's youth it does. 
"The fact is that . . .  [in the recent case] there are also features of 
a new sort of reality quite different from that of the placid, middle­
stratum Moscow landowning family whose way of life had long 
been solidly established and whose historian is our Count Leo 
Tolstoy." 
Class is surely part of Dostoevsky's point, but I think he is no 
less concerned with time. That is why he italicizes the word his­
torian, which takes on pejorative connotations. Twice more in this 
article Dostoevsky uses and italicizes this word, with mounting 
irony. By choosing to represent the past, the author of War and 
Peace has avoided the much more difficult task of investigating the 
present. From this perspective, indeed, the question of class is 
itself one of time, because even the present life of the nobility (say, 
of the heroes of Anna Karenina) is relatively remote from the seethǞ 
ing ferment of unformed possibilities that characterize the openness 
of the current moment. 77 
And who, Dostoevsky asks, will be the "historian" of the present, 
of the chaos reigning in all those "other corners" of life that seem 
to shape the ethos of the moment? "And if, within this chaos that 
has gone on for so long and that is particularly prevalent in the 
life of our society now,-a life in which, perhaps, even an . artist 

A Writer's Diary 
of Shakespearean proportions cannot find a normative law and a 
guiding thread-who, then, will illuminate even a little part of this 
chaos, never mind dreaming of some guiding thread?" Of course, 
the answer to this question is Dostoevsky himself. The form per­
haps best adapted to finding the "guiding thread" is implicitly the 
very work in which this article appears, A Writer's Diary. 
Presentness and Pastness 
To represent the present is for Dostoevsky altogether different from 
representing the past. We live through the present uncertainly, 
without knowing where it will lead, but the past is given to us in 
memory, which makes a radical experiential difference. As Dos­
toevsky points out, memory necessarily includes knowledge of what 
happened after the remembered event. Not only do we see the past 
in temporal perspective but we cannot help doing so, whereas the 
present cannot be seen that way. It therefore must not be described 
as if it were already past; it demands a completely different ap­
proach. The qualitative difference between the past and the present 
is central to the design of the Diary, conceived as a work monitoring 
the moment as it happens. 
In "Apropos of the Exhibition" (73.9), Dostoevsky raises these 
issues while considering genre painting, a form he regards as close 
to the Diary itself. It might seem that no obstacle exists to genre 
paintings that depict everyday scenes from the past, but in fact 
such efforts necessarily lead to radical incoherence and the confusion 
of distinct kinds of temporality. 
What is genre [painting), in essence? Genre is the art of portraying 
contemporary, immediate reality that the artist has himself felt per­
sonally and has seen with his own eyes, in contrast with historical 
reality, which cannot be seen with one's own eyes and which is por­
trayed not in its immediate but in its completed aspect . . .  Historical 
reality in art, for instance, is narurally not that of immediate reality 
(genre) precisely because the former is completed and not current. 
The present is not "completed" in that one does not know what 
may come of it, and that incompleteness is essential to our expe­
rience of presentness. Genre is the art of capturing that sense of 
the ongoing moment. Quite different techniques must be employed 
to represent the past, which is necessarily known as "completed." 
There can be no more radical distinction than that between open 
and closed time. To be sure, Dostoevsky concedes, some have tried 

Introductory Study 
79 
to paint the past as genre, but such attempts can lead to nothing 
but a shallow notoriety. For these paintings involve a "confusion 
of conceptions of reality" and rely on a falsity. This falsity pertains 
to a past offered as if subsequent events had not followed. 
Ask any psychologist you like and he will tell you that if you imagine 
some event of the past, especially of the distant past,--one that is 
completed and historical (and to live without imagining the past is 
irnpossible)-then the event will necessarily be imagined in its com­
pleted aspect, i.e., with the addition of all its subsequent developments 
that had not yet occurred at the historical moment in which the artist 
is trying to depict a persnn or event. And thus the essence of a 
historical event cannot even be imagined by an artist exactly as it 
probably happened in reality. 
Accurate representation of the past is impossible because each past 
moment was open: it was actually just another present moment. 
It had the potential to lead in directions other than the one actually 
realized. But we do not experience the past, we remember it, and 
memory alters the past by closing it down. We remember what 
did happen, not what might have; we remember what led to where 
we are now. Events that have happened lose the presentness they 
had and acquire pastness, which is quite a different thing. 
According to Dostoevsky, a remembered event necessarily in­
cludes within the event itself the future that had not yet happened 
and need not have happened. Memory therefore forecloses the pos­
sibility that something else might have happened. Our intellect 
may tell us that time was open then just as it is now, but our actual 
experience of the past, through memory, includes one and only 
one subsequent course of events. In short, memory necessarily in­
volves foreshadowing, the importing of the future into the past. It 
must therefore falsify the past, which did not somehow include the 
future that happened to have resulted from it. 78 Realized possibility 
is falsely, but unavoidably, perceived as necessity. 
Freedom is an attribute of presentness. We cannot imagine the 
people of the past as truly free, as we directly experience our own 
freedom, even if we know they were no less free than we are. In · 
Dostoevsky's view, past events cannot be endowed with the attri­
butes of presentness. Any attempt to "combine both realities-the 
historical and the immediate" therefore creates an "unnatural com­
bination," from which "arises the worst kind of untruth." Dos­
toevsky's example is Ge's shocking genre painting of "The Last 
Supper": 

So 
A Writer's Diary 
There sits Christ-but is that Christ? It may be a very good young 
man, deeply hurt by his quarrel with Judas . . .  but this is not the 
Christ we know . . . .  we must ask the question: where are the eighteen 
centuries of Christianity that followed, and how are they connected 
with the event? How is it possible that from such an ordinary quarrel 
of such ordinary people gathered to have supper, such as Mr. Ge 
depicts, there could arise something so colossal? 
Nothing at all is explained here; there is no historical truth here; 
there is not even any truth of genre here; everything here is false . . . .  
everything here is disproportionate and out of scale with the future. 
As Dostoevsky was well aware, these very questions are discussed 
at great length in War and Peace, and Dostoevsky's comments on 
genre painting implicitly initiate the Diary's several dialogues with 
Tolstoy. Up to a point, the two writers agree with each other and 
disagree with almost everyone else. In the embedded essays of War 
and Peace, Tolstoy also distinguishes between our experience of 
the present, which is open, and of the past, which memory and 
narrative history falsely represent as having led inevitably to where 
we are right now. A sort of temporal analogue to an optical illusion 
leads us unwittingly to overlook the presentness of each past mo­
ment. "It is this consideration," Tolstoy observes, "that makes the 
fall of the first man, resulting in the birth of the human race, 
appear patently less free than a man's entry into wedlock today. 
It is the reason why the life and activity of men who lived cenruries 
ago and are connected with me in time cannot seem to me as free 
as the life of a contemporary, the consequences of which are still 
unknown to me."79 If I examine an action performed a moment 
ago, Tolstoy explains, it seems unquestionably free, but if I recall 
one performed ten years ago, the consequences may be so plain 
that "I find it hard to imagine what would have happened had that 
action not been performed" (W&P, 1444-45). Thus a contemporary 
event appears to us the work of its participants, "but in the case 
of a more remote event, we see only its inevitable consequences, 
which prevent our considering anything else possible" (W&P, 
1445). Historical writing magnifies the distortions of memory, ac­
cording to Tolstoy's famous argument. 
In other essays Tolstoy repeatedly contrasts the openness of each 
moment of battle, in which "a hundred million chances" and 
choices can shape countless outcomes, with the neat narratives 
written by "the historians." Almost without exception, historians 
read their own present into the past as if only one outcome had 

Introductory Study 
8 1  
been possible all along. They commit several temporal fallacies, 
most notably "the fallacy of retrospection, which [mis]represents 
all the past as a preparation for future events" (W&P, 854). 
Dostoevsky's argument also coincides with Tolstoy's well-known 
dramatizations of the effects of memory. In Tolstoy's view, memory 
"imperceptibly, unconsciously, and inevitably" (W&P, 298) leads 
even the most truthful people into falsehood, and for the very 
reasons that Dostoevsky was later to repeat. In War and Peace 
Tolstoy often describes events and then, a few hundred pages later, 
describes characters' recollections of them, which differ consid­
erably from what actually happened. His most brilliant touch is to 
have his characters introduce the very same distortions that the 
readers themselves have unconsciously made. Unless we go back 
to the original passage, we may not notice the character's error. As 
Tolstoy depicts it, memory reprocesses the messiness of reality, 
with its loose ends and multiple possible outcomes, by shaping it 
into a good story. 80 
Tolstoy developed a number of remarkably complex devices to 
counter the distorting effects of memory. He wanted to represent 
the past as it was experienced, in all its presentness. For him, the 
obstacles Dostoevsky mentions served as challenges to be overcome. 
It would take us too far afield to explore Tolstoy's methods, but it 
is worth mentioning that at least one of them recalls Dostoevsky's 
"monthly publication." In an essay published while War and Peace 
was being serialized, Tolstoy explains that he is publishing each 
part of his book without knowing what will happen next to his 
fictional characters. For him as for them, the future will be un­
known and open to multiple possibilities. Otherwise he would 
unwittingly impose the subsequent events he has in mind and so 
be false to the experience of the characters. Serialization was there­
fore not just the way in which Tolstoy happened to publish War 
and Peace; it was essential to its design. It is quite possible that 
this idea exercised an important influence on Dostoevsky's Diary. 
Dostoevsky, however, took Tolstoy's innovation one step further 
and used periodical publication to portray current, not past, events. 
The dramatic attempt to discern by reportage the shape of time as 
it passes and so to fashion stories catching the throb of the present 
would take place before the readers' eyes, month by month, even 
as society changed. For Dostoevsky, Tolstoy's past-centered device, 
like Ge's painting, necessarily involved an essential falsity. Thus, 
although Tolstoy and Dostoevsky agreed about time, they differed 

82 
A Writer's Diary 
about the artistic consequences of their shared position. Tolstoy 
sought ways to endow the past with presenmess; Dostoevsky de­
veloped ways of describing the present as it unfolds. 
We may perhaps anribute these diferent solutions to difering 
conceptions of realism. For Dostoevsky, realism dictated that the 
past must be represented as we (now) experience it, in all its 
pasmess, shaped by memory of what came later. The past has 
pastness because it is known only through memory. We must be 
true to our experience, however distorting. For Tolstoy, realism 
demanded that the paīt be represented as the people of the past 
experienced it, in all the presentness it then possessed, which meant 
that the effects of our memories of what came later must somehow 
be thought away. We must be true to the experience of others, 
however much it differs from our own intuitions. Agreeing about 
the eternal openness of time as it passes, they disagreed about the 
artist's proper response. 
Sideshadowing 
In order to represent the present moment in all its openness and 
"incompleteness," the Diary makes frequent use of the device that 
I have called sideshadowing. Sideshadowing was essential to the 
work's original design. 
Sideshadowing may be understood as an opposite of foreslwd­
owing, which embodies a sense of time as closed. When a narative 
relies on foreshadowing, it establishes a radical divergence between 
the heroes, who do not know what will happen to them, and the 
reader, who can read signs of the future unavailable to the char­
acters. The hero experiences a world of choice and chance that 
allows for many possible futures, but the reader ses the shadow 
cast by coming events that have already been determined, in a sense 
already happened. Oedipus the King offers only the most dramatic 
example of the kind of narative irony made possible by this dif­
ference between reader's (or author's) time and characters' time. 
That irony depends on our awareness that the story is already over, 
already wrinen down in the text we are reading or seing performed. 
Foreshadowing works by reminding us of the structure of the whole 
that predetermines the significance and outcome of each moment. 
In foreshadowing, the reader, though not the hero, understands 
that the future is already present in the present. To use Dostoevsky's 

Introductory Study 
terms, foreshadowing treats present moments as already "com­
pleted." Robbed of their presentness, they are viewed as somehow 
already over, as simply the past of the inevitable future that the 
author has made available to the reader. When foreshadowing is 
used, the difference between time in the making and time already 
made, between "genre" and "history," is obliterated. That is why 
foreshadowing creates the sense of time as closed. 
By contrast, sideshadowing treats time as truly open. Wherever 
we might be tempted to see one path, it projects the possibility of 
two or more that might just as well have happened. If foreshadowing 
allows the shadow of an inevitable future to be cast on the present, 
sideshadowing allows us to see that even the present did not have 
to be what it is. A shadow is cast from the side, from another possible 
present that might just as well have been. Two or more alternative 
presents are made visible, the possible and the actual. The actual 
is therefore understood as just another possibility that somehow 
came to pass. With sideshadowing, we see not only what did happen 
but what might have happened. In a peculiar form of simultaneity, 
time itself acquires a double. 
Sideshadowing counters our tendency to view current events as 
inevitable products of the past. Just because one possibility was 
realized to the exclusion of incompatible alternatives does not mean 
that those alternatives could not have been realized. In allowing us 
to catch a glimpse of those unrealized possibilities, sideshadowing 
demonstrates that our tendency to trace straight lines of causality 
oversimplifies events, which may allow for many possible stories. 
However coherent and apparently necessary is the sequence we 
know, that necessity is an illusion. What happened did not have 
to happen, and whatever exists, including ourselves, might not 
have existed. Sideshadowing therefore induces a kind of temporally 
based humility. 
To understand a given moment is to understand not just what 
did happen but what else might have happened. Sideshadowing 
leads us into the subjunctive and the contrary-to-fact conditional; 
it implicitly insists on the wisdom of those tenses, which correctly 
project a ramifying temporality. The present we know is one of 
many possible presents. Many futures may follow from any 
moment. 
Sideshadowing may also be projected backward to suggest that 
we may be the product of a past different from the one we imagine. 

A Writer's Diary 
Or at least we could have been. Many routes led here, and they 
each had their own trajectory, which means tl).at the "same" present 
may tend to different futures. Varying pasts endow the present with 
different vectors and different ranges of possibilities to come. 
Whether applied to past, present, or future, sideshadowing mul­
tiplies stories. Each moment in time is understood as containing 
not just one but a whole fƪld of possibilitU!s. To understand a 
moment is to understand that whole fƪld and not just the particular 
one of its possibilities that happens to be realized. Sideshadowing 
creates a sense of time's openness and "incompleteness" by making 
potentialities visible. 
In works that use sideshadowing, the plot that is enacted becomes 
but one of many possible plots. 81 In the story the author narrates, 
we glimpse a complexity of myriad stories sustainable by the same 
material. It as if we were privy to the author's notebooks before 
he had chosen a particular course of events or as if we could 
somehow read through the final plot to glimpse all the alternatives 
simultaneously. Or perhaps it is as if we were somehow admitted 
to a writer's laboratory or allowed to read a writer's diary. 
Sideshadowing inheres in the very conception of Dostoevsky's 
new genre, which allows us to see stories in the process of creation. 
A Writer's Diary shimmers from the shadows of possible stories, 
stories not yet written or perhaps never to be written. It hints at 
the other plots for stories it does include, and we sense, from the 
detailed descriptions of real events on which the stories are based, 
the possibility of various outcomes. The Diary's technique of al­
lowing us to see stories in creation, of seeing diverse possibilities 
emerge from the same material, represents only one type of side­
shadowing inherent in Dostoevsky's experimental new form. 
Both before and after he published the Diary, Dostoevsky made 
frequent use of sideshadowing. His penchant for this device reflects 
his deeply held belief in human freedom and his desire to render 
it palpable to the reader. Dostoevsky knew that logical argument 
would never provide convincing proof that determinism and a linear 
sense of time are false, just as nothing would ever convince Men­
deleev to believe in the supernatural. Determinism was accepted 
by the intelligentsia on faith, as the only view that made sense. 
But Dostoevsky hoped to provide a special sort of 7Ul1Jelistic proof: 
what he called "a live image" of a different sense of the world. 
To do so, he had to jettison the structure of a well-made novel 

Introductory Study 
that makes the outcome seem inevitable. He needed the exact op­
posite, a plot that depended on a directly experienced sense of 
freedom and uncertainty. In this way, readers would have a palpable 
alternative to determinism, and they could ask which image of time 
corresponds more closely to their own experience. The underground 
man could only raise clever objections to logarithmic time, but 
Dostoevsky turned to the more powerful technique of a directly 
experienced alternative. 
In his novels Dostoevsky therefore developed complex methods 
of sideshadowing to create the sense of a world rife with possibil­
ities. The Diary, as a new form to be set literally in the ongoing 
present, was apparently designed to capitalize on these methods 
by placing them in the foreground and making them the work's 
defining purpose. In a new genre that took the form of a periodical, 
the openness of the world would not just be reflected in the work 
but would directly shape it. 
Sideshadowing in Dostoevsky's Fiction: Clouds of Story 
Let us first consider some examples of sideshadowing in Dostoev­
sky's fiction. In order to relieve their boredom, several characters 
in The Possessed go to visit the mad "prophet" Semyon Yakovlevich. 
Having completed a lengthy description of the journey and the 
visit itself, the narrator unexpectedly announces that none of these 
events are important. "At this point, however, there took place, I 
am told, an extremely enigmatic incident, and, I must own, it was 
chiefly on account of it that that I have described this expedition 
so minutely" (Possessed, 341). Here as elsewhere, the narrator of 
The Possessed typically gives us "too many facts," including ap­
parently "irrelevant" details. We recognize their presence as char­
acteristic of Dostoevskian narration. Too many facts, presented with 
no clear explanation and an air of mystery, lead us to construct or 
intimate many possible stories. Stories also multiply if the facts 
may not be facts at all or if other "facts" lie behind the ostensible 
ones, with ever-receding orders of possibility and suspicion. But 
what was this "extremely enigmatic incident"? 
It appears that, as everyone was leaving, Stavrogin and Liza 
Nikolaevna jostled against each other in the doorway. Or at least, 
"I am told" they did. 
I fancied that they both stood still for an instant, and looked, as it 

86 
A Writer's Diary 
were, strangely at one another, but I may not have seen rightly in 
the crowd. It is asserted, on the contrary, and quite seriously, that 
Liza, glancing at Nikolay Vsevolodovich [Stavrogin], quickly raised 
her hand to the level of his face, and would certainly have struck him 
if he had not drawn back in time. Perhaps she was displeased with 
the expression of his face, or the way he smiled, particularly just after 
such an episode with Mavriky Nikolaevich. I must admit I saw nothing 
myself, but al the others declared they had, though they certainly could 
not have seen it in such li crush, though perhaps some may have. But I 
did not believe it at the time. I remember, however, that Nikolay 
Vsevolodovich was rather pale al the way home. (Possessed, 341) 
Readers will recognize this rhetoric as quintessentially Dostoev­
skian. With qualification piled on qualification, tentative judgments 
no sooner made than withdrawn and perhaps ambiguously reas­
serted, the narator claims not to be sure what he himself has seen. 
Reports of others are probably even more unreliable, and apparently 
contradictory, though not necessarily groundless. Frivolous people 
with a taste for scandal say things "quite seriously" that are dif­
ferent from what the narator himself has seen, although he does 
not entirely trust his own eyes, either. Moreover, since the action 
in question was checked before it happened, one must distinguish 
between an aborted possibility and nothing at al. 
Something may or may not have happened, and if it did, it may 
have been one thing or another. Liza and Stavrogin may have simply 
stared strangely at each other, or, "on the contrary," Liza may have 
intended to slap Stavrogin. If that was her purpose, it may have 
had various motivations. Of course, nothing at al might have hap­
pened. What we are given here is not one but many possible incidents. 
The real point is that whatever happened, any of these incidents 
could have happened. What is important is the field of possibilities, 
not the one possibility actualized. 
We see here one reason that Dostoevsky uses such a chronicler 
to tell his story. Conscientious but often unsure, the narrator often 
presents various accounts of important and not so important in­
cidents. Rumors therefore predominate, and we are given incon­
clusive assessments about which (if any) of several contradictory 
stories might be true. It might almost be said that rumor is the 
prime character of The Possessed, and it is certainly the main engine 
of its many stories. As a result, our attention is called not only to 
actualities but also to possibilities. Clouds of story hover over the 

Introductory Study 
narrative landscape. The novel moves not from point to point but 
"from smudge to smudge."82 
Possibilities are multiplied not only by uncertainty over what 
happened but also by the variety of contexts in which events that 
clearly did happen might be set. That is another reason that we 
are repeatedly given "too many facts," which create many sequences 
leading to any given present. Even if we do know what happened 
in the present, its significance, and the futures it adumbrates, vary 
greatly, depending on the paths that might have led to it. In the 
scene at Semyon Yakovlevich's doorway, both uncertainties-about 
what did happen and about what might have led to whatever might 
have happened-add to the "enigma" and multiply sideshadows. 
At the beginning of Karamaz(JV, the chronicler of that novel 
reports on what might have happened to Adelaida lvanovna, old 
Karamazov's first wife, after she left him and ran away to Petersburg 
with a divinity student (i.e., a radical intellectual). Fyodor Pavlovich 
receives news that "she had somehow suddenly died somewhere in 
a garret, according to some stories-from typhus, but according to 
others-allegedly from starvation."83 We note the emphatic use of 
subjunctives and vague qualifiers in this sentence. The two versions 
of Adelaida lvanovna's death evidently contradict each other. More­
over, if Adelaida lvanovna died of starvation, we would be led to 
construct a whole different narrative-about her relations with the 
divinity student, for instance. And how could a wealthy woman 
have allowed herself to starve to death? From self-lacerating pride? 
To enact a romance, as she imagined she was doing when she 
married Fyodor Pavlovich? Out of spite, or from some sort of 
principle? If she did not die of starvation, who spread the rumor 
she had, and why; and why did it gain currency? 
As the passage continues, a different sort of doubling of possi­
bilities is described: 
Fyodor Pavlovich was drunk when he heard of his wife's death, and 
it is said that he ran out into the street and began shouting with joy, 
raising his hands to Heaven: "Lord, now lettest Thou Thy servant 
depan in peace," but according to others he wept without restraint 
like a little child, so much so that, they say, people were sorry for 
him, in spite of the repulsion he inspired. (BK, 6) 
We again note the frequent use of phrases indicating dubious report. 
Fyodor Pavlovich's two alleged reactions, each the subject of rumor, 
differ considerably and would seem to testifY to incompatible states 

88 
A Writer's Diary 
of mind and qualities of character. The reader might be inclined 
to think that one of them, weeping withollt restraint, might have 
been an act and therefore not so different from the buffoonish 
"shouting with joy," but in one of the novel's most memorable 
asides, the narator immediately insists that the weeping might in 
fact have been sincere: 
It is quite possible that both versions were true, that he rejoiced at 
his release, and at the same time wept for her who released him. As 
a general rule, people, even the wicked, are much more naive and 
simple-hearted than we suppose. And we ourselves are, too. (BK, 6) 
In this case, it is not important which story is true or what actually 
happened; what matters is that either version, or both together, 
ciJUld have been true. The chronicler allows that even Fyodor Pav­
lovich's character allows for radical alternatives. And the same ap­
plies to us. 
Even when Dostoevsky does not use a chronicler, he creates many 
of the same effects. The omniscient narator of Crime and Punish­
ment frequently pauses to recount that, years later, when Raskol­
nikov recalled a given incident, he wondered at his state of mind: 
why did he do what he did, or go where he went, when some other 
alternative, equally plausible, might have led to a different outcome? 
Like the chronicler's rumors, these "future recollections" endow 
the text with sideshadows. The reader learns not only what Ras­
kolnikov did but also what he might just as well have done. 
In Dostoevsky's first-person naratives, a key moment often oc­
curs when the hero who has been constructing one account for 
himself recognizes that something else might have been going on, 
that there was another story aside from the one he was telling. In 
the crucial discovery scene of "The Meek One," from the Novem­
ber 1876 Diary, the narator is shocked to find his wife singing. 
This apparently trivial incident indicates to him that his wife's 
thoughts have been quite different from the ones he attributed to 
her. He begins at last to grasp that other people have other stories. 
"The Dream of a Ridiculous Man" projects a whole other world 
in which the narator can relive his life differently and so become 
aware of other possibilities he has overlooked. Contemplating the 
alternative earth that he visits, a world like ours but with a different 
history and temporality, he asks, "Are such duplicates possible?" 
In the world and time of Dostoevsky, they are; and his works force 
the duplicates, time's doubles and shadows, into view. 

Introductory Study 
Of course, doubling figures as a key principle of plot construction 
in most of Dostoevsky's works. Heroes often possess a series of 
doubles, from highly delineated main characters to a series of de­
graded caricatures. Each double enacts a latent possibility for the 
hero. Svidrigailov is the Raskolnikov who might have killed him­
self, Luzhin the Raskolnikov who wants all his fortune "at once," 
and Lebeziatnikov the two-bit intellectual who imagines that he is 
superior to ordinary people. Raskolnikovism, it appears, allows for 
more lives than one. The Possessed seems overpopulated with Stav­
rogin's many doubles, to the point where he seems trapped in a 
hall of mirrors and bound by a plot that his other selves have 
made-an amazing variation on the myth of Narcissus, perhaps. 
(The Double may be another such variation.) In the Diary the various 
suicides, who are often compared with each other, serve as doubles 
of each other. The feuilletonistic narrator's wanderings and di­
gressions naturally offer "too many facts" sustaining too many 
stories; his dreamy unreliability creates a haze of possibilities. 
The criminal cases that figure in the Diary allow Dostoevsky to 
make the openness of time most explicit. Indeed, it might be 
supposed that one reason Dostoevsky often based plots on crime 
is that, as Porfiry Petrovich remarks in Crime and Punishment, we 
tend to imagine crimes as conforming to relatively simple stories 
"laid down in books," whereas in fact every crime "at once becomes 
a thoroughly special case and sometimes a case unlike any other 
that's gone before" (C&P, 333). Where others might see one story, 
Porfiry realizes there may be many others, which are invisible to 
linear intellect. 
To explain why he does not follow prescribed methods, Porfiry 
Petrovich 
chooses 
the 
example 
of 
"the 
old 
Austrian 
Hofkriegsrath . . .  on paper they'd beaten Napoleon and taken him 
prisoner, and there in their study they worked it all out in the 
cleverest fashion, but look you, General Mack surrendered with 
his whole army, he-he-he! "  (C&P, 334). Porfiry evidently derives 
this striking illustration from War and Peace, where it was used to 
show that in banle there are "a hundred million" possibilities where 
strategists typically see only one or two. Porfiry, and Dostoevsky, 
apply this Tolstoyan lesson to crime.s' 
No matter how ironclad the evidence for a given account might 
seem, the evidence might sustain other possibilities. The plot of 
KaramazO'V, and of several stories within it, depends on this premise 
of multiplicity. Up to a point, KaramazO'V resembles all detective 

90 
A Writer's Diary 
stories in which a second story, found by the detective, lies behind 
the obvious one believed by the official police. Karamazuv differs 
in emphasizing that several versions, not. just one, might be true. 
In this respect, Karamazuv is in part a parody of detective stories 
and their fundamental premise. Indeed, the whole moral import 
of Karamazuv involves discovering not only who actually murdered 
Fyodor Pavlovich but also who might have done so. From a moral 
perspective, it is not just the act, but also the field of possible acts, 
that maners. That is why Ivan, as he eventually learns, is wrong 
to focus on the "act" and ignore the "wish." Father Zosirna's belief 
that we are all to blame even for the crimes we have not committed, 
and that we are all responsible for each other, reflects the novel's 
key tenet that responsibility pertains not just to actualities but also 
to possibilities. 
Sideshadowing in the Diary: Kairova Time 
In the Diary Dostoevsky repeatedly refutes accepted views of well­
known crimes by showing their sideshadows. The Kairova case 
offers a telling example. The mistress of a married man, Kairova, 
who knew that her lover Velikanov was again living with his wife, 
purchased a razor, came to the bedroom where the couple was 
sleeping, and attacked the wife. The two awoke and prevented the 
mistress from continuing the anack; Kairova was tried and 
acquitted. 
Dostoevsky deplores the "liberal" reaction of those who applauded 
the verdict as somehow progressive, but indicates that the question 
put to the jurors was so simplistic that conviction was impossible. 
They were asked whether Kairova, "having premeditated her act," 
intended to kill Velikanova "but was prevented from the ultimate 
consummation of her intent" by the couple (5/76, 1.3). Even though 
Kairova was doubtless guilty of a crime, this question, in Dos­
toevsky's view, cannot be answered at all, either positively or nega­
tively, and so the jury, faced with an impossible dilemma, properly 
chose acquittal. Why was the question unanswerable? 
According to Dostoevsky, this case, which he recounts in some 
detail, could be one that challenges naive notions of linear inten­
tionality. It may well have happened, he writes, that Kairova's 
intention was not fixed at the outset (was therefore not "premed­
itated") but evolved bit by bit along with her behavior. When she 
bought the razor, Kairova might still nm have known whether she 

Introductory Study 
91 
would anack Velikanova with it, much less whether she would kill 
her. 
Most likely she hadn't the slightest idea of this even when sitting on 
the steps with the razor in her hand, while just behind her, on her 
own bed, lay her lover and her rival. No one, no one in the world 
could have the slightest idea of this. Moreover, even though it may 
seem absurd, I can state that even when she had begun slashing her 
rival she might still not have known whether she wanted to kill her 
or not and whether this was her purpose in slashing her. 
At each moment, her incomplete intention allowed for many pos­
sibilities, and to understand her act one must grasp that multiplicity. 
Dostoevsky cautions that he does not mean to say that she was 
insane or that she acted unconsciously. No, she was aware of what 
she was doing at each moment, but she could not tell in advance 
what she would do the next moment. To preclude misunderstand­
ing, Dostoevsky also counters the objection that this sort of thinking 
would make all convictions for attempted murder impossible: he 
admits that sometimes the intention to kill is indeed complete. 
Even in this case, according to Dostoevsky, Kairova is doubtless 
guilty of some crime, even if the court's question was so ill-formed 
as to preclude a proper conviction. 
Kairova might have done several radically different things, and 
Dostoevsky sketches out the field of possibilities. She might have 
passed the razor over her rival's throat "and then cried out, shud­
dered, and ran off as fast as she could." Or she might have taken 
fright and turned the razor on herself, and either maimed or killed 
herself. Or, on the contrary, she might have flown into a frenzy 
"and not only murdered Velikanova but even begun to abuse the 
body, cutting off the head, the nose, the lips; and only later, 
suddenly, when someone took that head away from her, had realized 
what she had done." 
Dostoevsky's point is that the incomplete moment and intention 
did not predetermine a single outcome. All these very different 
actions "could have happened and could have been done by this 
very same woman and sprung from the very same soul, in the very 
same mood and under the very same circumstances." If identical 
circumstances could lead to multiple results, then time is open, 
and to understand it one must imagine a field of possibilities. 
Whatever happens, one must project the sideshadows. Quite similar 
passages occur in Dostoevsky's early discussions of the Kornilova 
case. 

92 
A Writer's Diary 
The motif of seizing a weapon with no specific intention yet 
formulated was used again, with remarkable power, in Karamazov. 
It will be recalled that in his frenzied jealousy and pursuit of 
Grushenka, Dmitri seizes a pestle in the presence of Fenya and 
rushes off with it. When, after Fyodor Pavlovich has been found 
murdered, the investigating lawyer asks Dmitri why he seized the 
pestle, Dmitri is unable to give a coherent motive, precisely because 
he had none. He was angry, murderously angry, and he suddenly 
seized a weapon that happened to be in view, but he did not yet 
have a specific intention. Like Kairova's, his intention was to evolve 
bit by circumstantial bit. It might have led to murder, although in 
this case it did not; and even if it had, the murder would not have 
been premeditated. The intention was not formulated until the last 
possible moment, when he was standing over his father's head with 
the weapon in hand. The investigator, working from a naive and 
legalistic idea of intentionality, insists that Dmitri must have had 
some purpose in mind when he seized the pestle, much as the court 
in the Kairova case made the same assumption about the razor. 
"But what object had you in view in arming yourself with such a 
weapon?" 
"What object? No object. I just picked it up and ran off." 
"What for, if you had no object?" . . .  
"Bother the pestle!" broke from him suddenly. 
"But still . . .  " 
"Oh, to keep off the dogs . . . .  Oh, because it was dark . . . . In case 
anything turned up." 
"But have you ever on previous occasions taken a weapon with you 
when you went out, since you're afraid of the dark?" . . .  
"Well, upon my word, gentlemen! Yes, I took the pestle . . .  What 
does one pick things up for at such moments? I don't know what for. 
I snatched it up and ran-that's al." (BK, 571) 
As throughout the investigation, Dmitri is being entirely truthful 
here. He had no specific object in taking the pestle; he does not 
know why he snatched it, he just snatched it. The investigator 
assumes, as we generally do, that actions proceed from intentions, 
but here, as in the Kairova case, Dostoevsky's point is that some­
times actions may, instead of following from intentions, be part of 
the process by which intentions themselves evolve over time. 
Throughout this process, the intention may be vague and open. 
Dostoevsky is so often interpreted from a Freudian perspective 

Introductory Study 
93 
that it is worth stressing that his point is not that there is some 
subconscious intention guiding and preceding Kairova's and Dmi­
tri's actions. Their inability to identify an intention derives not 
from its repression but from its genuine absence. They did not 
have an intention, whether conscious or subconscious; rather, they 
were in a certain disposition. From a Dostoevskian standpoint, 
subconscious intentionality is really not that different from con­
scious intentionality, and both are equally inapplicable to Dmitri 
and Kairova. For them time was open, but a prior intention, 
whether conscious or unconscious, significantly closes down time. 
If their only choice was whether to carry out their plan, then time 
merely enacts or fails to enact what was there from the outset, but 
it does not itself shape anything and does not possess a developing 
plurality of possibilities. By contrast, the "prosaic intentionality" 
of "Kairova time" develops with constant sideshadows, with chang­
es in the evolving state of mind itself, and with a multiplicity of 
options and potentials that change moment by moment. 85 
The Design and the Prophet 
In introducing the Kairova case, Dostoevsky apologizes for taking 
it up after the trial is already over. "For nothing comes to an end, 
and so nothing can ever be too late," he writes; "every event 
continues and takes on new forms, even though it may have finished 
its initial stage of development" (5/76, I .2). In fact, the very design 
of the Diary presupposes ramifying, open-ended processes. The 
lives of people and of nations take place in "Kairova time." That 
is why the author repeatedly confides his difficulties in finding 
some sort of guiding thread, tells us of his strenuous anempts to 
discern even a vague field of possibilities in a world so diverse and 
rich in potentials. "A novelist could never imagine possibilities 
such as real life offers every day by the thousands under the guise 
of the most ordinary things" (3/76, 2. I), he confides. Readers of 
the Diary watch the author marvel at the baffling strangeness of 
ordinary events and wonder how he might convey them "when 
they all go off on their separate ways and simply refuse to arrange 
themselves into one neat bundle! "  (3/76, 1 . 3). 
It should now be apparent why the prophetic mode could not 
be reconciled with the work's original design. When, like Pierre 
in War and Peace, the author thinks he has discovered the key to 
history, the world's multiplicity disappears. He knows the true 
story of history-can foresee "how England ends"-and he has 

94 
A Writer's Diary 
discovered how utopia will come to pass. Instead of sideshadowing, 
foreshadowing governs history and divulges the "denouement" in 
advance. The present is in effect already over. There is no need 
to anend to the various conversations of the moment, as he has 
done before, because events-to-come speak to Dostoevsky: "I once 
more seemed to hear voices from what may be the very near and 
penurbing future" (9/76, 2. 5). 
The author sees signs of the future in the way one might discover 
foreshadowing in an already written novel. The present only seems 
incomplete to those who cannot read the entrails of time. To the 
author, it is already historical, already "complete," like the past­
a necessary moment in a story that has been tending for a thousand 
years to its providential ending. 
When Dostoevsky embraces this apocalyptic vision, a singularity 
of tone dominates the work. Seemingly interminable articles in­
terpret apparently trivial events in light of an inevitable future. 
The caprice and playful experimentation of a "monthly feuilleton" 
yield to the prophet's insistent monotone. There is no longer any 
need to determine an event's potentials by filtering it through di­
verse genres, and so a generic homogeneity takes over the work. 
Formally, as well as ideologically, the heterogeneity that defined 
the work fades from view for long stretches, until some disap­
pointment temporarily shocks Dostoevsky back to a more cautious 
relation to time. 
Vortex Time 
In the Diary's apocalyptic sections, Dostoevsky adapts another kind 
of time that also appears in his novels. I would call this other 
temporality vorrex time. Vortex time and sideshadowing work in 
opposite ways. If in sideshadowing apparently simple events ramify 
into multiple futures, in vortex time an apparent diversity of causes 
all converge on a single catastrophe. A hidden clock seems to 
synchronize these causal lines so that, even though they seem un­
related to each other, they not only lead to the same result but also 
do so at the same moment. 
Vortices shape Dostoevsky's famous "scandalous scenes," in 
which unexpected synchronicities create cascading crises. In The 
Possessed several causal lines all converge when a series of unex­
pected guests-Marya Timofeevna, Lebyadkin, Pyotr Stepanovich, 
and at last Stavrogin-appear in Varvara Petrovna's drawing rom. 
Reflecting on the way everything seems to conspire to produce 

Introductory Srudy 
95 
crisis, the narrator observes that "the utterly unexpected arrival of 
Nikolay Vsevolodovich, who was not expected for another month, 
was not only strange from its unexpectedness but from its fateful 
coincidence with the present moment" (Possessed, 179). 
Any reader of Dostoevsky's novels will immediately think of 
many similar examples and will recall the increasing intensity of 
excitement as the vortex is approached. Quite various motives lead 
Dmitri to stand over his father's head with a murder weapon in his 
hand: the money he owes Katerina lvanovna, the rivalry over 
Grushenka, resentment over his abandonment as a child, his father's 
counterclaim over the inheritance, Ivan's recently enunciated theory 
justifying murder, and the old man's loathsome behavior in the 
elder's cell. We watch Dmitri in a frenzy grab at straws more and 
more desperately to get the three thousand rubles he needs. The 
closer he gets to the catastrophe, the more evidently does any action, 
no matter to what end it may be directed, draw him to the murder 
scene. In much the same way, a diversity of contradictory ideologies 
all direct Raskolnikov to the murder scene, and several theories 
that cannot be reconciled with each other all converge for Kirillov 
in suicide. In the vortex all forces, all theories, no matter what 
their initial direction, are redirected to point toward the catastrophe 
ahead. 
And as the catastrophe or scandal approaches, time speeds up. 
Crises follow each other with increasing rapidity until a moment 
of apparently infinite temporal density is reached. For Madame Stav­
rogina, the chronicler remarks, "the present moment might really 
be . . .  one of those in which all the essence of life, of all the past 
and all the present, perhaps, too, all the future, is concentrated, 
as it were, focused" (Possessed, 183). In such scenes the novel may 
cite Dostoevsky's favorite line from the Apocalypse, that there shall 
be time no longer (Revelation 10:6). 
Of course, Dostoevsky's favorite metaphor for the speeding up 
of time is "the last moments of a man condemned." The nearer 
the prisoner gets to execution, the more he experiences in each 
moment, each second, each fraction of a second, until, perhaps, 
the speed itself is unbearable and he "longs to be shot more 
quickly." Readers of Dostoevsky will recall that the same vortex 
temporality characterizes the epileptic fit. The Idiot relies on the 
temporal similarity of execution and epilepsy, and of both with the 
idea of approaching apocalypse. 86 
As we have seen, the Diary comes to apply this model of time 

A Writer's Diary 
to current events. All diverse causal chains now lead to the same 
outcome, the vonex of war that wil bring utopia. They are al 
reaching their "final formulation" at the saine moment (the theory 
of "synchronism" or "simultaneity"). And time speeds up. Europe 
changes year by year, month by month, until at last it is changing 
"hour by hour" ( I I/77, 3. 1). For Dostoevsky, it makes'·no sense 
to negotiate peace terms with foreign powers that may not exist 
within a few days. When Dostoevsky writes this way, he insists 
that the predictions he made a few shon months ago, predictions 
that everyone regarded as fantastic, have now been confirmed. As 
the expected vonex approaches, Dostoevsky starts to record when 
he has written each pan of an issue because predictions are verified 
before they can even be printed. Issues become temporally labeled 
and layered: 
When I was beginning this chapter the facts and repons that are 
suddenly filling the entire European press had not yet appeared, so 
that everything I wrote here as speculation has now been borne out 
almost word for word. My Diary will come out next month, on October 
7, while today is only September 29 and the "soothsayings," if I can 
call them that, on which I rather riskily embarked in this chapter 
will look somewhat dated, like established facts from which I merely 
copied my "soothsayings." (9/77, 1.5) 
Such passages could not differ more profoundly from the January 
1876 issue. 
In his novels Dostoevsky found ways to combine sideshadowing 
with the vonex to produce the special thrill and suspense we call 
Dostoevskian. 87 He typically did so by setting a vonex plot within 
an antithetical world governed by an open, prosaic time. The latter 
measures the madness of the former, as Pyotr Ilich 's prudence 
contrasts with Dmitri Karamazov's insane attitude to blood and 
money (and the servant Nastasya's contrasts with Raskolnikov's). 
The vonex derives from the characters' ideologies and pathologies; 
it testifies to obsession and reflects illness of body, mind, or spirit. 
It is something to be exorcised, which is one reason that the epi­
graph of The Possessed is Jesus' driving of the madman's devils 
into the swine, "who ran violently down a steep place into the 
lake." Cured, the former madman returns to normal and the people 
see him "sitting at the feet of Jesus, clothed and in his right mind."88 
Some of Dostoevsky's heroes are cured and some are not, but all 
live in a world where obsession is demonic and exorcism is possible. 

Introductory Study 
97 
In Dostoevsky's novels vortex time typically possesses main char­
acters (and some minor ones) but does not govern the world. In 
The Possessed Stepan Trofimovich attributes the end of his profes­
sorial career to "a vortex of combined circumstances," but, the 
narrator tells us, "it turned out afterwards that there had been no 
'vortex' and even no 'circumstances'" (Possessed, 4). For other 
characters, the vortex surely exists but is of their own making. It 
is the "disease" that afflicts Raskolnikov, and so Dostoevsky also 
describes the healthy Razumikhin, who believes not in sudden 
challenges to fate but in constant small efforts and undramatic 
exertions. Razumikhin also maintains that history resists all 
schemes of explanation and never fits a pattern dreamed up by 
some "mathematical brain." He voices the temporality of the novel. 
We have already seen that Porfiry Petrovich cites Tolstoy's view of 
time as maximally open; his unequal contest with Raskolnikov may 
be viewed as a duel of temporalities in which Raskolnikov's ob­
sessional disease loses. 
Each of these and several other solutions effectively combine open 
and closed time into a coherent aesthetic structure. But that does 
not happen in the Diary, where Dostoevsky just abandons one 
temporality for the other. He apparently tries to overhaul the ma­
chine while it is in motion. To match his new shaping idea, he 
discards some parts and replaces them with others. The most ob­
vious formal markers of the original design-the monthly format, 
the division into chapters and articles, and the lengthy chapter 
titles-remain, but they become an empty shell. 
In part, this change reflects a peculiar fact about the Diary and 
about Dostoevsky at this time: he himself quite seriously assumed 
the obsessional role previously typical of his own characters. In 
this respect the Diary resembles Gogo! 's Selected Correspondence, 
in which Gogo! quite seriously speaks like one of his mad narra­
tors. 89 It is possible, of course, that Dostoevsky could have worked 
out an aesthetically effective form of apocalyptic prophecy based 
entirely on vortex time, but he was evidently unable to do so with 
the material and forms developed to convey a radically different 
chronicity. 
The Diary's Second Form-Shaping Idea: Prosaics 
In embracing the apocalypse, Dostoevsky also contradicted a sec­
ond "form-shaping idea" of the Diary as originally designed. The 
Diary was formulated to convey a Dostoevskian version of the 

A Writer's Diary 
"prosaic idea," associated with the great novels of Tolstoy and 
carried by some earlier Dostoevsky characters, such as Razumikhin 
and Porfiry Petrovich. What did prosaics mean for the author of 
A Writer's Diary? 
(1) First, it meant a relentless hostility to the intelligentsia's belief 
in a Theory to explain everything. The author insists on the mess­
iness of the world and the complexity of human nature, which can 
never be reduced to a system. Many of the articles in the 1873 
Diary and later issues indict the intelligentsia for its foolish beliefs 
that complexity is illusory and that a relatively simple "formula" 
might explain history and individual lives. As we have seen, Dos­
toevsky typically constructs his articles to make the opposite point. 
Taking an apparently simple phenomenon and paraphrasing the 
"linear" interpretations favored by the liberals and radicals, he 
reveals-in reportage, autobiography, sketch, arid fiction-layer 
upon inexhaustible layer of unsuspected and unforrnalizable 
complexity. 
(2) The Diary as originally designed rejected the idea that sal­
vation or social betterment depends on some grand scheme. In the 
author's real world beyond Theory, improvement comes prosaically, 
by unremarkable efforts of individual self-betterment and by "iso­
lated cases" of generosity. That is why the author's wanderings 
were to be a structural pivot of the work: he remarks on the 
unremarkable. Coming across examples of severe social problems, 
he discovers or imagines "isolated cases" in which one ordinary 
person, guided by no Theory, helps another. At times, he may 
also report chilling incidents in which members of the intelligentsia 
who disdain anything but total solutions withhold simple person­
to-person aid. 90 The work's sequence of small daily incidents directs 
our attention away from political abstractions. "Don't you se," 
the author explains, "that loving the universal man means surely 
to scorn and sometimes even to hate the real man standing next 
to you?" (73-S). 
(3) Progress must be made gradually. Neither history nor psy­
chology allow for short cuts. Individual self-improvement is the 
work of a lifetime. Dostoevsky notes with approval how Levin, in 
Anna Karenina, comes to understand that one cannot achieve in­
tegrity by donning a "uniform" or imitating a model. As people 
get better, their "microscopic efforts" accumulate and their ex­
amples may become infectious. By contrast, members of the in­
telligentsia have defeated their own purposes because "instead of 

Introductory Study 
99 
taking the first nine steps, they immediately took the tenth one" 
(3/76, 1 . 3). They try to go right to the end, but society can get 
better only if people stan "from the beginning," with each indi­
vidual self. 
(4) Any attempt to effect change suddenly, on the basis of a 
formula, will at best delay real improvement and at worst cause 
considerable harm. Such efforts at radical change have been made 
before, and the intelligentsia errs in seeing itself as the first gen­
eration to apply a "scientific" formula to society. According to 
Dostoevsky, people have been seeking such a formula for "the 
whole six thousand years of their history and they cannot find it. 
The ants know the formula for their ant heap; the bee knows the 
formula for its hive . . . .  but humans do not know their formula" 
(8/8o, 3.3). In his articles on Anna Karenina, Dostoevsky (correctly) 
attributes to Tolstoy a belief that evil has no single source and 
therefore allows for no single solution: "[In Anna] It is clear and 
intelligible to the point of obviousness that evil lies deeper in human 
beings than our socialist-physicians suppose; that no social structure 
will eliminate evil" (7-8/77, 2.3). It is equally clear to Dostoevsky 
that many of Russia's social diseases are iatrogenic, exacerbated by 
the "socialist-physicians" themselves. 
Consequently, the more influence the intelligentsia wields, and 
the more Russian thinkers come to accept total solutions "from the 
end," the worse things will become. At the extreme, utopians in 
power would create hell on earth because they would rapidly be­
come impatient with the recalcitrance of human nature. Love of 
Humanity would lead to the elimination of countless individual 
people: 
If there were brothers, then there would be brotherhood. If there are 
no brothers, then you will not achieve brotherhood through any sort 
of "institution." What sense is there in setting up an institution and 
inscribing on it: "Liberti, egaliti, fraterniti"? You will achieve nothing 
at all worthwhile here through an "institution," so that it will be 
necessary-absolutely, inescapably necessary-to add to these three 
"institutional" words a fourth: "ou Ia mort," "fraterniti ou Ia mort "­
and brother will go off to chop the head off brother so as to achieve 
brotherhood by means of this "civic institution." (8/So, 3.3) 
It is in passages like these that Dostoevsky, read a century later, 
does indeed seem prophetic. 
(S) Collectively and individually, ethics can never be reduced to 

100 
A Writer's Diary 
a system of rules. Instead, it is a matter of an educated sensitivity 
to individual cases. By showing the fine distinctions between ap­
parently similar cases, Dostoevsky demonstrates concretely the 
crudeness of generalizations in the face of life's dizzying complexity. 
The Diary's method of treating the same story from diverse per­
spectives and in different genres also serves to exhibit the unex­
pected depths contained in real particular cases but missing from 
rule-bound formulations. 
In the root sense of the word, The Diary preaches casuistry, 
reasoning by cases. Real ethical consciousness never reasons from 
the top down but from the bottom up. It proceeds from the par­
ticularities of each incident and not from the system of norms into 
which the case might be made to fit. "Cutting off heads is easy if 
one follows the letter of the law, but it is always much more difficult 
to settle a matter in accordance with the truth, in a humane and 
paternal fashion" (12/76, 1 . 5), he observes. Even the theory of 
"the corrupting environment" "in some specific instances and in 
some certain categories is dazzling in its truth, but . . .  is absolutely 
mistaken when applied as a whole and in general" (10/76, 1 .  1). 
In England, where the theory is applied on a case-by-case basis, 
it favors ethical decisions, Dostoevsky contends. But among us it 
has the opposite effect because of that most lamentable characteristic 
of Russia's educated people, the tendency to take all theories to 
the extreme and make all judgments categorical. 
(6) Although life exhibits endless complexity, the moral truths 
needed to grasp it are profoundly ordinary. Educated Russians 
constantly but mistakenly "feel that the truth is something far too 
dull and prosaic for us and much too ordinary," but ordinary and 
prosaic is what it is. "The truth can lie on the table right in front 
of people for a hundred years but they won't pick it up; they go 
chasing after fabrications precisely because they consider truth to 
be fantastic and utopian" (73. 1 5). The truths we seek are hidden 
in plain view. Of course, the idea of prosaic truth forms the philo­
sophical core of Anna Karenina, and Dostoevsky singles out for 
special praise Levin's discovery of moral foundations in a peasant's 
simple comment. Tolstoy's point, as Dostoevsky observes, was not 
that the peasant had some special insight but that he reminded 
Levin of what he already knew. Abstruse theories had concealed the 
moral sense that Levin had absorbed in childhood. 
(7) It follows for Dostoevsky that the most important social in­
stitutions are the most prosaic ones, especially the family. Levin 

Introductory Study 
1 0 1  
finds his way because of what he learned as a child, and Dostoevsky 
the prisoner was saved by childhood memories. But what about 
those products of "accidental families" who have not had such a 
childhood? For Dostoevsky, Tolstoy's failure to address this ques­
tion of contemporary children represents the main shoncoming of 
his work. That is one reason the Diary's first monthly issue takes 
children as its central theme and why that theme recurs in sub­
sequent issues. 
Child beggars, child abuse cases, suicides of the young-these 
related themes lead to a diversity of stories, sketches, and articles, 
as well as an occasional sermon. True families, Dostoevsky tells 
us, canot be produced by command, by theory, or by occasional 
attention. They form bit by bit, prosaically, at countless ordinary 
moments when "we continue to grow into one another's souls every 
day, every hour . . . .  A family, after all, is also created, not provided 
ready-made" (2/76, 2. 5). 
The 1876 Diary begins with a description of Dostoevsky's earlier 
exploration of this family idea in his novel A Raw Youth and then 
announces plans for a future novel that will be his Fathers arul 
Children. The monthly Diary is at last suspended so Dostoevsky 
can write that work, The Brothers KaramazCIV, an extension of both 
the earlier novel and the Diary. Dostoevsky also often cites The 
Possessed when introducing sketches about the reasons that bad 
contemporary fathers (who rely on progressive ideas rather than 
daily prosaic attention) produce worse children. It is almost as if 
Dostoevsky's many experiments of the 187os, the three novels and 
the intermittent Diary, constituted one long work about Russia's 
spiritual progress as reflected in its decaying families. 
A Debate with Tolstoy, and an 
Inverse Square Law of Ethics 
This complex of prosaic ideas could not be reconciled with Dos­
toevsky's apocalypticism. According to Dostoevsky's prophetic ar­
ticles, utopia was not only possible but immediately realizable. It 
could be achieved not gradually but suddenly, not by microscopic 
effons but by massive military force. Rather than prosaic truth, 
Dostoevsky offers an obscure key to history that he alone under­
stands. History's messiness could be resolved into a neat story after 
all. Although Dostoevsky's millenarian Theory differed from the 
ideologies of the intelligentsia, it shared the same characteristics 
that Dostoevsky himself had rejected as profoundly dangerous. 

1 02 
A Writer's Diary 
Particularly remarkable are those passages in which Dostoevsky 
abandons his concern for the family. In one essay Dostoevsky, with 
astonishing blindness to anything but his "cause," encourages a 
young woman who, against the understandable wishes of her family, 
wanted to serve with the volunteers in Serbia (6/76, 2. 5). And 
without a trace of irony, Dostoevsky enthusiasticaly repons a "typ­
ical" incident: 
A father-an old soldier-instead of living at his ease, suddenly takes 
up arms and sets off on foot for thousands of miles, asking directions 
along the way, to go fight the Turks and support his brethren, and 
he takes his nine-year-old daughter along with him (this is a fact): 
"There'll be good Christians to be found who'll look after my daughter 
while I'm off wandering." And he goes . . .  And there are thousands 
of cases like his! (10/76, 2.4) 
We could not be fanher from the Diary's articles describing what 
happens to children, especially young girls, who lose their families 
and fall into the hands of strangers. 
The Diary's anicies on the Eastern War contain no finely delin­
eated descriptions of its participants. We get no semifictional mus­
ings about what might actually happen to the soldiers or those they 
leave behind. Evidently, the work's original design of exploring 
individual cases might well yield narratives incompatible with uto­
pian politics. The form elaborated for one purpose could not be 
adapted for another, radicaly different one. 
Perhaps the most telling example of Dostoevsky's changed per­
spective occurs in his critique of the eighth pan of Tolstoy's Anna 
Karenina. Tolstoy's publisher, Katkov, had refused to run the novel's 
last section, in which the author satirized enthusiasm for the Eastern 
War. On prosaic grounds similar to those that Dostoevsky himself 
had defended, the novel's hero, Levin, rejects the ideologically 
based enthusiasm for a cause remote from home. Dostoevsky re­
acted with anger that probably reflects the inner conflicts of his 
own thought and of the Diary. 
In a key passage of the novel, Levin is asked whether he would 
kill a Turk about to tonure a child before his eyes, and he replies 
that he cannot decide such a question in advance. Particulars would 
be too imponant and the consequences of a wrong d&cision, either 
way, would be too terrible to allow for a prior decision based on 
generalities. In any case, the war is not before our eyes but at a 
distance, and that makes a great difference to Levin. Quite mis­
takenly, people tend to feel most confident in making judgments 

Introductory Study 
103 
about distant events precisely because particularities and complex­
ities tend to be obscured in proportion to our distance from them. 
Levin's morality, and the novel's, works by a sort of inverse square 
law, in which responsibility diminishes rapidly with distance. We 
owe our debt to particular people, not to Humanity. 
Dostoevsky replies to Tolstoy with all the perspicacity of someone 
answering a side of himself. The implications of Dostoevsky's ar­
gument extend far beyond the immediate topic at hand, the Eastern 
War. After citing Tolstoy's novel at length and paraphrasing it with 
great sensitivity, Dostoevsky's article elevates the disagreement into 
a timeless dialogue on fundamental and perhaps unresolvable eth­
ical questions. 
There may be merit to Levin's argument that the reliability of 
moral judgments is greatest when particulars are visible. But this 
prosaic argument itself has a moral weakness, according to Dos­
toevsky. For surely there is something wrong with Tolstoy's ap­
parent dismissal of all responsibility for anything we cannot touch 
with our own hands. Apparently echoing the ridiculous man of the 
April 1877 Diary, Dostoevsky asks whether we should feel no pity 
if we knew that on Mars infants' eyes were being pierced. And 
what if it were in the next hemisphere? In short, "if distance really 
does have such an influence on humaneness, then a new question 
arises of itself: At what distance does love of humanity end?" (7-
8/87, 3·4). 
For Levin, the reluctance to judge at a distance is all the greater 
when the judgment would involve violence and killing. It is to sort 
out the issue of violence from that of distance that the proponents 
of the war ask Levin what he would do if the Turks were torturing 
someone right in front of him. Would he use violence then? Citing 
Levin's refusal to answer, Dostoevsky re-creates a parodic version 
of such an eventuality. 
Imagine such a scene: Levin is standing right there, with rifle and 
fixed bayonet, and two paces away a Turk is voluptuously holding a 
needle, ready to pierce the eyes of the child already in his arms. The 
boy's seven-year-old sister screams and rushes madly to tear him away 
from the Turk. And here stands Levin, thinking and hesitating: "I 
don't know what I'll do. I don't feel anything. I'm one of the People 
myself. There isn't any immediate feeling for the oppression of the 
Slavs and there can't be any." 
But seriously, what would he have done after all the things he's told 
us? How could he not save the child? Would he really let the child 

104 
A Writer's Diary 
be tortured? Would he really not snatch him from the hands of the 
villainous Turk? 
"Well, yes, I'd snatch him away, but suppose I had to give the 
Turk a good hard push?" 
"Then push him!" 
"Push him, you say! And if he doesn't want to let the child go and 
draws his saber? Why, suppose I had to kill the Turk?" 
"Well then, kill him!" 
"But how can I kill him? No, I mustn't kill the Turk. No, it's 
better to let him pierce the child's eyes and torture him; I'll go home 
to Kitty." (7-8/77, 3-4l 
In part, Dostoevsky's satire impugns Levin's great reluctance to 
see that violence must sometimes be resisted by violence, or one 
becomes responsible for what one could have prevented. But the 
reach of Dostoevsky's satire extends further, to the very bases of 
prosaic morality. 
In "going home to Kitty," Dostoevsky's Levin resembles the 
ridiculous man's indifferent rejection of the little girl's pleas for 
help: Dostoevsky allows the shadow of that story to be cast over 
Tolstoy's novel. Dostoevsky understands that in Levin's prosaic 
perspective, the distance that affects responsibility is not only phys­
ical but relational. In prosaics, we owe our greatest debt to our 
families, to those who live with us, and only then, in concentric 
circles of greater compass and descending importance, to others­
first to our nearest friends, then perhaps to our employees or fellow 
workers, next to those with whom we are barely acquainted, and 
perhaps finally to someone one just happens to meet. We are not 
responsible for everyone equally, and from a prosaic standpoint it 
would be morally perverse to treat one's immediate family no dif­
ferently from someone one has just met. In this respect, distance 
does indeed "have an influence on humaneness." 
The irony of returning to Kitty is of course magnified by what 
Kitty is doing, namely, taking care of their infant. How can Levin 
let one infant be tortured so he can go and play with another, even 
if it is his own? Elsewhere in the Diary, Dostoevsky has himself 
pointed to the danger of thinking in terms of Humanity; here he 
presents the other side of the question, the danger of beginning, 
and perhaps almost ending, at home.91 
Of course, Dostoevsky's critique, like most parodies, distorts 
Levin's argument. Levin does not utterly renounce the use of force, 
or even of killing, when necessary. (Though skeptical of the Eastern 

Introductory Study 
105 
War, Tolstoy was not yet a pacifist.) What Levin renounces is mak­
ing such a decision in advance and on the basis of a principle. He 
insists on taking account of all the particularities of the moment and 
on trusting his educated ethical sensibility over any abstract rule. 
No rule can simply derive or forecast a future moment, with a rich 
enough sense of its presentness and ethically relevant facts. Dos­
toevsky's example, like the hypothetical situation proposed by Koz­
nyshev to Levin in the novel, is notably weak in particulars, a 
caricature of a real situation. Levin also implicitly rejects the un­
spoken assumption behind Dostoevsky's parody and Koznyshev's 
example. In projecting this torture of a child, they assume that the 
test of a moral outlook is how well it functions in extreme situations, 
whereas for Levin (and Tolstoy) the best test is ordinary life. An 
ethics based on extreme situations is likely to be of no use, or of 
positive harm, in anything but extreme situations, and Levin's 
whole education has been to see the importance of prosaic circum­
stances as the basis for morality. The Turkish example, we might 
say, is set in vortex time, in which everything converges on one ir­
reversible catastrophe, after which nothing of importance is left to 
consider: but most decisions of life take place in a continuum of 
time, in an open time of sideshadowing, where imponderable long­
term effects in multiple possible futures also need to be taken into 
account and answered for. 92 
Dostoevsky's dialogue with Tolstoy, and with himself, reflects 
the terrible conflict that tore his new work apart. That conflict was 
simultaneously moral and aesthetic. Could Dostoevsky's two rad­
ically different perspectives somehow be joined in a work that would 
be both morally convincing and aesthetically coherent? That seems 
to be the problem that Dostoevsky set for himself when he sus­
pended the Diary to write his greatest masterpiece, The Brothers 
Karamazov. 
The Interest of the Diary 
True to its own diversity, A Writer's Diary compels interest for 
various reasons. Everyone has recognized the brilliance of many of 
its parts: it contains Dostoevsky's greatest short fiction, as well as 
brilliant semifiction, sketches, and articles. As a source of problems, 
motifs, themes, and forms, it exercised decisive influence on Kara­
mazov. Beyond that, the Diary was itself a remarkable experiment 
with a new literary form. If one attends to the sections where 
Dostoevsky was able to realize his design, his new genre seems, 

106 
A Writer's Diary 
to this reader at least, quite successful. Even the ideological shift 
that conflicted with its design and obscured jts outlines is itself 
interesting. It tells us a great deal about the inner conflicts that 
shaped Dostoevsky's character, thought, and art. 
Notes 
All references to A Writerj DWry, which are to the present Lantz trans­
lation, are given by month and year, chapter and article. Thus a quote 
ascribed to "6/76, 2.I" is drawn from the June I876 issue, chapter 2, 
article I ("My Paradox"). Articles in the I873 DWry are identified by year 
and article only, so that 73·3 is "Environment." 
Dostoevsky frequently uses ellipses (thre dots); they are an important 
part of his style. I indicate Dostoevsky's ellipses by thre unspaced dots 
( ... ) and my own omissions with spaced dots ( . . .  ). 
My thanks to Nikolai Aristides, Caryl Emerson, Jane Morson, and 
Andrew Wachtel for their help with this study. 
Pan 1 :  Origin of an Anomaly 
I .  For more information on the DWry, see Morson, 17r£ Boundaries of 
Genre: Dostoevsky j "[)Wry of a Writer" and the Traditions of Literary Utopia 
(Austin: University of Texas Press, I98I; Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern 
University Press, I988). A bibliography of criticism on the DWry appears 
on p. I89, n. S· 
The present interpretation of the DWry differs substantially from the 
one advanced in Boundaries. These differences reflect changes in both my 
methodological approaches and my reading of the text itself. See the open­
ing to part 3 of the present essay. 
2. The phrase, of course, belongs to Henry James, Preface to 17r£ Tragic 
Muse, in 17r£ Art of the NODe/: Critical Prefaces by Henry James (I934; 
New York: Scribner's, I962), p. 84. James was not referring to Russian 
novels alone, but American Slavists have often used his characterization 
as a starting point for examining the great Russian novels, which are long 
and, apparently, "loose and baggy." 
3· V. G. Belinsky, Selected Philosophical Works (Moscow: Foreign Lan­
guages, I9S6), pp. 373, 386-87. 
4· The Russian reaction to belatedness was notably quite different from 
the reaction of English poets as described in the classic study by W. Jackson 
Bate, The Burden of the Past and the English Poet (I970; New York: Norton, 
I972). The Russian reaction to belatedness was not a sense that resources 
were exhausted but a feeling that it was necessary to hurry up to produce 
masterpieces. 
S· Lev Tolstoi, "Neskol'ko slov po povodu knigi 'Voina i mir'" (Some 
words about the book War and Peace), from the ninety-volume Jubilee 
edition, vol. I6, p. 7· The article first appeared in Russian Archive in 
I868. 

Introductory Study 
1 07 
6. See pan 4 of the present study. 
7· Viktor Shklovskii, "Roman-poema i roman pokhozhdenie," Pavesti 
o proze: Razmyshleniia i razbory, vol. 2, V kotorom rasskazyvaetsia o russkoi 
proze (Moscow: Khudozhestvennaia literatura, 1966), p. 280. 
8. Viktor Shklovskii, "0 russkom romane i povesti," Pavesti o proze, 
p. 3· 
9· On the Formalist idea of turning a journal into a literary work of its 
own kind, see Morson, Boundaries, pp. 56-58. 
10. In Pushkin's story Charsky asks the improvisatore, "How can it be 
that someone else's idea, which had only just reached your ear, immediately 
became your own propeny, as if you had carried, fostered, and nunured 
it for a long time? Does this mean that you never encounter either difficulty, 
or a dampening of spirit, or the restlessness that precedes inspiration?" 
The improvisatore responds: "No one except the improvisatore himself 
can comprehend this alacrity of impressions, the close tie between one's 
own inspiration and another's will." Alexander Pushkin, Complete Prose 
Fiction, trans. Paul Debreczeny (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University 
Press, 1983), p. 255. Of course, Dostoevsky, unlike Pushkin's improvis­
atore, could select his topics from among several themes and events pre­
sented by Russian society each month. 
r r .  All citations from Dostoevsky's letters, which will be given in the 
text, are drawn from the four-volume edition edited by A. S. Dolinin 
(Moscow and Leningrad: Gosizdat, 1929-58), hencefonh Pis 'ma. This 
citation is from Pis'ma, vol. r, p. 424· 
12. Fyodor Dostoevsky, The Possessed, trans. Constance Garnett (New 
York: Modern Library, 1936), p. 127. 
13. As Bakhtin correctly observed, Dostoevsky tended to avoid using 
what Bakhtin called "no man's thoughts"-"separate thoughts, assenions, 
propositions that can be themselves true or untrue, depending on their 
relationship to the subject and independent of the carrier to whom they 
belong." Mikhail Bakhtin, Problems of Dostoevsky's Poetics, ed. and trans. 
Caryl Emerson (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1984), p. 
93· Funher references are to Problems. 
14. Anna Dostoevsky, Dostoevsky: Reminiscences, trans. and ed. Beatrice 
Stillman (New York: Liveright, 1977), pp. 212-13 (italics mine). 
Part 2: An Encyclopedia of Genres 
1 5. In the recent thiny-volume edition of Dostoevsky's works (1972-
90), and in the earlier thineen-volume edition of Boris Tomashevsky and 
K. Khalabaev (Moscow and Leningrad: Gosudarstvennoe izdatel'stvo, 
1926-30), the announcement appears in the appended notes. It is omitted 
from the twelve-volume edition published by Marks (1894-95) and from 
the earlier English translation. 
16. Bakhtin, Problems, p. 138. With considerable exaggeration, Bakhtin, 
in defending the importance of "Bobok," maintains that menippean satire 
"sets the tone for Dostoevsky's entire work" (p. 138). On the other hand, 

108 
A Writer's Diary 
do believe that menippean satire is one of the key elements shaping 
Dostoevsky's work, and that, if Bakhtin has overestimated the genre's 
importance, his critics have in response underestimated it. 
17. See also the note in the thirty-volume edition of Dostoevsky's notes, 
vol. 21, p. 402. 
1 8. For a superb new interpretation of this story, which links it to 
Dickens and the genre of the Christmas story as well as to "The Dream 
of a Ridiculous Man" (which appears later in the Diary), see Robin Feuer 
Miller, "Dostoevsky's 'Dream of a Ridiculous Man': Unsealing the Generic 
Envelope," forthcoming in Freedom and Responsibility in Russian Literature: 
A Festschrift for Robert Louis Jackson, ed. Elizabeth Cheresh Allen and 
Gary Saul Morson (Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press). Miller's 
article develops Robert Louis Jackson's subtle reading of the story, which 
sets it in the context of the January 1876 Diary, in Jackson's "The Fourth 
Window: 'A Boy at Christ's Christmas Party,"' in The Art of Dostoevsky: 
Deliriums and Nocturnes (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 
1981), pp. 26o-7I. 
19. The Garnen version of this story, translated as "The Heavenly 
Christmas Tree," begins: "I am a novelist, and I suppose I have made 
up this story." Constance Garnen, trans., The Short Stories of Dostoevsky, 
ed. William Phillips (New York: Dial, 1946), p. 537· 
20. Thus I prefer the title "The Meek One" to other versions, such as 
Garnen's "A Gentle Spirit." 
21. See "Two Suicides" (Io/76, 1.3); the "icon" suicide is the second 
of the two. 
22. Robert Louis Jackson concludes that "Bobok" gives us the vision 
of "The Dream" in "reverse perspective." See Jackson, "Some Consid­
erations on 'The Dream of a Ridiculous Man' and 'Bobok' from the 
Aesthetic Point of View," in Art of Dostoevsky, p. 303. 
23. In the chapter "Night" in The Possessed, Stavrogin poses the same 
question (Possessed, 238-39). 
24. On these two readings, see Morson, Boundaries, 177-82. See also 
Miller, "Dostoevsky's 'Dream of a Ridiculous Man."' 
25. From "Otvet 'Russkomu vestniku"' in the thirty-volume edition of 
Dostoevsky's works, vol. 19, p. 1 34· 
26. Sideshadowing is discussed in greater detail in part 4 of the present 
essay. For further commentary on the concept, see Gary Saul Morson's 
articles, "Bakhtin, Genres, and Temporality," New Literary History 22, 
no. 4 (Aurumn 1991): 1071-92; "For the Time Being: Sideshadowing, 
Criticism, and the Russian Counter-Tradition," in After Post-Structuralism, 
ed. Nancy Easterlin and Barbara Riebling (Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern 
University Press, forthcoming); and "Anna Karenina's Omens," in Free­
dam and Responsibility in Russian Literature, ed. Allen and Morson. The 
topic will be discussed at length in a book I am writing, Narrative and 
Freedom: The Shaduws of Time. See also Michael Andre Bernstein's forth­
coming srudy, Foregone Conclusions. 
27. The Gorky quotation as cited by E. I. Zhurbina, Teariia i praktika 

Introductory Study 
1 09 
khudozhesrvenno-publitsisticheskikh zhanrov: Ocherk, Fel'eton (Moscow: 
Mysl', I969), p. 56, from vol. 30 of Gorky's collected works (I956); the 
Korolenko quotation as cited by Zhurbina, p. 70, from V. G. Korolenko, 
Sobranie sochinenii v desiati tomakh, vol. 8 (I955), p. 70. For more infor­
mation on these matters, and their relation to the essay and Montaigne, 
see Morson, Boundaries, pp. I4- I7. 
28. Fyodor Dostoevsky, The Brothers Karamazov, trans. Constance Gar­
nett (New York: Modern Library, I 950), p. 293· References in the text 
are to BK; the translations have occasionally been modified for accuracy 
or style. 
29. The classic essay on how a version of a writer's life can itself become 
a literary fact in some periods belongs to the Russian Formalist Boris 
Tomashevsky. See Boris Tomashevskij, "Literature and Biography," in 
Readings in Russian Poetics: Formalist and Structuralist Views, ed. Ladislav 
Matejka and Krystyna Pomorska (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, I97I), 
pp. 49-51 .  
30. From Crime and Punishment: Fyodor Dostoevsky, Crime and Pun­
ishment, trans. Constance Garnett (New York: Modern Library, I950), p. 
I 84. Further references are to C&P From The Idiot: Fyodor Dostoevsky, 
The Idiot, trans. Constance Garnett (New York: Modern Library, I962), 
pp. 2o-21. On "penumbral textuality," see Gary Saul Morson, Hidden in 
Plain View: Narrative and Creative Potentials in "War and Peace" (Stan­
ford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, I987), pp. 176-88. 
31. Joseph Frank's already authoritative biography of Dostoevsky stress­
es the centrality and sincerity of these convictions learned from the Siberian 
experience. See Frank, Dostoevsky: The Stir of Liberation, I 86o-65 (Prince­
ton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, I986). 
32. Konstantin Mochulsky, Dostoevsky: His Life and Work, trans. Michael 
A. Minihan (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University 
Press, 
1967), 
p. 474· 
33· For the notebooks to the Diary, see The Unpublished Dostoevsky: 
Diaries and Notebooks (I86o-8I), ed. Carl R. Proffer, vol. 2, trans. Arline 
Boyer and Carl Proffer (Ann Arbor, Mich.: Ardis, I975) and vol. 3, trans. 
Arline Boyer and David Lapeza (Ardis, I976). The Russian text is Nieiz­
dannyi Dostoevskii: Zapisnye knizhki i tetradi, I 86o-I88I, ed. V. R. Shcher­
bina et al., Literaturnoe nasledstvo no. 83 (Moscow: Nauka, 197I). 
34· For a sensitive interpretation of Dostoevsky's conversion experience 
in terms set by "The Peasant Marey," see Joseph Frank, Dostoevsky: The 
Ϳars of Ordeal, r85o-59 (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 
1983), pp. I I6-27. 
35· Joseph Frank offers a different sort of double reading of Dostoevsky's 
novel The Insulted and the Humiliated in which rwo novels, which Dos­
toevsky did not succeed in stitching together, compete in the final version. 
"One may of course attribute such dissonance to anistic oversight (and 
Dostoevsky's own admission that he wrote the book too hastily seems to 
confirm such a judgment), but it can also be diagnosed as pan of an 
internal evolution that had not yet completed its course." See Frank, Stir 

I 10 
A Writer's Diary 
of Libera1ion, p. u8. Frank's reading of this novel is the best I know, 
and I think that his conclusions about it are correct. In other cases, however, 
it seems to me that Dostoevsky learned to make a virtue of the forms 
produced by "haste" and found creative methods that deliberately exploited 
effects that previously and otherwise would be artistic lapses (as they are 
in The Insulted and 1he Humiliared). 
36. Frank makes the case for the explanation in terms of censorship 
(Srir of Libera1ion, p. 219). 
37· John 12:24, the epigraph to The Brorhers Karamazov. Frank correctly 
explains why it is wrong to regard Dostoevsky as believing that all suffering 
is positive (Srir of Liberalion, pp. 129-30). 
38. On this narrative's controlling analogy between individual conversion 
and the creation of an anistic image, see Robert Louis Jackson, "The 
Triple Vision: 'The Peasant Marey,"' in Art of Doslo!Wsky, pp. 2o-32. 
39· In order to sever the story from the rest of the Diary, Garnett omits 
its entire first paragraph. In her version the story begins, "It was the 
second day in Easter week" (Short S1ories of Doslo!Wsky, p. 529). In this 
way, the story's triple vision-the diarist, the prisoner, the child-becomes, 
without the diarist, a double vision. The sentence about Aksakov is kept, 
but its allusion to the previous anicle is of course lost. 
40. For the obscure book of prophecy, see 5-6/77, 1 .  1 ,  and Lant2 's notes 
to the article. If Dostoevsky's tone here is noncommittal, he later, with 
no apparent irony, quotes Lichtenberger's book as evidence in suppon of 
his views (7-8/77, 2.2). 
41. On evidence in Karamazov: I refer not only to the misleading in­
formation about the murder, and to the varied interpretations at the trial, 
but also to the inability of Zosirna's "mysterious visitor" to get people to 
accept his genuine evidence of guilt. 
42. In apocalyptic thought the end is often understood as the reali2ation 
of paradoxes: it is the time when there shall be no more time, when death 
shall die, when hell freezes over, etc. 
43· The Republic of Plaro, trans. Francis Macdonald Cornford (New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1945), p. 43· 
44· The idea of three stages of history, with the third the age of utopia 
(or the reign of the Holy Spirit), is a trope of apocalyptic thought. The 
prophet announces the third age. See Norman Cohn, The Pursuil of 1he 
Millennium: R!WOlulionary Millenarians and Myslical Anarchisls of 1he Middle 
Ages, rev. and expanded ed. (New York: Oxford University Press, 1970). 
45. See ibid.; also Norman Cohn, Warran1 for Genocide: The My1h of 1he 
Jewish World-Conspiracy and lhe "Pro10cols of 1he Elders of Zion" (New 
York: Harper, 1969). 
46. It seems not to have occurred to Dostoevsky that his own perspective 
as a Russian reader might affect his perception, or that an English reader 
might regard Pushkin's Italians as Russians in Italian dress. 
47. Fyodor Dostoevsky, "Noles from Underground" and "The Grand ln­
quisilor," the Garnett trans., rev. Ralph Matlaw (New York: Dutton, 196o), 
p. 1 1  5· Further references are to NFU. 

Introductory Study 
I I I  
48. See Bakhtin's remarkable analysis of the rhetoric of this essay (Prob­
lems, pp. 94-95). He concludes that here, as in Dostoevsky's journalism 
generally, "everywhere his thought makes its way through a labyrinth of 
voices, semi-voices, other people's words, and other people's gestures. He 
never proves his positions on the basis of other abstract positions, he does 
not link thoughts together according to some referential principle, but 
juxtaposes orientations and amid them constructs his own orientation . . . .  
His path leads not from idea to idea, but from orientation to orientation. 
To think, for him, means to question and to listen, to try out orientations." 
49. For a recent defense of ethical reasoning by cases, and a call for a 
revival of casuistry in this sense, see Albert R. Jonsen and Stephen Toul­
min, The Abuse of Casuistry: A History of Moral Reasoning (Berkeley and 
Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1988). On prosaics and Tolstoy, 
see Morson, Hiden in Plain View; Morson, "Prosaics: An Approach to 
the Humanities," American Scholar, Autumn I988, pp. 5I 5-28; Morson, 
"Prosaics and Anna Karenina, " Tolstoy Studies Journal I (I988): I-12; and 
Morson and Caryl Emerson, Mikhail Bakhtin: Crearion of a Prosaics (Stan­
ford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, I99CJ). 
so. Thus Dostoevsky defended arguing for the release of Kornilova and 
answered charges of inconsistency by asserting that temporary mental 
aberration and the "corrupting environmental" are sometimes relevant. The 
"environmental" theory, he says, is "a notion that in some specific instances 
and in some certain categories is da2Zling in its truth, but which is absolutely 
mistaken when applied as a whole and in general" ( 10/86, 1 .  I). 
5 1 .  Pis'ma 3:20I-2; the full passage is quoted in pan 3 of this 
introduction. 
52. For example, in response to one critic of the Diary, Dostoevsky 
wrote: "As far as my feuilleton is concerned ... By the way, I don't know 
why the Moscow columnist, my fellow writer, thinks that I am ashamed 
to be called a feuilletonist . . . .  If my Moscow teacher absolutely must call 
my Diary a feuilleton, then he's free to do so; I'm quite content with that" 
(73- 14). 
53· As cited in Zhurbina, Teoriia i praktika, p. 252. 
54· Unpublished Dostoevsky, 2:87. 
55· I of course use the term in the Russian Formalist sense of a device 
that announces itself as one. 
56. This passage may serve as a good example of a favorite rhetorical 
device of Dostoevsky's, which Bakhtin would describe in terms of "double- . 
voicing" and which Joseph Frank has recently called "inverted irony." As 
Frank explains, inverted irony "turns back on the writer as a means of 
turning against an imagined judge and critic in the person of the reader." 
It is used by both Dostoevsky (or his journalistic persona) and his char­
acters (e.g., the underground man). See Frank, Scir of Liberation, p. 236. 
57· In Boundaries of Genre, I stressed the deep formal and ideological 
affinity of the Diary and Herzen's From rhe Other Shore. For a remarkable 
new reading of the relation between these two works, see Aileen Kelly, 

I 1 2  
A Writer's Diary 
"Irony and Utopia in Herzen and Dostoevsky: From the Other Shore and 
Diary of a Writer, " Russian Review so, no. 4 (October 1991): 397-416. 
58. This point was not new to Dostoevsky. Long before he wrote the 
Diary, he viewed an as both having a social purpose and yet demanding 
absolute freedom, even to realize that purpose. That is why one cannot 
dictate themes to art, as the radical critics tried to do. In Dostoevsky's 
view, dictation in the name of utility destroys utility itself. Moreover, the 
utilitarians misconstrue usefulness by unduly limiting it to immediate 
needs; this misconstrual derives from their misunderstanding of time, 
which they view as closed. The utility of art is not to be limited to 
immediate needs, or by the demands of an ideology, because-and this is 
the main mistake of the radicals-the future is radically uncenain, and no 
ideology will ever fathom the future (or rather, futures). Even if we limit 
ourselves to the problem of utility, it must be said that we do not know 
what future needs will be. But beauty-Apollo Belvedere and Pushkin, 
both rejected by the radicals-will always be useful, in Dostoevsky's view. 
Thus, although the aesthetic (beauty) and the useful were regarded as 
opposite demands, they are the same when utility is properly understood. 
Dostoevsky presented this argument as a middle ground between the two 
camps, but it is plain that it is a sophisticated version of the anti-utilitarian 
position. I paraphrase Dostoevsky's position as expressed in his classic 
article, "Mr. --bov and the Question of An." For an English version, 
see Dostoevsky's Occasional Writings, ed. and trans. David Magarshack 
(New York: Random House, 1963), pp. 86-137. 
59· The most profound interpretation of ressemimem in Dostoevsky is 
Michael Andre Bernstein, "Lacerations: The Novels of Fyodor Dostoev­
sky," in Biller Carnival: "Ressemimem" and the Abject Hero (Princeton, 
N.j. :  Princeton University Press, 1992), pp. 87-1 20. Like Dostoevsky, 
Bernstein is himself concerned with the role of ressemiment in the inscape 
of the intellectual's mentality and with the spread of a dangerous complex 
of ideas to society at large. See esp. his book's introduction, "Murder and 
the Utopian Moment," pp. 3-10, and its concluding chap., "Those Chil­
dren That Come at You with Knives: Charles Manson and the Modern 
Saturnalia," pp. 1 57-84. Bernstein's book ends with a passage from The 
Idiot. 
6o. Cf. Ivan Karamazov's comment to Alyosha in the chapter "The 
Brothers Make Friends": "And I won't go through al the axioms laid 
down by Russian boys on that subject [atheism], all derived from European 
hypotheses; for what's a hypothesis there, is an axiom with the Russian 
boy, and not only with the boys but with their teachers too, for our Russian 
professors are often just the same boys themselves" (BK, 278-79). The 
Diary's passage on "the Russian aspect of their teachings" serves as the 
epigraph to Joseph Frank, Through the Russian Prism: Essays on Literature 
and Culture (Princeton, N .}. : Princeton University Press, 1990). See esp. 
chap. 6, "The Search for a Positive Hero," pp. 75-82. 

Introductory Study 
1 1 3 
Part 3: The New Design 
61. I have come to agree with a version of the thesis advanced by Aileen 
Kelly that the Diary is riven by inconsistencies between two visions. Kelly 
calls those two visions "irony" and "utopia." Her "irony" corresponds 
roughly to my "prosaics" (see part 4). "Herzen had argued with great 
cogency that one cannot be both an ironist and a utopian. Diary of a Writer 
can be seen as an evasion of that choice" (Kelly, "Irony and Utopia," p. 
407). It seems to me that something close to what Kelly calls the ironic 
vision gave birth to the original design of the Diary; the utopian vision, 
when it overcame Dostoevsky, led to the design's abandonment. He "evad­
ed" the choice by making both in turn and never reconciling them. 
6z. All the more remarkable because the letter was written at the end 
of 1877, when the Diary no longer seemed to possess formal unity. The 
passage seems to express Dostoevsky's original desire to make the Diary 
a new kind of literary form even while he attempted to persuade himself 
that somehow, despite all the changes the work had undergone, the formal 
unity was undamaged, if not perfected. For a reading of another key 
passage in this letter-Dostoevsky's hope that the Diary itself might become 
one genre in a still larger and more heterogeneous work(!)-see Andrew 
Wachtel's An Obsession with History (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 
forthcoming). Wachtel argues that Karamazoo itself might be regarded as 
a work embedded in (or should we say embedded out of?) the Diary. 
63. I refer, of course, to lppolit Terentiev in The Idiot. Garnett renders 
the line: "Can anything that has no shape appear as a shape?" :  Constance 
Garnett, trans., The Idiot by Fyodor Dostoevsky (New York: Modern 
Library, 1935), p. 389. Robert Louis Jackson has seen in this line the 
key to Dostoevsky's poetics. See his classic study, Dostoevsky's Quest for 
Form: A Study of His Philosophy of Art (New Haven, Conn. :  Yale University 
Press, 1966), esp. the chap. "Two Kinds of Beauty," pp. 40-70. 
64. In the monthly Diary, issues range from two to four chapters. Most 
have two. There are three double issues (issues for two months), two of 
which have four chapters (July-August 1876 and May-June 1 877) and one 
of which has three chapters (July-August 1 877). January 1876, March 
1877, October 1877, November 1 877, and August 1880 have three chapters 
each. 
65. Bakhtin uses the term clamps in this sense. See, e.g., Problems, p. 
72. 
66. I am not going to describe this Christmas party, he begins, because 
"I read about it myself with much pleasure in other feuilletons" (1/76, 
1 . 3). 
67. Or consider this marvelous sample of this kind of rhetoric, which 
occurs in the same article: speaking about clergymen-teachers who have 
engaged in work stoppages for more pay, Dostoevsky comments, "Our 
newspapers take the side of the whiners, as I do myself' (1/76, z/3). 
68. See the note in Dostoevsky's notebooks (Unpublished Dostoevsky 

1 14 
A Writer's Diary 
2: 1 14-1 5). The concepts obraz (image), obrazit', bezobrazie (ugliness, 
shapelessness) are central to Robert Louis Jackson's reading of Dostoev­
sky's aesthetics; see Dostoevsky's Quest for Fomi. Caryl Emerson uses the 
difference between Jackson, who focuses on the image, and Ba.khtin, who 
focuses on the word, to present two views of Dostoevsky's work and to 
create a dialogue between two critical visions. See Emerson, "Readings 
of Dostoevsky that Bakhtin Couldn't Do (Toward a Typology of Loopholes 
in His Thesis)," in Freedom and Responsibility in Russian Literature, ed. 
Allen and Morson. 
69. Believing in the devil without believing in God: this puzling state­
ment also appears in The Possessed, where it is glossed as the position of 
worldly people who really have no convictions at all, as distinguished from 
passionate atheists, who disbelieve passionately in both God and the devil. 
"Is it possible to believe in the devil without believing in God?" asks 
Stavrogin. The monk Tikhon replies, "That's quite possible. It's done 
right and left." Both Tikhon and Stavrogin then equate the worldly people 
who believe not in God but in the devil with the "lukewarm" mentioned 
in the Apocalypse: "I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot; 
I would thou wert cold or hot. So then because thou art lukewarm, and 
neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee out of my mouth" (Revelation 3 : 1 5-
16). See the chapter "At Tikhon's" in The Possessed, pp. 698-99. 
70. Gamen 's title "Lacerations" preserves this poetic structure for the 
book, but it is lost in the recent translation by Pevear and Volokhonsky, 
who render the title as "Strains." See Richard Pevear and Larissa Volok­
honsky, trans., The Brothers Karamaz(!IJ; A Nuvel in Four Parts with Ep­
ilogue by Fyodor Dostoevsky (San Francisco: North Point, 1990). See 
Caryl Emerson's review of this version: Emerson, "The Brothers, Com­
plete," Hudson Review 44, no. 2 (Sununer 1991): 309-16. 
71. See Morson, Boundaries, pp. 3o-33. Of course, in a looser sense, 
the term algorithm is used this way. 
Part 4: How and Why Dostoevsky Abandoned His Design 
72. The important concept of "form-shaping ideology" (or "idea" or 
"force") appears interminently in Bakhtin. See, e.g., Problems, pp. 103, 
1 10. For a gloss on this concept, see Morson and Emerson, Mikhail 
Bakhtin, chaps. 6 and 7. 
73. See Mikhail Bakhtin, "Epic and Novel: Toward a Methodology for 
the Study of the Novel," in The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays by 
M. M. Bakhtin, trans. Caryl Emerson and Michael Holquist (Austin: 
University of Texas Press, 1981), p. 28. For a gloss on the concept, see 
Morson and Emerson, Mikhail Bakhtin, p. 276. 
74· In "Irony and Utopia" Kelly observes: "The Diary, like The Brothers 
Karamazov, is ambivalent because it operates between two sets of criteria 
for making sense of reality and human conflict that are never reconciled. 
Dostoevsky the utopian believes that history derives its meaning from the 
transcendent purpose it is designed to accomplish, while Dostoevsky the 

Introductory Study 
1 1 5 
ironist ses human freedom threatened by attempts to impose a single 
coherent pattern on the chaotic multiplicity of contingent reality" (p. 410). 
Allowing for a difference in terminology, I think that Kelly is quite right 
about the Diary. From an aesthetic point of view, the relevant fact is that 
one of the two irreconcilable ideas proved incompatible with the design 
developed to express the other. I believe that in writing Karamaz11l, Dos­
toevsky set himself the task of finding both ideological and aesthetic rec­
onciliation. That is, he sought to combine the idea that inspired the Diary's 
design with the contradictory one that proved irreconcilable with it. Aes­
thetically, he surely succeeded in Karamaz(fl). Ideologically, he produced 
an intriguing, pleasing, and unstable amalgam, which I prefer to call "the 
mythic prosaic." 
75- On Dostoevsky's debate with Goncharov and Tolstoy, and on the 
problem of describing the present moment, see Roben Louis Jackson, 
"The Problem of Type," in Dostoevsky's Quest for Fomr, pp. 92-1 23. 
Agreing with Dostoevsky that realist artists represent types (characteristic 
of cenain aspects of society), Goncharov observes in a letter to Dostoevsky: 
"You say yourself that 'such a type is being born'; forgive me if I permit 
myself to note a contradiction here: if it is being born, then it is stil not 
a type . . . .  A work of [realist] an . . .  can only appear, in my opinion, after 
life has set; it does not harmoni2e with life that is coming into existence" 
(cited ibid., p. 109). Goncharov also once observed that "an, a serious 
and strict one, canot depict chaos, disintegration" (cited ibid., p. I I  1). 
76. Fyodor Dostoevsky, A Raw Youth, trans. Constance Garnett (New 
York: Dell, 1961), p. 6o7. 
77- The association of class with time is made by Arkady's tutor in A 
Raw Youth, who refers with disparagement to those who write what are 
in effect historical novels set in the present. They do so by simply choosing 
some representative of a class that has lost its former importance, some 
aristocratic "grandson of those heroes" of historical novels set in the past. 
The allusion is evidently to Konstantin Levin (in Tolstoy's Anna Karenina) 
as a son of "grandson" of some hero in War and Peace. 
It is wonh noting that in ruling out the aristocracy from the cutting 
edge of presentness, Dostoevsky is drastically limiting the field of pos­
sibilities for history. For how does he know that the aristocracy could not 
stil have an effect? Here Dostoevsky may be charged with some son of 
historical hubris, which may be seen as a symptom of the son of thinking 
that would lead him to imagine that he had found the key to history. 
78. This falsification would seem to be a version of what George Kline 
has called "the fallacy of the actual future." See George L. Kline, "'Pres­
ent,' 'Past,' and 'Future' as Categoreal Terms, and the 'Fallacy of the 
Actual Future,'" Review of Metaphysics 40 (December 1986): 2 1 5-35. 
79- Leo Tolstoy, War and Peace, trans. Ann Dunnigan (New York: 
Signet, 1968), p. 144. Funher references are to W&P 
So. On memory in Tolstoy, see Natasha Sankovitch, "Creating and Re­
covering Experience: Repetition in Tolstoy" (Ph.D. diss., Stanford Uni­
versity, 1992). 

1 16 
A Writer's Diary 
81. In Problems Bakhtin observes that in the polyphonic novel the plot 
is "conceived as only one of many possible plots and is consequently in 
the final analysis merely accidental for a giveri hero" (p. 84). In "Epic 
and Novel" he observes that "reality as we have it in the novel is only 
one of many possible realities" (p. 34). For Bakhtin, this view of time 
also justified ethical responsibility: in the present, we have choice, and so 
are accountable. And once an event has happened, once it has become 
past, it is irevocable, and so our actions have real consequences. (If events 
were revocable after they had happened-if the past were changeable­
then responsibility would disappear along with the sentiment of regret.) 
82. I owe this phrase to Caryl Emerson (conversation). On the tem­
porality of chroniclers and on rumors, see Emerson, Boris Godunuv: Trans­
positions of a Russian Theme (Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana University Press, 
1986), chapters 2 and 3· 
83. I have retranslated this and other lines from KaramazcnJ, inasmuch 
as Garnett (like other translators) has a tendency to soften Dostoevsky's 
seemingly obsessive hypotheticals. In Garnett, this sentence occurs on p. 
6 (end of bk. 1, chap. 1). 
84. War and Peace and Crime and Punishment were being serialized at 
the same time in the same journal. Porfiry refers to a recently published 
pan of Tolstoy's novel. A network of ongoing interrelations developed 
between the two works as they were being serialized. 
85. At the crucial moment, Dtnitri does not kil his father. A Freudian 
might be inclined to describe these events as a successful resistance of the 
repressed wish that has become manifest. There would be some merit in 
such a description, although one Inight also point out that Dtnitri 's wish 
is not at al repressed but fully conscious and frequently verbaliled. In 
general, Freudians have not faced the dificulty that Dostoevsky presents 
by making what should be dificult to speak (from a psychoanalytic per­
spective) the subject of endless commentary by everyone from wise monks 
to gifted buffoons. 
A more substantial objection might also be raised from a Dostoevskian 
standpoint. The psychoanalytic account assumes incorrectly that it is the 
evil wish that is somehow most "original" and most genuine, whereas 
Dostoevsky describes Dtnitri 's sense of nobility as no less original and 
genuine. Whichever choice Dmitri made, he would be denying a deep and 
powerful wish. Psychology here is fundamentally Manichaean: as Dtnitri 
says, "God and the devil are fighting there and the battlefield is the hean 
of man" (BK, 127). This is another way of saying that time is open and 
we have choice. The psychoanalytic assumption that only the vicious is 
likely to be honest and truthful would seem to Dostoevsky an appalling 
reverse sentimentality. It also gives new meaning to Tikhon's statement that 
it is entirely possible to deny God but to believe readily in the devil. (My 
thanks to Caryl Emerson for her help in formulating this point.) 
86. On time and the apocalypse in The Idiot, se Roben Hollander, 
"The Apocalyptic Framework of Dostoevsky's The Idiot, " Mosaic 7 (1974): 
123-39; and David M. Bethea, " The  Idiot: Historicism Arrives at the 

Introductory Study 
1 1 7 
Station," in The Shape of Apocalypse in Modem Russian Fiction (Princeton, 
N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1989), pp. 62-104. 
87. Bethea describes the Idiot as a "duel of temporalities" between 
historical chronicity and apocalypse (" The Idiot, " p. 93). He describes a 
decisive victory for apocalyptic temporality in this novel. It is worth noting 
that in War and Peace sideshadowing dominates the book's temporality 
because (unlike Dostoevsky) Tolstoy does not counterbalance it with vonex 
time. Bur in Anna Karenina, one mark of Anna's misperception of reality 
and her increasing illness is that she believes in omens, fate, and the vonex 
time of cenain romances. 
81!. The epigraph is Luke 8:32-37. 
89. For a recent reading of the Gogo! of Selected Passages as a Gogolian 
character, see Alexander Zholkovsky, "Rereading Gogol's Miswritten Book: 
Notes on Selected Passages from Corespondence with Friends" in Essays on 
Gogol: Logos and the Russian Word, ed. Susane Fusso and Priscilla Meyer 
(Evanston, Il. :  Northwestern University Press, 1992), pp. 1 72-84. 
90· In "An Isolated Case" (3/77, 3.2), Dostoevsky tells a story about 
a doctor who, "in a hurry to get home to have his coffee," refused to help 
a drowned man just pulled our of the water. And yet this doctor "was, 
perhaps, an educated man with new ideas, a progressive, bur one who 
'rationaly' demanded new, common laws and rights for all and paid no 
heed to isolated cases. He may have supposed, rather, that isolated cases 
damage the cause by postponing general solutions to the question and so 
far as isolated cases are concerned, 'the worse, the better."' 
91. I call this debate timeless because it seems to apply to our own 
epoch as well. Looking back on the carnage of the twentieth century, one 
recognizes the truth of Dostoevsky's (and Tolstoy's) idea that nothing causes 
greater suffering than schemes to save Humanity, or a favored portion of 
it, once and for all. From the Thousand-Year Reich to the Bolsheviks and 
the Khmer Rouge, we have witnessed the unprecedented horror of utopias 
in practice. And yet we have also become aware of the moral culpability 
of nations that could intervene to prevent terrible sufferings elsewhere bur 
neglect to do so. Bur again, the record of such interventions, when they 
have been attempted, also calls attention to the dangers, both practical 
and moral, of judging at a distance. There seem to be no easy answers. 
h is hard to imagine a time when these questions would not be relevant. 
92. On the ethicaly misleading character of extreme situations, see Bern­
stein, "Those Children That Come at You with Knives" and Bernstein, 
Foregone Conclusions. 


A Writer's Diary 
I 8 7 3 


1 
Introduction 
On the twentieth of December I learned that everything had been 
settled and that I was the editor of The Citizen. This extraordinary 
event-extraordinary for me at least (I don't wish to offend any­
one)-came about in a rather simple fashion, however. On the 
twentieth of December I had just read in the Moscow News the 
account of the wedding of the Chinese emperor; it left a strong 
impression on me. This magnificent and, apparently, extremely 
complex event also came about in a remarkably simple fashion: 
every last detail of the affair had been provided for and decreed a 
thousand years ago in nearly two hundred volumes of ceremonial. 
Comparing the enormity of the events in China with my own 
appoinunent as editor, I felt a sudden sense of ingratitude to our 
Russian practices, despite the ease with which my appointment 
had been confirmed. And I thought that we, that is, Prince Mesh­
chersky and I, would have found it incomparably more advanta­
geous to publish The Citizen in China. Everything is so clear over 
there . . . .  On the appointed day we both would have presented 
ourselves at China's Main Administration for Press Affairs. After 
kowtowing and licking the floor, we would rise, raise our index 
fingers, and respectfully bow our heads. The Plenipotentiary-in­
Chief for Press Affairs would, of course, pretend to take no more 
notice of us than he would of an errant fly. But the Third Assistant 
to the Third Secretary would rise, holding the warrant of my 
appoinunent as editor, and would pronounce in an impressive but 
gende voice the admonition prescribed by the ceremonial. It would 
be so clear and so comprehensible that we both would be immensely 
pleased to hear it. Were I in China and were I stupid and honest 
enough, when taking on the editorship and acknowledging my own 
121 

1 22 
A Writer's Diary 
limited abilities, to experience fear and pangs of conscience, some­
one would at once prove to me that I was dc;ubly stupid to entertain 
such feelings and that from that very moment I would have no 
need of intelligence at all, assuming I had had any in the first 
place; on the contrary, it would be far better if I had none at all. 
And without a doubt, this would be a most pleasant thing to hear. 
Concluding with the fine words: "Go thou, Editor; henceforth thou 
mayest eat rice and drink tea with thy conscience newly set at rest," 
the Third Assistant to the Third Secretary would hand me a beau­
tiful warrant printed in gold letters on red silk. Prince Meshchersky 
would pass over a substantial bribe, and the two of us would go 
home and immediately put out such a magnificent edition of The 
Citizen as we could never publish here. In China we would put 
out an excellent publication. 
I suspect, however, that in China Prince Meshchersky would 
certainly have tricked me by inviting me to be editor; he would 
have done it mainly so that I could stand in for him at the Main 
Administration of Press Affairs whenever he was summoned to 
have his heels beaten with bamboo sticks. But I would outsmart 
him: I would at once stop publication of Bismarck and would myself 
commence writing articles so excellent that I would be summoned 
to the bamboo sticks only after every other issue. I would learn to 
write, however. 
I would be an excellent writer in China; here, that sort of thing 
is much more difficult. There, everything has been anticipated and 
planned for a thousand years ahead, while here everything is topsy­
turvy for a thousand years. There I would have no choice but to 
write clearly, so that I'm not sure who would read me. Here, if 
you want people to read you it's better to write so that no one 
understands. Only in the Moscow News do they write column-and­
a-half editorials and-to my astonishment-they are written clearly, 
even if they are the products of a well-known pen. In The Voice 
such editorials go on for eight, ten, twelve, and even thirteen col­
umns. And so you see how many columns you must use up in 
order to win respect. 
In Russia, talking to other people is a science; at first glance, 
at least, it seems just the same as in China. Here, as there, there 
are a few very simplified and purely scientific techniques. Formerly, 
for instance, the words "I don't understand a thing" meant only 
that the person who uttered them was ignorant; now they bring 
great honor. One need only say, proudly and with a frank air, "I 

Introduction 
1 23 
don't understand religion; I don't understand anything about Rus­
sia; I don't understand anything about an," and immediately you 
place yourself above the crowd. And it's especially good if you 
really don't understand anything. 
But this simplified technique proves nothing. In essence, each 
one of us in Russia, without thinking much about it, suspects that 
everyone else is ignorant and never asks, conversely, "What if I'm 
the one who's ignorant, in fact?" It's a situation that ought to please 
us all, and yet no one is pleased and everyone gets angry. Indeed, 
sober thought in our time is all but impossible: it costs too much. 
It is true that people buy ready-made ideas. They are sold every­
where, and even given away; but the ones that come free of charge 
prove to be even more expensive, and people are already begining 
to realize that. The result is benefit to none and the same old 
disorder. 
We are, if you like, the same as China, but without her sense 
of order. We are barely beginning the process that is already coming 
to an end in China. No doubt we will reach that same end, but 
when? In order to get a thousand volumes of ceremonial so as at 
last to win the right not to think deeply about anything, we must 
experience at least another thousand years of sober thought. And 
there you have it-no one wants to hasten this term because no 
one wants to think. 
Something else that is true: if no one wants to think, then, it 
would seem, so much the easier for the Russian writer. Indeed, it 
really is easier; and woe to the writer and publisher who in our 
time begins to think soberly. It's even worse for one who decides 
to study and to understand things on his own, and still worse for 
one who makes a sincere declaration of his intention. And if he 
declares that he has already managed to understand a tiny smidgen 
and wants to express his ideas, then everyone quickly drops him . 
The only thing he can do is to seek out some suitable individual, 
or even hire one, and simply talk to him and to him alone. Perhaps 
he could publish a magazine for that one individual. It's a loathsome 
situation, because it amounts to talking to yourself and publishing 
a magazine only for your own amusement. I strongly suspect that 
for a long time yet The Citizen will have to talk to itself and appear 
only for its own amusement. Remember that medical science con­
siders talking to oneself a sign of predisposition to insanity. The 
Citizen cenainly must speak to citizens, and that is precisely its 
whole dilemma! 

1 24 
A Writer's Diary 
And so this is the sort of publication with which I have become 
involved. My situation is as uncertain as it can be. But I shall talk 
to myself and for my own amusement, in ·the form of this diary, 
whatever may come of it. What shall I talk about? About everything 
that strikes me and sets me to thinking. If I should find a reader 
and, God forbid, an opponent, I realize that one must be able to 
carry on a conversation and know whom to address and how to 
address him. I shall try to master this skill because among us, that 
is to say, in literature, it is the most difficult one of all. Besides, 
there are different kinds of opponents: one cannot strike up a 
conversation with every one. I'll tell you a story I heard the other 
day. They say it is an ancient fable, perhaps even of Indian origin, 
and that's a very comforting thought. 
Once upon a time the pig got into a quarrel with the lion and 
challenged him to a duel. When the pig came home he thought 
the maner over and lost his nerve. The whole herd assembled to 
consider the maner and announced their decision as follows: "Now 
then, brother pig, there is a wallow not far from here; go and have 
a good roll in it and then proceed to the duel. You'll see what 
happens." 
The pig did just that. The lion arrived, took a sniff, wrinkled 
up his nose, and walked away. And for a long time thereafter the 
pig boasted that the lion had turned tail and fled the field of banle. 
That's the fable. Of course we don't have any lions here-we 
don't have the climate for them and they're too grand a thing for 
us in any case. But in place of the lion put an honest person, such 
as each of us is obliged to be, and the moral comes out the same. 
Apropos of that, I'll tell you another linle story. 
Once when speaking with the late Herzen I paid him many 
compliments on his book From the Other Shore. To my great plea­
sure, Mikhail Petrovich Pogodin heaped praise on this same book 
in his excellent and most curious article about his meeting abroad 
with Herzen. The book is written in the form of a dialogue between 
Herzen and his opponent. 
"What I especially like," I remarked in passing, "is that your 
opponent is also very clever. You must agree that in many instances 
he backs you right to the wall." 
"Why that's the essence of the whole piece," laughed Herzen. 
"I'll tell you a story. Once when I was in St. Petersburg, Belinsky 
dragged me off to his place and sat me down to listen to him read 
an article, 'A Conversation Between Mr. A and Mr. B,' that he 

Introduction 
1 25 
had wrinen in some heat. (You can find it in his Collected Works.) 
In this article, Mr. A., who is Belinsky himself, of course, is made 
out to be very clever, while his opponent, Mr. B., is rather shallow. 
When Belinsky had finished reading, he asked me with feverish 
anticipation: 
'"Well, what do you think?' 
" 'Oh, it's fine, very fine, and it's obvious that you are very 
clever. But whatever made you waste your time talking to a fool 
like that?' 
"Belinsky threw himself on the sofa, buried his face in a pillow, 
and shouted, laughing for all he was worth: 
"'Oh, you've got me there, you really have!"' 

2 
Old People 
That story about Belinsky put me in mind of my debut in literature, 
God knows how many years ago. It was a sad and fateful time for 
me. I recall Belinsky in particular, as he was when I knew him 
then and as he then knew me. I often recall these old people now 
because, of course, I'm encountering the new people. Belinsky was 
the most intense person I have ever met. Herzen was something 
else altogether: he was a product of our aristocracy, gentillwmme 
russe et citoyen du monde above all, a type that appeared only in 
Russia and which could appear only in Russia. Herzen did not 
emigrate and he did not lay the foundation for other Russian 
emigres; no, he was simply born an emigre. They all, those people 
like him, were just born emigres, even though the majority of them 
never left Russia. In one hundred and fifty years of the life of the 
Russian gentry that preceded him, with only a few exceptions, the 
last roots roned and the last links with the Russian soil and the 
Russian truth were shaken loose. History itself seemed to predestine 
Herzen as its most vivid illustration of how the huge majority of 
our educated classes split themselves off from the People. In that 
sense he is a historical type. When they broke with the People, 
they naturally lost God as well. The restless ones among them 
became atheists; the listless and quiescent ones became indifferent. 
They bore only contempt for the Russian People, all the while 
imagining and believing that they loved the People and wished the 
best for them. They loved the People negatively, imagining in their 
stead some sort of ideal, a Russian People as they ought to be 
according to their conceptions. This ideal people, through an in­
voluntary process in the minds of certain leading representatives 
of the majority, took the form of the Paris mob of 1793. This was 
the most alluring ideal of a people at that time. Herzen, of course, 
126 

Old People 
1 27 
had to become a socialist and to become one exactly in the manner 
of a young Russian nobleman, that is, without any need or aim 
but simply out of the "logical progression of ideas" and the emp­
tiness he felt in his heart when in Russia. He renounced the very 
foundations of the old society; he denied the family, and was, it 
seems, a good husband and father. He denied private property but, 
pending the new order, contrived to put his own affairs in good 
order and was pleased to enjoy financial independence while abroad. 
He worked to foment revolutions and incited others to them, and 
at the same time he loved comfort and family peace. He was an 
artist, a thinker, a brilliant writer, a remarkably erudite man, a 
wit, a marvelous conversationalist (he spoke even better than he 
wrote), and had a superb capacity for self-reflection. Self-reflec­
tion-the ability to make of his own deepest feelings an object 
which he could set before him, pay it tribute and, in the next breath 
perhaps, ridicule it-was a thing he had developed to the highest 
degree. Certainly, he was an unusual man; but whatever he was­
whether he wrote his memoirs or published a journal with Proudhon 
or went out to the barricades of Paris (which he described so 
amusingly in his memoirs); whether he suffered or rejoiced or 
doubted; whether, to please the Poles, he sent to Russia, in 1863, 
his appeal to Russian revolutionaries, even though he did not trust 
the Poles and knew that they had deceived him, knew that his 
appeal would be the doom of hundreds of these unhappy young 
people; whether he, with incredible naivete, admitted this himself 
in one of his last articles, not even suspecting in what light his 
admission cast him-always, everywhere, throughout his life, he 
was above all a gentilhomme russe et citoyen du rrwnde, simply a 
product of the old system of serfdom which he hated and from 
which he emerged, not just by his birth but by his very rupture 
with his native land and its ideals. Belinsky, on the contrary, was 
no gentilhomme at all-oh, no. (God knows what his origins were. 
I think his father was an army doctor.) 
For the most part, Belinsky was not a self-reflective person; he 
was always, throughout his life, a wholehearted enthusiast. He was 
delighted with my first work, Poor People (subsequently, a year 
later, we went our separate ways for various reasons which, however, 
were altogether trivial); but at the time of our first acquaintance 
he attached himself to me with all his heart, and at once, with the 
most straightforward rashness, he threw himself into converting 
me to his faith. I am by no means exaggerating his ardent attraction 

1 28 
A Writer's Diary 
to me, at least in the first months of our acquaintance. I found 
him to be a passionate socialist, and in speaking to me he began 
directly with atheism. That was very sigri.ificant, I thought, and 
revealed his amazing intuition and his unusual capacity to become 
totally inspired by an idea. The lnternationale, in one of its proc­
lamations about two years ago, began directly with the significant 
declaration: "We are above all an atheistic society," i.e. , they began 
with the very essence of the matter. Belinsky began in the same 
way. While cherishing reason, science, and realism above all, he 
also understood better than anyone that reason, science, and realism 
alone could only create an antheap and not the social "harmony" 
in which man could create a life for himself. He knew that moral 
principles are the basis of everything. He believed in the new moral 
principles of socialism (which to date, however, have shown nothing 
but vile distortions of nature and common sense) to the point of 
folly and with no reflection at all; here there was only enthusiasm. 
But as a socialist he first had to dethrone Christianity. He knew 
that the revolution must necessarily begin with atheism. He had 
to dethrone the religion that provided the moral foundation of the 
society he was rejecting. He radically rejected the family, private 
property, and the moral responsibility of the individual. (I would 
note that he, like Herzen, was also a good husband and father). 
Certainly he understood that in denying individual moral respon­
sibility he was also denying personal freedom; but he believed with 
all his being (much more blindly than Herzen, of course, who, it 
seems, had his doubts near the end) that socialism not only would 
not destroy personal freedom but would, to the contrary, restore it 
to unheard-of grandeur, but on a new and adamantine foundation. 
There remained, however, the radiant personality of Christ him­
self, which was most difficult to contend with. Belinsky, as a so­
cialist, was absolutely bound to destroy Christ's teachings; to label 
them false and uninformed philanthropy, proscribed by contem­
porary science and by economic principles. Still there remained 
the most radiant image of the God-man, its moral unattainability, 
its marvelous and miraculous beauty. But Belinsky, in his contin­
uous, unflagging enthusiasm, did not pause even before this in­
surmountable obstacle, as did Renan when he proclaimed in his 
Vie de Jesus, a book filled with unbelief, that Christ is still the 
ideal of human beauty, an unattainable type, never to be repeated 
in the future. 
"But do you know," Belinsky screeched one evening (sometimes, 

Old People 
1 29 
if he was very excited, he would screech) as he turned to me, "Do 
you know that man's sins cannot be counted against him and that 
he cannot be laden down with obligations and with turning the 
other cheek when society is set up in such a mean fashion that a 
man cannot help but do wrong; economic factors alone lead him 
to do wrong, and it is absurd and cruel to demand from a man 
something which the very laws of nature make it impossible for 
him to carry out, even if he wanted to . . . .  " 
We were not alone that evening; one of Belinsky's friends, a man 
whom he highly respected and whose advice he often followed, was 
present, as was a certain young novice writer who later won fame 
in literature. 
"It's touching just to look at him," said Belinsky, suddenly break­
ing off his furious exclamations and turning to his friend as he 
pointed to me. "I no sooner mention the name of Christ than his 
whole face changes, just as if he were going to cry . . . .  But believe 
me, you naive fellow," he said, attacking me again, "Believe me, 
that your Christ, were he born in our time, would be the most 
undistinguished and ordinary of men; he would be utterly eclipsed 
by today's science and by those forces that now advance humanity." 
"Oh, I think not," interrupted Belinsky's friend. (I recall that 
we were sitting, while Belinsky was pacing back and forth around 
the rom). "I think not. If Christ appeared now he would join the 
socialist movement and take his place at its head . . . .  " 
"He would indeed," Belinsky agreed suddenly with surprising 
haste. "He certainly would join the socialists and follow them." 
These forces that advanced humanity, which Christ was destined 
to join, were then all Frenchmen: George Sand, the now totally 
forgotten Cabet, Pierre Leroux, and Proudhon, who was then only 
beginning his work. As far as I can recall, Belinsky held these 
four in the greatest respect. Fourier's reputation had slipped a good 
deal by then. Belinsky would discuss these four for whole evenings 
at a time. There was one Germaa to whom Belinsky then paid 
great tribute, and that was Feuerbach. (Belinsky, who all his life 
could never master a single foreign language, pronounced it "Pier­
bach"). Strauss was spoken of very reverently. 
Given such a warm faith in his ideas, he was, of course, the 
happiest of men. People were wrong in writing later that had 
Belinsky lived longer he would have joined the Slavophiles. He 
would never have ended up a Slavophile. Belinsky might have ended 
by emigrating had he lived longer and succeeded in getting out of 

1 30 
A Writer's Diary 
the country. And now, as a small and rapturous old man whose 
former wan faith never permitted him the slightest doubt, he 
would be making the rounds of various congresses in Germany and 
Switzerland; or he might have taken a post as adjutant to some 
German Mme. Hogg, and be rwming errands on behalf of the 
women's movement. 
Still, this most blessed among men, who possessed a remarkably 
tranquil conscience, had his occasional sad moments. But his sad­
ness was of a special kind: it came not from doubts or disillusion­
ments-oh, no-but from the questions "Why not today, why not 
tomorrow?" In all of Russia there was no one in a bigger hury. 
Once I met him near the Znamensky church at three o'clock in 
the afternoon. He told me that he had gone out for a stroll and 
was on his way home. 
"I often drop by here to take a look at how the construction is 
progressing" (the station for the Nikolaevsky railway was still being 
built). "It makes my heart rest a bit easier to stand and watch the 
work: at long last we'll have one railway at least. You'll never 
believe how that comforts my heart at times." 
This was said well and with passion; Belinsky never put on airs. 
We set off together. I recall that on our way he said, "And when 
they've laid me in my grave" (he knew that he had consumption), 
"only then will they realize whom they've lost." 
In his last year of life I no longer visited him. He had taken a 
dislike to me; but I had passionately accepted all his teaching. A 
year later, in Tobolsk, while we were in the cells of the transit 
prison awaiting our funher fate, the wives of the Decembrists 
managed to persuade the prison superintendent to arrange a secret 
meeting with them in his apartment. We saw these great martyr­
esses who had voluntarily followed their husbands to Siberia. They 
gave up everything: their social position, wealth, connections, rel­
atives, and sacrificed it all for the supreme moral duty, the freest 
duty that can ever exist. Guilty of nothing, they endured for twenty­
five long years everything that their convicted husbands endured. 
Our meeting went on for an hour. They blessed us on our new 
journey; they made the sign of the cross over us and gave each of 
us a copy of the Gospels, the only book permitted in the prison. 
This book lay under my pillow during the four years of my penal 
servitude. I read it and sometimes read it to others. I used it to 
teach one convict to read. The people around me were precisely 
those who, according to Belinsky's beliefs, could not help but commit 

Old People 
1 3 1 
crimes; accordingly, they were justified but were merely less for­
tunate than others. I knew that the whole Russian People also 
called us "unfortunates," and I heard this term used many times 
and coming from many lips. But this was something different, 
certainly not what Belinsky was talking about and what we hear 
now in some verdicts brought down by our juries, for example. In 
this word "unfortunate" and in this verdict of our People there 
was the reflection of a different idea. Four years of penal servitude 
was a long school; I had the time to become convinced . . . .  And 
that is just what I would like to talk about now. 

3 
Environment 
I think that all jurors the whole world over, and our jurors in 
particular, must share a feeling of power (they have other feelings 
as well, of course); more precisely, they have a feeling of autocratic 
power. This can be an ugly feeling, at least when it dominates their 
other feelings. Even though it may not be obvious, even though it 
may be suppressed by a mass of other, nobler emotions, this sense 
of autocratic power must be a strong presence in the heart of every 
juror, even when he is most acutely aware of his civic duty. I suppose 
that this is somehow a product of the laws of nature themselves. 
And so, I recall how terribly curious I was, in one respect at least, 
when our new (just) courts were instituted. In my flights of fancy 
I saw trials where almost all the jurors might be peasants who only 
yesterday were serfs. The prosecutor and the defense lawyers would 
address them, trying to curry favor and divine their mood, while 
our good peasants would sit and keep their mouths shut: "So that's 
how things are these days. If I feel like lettin' the fella off, I'll do 
it; and if not, it's Siberia for him." 
And yet the surprising thing now is that they do not convict the 
accused but acquit them consistently. Of course, this is also an 
exercise, almost even an abuse of power, but in one direction, toward 
an extreme, a sentimental one, perhaps-one can't tell. But it is a 
general, almost preconceived tendency, just as if everyone had con­
spired. There can be no doubt how widespread this "tendency" 
is. And the problem is that the mania for acquinal regardless of 
the circumstances has developed not only among peasants, yester­
day's insulted and humiliated, but has seized all Russian jurors, 
even those from the uppermost classes such as noblemen and uni­
versity professors. The universality of this tendency in itself pres­
ents a most curious topic for reflection and leads one to diverse 
and sometimes even strange surmises. 
132 

Environment 
1 33 
Not long ago one of our most influential newspapers briefly set 
forth, in a very modest and well-intentioned little article, the fol­
lowing hypothesis: perhaps our jurors, as people who suddenly, 
without rhyme or reason, sense the magnitude of the power that 
has been conferred upon them (simply out of the blue, as it were), 
and who for centuries have been oppressed and downtrodden­
perhaps they are inclined to take any opportunity to spite authorities 
such as the prosecutor, just for the fun of it or, so to say, for the 
sake of contrast with the past. Not a bad hypothesis and also not 
without a certain playful spirit of its own; but, of course, it can't 
explain everything. 
"We just feel sorry to wreck the life of another person; after all, 
he's a human being too. Russians are compassionate people"-such 
is the conclusion reached by others, as I've sometimes heard it 
expressed. 
However, I have always thought that in England, for instance, 
the people are also compassionate; and even if they do not have 
the same softheartedness as we Russians, then at least they have 
a sense of humanity; they have an awareness and a keen sense of 
Christian duty to their neighbor, a sense which, perhaps, taken to 
a high degree, to a firm and independent conviction, may be even 
stronger than ours, when you take into account the level of education 
over there and their long tradition of independent thought. Over 
there, such power didn't just tumble down on them out of the blue, 
after all. Indeed, they themselves invented the very system of trial 
by jury; they borrowed it from no one, but affirmed it through 
centuries; they took it from life and didn't merely receive it as a 
gift. 
Yet over there the juror understands from the very moment he 
takes his place in the courtroom that he is not only a sensitive 
individual with a tender heart but is first of all a citizen. He even 
thinks (correctly or not) that fulfilling his civic duty stands even 
higher than any private victory of the heart. Not very long ago 
there was a clamor throughout the kingdom when a jury acquitted 
one notorious thief. The hubbub all over the country proved that 
if sentences just like ours are possible over there, then all the same 
they happen rarely, as exceptions, and they quickly rouse public 
indignation. An English juror understands above all that in his 
hands rests the banner of all England; that he has already ceased 
to be a private individual and is obliged to represent the opinion 
of his country. The capacity to be a citizen is just that capacity to 

1 34 
A Writer's Diary 
elevate oneself to the level of the opinion of the entire country. Oh, 
yes, there are "compassionate" verdicts there, and the influence of 
the "corrupting environment" (our favorite doctrine now, it seems) 
is taken into consideration. But this is done only up to a cenain 
limit, as far as is tolerated by the common sense of the country 
and the level of its informed and Christian morality (and that level, 
it seems, is quite high). Nonetheless, very often the English juror 
grudgingly pronounces the guilty verdict, understanding first of all 
that his duty consists primarily in using that verdict to bear witness 
to all his fellow citizens that in old England (for which any one of 
them is prepared to shed his blood) vice is stil caled vice and 
vilainy is stil called villainy, and that the moral foundations of 
the country endure-firm, unchanged, standing as they stood 
before. 
"Suppose we do assume," I hear a voice saying, "that your firm 
foundations (Christian ones, that is) endure and that in truth one 
must be a citizen above al, must hold up the baner, etc., etc., 
as you said. I won't challenge that for the time being. But where 
do you think we'll find such a citizen in Russia? Just consider our 
situation only a few years ago! Civic rights (and what rights!) have 
tumbled down on our citizen as if from a mountain. They've 
crushed him, and they're stil only a burden to him, a real burden!" 
"Of course, there's truth in what you say," I answer the voice, 
a bit despondent, "but still, the Russian People . . . .  " 
"The Russian People? Please!" says another voice. "We've just 
heard that the boon of citizenship has tumbled down from the 
mountain and crushed the People. Perhaps they not only feel that 
they've received so much power as a gift, but even sense that it 
was wasted on them because they got it for nothing and aren't yet 
worthy of it. Please note that this certainly doesn't mean that they 
realy aren't worthy of the gift, and that it was unnecessary or 
premature to give it; quite the contrary: the People themselves, in 
their humble conscience, acknowledge that they are unworthy, and 
the People's humble, yet lofty, awareness of their own unworthiness 
is precisely the guarantee that they are worthy. And meanwhile the 
People, in their humility, are troubled. Who has peered into the 
innermost secret places of their heans? Is there anyone among us 
who can claim truly to know the Russian People? No, it's not 
simply a matter here of compassion and softheanedness, as you, 
sir, said so scoffingly. It's that this power itself is frightful! We 
have been frightened by this dreadful power over human fate, over 

Environment 
1 35 
the fates of our brethren, and until we mature into our citizenship, 
we will show mercy. We show mercy out of fear. We sit as jurors 
and think, perhaps: 'Are we any better than the accused? We have 
money and are free from want, but were we to be in his position 
we might do even worse than he did-so we show mercy.' So maybe 
it's a good thing, this heartfelt mercy. Maybe it's a pledge of some 
sublime form of Christianity of the future which the world has not 
yet known! "  
"That's a partly Slavophile voice," I think to myself. It's truly 
a comforting thought, but the conjecture about the People's humility 
before the power they have received gratis and that has been be­
stowed upon them, still "unworthy" of it, is, of course, somewhat 
neater than the suggestion that they want to "tease the prosecutor 
a bit," although even the latter still appeals to me because of its 
realism (accepting it, of course, more as an individual case, which 
indeed is what its author intended). But still . . .  this is what troubles 
me most of all: how is it that our People suddenly began to be so 
afraid of a little suffering? "It's a painful thing," they say, "to 
convict a man." And what of it? So take your pain away with you. 
The truth stands higher than your pain. 
In fact, if we consider that we ourselves are sometimes even worse 
than the criminal, we thereby also acknowledge that we are half 
to blame for his crime. If he has transgressed the law which the 
nation prescribed for him, then we ourselves are to blame that he 
now stands before us. If we were better, then he, too, would be 
better and would not now be standing here before us . . . .  
"And so now we ought to acquit him?" 
No, quite the contrary: now is precisely the time we must tell 
the truth and call evil evil; in return, we must ourselves take on 
half the burden of the sentence. We will enter the courtroom with 
the thought that we, too, are guilty. This pain of the heart, which 
everyone so fears now and which we will take with us when we 
leave the court, will be punishment for us. If this pain is genuine 
and severe, then it will purge us and make us better. And whɡn 
we have made ourselves better, we will also improve the environ­
ment and make it better. And this is the only way it can be made 
better. But to flee from our own pity and acquit everyone so as not 
to sufer ourselves-why, that's too easy. Doing that, we slowly and 
surely come to the conclusion that there are no crimes at all, and 
"the environment is to blame" for everything. We inevitably reach 
the point where we consider crime even a duty, a noble protest 

A Writer's Diary 
against the environment. "Since society is organized in such a vile 
fashion, one can't get along in it without protest and without 
crimes." "Since society is organized in such a vile fashion, one 
can only break out of it with a knife in hand." So runs the doctrine 
of the environment, as opposed to Christianity which, fuly rec­
ognizing the pressure of the environment and having proclaimed 
mercy for the sinner, still places a moral duty on the individual to 
struggle with the environment and marks the line where the en­
vironment ends and duty begins. 
In making the individual responsible, Christianity thereby ac­
knowledges his freedom. In making the individual dependent on 
every flaw in the social structure, however, the doctrine of the 
environment reduces him to an absolute nonentity, exempts him 
totally from every personal moral duty and from all independence, 
reduces him to the lowest form of slavery imaginable. If that's so, 
then if a man wants some tobacco and has no money, he can kill 
another to get some tobacco. And why not? An educated man, who 
sufers more keenly than an uneducated one from unsatisfied needs, 
requires money to satisfy them. So why shouldn't he kill an un­
educated man if he has no other way of getting money? Haven't 
you listened to the voices of the defense lawyers: "Of course," they 
say, "the law has been violated; of course he committed a crime 
in killing this uneducated man. But, gentlemen of the jury, take 
into consideration that. . . .  " And so on. Why such views have 
almost been expressed already, and not only "almost." . . .  
"But you, however," says someone's sarcastic voice, "you seem 
to be charging the People with subscribing to the latest theory of 
the environment; but how on earth did they get that theory? Some­
times these jurors sitting there are all peasants, and every one of 
them considers it a mortal sin to eat meat during the fasts. You 
should have just accused them squarely of harboring social 
tendencies." 
"Of course, you're right-what do they care about 'environment,' 
the peasants as a whole, that is?" I think to myself. "But still, 
these ideas float about in the air; there is something pervasive about 
an idea . . . .  
" 
"Listen to that, now!" laughs the sarcastic voice. 
"But what if our People are particularly inclined toward this 
theory of the environment, by their very nature, or by their Slavic 
inclinations, if you like? What if they are the best raw material in 
Europe for those who preach such a doctrine?" 

Environment 
1 37 
The sarcastic voice guffaws even louder, but it's a bit forced. 
No, this is still only a trick someone is pulling on the People, 
not a "philosophy of the environment." There's a mistake here, a 
fraud, and a very seductive fraud. 
One can explain this fraud, using an example at least, as follows: 
Let's grant that the People do call criminals "unfonunates" and 
give them pennies and bread. What do they mean by doing that, 
and what have they meant over the course of perhaps some cen­
turies? Is it Christian truth or the truth of the "environment?" 
Here is precisely where we find the stumbling block and the place 
where the lever is concealed which the propagator of "the envi­
ronment" could seize upon to effect. 
Some ideas exist that are unexpressed and unconscious but that 
simply are strongly felt; many such ideas are fused, as it were, with 
the human heart. They are present in the People generally, and in 
humanity taken as a whole. Only while these ideas lie unconscious 
in peasant life and are simply felt strongly and truly can the People 
live a vigorous "living life." The whole energy of the life of the 
People consists in the striving to bring these hidden ideas to light. 
The more obstinately the People cling to them, the less capable 
they are of betraying their instincts, the less inclined they are to 
yield to diverse and erroneous explanations of these ideas-the 
stronger, more steadfast, and happier they are . Among such ideas 
concealed within the Russian People-the ideas of the Russian 
People-is the notion of calling a crime a misfonune and the crim­
inal an unfonunate. 
This notion is purely Russian. It has not been observed among 
any European people. In the West it's proclaimed only by some 
philosophers and thinkers. But our People proclaimed it long before 
their philosophers and thinkers. It does not follow, however, that 
the People would never be led astray at least temporarily or su­
perficially by some thinker's false interpretation of this idea. The 
ultimate interpretation and the last word will remain, undoubtedly, 
always the People's, but in the short term this might not be the case. 
To put it briefly, when they use the word "unfonunate," the 
People are saying to the "unfonunate" more or less as follows: 
"You have sinned and are suffering, but we, too, are sinners. Had 
we been in your place we might have done even worse. Were we 
bener than we are, perhaps you might not be in prison. With the 
retribution for your crime you have also taken on the burden for 

A Writer's Diary 
all our lawlessness. Pray for us, and we pray for you. But for now, 
unfortunate ones, accept these alms of ours; we give them that you 
might know we remember you and have not 
·
broken our ties with 
you as a brother." 
You must agree that there is nothing easier than to apply the 
doctrine of "environment" to such a view: "Society is vile, and 
therefore we too are vile; but we are rich, we are secure, and it is 
only by chance that we escaped encountering the things you did. 
And had we encountered them, we would have acted as you did. 
Who is to blame? The environment is to blame. And so there is 
only a faulty social structure, but there is no crime whatsoever." 
And the trick I spoke of earlier is the sophistry used to draw 
such conclusions. 
No, the People do not deny there is crime, and they know that 
the criminal is guilty. The People know that they also share the 
guilt in every crime. But by accusing themselves, they prove that 
they do not believe in "environment"; they believe, on the contrary, 
that the environment depends completely on them, on their un­
ceasing repentance and quest for self-perfection. Energy, work, and 
struggle-these are the means through which the environment is 
improved. Only by work and struggle do we attain independence 
and a sense of our own dignity. "Let us become better, and the 
environment will be better." This is what the Russian People sense 
so strongly but do not express in their concealed idea of the criminal 
as an unfortunate. 
Now imagine if the criminal himself, hearing from the People 
that he is an "unfortunate," should consider himself only an un­
fortunate and not a criminal. In that case the People will renounce 
such a false interpretation and call it a betrayal of the People's 
truth and faith. 
I could offer some examples of this, but let us set them aside 
for the moment and say the following. 
The criminal and the person planing to commit a crime are 
two diferent people, but they belong to the same category. What 
if the criminal, consciously preparing to commit a crime, says to 
himself: "There is no crime!" Will the People still call him an 
"unfortunate"? 
Perhaps they would; in fact they cenainly would. The People 
are compassionate, and there is no one more unfortunate than one 
who has even ceased to consider himself a criminal: he is an animal, 

Environment 
1 39 
a beast. And what of it if he does not even understand that he is 
an animal and has crippled his own conscience? He is only doubly 
unforrunate. Doubly unforrunate, but also doubly a criminal. The 
People wil feel compassion for him but will not renounce their 
own truth. Never have the People, in calling a criminal an "un­
fortunate," ceased to regard him as a criminal! And there could 
be no greater misfortune for us than if the People agreed with the 
criminal and replied to him: "No, you are not guilty, for there is 
no 'crime"'! 
Such is our faith-our conunon faith, I should like to say; it is 
the faith of al who have hopes and expectations. I should like to 
add two more things. 
I was in prison and saw criminals, hardened criminals. I repeat: 
it was a hard school. Not one of them ceased to regard himself as 
a criminal. In appearance they were a terrible and a cruel lot. Only 
the stupid ones or newcomers would "put on a show," however, 
and the others made fun of them. For the most part they were a 
gloomy, pensive lot. No one discussed his own crimes. I never 
heard a protest of any kind. Even speaking aloud of one's crimes 
was not done. From time to time we would hear a defiant or 
bragging voice, and al the prisoners, as one man, would cut the 
upstart shon. Talking about that was simply not acceptable. Yet 
I believe that perhaps not one of them escaped the long inner 
sufering that cleansed and strengthened him. I saw them lonely 
and pensive; I saw them in church praying before confession; I 
listened to their single, unexpected words and exclamations; I re­
member their faces. Oh, believe me, in his hean not one of them 
considered himself justified! 
I would not like my words to be taken as harsh. Still, I will risk 
speaking my mind and say plainly: with strict punishment, prison, 
and hard labor you would have saved perhaps half of them. You 
would have eased their burden, 
not increased it. Purification 
through sufering is easier-easier, I say, than the lot you assign to 
many of them by whoiesale acquittals in court. You only plant 
cynicism in their hearts; you leave them with a seductive question 
and with contempt for you yourselves. You don't believe it? They 
have contempt for you and your courts and for the justice system 
of the whole country! Into their heans you pour disbelief in the 
People's truth, in God's truth; you leave them confused . . . .  The 
criminal walks out of the court thinking: "So that's how it is now; 

A Writer's Diary 
they've gooe soft. They've goten clever, it sems. Maybe they're 
afraid. So I can do the same thing again. It's clear enough: I was 
in such a hard pinch, I couldn't help stea.fuig." 
And do you really think that when you let them al off as innocent 
or with a recommendation for mercy you are giving them the chance 
to reform? He'll reform, al right! Why should he worry? "It looks 
like I didn't do anything wrong at al"-this is what he thinks in 
the [l11ll analysis. You yourselves put that notion in his head. The 
main thing is that faith in the law and in the People's truth is 
being shaken. 
Not long ago I spent several years living abroad. When I left 
Rusia the new courts were only in their infancy. How eagerly I 
would read in our newspapers there everything concerning the 
Rusian courts. With real sorrow I also observed Rusians living 
abroad and their children, who did not know their native language 
or who were forgeting it. It was clear to me that half of them, by 
the very nature of things, would eventualy become expatriates. I 
always found it painful to think about that: so much vitality, so 
many of the best, perhaps, of our people, while we in Rusia are 
so in ned of good people! But sometimes as I left the reading 
rom, by God, gentlemen, I became reconciled to the temporary 
emigration and emigres in spite of myself. My heart ached. I would 
read in the newspaper of a wife who murdered her husband and 
who was acquitted. The crime is obvious and proven; she herself 
confeses. "Not guilty." A young man breaks open a strongbox 
and steals the money. "I was in love," he says, "very much in 
love, and I neded money to buy things for my mistres." "Not 
guilty." It would not be so terrible if these cases could be justified 
by compassion or pity; but truly I could not understand the reasons 
for the acquittal and I was bewildered. I came away with a troubled 
feling, almost as if I had ben personally insulted. In these bitter 
moments I would sometimes imagine Rusia as a kind of quagmire 
or swamp on which someone had contrived to build a palace. The 
surface of the soil looks firm and smoth, but in reality it is like 
the surface of some sort of jellied gren-pea aspic, and once you 
step on it you slip down to the very abyss. I reproached myself 
for my faintheartedness; I was encouraged by the thought that, 
being far away, I might be mistaken and that I myself was the 
kind of temporary emigre I spoke of; that I could not se things 
at first hand nor hear clearly . . . .  
And now I have been home again for a long while. 

Environment 
"But come now-do they really feel pity?" That's the question! 
Don't laugh because I put so much stress on it. At least pity provides 
some son of explanation; at least it leads you out of the darkness, 
and without it we comprehend nothing and see only gloomy black­
ness inhabited by some madman. 
A peasant beats his wife, inflicts injuries on her for many years, 
abuses her worse than his dog. In despair to the point of suicide 
and scarcely in her right mind, she goes to the village coun. They 
send her away with an indifferent mumble: "Learn to live together." 
Can this be pity? These are the dull words of a drunkard who has 
just come to after a long spree, a man who is scarcely aware that 
you are standing in front of him, who stupidly and listlessly waves 
you away so you won't bother him; a man whose tongue doesn't 
work properly, who has nothing in his head but alcohol fumes and 
folly. 
The woman's story, by the way, is well known and happened 
only recently. We read about it in all the newspapers and, perhaps, 
we still remember it. Plainly and simply, the wife who suffered 
from her husband's beatings hanged herself; the husband was tried 
and found deserving of mercy. But for a long time thereafter I 
fancied I could see all the circumstances of the case; I see them 
even now. 
I kept imagining his figure: he was tall, the repons said, very 
thick-set, powerful, fair-haired. I would add another touch: thin­
ning hair. His body is white and bloated; his movements slow and 
solemn; his gaze is steady. He speaks little and rarely and drops 
his words like precious pearls, cherishing them above al else. 
Witnesses testified that he had a cruel nature: he would catch a 
chicken and hang it by its feet, head down, just for his own pleasure. 
This amused him-a most characteristic trait! For a number of 
years he had beaten his wife with anything that was at hand-ropes 
or sticks. He would take up a floorboard, thrust her feet into the 
gap, press the board down, and beat and beat her. I think he 
himself did not know why he was beating her; he just did it, 
probably from the same motives for which he hung the chicken. 
He sometimes also starved her, giving her no bread for three days. 
He would place the bread on a shelf, sununon her, and say: "Don't 
you dare touch that bread. That's my bread." And that's another 
remarkably characteristic trait! She and her ten-year-old child 
would go off begging to the neighbors: if they were given bread 
they would eat; if not, they went hungry. When he asked her to 

A Writer's Diary 
work she did everything with never a hesitation or a murmur, 
intimidated, until finally she became a virtual madwoman. I can 
imagine what she looked like: she must ha\re been a very small 
woman, thin as a rail. It sometimes happens that very large, heavy­
set men with white, bloated bodies marry very small, skinny 
women (they are even inclined to choose such, I've noticed), and 
it is so strange to watch them standing or walking together. It 
seems to me that if she had become pregnant by him in her final 
days it would have been an even more characteristic and essential 
finishing touch; otherwise the picture is somehow incomplete. Have 
you seen how a peasant beats his wife? I have. He begins with a 
rope or a strap. Peasant life is without aesthetic pleasures such as 
music, theaters, and magazines; it is natural that this void be filled 
with something. Once he has bound his wife or thrust her feet into 
an opening in the floorboards, our peasant would begin, probably 
methodically, indifferently, even sleepily; his blows are measured; 
he doesn't listen to her cries and her pleading; or rather, he does 
listen, and listens with delight-otherwise what satisfaction would 
there be in beating her? Do you know, gentlemen, people are born 
in various circumstances: can you not conceive that this woman, 
in other circumstances, might have been some Juliet or Beatrice 
from Shakespeare, or Gretchen from Faust? I'm not saying that 
she was-it would be absurd to claim that-but yet there could be 
the embryo of something very noble in her soul, something no 
worse, perhaps, than what could be found in a woman of noble 
binh: a loving, even lofty, bean; a character filled with a most 
original beauty. The very fact that she hesitated so long in taking 
her own life shows something so quiet, meek, patient, and affec­
tionate about her. And so this same Beatrice or Gretchen is beaten 
and whipped like a dog! The blows rain down faster and faster, 
harder and harder-countless blows. He begins to grow heated and 
finds it to his taste. At last he grows wild, and his wildness pleases 
him. The animal cries of his victim intoxicate him like liquor: "I'll 
wash your feet and drink the water," cries Beatrice in an inhuman 
voice. But finally she grows quiet; she stops shrieking and only 
groans wildly, her breath catching constantly; and now the blows 
come ever faster and ever more furiously . . . .  Suddenly he throws 
down the strap; like a madman he seizes a stick or a branch, 
anything he can find, and shatters it with three final, terrible blows 
across her back-enough! He steps away, sits down at the table, 
heaves a sigh, and sets to drinking his kvass. A small girl, their 

Environment 
143 
daughter (and they did have a daughter!) trembles on the stove in 
the corner, trying to hide: she has heard her mother crying. He 
walks out of the hut. Toward dawn the mother would revive and 
get up, groaning and crying with every movement, and set off to 
milk the cow, fetch water, go to work. 
And as he leaves he tells her in his slow, methodical, and serious 
voice: "Don't you dare eat that bread. That's my bread." 
Toward the end he also liked hanging her by her feet as well, 
the same way he had hung the chicken. Probably he would hang 
her, step aside, and sit down to have his porridge. When he had 
finished his meal he would suddenly seize the strap again and set 
to work on the hanging woman . . . .  The little girl, all atremble and 
huddled on the stove, would steal a wild glance at her mother 
hanging by her heels and try to hide again. 
The mother hanged herself on a May morning, a bright spring 
day, probably. She had been seen the night before, beaten and 
completely crazed. Before her death she had also made a trip to 
the village court, and there it was that they mumbled to her, "Learn 
to live together." 
When the rope tightened around the mother's neck and she was 
making her last strangled cries, the little girl called out from the 
corner: "Mama, why are you choking?" Then she cautiously 
approached her, called out to the hanging woman, gazed wildly at 
her. In the course of the morning she came out of her corner to 
look at the mother again, until the father finally returned. 
And now we see him before the court-solemn, pufy-faced, 
closely following the proceedings. He denies everything. "We never 
spoke a sharp word to each other," he says, dropping a few of his 
words like precious pearls. The jury leaves, and after a "brief 
deliberation" they bring in the verdict: "Guilty, but with recom­
mendation for clemency. " 
Note that the girl testified against her father. She told everything 
and, they say, wrung tears from the spectators. Had it not been 
for the "clemency" ofthe jury he would have been exiled to Siberia. 
But with "clemency" he need spend only eight months in prison 
and then come home and ask that his daughter, who testified against 
him on behalf of her mother, be returned to him. Once again he 
will have someone to hang by the heels. 
"A recommendation for clemency! "  And this verdict was given 
in full cognizance of the facts. They knew what awaited the child. 
Clemency to whom, and for what? You feel as if you are in some 

144 
A Writer's Diary 
sort of whirlwind that's caught you up and twists and turns you 
around. 
Wait a moment, I'll tell you one more story. 
Once, before the new courts were established (not long before, 
however), I read of this particular little incident in our newspapers: 
a mother was holding in her arms her baby of a year or fourteen 
months. Children of that age are teething; they are ailing and cry 
and suffer a good deal. It seems the mother lost patience with the 
baby; perhaps she was very busy, and here she had to carry this 
child and listen to its heart-rending cries. She got angry. But can 
such a small child be beaten for something like this? It's a pity to 
strike it, and what can it understand anyway? It's so helpless and 
can't do a thing for itself. And even if you do beat it, it won't stop 
crying. Its little tears will just keep pouring out and it will put its 
arms around you; or else it will start to kiss you and just go on 
crying. So she didn't beat the child. A samovar ful of boiling 
water stood in the room. She put the child's little hand right under 
the tap and opened it. She held the child's hand under the boiling 
water for a good ten seconds. 
That's a fact; I read it. But now imagine if this happened today 
and the woman was brought to trial. The jury goes out and, "after 
a brief deliberation," brings in the verdict: "Recommendation for 
clemency." 
Well, imagine: I invite mothers, at least, to imagine it. And the 
defense lawyer, no doubt, would probably start twisting the facts: 
"Gentlemen of the jury, this is not what one could cal a humane 
act, but you must consider the case as a whole; you must take into 
account the circumstances, the environment. This woman is poor; 
she is the only person working in the household; she puts up with 
a lot. She had not even the means to hire a nurse for her child. It 
is only natural that at a moment when, filled with anger caused 
by the corroding environment, so to say, gentlemen, it is only 
natural that she should have put the child's hand under the samovar 
tap . . .  , and so . . . .  " 
Oh, of course I fully appreciate the value of the legal profession; 
it is an elevated calling and a universally respected one. But one 
cannot help sometimes looking at it from a particular point of 
view-a frivolous one, I agree-but involuntary nonetheless: what 
an unbearable job it must be at times, one thinks. The lawyer 
dodges, twists himself around like a snake, lies against his own 

Environment 
1 45 
conscience, against his own convictions, against all morality, against 
all humanity! No, truly, he earns his money. 
"Come, come!" exclaims suddenly the sarcastic voice we heard 
before. "Why this is all nonsense, nothing but a product of your 
imagination. A jury never brought in such a verdict. No lawyer 
ever contorted the facts like that. You made it all up." 
But the wife, hung by her heels like a chicken; the "This is my 
bread, don't you dare eat it"; the girl trembling on the stove, 
listenin$ for half an hour to her mother's cries; and "Mamma, why 
are you choking?"-isn't that just the same as the hand under the 
boiling water? Why it's almost the same! 
"Backwardness, ignorance, the environment-have some pity," 
the peasant's lawyer insisted. Yet millions of them do exist and 
not all hang their wives by their heels! There ought to be some 
limit here . . . .  On the other hand, take an educated person: suppose 
he hangs his wife by her heels? Enough contortions, gentlemen of 
the bar. Enough of your "environment." 

Something Personal 
A number of times people have urged me to write my literary 
memoirs. I don't know whether I should, and in any case my 
memory is weak. Besides, I find that recalling the past makes me 
sad; on the whole, I don't like reminiscing. Yet certain episodes 
from the beginning of my literary career come to me of their own 
accord and with amazing clarity, despite my weak memory. Here, 
for example, is one anecdote. 
One spring morning I dropped in on the late Egor Petrovich 
Kovalevsky. He had a very high opinion of my novel Crime and 
Punishment, which at that time had only just appeared in The 
Russian Messenger. He praised it with much enthusiasm and passed 
on a comment that I greatly valued from a certain person whose 
name I canot reveal. Meanwhile, two publishers of two magazines 
entered the room one after the other. One of these magazines later 
acquired a circulation unprecedented among our monthly pub­
lications, but at that time it was only just becoming established. 
The second magazine, on the other hand, was coming to the end 
of a remarkable life that had had so much influence on both lit­
erature and the public at large. But then, on that morning, its 
publisher still did not know that his journal was already so close 
to the end of its career. This publisher and I went into another 
room and were left by ourselves. 
Without giving his name I will say only that our first meeting 
had been a very lively one, an exceptional encounter which I have 
always remembered. Perhaps he remembers it as well. At that time 
he was not yet a publisher. Subsequently, we had a good many 
misunderstandings. We very rarely met after my return from Sib­
eria, but once in passing he paid me a very wann compliment, 
and in connection with some other matter he drew my attention 

Something Personal 
1 47 
to a poem-the best he had ever wrinen. I'll add that there could 
be no one whose appearance and manner are less like those of a 
poet, never mind a "suffering" poet. And yet he is one of the 
most passionate, gloomy, and "suffering" of our poets. 
"Well," he told me, "we've just given you a dressing-down," 
(he meant in his magazine and on account of Crime and Punishment). 
"I know," I said. 
"And do you know why?" 
"As a maner of principle, I should think." 
"For Chernyshevsky." 
I was struck dumb with astonishment. 
"N.N., who wrote the review," the publisher continued, "told 
me, 'His novel is good, but since he stooped to mocking and 
caricaturing this poor exiled Chernyshevsky in a tale he wrote two 
years ago, I'm going to tear his novel to pieces."' 
"Do you mean it's still that stupid gossip about 'The Crocodile?"' 
I cried, when I made the connection. "Don't tell me that you 
believe that too! Have you read 'The Crocodile?"' 
"No, I haven't." 
"Well, it's all gossip, the vilest kind of gossip there can be. Only 
someone with the intellect and the poetic instincts of a Bulgarin 
could find a 'civic' allegory between the lines of this linle comic 
story-but an allegory about Chernyshevsky! If you only knew how 
absurd such an accusation is! In fact I'll never forgive myself for 
not protesting this vile slander two years ago, just when people 
started spreading it!" 
This conversation with the editor of a magazine which has now 
long faded happened seven years ago, and yet I haven't protested 
this "slander" until now: either I ignored it or "just didn't have 
the time." Meanwhile, this mean act anributed to me simply re­
mained in the memories of certain individuals as an undisputed 
fact; it has made the rounds in literary circles; it has reached the 
public; and it has caused me unpleasantness more than once. It is 
time to say at least a few words about it, the more so that it is now 
apropos. And although what I have to say is unsubstantiated, it is 
intended to refute a slander which is itself unerly unsubstantiated. 
My long silence and my neglect up to this point have only seemed 
to give it credence. 
The first time I met Nikolai Gavrilovich Chernyshevsky was in 
1859, the first year after my return from Siberia. I don't remember 
where and how we met. We met subsequently but not very often 

A Writer's Diary 
and exchanged a few words, but only a few. We always shook 
hands, however. Herzen told me that Chernyshevsky made an un­
pleasant impression on him by his appearance and manner. As for 
me, I liked Chernyshevsky's appearance and maner. 
One morning I found attached to the doorknob of my apartment 
one of the most remarkable of those proclamations that were ap­
pearing at the time-and quite a lot of them were appearing then. 
This one was entitled "To the Young Generation." You could 
imagine nothing more foolish and absurd. Its contents were quite 
outrageous, and it was couched in the most ridiculous terms, which 
only a villain could devise so as to cause maximum offense. I was 
angry and downcast for the whole day. All this was still a new 
thing then and it was so close at hand that it was difficult to get 
an accurate picture of the people who wrote it. It was difficult 
simply because one somehow couldn't believe that beneath this 
confused bluster lay something utterly trivial. I'm not talking about 
the whole movement of that time, only about the people involved 
in it. As far as the movement is concerned, it was a perverse and 
unhealthy phenomenon, yet an inevitable product of historical de­
velopment; it will constitute a solemn page in the Petersburg period 
of our history. And this page, it seems, is still a long way from 
being written. 
And so I, who in heart and in soul had long been at odds both 
with these people and with the intentions of their movement-! 
suddenly felt annoyed and almost ashamed at their clumsiness: 
"Why do they do things in such a stupid and clumsy way?" And 
what concern of mine was this cause? But it wasn't their ineffec­
tiveness that I regretted. I did not know a single one of the people 
who ran around distributing proclamations, nor do I know any 
now. But I was saddened when I realized that this was not merely 
an isolated phenomenon, not a silly linle prank of certain people 
who were of no concern to me. One feeling was overwhelming: 
their level of education, their mentality, and their utter lack of 
understanding of reality oppressed me terribly. Although I had 
already lived in St. Petersburg for three years and had closely 
followed certain events, I was still shocked by the proclamation 
that morning. For me it was an utterly new and surprising reve­
lation: until that day I had never suspected such'Peniness could 
exist! I was frightened precisely by the degree of pettiness. Toward 
evening I suddenly got the notion to go off to see Chernyshevsky. 

Something Personal 
149 
I had never ever called on him before, nor thought to do so, any 
more than he had called on me. 
I recall that this was five o'clock in the afternoon. I found Nikolai 
Gavrilovich quite alone; not even his servants were home, and he 
let me in himself. He gave me a most cordial welcome and led me 
into his study. 
"Nikolai Gavrilovich, what on earth is this?" I said when I took 
out the proclamation. 
He took it as something utterly unfamiliar and read it. There 
were only about ten lines. 
"Well, what about it?" he asked with a faint smile. 
"Are they really so stupid and ridiculous? Is there really no way 
of stopping them and putting an end to this abomination?" 
He gave an impressive and very serious reply. 
"Do you really suppose that I support them? Do you think that 
I could have had a hand in putting together this wretched leaflet?" 
"No, I do not," I answered, "and I hardly think it necessary 
to assure you of it. But in any case they must be stopped somehow. 
Your word means something to them, and of course they're afraid 
of what you might say." 
"I don't know any of them." 
"I'm sure you don't. But you certainly don't need to know them 
or speak to them personally. You need only express a word of 
censure publicly, and they'll hear about it." 
"That may not have any effect. And, indeed, things like this, 
as extraneous facts, are inevitable." 
"Yet they are damaging to everyone and everything." 
At this point another visitor, I don't remember who, rang the 
bell. I left. I consider it my duty to note that I spoke sincerely 
with Chernyshevsky and I fully believed then, as I believe now, 
that he did not support those who ran around distributing proc­
lamations. It seemed to me that Nikolai Gavrilovich was not dis­
pleased at my visit; he confirmed this when, a few days later, he 
himself called on me. He spent an hour with me, and I must 
confess that rarely have I met a kinder and more cordial person, 
so that even then I was surprised to hear some people claim that 
he was harsh and unsociable. I realized that he wanted to get to 
know me and I recall being pleased at that. I visited him once 
more, and he returned my call. Shortly thereafter my circumstances 
compelled me to move to Moscow, where I spent nine months. 

I SO 
A Writer's Diary 
Our acquaintance, which had only begun, was thus broken off. 
Thereafter came Chemyshevsky's arest an.d his exile. I was never 
able to learn anything about his case; I know nothing even now. 
A year and a half later I got the notion to write a fantastic tale, 
modeled somewhat on Gogol's "The Nose." I had never tried 
writing in a fantastic vein before. This was a purely literary prank, 
done solely for fun. Several comic situations had presented them­
selves, in fact, and these I wanted to develop. Although it doesn't 
merit a retelling of the plot, I will do so so that it may be clear 
what people made of it. At the time in Petersburg some German 
had a crocodile, which he was exhibiting in the Arcade for an 
admission fee. A certain Petersburg official, before going on a trip 
abroad, takes his young wife and their inseparable friend to the 
Arcade and the thre of them happen to stop by to se the crocodile. 
This clerk is of the middling sort, but one of those with a certain 
independent means; he is still young but is corroded by vanity; 
above all, he is a fool, like the unforgettable Major Kovalev who 
lost his nose. He is comically confident of his great virtues; semi­
educated, but considers himself almost a genius; people in his own 
department look on him as utterly worthless, and he is constantly 
offended by the fact that no one pays attention to him. As if in 
revenge for this, he bullies and tyrannizes his weak-charactered 
friend, flaunting his intellect before him . His friend hates him but 
tolerates everything because he is secretly attracted to the wife. 
This young and quite pretty lady, a purely Petersburg type-a silly 
flirt of the middle class-gapes at the monkeys displayed along 
with the crocodile in the Arcade. Meanwhile, her brilliant husband 
has teased the crocodile, which hitherto had been sleepy and lying 
like a log. The crocodile suddenly opens its maw and swallows 
him whole, leaving not a shred behind. It is soon evident that the 
great man has suffered not the slightest damage from the crocodile; 
on the contrary, with his characteristic obstinacy he declares from 
within the beast that he is quite comfortable there. The friend and 
the wife go off to urge the authorities to free the husband. To 
accomplish this the authorities consider it absolutely essential to 
kill the crocodile, cut it open, and free the great man. Of course, 
they would also have to recompense the German owner and his 
inseparable Mutter for the crocodile. The German at first is both 
irate and afraid that his crocodile, having swallowed ein ganz gov­
ernment official, might die. But soon he realizes that this member 
of the Petersburg administration, swallowed by a crocodile but still 

Something Personal 
1 5 1 
alive, could subsequently have great appeal at box-offices all over 
Europe. He demands an enormous sum for the crocodile and the 
rank of colonel as well. The authorities, on the other hand, are 
thoroughly nonplussed by this sort of incident, which is new to 
the Ministry and entirely without precedent. "If there had been 
even some tiny little precedent we could act; but as it stands it's 
awkward." The authorities also suspect that the clerk crawled into 
the crocodile as a result of some forbidden, liberal tendencies. 
Meanwhile, his spouse finds her status as "a widow, more or less" 
not without a certain interest. Her swallowed husband, meanwhile, 
tells his friend flatly that staying inside the crocodile is incompa­
rably better than working at his job since now, at least, people 
have to pay attention to him-something he could never get them 
to do before. He insists that his wife give parties and that he and 
the crocodile be taken along in a trunk. He is certain that the 
whole of Petersburg society and al the high officials will come 
rushing to these parties to look at this new phenomenon. And here 
he intends to carry the day : "I will proclaim the truth and teach 
them; I will give advice to the statesman and display my talents 
before the minister," he says, considering himself a creature not of 
this earth, already entitled to give advice and to pronounce judg­
ments. The friend asks, delicately but not without malice: "And 
what if, through some unexpected process which, however, must 
be expected, you were to be digested into something which you 
might not expect?" The great man answers that he has already 
considered that, but he will indignantly struggle against this phe­
nomenon, even though, in accordance with the laws of nature, it 
is highly probable. His wife, however, does not agree to give parties 
for such a purpose, even though she is attracted to the idea: "How 
would it look, having my husband brought to me in a trunk?" she 
says. Besides, her status as more or less a widow becomes increas­
ingly appealing. She comes into fashion; people take an interest 
in her. Her husband's superior begins visiting and plans to use 
her for his own ends . ... Such is the first half of this farcical story; 
it is unfinished. I will certainly finish it one day, although I had 
already forgotten it and had to reread it to refresh my memory. 
But here is what people made out of that little thing. Scarcely 
had the story appeared in the magazine Epoch (in 1865) when 
suddenly The Voice made a strange observation in a feuilleton. I 
don't remember it literally, and it happened too long ago to check, 
but its sense was something like the following: "It is in vain that 

1 52 
A Writer's Diary 
the author of "The Crocodile" sets out on such a path; this will 
bring him neither the honor nor the advantage he expects," and 
so forth. Then followed several most obscure and unfriendly barbs. 
I glanced over them and understood nothing; I saw only that there 
was a good deal of poison in them, but did not know why. The 
vague remark in The Voice could do me no harm in itself, of course; 
a reader would have no more understanding of it than I had. But 
suddenly, a week later, N. N. Strakhov told me: "Do you know 
what they think there? They're sure that your "Crocodile" is an 
allegory-the history of Chernyshevsky's exile-and that you want­
ed to lampoon him." Although I was surprised, I was not very 
worried: people interpret things in all sorts of ways, after all. This 
interpretation seemed to me to be too isolated and too farfetched 
to gain much curency, and I thought it utterly unecessary to 
protest. I shall never forgive myself this, because that interpretation 
took hold and spread widely. Calomniez, il en restera roujours quelque 
chose. 
However, I'm convinced even now that there was no intention 
of slandering me; why would there be, and for what? I had quareled 
with almost no one in the literary world, at least not quareled 
seriously. Now, at this moment, for the second time in the twenty­
seven years of my literary career, I am speaking about myself 
personally. This was simply a matter of obtuseness, gloomy, sus­
picious obtuseness that had settled in the mind of some person 
with a "tendency." I am convinced that this mind, so ful of 
thoughts, is even now certain that it was not mistaken and that I 
deliberately ridiculed the unfortunate Chernyshevsky. I even believe 
that none of my explanations and excuses will alter that view in 
my favor even now. And yet this is a mind filled with thoughts. 
(Of course, I am not speaking of Andrei Aleksandrovich; in his 
capacity as editor and publisher of his newspaper he played no 
role here, as usual). 
Where is the allegory? Well, of course the crocodile represents 
Siberia; the self-confident and frivolous official is Chemyshevsky. 
He's fallen into the maw of the crocodile but still cherishes the 
hope to give instruction to the whole world. The weak-charactered 
friend whom he treats so despotically represents all of Chemy­
shevsky's Petersburg friends. The pretty but none-too-intelligent 
wife who relishes her status as a "widow, more or less," is . . . .  But 
at this point things become so messy that I don't wish to soil myself 
by continuing to interpret the allegory. (Yet that interpretation has 

Something Personal 
1 5 3 
become firmly entrenched, and that last suggestion has perhaps 
become particularly entrenched-1 have definite evidence of that.) 
This means that people assumed that I, a former exile and con­
vict, would rejoice in the exile of some other "unfortunate"; and, 
even more, that I would write a gleeful lampoon about it. But tell 
me, where is the prof? Is it in the allegory? You can bring me 
whatever you like-"Notes of a Madman," the ode "God," "Yury 
Miloslavsky," the poetry of Fet-whatever you like-and I will at 
once set to proving to you from the first ten lines you care to show 
me that here is an alegory of the Franco-Prussian War or a lampoon 
of the actor Gorbunov; in short, on anyone you like. Remember 
how in the old days, at the very end of the forties, for example, 
the censor would examine manuscripts and black-liners? There was 
not a line or a dot where he did not suspect an allegory of some 
sort. Let them produce at least something from my life to show I 
resemble the malicious, heartless writer of lampoons who could be 
expected to write such stories. 
On the other hand, the very haste and carelessness of such 
groundless conclusions testify to a certain mean spirit in the ac­
cusers themselves and reveal their coarse and inhumane views. That 
their conclusion is simple-minded is no excuse-what of it? One 
can be simple-minded and vile, and nothing more. 
Perhaps I bore some personal hatred of Chernyshevsky? To dis­
count such an accusation I deliberately told you of our brief and 
cordial acquaintance. People will say that this is not enough and 
that I bore a secret hatred. But let them present some causes for 
this hatred if they have any to present. There were none. On the 
other hand, I am convinced that Chernyshevsky himself would 
confirm the accuracy of my account of our meeting if he ever had 
a chance to read it. And God grant him that opportunity. This I 
wish as warmly and passionately as I sincerely regretted and still 
regret his misfortune. 
But perhaps there was hatred because of convictions? 
Why should there be? Chernyshevsky's convictions never of-. 
fended me. One can have a good deal of respect for a man even 
when one has radically different opinions from him. Here, inci­
dentally, I can speak not entirely without substantiation and even 
have some small evidence to offer. One of the very last issues of 
the magazine Epoch, which ceased publishing at that time (it might 
have been the very last issue), contained a long critical article on 
Chernyshevsky's "famous" novel What Is To Be Dum? This is a 

1 54 
A Writer's Diary 
remarkable anicle and it is the product of a well-known author. 
And what do we find here? It pays proper tribute to Cherny­
shevsky's intellect and talent. The novel itself earns fervent praise. 
No one ever doubted his remarkable intellect. Our anicle only 
remarked on the specific features and the errantry of this intellect, 
but the very seriousness of the anicle testified that our critic also 
paid due respect to the author's merits. Now you must agree: if I 
had hated Chemyshevsky because of his convictions, I would, of 
course, naturally not have allowed the journal to publish an article 
that spoke of him with due respect; and in fact it was I and no 
one else who edited The Epoch. 
Perhaps in printing a malicious allegory I hoped to gain some­
thing somewhere en haut lieu? But can anyone ever say of me that 
I sought or gained anything in that sense in any lieu whatsoever, 
i.e. , that I sold my pen? I believe that the one who made that 
conjecture did not himself have that idea, despite his naivete. And 
it would cenainly not have gained currency in the literary world 
had that been all I was accused of. 
What of the possible accusation that I lampooned cenain domestic 
arrangements of Nikolai Gavrilovich in my "allegory?" I repeat 
once more that I do not even wish to touch upon that in my 
"defense" so as not to soil myself . . . .  
It's a shame that I have to speak about myself this time. But 
that's what it means to write literary memoirs. I shall never write 
them. I deeply regret that I have undoubtedly bored the reader; 
but I am writing a diary, a diary which consists panly of my 
personal impressions, and just recently I had one "literary" im­
pression which indirectly reminded me of this forgotten anecdote 
about my forgotten "Crocodile." 
The other day one of the people I respect most and whose opinion 
I value highly said to me: "I've only just read your article on 
'Environment' and on the sentences handed down by our jurors 
(The Citizen, No. 2). I agree with you fully, but your article can 
cause an unpleasant misunderstanding. People will think that you 
are in favor of abolishing the jury system and that you suppon 
renewed interference from some administrative overseer . . . .  " 
I was astonished and saddened. This was the voice of a man 
who was most impartial and who stood outside any literary parties 
and "allegories." 
"Do you really think that people will interpret my anicle that 

Something Personal 
I S S  
way? After this I won't be able to talk about anything. The eco­
nomic and moral condition of the People after their liberation from 
the yoke of serfdom is dreadful. The facts continually testifying to 
that are indisputable and highly alarming. The decline of morality, 
the fall in prices, the Yid tavern-keepers, thievery, banditry in 
broad daylight-all these facts are indisputable, and they grow more 
ominous every day. And what are we to do? If someone, troubled 
in spirit and in heart, takes up a pen and writes-what then? Will 
they cry out that he is a proponent of serfdom and stands for a 
return to the enslavement of the peasants?" 
"In any case we must hope that the People have complete freedom 
to emerge from their lamentable situation on their own, without 
any patriarchal supervision or turning back." 
"Of course we must; that's my idea precisely! And even if this 
national decadence (and here and there the People themselves, when 
they look at what they are doing, are now saying: 'It's true enough, 
we've gone weak! ')-even if it, I say, were to cause some sort of 
real, indisputable calamity among the People, some sort of mon­
umental collapse, some great disaster-even then they would save 
themselves, themselves and us as well, as they have already done 
more than once; their whole history can testify to that. That is my 
idea. An end to interference is just what's needed! . . .  But how 
many different ways can one's words be interpreted. You might 
even stumble upon another allegory here! 

5 
VIas 
Do you remember Vias? He comes to mind for some reason. 
In open coat of homespun thread 
Through town you see him slowly pass; 
No hat to cover his gray head, 
This peasant pilgrim called Old VIas. 
A copper icon on his breast, 
He gathers offerings for God's church . . . .  
As you know, at one time this Vias "had no God." 
. . .  his heavy hand 
Dispatched his wife while in her prime; 
Thieves, bandits, and their contraband 
Found refuge with him many a time. 
He even gave refuge to thieves, says the poet, trying to frighten 
us and adopting the tone of a pious old woman. Goodness, the 
sins he committed! But then came the clap of thunder. Vias fell 
ill and saw a vision, after which he vowed to become a beggar and 
collect money to build a church. It was Hell itself he saw in his 
vision, no more and no less: 
He saw the world of vanities crumble, 
He saw the sinners roast in Hell, 
Where nimble devils, unrelenting, 
Attack the wretched here within. 
A restless witch, skilled in tormenting, 
With Ethiops as black as sin . . .  

VIas 
Some are impaled on rods of iron 
While others lick the red-hot floor . . . .  
1 57 
In short, there are inconceivable horrors, so dreadful that one is 
frightened to read about them. "But," the poet continues, "not all 
can be described: 'Pious pilgrims, clever women,/Can tell you 
better tales than this_"' 
Oh, poet! (You are, unfortunately, our genuine poet.) If only 
you would stop approaching the People with your rapturous out­
pourings about which "Pious pilgrims, clever women,/Can tell you 
better tales-," you would not offend us by concluding that it is 
only through such paltry doings of old women that we "See Godly 
temples rising up/All o'er the face of our own land_" Yet even 
though it is only his own "foolishness" that leads Vias to wander 
with his beggar's sack, you still have understood the full gravity 
of his suffering; you were still struck by the grandeur of his figure. 
(You are a poet, after all, and could scarcely react differently)_ "All 
the might of this great soul,/Devoted to this Godly cause,-" as 
you so grandly put it. I would like to think, however, that you 
mock him unwittingly, as a result of your liberal fear, because this 
awesome, even frightening force of Vias's humility, this urge of his 
to save himself, this passionate thirst for suffering has struck even 
you, a universal man and Russian gentilhomme, and this majestic 
image from the People has wrung rapture and respect even out of 
your ultraliberal soul! 
VIas gave away all that he owned 
And for himself he kept but naught; 
And, gathering alms, the world he roamed; 
To build God's temple here, he sought. 
And so it is this peasant lives-
Full thirty years it soon will be-
Feeding himself on what God gives 
And keeping his vow most rigidly. 
Filled with grief past consolation, 
Dark of face, erect and tall, 
(That's truly marvelous!) 
He passes on with gait unhurried 
Through the village, through the town. 

But never a word pased o'er his lips. 
A bok, an icon at his side, 
Strong chains of iron round his hips 
To overcome his sinful pride. 
A Writer's Diary 
That really is wonderfuly said! It's so good, in fact, that it's just 
as if you were not its author; as if it were not you but some other 
person who later gave a performance "on the Volga" in verses 
about the barge-haulers' songs that were likewise magnificent. Well, 
perhaps you didn't really give a performance "on the Volga," or 
maybe just a small one: even on the Volga you were in love with 
the universal man within that barge-hauler, and you truly suffered 
for him-not for the barge-hauler himself, that is, but for what we 
might call the universal barge-hauler. Don't you se that loving the 
universal man means surely to scorn and sometimes even to hate 
the real man standing next to you? I deliberately picked out the 
incomparably beautiful verses in this farcical (you 'II pardon me, 
but I mean the thing as a whole) poem of yours. 
I recalled this poetical VIas because the other day I heard an 
utterly fantastic story about another VIas-about two of them, in 
fact-but these Vlases were quite special and unprecedented. This 
is a true incident and its exceptionality alone makes it remarkable. 
In the monasteries of Holy Russia there are, even now, people 
say, certain ascetics and monks who are confessors and who cast 
their light on us all. Whether this is a good thing or bad, and 
whether we ned monks or do not-these are things I choose not 
to discuss at present, nor did I take up my pen for that purpose. 
But since we are living in the real world as given, one canot throw 
even a monk out of the story if the whole thing is based on him. 
These monks who illuminate the lives of others are sometimes, 
apparently, men of great education and intellect. That is what 
people say, at least; I know nothing about it. I have heard that 
there are some who have an amazing ability to penetrate the human 
heart and to gain mastery over it. Several such people, apparently, 
are known all over Russia, or at least are known to those who are 
concerned with such things. Such an elder lives, let's suppose, in 
Kherson Province, and people come to him, some even on fOOl, 
from Petersburg, from Arkhangelsk, from the Caucasus, and from 
Siberia. They come, of course, with souls weighed down by despair, 
souls that no longer expect recovery; or they come bearing such a 

VIas 
1 59 
terrible burden in their hearts that the sinners can no longer speak 
about it to their own priest and spirirual father-not because of 
fear or mistrust, but simply out of utter despair for their own 
salvation. But then they hear about some such remarkable monk 
and they go to see him . 
"And so it is," such an elder once said in friendly conversation 
with a certain listener, "that I have been listening to people for 
twenty years now, and you can believe how many things I have 
heard during these twenty years of my acquaintance with the most 
secret and complex ailments of the human soul. But even after 
twenty years I sometimes shudder and grow angry when I hear 
some secret confessions. You lose the spiritual calm that's needed 
to give comfort and have to restore your own humility and tran­
quility . . . .  " 
And then he told me this remarkable tale from the life of the 
People that I mentioned above. 
It happened once that a peasant came crawling into my cell on 
his knees. I had already seen him through the window, crawling 
on the ground. The first thing he said to me was: "There's no 
salvation for me; I'm damned! Say what you like-l'm damned all 
the same!" 
I managed to calm him down. I could see that he had been 
crawling for the sake of the suffering and had crawled a great 
distance. 
"A few of the lads got together in the village," he began, "and 
we set to arguing among ourselves as to which of us could do the 
most daring, shocking thing. I'm a proud fellow, and so I said I'd 
do worse than any of them. One of the lads took me aside and 
told me, face-to-face, 'You'd never ever do what you said; you're 
just bragging.' 
"I told him I was ready to swear to it. 
" 'Just wait now,' he says, 'You have to swear by your own 
salvation in Heaven that you'll do everything I tell you.' 
"I swore to it. 
" 'It'll soon be Lenl," uc: says, 'so make your fast. When you go 
to Holy Communion, take the Eucharist but don't swallow it. When 
you step back, take it out of your mouth and keep it. Then I'll 
tell you what else to do.' 
"That's what I did. He took me straight from the church into a 
garden. He took a stick, drove it into the ear•'l, and said 'Put the 
Eucharist on the stick.' I did that. 

1 60 
'"Now,' he says, 'get a gun .' 
"I brought one. 
'"Load it.' 
"I did that. 
" 'Take it up and shoot.' 
A Writer's Diary 
"I raised the gun and aimed it. And just as I was about to fire 
I suddenly saw before me a cross and, on it, the crucified Christ. 
Then I fell down, unconscious." 
This had happened a few years before he came to the elder. Who 
was this Vias? Where did he come from? What was his name? 
None of that, of course, did the elder reveal, nor did he tell what 
penance he had imposed on him. He probably burdened his soul 
with some terrible load even beyond human strength, considering 
that, in this case, the heavier the burden, the bener. He came 
crawling in looking for suffering, after all. Now isn't this a very 
typical incident that suggests a great deal, so that it's worthy of a 
few minutes of close examination? I still hold that these very same 
and sundry "Vlases,'' repentant and unrepentant, will say the last 
word; they will say it and will show us a new path and a new way 
out of all those apparently insoluble tangles we find ourselves in. 
Our Russian destiny will not be finaly resolved by Petersburg. 
And therefore every new feature, even the smallest, that serves to 
characterize these "new people" may be worthy of our anention. 
In the first place, I am amazed-and amazed most of all-by the 
very origin of this afair, namely, that such an argument and contest 
as to who could do the most daring thing could even occur in a 
Russian vilage. This is a fact that has many implications, and for 
me it was almost a total surprise; and I have seen a good many of 
the People, including some who were most willful. I would also 
note that the apparent singularity of the fact in itself testifies to its 
veracity: when people tell lies, they invent something much more 
mundane and in keeping with everyday life so as to be believed. 
Then, the purely medical aspect of the case is quite remarkable. 
A hallucination is predominantly a pathological phenomenon, and 
such an illness is very rare. The possibility of a person, in good 
health but highly distraught, having a sudden hallucination may 
be unprecedented. But that's a medical problem, and I know little 
about it. 
The psychological aspect of the case is another maner. We have 
before us two national types that represent with full clarity the 

VIas 
1 6 1  
Russian People in their entirety. We see, first, the complete loss 
of a sense of measure in everything (and note that this is nearly 
always something temporary and passing that seems like the work 
of some evil power). There is an urge to go beyond the limit, an 
urge for that sinking sensation one has when one has come to the 
edge of an abyss, leans halfway over it, looks into the bonomless 
pit itself, and-in some particular but not infrequent cases-throws 
oneself headlong into it like a madman. We see this urge for negation 
in a person who may be the most inclined toward belief and rev­
erence-the urge to negate everything: those things his heart holds 
most sacred, all those things the People cherish in totality, a thing 
which only a moment earlier had been an object of worship but 
which now suddenly seems an unbearable burden. What is espe­
cially striking is the haste and impetuosity with which the Russian 
reveals himself-in his good or his evil aspects-in certain char­
acteristic moments of his own life or the life of the nation. Some­
times he simply can't be held back. Whether it is a maner of love 
or of drink, of debauchery, egoism, or envy-some Russians will 
surrender themselves unerly and totally, ready to break their links 
with everything and renounce everything: family, custom, God. 
The kindest man may suddenly be transformed into a vile reprobate 
and criminal; he needs only to be caught up by this whirlwind, 
this fateful maelstrom of violent and momentary negation and de­
struction of self that is so typical of the Russian national character 
at certain fateful moments in its existence. On the other hand, it 
is with the same force, the same impetuosity, the same urge for 
self-preservation and repentance that the Russian, like the Russian 
People as a whole, saves himself; he does this usually when he 
reaches the outermost limit, that is, when he has nowhere farther 
to go. Especially characteristic is the fact that this impulse back­
ward, the impulse to restore and save oneself, is always more serious 
than the former urge to deny and destroy the self. Accordingly, the 
urge to destroy can be charged to a peny meanness of spirit; but 
the Russian sets about restoring himself with the most enormous 
and serious effort, and has only contempt for himself in his former 
movement toward negation. 
I think that the principal and most basic spiritual need of the 
Russian People is the need for suffering, incessant and unslakeable 
suffering, everywhere and in everything. I think the Russian People 
have been infused with this need to suffer from time immemorial. 
A current of martyrdom runs through their entire history, and it 

A Writer's Diary 
flows not only from external misfortunes and disasters but springs 
from the very heart of the People themselves. There is always an 
element of suffering even in the happiness of the Russian People, 
and without it their happiness is incomplete. Never, not even in 
the most triumphant moments of their history, do they assume a 
proud and triumphant air; they have an air of tenderness that almost 
reaches the point of sufering; the People sigh and attribute their 
glory to the mercy of the Lord. The Russian People seem to take 
delight in their sufferings. What is true of the entire People is also 
true of individuals, generally speaking at least. Consider, for ex­
ample, the many types of Russian wrongdoers. Here one finds not 
only debauchery taken to an extreme, debauchery that is sometimes 
amazing in its bold sweep and in the abominable depths to which 
a human soul can sink. The wrongdoer is, first of all, a suffering 
person himself. There is no naively gloating self-satisfaction in the 
Russian, even if he is a fool. Compare a Russian drunkard with a 
German one, for example: the Russian is far more foul than the 
German, but the German is certainly the more stupid and ridiculous 
of the two. The Germans are predominantly a complacent people 
who are proud of themselves. These basic national traits stand out 
the more strongly in the drunken German in proportion to the 
amount of beer consumed. The drunken German is definitely a 
happy man and he never weeps; he sings songs boasting of his 
prowess and is proud of himself. He comes home drunk as a cobbler, 
but still proud of himself. The Russian likes to drink from grief 
and to weep. And if he does put on airs, it's not because he's 
gloating; he only wants to raise a ruckus. He'll always recall some 
past insult and hurl reproaches at the one who insulted him, wheth­
er that person is present or not. He may brazenly insist that he's 
the next thing to a general; he'll swear like a trooper if you don't 
believe him, and finally he'll shout for someone to come and help 
him convince you. Yet the reason he presents such an ugly spec­
tacle, the reason he wants someone to help him, is that in the 
depths of his drunken soul he knows very well that he's not a 
general but only a vile drunkard who has sunk to a level lower 
than any animal. What's true of one tiny instance is also true of 
much more important ones. The worst wrongdoer, even the one 
whose brazen and refined vices seem so attractive that other fools 
follow his example, still has some secret sense, in the depths of 
his deformed soul, that in the final analysis he's nothing more than 
a wretch. He's not complacent; reproach wells up in his heart, and 

VIas 
he takes his revenge for it on those around him; he rages and 
attacks everyone. So it is that he pushes himself to the limit as he 
grapples with the suffering that is constantly building up in his 
heart; at the same time he seems to revel with delight in his 
suffering. If he has the capacity to rise up out of his fallen state, 
then he exacts a terrible vengeance on himself for his past fall, an 
even more painful vengeance than he had exacted on others for the 
secret torments his own dissatisfaction with himself caused him 
while befogged in his degradation. 
Who provided the impulse to set both these peasant lads to 
disputing which could commit the most brazen sin? What were 
the reasons that led to such a contest? These things remain a 
mystery, but there can be no doubt that both lads suffered-one 
by accepting the challenge, the other by offering it. Of course there 
must have been some prior cause: either some concealed enmity 
between them or a hatred that began in childhood, of which they 
themselves were unaware and which suddenly erupted at the mo­
ment of their dispute and challenge. The latter is the more likely; 
and it's likely that they were friends until that moment, living in 
an accord that became harder to bear the longer it went on. But 
at the moment of the challenge, the tension of mutual hatred and 
the victim's envy of his Mephistopheles was already something 
extraordinary. 
"I'm not afraid of anything; I'll do whatever you say; let my 
soul be damned, but I'll put you in disgrace! "  
"You're bluffing. You'll run away like a mouse to the cellar. I'll 
have the last laugh. The soul be damned! "  
They could have found some other deed-something very shock­
ing-for their contest: a robbery, a murder, open rebellion against 
some powerful person. The lad swore, after all, that he was ready 
for anything, and his tempter knew that a serious promise had 
been made, one that would be kept. 
But no. The tempter thinks the most dreadful acts are too or­
dinary. He invents some unthinkable sin, unprecedented and in­
conceivable, and his choice reveals the People's whole outlook on 
life. 
Inconceivable? Yet the very fact that he had decided on this, 
specifically, shows that he had perhaps been considering it already. 
This fanciful notion had crept into his soul long ago, perhaps even 
in his childhood; he was struck by the horror of it, yet also found 
it agonizingly delightful. That he had conceived of it all-the gun, 

A Writer's Diary 
the garden-long before and had kept it as an awful secret-of this 
there can be scarcely any doubt. Of course, he did not conceive 
this with the intent of carrying it out himself, "and indeed, he would 
perhaps never have dared do it on his own. It was only that this 
vision appealed to him; from time to time it would stir his soul, 
beckoning him on, while he would shrink back, cold with horror. 
One moment of unheard of audacity and then-let everything be 
damned! And of course he believed that this would be the cause 
of his eternal perdition, but: "All the same, what heights I 
reached! "  
There are many things one cannot conceive but only feel. There 
is a great deal one can know unconsciously. Yet, in truth, this is 
a curious soul, particularly coming from the environment it does. 
Indeed, that's the whole point of the maner. It would also be good 
to know how he regarded himself: did he feel more to blame than 
his victim? As far as we can judge by his mentality, we must suppose 
that he regarded himself as more to blame, or at least equally to 
blame, so that when challenging his victim to this "brazen act," 
he was challenging himself as well. 
We hear that the Russian People know the Gospels poorly and 
that they do not know the fundamental principles of our faith. 
That's true, of course, but they do know Christ and they have 
borne Him in their hearts from time immemorial. There can be 
no doubt of that. How can one have a genuine conception of Christ 
without religious instruction? That's another question. But a heart­
felt knowledge of Christ and a genuine conception of Him are fully 
present. It is passed on from generation to generation and has 
become a part of the People's hearts. Perhaps the only love of the 
Russian People is Christ, and they love His image in their own 
fashion, that is, to the point of suffering. Above all else the People 
take pride in the name "Orthodox"-namely, those whose concept 
of Christ is truer than any others'. I repeat: there is much one can 
know unconsciously. 
And so to make a mockery of something the People hold so 
sacred, and thus to break one's links with the whole land; to destroy 
oneself forever through negation and pride solely for the sake of 
one moment of triumph-why the Russian Mephistopheles could 
invent nothing more daring! The prospect of such an extreme of 
passion, the prospect of such dark and complex sensations within 
the soul of a common, simple man is astounding! And remember 
that all this developed almost to the point of a conscious idea. 

VIas 
x6s 
The victim, however, does not give in, is not humbled, is not 
frightened. At least he pretends that he isn't frightened. The lad 
accepts the challenge. Days pass, and he keeps to his promise. 
And now it is no longer a fanciful notion but a reality: he attends 
church; he hears the words of Christ every day, yet he does not 
shrink back. There are terrible murderers who are not daunted 
even by the sight of their victim. One such murderer, caught at 
the scene of the crime and guilty beyond any doubt, would not 
confess but kept lying to the investigating magistrate. And when 
the magistrate rose and ordered the man taken to prison, the mur­
derer, with an air of utter tenderness, asked as a favor to be allowed 
to bid farewell to the woman he had murdered and whose body 
was still lying there (she was his former mistress, and he had killed 
her out of jealousy). He bent down, kissed her tenderly, and began 
to weep; still on his knees, he stretched his hands over her body 
and said once more that he was not guilty. I simply want to note 
that a man's feelings can atrophy to a brutish level. 
But in the case in point there is no question of atrophy of feelings. 
Moreover, there is also something quite peculiar-mystical horror, 
the most colossal power over the human soul. This cenainly was 
present, at least judging by the outcome of the affair. Yet the young 
lad's powerful spirit was still capable of grappling with this horror; 
he proved that. But is this really strength, or is it only an extreme 
of pusillanimity? Probably it is both these things combined in the 
meeting of opposite extremes. Nevertheless, this mystical horror 
not only did not bring an end to the struggle but prolonged it even 
more; and it probably was the very force that brought the struggle 
to an end by banishing every tender feeling from the sinner's heart: 
the more strongly the horror oppressed him, the less possible it 
became for him to feel. A sense of horror is something pitiless; it 
withers the hean and hardens it toward any lofty or tender feeling. 
And that is why the criminal was able to endure the moment before 
the communion chalice even though he may have been utterly 
paralyzed by fear. I also think that the mutual hatred of victim 
and tormentor totally vanished during these days. The tormented 
victim may have had pathological fits of hatred toward himself, 
those around him, and those who were praying in church, but least 
of all he hated his Mephistopheles. They both felt that they had 
need of one another so that together they might put an end to the 
affair. Each probably felt himself powerless to end it alone. Why, 
then, did they carry on? Why did they assume such a burden of 

166 
A Writer's Diary 
torment? Yet they simply were unable to break their alliance. Had 
their contract been broken, they would at once have become in­
flamed with a mutual hatred ten times stronger than before, and 
there probably would have been a murder: the victim would have 
killed his tormentor. 
This could well have happened. Even murder would be nothing 
compared to the horror endured by the victim. The point is that 
deep within the souls of each of them there must have been some 
sort of infernal delight in their own perdition, the breath-catching 
urge to lean over the abyss and peer into it, a stupendous rapture 
at one's own temerity. It's almost impossible that they could have 
brought the affair to its conclusion without these passionate sen­
sations to stimulate them. They were not a couple of stupid, dull 
youngsters or simple lads playing pranks-not when they began 
with a competition to see who could commit the worst sin and 
ended with the despair in the elder's cell. 
Note also that the tempter did not reveal the whole secret to his 
victim: when he left the church he did not know what he was to 
do with the Eucharist until the very moment his tempter ordered 
him to get the gun . So many days of such mystical uncertainty 
again testify to this sinner's terrible obstinacy. On the other hand, 
our village Mephistopheles reveals himself as a fine psychologist. 
But perhaps when they came into the garden neither was aware 
of what he was doing? Still, the victim remembered loading and 
aiming the gun . Could he have only been acting mechanically, even 
though fully aware, as sometimes really happens when one is truly 
terrified? I do not think so: had he been transformed into a virtual 
machine that continues its operation only through force of inertia 
he would certainly not have had the vision that followed. He would 
simply have fallen down senseless once the ful force of inertia had 
been exhausted-not before, but after shooting. No, it's most likely 
that he was in a state of complete and extraordinarily lucid con­
sciousness the whole time, despite the mortal dread that kept grow­
ing with every second. And the very fact that the victim endured 
such pressure of progressively growing horror is, I repeat, prof 
of his immense spiritual strength. 
Let us also keep in mind, in any case, that loading a gun is a 
process that demands a certain amount of concentratioil. I think 
that the most difficult, unbearable thing at a moment like this is 
the capacity to detach oneself from one's horror, from the idea that 

VIas 
continues to oppress. Usually, people who are stricken by such an 
extreme of horror are no longer able to pull themselves away from 
contemplating it; they cannot detach themselves from the object or 
idea that has struck them. They stand transfixed before it and stare, 
as if enchanted, directly into the face of the object of horror. But 
the young lad carefully loaded the gun, and he remembered doing 
it; he remembered taking aim, and remembered everything, right 
to the very last moment. It is also possible that the process of 
loading the gun was a relief, a release for his suffering soul, and 
he was happy to concentrate but for a brief moment on some 
external object that provided this release. This is what happens at 
the guillotine to those about to be decapitated. Mme. Dubarry 
cried to the executioner: "Encore un moment, monsieur le bour­
reau, encore un moment!" Her suferings would have been mul­
tiplied twentyfold during this extra moment, had she been granted 
it, yet still she cried out and begged for it. But if we suppose that 
for our sinner the loading of the gun was something like Dubarry's 
"encore un moment," then of course after such a moment he could 
not once more have faced the horror from which he had detached 
himself and continued to aim and fire. Now his hands would simply 
have grown numb and refused to move, and the gun would have 
dropped from them, despite the consciousness and willpower that 
had not left him. 
And now, at the very ultimate moment, all the falsehood, all the 
baseness of his act, all the cowardice that he took for strength, all 
the disgrace of his fall-all these things burst forth from his heart 
in an instant and stood before him in dreadful accusation. An 
incredible vision appeared to him, and it was all over. 
The thunderous voice of judgment came out of his own heart, 
of course. Why was it not expressed consciously? Why was there 
not a sudden parting of the clouds that had obscured his mind and 
his conscience? Why did it appear in an image that seemed entirely 
external, as a fact independent of his own spirit? We find here an 
immense psychological problem and an act of God. The criminal 
certainly saw this as an act of God. Our VIas became a beggar 
and demanded suffering. 
And what of the other VIas, the tempter who was left? The story 
does not say that he came crawling after repentance; it says nothing 
about him. Perhaps he, too, came crawling; but perhaps he stayed 
on in his village and lives there now, still drinking and scoffing 

1 68 
A Writer's Diary 
on church holidays: he did not see the vision, after all. But is that 
what really happened? I would very much like to know his story, 
just for the sake of information, as a subject "for a sketch. 
This is why I would like to know: what if he really and truly is 
a village nihilist, a homegrown cynic and thinker, an unbeliever 
who decided on such a contest with haughty mockery on his face, 
who did not suffer and tremble with his victim, as I suggest in 
this sketch, but who followed his victim's trembling and writhing 
with cold curiosity, solely out of a need to see someone else suffer, 
to see another man humiliated-who knows, perhaps even for the 
sake of scientific enquiry? 
If indeed such traits are present even in the character of the 
People (and nowadays we may assume anything) and in our villages, 
then this is a new revelation, and a surprising one at that. I think 
we never heard of such traits before. Mr. Ostrovsky's tempte , in 
his fine comedy Don't Live as You Choose, is not well done at all. 
It's a shame we have no accurate information about these things. 
Of course, the interest in the story I have told-at least if it 
contains any interest-lies only in the fact that it is genuine. But 
peering into the soul of our contemporary Vias may sometimes be 
not without benefit. Our contemporary Vias is quickly changing. 
The same seething ferment is going on in the depths where he 
lives as it is higher up, where we dwell, and it has been going on 
since February 19. Our epic hero has awakened and is stretching 
his arms; perhaps he will have the urge to go on a spree, to dash 
off somewhere beyond the limit. People say that he's already gone 
on a spree. Dreadful things are told and described in print: drunk­
enness, banditry, drunken children, drunken mothers, cynicism, 
destitution, corruption, godlessness. Some serious but rather rash 
people consider, on the basis of facts, that if such a "spree" con­
tinues for only ten years more, the consequences from an economic 
standpoint alone will be beyond imagining. But let us remember 
"Vias" and be calm: at the critical moment all the falsehood, if 
indeed it is falsehood, will burst forth from the People's hearts and 
confront them with incredible accusatory power. Vias will come to 
his senses and will set about doing God's work. In any case, he 
will save himself should things have reached the point of disaster. 
He will save himself and us as well, for once more the light and 
the salvation will come radiating from below (in a form that our 
liberals may find entirely surprising; and there will be a good deal 
of amusement in this). We even have a few hints about this surprise, 

VIas 
and facts are appearing even now . . . .  However, we can talk about 
that later. In any case, our bankruptcy as "fledglings from Peter's 
nest" is now beyond doubt. The Petrine period of Russian history 
was truly ended by the 19th of February, so that long ago we 
entered into a period of complete uncertainty. 

6 
Bobak 
On this occasion I shal include "The Notes of a Certain 
Person." That person is not I, but someone else entirely. 
I think no further foreword is neded. 
NOTES OF A CERTAIN PERSON 
The other day Semyon Ardalonovich up and said to me, "Ivan 
lvanych, tell me, for Heaven's sake, wil there ever be a day when 
you'll be sober?" 
That's a strange thing to ask. I'm not offended; I'm a timid 
fellow. But just the same, they made me out to be a madman. An 
anist once happened to paint my portrait. "You're a literary man, 
after al," he says. So I let him have his way, and he put the portrait 
on exhibit. And now I read: "Go and look at this sickly face that 
sems to border on insanity." 
My face may well be like that, but do they have to say it right 
in print? Everything that appears in print should be noble; we 
need some ideals, but this . . . .  
He could at least have said it indirectly-that's the whole point 
of style. But no, he won't say it indirectly. Humor and elegance 
of style are disappearing nowadays, and abuse is taken for witticism. 
But I don't take offense: I'm not some distinguished man of letters 
who'll go off his head over a thing like that. I wrote a story, but 
they wouldn't publish it. I wrote an anicle, but it was rejected. 
I've taken a lot of anicles around to various publishers, but they 
always turn me down: "There's no salt in it," they say. 
"What sort of salt do you want, then?" I ask, with sarcasm in 
my voice. "Attic?" 
He doesn't even understand. Mostly I do translations from the 
170 

Bobok 
1 7 1  
French for boksellers. I also write advertisements for shopkeepers: 
"A rare item! The finest tea from our own plantations . . . .  " I made 
a pile of money writing a eulogy for His Excellency the late Piotr 
Matveevich. I put together The Art of Appealing to the Ladies on 
commission from a bookseller. I've put out about six of these little 
books in my lifetime. I want to do a collection of Voltaire's bon 
mots, but I fear that people here may find them a bit too tame. 
What's Voltaire nowadays? These days we need an oak cudgel, not 
a Voltaire! We ought to be knocking one another's teeth out! Well, 
that's my entire literary output. From time to time I'll send leners 
to the editor, fully signed, but for which I'm not paid. I'm always 
giving advice and admonitions, criticizing things and pointing out 
the way. Last week I sent my fortieth lener in two years to the 
same newspaper; they've set me back four rubles in postage stamps 
alone. I have a nasty disposition, that's what it is. 
I don't think the artist painted me on account of my literary 
work; it probably was on account of the two symmetrical warts on 
my forehead: that's a phenomenon of nature, he says. They don't 
have any ideas, you see, so now they go on about these phenomena. 
But what a job he did on my warts in the portrait-they're as good 
as life! That's what they call realism. 
As far as madness is concerned, we've had a lot of people reck­
oned among the insane in the past year. And it's done in such a 
fine literary style: "Given such an original talent . . .  and then, at 
the very end, we see that . . .  however, it should have long been 
apparent . . . .  " It's done very slyly-in fact from the point of view 
of pure art one might even admire it. But yet these "lunatics" 
come back even more clever than they were before. That's just how 
it is: we can drive people mad, but we've never yet made anyone 
more clever. 
I think the cleverest of all is the one who calls himself a fool at 
least once a month. Now that's something we never hear of these 
days! There was a time when a fool realized that he was a fool 
once a year at the very least, but now it never happens. Everything's 
so muddled now that you can't tell a fool from a clever man . They've 
done that on purpose. 
I recall the winy saying of the Spaniards, some two hundred and 
fifty years ago, at the time the French built their first madhouse: 
"They have locked up all their fools in a special building to make 
people think that they themselves are wise." Just so: you can't 

1 72 
A Writer's Diary 
prove your own intelligence by shutting someone else up in a 
madhouse. "Mr. K. has gone mad, so now we are wise." No, that's 
not how it works. 
· 
But damn it, why have I started carrying on about my own 
intelligence? Al I do is grumble. Even my maid is fed up with it. 
A friend of mind dropped in yesterday. "Your style is changing," 
he says. "It's like mincemeat. You chop things finer and finer. You 
put something in parentheses with other parentheses inside and 
then insert something else in brackets, and start chopping it some 
more . . . .  " 
He's right. Something queer is happening to me. My character 
is changing, and my head aches. I'm begining to se and hear 
some strange things. Not voices, exactly, but it's as if someone 
right beside me is saying: "Bobok, bobok, bobok!" 
What is this bobok? I must find some distraction. 
I was walking around looking for some distraction when I came 
upon a funeral. It was a distant relative of mine. He was a Collegiate 
Councilor, however. A widow, five daughters, none of them married. 
Think what it must cost in shoes alone! The deceased earned a 
regular salary, but now there's only a miserable little pension. 
They'll have to tighten their belts. They always received me coldly. 
And I wouldn't have gone now, had it not been such a special 
occasion. I joined the others in the procession to the cemetery; 
they kept apart from me and looked down their noses. My uniform 
coat really is rather shabby. It must be twenty-five years since I've 
been to a cemetery. What a place it is! 
First of all, there's the smell. About fifteen corpses had arrived. 
Funeral palls of various prices. There were even two catafalques: 
one for a general and one for a lady. A lot of mournful faces, a lot 
of faces pretending to mourn, and a lot of obviously happy faces 
as well. The clergy have nothing to complain about: it's an income 
for them. But the smell, the smell! I wouldn't want to be a cler­
gyman here. 
I took a cautious look at the faces of the corpses, unsure of my 
own impressionability. Some of them have soft expressions, others 
unpleasant ones. On the whole their smiles aren't nice, and some 
of them are particularly not nice. I don't like them; I'll have dreams 
about them. 
During the service I went out of the church to get some air. It 
was overcast but dry. Cold, too; but it's October, after all. I took 

Bobok 
1 7 3 
a walk round the graves. They have various categories. The third 
category costs thirty rubles; it's decent and not too expensive. The 
first two categories mean'burial inside the church or in the entry; 
they make you pay through the nose for those. This time they 
buried six, including the general and the lady, in the third category. 
I took a look in these wretched graves, and it was dreadful: water, 
and what water! It was quite green and . . .  but why go on about 
it? The gravedigger was constantly bailing it out with a bucket. 
While the service was still going on I went out the gate to stroll 
around a bit. There's an almshouse there, and a restaurant a little 
farther along. Not a bad little place; you can get a bite to eat and 
everything. Quite a few of the mourners had come in here as well. 
I could see a lot of good cheer and genuine liveliness. I had a snack 
and a drink. 
Then I lent a hand in carrying a coffin to the grave. Why is it 
these corpses get so heavy when they're in the coffin? I've heard 
it's some sort of inertia, that the body can't manage itself any more, 
it seems . . .  or some such nonsense. It goes against common sense 
and the laws of mechanics. I don't like it when people with only 
a general education bun in to try to solve specialized problems, 
but it's done al the time in Russia. Civilians love to make judgments 
on military matters-even on things only a field marshal should 
decide, while people trained as engineers more often talk of phi­
losophy and political economy. 
I didn't go to the Litany afterward. I'm a proud man, and if 
they are going to receive me only because of special circumstances, 
then why bother trudging off to their dinners, even if they are 
funeral dinners? I just don't understand why I stayed at the cem­
etery. I sat down on a tombstone and fell into an appropriate reverie. 
I began thinking about the Moscow Exhibition and ended think­
ing about astonishment; I mean astonishment in general, as a topic. 
This is what I concluded about "astonishment." 
It's ridiculous, of course, to be astonished at everything, while 
being astonished at nothing is much more attractive and for some 
reason is considered good form. But, practically speaking, it's hard­
ly like that. I think it's far more ridiculous to be astonished at 
nothing than to be astonished at everything. Besides, to be aston­
ished at nothing is almost the same as to respect nothing. And a 
stupid man isn't even capable of respect. 
"Above all I want to feel respect. I long to feel respect," an 
acquaintance of mine told me just the other day. 

174 
A Writer's Diary 
He longs to fel respect! My God, I thought, what would happen 
to you if you ventured to say that in print! 
At this point my mind began to wander: I don't like reading 
inscriptions on gravestones; you always se the same thing. On the 
stone next to me lay a half-eaten sandwich: stupid and inappro­
priate. I threw it on the ground, since it wasn't bread, only a 
sandwich. However, I think it's not a sin to throw bread crumbs 
on the ground; it's only a sin when it's on the floor. I must check 
it in Suvorin's Almanac. 
I imagine I must have sat there for a long time, perhaps too long; 
I mean to say that I even lay down on a long stone carved like a 
marble coffin. And how was it that suddenly I began hearing various 
things? At first I didn't pay any attention and tried to ignore the 
voices. But the conversation went on. I could hear some muffted 
sounds, as if the mouths were covered with pillows; and yet they 
were audible and semed quite near. I came to life, sat up, and 
began listening carefuly. 
"That's simply not possible, Your Excellency. You declared in 
hearts, sir; I'm your partner, and now, suddenly, you have seven 
in diamonds. We should have agred about the diamonds before­
hand, sir." 
"What, then, are we to play entirely by memory? What charm 
is there in that?" 
"It's absolutely impossible, Your Excellency, without stipulations 
of some sort. We must have a dumy, and we must have one hand 
not turned up." 
"Well, you won't find any dumy here." 
What presumption! Both strange and surprising. One voice was 
very weighty and authoritative, the other sounded soft and sac­
charine; I wouldn't have believed it, had I not heard it myself. I 
didn't think I could be at the Litany. But how can they be playing 
preference here, and who is this general? The sounds were coming 
from the grave; that was certain. I bent down and read the in­
scription on the headstone: "Here lies the body of Major-General 
Pervoedov . . .  Chevalier of this order and that." Hm. "Pased 
away in August of this year . . .  fifty-seven . . .  Rest, belo\'ed ashes, 
until the joyous mom." 
Well, damn it, he realy was a general! On the other little grave, 
where the obsequious voice came from, there was stil no monu­
ment, only a stone slab; a newcomer, no doubt. A Court Councilor, 
by the sound of his voice. 

Bobok 
1 75 
"Oh-ho-ho!" said a new voice, about thirty feet away from the 
general's place and coming from a fresh grave. This was a rough, 
masculine voice, but softened by a sanctimonious touch. 
"Oh-ho-ho!" 
"Oh, he's hiccuping again!" suddenly came the fussy and haugh­
ty voice of an iritated lady, apparently one from high society. 
"What a punishment to lie next to this shopkeeper!" 
"I wasn't hiccuping at al; I've had nothing to eat in any case; 
it's just my nature. Anyhow, madam, it's your own fussiness about 
things here that keep you from settling down." 
"Then why did you have to lie next to me?" 
"It was my wife and litde ones who put me here; it wasn't my 
wish. The mystery of death! I wouldn't have lain next to you for 
anything, not for gold of any color. I'm here because of my means­
it's a matter of price, ma'am. Because that's something we can 
always manage, to pay for a third-class grave." 
"You must have piled up a good bit with your overcharging." 
"How can we overcharge you when you haven't paid a thing on 
your account since January? You've a tidy litde bill in the shop." 
"That's ridiculous. In my opinion it is utterly ridiculous to try 
to collect debts here! Go up above. Ask my niece; she inherited 
it al." 
"There's not much chance of asking anywhere, or going anywhere 
now. We've both come to the end of our days, and we are equal 
in sin before God's judgment." 
"Equal in sin," the deceased lady mimicked scornfuly. "Don't 
you dare say another word to me!" 
"Oh-ho-ho!" 
"Still, the shopkeeper is doing as the lady says, Your Excellency." 
"And why should he not do as she says?" 
"As we al know, Your Excellency, because of the new order 
down here." 
"What new order do you mean?" 
"Well, you see, Your Excellency, we have, so to say, died." 
"Ah, yes! But still, the order . . . .  
" 
Well, I was obliged to them; they certainly cheered me up! If 
that is the state of affairs down there, what can we expect of the 
upper floor? But the things that were going on down there! I went 
on listening, however, but it was with real irritation. 
"No, I wish I could have lived a bit longer! No . . .  you know . . .  

1 76 
A Writer's Diary 
I wish I could have lived a bit longer!" said a new voice, coming 
from somewhere in the space between the general and the irritated 
lady. 
. 
"Listen to that, Your Excellency, our neighbor is at it again. He 
doesn't say a word for thre days, and suddenly: 'I wish I could 
have lived a bit longer; no, I wish I could have lived!' And he 
says it with such appetite, he-he-he!" 
"And without thinking of what he's saying." 
"It gets the better of him, Your Excellency, and he falls asleep, 
fast asleep. He's been here since April, you know, and all of a 
sudden: 'I wish I could have lived!"' 
"It is a bit dull, though," remarked His Excellency. 
"It does get dull, Your Excellency. Shal we tease Avdotia lg­
natevna again, he-he-he?" 
"No, please, spare me that. I cannot abide that twittering 
busybody." 
"And I canot abide either one of you," replied the woman with 
disgust. "You are both extremely boring and have no capacity for 
discussing elevated matters. You needn't put on airs, Your Excel­
lency; I know a little story about how a servant swept you out 
from under the bed of a maried lady one morning." 
"Wretched woman!" muttered the General. 
"Avdotia lgnatevna, ma'am," the shopkeeper muttered again 
suddenly, "tell me, dear lady, and don't bear me a grudge: are 
these my forty days of torment, or is it something else . . .  ?" 
"Oh, he's on about that again. I just knew it, because I can 
smell the stench of him, and that means he's tossing and turning!" 
"I'm not tossing and turning, ma'am, and I don't have any stench 
because my body is still whole and sound. But you, my lady, have 
already begun to turn bad, because the stench is truly unbearable, 
even for a place like this. It's only out of politeness that I haven't 
mentioned it." 
"Oh, you are a nasty creature to insult me so. He reeks to high 
heaven, but he talks about me." 
"Oh-ho-ho-ho! If only my forty-day memorial would come. I 
can hear the tearful voices up there, the wailing of my wife and 
the quiet weeping of my children!" 
"Much they have to weep about: they'll stuf themselves ful of 
rice porridge and go home. Oh, I wish someone would wake up!" 
"Avdotia lgnatevna," the unctuous official spoke up. "Just wait 
a wee while and the newcomers will begin to talk." 

Bobok 
1 77 
"Are there any young people among them?" 
"There are, Avdotia lgnatevna. There are even some young men." 
"Isn't that just what we need!" 
"Well, haven't they begun yet?" the general inquired. 
"The ones from the other day haven't even come to yet, Your 
Excellency. I'm sure you are aware that sometimes they don't say 
a word for a week. It's good that they brought a lot of them all at 
once yesterday, the day before, and again today. Aside from them, 
almost everyone for twenty-five yards around is from last year." 
"Yes, it should be interesting." 
"Just today, Your Excellency, they buried the Actual Privy Coun­
cilor Tarasevich. I recognized the voices. I know his nephew who 
helped lower the coffin." 
"Hmm, where is he, then?" 
"Only about five paces from you, Your Excellency, on your left. 
Almost at your very feet . . . .  You ought to make his acquaintance, 
Your Excellency." 
"Hmm, perhaps not . . . .  I don't think I should make the first 
move." 
"He'll take the initiative himself, Your Excellency. He'll even 
be flattered. Let me look after things, Your Excellency, and I. . . .  " 
"Ah, ah . . .  oh, what's happening to me?" groaned the thin, 
frightened voice of a newcomer. 
"A newcomer, Your Excellency, a newcomer, thank God, and 
how quickly! Sometimes they don't say a word for a week." 
"A young man , it seems!" squealed Avdotia Ignatevna. 
"I . . .  I . . .  I had complications, and so suddenly!" the young 
man babbled again. "Schultz told me just last night: 'You have 
complications,' he said, and I was dead by morning. Ah, ah! "  
"There's nothing to be done, young man," said the General kind­
ly, evidently delighted by the presence of someone new. "You must 
stop grieving! Welcome to our Vale of Jehoshaphat, as it might be 
called. We are good people, and you'll get to know us and like us. 
Major-General Vasily Vasilievich Pervoedov, at your service." 
"Oh, no, no! I won't accept this! I'm being treated by Schultz; 
I developed complications, you see; first I had chest pains and a 
cough, and then I caught a cold; chest congestion and influenza . . .  
and then suddenly, quite unexpectedly . . .  that's the main thing, it 
was quite unexpected." 
"You say it was your chest first,'' the official joined in gently, 
as if wishing to raise the spirits of the newcomer. 

1 78 
A Writer's Diary 
"Yes, my chest, with a lot of phlegm; then suddenly, no more 
phlegm, just my chest. I couldn't breathe . . .  and, you know . . . .  
"I know, I know. But with chest problems you should have gone 
to Ekk right away, not to Schultz." 
"I kept intending to go to Botkin, you know . . .  and sudden­
ly . . . .  " 
"Well, Botkin will skin you," remarked the General. 
"Botkin doesn't skin you, not at al. I've heard he's got such a 
fine manner and he can tell you everything beforehand." 
"His Excellency was remarking about Botkin's fees," the official 
corrected. 
"What do you mean? He only charges thre rubles, and he gives 
you such an examination, and a prescription . . . .  And I certainly 
wanted to consult him, because I was told that . . . .  So, gentlemen, 
what should I do: go to Ekk or to Botkin?" 
"What? To whom?" The General's corpse shook with friendly 
laughter. The official's falsetto joined in. 
"My dear boy, my dear, delightful boy, how I love you!" squealed 
Avdotya lgnatevna with delight. "How I wish they would put 
someone like you next to me!" 
No, I canot put up with this! Is this what corpses are like 
today? But I must listen to more of this and not jump to any 
conclusions. This whining newcomer-! remember seeing him in 
his coffin not long ago and he looked like a frightened chicken, 
an absolutely repulsive expression on his face! But let's hear what 
comes next. 
But next there developed such a row that I couldn't even keep 
it all in my memory, since very many of them woke up al at once. 
An official, a State Councilor, awoke and immediately, without a 
moment's hesitation, began taking up with the General a proposal 
for a new subcommittee in the Ministry of -- Affairs and for the 
probable transfer of various functionaries connected with this sub­
committee; and the General was utterly carried away by this dis­
cussion. I confess that I myself learned many a new thing and was 
amazed at the ways one can glean news of officialdom in this capital 
city of ours. Then a certain engineer awoke; but he went on mum­
bling utter nonsense for a long time, so that our friends paid him 
no heed and simply let him work it out of his system. At last the 
prominent lady who had been buried under the catafalque that 

Bobok 
179 
morning began to display signs of sepulchral animation. Lebe­
ziatnikov (for the name of the obsequious Court Councilor whom 
I so despised and who was located near General Pervoedov was in 
fact Lebeziatnikov) began fussing and expressing his astonishment 
that they were awakening so quickly this time. I confess that I was 
amazed as well. However, some of those who were waking up had 
been buried two days earlier, such as a certain very young girl of 
about sixteen who could, however, only giggle in a most vile and 
rapacious manner. 
"Your Excellency, the Privy Councilor Tarasevich is awakening! "  
Lebeziatnikov anounced suddenly and hastily. 
"Eh? What?" mumbled the newly awakened Privy Councilor in 
a fussy, lisping voice. There was something capriciously imperious 
in the sound of that voice. I listened with curiosity, since I had 
heard some things about this Tarasevich of late, things that were 
highly suggestive and alarming. 
"It is I, Your Excellency, for the moment it is only I, sir." 
"What is your problem? How may I help you?" 
"I wish only to inquire about Your Excellency's health. At first, 
everyone here, being unaccustomed to the place, feels somewhat 
cramped . . . .  General Pervoedov would like to have the honor of 
making Your Excellency's acquaintance and hopes . . . .  " 
"Never heard of him ." 
"Surely, Your Excellency-General Pervoedov, Vasily Vasile­
vich . . . .  " 
"Are you General Pervoedov?" 
"Indeed not, Your Excellency, I am only Court Councilor Le­
beziatnikov at your service, sir; but General Pervoedov . . . .  " 
"Nonsense! I must ask you to leave me in peace." 
"Let him be," said General Pervoedov with dignity, at last put­
ting an end to the vile overzealousness of his sepulchral minion. 
"He hasn't quite awakened yet, Your Excellency, and you must 
keep that in mind. It's only that he's unaccustomed to things here; 
once he wakes up fully he'll receive you properly . . . .  " 
"Let him be," repeated the General. 
"Vasily Vasilevich! Hallo, Your Excellency! "  came the sudden 
exclamation of a new voice, loud and excited, from the vicinity of 
Avdotia lgnatevna. This was an impertinent, aristocratic voice with 
a fashionably weary tone and impudent intonation. "I've been 
listening to you all for the past two hours; I've been here for three 

1 80 
A Writer's Diary 
days now. Do you remember me, Vasily Vasilevich? Klinevich: we 
met at the Volokonskys' where you-1 can't imagine why-were 
also received." 
"What? Count Piotr Petrovich? Have you really . . .  at such tender 
years . . .  ? I am truly sorry!" 
"And I am sorry as well, yet what does it maner? I want to get 
al that I can from this place. And I'm not a count but a baron, 
only a baron. We're merely some mangy linle family of barons 
who originated in the servants' quarters; how we came to be barons 
I don't know, nor do I care. I'm only a good-for-nothing from the 
pseudo-upper class and consider myself a charming rascal. My 
father is a general of some sort, and my mother was once received 
en haur lieu. Sieffel the Yid and I passed off fifty thousand rubles'­
worth of false banknotes last year, but I informed on him, and 
Julie Charpentier de Lusignan went off to Bordeaux with al the 
money. And just imagine-1 was already quite properly engaged 
to Miss Shchevalevsky, who's thre months short of being sixteen 
and still at school. She was bringing ninety thousand with her. 
Avdotia lgnatevna, do you remember how you seduced me fifteen 
years ago when I was fourteen and still in the Corps of Pages?" 
"Ah, it's you, wretch. WeU, God sent you, at least, otherwise 
there would be no one here . . . .  " 
"You were wrong when you thought it was your neighbor, the 
merchant, who was smelling bad . . . .  I just kept quiet and laughed. 
That was me; they had to bury me in a sealed coffin." 
"What a vile creature you are! Still, I'm glad; you will simply 
not believe, Klinevich, what lack of life and wit there is here." 
"Yes, indeed, and I have some original ideas to try out. Your 
Excellency-not you, Pervoedov-the other Excellency, Mister Ta­
rasevich, Privy Councilor! Answer me! It's Klinevich, who took 
you to se Mlle. Furie last Lent. Do you hear me?" 
"I hear you, Klinevich. I'm very pleased, and you have my 
assurance that . . . .  " 
"I don't have any assurance of anything, and don't give a hang. 
I would only like to give you a big kiss, you dear old fellow, but 
I can't, thank God . Do you know, gentlemen, what this grand-pere 
cooked up? He died thre or four days ago and-can you imagine?­
he left a deficit of some four hundred thousand in government 
funds. The sum was supposed to support widows and orphans, 
but it seems for some reason he was the sole administrator and so 
his accounts hadn't been audited for eight years. I can imagine 

Bobok 
1 8 1  
what long faces they're all wearing up there and how they'll re­
member him. The very thought makes one's mouth water, doesn't 
it! Al last year I was amazed at how a seventy-year-old fellow like 
him, with gout and rheumatism, could have such stores of energy 
for dissipation; but now we have the answer! It was those widows 
and orphans: the very thought of them must have warmed his 
blood! I've known about it for a long time, and I was the only 
one who knew; Charpentier told me, and when I found out I at 
once leaned on him , the blessed man, in friendly fashion: 'Let's 
have twenty-five thousand, unless you'd like your accounts audited 
tomorrow.' But he could only scrape up thirteen thousand, and so, 
it sems, he died just in time. Grand-pere, hey, do you hear me?" 
"Cher Klinevich, I am fuly in agreement with you, and you 
need not . . .  enter into such details. Life contains so much suffering, 
so many torments, and so little retribution . . . .  I wanted some peace 
at last and, as far as I can see, I have hopes of deriving something 
from this place as well . . . .  " 
"I'll wager he's already snifed out Katish Berestova!" 
"Who? . . .  Which Katish?" came the trembling, rapacious voice 
of the old man. 
"Ah, which Katish indeed? She's here, not more than five paces 
from me, on the left, and ten paces from you. This is her fifth 
day here, and if you had known, grand-pere, what a wicked little 
creature she is . . .  a good home, a good education, and a monster 
to the tips of her fingers! I didn't show her to anyone up there; I 
was the only one who knew . . . .  Katish, say something!" 
"Hee-hee-hee!" responded a cracked, girlish voice; but in that 
voice one felt something like the prick of a needle. "Hee-hee-hee!" 
"And is she a nice little blo-onde?" babbled the grand-pere, 
drawing out the last word. 
''Hee-hee-hee! '' 
"For a long time now . . .  a long time," babbled the old fellow, 
trying to catch his breath, "I've loved to dream about a nice little 
blonde . . .  about fifteen . . .  in circumstances just like these . . . .  " 
"Monster!" exclaimed Avdotia lgnatevna. 
"Enough!" Klinevich anounced flatly. "I see that I have ex­
cellent material to work with. We shall at once set to arranging 
things here in a better fashion. The main thing is that we pass our 
remaining time here happily. But how much time have we? Hey, 
you, the official of some sort-Lebeziatnikov, was it, that someone 
called you?" 

A Writer's Diary 
"Lebeziatnikov, Semyon Evseich, Coun Councilor, at your serv­
ice, and absolutely delighted to be so." 
"I couldn't give a damn if you're delighted, but you sem to 
know everything about this place. Tell me, first (and I've been 
amazed at it since yesterday), how is it that we can speak here? 
We've died, after all, and yet we're speaking; we sem to be able 
to move, and yet we shouldn't be able to speak and move. What 
son of hocus-pocus is this?" 
"If you please, baron, Platon Nikolaevich could explain it bener 
than 1." 
"Who is this Platon Nikolaevich? Just answer my question! "  
"Platon Nikolaevich, our local homegrown philosopher, natural 
scientist, and Master of Ans. He's published several linle boks 
of philosophy, but for the past thre months he's gone right off to 
sleep so that there's no way we can rouse him now. Once a week 
he muners a few irrelevant words." 
"Get to the point! "  
"He explains it all by a very simple fact, namely, that up above, 
while we were still alive, we were wrong in thinking that death up 
there was really death. Here the body more or less comes to life 
again; the remnants of life are concentrated, but only in the con­
sciousness. This is-I don't quite know how to put it-a contin­
uation of life as if by inertia. In his view, everything is concentrated 
somewhere in the consciousness and continues for two or thre 
months . . .  sometimes even for half a year . . . .  We have one person 
here, for instance, whose body has almost entirely decomposed, 
but every six weeks or so he will still suddenly mumble one word­
meaningless of course-about a bean or something: 'Bobok, bobok.' 
So that means there is stil a faint spark of life glowing in him .
.
.
.
 " 
"Quite silly. But how is it that I have no sense of smell, and yet 
I can smell the stench?" 
"That's . . .  he-he! Well, at this point our philosopher got com­
pletely lost in a fog. He remarked specifically about the sense of 
smell, that the stench here was a moral one, so to say-he-he! Ap­
parently the stench is from the soul, so that after two or thre months 
it can reach a new awareness . . .  this being, so to say, the final con­
cession of mercy . . . .  Yet it sems to me, baron, that these are all 
mystical ravings, quite understandable in his cin:wnstances . . . .  
" 
"That's enough; I'm sure the rest is all nonsense. The main 
thing is that we have two or thre months of life and then, finally, 
bobok. I propose to you that we spend these two months as pleas­
antly as possible and to do so, that we arange things on an entirely 

Bobok 
new basis. Ladies and gentlemen! I propose that we abandon all 
sense of shame!" 
"Oh, indeed, let us abandon all sense of shame! "  came the sound 
of many voices; strangely enough, there were entirely new voices 
among them, meaning that they belonged to people who had only 
just awakened. The bass voice of the engineer, who had now com­
pletely awakened, rumbled among them with special eagerness. 
The girl Katish burst into a fit of joyous giggles. 
"Oh, how I long to lose my sense of shame! "  exclaimed Avdotia 
lgnatevna rapturously. 
"Do you hear that? If even Avdotia Ignatevna wants to abandon 
her sense of shame . . . .  " 
"No, no, Klinevich. I used to feel shame; I was still ashamed 
up there, but here I have a terrible urge to be ashamed of nothing! "  
"As I understand it, Klinevich," growled the engineer's bass 
voice, "you want to organize our life here, so to say, on new and 
rational principles." 
"I really don't give a damn about that. We should wait for 
Kudeiarov for that; they brought him in yesterday. Once he wakes 
up he'll explain it all to you. What a personality he is-a giant 
among men! I think they'll be hauling in another one of your 
natural scientists tomorrow, and probably an officer and, if I'm not 
mistaken, a cenain newspaper columnist in three or four days and 
his editor, too, I think . But never mind them! We're getting a nice 
little group together and everything will take shape of itself. But 
meanwhile, I don't want any lying. That's the only demand I make, 
because it's the most important thing. It's impossible to live on 
earth without lying, for life and lies are synonymous; but down 
here, just for fun, let's not lie. The grave means something after 
all, damn it! We'll each tell our stories to the others and be ashamed 
of nothing. I'll tell you about myself first of all. I'm a carnivore 
in essence, you se. Up there, all such things were held together 
with rotten ropes. Down with ropes! Let's live these two months 
in the most shameless truth! Let us bare our bodies and our souls! "  
"Let us bare ourselves! "  cried all the voices. 
"I'm terribly, terribly eager to bare myself," squealed Avdotia 
lgnatevna. 
"Ah . . .  ha . . .  I can see that we are going to have a very fine 
time here. I don't want to go see Ekk!" 
"No, I wish I could live a bit longer, just a bit longer, you 
know!" 
"Hee-hee-hee! "  giggled Katish. 

A Writer's Diary 
"The main thing is that no one can stop us, and even though 
Pervoedov may get angry, as I can se, I;J.e stil can't touch me. 
Grand-pm, do you agre?" 
"I agree, absolutely and with the greatest pleasure, but on con­
dition that Katish begin her autobiography first ." 
"I protest; I protest with every ounce of my strength! "  said 
General Pervoedov forcefully. 
"Your Excellency! "  babbled the wretched Lebeziatnikov in a 
flury of excitement, lowering his voice to coax the General. "Your 
Excellency, it would be much better for us if we agred. That girl 
is right here, you know . . .  and finaly, there are al those other 
things . . . .  
, 
"To be sure, there is the girl, but . . . .  " 
"It would be better, Your Excellency, it truly would be better! 
Let's at least give it a try; let's at least have an example . . . .  " 
"Even in the grave they don't give you any peace!" 
"In the first place, General, you play cards in the grave, and in 
the second place, we don't give a damn about you," intoned Kli­
nevich with measured emphasis. 
"My dear sir, I must ask you not to forget yourself." 
"What? You can't get your hands on me, and I can tease you 
from here just as I used to tease Julie's lapdog. In any case, ladies 
and gentlemen, what son of a general is he down here? He was a 
general up there, but down here he's not even small potatoes! "  
"No, I ' m  not small potatoes . . .  even here I'm . . . .  " 
"Down here you'll rot in your coffin, and six brass buttons will 
be al that's left." 
"Bravo, Klinevich! "  howled several voices. 
"I served my emperor . . . .  I have a sword . . . .  " 
"Your sword is fit only for kiling mice, and besides, you've 
never drawn it from its scabbard." 
"Al the same, I was a pan of the whole." 
"There was no shortage of pans of the whole." 
"Bravo, Klinevich, bravo, ha-ha-ha! "  
" I  don't understand what significance the sword has," anounced 
the engineer. 
"We shal flee from the Prussians like mice, and they'll smash 
us to smitherens! "  cried a new voice from far away, literally chok­
ing with delight. 
"A sword, my dear sir, signifies honor! "  the General tried to 
shout, but only I heard him. Thereupon began a long and furious 

Bobok 
1 8 5  
uproar with riotous shouting and racket; only Avdotia Ignatevna's 
squeals, impatient to the point of hysteria, could be recognized. 
"Quickly, quickly! Oh, when are we going to give up our sense 
of shame?" 
"Oh-ho-ho! In truth my soul is going through its torment!" came 
the voice of the shopkeeper, and . . . .  
And at this point I suddenly sneezed. It happened unexpectedly 
and unintentionally, but the effect was striking: everything fell silent 
as the grave and vanished like a dream. A real sepulchral silence 
ensued. I do not think that they were shamed by my presence: 
they had resolved to be ashamed of nothing, after all! I waited 
about five minutes and heard not a word and not a sound. I cannot 
suppose, either, that they feared I would denounce them to the 
police, for what could the police do in this case? I cannot help but 
conclude that they still had some sort of secret, unknown to mortal 
men, which they carefully concealed from every mortal. 
"Well, dear friends," I thought, "I'll come and visit you again." 
And with this I left the cemetery. 
No, I cannot accept this, in truth, I cannot! Bobok does not 
trouble me (that's what it turned out to be, this bobok)! 
Debauchery in a place like that, debauchery of one's final hopes, 
debauchery among sagging, decomposing bodies, debauchery that 
does not even spare the final moments of consciousness! These 
moments are given to them as a gift and . . . .  And the main thing­
in a place like that! No, this I cannot accept . . . .  
I shall visit other "categories" in the graveyard and listen every­
where. That's just what has to be done-to listen everywhere, not 
just at one end of the cemetery, so as to form an understanding. 
Perhaps I'll stumble on something to give comfort as well. 
But I'll certainly come back to these people. They did promise 
to tell their autobiographies and various other linle stories. Fool 
No, I won't go, certainly not; it's a matter of conscience! 
I'll bring this to The Citizen. One of the editors there has also 
had his portrait exhibited. Perhaps he'll print this. 

7 
A Troubled Countenance 
I've been reading a thing or two from our current literature and 
feel that The Citizen should include some mention of this on its 
pages. But what sort of a critic am I? I truly had intended to write 
a proper critical article, but it seems I can only say something "a 
propos." The things I read were "The Sealed Angel," by Mr. 
Leskov, a poem by Nekrasov, and an article by Mr. Shchedrin. 
I've also read the articles by Mr. Skabichevsky and N. M. in Notes 
of the Fatherland. Both these articles were revelations to me, in a 
way, and I certainly must talk about them sometime. But now I 
shall begin from the beginning, i.e. , in the order in which I read 
the works-with "The Sealed Angel." 
This is a story by Mr. Leskov in The Russian Messenger. I know 
that many people here in Petersburg liked this work and that very 
many people read it. In truth, the story deserves this attention: it 
is distinctive and entertaining. It is a tale told by a former dissenter, 
an Old Believer, at a posting station one Christmas night, of how 
he and a whole worker's artel of some hundred and fifty other 
dissenters were converted to Orthodoxy through a miracle. These 
workers were building a bridge in a large Russian city and had 
spent three years living in their own separate barracks on the bank 
of the river. They had their own chapel and in it a large collection 
of ancient icons that had been consecrated before the time of Pa­
triarch Nikon. Mr. Leskov relates in a very interesting manner 
how one gentleman-a not altogether unimportant official-wanted 
to extract a bribe of some fifteen thousand rubles from the artel. 
Making a sudden incursion into the chapel with troops to back 
him up, he demanded a hundred rubles ransom for each icon. The 
dissenters were unable to provide this money. Thereupon he con­
fiscated their icons. Holes were drilled in the icons and they were 
! 86 

A Troubled Countenance 
strung on iron rods like so many bagels and then taken away to 
some cellar. But among them was an icon of an angel, ancient and 
particularly revered, and considered by the artel to have miraculous 
powers. The official, angered by the stubborn refusal of the dis­
senters to pay the ransom, decided to impress them in a striking 
maner, gain revenge, and offend them deeply: he took a stick of 
sealing wax and in the presence of the whole group dripped the 
wax on the angel's face and applied an official seal to it. When 
the local bishop saw the sealed face of the holy image he declared, 
"A troubled countenance," and had the desecrated icon placed on 
a window in the cathedral. Mr. Leskov assures us that the bishop's 
words and his placing of the desecrated icon in the cathedral rather 
than in the cellar pleased the group of Old Believers. 
Thereupon followed the complex and interesting story of how 
this "Angel" was stolen from the cathedral. An Englishman, a 
gentleman and apparently the contractor for the bridge, became 
involved with the dissenters and took a liking to them; since they 
were frank and honest with him, he undertook to help them. The 
dissenters' conversations with the Englishman about icon painting 
are particularly noteworthy. This part is truly good, the best in 
the whole story. The story ends with the description of how the 
icon was at last stolen from the cathedral during the midnight 
service, the seal removed from the angel, and a new icon-still 
unconsecrated and which the Englishman's wife undertook to "seal 
up" in the manner of the old one-substituted for the original. 
And so at the critical moment the miracle happened: light was 
seen emanating from the newly sealed icon (true, it was seen only 
by one person), and when the icon was brought to the cathedral 
it turned out to be unsealed; that is, there was no wax on the face 
of the angel. The dissenter who had brought the icon was so struck 
by this that he at once went to the bishop in the cathedral and 
confessed everything; the bishop forgave him, saying: "This should 
be an inspiring demonstration to you of where the faith is more 
efficacious. You," he said, "removed the seal from your angel 
through a knavish trick, while ours removed his own seal and led 
you here." 
The miracle so struck the dissenters that the whole artel of them, 
a hundred and fifty men or so, embraced the Orthodox faith. 
But at this point the author made a slip and ended his tale rather 
awkwardly. (Mr. Leskov is inclined to such slips: just recall the 
end of Deacon Akhilla in his Cathedral Folk.) It seems he got 

1 88 
A Writer's Diary 
frightened of being accused of favoring superstitions, so he made 
haste to demystify the miracle. He has the _narrator himself, a little 
peasant and former dissenter, "merrily" confess that the day after 
their conversion to Orthodoxy they discovered how the seal had 
been removed from the angel. The Englishwoman had not dared 
to pour wax over the face of the angel, even though the icon was 
yet unconsecrated, so she fastened the seal to a piece of paper 
which she slipped under the edge of the mounting. The paper, of 
course, slid free while the icon was being taken to the cathedral, 
and the angel thus became "unsealed." Thus it is not entirely 
comprehensible why the dissenters remained faithful to Orthodoxy 
despite the explanation of the "miracle." Of course, they were 
touched by the kindness ofthe bishop who forgave them. But taking 
into account the firmness and the purity of their former beliefs; 
taking into account the desecration of their sacred objects and the 
insult offered to the sacredness of their own feelings; taking into 
account, finally, the general nature of our dissenters as a whole, 
one can hardly explain the conversion of dissenters by an appeal 
to their tender feelings: tender feelings for what and for whom? 
Was it gratitude merely for the forgiveness of the bishop? But surely 
they-better than anyone-should have been aware of the extent of 
a bishop's authority in the church, and they would thus be unlikely 
to have many tender feelings toward that same church in which a 
bishop, after such an unprecedented, public, shameless, and ar­
bitrary sacrilege by a bribe-seeking official (a sacrilege that touched 
the dissenters and all Orthodox believers in equal measure), allowed 
himself only to sigh, "A troubled countenance!"; a bishop who 
could not even prevent a minor official from taking actions so bestial 
and offensive to religion. 
And, on the whole, in this regard Mr. Leskov's tale left me with 
a queasy feeling and a certain skepticism toward the truth of his 
story. Of course, the story is marvelously narrated and merits much 
praise, but the question remains as to whether it is all true. Could 
all that really happen in Russia? And that is just the point, since 
the story is supposed to be based on actual fact. Let's imagine a 
case like this: let's suppose that in some Orthodox church some­
where there now is an ancient icon of miraculous powers revered 
by all Orthodox everywhere. Imagine that some artel of dissenters, 
as a group, steals that icon from the cathedral specifically in order 
to keep that ancient holy thing in their own chapel. All that could 
happen, of course. Imagine that some ten years thereafter an official 

A Troubled Countenance 
finds this icon and haggles with the dissenters to extract a sizable 
bribe. They aren't able to raise such a sum, and so he takes some 
sealing wax, drips it on the face of the holy image, and applies an 
official seal to it. Does he do that simply because the icon has been 
in the hands of the dissenters for a time and its sacred essence has 
been lost? The "Angel" Mr. Leskov tells us about was also an 
Orthodox icon, consecrated in ancient times and revered by all 
Orthodoxy before the schism, was it not? And surely in such cir­
cumstances the local bishop could and would have the right at least 
to raise a finger in defense of the icon and not simply sigh, "A 
troubled countenance." Our educated people may regard these dis­
turbing questions of mine only as petty superstitions; but I am 
convinced that offenses to the People's feelings in regard to the 
things they revere as sacred is a terrible outrage and an act of 
extraordinary inhumanity. Would the thought never have occurred 
to the dissenters: "So how would this Orthodox bishop have stood 
up for the church had the offender been some even more prominent 
person?" Could they have had any respect for a church in which 
the highest spiritual authority, as described in the story, has so 
little actual power? For how can one explain the action of the bishop 
if not through his lack of power? Is it really a matter of his laziness 
and indifference, and the unbelievable suggestion that he, having 
forgotten the duties of his office, has become merely a government 
official? For such nonsense to get into the heads of his spiritual 
flock would be the very worst thing of all: his Orthodox children 
would then gradually lose all their energy for matters of faith; their 
devotion and love for the church would disappear, and the dissenters 
would regard the Orthodox church with scorn. A spiritual pastor 
must mean something, mustn't he? Don't the dissenters realize 
that? 
And so those are the sorts of thoughts that come into my head 
after reading Mr. Leskov's lovely story. And thus once more I say 
that I am inclined to regard this story-at least in certain details­
as almost implausible. Meanwhile, I read the following news item 
in one of the recent issues of The Voice: 
One of the village priests from Orel Province writes to the newspaper 
Contemporary Life: "I have been engaged in teaching the children of 
my parishioners to read and write almost since the abolition of serf­
dom, and I abandoned that duty only when our local zemstvo took 
on the cost of teaching and expressed the desire to have teachers who 

1 90 
A Writer's Diary 
were free from other duties. But at the beginning of the current school 
year of 1 872-73 there was a shonage of villɀe schoolmasters in our 
district. Not wishing to see our village school closed, I decided to 
declare my wish to take on the position of teacher and applied to the 
school board to be confirmed in that position. The school board replied 
that 'I would be officially given the post of schoolmaster when the 
peasants' community expressed its agreement.' The community did 
agree and drew up a resolution to that effect. In accordance with the 
wishes of the school board, I applied to the county administration 
for the resolution to be endorsed. The county administration, headed 
by an ignorant clerk, one M.S., and a warden who is completely 
under his thumb, declined to endorse the resolution on the grounds 
that I had no time to teach; but in reality their motives were quite 
different. I applied to the mediator. He made the following remarkable 
statement straight to my face: 'In genera/ the government is rwt disposed 
to have peasant education in the hands of the clergy.' 'Why would that 
be?' I asked. 'Because,' the mediator replied, 'the clergy promote 
superstitions.' '' 
What do you think of that piece of news, ladies and gentlemen? 
It almost reestablishes the veracity of Mr. Leskov's story, upon 
which I cast so much doubt and which I stubbornly continue to 
doubt. What is important here is not that such a mediator happened 
to exist: what does it matter if some fool idly makes a foolish 
remark? And what do we care about his convictions? What is 
important is that this was expressed so frankly and with such 
authority, with such deliberate authority and with such cool lack 
of ceremony. He expresses his wise conviction frankly and without 
a moment's hesitation, right to the face of the priest, and aside from 
that has the impudence to attribute his convictions to the govern­
ment and to speak in the name of the government. 
Now tell me, would anyone-never mind a mediator, but someone 
having ten times his authority-venture to tell that to a pastor in 
the Baltic provinces, say? Heavens, what a noise this pastor would 
make, and what a row would have ensued! In Russia the priest 
humbly writes to the newspaper to draw attention to the arrogant 
person. But the thought occurs that had this person been of higher 
rank than a mediator (which could very well happen, because 
anything can happen in Russia), then perhaps the good shepherd 
from Ore! Province might not have even tried to accuse him, know­
ing that all that would come of it would be "a troubled counte­
nance" and nothing more. And one cannot demand from him the 

A Troubled Countenance 
1 9 1  
zeal of the first centuries of Christianity even though we might like 
to have it. On the whole we are inclined to accuse our clergy of 
indifference toward their sacred cause; but what can they do, given 
their circumstances? And meanwhile the clergy's help to the People 
has never been so urgently needed. We are living through the most 
troubled, the most awkward, the most transitory, and the most 
fateful moment, perhaps, in the whole history of the Russian 
People. 
A very strange phenomenon came to light recently in one corner 
of Russia: German Protestantism in the midst of Orthodoxy, the 
new sect of Stundists. The Citizen wrote about the sect at the time. 
It is an almost grotesque phenomenon, but one seems to sense 
something prophetic in it. 
In the province of Kherson a certain Pastor Bonecktberg, seeing 
the local Russian peasants as unenlightened and spiritually aban­
doned, took pity on them out of the kindness of his heart and 
began preaching the Christian faith to them but maintaining an 
Orthodox view and urging them not to deviate from the Orthodox 
faith. But the matter developed differently: his preaching had com­
plete success, yet the new Christians began by leaving Orthodoxy 
at once, making that their first and categorical condition; they 
turned away from ritual and icons and began to congregate in the 
Lutheran fashion, singing psalms from a book; some of them even 
learned German. The sect is spreading with fanatical speed and is 
moving into other districts and provinces. The sectarians have 
changed their way of life and no longer drink. Their reasoning is 
as follows. 
"They (the German Lutheran Stundists, that is) live so well, so 
honestly, and in such a decent fashion because they don't have to 
fast in the Lenten seasons . . . .  
" 
It's wretched logic, but it does have a certain sense, particularly 
if you regard fasting as merely a ritual. And where is a poor man 
to learn the salutary and profound purpose of Lent? And, indeed, 
the whole of his former faith he regarded merely as ritual. 
Thus it was the ritual he was protesting. 
This, I suppose, is understandable. But why did he start pro­
testing so suddenly? Where can we find the reason that compelled 
him to do it? 
The reason, perhaps, is a very general one: it is the fact that 
since the Emancipation of February I 9, I 86 I, the light of a new 

1 92 
A Writer's Diary 
life has been shining on him. He might have stumbled and fallen 
when he took his first steps on the new road, but there was no 
doubt he would recover; and when he recovered he saw at once 
how "poor and wretched, naked, blind and base" he was. The 
most important thing was that he longed for truth-whatever that 
truth might cost, even if it meant sacrificing all that he had formerly 
held sacred. Because one cannot-neither through depravity nor 
pressure nor humiliation of any sort-wipe out, extinguish, or erad­
icate in the hearts of our People the thirst for truth, for that thirst 
is more precious to them than anything. The People may sink to 
terrible depths; but at the moments when they are most despicable 
they will always remember that they are only despicable and no 
more, and that somewhere there exists a higher truth and this truth 
stands above all else. 
So that is the phenomenon. It is, perhaps, still a unique phe­
nomenon on the periphery of things, but it is scarcely an accidental 
one. It may die down and solidify in its early stages and again be 
transformed into some sort of ritualism, as in the case of most of 
the Russian sects, especially when they are left alone. But whatever 
you think, I want to repeat that this phenomenon, perhaps, still 
contains something almost prophetic. At the present time, when 
everything in the future appears so enigmatic, it is sometimes 
permissible to believe even in prophecies. 
What would happen if something of this sort were to spread all 
over Russia? I don't mean exactly the same thing-not the Stundists 
(especially as I have heard that appropriate measures have already 
been taken)-but just something along the same lines? What if the 
entire People, having sunk to the depths of their degradation and 
perceived their own wretchedness, should suddenly say to them­
selves: "I do not want degradation; I do not want to drink liquor. 
I want truth and the fear of God; but truth most of all, truth above 
all." 
That the thirst for truth will come upon him, of course, is cause 
for joy. And yet instead of truth the result may be the most out­
landish lies, as in the case of the Stundists. 
In fact, what kind of Protestants, what kind of Germans are our 
People anyway? And why should they learn German in order to 
sing psalms? Isn't everything, everything that they are seeking, to 
be found in Orthodoxy? Does not Orthodoxy, and Orthodoxy alone, 
contain the truth and the salvation of the Russian People, and in 
ages yet to come the salvation of the whole of humanity? Has not 

A Troubled Countenance 
1 93 
Orthodoxy alone preserved the divine image of Christ in all its 
purity? And perhaps the principal, preordained mission of the 
Russian People, within the destiny of humanity as a whole, is 
simply to preserve within it this divine image of Christ in all its 
purity, and when the time comes, to reveal this image to a world 
that has lost its way! 
Indeed; but before all this comes to pass, our pastor has awakened 
early, with the birds, and has come to the People to tell them the 
truth-the Orthodox truth, since he was very conscientious. But 
the People followed him, and not Orthodoxy-not from gratitude 
alone, but because it was through him that they first glimpsed the 
truth. And so it turned out that "life is good with him because 
there is no fasting." One can understand a conclusion like that 
when a strong personality has become involved. 
By the way, what about our priests? What do we hear about 
them? 
Our priests are also beginning to rouse themselves, we hear. Our 
clergy have for some time now been showing signs of life, appar­
ently. We were touched to read the bishops' admonitions in churches 
regarding preaching and an exemplary way of life for clergy. Our 
clergy, according to all accounts, are resolutely sening themselves 
the task of writing sermons and are preparing to deliver them. 
But will they manage to arrive in time? Will they manage to 
awaken with the birds? Our pastor is a bird of a different feather, 
a bird of passage, and he has another kind of backing. His service 
is of a different kind, in any case; his church hierarchy is different, 
and so on. All that is true, of course, but our priest isn't a gov­
ernment official either, after all! And is he not the one who preaches 
the unique great Truth which has the power to save the whole 
world? 
The pastor arrived before our priest, that's true. But what could 
our priest have done in the case of, say, the Stundists? We are all 
inclined to blame our priests, but let us look closely into the prob­
lem: could they have limited themselves merely to reporting the 
maner to the authorities? Oh, of course not: we have many good 
spiritual leaders among us-more, perhaps, than we expect or more 
than we ourselves deserve. But still, what would our good priest 
have preached about in this case? (1, as a layman unfamiliar with 
the matter, sometimes wonder about this.) About the superiority 
of Orthodoxy to Lutheranism? But the peasants are a dark people, 
after all: they will understand nothing, and probably will not be 

1 94 
A Writer's Diary 
swayed by this. About good behavior and good moral standards, 
speaking generally and not going into too ri)lny details? But what 
kind of "good moral standards" can there be when the People are 
drunk from morning until night? In that case, abstention from 
liquor so as to eliminate the evil at its very source? No doubt that 
would be the thing to do, although without entering into too many 
details, for . . .  for one stil has to take into account Russia's im­
portance as a great power which costs us so dearly . . . .  Well, this, 
in a sense, is almost the same thing as "a troubled countenance," 
you se. And so al there is left to preach about is that the People 
should drink just a bit less . . . .  
But what does our pastor care about Russia's importance as a 
great European power? And he's not afraid of any "troubled coun­
tenance," and his service is of quite a different kind. And that is 
why he won the day. 

8 
A Half-Letter from "A Certain Person" 
I am printing below a lener, or more precisely a half-letter, from 
"a certain person" to the editor of The Citizen; it was quite im­
possible to print the whole lener. This is still that same "person," 
the very one who has already once distinguished himself in The 
Citizen on the subject of graves. I must confess that I am printing 
this simply in order to be rid of him. The editor's office has received 
literally stacks of his articles. In the first place, this person appears 
as my resolute defender against my supposed literary enemies. On 
my behalf he has already written three "anticriticisms," two 
"notes," three "marginal notes," one article "apropos," and finally 
"an admonition on behavior." In this laner polemical composition 
of his he purports to admonish my "enemies" but in fact anacks 
me, and even does it in a tone whose energy and fury I have never 
encountered, even among my "enemies." And he wants me to print 
it all! I made it very plain to him that, in the first place, I have 
no "enemies" and that he is only imagining the whole thing; and, 
in the second place, he is too late, for all that journalistic racket 
we heard after the appearance of the first issue of The Citizen this 
year-all the fury unprecedented in literature, the intolerance and 
the simple-minded methods of attack-stopped two or three weeks 
ago just as sʰddenly and inexplicably as it began. Finally, if I were 
to take it into my head to answer anyone, I could manage to do 
it myself, without his help. 
He got angry, quarreled with me, and left. I was relieved. He 
is not a well man . . . .  In the article that he already published here, 
he revealed a few features of his biography: he is a man in distress 
who "distresses" himself every day. But what frightens me most 
is the excessive force of the "civic energy" of this contributor. 
Imagine that from the very beginning he made it plain that he 
195 

A Writer's Diary 
expected no honorariwn whatsoever but was writing simply out of 
his "civic duty." He even confessed, with a proud but self-damaging 
frankness, that he was not writing to defend me at all but only 
wanted to use the opportunity to expound his own ideas, since not 
a single periodical would accept his articles. Plainly and simply, 
he was cherishing the fond hope of creating his own little corner 
for himself in our journal from which-even without pay-he would 
have the opportunity to expound his ideas on a regular basis. What 
sort of ideas does he have? He writes about everything; he expresses 
opinions about everything with bitterness, with rage, with venom, 
and with "a tear of tenderness." "Venom for ninety percent and 
a tear of tenderness for one percent," he himself declares in one 
of his manuscripts. If a new magazine or newspaper should begin 
publication, he is there at once: he imparts his wisdom and offers 
his admonitions. It's absolutely true that he sent off as many as 
forty letters full of advice to one newspaper: advice on publishing, 
on how to behave, on what to write about, and on what to pay 
attention to. In the course of two and a half months some twenty­
eight of his letters have accumulated in our editor's office. He always 
writes over his full signature so that he is known everywhere; he 
spends his last kopecks on postage stamps and even encloses return 
postage in his letters, supposing that he will at last achieve his end 
and manage to begin correspondence on civic matters with various 
editors. What amazes me most is that even after twenty-eight letters 
I am completely unable to discover what his views are and exactly 
what he is aiming at. It's all a great muddle . . . .  Along with crude 
methods, red-nosed cynicism, and the "aggrieved aroma" of a 
frenzied style and worn-out boots, there are flashes of a certain 
covert longing for tenderness, for some ideal; there is faith in beauty, 
Sehnsucht for something lost, and the result of it all is something 
quite revolting. I'm quite fed up with him. True, he's open about 
his rudeness and expects no payment for his efforts, so in that 
sense he is an honorable person; but I've had enough of him and 
his honor! No more than three days after our quarrel he appeared 
again with his "final attempt," and brought this "Letter of a Certain 
Person." What could I do but take it? And now I'd better print 
it. 
It's quite impossible to publish the first half of the letter. Here 
he writes only of personalities and abuses beyond all limits almost 
all the Petersburg and Moscow press. Not one of the periodicals 
he reproaches ever reached the level of shameless mockery of his 
abuse. And yet his own main point is to abuse them solely for the 

A Half-Letter from "A Certain Person" 
1 97 
vulgarity and sneering tone of their polemics. I simply took a 
scissors, cut off the first half of his lener, and returned it to him. 
The concluding part of his lener I am printing only because it 
contains what one might call a general topic: here he exhorts some 
imaginary columnist, and his exhortation is general enough to be 
applicable to columnists of all periods and all nations. The style 
is very elevated, and the force of the style is equalled only by the 
simple-mindedness of the ideas expressed. When he addresses his 
exhortation to the columnist he uses the "thou" form, as in the 
classical odes. The author was very firm in his wish that I should 
not begin his half-lener after a full stop but insisted that it begin 
right in the middle of a sentence, just where I had cut it off with 
the scissors, as if to say, "Let them see how they mutilated me!" 
He also insisted on the title: I wanted to print "A Lener from 'A 
Certain Person,'" but he absolutely insisted that it be entitled "A 
Half-Lener from 'A Certain Person."' 
And so, here is this half-lener: 
A HALF-LETTER FROM "A CERTAIN PERSON" 
. . .  and does the word "swine" truly contain such magical and 
alluring meaning that you at once take it to apply inevitably to 
yourself? I have observed for a long time that in Russian literature 
this linle word has always had a certain special and even mystical 
meaning, as it were. Dear old Krylov himself realized that and used 
the word "swine" with particular fondness in his fables. The literary 
man who reads this word, even when he is completely alone, will 
shudder forthwith and at once commence to thinking: "Could that 
be me? Does that refer to me?" Granted, it is a powerful little word, 
but why must you always assume that it refers to yourself and yourself 
alone? There are others besides you. Or perhaps you have your own 
private reasons for thinking this? For how else can I explain your 
suspicious cast of mind?* 
*This is certainly an exaggeration, but it does contain a measure of truth. There 
is a hint here specifically at the fact that in the first issue of Th£ Citizen I had the 
misfortune to cite an ancient Indian fable about the duel of the lion and the pig; 
in doing so, however, I carefully eliminated even the possibility of supposing that 
I was immodestly using the word "lion" to refer to myself. And what happened? 
In fact, many people expressed extreme and hasry suspicions about it. It was a 
regular phenomenon: a lener to the editor arrived from a subscriber in a remote 
border region of Russia; the subscriber brazenly and recklessly accused the editors 
of referring to their subscribers as "swine"-an assumption so absurd that even 
certain Petersburg columnists did not venture to make use of it when casting their 
aspersions . . .  and of course that is the measure of everything. The Editor. [Dos­
toevsky's note) 

A Writer's Diary 
The second thing I wish to point out to you, my columnist friend, 
is that you lack restraint in preparing your co!umns. The pages you 
write are so crammed with generals, wealthy stockholders, and princes 
who need you and your witty words that on reading you I have to 
conclude that their excessive number suggests rather that you do not 
know even one of them. At one point you are present at an important 
meeting and utter some bon mot, carelessly and haughtily, but in 
doing so you cast a ray of light on the proceedings, and the meeting 
at once takes a turn for the better. At another point you ridicule a 
certain wealthy prince to his face, in exchange for which he promptly 
invites you to dinner; but you pass him by and proudly, yet in proper 
liberal fashion, decline the invitation. And then, in an intimate salon 
conversation you jokingly reveal the whole secret inner workings of 
Russia to a visiting foreign lord: in trepidation and delight he at once 
telegraphs London, and on the following day Victoria's whole cabinet 
is turned out. And again, while taking your stroll from two to four 
on the Nevsky, you propose the solution to a thorny problem of state 
to three retired cabinet ministers who are, nonetheless, running after 
you; you encounter a captain of the Guards who has lost everything 
at cards and toss him a loan of two hundred rubles; you go with him 
to Finfina to express your noble (supposedly) indignation . . . .  In short, 
you are here, you are there, you are everywhere: you move through 
all society; people are always plucking at your sleeve; you gobble up 
truffles and sample bonbons, drive here and there in cabs, are on 
intimate terms with the waiters at Palkin's-in a word, without you 
nothing can happen. A position as lofty as yours at last begins to 
seem suspicious. The unassuming reader in the provinces may indeed 
take you for one who has been passed over for some honor, or at least 
for a retired minister who wants to regain his office by means of a 
free, but opposition, press. But the experienced reader in either of 
the capitals knows otherwise: for he knows that you are no more than 
a pen-pusher hired by a publisher determined to make a profit; you 
have been hired, and you are obliged to defend the interests of your 
employer. It is he (and no other) who sets you against any person he 
chooses. 
And so all your anger and passion and barking is nothing more 
than the work of a hireling who attacks in whatever direction his 
employer's hand points. If you would at least stand up for yourself! 
But it is quite the contrary: what surprises me most about you is that 
you really do grow heated and take things to heart as if they really 
meant something to you; you abuse a rival columnist supposedly over 
some cherished idea or matter of principle which is truly precious to 
you. Meanwhile you know very well that you have no ideas of your 

A Half-Letter from "A Certain Person" 
1 99 
own, never mind principles. Or have you, perhaps, after so many 
years of excitement and savoring the stench of your success, at last 
imagined that you have an idea or are capable of having principles? 
If such is the case, then how can you count on my respect? 
There was a time when you were an honest and decent young 
man . . . .  Oh, recall Pushkin's verse-a translation from the Persian, 
if I am not mistaken: a venerable old man speaks to a youth who is 
avid to go off to battle: 
I fear amidst war's strident clamor 
Thou canst but lose and ne'er reclaim 
Thy modesty, thy timid manner, 
Thy tender charm, thy sense of shame. 
Alas, you have lost all these things, lost them long ago, and lost 
them forever! Just look at how you have quarreled with your columnist­
enemy and try to comprehend the depths to which you both have 
sunk in your abuses! For neither of you is as despicable as you paint 
each other. Remember that in their early years children fight with 
one another largely because they have still not learned how to express 
their ideas intelligently. And you-a child with gray hair-from a lack 
of ideas use all the words you know to abuse someone else. A bad 
method! It is precisely your lack of convictions and genuine learning 
that leads you to try to pry into your rival's private life. You are avid 
to learn of his failings; you exaggerate them and expose them to 
salutary publicity. Neither do you spare his wife and children. You 
both pretend the other is dead and you write one another lampoons 
in the form of obiruaries. Tell me, who will ever believe you in the 
end? As I read your column, spattered with your saliva and ink, I 
cannot help but be led to think that you are not right, that there must 
be some special, secret meaning to your article, that you and your 
rival must have come to blows at a dacha somewhere and neither of 
you can forget the incident. I cannot help but find in favor of your 
rival, and the effect of your case is ruined. Is that really what you 
were setting out to do? 
How childishly clumsy you are! Having heaped abuse on your rival, 
you end your column as follows: "I can see you now, Mr. N. N.: 
after you have read these lines you rush about your room in a fury; 
you tear your hair; you shout at your wife who has come running into 
the rom in alarm; you drive your children away; grinding your teeth, 
you pound the wall with your fist in impotent rage . . . .  
" 
Oh, my friend, you are only a naive but overwrought victim of your 
own fictitious fury affected for your employer's benefit! My columnist 

200 
A Writer's Diary 
friend! Tell me: when I read in your column the lines that supposedly 
describe your rival, do you not realize that I see this is you-you 
yourself, and not your rival-who is rushing·about the room tearing 
your hair; that it is you who beats your servant who rushes in, fright­
ened (that is, if you have a servant and if he has not lost his primitive 
innocence since February 19th); it is you who, with shrieking and 
gnashing of teeth, flings yourself against the wall and beats it with 
your fists until they are bloody! For who will believe that you can 
send such lines to your rival unless you have first pounded the wall 
until your own fists were bloody? In such a manner you betray yourself. 
Come to your senses; show some compunction. And when you show 
some compunction, you will also acquire some ability to write a col­
umn. That is the benefit you can derive from this. 
Let me give you an allegory. Out of the blue you suddenly put up 
posters announcing that next Thursday or Friday (imagine the day 
on which you write your column) in Berg's Theater or in some facility 
specially set up for the purpose, you will display yourself naked, right 
down to the last detail. I believe that you will find willing spectators; 
such spectacles are particularly attractive to today's society. I believe 
that a crowd will assemble-even a large crowd. But will they come 
to show their respect for you? And if not, then what have you 
accomplished? 
Consider, now, if you are able: are your columns not doing this 
very same thing? Do you not come out on the very same day every 
week, naked to the last detail, and display yourself to the public? 
And for what, and for whom do you do this? 
The most amusing thing here is that all your readers know the secret 
behind your war; they know, yet they don't wish to know and pass 
by you indifferently, while you both rush about in fury and think that 
everyone is following your doings. Oh, simpleminded man! The public 
knows all too well that the owner of a newspaper in the capital, seeing 
another newspaper established on the same lines as his own, pats the 
pocket where he keeps his wallet and says to himself: "This wretched 
new paper may do me out of a couple of thousand subscribers. I'll 
hire myself a shaggy great mongrel and set him on my rival." That 
mongrel is you! 
The owner is pleased with you; he strokes his whiskers and, after 
breakfast, thinks with a smile, "Yes, indeed, I've hounded him, and 
no mistake!" 
Do you recall Turgenev's Antropka? This is truly a brilliant piece 
by a favorite writer. Antropka is a little urchin in a village-or, more 
correctly, he is the brother of another village urchin (whose name, 
let's say, is Nefed)-who has disappeared from the hut one dark 

A Half-Letter from "A Certain Person" 
201 
summer night on account of some misdeed. The strict father has sent 
the older boy to bring his miscreant little brother home. And so, on 
the bank of a ravine we hear the shrill cries: 
"Antropka! Antropka! "  
For a long time the guilty little scamp does not reply, but at last, 
"as if from another world," a quavering, meek little voice is heard 
from the other side of the ravine: 
"Wha-a-t?" 
"Daddy wants to be-e-at you!" says the older brother, with mali­
cious, eager joy. 
The voice "from another world" is not heard again, of course. But 
in the dark night the strained, tormented, malicious cries still 
continue: 
"Antropka-a! Antropka-a-a!" 
This brilliant little picture of crying out to Antropka and-most 
imponant-its impotent but angry distress is heard again, not only 
among village urchins but also among adults who have attained hoary 
venerability, members of today's society who, however, have been 
upset by the reforms. And isn't there a thing or two in our capital 
that reminds you of these Antropkas? For do you not see something 
of Antropka in the relationship between these two owners of city 
newspapers? Have not you and your rival both been sent out by your 
masters to find Antropkas? And the Antropkas-aren't these the new 
subscribers who you assume might believe in your innocence? You 
both know that all your rage, al your strained effons will be in vain 
and that Antropka will not answer, that you will not manage to steal 
away a single subscriber from the other, that each of you will have 
enough subscribers in any case. But you have both become so wrapped 
up in this game of yours and enjoy this impotent journalistic laceration 
so much that you cannot restrain yourselves! And so every week, on 
the established days, there come the furious, strained cries: "An­
tropka-a! Antropka-a!" And we listen to them. 
I'll permit myself one more allegory. 
Imagine that you have been invited into proper society (for I suppose 
that you too move in proper social circles). You are one of the invited 
guests at an evening party for the name day of a State Councilor (one 
as high in rank as that). The host has already informed the guests 
that you are a very witty man. You enter politely, well dressed; you 
pay your respects to the hostess and compliment her graciously. You 
sense with pleasure that people are looking at you, and you prepare 
to distinguish yourself. And suddenly-oh, horrors!-in the corner of 
the rom you notice your literary rival who has arrived before you; 

202 
A Writer's Diary 
until now you never even suspected he knew your hosts. Your ex­
pression has changed, but the host, assuming this is due to a passing 
indisposition, naively hurries to introduce you 'to your literary enemy. 
You both muner something and at once turn your backs on one 
another. The host is embarrassed but takes courage, supposing that 
this is no more than a new literary fashion of which he is unaware, 
being always caught up in official business. In the meantime, card 
games are arranged and the hostess, with her usual graciousness, 
invites you to play whist. To get away from your rival you happily 
choose a card. A new horror: it turns out that you are to share his 
table. You cannot refuse since as partners you have two congenial and 
agreeable society ladies. They both quickly take their seats, while 
various relatives and friends gather around, al eager to listen to two 
literary men, all staring fixedly at your mouths, ready to seize upon 
your first words. Your rival turns to one of the ladies and calmly says, 
"You have the opportunity to make a good deal, madam." Everyone 
smiles and exchanges glances: his winy remark has gone over well, 
and your hean contracts with envy. The lady deals the cards. You 
pick up your cards and find deuces, threes, sixes; the highest card is 
a jack. You grind your teeth while your rival smiles. He has a good 
hand and proudly declares a slam. Your eyes grow dim. You seize a 
heavy bronze candlestick, a family heirloom and the pride of the host 
(the hostess keeps it locked in a cupboard al year, exhibiting it only 
on name days). You seize this candlestick and fling it violently at your 
rival's head. Screams and confusion! Everyone jumps to his feet, but 
you two have already leapt at each other, mouths foaming with rage, 
and are pulling at each other's hair.* Judging by the lack of patience 
and self-restraint exhibited in your writing, I am justified in con­
cluding that you have a similar lack of patience in private society. 
Your panner, the young lady who was expecting such winy conver­
sation from you, screams and takes refuge under the wing of her 
husband, an important lieutenant-colonel of engineers. He, pointing 
at the two of you twisting each other's hair, tells her, "I warned you 
what to expect from contemporary literature, my dear!" But the two 
of you have already been dragged down the stairs and kicked out onto 
the street. The host, whose name day is being celebrated, feels re­
sponsible and apologizes to his guests, suggesting they forget about 
Russian literature and continue with whist. You have deprived yourself 
of a social evening, some pleasant yet innocent moments with a Pe­
tersburg lady, and a supper. But neither of you is concerned about 
that: each of you takes a cab and rushes away through the malodorous 
*The editor finds this picture somewhat exagerated. (Dostoevesky's note) 

A Half-Letter from "A Certain Person" 
203 
Petersburg streets, each to his own apanment to sit right down and 
compose a column. You urge your driver on, with a fleeting moment 
of envy of his innocence; but you are already mulling over your anicle. 
You arrive, seize your pen, and relate exactly, down to the last detail, 
what happened to you at the home of the Councilor! 
You denounce your host; you denounce his wife and the refresh­
ments; you inveigh against the custom of celebrating name days; you 
criticize the engineer lieutenant-colonel and the lady, your partner; 
and at last you come to your rival. And now you set it all down to 
the last detail in your well-known, usual, current fashion of revealing 
all inside infonnation. You tell of how he beat you and how you beat 
him; you vow that you will beat him again in the future and that he 
has promised to beat you. You want to append to your anicle the 
handful of his hair that you have torn out. But it's already morning . . . .  
You rush around the rom, waiting for the editorial offices to open. 
You arrive at the editor's office, and suddenly he, with a calm air, 
announces that on the previous night he has made up with his rival 
publisher, who has closed down his newspaper, transferring the sub­
scribers to him, your employer; the two of them have celebrated their 
peace with a bottle of champagne at Dussault's. Then he thanks you 
for your services and announces that he no longer needs you. Now 
teU me what a spot you are in! 
What I like least of all are the last days of the pre-Lenten carnival, 
when the common people are drinking themselves into the last stages 
of ugliness. The dull, ugly faces of besotted figures in torn coats crowd 
around the taverns. Two of them stop on the street: one claims he is 
a general, while the other shouts, "Liar!" The first curses in rage, 
while the second again shouts, "Liar!" The first works himself up 
still more furiously, while the second goes on with his "Liar!" And 
so it continues for perhaps two hundred times! It is beauty that they 
both find in this impotent and endless repetition of the same words, 
wallowing, as it were, in the enjoyment of the impotence of their own 
degradation. 
When I read your columns I cannot help but imagine a kind of 
endless, drunken, senseless carnival that has gone on in our literature 
for much too long already. For aren't you two doing the same thing 
as these two mindless drunkards in peasant coats standing on the 
street corner? Does your rival not claim in each of his columns that 
he is a general, and do you not reply to him, like the peasant on the 
corner, "Liar!"? And it all goes on a countless number of times 
without even the least suspicion that the whole thing has at last made 
us sick to death. I imagine you both just as if you were on the last 
day of Carnival (the day of forgiveness!), deprived of your senses by 

204 
A Writer's Diary 
intoxication; I picture you both on the stret in front of the offices of 
your respective editors, wallowing in the diry brown snow of our 
capital, thrashing about and shouting hoarsely at each other with all 
your might: "Help! Police! He-e-elp!" 
But I say nothing and hurry past . . . .  
A Silent Observer. 
N.B. "Silent Observer" is the pseudonym of "A Certain Per­
son"; I neglected to mention this before. 

9 
Apropos of the Exhibition 
I went in to see the exhibition. Quite a number of paintings by 
our Russian artists are being sent off to the Vienna International 
Exhibition. It's not the first time this has happened, and contem­
porary Russian artists are beginning to become known in Europe. 
But still the question arises: can they understand our artists there, 
and from what point of view will they judge them? In my opinion, 
if you were to make the best possible French or German translation 
of a comedy by Mr. Ostrovsky-Our Own Folk, We'll Settle It, 
say, or any other one-and were to stage it somewhere in Europe, 
I truly don't know what the result would be. Something would be 
understood, of course; and-who knows?-perhaps people there 
would even find some enjoyment in it; but at least three-quarters 
of the comedy would remain totally inaccessible to the European 
mentality. I recall in my youth how terribly interested I was to 
learn that Mr. Viardot (the husband of the famous singer who was 
then performing here in the Italian opera), a Frenchman who knew 
not a word of Russian, was translating our Gogol under the guidance 
of Mr. Turgenev. Viardot, of course, had some critical and artistic 
ability and in addition a sensitivity to the poetry of other nation­
alities, which he proved with his excellent translation of Don Quixote 
into French. Mr. Turgenev, of course, understood Gogol down to 
the finest subtleties; I suppose that, like everyone in those days, 
he was in raptures over him; and beyond that he himself was a 
poet, although at that time he had still scarcely stepped over the 
threshold of his poetic career. (N.B. He had written only a few 
verses-I forget which ones-besides the tale "Three Portraits," a 
work of importance.) And so something could have come of it. I 
note that Mr. Turgenev probably has an excellent knowledge of 
French. And what happened? The result of this translation was 
205 

206 
A Writer's Diary 
something so strange that even though I had previously suspected 
it was impossible to translate Gogol into French, I still never ex­
pected anything like this to emerge. You can find this translation 
even now; have a look and se what it is like. Gogol has literally 
disappeared. All the humor, everything comic, all the individual 
details and principal turns of the plot which, even now, when you 
sometimes recall them by chance while alone (and often during the 
most unliterary moments of your life) cause you suddenly to burst 
out laughing to yourself in an utterly unrestrained fashion-all this 
has disappeared as if it had never existed. I don't know what the 
French could have made of Gogol on the basis of this translation; 
I suppose that they didn't think anything at all, however. "The 
Queen of Spades" and Th£ Captain's Daughter, which were also 
translated into French at the time, have also doubtless ben di­
minished by half, although there was much more in them that could 
be understood than in Gogol. In short, all that is characteristic, all 
that is ours and predominantly national (and thus all that is truly 
artistic) is, in my opinion, incomprehensible to Europe. Translate 
Turgenev's short novel Rudin (and I speak of Mr. Turgenev because 
he has ben the most translated of Russian writers, and of his 
novel Rudin because of all his works it is the one that most closely 
approaches something in the German mentality) into any European 
language you like and even it will not be understood. There will 
not be even the slightest hint of the real essence of the thing. A 
Hunter's Sketches will not be understood any more than Pushkin 
or any more than Gogol. And so all of our major talents, I think, 
are perhaps fated to remain completely unknown to Europe for a 
long time; and the greater and more original the talent, the less it 
will be recognized. Yet I believe that we understand Dickens in 
Russian almost as well as the English do, perhaps even with all 
the subtleties; we may even love him no less than do his own 
countrymen. And yet how typical, original, and national Dickens 
is! What can we conclude from this? Is such an understanding of 
other nationalities a special gift the Russians have which the Eur­
opeans do not? Perhaps there is a particular gift, and if such a gift 
exists (just as does the gift of speaking foreign languages, which 
is really greater in the Russians than in other Europeans), then it 
is something of great significance, promises much for the future, 
and means that the Russians are destined to do many things, al­
though I don't know whether this is a wholly good gift or whether 
it contains something harmful as well . . . .  It is more likely (many 

Apropos of the Exhibition 
207 
people will say) that Europeans know little about Russia and Rus­
sian life because until now they have not had the need to come to 
know them in any great detail. It is true, indeed, that in Europe 
until now there has been no particular necessity to get to know us 
in any detail. But still it seems certain that a European of any 
nationality can always learn another European language and enter 
into the soul of any other European nationality more easily than 
he can learn Russian and comprehend our Russian essence. Even 
Europeans who have made a point of studying us for some particular 
purpose (and there have been such), and who applied great effort 
to their study, left us having surely learned a great deal, perhaps, 
but still not fully understanding certain facts; one may even say 
that it will be a long time-a generation or two at least-before 
they do understand. Al this suggests that we may still suffer a 
long and unhappy alienation from the European family of nations; 
that the Europeans will continue to make a long series of errors 
in their assessments of Russia; that they will evidently be inclined 
always to think the worst of us. And perhaps it also explains that 
constant, general hostility of Europe toward us, a hostility founded 
on some very powerful and immediate sense of loathing; it is a 
loathing of us as if we were something repulsive; it is partly even 
a superstitious fear of us; and it is the eternal, familiar, ancient 
judgment pronounced on us: that we are not Europeans at all. . . .  
We, of course, take offense at this and try with all our might to 
prove that we are Europeans . . . .  
Of course, I'm not saying that our landscape painters, for in­
stance, will not be understood in Europe: the views of the Crimea, 
the Caucasus, and even of our steppes will arouse interest there 
too, naturaly. But our Russian, predominantly national landscapes, 
i.e. , those of the northern and central regions of our European 
Russia, will create no great effect in Vienna, I think. "This barren 
landscape," whose whole character consists in its lack of character, 
so to say, is charming and dear to us, however. But what do the 
Germans care about our feelings? Take those two birch trees in 
Mr. Kuindzhi's landscape, for instance ("A View of Valaam"): in 
the foreground there is a marsh and swamp grass; in the back­
ground, a forest; rising from the forest we see not really a cloud 
but a mist, dampness; dampness seems to penetrate everything; 
you can almost feel it; and in the center, between you and the 
forest, stand two white birch trees, bright and strong-the most 
powerful point in the picture. What is special about this? What is 

208 
A Writer's Diary 
characteristic? Yet how fine it is! . . .  Perhaps I am mistaken, but 
I think this isn't likely to appeal to a German. 
About historical painting there's nothing
. 
to be said: we've long 
been far from brilliant in purely historical genres, so we won't 
cause any astonishment in Europe; we won't even cause much 
astonishment with our paintings of battles; even the resettlement 
of the Circassians (a huge, highly colored painting that may have 
great merit-I can't judge) will not produce a very strong impression 
abroad, I think. But genre painting, our own genre painting-will 
they understand any of it? Yet it has reigned almost exclusively 
here for so many years; and if we have something to be proud of 
and something to show off, then of course it is our genre painting. 
Take, for example, the little painting by Makovsky, "The Lovers 
of Nightingales' Singing"-l'm not sure what it's called. Just look 
at it: the little room of some townsman or retired soldier, a dealer 
in songbirds and, probably, one who traps birds as well. You can 
see several bird cages, benches, a table on which a samovar is 
standing; around the samovar sit the guests, two merchants or 
shopkeepers, admirers of the nightingale's singing. The nightingale 
is in a cage hanging in the window and is probably whistling, 
chattering, and trilling out its song while the guests listen. They 
are obviously both serious people, dour shopkeepers concerned 
mainly with their profits, well on in years, and perhaps tyrants in 
their own families (it seems somehow accepted that this entire "dark 
kingdom" must absolutely consist of family tyrants who rule their 
households with an iron fist), and yet they have obviously both 
melted from delight-a most innocent, almost touching delight. 
Something touching to the point of absurdity is going on here. The 
one sitting by the window has bowed his head a little; he has raised 
one hand and holds it suspended, listening intently, melting, a 
blissful smile on his face; he is listening to the last sounds of the 
trill. . . .  He wants to capture something; he's afraid of losing some­
thing. The other is sitting at the table, drinking tea, with his back 
almost toward you. But you know that he is "suffering" no less 
than his friend. The host is sitting in front of them; he has invited 
them to listen and, of course, to sell them the nightingale. He is 
a rather wizened and tall fellow somewhat past forty, dressed very 
casually (what need is there for formality here in any case?); he is 
saying something to the merchants, and you sense that he speaks 
with authority. In terms of social status (meaning financial status), 
he is an insignificant person before these shopkeepers, of course; 

Apropos of the Exhibition 
209 
but now he has a nightingale, and a good one, and therefore he 
looks proud (as if he were singing himself); he treats the merchants 
even with a certain arrogance and severity (don't disturb the birds, 
gentlemen) . . . .  It's interesting that the shopkeepers sit and never 
question that it is only appropriate for the host to talk a bit harshly 
to them because "that nightingale he's got is a really fine bird!" 
When they've finished their tea the bargaining will begin . . . .  Well, 
I ask you, what will a German or a Viennese Yid (Vienna, they 
say, is ful of Yids, just like Odessa) understand in this picture? 
Someone may explain what is going on, and he will learn that the 
Russian merchant of fair-to-middlin' means has two passions: race 
horses and nightingales, and so this picture is all terribly funny; 
but what will come of that? That is a piece of abstract knowledge, 
and a German will find it very difficult to imagine why it's so 
amusing. But we look at the picture and smile; we recall it later, 
and again for some reason we find it amusing and pleasant. You 
may laugh at me, but truly I believe that in little pictures such as 
these one even finds love for humanity, not only for the Russians 
in particular but even for humans in general. I chose this little 
picture only to give one example. But what's most anoying is that 
we would understand a similar picture from German life just as 
well as they themselves and would even take as much delight in it 
as they and experience almost the same German feelings as they; 
but they would understand absolutely nothing of one of our Russian 
paintings. In one sense, however, we may be bener off for that. 
Then we see a game of cards going on in an Estonian or Livonian 
cabin; now that, of course, can be understood, especially the figure 
of the boy who is taking part in the game. Everyone is playing 
cards and telling fortunes, so that "The Ten of Spades" (that is 
the name of the painting) will be quite comprehensible. But I don't 
think that Perov's "Hunters" would be understood. I am delib­
erately picking out one of the most accessible paintings of our 
national genre school. This painting, "Hunters at a Campsite," has 
been well known for a long time now. One of the hunters is excitedly 
telling some very tal tale; another listens to him, utterly convinced; 
the third doesn't believe a word of it and lies there laughing . . . .  
What a charming thing! Of course, if it were explained, the Ger­
mans would also understand, but they wouldn't understand as we 
do that this is a purely Russian yarn spinner and he's concocting 
his story in purely Russian fashion. Why, we can almost hear him 
and know what he's talking about; we know every twist and turn 

2 1 0  
A Writer's Diary 
in his line of fibs, the words he uses and the emotions he expresses. 
I'm sure that if Mr. Perov (and he would certainly have the ability 
to do it) were to ponray French or German hunters (in another 
manner, of course, and with different characters), then we Russians 
would understand German and French yarn-spinnings as well, with 
all their subtleties and all their specifically national characteristics, 
their style and their subject; we would grasp all this from merely 
looking at the picture. But a German, no matter how he tried, 
wouldn't understand our Russian manner of lying. Of course this 
is not a great loss to the German, and once again, perhaps, we 
have an advantage; still, the German wouldn't understand the paint­
ing completely and so would not be able to appreciate it properly; 
and that's a pity, because we are going there to have our paintings 
applauded. 
I don't know how people in Vienna will react to Makovsky's 
"Psalm-Singers." In my view this is no longer a genre painting 
but a historical one. I'm not quite serious, of course; but just study 
the picture carefully: it's only a group of singers-an official church 
choir of sons-performing at a service. They're all gentlemen with 
carefully shaven chins and wearing official costumes. Look carefully 
at this gentleman with the side-whiskers, for instance: it's clear 
that he is camouflaged, as it were, in this costume which doesn't 
suit his personality at all and which he wears only as pan of his 
official function. It's true that all choristers wear such costumes 
only as pan of their official function and that such has been the 
practice since time immemorial, since the days of the Patriarchs; 
but here this "camouflage" seems to be particularly noticeable. 
You are used to seeing such a fine-looking official only in uniform 
in a government office; he's a modest, solid, well-groomed fellow 
of the middle class. He's in the middle of drawing out his song­
something like the famous "Affli-i-cted!"-but even the "Afflict­
ed!" is transformed into something official when you look at him. 
In fact there's nothing funnier than to suppose that this totally 
loyal fellow who has settled comfonably in government service 
could be "afflicted" by anything! If you don't look at them but 
simply turn away and listen, you will be charmed; but when you 
look at these figures you feel that the psalm is being sung just for 
the sake of form . . .  that the picture is really about something quite 
different . . . .  
I have a great fear when "tendency" takes hold of a young artist, 
especially at the beginning of his career; and what do you think 

Apropos of the Exhibition 
2 1 1  
causes me the most concern? Precisely that the purpose of this 
tendency will not be achieved. There is a certain dear critic whom 
I have been reading recently and whose name I don't wish to 
mention here. Will he believe that any work of art without a pre­
conceived tendency, a work created exclusively out of the demands 
of art and even on an entirely noncontroversial subject which doesn't 
contain the least hint of anything "tendentious"-will this critic 
believe that such a work contributes far more for his purposes than 
all the "songs about the shirt," for instance (not Hood's, but those 
of our own writers), even though superficially the work may appear 
to belong to the category called "satisfaction of idle curiosity"? If 
even scholars, apparently, have still not realized this, then what 
may sometimes happen in the hearts and minds of our young writers 
and artists? What a muddle of conceptions and preconceived no­
tions they must have! To satisfy social demands, the young poet 
suppresses his own natural need to express himself in his own 
images, fearing that he will be censured for "idle curiosity"; he 
suppresses and obliterates the images that arise out of his own soul; 
he ignores them or leaves them undeveloped, while extracting from 
himself with painful tremors the images that satisfy common, of­
ficial, liberal, and social opinion. What a terribly simple and naive 
mistake, what a serious mistake this is! One of the most serious 
mistakes is that the denunciation of vice (or what liberal opinion 
accepts as vice) and the arousal of feelings of hatred and vengeance 
is considered the only possible way to achieve the purpose! But 
even with such a narrow approach as this, a powerful talent could 
still wriggle free and not suffocate at the very beginning of his 
career; he need only keep in mind the golden rule that a word 
spoken may be silver, but one unspoken is gold. There are so many 
significant talents who promised so much but who were so badly 
corroded by "tendency" that it essentially put them into uniform. 
I have read the two latest poems by Nekrasov, and this honorable 
poet of ours is now certainly wearing a uniform. Yet even in these 
poems there are some good things that hint at Mr. Nekrasov's. 
former talent. But what is to be done? His subject is also "wearing 
a uniform"; his technique, his ideas, his vocabulary, his verisi­
militude are uniformed . . .  yes, even verisimilitude itself has donned 
a uniform. Does our esteemed poet know, for instance, that no 
woman, not even one overflowing with the finest of civic sentiments 
and who has gone to such efforts in order to see her unfortunate 
husband by traveling four thousand miles in a cart "and coming 

2 1 2  
A Writer's Diary 
to know its delights"; who has, as you tell us, fallen "from the 
lofty heights of the Altai" (which, by the way, is quite irnpossible)­
do you know, sir, that this woman would never kiss the chains of 
her beloved husband first of all? She would first kiss him, and 
only then, if seized by such a powerful and noble upsurge of civic 
feeling, would she kiss his chains; and any woman certainly would 
act that way. Of course, this is only a minor observation, and it 
would not be worth mentioning since the poem itself was written 
for no particular reason except, maybe, to toss off something for 
January 1st. Mr. Nekrasov, however, still has a solid reputation in 
literature, one that is established and almost complete, and has 
produced many excellent verses. He is a poet of suffering, and has 
almost earned this appellation. But I can't help feeling sorry for 
the new poets: not a single one of them has a talent strong enough 
to keep him from submitting to "uniformed" ideas at the begining 
of his career and thus saving himself from literary consumption 
and death. What is to be done? A uniform is a pretty thing, after 
all, with its embroidery and glitter . . . .  And what an advantage to 
wear one! These days, especially advantageous. 
No sooner had I read in the newspapers of Mr. Repin's barge­
haulers than I got frightened. Even the subject itself is terrible: 
we have accepted somehow that barge-haulers are the best means 
of representing the well-known social notion of the unpaid debt of 
the upper classes to the People. I came expecting to see these 
barge-haulers all lined up in uniforms with the usual labels stuck 
to their foreheads. And what happened? To my delight, all my 
fears turned out to be vain: they are barge-haulers, real barge­
haulers and nothing more. Not a single one of them shouts from 
the painting to the viewer: "Look how unfortunate I am and how 
indebted you are to the People! "  And in that alone we can credit 
the artist with a great service. They are marvelous, familiar figures: 
the two foremost haulers are almost laughing; at any rate they are 
certainly not crying, and aren't thinking at all about their social 
status. A little soldier is slyly trying to conceal the fact that he 
wants to fil his pipe. The little boy has put on a serious face; he 
is shouting, even arguing. He is a wonderful figure, almost the best 
in the picture and equal in conception to that of the very last hauler, 
a wretched, drooping little peasant who is trudging along on his 
own and whose face isn't even visible. One simply can't imagine 
that any notion of the politicoeconomic and social debts of the 
higher classes to the People could ever penetrate the poor, droping 

Apropos of the Exhibition 
2 1 3 
head of this little peasant, oppressed by perpetual grief . . .  and­
and do you know, my dear critic, that the very humble innocence 
of thought of this peasant achieves your purpose far more readily 
than you think?-precisely your tendentious, liberal purpose! More 
than one spectator will walk away with pain in his heart and with 
love (and with what love!) for this poor little peasant, or for this 
boy, or for this sly scoundrel, the soldier! Why, you can't help but 
love them, these defenseless creatures; you can't walk away without 
loving them. You can't help but think that you are indebted, truly 
indebted to the People . . . .  You will be dreaming of this whole group 
of barge-haulers afterward; you will still recall them fifteen years 
later! And had they not been so natural, so innocent, and so simple, 
they would not have produced such an impression and would not 
have composed such a picture. Why, it's almost complete! Anyway, 
all these uniform collars are disgusting, no matter how much gold 
embroidery they have! Still, what need is there to go on about this? 
One can't recount a painting; they're far too difficult to convey in 
words. I will say only that the figures are Gogolian. That is a large 
thing to say, but I am not claiming that Mr. Repin is a Gogo! in 
his own medium. Our genre painting still has not reached the level 
of Gogo! and Dickens. 
One can see, though, that even Mr. Repin overdoes it a bit: this 
is noticeable specifically in the costumes, and there only in two 
figures. It's quite impossible for rags like that even to exist. That 
shirt, for instance, must have accidentally fallen into a bowl where 
meat was being chopped for cutlets. To be sure, barge-haulers are 
not noted for wearing finery. We all know where such people come 
from: at home at winter's end, at least according to a number of 
reports, they subsist on bark and in the spring go off to find a 
boss who'll hire them to haul barges, some of them, at least, only 
for the porridge they eat, with scarcely any formal contract. There 
have been some cases where a barge-hauler died of eating porridge 
on his first days on the job; he would fall upon it in his hunger, 
choke to death, and "burst." Doctors doing autopsies, it is said, 
found such people stufed with porridge right up to their throats. 
So there are some subjects of this sort. But still, an unspoken word 
is golden, the more so that one couldn't even put on a shirt like 
that once it had been taken off: you'd never get into it again. 
However, in comparison with the merits and the independent con­
ception of the painting, this minor exaggeration in costumes is 
insignificant. 

2 1 4  
A Writer's Diary 
It's a pity that I know nothing of Mr. Repin. It would be in­
teresting to know if he is a young man. How I wish he were still 
a young man who is only beginning his artistic career. A few lines 
above I was quick to stipulate that he is still not a Gogo!. Yes, Mr. 
Repin, it's a long, long trip to reach Gogo!; don't let your well­
earned success go to your head. Our genre painting has made a 
good start and we have talented people, but it lacks something to 
enable it to broaden and expand. Why, even Dickens is genre and 
nothing more, but Dickens created Pickwick, Oliver Twist, and the 
grandfather and grand-daughter in The Old Curiosity Shop. No, 
our genre painting is a long way from that; it is still at the stage 
of "Hunters" and "Nightingales." Dickens has a lot of "Hunters" 
and "Nightingales" on the periphery of his works. So far as I can 
tell from various indicators, it seems that at the present moment 
in our art our genre painting regards Pickwick and the grand­
daughter even as something ideal, and as far as I could gather from 
conversations with certain of our major artists, they fear the ideal 
like some kind of unclean spirit. No doubt this is a noble fear, but 
it is a prejudicial and unjust one. Our artists need a bit more 
boldness, a bit more independence of thought, and, perhaps, a bit 
more education. And that's why I think our historical painting is 
not strong and is somehow languishing. Evidently our contem­
porary artists are afraid of historical subjects and have fastened 
upon genre as the sole true and legitimate outlet for any real talent. 
I think that an artist seems to sense that (in his conception) he 
will certainly have to "idealize" in historical painting, and thus, 
to lie. "One must portray reality as it is," they say, whereas reality 
such as this does not exist and never has on earth because the 
essence of things is inaccessible to man; he perceives nature as it 
is reflected in his ideas, after it has passed through his senses. 
Accordingly, more scope must be given to the idea, and the ideal 
should not be feared. A portraitist, for example, seats his subject 
to paint its portrait; he prepares; he studies the subject carefully. 
Why does he do that? Because he knows from experience that a 
person does not always look like himself, and therefore he seeks 
out "the principal idea of his physiognomy," that moment when 
the subject most resembles his self. The portraitist's gift consists 
in the ability to seek out and capture that moment. And so what 
is the artist doing here if not trusting first his own idea (the ideal) 
more than the reality before him? The ideal is also reality, after 
all, and just as legitimate as immediate reality. Many artists in 

Apropos of the Exhibition 
2 1 5 
Russia don't seem to realize that. Take Bronnikov's "Hymn of the 
Pythagoreans," for instance. Some genre painter (even one of our 
most talented) might even be surprised at how a contemporary 
artist could pick such subjects. And yet subjects such as these 
(almost fantastic ones) are just as real and just as essential to art 
and to humans as is immediate reality. 
What is genre, in essence? Genre is the art of portraying con­
temporary, immediate reality that the artist has himself felt per­
sonaly and has seen with his own eyes, in contrast with historical 
reality, for instance, which cannot be seen with one's own eyes and 
which is portrayed not in its immediate but in its completed aspect. 
(Let me make a nota bene here: I said "seen with his own eyes." 
But Dickens never saw Pickwick with his own eyes; he perceived 
him only in a variety of forms of reality that he had observed; he 
created a character and presented him as the result of his obser­
vations. Thus this character is every bit as real as one who really 
exists, even though Dickens took only an ideal of the reality.) But 
what happens here is a confusion of conceptions of reality. Historical 
reality in art, for instance, is naturally not that of immediate reality 
(genre) precisely because the former is completed and not current. 
Ask any psychologist you like and he will tell you that if you imagine 
some event of the past, especially of the distant past-one that is 
completed and historical (and to live without imagining the past 
is impossible)-then the event will necessarily be imagined in its 
completed aspect, i.e., with the addition of all its subsequent de­
velopments that had not yet occurred at the historical moment in 
which the artist is trying to depict a person or event. And thus 
the essence of a historical event cannot even be imagined by an 
artist exactly as it probably happened in reality. And so the artist 
is overcome by a kind of superstitious fear of the fact that he will 
perhaps have to "idealize" despite himself, which to his mind 
means to lie. So, to avoid this imaginary error, he tries (and there 
were cases of this) to combine both realities-the historical and the 
immediate; from this unnatural combination arises the worst kind 
of untruth. In my view this pernicious error can be seen in certain 
of Mr. Ge's paintings. For instance, he took his "Last Supper," 
which once created such a stir, and made a regular genre painting 
out of it. Look at it more carefully: this is an ordinary quarrel of 
some very ordinary people. There sits Christ-but is that Christ? 
It may be a very good young man, deeply hurt by his quarrel with 
Judas, who is standing there getting dressed to go off and denounce 

2 1 6  
A Writer's Diary 
him, but this is not the Christ we know. His friends have crowded 
around the Teacher to comfort him; but we must ask the question: 
where are the eighteen centuries of Christianity that followed, and 
how are they connected with the event? How is it possible that 
from such an ordinary quarrel of such ordinary people gathered to 
have supper, such as Mr. Ge depicts, there could arise something 
so colossal? 
Nothing at all is explained here; there is no historical truth here; 
there is not even any truth of genre here; everything here is false. 
No matter from which point of view you judge, this event could 
not have happened this way: everything here is disproportionate 
and out of scale with the future. Titian, at least, would have given 
this Teacher a face like the one he gave him in his famous picture 
"Render unto Caesar"; then many things would have become clear 
at once. In Mr. Ge's picture some good people have simply gotten 
into a quarrel; the result is something false, a preconceived idea. 
And falsity is always a lie and not realism at all. Mr. Ge was trying 
for realism. 
Well, it seems I have forgotten about the exhibition. However . . .  
what sort of a reporter am I? I only wanted to make a few remarks 
"apropos." Nevertheless, the editors promise to publish a detailed 
account of our artists' paintings that are being sent to the Vienna 
Exhibition; or, perhaps, still better, to try to talk about them from 
the Exhibition itself, with an account of the impression they pro­
duce, in turn, on the foreigners who come to see them. 

10 
An Impersonator 
Who asked you in!?? 
A little note abusing me has appeared in The Russian World, no. 
I03. I don't reply to abusive articles, but I shall reply to this one 
because of certain reasons that will become clear in the course of 
my reply. 
First of all, the fact is that the one who vilifies me is a clergyman; 
that was the last area from which I expected an attack. The "Note" 
is signed "Pr. P. Kastorsky." What is this "Pr."? Priest? What can 
this abbreviation mean if not "priest"? The more so that the note 
concerns a church matter. In numbers IS and I6 of The Citizen 
Mr. Nedolin's tale "The Deacon" was published. And that's what 
the note is about. 
Here is the "note": 
UNMARRIED NOTIONS OF A MARRIED MONK 
Clergymen and others associated with the church are in our time 
not infrequently chosen by our writers as heroes of their literary works; 
even oftener they appear as incidental or "accessory" characters. It 
is certainly a fine thing that they are portrayed in literature: the clerical 
world has a good many characteristic types, so why not portray them 
with their good and bad qualities? The recent success of "Notes of 
a Psalm-reader" in Notes of the Fatherland, and then the still greater 
success of Cathedral Folk in The Russian Messenger show how much 
interest the literary portrayal of the everyday life of our clergy can 
arouse in society. Both the aforementioned works presented our clergy 
from different points of view, and both were read with attention and 
with pleasure. And why was this? Because they were written well, 
were artistic, and showed a knowledge of their subject. But the result 
217 

2 1 8  
A Writer's Diary 
is quite different when, as a result of imitation or some other reason­
presumption or frivolity, for instance-people with absolutely no con­
ception of the subject undertake such a task. They only embarrass 
themselves and damage the cause by presenting mistaken views; and 
therefore one cannot pass unheeding such ill-disposed attempts to 
caricature the life of our clergy. I, following in the footsteps of "Psalm­
reader," who in The Russian World not long ago drew attention to the 
writer Dostoevsky's ignorance of choristers, cannot remain silent about 
an even more serious, ludicrous, and unforgivable act of ignorance 
which again was made manifest in the same magazine, The Citizen, 
beneath which the signature of this same Mr. Dostoevsky appears as 
editor. 
We shall pause here for a moment. What does he mean, "fol­
lowing in the footsteps of 'Psalm-reader,' who revealed the ignorance 
of the writer Dostoevsky"? I never read that article. (And again, 
it's The Russian World!) When I look it up (in no. 87), I find there 
really is a charge against me signed by "Psalm-reader." Let's have 
a look at what it is: 
ON CHORISTERS ' UNIFORMS 
(A Letter to the Editor) 
In issue no. 1 3  of The Citizen (March 26) I happened to read Mr. 
Dostoevsky's article about the exhibition at the Academy of Arts. 
Discussing the psalm-readers portrayed by the painter Makovsky, Mr. 
Dostoevsky wrote the following lines: "They're all gentlemen with 
carefully shaven chins and wearing offuial costumes. It's true that all 
choristers wear such costumes only as part of their official function and 
from time immemorial have worn such costumes, and such has been the 
practice from time immemorial, since the days of the Patriarchate . . . .  ," 
Let me interrupt for a moment: in the first place, there is certainly 
no such stupid sentence in my article. I wrote: "It's true that all 
choristers wear such costumes only as part of their official function 
and that such has been the practice since time immemorial, since 
the days of the Patriarchate . . .  ," which is something quite different. 
Let's continue the quotation: 
This is without foundation: neither from time immemorial nor since 
the days of the Patriarchate have members of choirs in the Russian 
church ever worn such costumes as we see them wearing nowadays 

An Impersonator 
2 1 9 
and in which they are portrayed in Mr. Makovsky's painting. This 
uniform is a recent borrowing from the West-from Poland, to be 
more precise-and among the esteemed leaders of our church there 
have been and still are more than a few who find this liveried mas­
querade to be inappropriate; the choristers in their choirs sing in 
ordinary black frock-coats which, of course, are much more modest 
and decorous than the broad-sleeved Polish gown. "From time im­
memorial" and since the days of the "Patriarchate" choristers have 
sung standing in long black caftans, and always holding rosaries; this 
is precisely how the choristers stand even now in the churches of the 
dissenters and the prayer houses of the Old Believers. 
N.B. : It would seem from this, perhaps, that in Orthodox church­
es today the choristers sing while seated. It is always useful to 
listen to an informed person. 
Fearing [he has a lot to fear!) lest Mr. Dostoevsky's ill-informed 
remarks establish an erroneous view on these uniforms [will this cause 
an eanhquake or something?], which should have been remodeled in 
Russian fashion long ago, I have the honor to ask the editor of The 
Russian World to provide space for these brief lines of mine. 
Psalm-reader. 
This is the note of the Psalm-reader to which the priest Kastorsky 
refers. Before continuing with Kastorsky, let us finish with the 
Psalm-reader. 
What made you so angry, Mr. Psalm-reader? You point out an 
error and try to teach us a lesson, but meanwhile you fall into error 
yourself. You say: "This is without foundation: neither from time 
immemorial nor since the days of the Patriarchate have members of 
choirs in the Russian church ever worn such costumes . . . .  " Is that 
so? Why is that "without foundation"? Why can one not say from 
time immemorial and since the days of the Patriarchate? What, was 
it only yesterday they started wearing these clothes? Hasn't it been 
at least since great-great-great-grandfather's day? With the solemn 
frown of a great historian you come to correct us, but you yourself 
say nothing precise. One expects the great historian to determine 
accurately the time, the year, maybe even the day when the cho­
risters first donned this garb, but after you have finished blowing 
your trumpet you content yourself with only a feeble supposition: 
"We got this from Poland," and nothing more! But what a grand 
ringing of bells you indulged in! 
Just tell us, Mr. Psalm-reader, what you think: was this Polish 

220 
A Writer's Diary 
influence, which was felt in Russia in many areas at once-and 
even on the clergy-something that occUrred a long time ago, in 
your opinion, or did it happen just the other day? Then why can't 
one, for the sake of making sense, say that this has been the case 
from time immemorial and since the days of the Patriarchate? It goes 
back not only to the time of the Patriarchate but almost to the time 
of the patriarchs. 
These costumes (or ones like them) appeared at the time of Peter 
the Great; accordingly, they go back almost to the time of the 
patriarchs, or very nearly so. Is that recent? Can't one say from 
time immemorial, after all? Or "since the days of the Patriarchate"? 
And if in my article I myse:f did not specify with historical accuracy 
just when our choristers began wearing these costumes, then it was 
because I had no intention or aim in so doing but wanted only to 
say that this was begun a very long time ago-so long ago that one 
could say "from time immemorial, " and everyone who read my article 
would understand. I was not talking about the time of Dmitry 
Donskoi and I was not talking about Yaroslav's time. I meant "a 
very long time ago" and nothing more. 
But enough of the learned Psalm-reader. He jumped up, waved 
his arms a lot, and-nothing came of it. At least he expressed 
himself politely: "Fearing," he says, "lest Mr. Dostoevsky's ill­
informed remarks . . .  " and so on. But Pr. Kastorsky at once goes 
beyond the limits set by the Psalm-reader. He's a frisky fellow! . . .  
"The writer Dostoevsky's ignorance of choristers . . . .  " "I cannot 
remain silent about an even more serious, ludicrous, and unfor­
givable act of ignorance which again was made manifest in the 
same magazine, The Citizen, beneath which the signature of this 
same Mr. Dostoevsky appears as editor." 
Just think what dreadful crimes this Dostoevsky has committed: 
one can't even forgive them! A man of the cloth who, it would 
seem, ought to be love incarnate but who is incapable of forgive­
ness! . . .  But what sort of "ignorance" does he have in mind? 
What's the matter here? There's nothing to be done but to quote 
the whole of Kastorsky; we'll give the readers a treat. Why should 
we content ourselves with only "half a loaf'? The more, the better; 
that's my idea. 
In issues 1 5-16 of The Citizen, which came out on the 16th of April, 
there appeared "The Deacon: A Story Told to a Group of Friends," 
by Mr. Nedolin. This story has a most erroneous and impossible 

An Impersonator 
2 2 1  
basis: it portrays a deacon most vociferous who is beaten by his wife, 
and beaten so energetically and cruelly that he flees to a monastery 
to escape her blows; here he "consecrated himself to the Lord and 
could no longer think of worldly matters." He stands inside the walls 
of the monastery, while the wife who had been beating him stands 
outside; here he sings an adaptation of the psalm: 
Holy, 0 God, is Thine anointed! 
To do Thy will is he appointed. 
The giant, foe of Christians all 
Beneath his sword shall surely fall. 
And his abandoned wife again "stands outside the monastery; press­
ing her burning forehead to the wall she weeps" and begs that her 
husband, who has been accepted into the monastery, can be sent out 
so that she can be "his slave and his dog." But the husband did not 
come out and remained in the monastery until his death. 
What a wretched, impossible, and absurd cock-and-bull story this 
is! Who this Mr. Nedolin is we do not know; but certainly he is 
someone who is totally ignorant of Russian legislation or Russian 
life-ignorant to the point that he supposes that in Russia a married 
man can be accepted into a monastery and be permitted to stay there; 
but how could the editor, Mr. Dostoevsky, not know that? He was 
the one who not long ago was proclaiming at such length that he was 
a great Christian and an Orthodox one as well, with an orthodox faith 
in miracles of the most singular kind. Does he, perhaps, number the 
acceptance of a married man into a monastery among his miracles? 
If so, then that is a different matter; but anyone who knows even the 
least bit about the laws and regulations of our church could easily 
show Mr. Dostoevsky that such a miracle could never happen here 
because it is strictly forbidden and can be prosecuted under specific 
laws which no monastic authority can violate, and that a man who 
has a living wife cannot be admitted to a monastery. 
The extremely impoverished and clumsily constructed plot of the 
story "The Deacon" could still have been improved somewhat, of 
course, had it been given a plausible ending, and this could well have 
been done by a writer or an editor with even a sketchy knowledge 
of the milieu depicted. The story could have been developed, for 
instance, to the familiar dramatic situation in which the deacon, to 
hide from his shrewish wife, flees to various monasteries; but he is 
evicted by the authorities of some of them because he is married, 
while from others his wife demands he be returned to her, and again, 
perhaps, she beats him . . . .  Then, seeing no way to save himself from 

222 
A Writer's Diary 
his wife in his own country but still longing for monastic life, the 
unfortunate deacon might run away to Mount Athos, say, where under 
the Moslem rule of the Turkish Sultan the Orthodox Church in many 
ways functions more independently than it does in Russia. There, as 
we know, monasteries sometimes are not afraid to take in even married 
people who wish to become monks; there the Russian deacon who 
had been so mercilessly abused by his wife might find refuge and 
pray and sing, but in any case he would certainly not sing the ad­
aptation into verse which the deacon of The Citizen sings because, 
first, as is very well known, this adaptation enjoys no popularity among 
men of the cloth; second, it is not adapted to singing and is not sung; 
and third, adaptations of secular verses are not permined to be sung 
within the walls of a monastery, and no one who lives in the monastery 
is allowed to violate that prohibition lest the silence appropriate to 
the place be disturbed. 
Pr. P. Kastorsky. 
Now let me reply to this point by point and, first, let me assure 
the perturbed priest Kastorsky about his main point by explaining 
to him that the story "The Deacon" was never intended as a study 
of manners and mores. Its esteemed author, Mr. Nedolin (not a 
pseudonym), who spent a part of his life in very active government 
service, had in this instance no concern at all with clerical life. 
Mr. Nedolin could, with no loss at all to himself or to the story, 
have just as well made his hero, the "deacon, " a postal clerk, for 
instance, and if he was a deacon in the story then it is only because 
this is an actual incident. This poem in prose is something excep­
tional, almost fantastic. Do you know, priest Kastorsky, that when 
one describes actual events by scrupulously observing all their 
random nature they nearly always take on a fantastic, almost im­
probable character? The task of art is not to portray the random 
bits of daily life but their general idea, perceptively read and faith­
fully drawn out from the entire broad range of similar phenomena 
of life. Mr. Nedolin's story generalizes on quite a different mani­
festation of the human spirit. If he had had intentions of portraying 
manners and mores, for instance, then from that point of view this 
one anecdote of his would certainly have entered into the excep­
tional. Recently (several months ago, I mean), I heard that in one 
of our most distinguished monasteries one stupid and malicious 
monk killed a ten-year-old boy in school with his cruel beatings, 
and did so in the presence of witnesses. Now, doesn't this seem 

An Impersonator 
223 
quite fantastic at first glance? And yet it apparently is quite true. 
But if someone were to write a story about that, people would at 
once begin to shout that it was improbable, exceptional, presented 
with some preconceived intention-and they would be right, at 
least judging from the point of view of only an accurate portrayal 
of the ways of our monasteries. There would be no accuracy with 
only such an anecdote; even today one finds in our monasteries an 
angelic life for the glory of God and the church, and the incident 
of the cruel monk will remain forever an exception. But for the 
storyteller, for the poet, there may be other tasks beyond the aspect 
of genre; there are the depths of the human spirit and character­
general, eternal, and, I think, never to be fully explored. But you 
seem to think that once the word deacon has appeared in print 
there must absolutely follow some special description of clerical 
life; and if it's to be a description of clerical life then we have 
writers with patents who have already staked out this territory, and 
woe to anyone else who ventures to tread on it: this is our corner, 
our area to exploit, our source of income. Tell me the truth, Priest 
Kastorsky: isn't that what really upset you? For heaven's sake, 
surely someone can write the word deacon without intending to 
take anything away from Mr. Leskov. So please calm down. 
Now that I've soothed you somewhat, I must ask you to direct 
your attention to the title of your polemical article, "Unmarried 
Notions of a Married Monk." 
Let me ask in passing: what do you mean by "unmarried" here? 
How would these notions be changed if they were "married" ones? 
Are there, in fact, "married" and "unmarried" notions? Well, of 
course, you're not a literary man, and this is all a lot of nonsense; 
you are the excited priest Kastorsky, and we shouldn't expect fine 
style from you, particularly in the state you're in. The main point 
here is this: who told you that our deacon became a monk? Where 
in Mr. Nedolin's entire story did you find that he took monastic 
vows? Yet this is a vital point; when you put such a title on your 
article you plainly mislead the reader unacquainted with Mr. Ne­
dolin's story: "True enough," he thinks, "a married deacon can't 
become a monk! How is it The Citizen didn't know that?" And 
so, after distracting the reader with the word monk you exclaim 
triumphantly in the middle of your article: "What a wretched, 
impossible, and absurd cock-and-bull story this is! . . .  How could 
the editor, Mr. Dostoevsky, not know that . . .  " and so on. 
You have stacked the deck, plainly and simply, and I am quietly 

224 
A Writer's Diary 
exposing your cheating. But you have made a small error, Father, 
and didn't think too carefully about what you were doing. A married 
man cannot take monastic vows, that is true; but why will "no 
monastic authority admit a married man into a monastery," as you 
claim with such excitement? Where did you find such information? 
Should someone, for instance, have a notion to take up residence 
in a monastery (one that had proper facilities, for example) but 
had a wife somewhere in the capital or abroad, would he be thrown 
out of the monastery simply because he was married? Is that how 
it is? You do not know such things, Father, and you a clergyman! 
I could even mention several persons, whom all Petersburg society 
knows well and still remembers, who very late in life moved into 
monasteries and have been living there a long time even though 
they are married and have wives who are alive even now. It was 
all arranged by mutual consent. In just such a manner Mr. Nedolin's 
deacon took up re[idence in the monastery. All you have to do is 
take away the distortion you deliberately concocted about monastic 
vows (which does not appear at all in Mr. Nedolin's story) and 
everything will at once be clear to you. In the story it was even 
better than a matter of mutual consent; it happened directly with 
the permission of the authorities. I have the means to pacify you 
most effectively on this account, Father. Suppose that I made some 
enquiries and received the following information. 
First, some six months before his admission to the monastery, the 
artist-deacon had first revealed to the landowner, as he was bidding 
him farewell, that he intended to go take up residence in the mon­
astery; even then he knew what he was talking about, because he 
had already made known his intention to Father John, the abbot, 
who was very fond of him (or at least was fond of his singing, 
because he was a great music lover and had done his best to support 
Safran.) It seems that the abbot himself had even been encouraging 
him to come and live in the monastery. The deacon hesitated in 
taking up the landowner's offer to go abroad, and that was why 
he waited another six months or so; but when his patience ran out 
he did go off to the monastery. This was a very simple matter to 
arrange: Father John was a bosom friend of the superior of the 
diocese, and when two such personages agree on something then 
no further pretexts are needed. But probably a pretext was found 
whereby the deacon was "posted," so to say, to the monastery. The 
vow the deacon made to "consecrate himself to the Lord" (which 
makes you particularly angry) was an entirely free, unofficial, and 

An Impersonator 
225 
inner one, made to himself and as maner of his own conscience. 
Moreover, in Mr. Nedolin's story it is stated very clearly that the 
deacon was only residing in the monastery and had by no means 
taken monastic vows; that, Father, is your own quite brazen con­
coction. Here is some specific evidence: the landowner, who had 
returned, continued to urge Sofron to leave the monastery and go 
abroad, and the deacon even considered that on the first day of 
their talks. Now could that have happened had Sofron already taken 
vows? And, finally, don't conceal the fact that he was an extraor­
dinary artist-uncommonly gifted, at least-and that is how he 
appears in the story from the very beginning. And if such is the 
case, then it is understandable why Father John, the great music 
lover, should take such an interest in him . . . .  
"But that isn't explained in the story!" you will shout in a fit 
of anger. But no, it is explained in part; one can deduce a good 
deal from the story even though it is brief and can be read quickly. 
But suppose that not everything is explained: why should it be? 
It need only be plausible; and if you take away the obfuscation of 
monastic vows, then it all becomes plausible. True, Mr. Nedolin's 
story is a linle too compact; but then you aren't a literary man, 
Father, and have proved it; yet I can tell you frankly that a huge 
number of the stories and novels we see today would profit by 
some abbreviation. What is the point of the author dragging you 
through some four hundred and eighty pages and then suddenly, 
on page four hundred and eighty-one, inexplicably dropping the 
narrative in Petersburg or Moscow and dragging you off to some­
where in Moldavo-Wallachia for the sole purpose of telling you how 
a flock of ravens and owls flew off some Moldavo-Wallachian roof; 
and having told you that, he again suddenly abandons the ravens 
and Moldavo-Wallachia as if they had never existed and never 
returns to them again for the rest of the story so that, at last, the 
reader is left in total bewilderment? Some authors write for money, 
simply to produce more pages! Mr. Nedolin did not do that and 
perhaps he was right. 
"But the wife, the wife!" I hear you exclaim as you roll your 
eyes. "How could the wife allow that and not complain? Why didn't 
she make a legal 'demand' that he be returned to her, by force?" 
But it was precisely on this point about the wife that you truly 
misfired, Father. Your imagination took such flight in your article 
that you even began composing a novel of your own: how the wife 
at last had her deacon returned to her, again began thrashing him, 

226 
A Writer's Diary 
and how he fled to another monastery and was again brought back 
until he at last fled to Mount Athos where he settled peacefully 
under the "Mohammedan" administration of the Sultan (imagine 
that: I had always assumed the Sultan was a Christian!). 
Joking aside, Father, you should realize that your office alone 
demands at least a little knowledge of the human heart, but you 
don't know it at all. You might be a poor fictionist, but if you were 
to take pen in hand you might still be able to describe the everyday 
lives of the clergy more accurately than Mr. Nedolin; but in matters 
of the human heart Mr. Nedolin knows more than you do. A woman 
who spends whole days standing outside a monastery wall, weeping, 
will not go to court and will not resort to force. She's had enough 
of force! But your version is just one beating after another; in an 
outburst of authorial enthusiasm you continue the novel, and again 
you have beating. No, enough beating, for heaven's sake! Do you 
recall, Father, the last scene of Gogol's Marriage? After Podkolesin 
has jumped out the window Kochkarev shouts: "Bring him back! 
Bring him back!"-imagining that the absconded bridegroom is 
still fit for the marriage. Well, that's just the way you judge matters 
here. The matchmaker stops Kochkarev by saying: "Ah, you know 
nothing about the marriage business: it's one thing if he'd gone 
through the door, but when he flew out the window it's good-bye 
forever." If you take away the comic aspects of Podkolesin's case, 
he fits exactly the situation of the poor deacon's wife abandoned 
by her husband. No, Father, the beatings are finished! This 
woman-this exceptional character, a passionate and powerful crea­
ture who, by the way, has much greater spiritual strength than her 
artist-husband-this woman, under the influence of her environ­
ment, habits, and lack of education, might truly begin by beating 
her husband. The very realism of the events here would appeal to 
a man of sense and understanding, and Mr. Nedolin acted like a 
master in not toning down the reality. Women who have an excess 
of spirit and character, especially passionate women, can love no 
other way than despotically and even have a particular inclination 
toward such weak, childish characters as the artist-deacon. And 
why did she come to love him so deeply? Can she really know? 
He weeps; she cannot help but look scornfully on his tears; but 
she does it like a cat watching a mouse, herself tormented and 
enjoying his tears. She is jealous: "Don't you dare sing in front of 
gentlemǁn!" It seems she could swallow him whole out of love. 
And then he runs away from her; she never believed he could do 

An Impersonator 
227 
it! She is proud and presumptuous; she knows that she is beautiful, 
and (this is a strange psychological fact) she was convinced all the 
while that he loved her as totally as she loved him and could not 
live without her, despite the beatings! Why, that was her whole 
faith; moreover, she never had any doubts about it. And suddenly 
everything is revealed to her: this child, this artist does not love 
her at all, has long ceased loving her, and, perhaps, never even 
loved her formerly! She is at once humbled, downcast, crushed, 
but still does not have the strength to renounce him; she loves him 
madly, even more madly than before. But since she is a powerful, 
noble, and exceptional character, she grows and rises far above her 
former way of life and her former environment. No, now she will 
certainly not resort to force to get him back. She would never take 
him now even if it could be done by force; she still has her immense 
pride, but now it is a different kind of pride; it has become en­
nobled: she would rather die of grief right there on the grass by 
the monastery wall than use violence, write petitions, and try to 
prove her rights. Ah, Father, don't you see that the whole point 
of the story is in this and not at all in the details of the daily lives 
of the clergy? No, Father, this little story is a lot more significant 
than it seems to you, and a good deal deeper. I repeat: you would 
not write it this way and you do not even understand what it is 
about. You have the soul of a Kochkarev in part (I mean in a 
literary sense, of course-! won't go further than that), as I had 
the honor of pointing out to you . . . .  
As far as your own authorship and artistic sense are concerned, 
I think that Pushkin's well-known epigram can be applied to you 
entirely: 
A painting once a cobbler stopped to view, 
And pointed out an error in one shoe; 
The artist took the brush and made it right. 
"There!" said the cobbler, "Now I think you might 
Correct that bosom: it's a bit too bare; 
The face as well requires some repair." 
To these complaints Apelles put an end: 
"Judge not above the boots, my cobbler friend!" 
You, Father, are that very same cobbler, the only difference being 
that you failed to show Mr. Nedolin any errors even in matters of 
footwear, something which I trust I have proved to you very clearly. 
And you won't gain anything by manipulating the evidence. In a 

228 
A Writer's Diary 
case like this, you see, to be able to understand anything about 
the human soul and "judge above the boots," you need more de­
velopment in another direction and less of that cynicism, that "spir­
itual materialism"; there must be less scorn for people, less 
disrespect and indifference toward them. Let us have less of that 
carnivorous greed and more faith, hope, and charity! Just look at 
the crude cynicism with which you treat me personally and the 
indecency, so inappropriate to your office, with which you speak 
of miracles. I didn't want to believe it when I read the following 
lines you wrote about me: "But how could the editor, Mr. Dos­
toevsky, not know that? He was the one who not long ago was 
proclaiming at such length that he was a great Christian and an 
Orthodox one as well, with an orthodox faith in miracles of the 
most singular kind. Does he, perhaps, number the acceptance of 
a married man into a monastery among his miracles? If so, then 
that is a different matter. . . .  " 
In the first place, Father, this is something you made up (what 
a passion for making up stories you have, after all!). Nowhere did 
I ever say anything about my personal faith in miracles. All that 
you have invented, and I challenge you to show me where you 
found it. Let me say one thing more: had I, F. Dostoevsky, said 
that about myself (which I never did), then believe me I would 
not have disavowed my remarks out of any fear of liberals or of 
Kastorskys. Plainly and simply, there was never anything of the 
sort, and I am simply stating that fact. But had there been, why 
would my faith in miracles be any business of yours? What relevance 
do they have to this matter? And what are singular miracles and 
nonsingular ones? How do you explain such distinctions to yourself? 
On the whole, I wish you would not bother me in such matters, 
if only because pestering me with such things does not suit you at 
all, despite all your contemporary enlightened views. A man of the 
cloth, and so irritable! You ought to be ashamed, Mr. Kastorsky. 
But, you know, you're really not Mr. Kastorsky, and certainly 
not the priest Kastorsky; that's all fraud and nonsense. You're an 
impostor, wearing a disguise like the mummers at Christmas. And 
do you know what else? I wasn't taken in by you for even a tiny 
moment; I recognized you as an impostor immediately, and that 
pleases me, for I can see your long nose even from here: you were 
quite convinced that I would take the clown's mask with its gaudy 
colors for a real face. You should also know that I replied to you 

An Impersonator 
229 
rather too impolitely only because I at once recognized you as an 
impostor. If you really had been a priest !-despite your crude 
remarks, which at the end of your article reach the level of a boastful 
seminarian's whinnying-would have answered you within the 
bounds of decorum, not out of personal respect for you but out of 
respect for your high office and the high idea contained in it. But 
since you are just an impostor, then you must suffer a penalty. I 
shall begin the punishment by explaining to you in detail how it 
was that I recognized you (between you and me, I had even guessed 
beforehand who was hiding behind the mask, but I will not say 
your name aloud, at least for the time being), and of course you 
must find that very annoying . . . .  
"But if you guessed beforehand, then why did you address your 
reply to a priest?" you may ask. "Why did you first write so many 
unnecessary things? " 
"Because one treats a man by the way he is dressed," I reply. 
And if I wrote something unpleasant to Mr. "Priest" then the 
gentleman who thought up and used such an unworthy device as 
to dress himself in priestly garb should have that on his conscience. 
Yes, it was a shabby trick, and he realized it himself. Moreover, 
he did his best to shield himself. He did not sign the letter "P. 
Kastorsky, Priest" but used an abbreviation, "Pr." "Pr. " doesn't 
mean priest, strictly speaking at least. One could always say that 
it meant "prince," or something of the sort. 
I recognized you by your style, Mr. Mummer. This is the main 
thing here, you see: critics today sometimes praise contemporary 
writers for that, and even readers are satisfied (because what are 
they to read, after all?). But our criticism has long been in a sad 
state, and our artists for the most part are closer to sign painters 
than genuine artists. Not all of them, of course. There are some 
who have talent, but most are pretenders. In the first place, Mr. 
Mummer, you overdid it in your letter. Do you know what it means 
to speak in essences? No? Let me explain it to you. The contem­
porary "artist-writer" who creates certain types and who stakes 
off a certain speciality for himself in literature (portraying mer­
chants, say, or peasants, and so on) usually spends his whole life 
walking around with a pencil and notebook, eavesdropping and 
writing down characteristic words and phrases; at last he manages 
to collect several hundred of such characteristic little words. Then 
he begins to write a novel, and as soon as one of his merchants or 
clergymen is to say something, the writer puts together a speech 

230 
A Writer's Diary 
for him from the phrases written in his notebok. The readers 
laugh and admire the work because it seems so authentic: it's copied 
straight from nature, but it proves to be worse than a lie precisely 
because the merchant or the soldier in the novel speaks in essences, 
that is, in a manner in which no merchant or soldier ever speaks 
in real life. In real life, for instance, he may use one such expression 
as you have written down out of every eleven. This word may be 
characteristic and malapropos, but the other ten words that pre­
ceded it are quite correct, like those of anyone else. But in the 
works of the artist who creates types, such a character uses only 
the characteristic words which had been written down, and the 
result is something false. The character thus depicted speaks like 
a book. Readers admire it, but you can't deceive an old experienced 
literary man. 
Work like this, for the most part, is the work of a sign painter 
or house painter. But eventually the "artist" begins to regard him­
self as a Raphael and you can't convince him otherwise! Writing 
down characteristic linle phrases is a fine and useful thing, and 
one can't get by without it; but one mustn't use them in a completely 
mechanical fashion. It's true that there are shades of difference 
between such "stenographer-artists" as well; some are certainly 
more talented than others, and therefore they use these phrases 
with some caution, taking into account the mood of the era, the 
locale, the character's educational level, and maintaining a sense 
of measure. But they still cannot avoid this "essence-ism." The 
very valuable rule that an uttered word is silver but an unuttered 
one golden has long ceased to be a habit among our artists. They 
have linle faith in their readers. The sense of measure is disap­
pearing altogether. Finally, we should also take into account the 
fact that our artists (like any group of ordinary people) begin to 
scrutinize carefully the facts of real life, take note of their char­
acteristic features, and transform a specific type into a work of an 
at a time when that type is already passing from the scene and is 
changing into something else in conformity with the nature of the 
epoch and its development; the result is that we are almost always 
served stale food as if it were fresh. And they themselves believe 
that it is fresh and not something stale or ephemeral. An observation 
of this sort is rather too subtle for our author-artist, however, and 
he probably will not understand it. But I will still say that only a 
writer of genius or a very powerful talent can distinguish a type 

An Impersonator 
23 1  
at the right time and present it to us at the right time; the ordinary 
writer simply follows in his footsteps more or less slavishly, working 
from ready-made panerns. 
I, for instance, have never once in my life met a single priest­
even a most highly educated one-whose manner of speech was 
entirely without some of those distinctive features linked to his 
profession. It may be only some tiny detail, but there always is 
something. Yet if you were to make a stenographic record of his 
conversation and print it, then probably you would not notice any 
of those distinctive features, at least in the case of a highly educated 
priest who had spent a good deal of time in lay society. Naturally, 
this is not enough for our "artist"; the public as well has been 
taught to expect something else. For example, most readers think 
that the uneducated people in Pushkin's tales certainly speak less 
correctly than those of Grigorovich, who spent his whole life de­
scribing peasants. I think that many artists as well will agree with 
that. Grigorovich would not allow one of his priests, for instance, 
to speak with scarcely any of the characteristic features of his class 
and milieu; therefore he would not put such a priest in his story 
but would have a more characteristic one. And so he would make 
a contemporary priest in given circumstances and in a given milieu 
speak something like a priest from the beginning of the century, 
also in given circumstances and in a given milieu. 
Priest Kastorsky begins as do the others, scarcely showing any 
traces of his own given milieu. 
As long as he is praising the artistic merits of the writer Leskov 
he speaks like everyone else, with none of the distinctive expressions 
and thoughts characteristic of his profession. But that is what the 
author wanted: he had to leave this aside so that his positive literary 
assessment might sound more serious and his criticism of Mr. 
Nedolin more severe, for a comic and characteristic phrase would 
have spoiled the severe tone. But suddenly the author realized that 
the reader might not believe that this was a priest writing; he took 
fright and at once plunged into typicalities-a whole load of them. 
There's scarcely a word that isn't typical! And naturally the result 
of all this welter is a counterfeit and disproportional typicality. 
The most obvious sign of an uneducated man who for some reason 
is compelled to speak using language and conceptions that are not 
of his own milieu is a certain inaccuracy in the use of words whose 
meaning, let's suppose, he knows but whose nuances of usage in 

232 
A Writer's Diary 
the realm of conceptions of some other profession he does not 
know. " . . .  And therefore w pass unheeding such ill-disposed at-
tempts . . .  ," "the ignorance once more made manifest in this same 
magazine . . .  ," "it portrays a deacon most vociferous .
. . ," and so 
on. This last expression, "most vociferous," is rather too crude 
precisely because Pr. Kastorsky, wishing to express the concept of 
a person endowed with a beautiful singing voice, thinks that the 
expression "most vociferous" conveys this notion. The author­
specialist forgot that, although even now one can find poorly ed­
ucated people among the clergy, there are very few indeed who are 
so ignorant as not to understand the meaning of words. This might 
do in a novel, Mr. Mummer, but it does not stand up in real life. 
Such an erroneous expression might be appropriate for a sacristan, 
but certainly not for a priest. I will not cite any more of these 
expressions; there are, I repeat, a whole load of them, pulled most 
crudely out of a notebook. But the worst of all is that the author­
typicalist (if one speaks of the author-artist, then the concept of 
the author-tradesman is also possible, and the word typicalist defines 
a trade or a craft)-the author-typicalist has presented his type in 
such a morally unattractive light. He should have presented Pr. 
Kastorsky as a man of dignity and virtue, and typicality would not 
have hindered that at all. But the typicalist himself was put in an 
awkward position from which he could not extricate himself: he 
felt absolutely compelled to abuse his fellow author and jeer at him, 
and so he, like some mummer-impostor, had to attribute his better 
impulses to a priest. And when it came to miracles, the typicalist 
lost all self-restraint. The result was something terribly stupid: a 
man of the cloth, yet he jeers at miracles and divides them into 
singular and nonsingular ones! That was poorly done, Mr. 
Typicalist. 
I think that the "Psalm-reader" as well is a product of that same 
pen: the awkward tradesman's naivete simply overflowed at the end 
with all the "fears" of the Psalm-reader, which do not sparkle with 
much wit. In short, gentlemen, all this sign painter's work might 
do in stories but, I repeat, it will not stand up to an encounter 
with real life and will at once betray its true nature. Don't try to 
deceive an old literary man, you author-artists. 
What are these, then, simply jokes on their part? No, they're 
not jokes at all. It's-well, one could say it's Darwinism, the strug­
gle for survival. Don't you dare set foot in our meadow, they say. 
But what harm could Mr. Nedolin do to you, gentlemen? I assure 

An Impersonator 
233 
you that he has no intention whatsoever of describing the clergy 
from the point of view of their everyday lives; you can rest assured 
on that. It's true that one peculiar thing confused me for a moment: 
if the impostor typicalist attacked Mr. Nedolin, then in abusing 
him he ought conversely to be praising himself. (On this score 
these people haven't the least bit of self-respect: they are prepared 
to write and publish praises to themselves in their own hand with 
utter shamelessness.) And yet, to my great surprise, the typicalist 
promotes and praises the talented Mr. Leskov and not himself. 
Something different is going on here, and it, probably, will be 
clarified. But the fact that we are dealing with an impostor is beyond 
all doubt. 
And what is the role of The Russian World in this case? I truly 
don't know. I never had any dealings with The Russian World and 
never intended to have any. Lord knows why people leap out at 
you. 

11 
Dreams and Musings 
In the last issue of The Citizen we again took up the topic of 
drunkenness or, rather, of the possibility of healing the abscess of 
widespread drunkenness among the People, of our hopes and our 
faith in a better future soon to come. But for a long time my hean 
could not help but be beset by sorrow and doubts. Of course, 
because of current important affairs (and in Russia everyone looks 
like such an important man of affairs) one hasn't the time (and it 
is foolish) to think about what will happen ten years from now or 
at the end of the century, i.e. , when we will no longer be here. 
The mono of the real man of affairs of our time is apres moi le 
deluge. But for idle, impractical people who have no affairs to deal 
with, truly it is permissible sometimes to dream-if one can 
dream-of things to come. Didn't Poprischin, in Gogol's "Notes 
of a Madman," dream of Spanish affairs?-" . . .  all these events 
have so shattered and shaken me that I . . .  " etc., he wrote forty 
years ago. I confess that sometimes there are many things that 
shake me as well, and truly I even get depressed from my musings. 
I was musing the other day, for instance, about Russia's status as 
a great European power, and what didn't come into my head on 
this sad topic! 
Just consider our efforts to become a great European power, 
whatever the price, as soon as possible. Granted, we are already a 
great power; but I wish only to say that this costs us too dearly­
much more dearly than the other great powers, and that is a very 
bad sign. The whole thing thus becomes somewhat unnatural. I 
would hasten to make this reservation, however: I am judging 
exclusively from the Westernerizers' point of view, and such really 
is the conclusion that emerges from that view. The national and, 
so to say, somewhat Slavophile point of view is another matter; 
234 

Dreams and Musings 
23 5  
here, as we know, there is a faith in certain inner, distinctive forces 
of the People, in certain principles of the People which are inherent 
in them and entirely individual and original and which are their 
salvation and support. But when I read Mr. Pypin's articles I was 
sobered. Of course, I continue to wish with all my might, as I 
always have, that the precious, solid, and independent principles 
inherent in the Russian People exist in reality. But still, you will 
have to accept his point: what kind of principles are these when 
even Mr. Pypin himself cannot see, hear, or discern them, when 
they are hidden away and simply refuse to be tracked down? And 
therefore even I must manage to get by without these principles 
that give solace to the soul. So I conclude that we are still barely 
clinging to the summit of our great power status, doing whatever 
we can to keep our neighbors from quickly realizing our situation. 
In this we can find tremendous help from the general European 
ignorance of all things that concern Russia. At least until now there 
has been no doubt at all about this ignorance, and this is something 
we should not regret; to the contrary, it will be very disadvantageous 
for us if our neighbors look more closely and carefully at us. The 
fact that until now they understood nothing about us was a great 
source of our strength. But the point is that now, alas, it seems 
they are beginning to understand us better; and that is very 
dangerous. 
Our gigantic neighbor is persistently studying us and already sees 
right through many things. Without entering into the fine points, 
take even our most obvious features that stand out at once. Take 
our immense spaces and our border areas (populated by non-Rus­
sians and foreigners who year by year grow more strongly individ­
ualistic in their own non-Russian elements and in foreign elements 
borrowed from their neighbors). Take these things and consider: 
in how many areas are we strategically vulnerable? In order to 
defend all this (from my civilian's point of view, at least) we need 
to have a far larger army than our neighbors. Take into account 
as well the fact that these days war is made not so much with 
armaments as with brains, and you will agree that in this latter 
area we are particularly disadvantaged. 
Nowadays armaments are changed every ten years or even more 
often. In fifteen years or so, perhaps, soldiers will no longer shoot 
with rifles but with lightning of some sort, using a kind of all­
consuming electrical current produced by a machine. Tell me, what 
can we invent in this line so as to set it aside as a surprise for our 

A Writer's Diary 
neighbors? What if, fifteen years from now, every great power has 
acquired and hidden away in storage one such surprise for any 
eventuality? Alas, we can only adopt and purchase weapons from 
others and we do well if we manage to repair them ourselves. To 
invent machines such as these we need our own independent sci­
ence, not one we have purchased; our own, not one brought in 
from abroad; a science that is free and has its rots in our own 
soil. We still do not have such a science; we do not even have a 
purchased one. Again, take our railways: consider our distances 
and our poverty; compare our capital cities with those of the other 
great powers and try to comprehend: how much would such a 
railway network, essential for us as a great power, cost? And note 
that in Europe these networks were built long ago and were done 
gradually, while we have to hury and catch up; distances there 
are short, while ours are on the scale of the Pacific Ocean. Even 
now, we are painfuly aware of what the mere beginning of our 
railway network has cost us; we know what the substantial diversion 
of capital into this one area has meant to the detriment of our poor 
agriculture, say, and to every other industry as well. The point 
here is not so much the monetary sum as the measure of the nation's 
effort. However, we will never be able to finish if we try to list 
point by point our needs and our lack of resources. But take, at 
last, education-science, that is-and look at how far we have to 
go to catch up to the others in this area. In my humble opinion, 
if we want to overtake any one of the great powers we ought every 
year to be spending at least as much on education as we do on the 
military. We also have to realize that so much time has already 
been lost that we do not have the necessary funds, and that in the 
final analysis all this would serve only as a sudden prod and not 
as a normal development; it would be agitation and not education. 
I'm just musing here, of course; but . . .  I repeat, one sometimes 
cannot help but speculate in this way and so I shall continue. Note 
that I place a monetary value on everything; but is that really the 
proper way to calculate things? Money certainly does not buy 
everything; only some uneducated merchant in one of Mr. Os­
trovsky's comedies would argue that. Money will build you schools 
but won't produce teachers. A teacher is something delicate; a 
teacher for the People, a national teacher, is produced over the 
course of centuries and is maintained by traditions and immeas­
urable experience. But let's suppose that with money you do pro­
duce not only teachers but, finally, scientists as well; and what of 

Dreams and Musings 
237 
it?-you still would not produce human beings. What does it matter 
if he is learned if he cannot truly understand things? He may 
master pedagogy and teach it superbly from behind his desk but 
he himself still not become a pedagogue. People-people are the 
most important thing. People are more valuable than even money. 
You cannot buy people at any market for any sum of money because 
they are not bought and sold but, again, are produced only over 
the course of centuries; and that requires time-some twenty-five 
or thirty years at least, even in Russia where centuries have long 
since been devalued. A person of ideas and independent learning, 
a person who can independently deal with practical matters, is 
produced only by a prolonged independent life of the nation, by 
years of its onerous labor; in a word, such a person is produced 
by the entire historical life of the country. But our historical life 
over the past two centuries has hardly been independent. To hasten 
artificially the essential and constant historical phases of the life of 
the nation is absolutely impossible. We have seen this in our own 
country, and the problem continues today: two centuries ago we 
wanted to hurry and to push everything ahead, but instead we got 
stuck; for despite all the triumphant shouts of our Westernizers we 
certainly did get stuck. Our Westernizers are the people who today 
are trumpeting at full volume and with extraordinary malice and 
satisfaction that we have neither science nor common sense or 
patience or ability, that we are destined only to crawl behind Eu­
rope, slavishly aping her in everything, and that because we are 
Europe's wards it is criminal for us even to think of our own 
independence; but tomorrow, should you even try to voice your 
doubts about the unquestionably wholesome effect of our revolution 
of two centuries back, they would at once cry out in unison that 
all your dreams of national independence are only kvass, kvass, 
and more kvass; two centuries ago, they would say, we emerged 
from the mob of barbarians and became most enlightened and 
happy Europeans, and we ought to remember this with gratitude 
for the rest of our days. 
But let's leave the Westernizers and suppose that we can do 
everything with money-even buy time, even somehow at full steam 
reproduce the uniqueness of our way of life; the question then 
arises as to where we are to find this money. Nearly half our present 
budget is provided by vodka-that is, by the current drunkenness 
and debauch of the People-and so by the whole future of our 
People. We are, so to say, funding our grand budget as a great 

A Writer's Diary 
European power with our own future. We are cutting off the tree 
at its very rot in order to get its fruit more ·quickly. And who was 
it who wanted that? It happened involuntarily, of itself, through 
the strict historical course of events. Our People, liberated by the 
mighty command of our Monarch, are inexperienced in this new 
life and are taking their first steps along this new road without 
having lived independently: this is an enormous and extraordinary 
turning point, scarcely expected and scarcely precedented in history 
because of its comprehensiveness and its nature. These initial, 
independent steps of an epic hero on his new road demanded 
immense caution and extraordinary care; meanwhile, what did our 
People encounter on these first steps? Uncertainty on the part of 
the upper levels of society; the centuries-long alienation of our 
intelligentsia from the People (this is the main thing); and, to 
complete the picture, cheap vodka and the Yid. The People took 
to drink and went off on a spree-first from joy and then from 
habit. Did anyone ever show them anything better than cheap 
vodka? Did anyone ever provide them any diversion or teach them 
anything? Nowadays in some areas-in many areas, in fact-there 
are taverns not just for hundreds of inhabitants but for dozens and, 
indeed, for only a few dozen. There are areas with taverns and 
only fifty inhabitants, or even fewer. The Citizen has already pub­
lished a special article that contained a detailed budget for one of 
our present-day taverns: one simply cannot suppose that taverns 
could survive only through the sale of vodka. So how, then, do 
they stay in business? Through the debauchery of the People, 
through thievery, receiving stolen goods, usury, banditry, the de­
struction of the family, and the disgrace of the People-that's how 
they stay in business! 
Mothers drink, children drink, the churches are empty, fathers 
take to banditry: the bronze arm of Ivan Susanin is sawed off and 
brought to the tavern; and the tavern accepts it! Just ask the opinion 
of medicine: what sort of a generation can be born from such 
drunkards? But never mind; suppose, just suppose (and God grant 
it is so!) that these are only the musings of a pessimist who ex­
aggerates the trouble by tenfold! We believe, we try to believe, 
but . . .  if in the next ten or fifteen years the propensity of our 
People for drunkenness (which is still undeniable) does not di­
minish but persists and so expands even more, then would not my 
picture of things be justified? And now we must have the budget 
of a great power and therefore we are greatly in need of money; 

Dreams and Musings 
239/ 
who, I ask, is going to supply this money over the next fifteen 
years if the present state of affairs continues? Labor? Industry? 
For sound financing is provided only by labor and industry. But 
what kind of labor can we have when these taverns exist? Genuine, 
proper capital accumulates in a country only on the basis of the 
general well-being of its labor force; otherwise capital accumulates 
only in the hands of kulaks and Yids. And so it will be if things 
continue as they are, if the People do not come to their senses, 
and if the intelligentsia do not come to their aid. If the People do 
not come to their senses, then they all, as a whole, in a very short 
time, will find themselves in the hands of all sorts of Yids, and 
then no community will be able to help them: there will be only 
beggars equal in poverty who have mortgaged themselves and sold 
themselves into bondage as a community, while the Yids and the 
kulaks will be providing the entire budget on their behalf. We will 
have a class of peny, base, and thoroughly depraved bourgeois and 
a countless number of beggars enslaved by them-that is the pic­
ture! The wretched Yids will be drinking the blood of the People 
and feeding themselves on the People's debauchery and humiliation, 
but since they will be providing the funds for the budget they will 
have to be supported. It is a nasty picture, a terrible picture, and 
thank God that it is only a dream! The dream of Titular Councilor 
Poprishchin, I agree. But it will not come true! The People have 
had to save themselves more than once already! They will find in 
themselves a protective force as they have always found it; they 
will find within themselves the principles that will preserve and 
save them-those very same principles which our intelligentsia sim­
ply cannot find in our People. The People will turn their backs 
on the tavern; they will choose labor and order; they will choose 
honor and not the tavern! . . .  
And, thank God, all this seems to be borne out; at least there 
are signs that it is. We have already noted the temperance societies. 
It's true that they are only just beginning; they are weak attempts, 
barely perceptible, but-but let us hope their development is not 
hindered because of any special considerations! On the contrary, 
it is so necessary to support them! What if they were supported 
by all our leading intellects, our literary people, our socialists, our 
clergy, and by each one who writes, month after month, of how 
he is fainting beneath the burden of his debt to the People. What 
if our schoolteachers, who are only now beginning to appear, were 
to support them! I know that I am an impractical person (now, 

A Writer's Diary 
after Mr. Spasovich's recent, well-known speech, it is even flattering 
to admit that), but-just think-I can see that even the poorest of 
schoolteachers could do so much, and merely through his own 
initiative, if only he wanted to! And this is the point: what matters 
here is personality, character; what matters is the person who can 
work and the one who truly has the desire to do something. For 
the most part, teachers' positions are now being taken by young 
people who, although they might want to do good, do not know 
the People; they are wary and mistrustful; after their first, often 
very ardent and noble efforts, they quickly tire and take a gloomy 
view of things; they begin to regard their post merely as a step on 
the way to something better; then they either take utterly to drink 
or, for an extra ten rubles, they abandon everything and run off 
wherever they choose; they even run off without pay, even to Amer­
ica "to experience free labor in a free country." This has happened 
and, I have heard, is happening even now. There, in America, 
some sort of vile entrepreneur can wear out the former teacher with 
rough manual labor, cheat him of his pay, and even thrash him 
with his fists; and at every blow the teacher exclaims to himself 
tenderly: "Lord, how reactionary and ignoble such blows were in 
my own country, and how noble, delicious, and liberal they are 
here!" And it will seem that way to him for a long time; trifles 
such as these will not lead him to change his convictions! But let 
us leave him in America; I will continue my idea. My idea, I 
remind you, is that even the least significant village schoolteacher 
could undertake the whole initiative to liberate the People from the 
barbaric passion for drink, if only he so desired. On this subject 
I even have the plot for a short novel and, perhaps, I shall risk 
passing it on to the reader before the novel is written . . . .  

12 
Apropos of a New Play 
This new play is a drama by Mr. Kishensky, Strong Drink Every 
Day Keeps Fortune Away; we decided to include the whole of the 
three last acts in this twenty-fifth issue of The Citizen despite the 
fact that they took up nearly half of our space. But we did not 
want to disturb the totality of the impression they produce, and 
perhaps the readers will agree that the play merits their particular 
attention. It was written for the popular stage and written know­
ledgeably, clearly, and with indisputable talent-and that is the 
main thing, particularly now, when scarcely any new talents are 
corning on the scene. 
The characters, who are all products of the industrial milieu of 
a small "factory town," are a most varied lot and are clearly drawn. 
You can see the plot here for yourselves, and I will not sumarize 
it in any detail. The idea is serious and profound. It is very much 
a tragedy whose fatum is vodka; it is vodka which ties everything 
together, pervades everything, sets things in motion, and brings 
about the catastrophe. True, the author, like a genuine artist, could 
not help but take a broader view of the world he depicts even 
though he announces in the title of his drama that his subject is 
"strong drink every day keeps fortune away." We also find reflected 
here the whole extraordinary economic and moral trauma that fol­
lowed the wide-ranging reforms of the current reign. The old world 
and the old order-which, as bad as it was, was still an order­
have disappeared forever. And the strange thing is that the dark 
moral aspects of the old order-egoism, cynicism, slavery, disunity, 
venality-have not only not disappeared with the abolition of serf­
dom but seem to have grown stronger, developed, and multiplied; 
on the other hand, of the good moral aspects of the old way of 
life-which certainly existed-scarcely anything remains. All this 

A Writer's Diary 
is reflected in the picture presented by Mr. Kishensky, at least in 
my understanding of it. Everything here is transitory, everything 
is unstable and, alas, provides not even a hint of something better 
to come. 
The author vigorously makes the point that education is the means 
of salvation and the only solution; but meanwhile vodka has every­
thing in thrall; it has poisoned everything and turned it wrong; it 
has invaded the People and made them its slaves. It is a gloomy, 
terrible picture Mr. Kishensky draws of this new slavery into which 
the Russian peasant has fallen after emerging from his former 
slavery. 
The play has two different types of characters: people of the old, 
disappearing world, and those of the new, young generation. 
The author knows the young generation. His favorite characters, 
whom he sees as the hope of the future and who constitute the 
bright spots in this gloomy picture, have come out rather well 
(which is very odd, since our poets are scarcely ever successful 
with "positive" characters). At least, Maria is flawless. Ivan, her 
fiance, is not quite so successful, despite the veracity with which 
he is portrayed. This young lad is handsome, bold, literate; he has 
seen and learned a good deal about the new life and is kind and 
honest. His only failing is that the author has come to love him a 
bit too much and has portrayed him too positively. Had the author 
taken a somewhat more negative attitude toward him, the reader's 
impression would have been more favorable toward this favorite 
hero. True, the author, as a sensitive artist, did not fail also to note 
the most unfavorable traits in the character of his Ivan. Ivan is a 
character with great energy and a strong mind, but he is young 
and arrogant. He has a noble faith in truth and justice but assumes 
that others have the same faith and unfairly demands the impossible 
from them. For example, he has some knowledge of the law, so 
that the clerk "Levanid lgnatych" is reluctant to attack him di­
rectly; but he has too naive a faith in his own knowledge and 
therefore is not equipped to cope with evil; he not only fails to 
understand the danger he is in but never even suspects it. This is 
all so natural and would have come off beautifully, because that is 
how things would happen. Moreover, the author did not leave out 
a host of very sympathetic details: Vanya is aware of all the infamy 
of the villains (who are hostile to him as well), but as a healthy 
and strong young man who still finds everything in life so attractive, 
he is unwilling to keep away from them; he joins them and sings 

Apropos of a New Play 
243 
songs with them. This youthful trait makes him very attractive to 
the reader. But, I repeat, the author grew too fond of him and 
never once ventured to look at him objectively. It seems to me that 
it is still not enough to portray faithfully all the given qualities of 
a character; one must truly illuminate that character with one's own 
artistic vision. A real artist must under no circumstances remain 
on the same level as the character he portrays, contenting himself 
only with a reflection of real life; no truth will emerge from such 
an impression. Had the author applied a little-even a touch-of 
irony to the confidence and youthful arrogance of his hero, the 
reader would have had more fondness for the character. Otherwise 
one thinks that the author simply wanted to show him as being 
entirely in the right in the whole calamity that befell him. 
The other characters from the young generation-characters who 
are lost almost from childhood, "the sacrificed generation" -have 
come off even more truthfully than the "positive" characters. They 
fall into two groups: the guiltless and the guilty. We have here, for 
instance, one girl (Matryosha), an unfortunate creature who is sac­
rificed; and the worst thing is that you sense she is not the only 
such victim, that you can find as many such "unfortunates" in 
Russia as you please, that there are whole villages of them, mul­
titudes. The veracity of this description induces a sense of horror 
in a person who has feelings and who looks carefully at our future. 
This is the. generation which has sprung up after the reforms. In 
early childhood they encountered a family that was already dis­
integrating and without ideals; they found wholesale drunkenness; 
then, directly, they found themselves in the factory. The poor girl! 
She has practiced debauchery from the age of twelve, perhaps, and 
she herself scarcely knows that she is debauched. At Christmas she 
leaves the factory for a short stay in the village and is astonished 
that her former friend, the village girl Masha, can prefer her honor 
to fine clothes: "Come on, now, Stepan Zakharych, your ignorance 
is showing," she says. "What's the harm if some shopkeeper or 
gentleman wants to play around with a girl?" She makes this 
remark with total conviction of its truth and justice; moreover, she 
says this feeling pity for Masha and the villagers. When Masha 
spurns a wretched scoundrel of a businessman, Matryosha says 
plainly: "What's the use of trying to talk sense to these people! 
Ignorant clods! Somebody else in her place would've been glad to 
do it! She could have charmed him and got a little something for 
herself; it would have kept her brother happy, too!" And finally, 

244 
A Writer's Diary 
when this unfurtunate M.atryosha conspires with the wretched busi­
nesman to give Masha some sleeping povider so that be can rape 
the por, honest girl while sbe is unconscious, and then when sbe 
climbs onto the stove to se whether the victim bas fallen asleep, 
sbe does these evil things not only unaware of any wrong but fully 
convinced that sbe is doing ber fOrmer friend Masha a favor, a 
god ded for which the girl wil later thank ber. In Act Five­
the last, terrible catastropbe-M.atryosha is not troubled by Masha's 
despair, nor that of ber father or ber fiance, nor by the murder 
which is about to be committed, nor by anything else. Inded, sbe 
bas no heart, fur where could sbe have acquired one? Sbe shrugs 
ber shoulders and utters ber favorite word: "Ignorance!" The au­
thor uses this exclamation frequently and with it applies the final, 
artistic touch to this character. A tragic fate! A human being trans­
funed into some ronen worm, utterly pleased with herself and 
ber pitifuly limited horizon. 
Here we have environment, /alJDft; this unfonunate girl is not to 
be blamed, and you realize that. But there is another character, the 
most rounded one in the play; this is Masha's brother, a debauched, 
wasted, despicable factory lad who eventually seUs his sister to the 
businesman for thre hundred rubles and a velvet jacket. Now this 
is a character from among the guilty of the "sacrificed" generation. 
Here we have not only the influence of the environment. True, his 
circumstances and environment are the same: drunkennes, the 
disintegrating family, and the factory. But be does not place his 
faith in debauchery naively, as does MatryOSha. He is not naively 
base as sbe is, but lovingly so; be brings something of his own to 
his moral squalor. He realizes that vice is vice and knows what 
virtue is; but be bas come consciously to love vice and to despise 
honor. He already consciously rejects the old order of the family 
and custom; be is stupid and duU, that's true, but he bas a cenain 
enthusiasm fur sensuality and for the most base and cynical fOrm 
of materialism. He is not simply a worm, as is MatryOSha, in whom 
everything is petty and withered. He stands at the meting of the 
vilage commune and you fel that be understands nothing of what 
is going on and is incapable of understanding, that be is living in 
a world of his own and bas detached himself completely from the 
real world. He seUs his sister without any pangs of conscience and 
appears the next morning in his father's hut-the scene of despair­
in his velvet jacket, carying a new accordion. The one thing in 
which be believes as aU-powerful is vodka. With a most obtuse yet 

Apropos of a New Play 
245 
assured manner, he serves vodka before each of his undertakings­
plain vodka to the men, sweetened to the women-certain that 
everything will happen as he wishes and that vodka can achieve 
everything. The finishing touch to the irony with which he is 
portrayed is that he has, alongside his utter cynicism, an urge to 
observe the polite manners of the past, the traditional "decorum" 
of peasant life. Having arrived in the village and not yet having 
greeted his mother, he installs himself in the tavern and politely 
sends her some sweetened vodka. When he and Matryosha manage 
to get the mother to come to the tavern where they can be free to 
cajole her into giving permission to sell her own daughter to be 
raped by the businessman, he first serves her sweet vodka and 
offers her a seat saying, "Be so kind as t' take a chair, dear 
mamma." And she is very gratified at this mark of "civility." Some 
of those who have read Act One of the play have reproached our 
author for his excessively naturalistic peasant language, maintaining 
that it could be more literary. I, too, am not satisfied with the 
naturalism of the language; everything ought to be artistic. But if 
you read attentively and read the play a second time you cannot 
help but agree that it would be impossible to change the language­
at least in some places-without weakening the distinctive quality 
of the play. This "be so kind as t' take a chair, dear mamma" 
could not be changed: otherwise it would not sound so common. 
And note that the son has as much respect for his "dear mamma," 
this vile, stupid, tipsy old crone, as he does for the sole of his 
boot. 
Here are the tragic words of the father of this family, a drunken 
old man, about this "sacrificed generation": 
Zakhar (drinks a glass of vodka): Drunkards! Think about this 
now, my friends: a fella sits at his machine in the factory all week; 
his hands and his feet get numb and he feels just like his head is full 
of fog. It's like they all get a bit crazy! They don't even look like 
humans no more. There ain't a breath of air in the place; the walls 
are bare; you don't even want to look at it! There's never a ray of 
sunlight to brighten it up; that you only see on holidays! And so, 
friends, a holiday comes along: now you, Granddad, can sit and read 
the Bible; another fella will go off to have a look at the crop in the 
field or into the woods or to his beehives, maybe; or maybe he'll go 
have a chat with the neighbors about the zemstvo or a meeting or 
maybe the price of grain. But where's the factory hand to go, tell 
me? What's he got to talk about? Everything in his life is measured 

A Writer's Diary 
off and weighed. Is he going to talk about the fines they set for Lord 
knows what? Or about the rotten food tliey give him? Or that for a 
ruble's-worth of tea they charge him two and a half, and don't let 
him out of the gate so he's got to buy his provisions from the owner 
and so's there'll be even more deviltry going on inside? Is that what 
he'll talk about? Well then, his only road leads to the tavern, and the 
only talk is about vodka and filthy goings-on. 
Vasily: That's just the way it is! 
Zakhar: Think about it, friends. Our factory lad also wants his bit 
of fun; he's young, too! People get together for a round dance and 
some songs and laughter-and the factory watchman sends them pack­
ing. So the whole lot of them go off to the tavern or some pot-house! 
And the talk turns to girls and to who can outdrink the others. And 
just look at the things that go on inside the factories! Girls of twelve 
are looking out for lovers! The little ones who change the bobbins 
guzzle vodka like water! And the filthy language in the factory, the 
yelling and groaning-it's a steady uproar, a regular hell! The children 
pick it up from the grownups. We send our children there to their 
doom! You think you can find even one girl there who's not gone 
wrong, and one lad who's not taken to drink-in those factories? 
But the most characteristic of al the scenes in this peasant drama 
is Act Three, the meeting of the commune. This part of the play 
contains a powerful idea. This meeting is the cmly thing that has 
remained solid and fundamental in Russian peasant life; it is its 
main link with the past and its main hope for the future. And we 
see that this meeting as well already bears the seeds of its own 
destruction; its inner workings are already infected! You see that 
in many ways it is only a matter of form, but that its inner spirit 
and age-old inner truth have been shaken, shaken along with the 
shaky people who participate in it. 
A scandalous injustice is done at this meeting: contrary to custom 
and law, the only son of a widow (Ivan, the hero of the play) is 
sent off to the army in place of another from a wealthy family of 
three; what is worse, this is done knowingly, with conscious con­
tempt for justice and custom; it is done for vodka and for money. 
It is not even a case of bribery here; a bribe would not be so 
serious, after all; a bribe can be an isolated crime that can be set 
right. No, almost everything here stems from deliberate contempt 
for oneself, for one's own _sense of justice and, accordingly, for one's 

Apropos of a New Play 
247 
own traditional way of life. The cynicism already is evident in the 
fact that, contrary to custom and ancient rule, the commune allows 
a drinking bout at the beginning of the meeting: "We'll sort things 
out better if we're a bit stewed," say the leaders of the meeting 
with a sneer. Half the citizens who gather there have already long 
lost any faith in the force of the commune's decision and so in the 
necessity for it: they consider it little more than an unnecessary 
formality that can always be dispensed with. Justice can and should 
be ignored for the sake of immediate advantage. Very soon, one 
feels, the modern "clever fellows" will regard this whole ceremony 
as mere stupidity, merely another unnecessary burden, because the 
decision of the commune, whatever it may be, will always turn out 
to be the one favored by the wealthy and powerful predator who 
runs the meeting. Instead of empty formalism, then, it is better 
to go straight into the grip of this predator. And he will treat you 
with some vodka, as well. You can see that the majority of these 
autonomous members no longer even assume that their decision 
could hold against the will of this powerful man; they have all 
grown feeble; their hearts are flabby; they all want something sweet, 
some material reward. In essence, they are all slaves already and 
cannot even conceive of how to resolve something for justice rather 
than for their own advantage. The young generation is present here 
and looks at what their fathers are doing not only disrespectfully, 
not only scornfully, but as at some outdated nonsense; they see it 
precisely as a stupid, unnecessary form that survives only through 
the obstinacy of a few stupid old men who, in any case, can always 
be bribed. This is how Stepan-the drunken, despicable lad who 
later sells his sister-regards the meeting. The author renders all 
these episodes of the commune's meeting very well. And the most 
important thing is that Stepan's view is almost correct: not only 
does he understand nothing of what is happening at the meeting; 
he doesn't even think it necessary to understand. He could not 
help but notice that an outsider, the businessman who has resolved 
to ruin Vanka and to take away his fiancee, was permitted to 
influence the meeting. The members of the commune drank his 
liquor and allowed the businessman's clerk to say out loud that 
without the businessman, whose factory work supports them, "your 
whole district would go a-begging on church porches, but if the 
decision is in favor of his honor, then he'll cancel a lot of the fines 
imposed on the people." The matter is decided in the businessman's 
favor, of course, and Vanya is sent off to the army. 

A Writer's Diary 
At this meeting (which involves a most varied lot of characters) 
there are rwo almost tragic figures: one is Naum Egorov, an old 
man who for rwenty years has occupied the first place at the meeting 
and has directed it; and the other, Stepanida, Ivan's mother. Naum 
Egorych is a sensible, steady, honest old man with a lofty soul. 
He has a high regard for the decision of the commune. For him 
this is not simply a gathering of householders in a certain village; 
no, he has elevated himself to take the broadest view of things: 
although the decision may be only that of a meeting of his village, 
for him it seems a part of the judgment of all peasant Russia, 
which stands and survives only through the commune and its de­
cision. But, alas, he is too reasonable and cannot help but see the 
weakened state of the commune and the direction in which it has 
been pulled for some time. Of course there was injustice and villainy 
at former meetings rwenty years ago; but contempt for the meeting 
from its very own members and contempt for their own business 
was not present and was not elevated into a principle. People did 
bad things, but they knew they were doing bad and that there was 
good; now, however, they do not believe in good, or even in the 
necessity for it. Nevertheless, Naum, this last of the Mohicans, 
maintains his belief in the truth of the commune no maner what 
the cost; he believes in an almost compulsory truth, and therein lies 
his tragedy. He is a formalist: sensing that the content is slipping 
out of his hands, he insists all the more stubbornly on the form. 
When he sees that the members are drunk, he is about to ask that 
the meeting be postponed; but when they shout that "we'll sort 
things out bener if we're a bit stewed" he submits: "The commune 
has made its decision; one can't go against it." He is fully and 
painfully aware that in essence the wretched clerk they have hired, 
Levanid lgnatych, is the only one who maners and that the meeting 
will make the decision as ordered by the businessman's clerk. But 
still the old man maintains his self-deceit despite himself: he dis­
misses Levanid from the chair of the meeting and takes over him­
self, giving the clerk a reprimand for his rude remarks about the 
commune. 
A few honest voices are raised on Vanka 's behalf, commending 
him as a good, sensible lad whom the commune needs and who 
ought to be spared; then the drunken voice of an old man pipes 
up, "Well, if he's the best we've got, we ought to make him a 
recruit! "  This is now a conscious mockery of justice, a flaunting 
of injustice, a game . . . .  A judge is making a joke of himself, and 

Apropos of a New Play 
249 
in a case that concerns the fate of a man! Naum hears this and of 
course realizes that his "commune" is coming to its end. Ivan's 
mother is standing there. She is not yet an old woman and is strong 
and proud. She has been a widow since she was a young woman. 
As a widow she has been intimidated and wronged by the commune. 
But she has endured everything, has set her little house in order, 
and has raised her only beloved son, Vanya, to be her joy and 
consolation; now she hears how the commune is taking away her 
last hope and her last joy, her son. Naum Egorych, foreseeing the 
drunken, wanton decision of the commune, quickly tells Stepanida: 
"Ekh, what's to be done! The commune's got the authority! You've 
got to plead with them, Stepanida; plead with the commune! "  But 
she is not willing to beg. She stubbornly accuses the commune of 
an unjust decision, taken while drunk and having been bribed, 
and of envy of her Vanya. "Now, Stepanida, you'll only make them 
more angry at you! "  Naum exclaims in alarm. "Do you think I'd 
do this if I saw any law or conscience here, Naum Egorych," 
Stepanida replies. "It's only vodka talking! If I thought I could 
win any sympathy I'd scrape my knees on the bare ground; I'd 
wash the floor of the hut with my tears; I'd break my head bowing 
to the ground to them! But you can't change their minds and get 
them to take pity! Can't you see: this has all been set up and 
prearranged. They're a flock of crows who want to get rid of my 
bright falcon; they'll peck him to death! You people sell your souls 
for vodka! What do you worship? Vodka! Whoever brings you the 
most has bought your vote. Don't you see, Vanya, that you've 
offended that fat merchant? Don't the rest of you know that that 
merchant sneaked in drunk to bring shame on Vanya 's bride? But 
you don't know about that! The merchant's vodka is good! You've 
got no shame, you bloodsuckers! You even blamed me for taking 
in a homeless orphan! But you won't have it your way! It won't 
happen! That there mediocor knows my Vanya and won't let him 
be wronged! "  (She exits hastily.) 
The proud woman is one of the characters our poet is most 
successful at portraying. Say what you will, gentlemen, but this is 
a powerful scene. Of course, it's a Russian village and the character 
is a simple peasant woman who cannot even speak correctly; but, 
my Lord, this monologue about scraping the skin from her knees 
"if she thought she could win any sympathy" is worth many an 
emotional scene from similar tragedies. There are no classical phras­
es here, no beautiful language, no white coverlet, and no burning 

A Writer's Diary 
black eyes of a Rachel; yet I tell you that if we had our own Rachel 
you would have shuddered in the theater "at the unvarnished truth 
of this scene of a mother cursing the communal court. The scene 
ends with a significant movement: they run off to the "mediocor" 
to find justice and to complain to him of the commune's decision, 
and this is a depressing warning. 
It is scarcely necessary to point out any more of the best scenes 
of this work. But I canot resist sharing my impression and wil 
say plainly that rarely have I read anything more powerful and 
more tragic than the finale of Act Four. 
The victim, Masha, who has been sold to the businessman by 
her mother and brother, has already been drugged and is lying 
unconscious on the stove. Matryosha, this artless criminal, climbs 
onto the stove to have a look and-almost joyfuly, almost convinced 
that she has now made Masha happy-announces to the business­
man: "She's ready! She wouldn't move even if you cut her to 
pieces!" The clerk Levanid, the businessman's friend, gets up and 
leaves. "What a life you merchants have," he says enviously. And 
now, before approaching his victim, the businessman is seized by 
an almost poetic feeling: "It's 'cause we're a power now! "  he 
exclaims lasciviously and significantly. "Whatever we want we can 
do! If a merchant gets a notion to do something nowadays then he 
can do it, 'cause we're a power! "  "You're a power, true enough! "  
the victim's brother agres. Then the superfluous characters leave 
the hut, the wretched scoundrel creps toward Masha, while the 
drunken mother who has sold her innocent daughter, the unfor­
tunate Vanya's fiancee, fals asleep in a drunken stupor on the floor 
at the feet of the utterly drunken father of this happy family. Strong 
Drink Every Day Keeps Fonune Away! 
I wil not list al the other features of this terrible picture which 
strike you with their truth, such as the criminals who scarcely are 
aware of their crime, or those who are aware but who no longer 
have the right to condemn their crime, such as the drunken father, 
for example, whom the daughter tragically accuses to his face and 
whom she curses . . . .  There are some remarkably subtle observa­
tions here: when Masha comes to her senses, she first wants to kil 
herself; then, however, she puts on the silk sarafan which the 
businessman has left for her with her mother, but puts it on out 
of malignant joy, to torment "Mrself. to inflict even more pain on 
herself as if to say, "You se, I've become a trollop myself now! "  

Apropos of a New Play 
2 5 1 
Here is the conversation of the "innocent" mother and the "in­
nocent" Matryosha on the day after the tragedy: 
Matryoshka (enters): Good day to you, Aunt Arina! How are things 
here? I have to tell you I was scared to call on you yesterday! 
Arina: Oh-h, my girl, what a dreadful time we've had! It was awful! 
When she found out in the morning she grabbed a knife and almost 
killed us all with her own hand; and then she wanted to do herself 
in! We had an awful time trying to calm her down! She doesn't even 
want to set eyes on Styopka now. 
Matryoshka: He was telling me! 
Arina: Well, toward evening she serried down, you see, and now 
she's like a stone! "God's punished me for Matryoshka," she says, 
"and now I'm just like her." Just now I gave her the sarafan-the 
one that Silanty Savelich bought from you-and she put it on. "I've 
turned into Matryoshka," she says, "so I should put on her sarafan." 
That's how things are. 
Matryoshka: Where is she now? 
Arina: Oh, my girl, she's gone off to the shed and crawled into the 
straw; she 's laying there with her face buried in it. 
Matryoshka: I hope she doesn't do anything foolish to herself :when 
she's not in her senses! 
But the victim did not kill herself: "I got scared," she says later. 
Our poet has a depth of psychological insight into the People. Take 
Vanya, who returns unexpectedly from the mediator after a day's 
absence. For the sake of real truth the poet did not spare his hero: 
in the first moments Ivan is in a state of bestial rage; he holds 
Masha alone to be responsible, he is unjust and hateful; but when 
at last he understands what has really happened, he proposes, as 
if despite himself, that Masha marry him even so. But our author 
knows all too well that this is almost unthinkable, given the customs 
of our People, at least if the relationship is an honest one. A girl 
who has been dishonored, even through deceit and even through 
no fault of her own, is still considered to be unclean if not com­
pletely dishonorable. And Masha herself is proud: "Don't dirty 
yourself with me, Vanya! "  she cries. "Go away! Farewell, Vanya! "  
And then, in the last monologue, she quickly goes to the table, 
pours a glass of vodka, casts a burning glance at everyone, and 

A Writer's Diary 
cries with a desperate, malicious, outlandish glee: "Well, why are 
you so down in the mouth? Be glad-you've· done your job! Momma! 
Daddy! Let's drink and have a good time! You won't have to go 
hanging about the taverns alone now, Dad, you can go with your 
daughter! It was lonely for you to drink by yourself, Momma, but 
now there's the rwo of us! Let the liquor flow! Let it drown my 
grief and my conscience!" 
And she raises the glass to her lips. So ends the drama. 
I'm not saying that there are no flaws here; but this work has 
so many genuine merits that its flaws are almost without signifi­
cance. For example, Masha's tone in the monologue of Act Four­
which she ends with a beguiling and lofty rush of spirit: "Now it 
has become so easy!"-is rather too melodic. It's true that this is 
scarcely even a monologue but a reflection or a feeling-one of those 
same reflections and feelings whose influence has led Russians with 
heart and poetry to compose all the songs of the Russian People. 
Therefore Masha's reflection, which in essence is utterly faithful 
and natural, could have taken a rather lyrical form. But art has its 
limitations and rules, and the monologue might have been shorter. 
Perhaps Masha's tone at the end of the play, after the catastrophe, 
is not entirely true either: it would have been better had she spoken 
just a bit less. Her father's terrible words would have had much 
stronger effect if they had also been fewer and not so melodious. 
But all that can be remedied; the author can certainly correct that 
in the second edition, and, I repeat, in comparison with the work's 
indisputable merits all these things are linle more than trifles. It 
would also be good if the author were to eliminate altogether from 
his play the appearance at the end (quite unnecessarily) of the 
virtuous old factory owner who virtualy sermonizes about our 
"debts to the People." His being here is all the more absurd since 
he is the very same factory owner who has enslaved the entire 
population of the area, who harasses them with arbitrary fines and 
feeds his workers rotten food. Finally, the master of the house, 
Zakhar, has emerged rather ambiguously. There is something false, 
unexplained, and stiff in his own explanation of why he took to 
drink; the matter could be conveyed much more simply and 
naturally. 
However, this is only my opinion and I may be wrong; but I am 
certain that I am not wrong about the solid merits of this serious 
work. I am only too pleased to share my impressions with the 
readers. Nothing more serious than this, at least, has appeared 
recently-and perhaps for quite a long time-in our literature . . . .  

13 
Little Pictures 
Sumer, school holidays; dust and heat, heat and dust. It is un­
pleasant to stay in the city. Everyone has left. The other day I was 
about to get on with reading the pile of manuscripts that has 
accumulated in the editorial office . . . .  But I'll postpone my remarks 
about manuscripts, although I do have something to say about 
them. One wants fresh air, leisure, freedom; but instead of fresh 
air and freedom I find myself wandering alone aimlessly along 
streets covered with sand and lime, feeling as if insulted by some­
one-truly, a feeling rather like that. As we all know, half of our 
problems vanish if we can only find someone to blame for them, 
and it's all the more vexing when there's really no one to be 
found . . . .  
The other day I was crossing from the sunny to the shady side 
of Nevsky Prospect. As you know, you always cross Nevsky Pros­
pect carefully or else you may be run over in a moment; you jockey 
for position, look carefully around, and seize the moment before 
launching off on the dangerous journey; you wait for a tiny gap in 
the rush of carriages two or three lanes wide. In winter-two or 
three days before Christmas, for instance-crossing the Prospect is 
particularly interesting: you take a great risk, especially if a frosty 
white fog has covered the city since dawn so that you scarcely can 
make out a passerby three paces away. And so you somehow slip 
through the first lanes of carriages and cabs rushing toward the 
Police Bridge, happy that you no longer have to worry about them; 
the hoofbeats, rumblings, and hoarse cries of the coachmen are 
left behind, but there's no time for rejoicing: you have only reached 
the midpoint ofthe dangerous crossing, while risk and the unknown 
253 

254 
A Writer's Diary 
await you. You cast a hasty, anxious glance and quickly determine 
how to slip through the second lane of carriages rushing in the 
direction of the Anichkov Bridge. But you sense that there is no 
time for thinking, and besides, there is this hellish fog: all you can 
hear are hoofbeats and shouts and can see no farther than a couple 
of yards around you. And then-suddenly, unexpectedly-out of 
the fog come urgent, rapidly approaching, harsh sounds, fearful 
and ominous at this moment and very like the noise of six or seven 
people chopping cabbage in a vat. "Where to go? Ahead or back? 
Will I have time or not?" And lucky for you that you stood still: 
out of the fog only a pace away from you suddenly emerges the 
gray snout of a hotly breathing trorting horse, rushing madly with 
the speed of an express train; there's foam on the bit, the shaft­
bow is juning out, the reins are taut, while the lovely strong legs 
quickly, evenly, and steadily measure off a sazhen at every pace. 
A moment passes, there is the desperate cry of the coachman, and 
everything flashes and flies past, from the fog and into the fog 
again-the hoofbeats, the chopping sounds, the cries have all dis­
appeared again like a vision. An authentically Petersburg vision! 
You cross yourself and now, almost scorning the second lane of 
carriages which so frightened you for a moment, quickly reach the 
welcome sidewalk still all a-tremble from what you have experienced 
and-oddly enough-deriving at the same time some inexplicable 
pleasure from it, certainly not because you have escaped the danger, 
but simply because you were subjected to it. It is a retroactive 
pleasure, I don't dispute, and one that in our age is useless besides, 
the more so that one ought to be protesting and not feeling pleasure, 
for the trotting horse is certainly not some liberal thing; it brings 
to mind the hussar or the merchant on a spree and, accordingly, 
notions of inequality, high-handedness, Ia tyrannie, and so on. I 
know that and don't dispute it; I merely want to finish my thought. 
And so the other day, with the usual winter caution, I was about 
to cross the Nevsky Prospect when suddenly, snapping out of my 
reverie, I stopped in amazement in the very middle of the crossing: 
there was no one around, not a single carriage, not even some 
cabbie's rattling droshky! The street was empty for two hundred 
yards in either direction; one might even stop to discuss Russian 
literature with a friend, so little was the danger! It was an insult, 
even! When have we ever seen such a thing? 
Dust and heat, astonishing odors, tom-up pavement, and build­
ings being remodeled. It's more and more common now to touch 

Little Pictures 
25 5  
up the fa4fade to make it look stylish and distinct. I'm amazed by 
the architecture of our day. In fact, all of Petersburg's architecture 
is remarkably characteristic and distinct and always impressed me 
specifically by the fact that it expresses all the lack of character 
and personality typical of the city over the entire period of its 
existence. In a positive sense, what is typical and unique to Pe­
tersburg are only these little decaying wooden houses, which still 
survive, sometimes on even the most elegant streets next to enor­
mous mansions, and which stand out as glaringly as a pile of 
firewood beside a marble palazzo. As far as the palazzi are con­
cerned, it is precisely in them that we see all the lack of character 
of the idea and all the negativity of the essence of the Petersburg 
period from its very beginning to its end. In that sense, there is 
no such ciry as Petersburg; from the point of view of architecture, 
it is a reflection of all the architectural styles of the world and of 
all periods and fashions; everything has been, bit by bit, borrowed 
and distorted in its own way. In these buildings you can read as 
in a book al the currents of all the great and trivial ideas that, 
appropriately or accidentally, have landed here from Europe and 
that gradually overcame and captured us. Here we see the pallid 
architecture of churches of the last century; here is a pitiful imitation 
in Roman style from the beginning of our century; here we see a 
building that seems to have come from the Renaissance era; and 
there is an example of the ancient Byzantine style, supposedly 
discovered by the architect Ton during the reign of Nicholas I. 
And then we see some more buildings-hospitals, institutes, and 
even palaces from the first decades of our century; these are in the 
style of Napoleon !-immense, pseudomajestic and unbelievably 
boring; there is something labored and contrived in the style which, 
like the bees on Napoleon's mantle, is supposed to express the 
majesty of the new epoch that had then just begun and the un­
precedented dynasty with its pretentions to existence in perpetuity. 
And then we see some houses, or palaces almost, belonging to. 
certain of our noble families but products of a much later period. 
These are built in the manner of some Italian palazzi or in the not 
entirely pure French style of the prerevolutionary era. But in the 
Venetian or Roman palazzi in Italy, whole generations of Italian 
families have lived out their days, one after the other, over the 
course of centuries. Our palazzi, however, were installed only dur­
ing the last reign, but also with pretensions to permanence, it 
seems: the order of things that had been established at that time 

A Writer's Diary 
seemed only too solid and reassuring, and the appearance of these 
palazzi seemed to express all that faith: they, too, were intended 
to last for ages. However, this all came almost on the eve of the 
Crimean War, and then followed the liberation of the peasants . . . .  
I will be very sad if, someday, on one of these palaces I see the 
sign of a tavern and pleasure garden or a French hotel for travelers. 
And, finally, look at the architecture of this enormous, modern 
hotel. Here we see the businesslike approach, Americanism, hun­
dreds of rooms, an immense commercial enterprise; one sees im­
mediately that we, too, have railways and we have suddenly found 
ourselves to be businessmen. And now . . .  truly, I don't know how 
to define our current architecrure. We have some sort of disorderly 
style here which, however, entirely corresponds to the disorder of 
the present moment. We have a vast number of very tall (and above 
all, they must be tall) buildings for tenants, buildings with very 
thin walls, so they say, and cheaply built, with an amazing variety 
of styles of fao;ades: we see Rastrelli and late rococo, doge balconies 
and windows which absolutely must be reils-de-breuf and absolutely 
must have five stories-and all this in one single fao;ade. "Now 
then, my friend, you've got to put in a doge window for me; I'm 
no worse than one of them raggedy doges, am I? And you've got 
to build me five stories so's I can take in tenants: a window is one 
thing, but I've got to have five stories; I can't go wasting all my 
money on playthings." However, I'm not a Petersburg feuilletonist 
and this wasn't at all what I started to talk about. I began with 
manuscripts in the editor's office and went off on something 
unrelated. 
2 
Dust and heat. I've heard that several parks and amusement cen­
ters, where one can get a breath of fresh air, have been opened for 
those who are spending the summer in Petersburg. I don't know 
if there is any fresh air to breathe there because I still have not 
visited any of them. It's better, stufier, and sadder in Petersburg. 
You can walk around, pondering things in utter solitude, and this 
is better than the fresh air of the Petersburg amusement parks. 
Besides, very many parks and gardens have suddenly been opened 
in the city and in places where one never expected them. On almost 
every street now you can find a gate which often has a heap of 
lime and bricks beside it, with a sign: "Entrance to the tavern 
garden." There in the courtyard some forty years ago a little plot 

Little Pictures 
257 
ten paces by five had been fenced off in front of some decrepit 
outbuilding. And so this is now the "tavern garden." Tell me, why 
is it so much more melancholy in Petersburg on Sundays than on 
weekdays? Is it because of the vodka? The drunkenness? Is it 
because drunken peasants lie about and sleep on Nevsky Prospect 
in broad daylight-or at least in the evening, as I 've seen myself? 
I don't think so. Working people who are out drinking don't bother 
me, and, having stayed on in Petersburg, now I 've become quite 
accustomed to them, although formerly I couldn't abide them and 
even hated them. On holidays they walk around the streets drunk­
whole crowds of them at times-pushing people and stumbling into 
them; and this is not because they want to create a row but just 
because a drunken man cannot help but stumble into people and 
push them. They curse out loud despite the crowds of women and 
children they pass; and this not from rudeness but just because a 
drunken man can have no other language than a foul one. And 
this really is a language, a whole language-as I recently became 
convinced; it is the language most convenient, original, and best 
suited foǵ one who is drunk or even tipsy, so that it absolutely had 
to come into being; and if it did not exist-il faudrait /'inventer. 
I'm quite serious here. Just consider. As we know, the first thing 
that happens to a drunken person is that his tongue becomes tied 
and moves sluggishly; however, the flow of thoughts and sensations 
of a drunken man-or at least of anyone who is not as drunk as 
a cobbler-increases by almost ten. And therefore there is a natural 
need to find the sort of language that can satisfy both these, mu­
tually contradictory, states. Ages and ages ago this language was 
found and accepted all over Russia. Purely and simply, it is one 
noun not found in the dictionary, so that the entire language consists 
of but one word that can be pronounced with remarkable ease. 
One Sunday, quite late in the evening, I happened to be walking 
some fifteen paces away from a group of six drunken tradesmen; 
suddenly I realized that it was possible to express all thoughts, 
sensations, and even entire, profound propositions using only this 
one noun which, besides, has very few syllables. One of the lads 
first pronounces this noun sharply and forcefully to express his 
scornful dismissal of something they had been discussing earlier. 
Another replies by repeating this same noun, but now in quite a 
different tone and sense-specifically, in the sense that he thor­
oughly doubts the expediency of the first lad's denial. A third one 
becomes indignant at what the first has said; sharply and excitedly, 

A Writer's Diary 
he gets into the discussion, shouting out this same noun, but now 
in the sense of disparagement and abuse. Tlie second fellow again 
interrupts, angry at the third, who's offended him, and stops him 
as if to say: "Why do you have to stick your oar in, chum? We've 
been having quite a discussion here; what d'you mean by getting 
on to our Filka! "  And this whole notion he expressed by using 
this same forbidden word, this same monosyllabic name of a certain 
object, and raised his hand to take the third fellow by the shoulder. 
But then, suddenly, the fourth lad, the youngest of the group, who 
had kept silent to this point but who probably had found the 
solution to the original problem that had caused the dispute, raised 
his arm and shouted . . . .  "Eureka!" you might think. "I've got it! 
I've got it! "  No, it wasn't eureka, and he hadn't got it. He only 
went on repeating this same noun, not found in the dictionary; 
just one word, only a single word, but with delight, with a scream 
of rapture, and, it sems, a little too exuberantly, because the sixth, 
a morose fellow and the eldest of them, didn't like the sound of it 
and at once put a stop to the youngster's delight by turning to him 
and repeating in a gloomy, didactic bass . . .  that same no).lD which 
isn't mentioned in the presence of ladies and which clearly and 
accurately signified: "What're you bawling about?" And so, with­
out having said anything else at al, they repeated this same little 
word of theirs six times in succession and understood one another 
completely. This is a fact that I witnessed myself. "Have mercy!" 
I shouted at them suddenly, without knowing why (I was in the 
middle of a crowd of people). "You've not walked more than ten 
paces and you've used (and I used the word) six times! That's 
disgraceful! Aren't you ashamed of yourselves?" 
They al stared at me as people stare at something unerly un­
expected and fell silent for a moment; I thought they would begin 
abusing me, but they didn't. Only the youngest, after walking some 
ten paces more, suddenly turned to me and shouted as he walked, 
"So why'd you have to say it one more time when you've already 
heard it six times from us?" 
A burst of laughter rang out and the group went on, paying no 
more attention to me. 
3 
No, it's not such people who've ben out drinking that I'm talking 
about, and it's not those who make me so sad on Sundays. I wru: 

Little Pictures 
259 
most surprised to discover not long ago that there are peasants, 
townspeople, and tradesmen in Petersburg who are quite sober, 
who do not "indulge" at all, even on Sundays; and it wasn't 
specifically that which astonished me, but the fact that there are 
many more of them, it seems, than I had heretofore suspected. 
Now these people I find an even more melancholy sight than the 
drunken revelers, and that's not because I feel sorry for the sober 
people; there's certainly no reason to feel sorry for them; yet some 
strange ideas come into one's mind . . . .  Toward evening on Sundays 
(you never see them at all on weekdays) a great many such people, 
who have been busily working all week and who are absolutely 
sober, come out onto the streets. They come out specifically to take 
walks. I have noticed that they never go to the Nevsky but tend 
to take strolls near their homes or amble along as they and their 
families return from visiting somewhere. (It seems there are also 
many tradesmen with families in Petersburg). They proceed se­
dately with terribly serious faces, looking not at all as if they were 
out for a stroll; they say little to one another-husbands and wives 
particularly say scarcely a word to one another-but they are always 
dressed in their Sunday best. Their clothes are poor and old; the 
women wear colorful dresses; but everything has been cleaned and 
washed for the holiday, specifically, perhaps, for this very hour. 
There are some in Russian dress, but many men wear German 
clothes and are clean-shaven. What I find most annoying is that it 
seems they really and truly believe they are enjoying a genuine 
holiday treat in taking such a promenade. But what sort of a treat 
could it be on this broad, bare, dusty street where the dust hangs 
in the air even after sunset? That's just my point: as far as they 
are concerned, this is paradise; so, to each his own. 
Very often they have children with them; there are also very 
many children in Petersburg, and people still say that terrible 
numbers of them die off here. As I could see, they are mostly very 
young and have barely learned to walk or cannot yet walk at all. 
Could it be that there are so few older children because they do 
not survive infancy? Here I see among the crowd a single trades­
man, but with a child, a little boy; they are by themselves, and 
both have such a lonely look about them. The man is about thirty 
and has a haggard and unhealthy face. He is dressed in his Sunday 
best: a German frock coat, worn at the seams, with shabby buttons 
and a very greasy collar; his trousers are "accidental" third-hand 

260 
A Writer's Diary 
ones acquired at the flea market but cleaned up as well as can be. 
A calico shirtfront, a tie, a top hat (very rumpled); he is clean­
shaven. Probably he works in some locksmith's shop or does some­
thing in a printing office. His expression is doleful and gloomy, 
pensive, harsh, and almost angry. He holds the child's hand and 
the child toddles along behind him, scarcely able to keep his bal­
ance. He's a little boy a bit more than two years old, very feeble 
and pale but wearing a little caftan and boots with red trim and 
a cap with a little peacock feather. He is tired; the father has said 
something to him; perhaps it was just a remark but it sounds as 
if he raised his voice. The boy grew quiet. But they went on another 
five paces and the father bent down, carefully picked up the child, 
and carried him in his arms. The child clung to the father trustingly, 
as if this were a matter of habit; he put his right arm around his 
father's neck and began to stare at me with childish amazement, 
as if to say, "Why are you following us and staring that way?" I 
was about to nod to him and smile but he frowned and clung even 
more tightly to his father's neck. It appears that the two are great 
friends. 
When I wander about the streets I enjoy examining certain total 
strangers, studying their faces and trying to guess who they are, 
how they live, what they work at, and what is on their minds at 
this particular moment. When I looked at the tradesman and his 
son I got the idea that the wife must have died only a month ago 
and, for some reason, I thought it must have been of consumption. 
The motherless little boy (the father works all week in the shop) 
is looked after for the time being by some old woman who lives 
in the basement where they rent a wretched little room, or perhaps 
only a space in the corner. And now, on Sunday, the widower and 
his son have gone somewhere far away on the Vyborg side to their 
only remaining relative-most likely the late wi's sister, whom 
they rather rarely visited before; she's marriegAo some noncom­
missioned officer with a wound stripe and she certainly must live 
in some enormous government building, al;o in the basement but 
in her own apartment. She, perhaps, heaved a few sighs over her 
late sister, but not many; the widower also probably did not spend 
overly long in grieving during his visit but was gloomy all the 
while, spoke rarely and little; he certainly must have turned the 
conversation to some particular point concerning his work but soon 
left off talking of that as well. They must have put on the samovar 
and drunk their tea in Russian style, sucking little bits of sugar. 

Little Pictures 
The boy sat on a bench in the corner the whole time, frowning 
and shy, until at last he fell asleep. His aunt and her husband paid 
little attention to him, but they finally gave him a bit of milk and 
bread. The host-the sergeant who until now had paid no attention 
to him-made some joke about the child as a mark of affection, 
but something very risque and inappropriate; he himself (and only 
he) laughed at it, while the widower, on the contrary, at that same 
moment, for some unknown reason, sternly raised his voice at the 
boy, the result of which was that the latter felt a sudden need for 
the toilet; thereupon the father, no longer scolding and with a 
serious air, carried him out of the rom for a moment . . . .  They 
said their goodbyes in the same gloomy and solemn manner as they 
had carried on their conversation, observing all the polite conven­
tions of decorum. The father took up the child in his arms and 
carried him home, from the Vyborg side to the Liteiny. Tomorrow 
he'll again be in the shop and the boy will be with the old woman. 
And so you walk around and about and imagine all sons of idle 
pictures like this for your own diversion. It's a pointless occupation, 
and "nothing edifying can be derived therefrom." And that is why 
my spirits sink on Sundays in vacation time on the dusty and 
gloomy Petersburg streets. What, hasn't it occurred to you that the 
streets in Petersburg are gloomy? I think that this must be the 
gloomiest city that can possibly exist in the world! 
It's true that on weekdays as well a great many children are 
brought out, but toward evening on Sundays there are almost ten 
times as many of them on the streets. How haggard, pale, sickly, 
and anemic they are , and what gloomy little faces they have, es­
pecially those who are still being carried; those who are already 
walking all have croked legs and flounder along rocking from side 
to side. Almost all of them have been carefully dressed, however. 
But good heavens, a child is like a little flower or a leaf on a tree 
in spring: it needs light, air, freedom, rom to grow, fresh food; 
but instead of all these things there is the stufy basement with 
some odor of kvass or cabbage, a dreadful stench at night, food 
that does not nourish, cockroaches and fleas, raw dampness that 
seeps from the walls, and outside only dust, bricks, and lime. 
But they love their pale and sickly children. Here's a little three­
year-old girl, a pretty little thing in a clean dress; she's hurrying 
to her mother who is sitting by the gate amid a large group of 
people who have come out of the building to chat for an hour or 
two. The mother is busy talking but keeps her eye on the child, 

A Writer's Diary 
who is playing some ten paces away. The girl bends down to pick 
up something-a little pebble of some son-and accidentally steps 
on the hem of her skin; now she simply can't straighten up. She 
tries twice and then falls down and stans to cry. The mother was 
about to get up to help her, but I picked up the little girl first. 
She straightened, cast a quick and curious glance at me, still with 
tears in her eyes, and then, a bit afraid and embarassed, quickly 
ran back to her mother. I approached and politely inquired how 
old the girl was; the mother replied affably enough but with great 
reserve. I remarked that I had a little girl of the same age, but no 
reply followed. "You may very well be a good man," the mother's 
silent glance told me, "but what are you doing standing here? 
You'd best be on your way." Al the people who had ben talking 
also feU silent and semed to be thinking the same thing. I touched 
my hat and went on. 
Here, on a busy intersection, another little girl has lagged behind 
her mother, who until now had ben holding her hand. True, the 
peasant woman suddenly sponed some fifteen paces away a friend 
who was coming to visit her and, trusting that the child knew the 
way, she let go of her hand and rushed off to meet her visitor. But 
the child, thus suddenly abandoned, took fright and began to cry, 
runing tearfully to catch up with her mother. 
A gray-haired and bearded passerby-a total stranger-stopped 
the runing woman and seized her hand: "Why are you rushing 
off so? Can't you see the child crying back there? You mustn't do 
that! The girl might get frightened." 
The woman wanted to make some sharp reply but thought bener 
of it; with no sign of annoyance or impatience, she picked up the 
little girl who came runing to her and now walked sedately toward 
her visitor. The man looked on sternly until he saw the outcome 
and then went on his way. 
Pointless, quite pointless little scenes, which I'm almost ashamed 
to set down in my diary. From now on I'll try to be much more 
senous. 

14 
To a Teacher 
A Moscow columnist in our Petersburg Voice (no. 210) has taken 
me to task for my last three "little pictures" (The Citizen, no. 29). 
Motivated, apparently, by feelings of delicacy, he objects that in 
my second scene, when I spoke about the foul language of our 
people when drunk, I referred to-but of course did not name-a 
certain indecent object . . . .  "I never imagined the depths to which 
a columnist could sink when he has no proper material at hand," 
says my Moscow complainant about me. And so it turns out that 
I resorted to something indecent solely to enliven my column and 
give it some zest, some cayenne pepper. . . .  
Now that makes me sad; and all the while I was thinking that 
people would draw the very opposite conclusion from my column, 
i.e., that from a great deal of material I derived only a little. I 
thought that the title would save me: little pictures, not large ones; 
people don't expect so much from little ones. And so I jotted down 
only a few sad thoughts about the way our Petersburg working 
classes spend their spare time. The sparseness of their joys and 
entertainments; the poverty of their spiritual lives; the basements 
where they raise their pale, scrofulous children; the boring, broad 
Petersburg streets-straight as arrows-as places for their walks; 
this young tradesman-widower with his child in his arms (an actual 
picture)-all that seemed to me material enough for a feuilleton so 
that, I repeat, I might have been accused of something quite the 
opposite, i.e., that I did little with such an abundance of material. 
I was consoled by the fact that I managed at least to suggest my 
main conclusion: that among the vast majority of our People-even 
the ones in Petersburg basements, even given the most impover­
ished spiritual environment-there still is a striving for dignity, for 
a certain decency, for genuine self-respect; love for the family and 

A Writer's Diary 
for children is being preserved. I was especially struck by the fact 
that they so truly and even tenderly love tlieir sickly children; I 
was specifically cheered by the thought that disorders and abuses 
in our People's family life, even amid circumstances such as those 
in Petersburg, are still exceptions-numerous though they may be­
and wanted to share this fresh impression with the readers. Just 
at that time I had read in a newspaper column a very frank ad­
mission from a highly intelligent man regarding a certain book of 
an official nature that had come out. The column argued that to 
discuss whether the reform had or had not benefited the People 
was essentially a waste of time: even if the reform had been of no 
benefit to the People it was no matter-let everything go to blazes, 
since the reform had to happen (and there may be a good deal of 
truth in that, on the principle of pereat mundus, despite the way 
the question was put). And finally, as far as the People-the peas­
ants-are concerned, the columnist admitted very plainly that "in 
fact it is quite true that our People themselves did not deserve the 
reform . . .  and that if, before the reform, in literature and journalism 
we and Messrs. Marko Vovchok and Grigorovich crowned our peas­
ants with roses and laurels, we know full well that we placed these 
crowns on heads infested with lice . . . .  But that was necessary at 
the time in order to rouse enthusiasm for the cause," etc., etc. That 
is the essence of the idea (which I did not quote literally) expressed 
in the column with such frankness and without the least trace of 
the former polite formulas. I must admit that these remarks are 
even too frank; their starkness, which is made evident almost for 
the first time with such satisfaction, put me in a most curious 
disposition, and I recall that I decided then that though we in The 
Citizen, for instance, may well agree with the first part of this 
notion-the reform was needed no matter what the consequences­
still in no way can we agree with the second part of this fateful 
notion, and we are firmly convinced that these lice-ridden heads 
were still worthy of the reform and were in no way beneath it. I 
think that such a conviction can make up one of the characteristic 
features of our own point of view; that is why I mention it now. 
As far as my feuilleton is concerned . . . .  By the way, I don't know 
why the Moscow columnist, my fellow writer, thinks that I am 
ashamed to be called a feuilletonist and states in French that I am 
"plus feuilletoniste que Jules Janin, plus catholique que le pape." 
This bit of French from Moscow is put here to make people think 
that the author is a fellow of proper form, but I still don't understand 

To a Teacher 
why he labels me as one of the Roman Catholic persuasion and 
why he needed to bring the poor pope into it. As far as I am 
concerned, I only stated that I was not a "Petersburg" feuilletonist; 
and by this I meant only to indicate for the future that I don't 
intend to write only about Petersburg life in particular; accordingly, 
there's no reason to expect very detailed accounts of that life from 
me whenever I find it necessary to talk about it. If my Moscow 
teacher absolutely must call my Diary a feuilleton, then he's free 
to do so; I'm quite content with that. 
My Moscow teacher assures us that my feuilleton created quite 
a furor in Moscow "in the market stalls and in Zariade" and calls 
it a "shopkeeper's" feuilleton. I'm very pleased that I provided so 
much enjoyment to the readers from those areas of our ancient 
capital. But the venom of his remarks comes from the assertion 
that supposedly I sought deliberately for sensation; not having any 
better educated readers, I sought some in Zariade, and with that 
in mind I wrote "about that" and, accordingly, I am "the most 
resourceful of all the feuilletonists . . . .  " 
"I just can't figure it out [writes the teacher, telling of the effect of 
my feuilleton in Moscow]-I can't figure it out; it's truly amazing that 
everybody wants to get his hands on this issue of The Citizen, " said 
one of our newspaper sellers in surprise as he answered my question 
about the demand for The Citizen. When I explained the reason to 
him, the newsboy ran off to Mecklenburg and Zhivarev, our news­
paper dealers, to pick up all their remaining issues; but they had also 
sold out. "People in the market stalls and Zariade keep asking for 
it. . . .  " The fact is that the central shopping district has heard the 
news that The Citizen has printed an article about that, and so all the 
shopkeepers, instead of buying Entertainment, have rushed to pick up 
a Citizen. 
Listen, that's not bad news at all, and you're wasting your time 
trying to shame me about having readers among the shopkeepers. 
Quite the contrary: I would very much like to win their favor since 
I certainly don't have the same low opinion of them as you. You 
see, they bought the paper to have a good laugh and also because 
there was a commotion over it. Everyone pounces on a commotion; 
it's the nature of every hwnan being, especially in Russia (you, 
for example, pounced on it at once); so I think that one mustn't 
reserve any particular scorn for the shopkeepers over that. As far 
as amusement and having a laugh are concerned, there are various 

266 
A Writer's Diary 
forms of amusement and various kinds of laughter, even in matters 
that may be quite unseemly. My teacher qualifies his remarks, 
however; he adds: "I am certain that the pen of the author of the 
'little pictures abaut that' was guided by the best of intentions when 
it wrote this shopkeeper's feuilleton." In other words, the teacher 
gives me credit by allowing that when I mentioned that, I was not 
motivated directly and principally by a desire to corrupt the People. 
I thank him for this, at least; since the author is writing in The 
Voice, this magnanimous qualification is, perhaps, meaningful, 
since I know from experience that its publisher, Andrei Aleksan­
drovich, would not think twice about accusing me of whatever he 
pleases, even of intentions of corrupting the Russian People and 
Russian society. (He has, after all, accused me of supporting serf­
dom.) Andrei Aleksandrovich 's influence also showed itself in the 
implications of your startling remark: " . . .  and if such 'little pic­
tures' of yours will do nothing to contribute to the reform of in­
ebriated workers . . .  ," you say. This thought comes straight from 
the head of Andrei Aleksandrovich! Why, he gets the notion that 
I was writing with the direct and immediate purpose of correcting 
the bad language of our foul-mouthed working people! But, you 
see, they've never even heard of you and me, nor even of Andrei 
Aleksandrovich-these workers I wrote about in my feuilleton! 
No, I had something different in mind when I wrote about that 
"noun which is not mentioned in the presence of ladies but which 
is most commonly used among drunkards," and I insist that I had 
a rather serious and justifiable intention, and I will prove it to you. 
My idea was to show the uncorruptedness of the Russian People, 
to show that if our People do use bad language when drunk (for 
when sober they use it much, much less frequently) then they do 
so not out of love for obscene words and not from the pleasure of 
profanity but simply from a foul habit which has become almost 
a necessity, so that even those notions and feelings which are the 
furthest from profanity are expressed in profane language. I went 
on to point out that the main reason for this habit of profanity 
must be sought in drunkenness. You may think whatever you like 
of my surmise on the necessity-when one is drunk and the tongue 
does not move freely and yet one has a strong urge to talk-to 
resort to the shortest, most conventional, and most expressive 
words; but that our People are uncorrupted even when they do use 
profanity-that was worth pointing out. I even make so bold as to 
affirm that the aesthetically and intellectually developed levels of 

To a Teacher 
our society are incomparably more corrupted in this sense than 
our coarse and very backward common People. In masculine so­
ciety, even of the highest circles-even among gray-haired and 
bemedaled old men-it sometimes happens after dinner, when im· 
portant topics and sometimes even matters of state are discussed, 
that little by little the conversation turns to somewhat risque sub­
jects. These subjects, in turn, soon degenerate into such abomi­
nation, such foul language, and such foul thoughts that the 
imagination of the People would never conceive of the like. This 
happens very often among all groups of this circle that stands so 
high above the People. Men who are known as paragons of virtue, 
even devoutly religious men, even the most romantic poets-they 
all participate eagerly in such conversations. What is most impor­
tant here is the fact that certain of these men are unquestionably 
upright and do many good deeds as well. What appeals to them 
is the obscenity of it and the refinement of that obscenity; not so 
much the profane word, as the idea which that word contains; they 
like the depth of the degradation; they like, specifically, the stench, 
just as a refined epicure likes Limburger cheese (something un· 
known to the People); they have the urge to smear it around, to 
inhale and revel in the odor. They laugh; and of course they speak 
condescendingly of this abomination; but it is obvious that they 
like it and cannot do without it, even if it be only in words. The 
People have a different kind of laughter, even when it is about 
those same topics. I am sure that in our Zariade people did not 
laugh for the sake of the abomination, nor from love of that and 
the art of it; their laughter was extremely simple-hearted and not 
depraved; healthy, though coarse; entirely unlike the laughter of 
some of those who spread filth in our society or in our literature. 
The People use profanity to no purpose and often when talking 
about things that are not at all indecent. Our People are not corrupt 
and are even very pure, despite the fact that they are unquestionably 
the greatest users of profanity in the whole world-and, truly, it 
is worth giving a little thought to this contradiction. 
My Moscow teacher finishes his remarks in his feuilleton about 
me with extraordinary, almost satanic pride: 
I shall utilize the example of my esteemed colleague I he means me] 
when I have to write a feuilleton and have no material and shall try 
then to create some "little pictures" !what contempt!) of my own; 
but at the present moment I have no need to take advantage of the 

268 
A Writer's Diary 
example he offers [i.e., a clever person always has lots of ideas without 
that], because even though we in Moscow also have "heat and dust," 
"dust and heat" [the opening words of my feuilleton-quoted to try 
to shame me once more], still, from out of this dust [Aha! Here he's 
getting to the point; now he's going to show us what a clever Moscow 
journalist can find even in "this dust," as compared to Petersburg's] 
and from beneath this heat [What does that mean-"from beneath 
this heat"?) one can, with a certain amount of attention (Just listen 
to him!], perceive that the living pulse of our renowned city, which 
weakens palpably in the summer, begins to beat stronger so that, ever 
gaining strength, it reaches in the winter months an intensity which 
the pulse of Moscow life can no longer surpass. 
Now what an idea! That's how it is in our Moscow! And what 
a lesson for me! And do you know what, teacher? I can't help but 
think that you deliberately seized upon my remarks about that 
specifically to add some entenainment value to your feuilleton as 
well (otherwise, why all your intensity?); perhaps you even envied 
my success in Zariade. This is indeed very possible. Otherwise 
you would not have dug so deeply into the matter and smeared 
around so much filth by referring to it so many times. Not only 
did you mention it and smear it around, you even had a good smell 
yourself: " . . .  still, we are mature enough at least to be able to 
smell when we are served up something that pierces the nose and 
can judge it despite the author's intentions . . . .  
" 
Now what does that smell like? 

15 
Something about Lying 
Why is it that we all-every single one of us-tell lies? I'm con­
vinced that people will stop me right there and shout: "Ah, what 
a lot of nonsense! Not everybody, certainly not! You don't have a 
topic and so you've thought that up for an effective opening." I've 
already been charged with failing to have a topic; but the point is 
that I truly am convinced of the universality of our lying. You live 
with an idea for fifty years, you see it and feel it, and suddenly it 
appears to you in such a light that you think you've never known 
it at all. Not long ago it suddenly dawned on me that in among 
our educated classes in Russia there can't be even a single person 
who doesn't lie. That is just because in Russia even entirely honest 
people can lie. I am convinced that among other nations, in their 
vast majority, only worthless people lie; they lie for practical ad­
vantage, that is, with direct criminal intent. But in Russia the most 
honest people can lie for no reason whatsoever and with the most 
honorable intentions. The vast majority of our lies are told for the 
sake of sociability. One wants to produce an aesthetic impression 
on the listener, to make him feel good, and so people lie, even 
sacrificing themselves to the listener, so to say. Let any one of you 
try to recall: haven't you, for instance, twenty times or more ex­
aggerated the number of miles you've driven in an hour if you felt 
that this might please your listener? And wasn't your listener really 
pleased enough to avow at once that a certain troika he knew about 
had once outpaced a railway train on a bet, and so on, and so on? 
And what about hunting dogs, or how you were fined for false 
teeth in Paris or how Botkin cured you? And haven't you told such 
marvels about your own illness that although you naturally began 
believing them yourself halfway through the story (for halfway 
through the story you always begin to believe it yourself), still, 

270 
A Writer's Diary 
when you went to bed that night recalling with satisfaction how 
pleasantly impressed your listener had been, you couldn't help 
saying, "Eh, what a pack of fibs I told!" However, that's a poor 
example, for there's nothing more pleasant than to talk of one's 
own illness if you can only find someone to listen; and once you've 
begun to speak, it's just impossible not to lie; that even aids the 
recovery. But when you've come back from abroad, haven't you 
told about the thousand things you've seen "with your own 
eyes . . .  "? However, let me take back that example as well: there's 
no way a Russian returning from abroad can help exaggerating; 
otherwise there would have been no point in going there. But what 
about the natural sciences! Haven't you discussed the natural sci­
ences or the bankruptcy and escapes abroad of various Petersburg 
and other Yids without understanding anything at all about those 
Yids and without the faintest idea about the natural sciences? Tell 
me, now, haven't you told a story of something that supposedly 
happened to you to the very same person who had once told it to 
you, claiming that it had happened to him? Have you really for­
gotten how, in the middle of the story, you suddenly remembered 
this and guessed what was happening and found confirmation of 
it in the pained look your listener directed so intently at you (for 
in such cases people for some reason stare at one another with ten 
times the usual concentration); do you recall how, despite everything 
and despite the fact that all the humor had now been lost, you 
still-with the courage worthy of a great purpose-continued to 
babble out your story and, finishing it hurriedly and with nervously 
hasty politeness, handshakes and smiles, you each rushed off on 
your separate ways so that when-right out of the blue-something 
prompted you in your final paroxysm to shout down the stairs at 
your fleeing listener some question about the health of his auntie, 
he did not even turn around to reply; and this fact remained in 
your memory as the most painful part of the entire incident? In 
short, if anyone can answer no to all this-that is, that he has never 
tole! any such stories, has never mentioned Botkin, never lied about 
the Yids, never shouted down the stairs some question about the 
health of auntie, and that nothing of this sort has ever happened 
to him-then I simply won't believe it. I know that the Russian 
liar very often lies without ever noticing it himself so that one may 
not even be aware that he is lying. This is how it happens, you 
see: no sooner will a person tell a lie and pass it off successfully, 
than he'll take such a liking to it that he'll include the story among 

Something about Lying 
27 1 
the authentic facts of his personal life; and he acts utterly in good 
conscience because he believes it fully himself; indeed, it would 
sometimes be unnatural not to believe it. 
"Eh, nonsense!" people will say once more. "These are just 
trivial things, white lies; they're not of any universal significance." 
That may be. I agree that this all seems very innocent and suggests 
only noble traits of character-the feeling of gratirude, for instance. 
Because if someone has listened to your lies, then you can't help 
but let your listener tell you a few as well, if only from a sense of 
gratitude. 
The genteel murual relationship that lying involves is virtually 
the prime prerequisite of Russian society-of all Russian meetings, 
gatherings, clubs, learned societies, and so on. In fact, it is only 
some honest blockhead who will stand up for the truth in such 
instances and suddenly begin to doubt the number of miles you 
have driven or the marvels that Botkin has performed on you. But 
these are only callous and hemorrhoidal fellows who are quickly 
punished for what they have done and who later wonder why this 
punishment befell them. They're mediocre people. Nevertheless, 
all this lying, despite its innocent nature, so strongly suggests some 
of our significant fundamental traits that we can almost see some­
thing universal emerging. For example: first, that we Russians are 
above all afraid of the truth, or rather, we are not so much afraid 
of it as we constantly feel that the truth is something far too dull 
and prosaic for us and much too ordinary, and so, in constantly 
evading it, we have at last transformed it into one of the most 
unusual and rare things in our Russian world (I'm not talking 
about the newspaper of that name). In this way we have entirely 
abandoned the axiom that truth is the most poetic thing in the 
world, especially truth in its purest form; moreover, it is even more 
fantastic than anything the ingenious human mind is capable of 
inventing and conceiving. In Russia the truth almost always has 
an entirely fantastical character. In fact, people have finally reached· 
the point where all those things the human mind is forever and 
ever lying to itself about are much more understandable than the 
truth itself; and this is the case all over the world. The truth can 
lie on the table right in front of people for a hundred years but 
they won't pick it up; they go chasing after fabrications precisely 
because they consider truth to be fantastic and utopian. 
The second point that our universal Russian lying suggests is 
that we are all ashamed of ourselves. Truly, every one of us carries 

272 
A Writer's Diary 
within an almost inborn shame of himself and his own face; and 
as son as a Russian finds himself in society he at once tries as 
hard as he can to appear to be anything other than he in fact really 
is; everyone tries to put on an entirely different face. 
Herzen has already said of Russians abroad that they simply do 
not know how to behave in public: they speak loudly when everyone 
else is quiet and do not know how to say anything politely and 
narurally when it is necessary to speak. And he is absolutely right: 
at once we see some distortion, a lie, a painful strain; at once we 
see the urge to feel shame for things as they actualy are, to cam­
ouflage and conceal one's own GO-given, Russian face and appear 
with a different one, as alien and un-Russian as possible. Al of 
this comes from the most complete inner conviction that for every 
Russian his own face must certainly be insignificant and comic to 
the point of shame, and that if he puts on a French or English 
face-one not his own, in short-the result will be something much 
more respectable and no one will recognize him behind that coun­
tenance. In this regard, let me note one very characteristic thing: 
all this wretched shame of one's self and all this cheap rejection 
of one's self is unconscious in the majority of cases; it is something 
involuntary and overpowering; but, consciously, the Russians-even 
those who are most thorough in rejecting their selves-are still not 
prepared to accept their insignificance and make no bones about 
demanding respect: "I'm just like an Englishman, after all," argues 
the Russian, "and so I, too, must be respected since all Englishmen 
are respected." This basic social type of ours has been evolving 
for two hundred years in accord with the explicit principle stated 
two hundred years ago: never under any circumstances must you 
be yourself; you must put on a different face and despise your own 
for all time; always be ashamed of your own self and never be 
yourself. The results were conclusive. There is not a Gennan nor 
a Frenchman nor any Englishman in the world who, when meeting 
other people, would be ashamed of his own face if in his own heart 
he knew he had done nothing shameful. The Russian knows this 
full well; and the educated Russian also knows that being un­
ashamed of one's own face, wherever he may be, is precisely the 
chief and essential feature of one's sense of personal dignity. That 
is why he wants to appear as a Frenchman or an Englishman: just 
so that he will quickly be taken for someone who is never, anywhere, 
ashamed of his own face. 
"Innocuous things, old hat; we've heard it a thousand times," 

Something about Lying 
273 
people will say again. That may well be, but here is something 
still more characteristic. There is a point on which any Russian 
person of the educated category, when appearing in society or in 
public, is terribly exacting and will not yield an inch. (At home 
or in his own mind it's another matter.) This point is intellect, the 
desire to appear more clever than he is and-this is remarkable­
it is certainly not a desire to seem cleverer than everybody else or 
even cleverer than anyone in particular but only not to be stupider 
than anyone else. "Just admit," he says, "that I'm not stupider than 
anyone else and I'll admit that you're not stupider than anyone 
else." Once again we have something in the nature of mutual 
gratitude here. To take an example: as we know, the Russian will 
happily and eagerly defer to European authority without even per­
mining himself any analysis of the matter; he particularly does not 
like to analyze such instances. Oh, it's another matter should the 
authority of genius come down from his pedestal or simply go out 
of fashion: then no one is more severe to that authority than the 
Russian intelligentsia; there is no limit to its arrogance, contempt, 
and mockery. We stand in naive amazement later if we find out 
that in Europe they continue to respect the authority who has come 
down from his pedestal here and that they still pay him his full 
due. But that very same Russian, although he may have bowed 
before that fashionable genius without ever analyzing why, will still 
never ever admit that he is stupider than this genius before whom 
he has just bowed, no matter how ultra-European he may be. "Well, 
so there's a Goethe and a Liebig and a Bismarck, we'll say . . .  but 
still, I amount to something too"-this is how every Russian, even 
the most wretched, if it comes to that, pictures it. In fact, it's not 
a matter of "picturing," since there is scarcely any conscious 
thought here; it is more of a spasmodic reaction. It is a kind of 
continual sensation of idle, random, and quite unjustified self­
esteem. In short, the Russian of the higher classes can never, under 
any circumstances, attain that highest, perhaps, degree of mani­
festation of human dignity which is to acknowledge oneself less 
intelligent than another when this truly is the case; I don't even 
know if there can be exceptions to this. I hope that people don't 
find my "paradox" too amusing. A rival of Liebig who, perhaps, 
never finished his high-school course, will naturally not try to argue 
that he is the better man when he's told that he is in the presence 
of Liebig himself. He'll hold his peace; but still, something will 
be urging him on to make a claim, even in Liebig's presence . . . .  

274 
A Writer's Diary 
It's another maner if, let's say, he were to meet Liebig without 
knowing it in a railway car, say. And if the. talk turned to chemistry 
and our gentleman managed to get into the conversation, then 
there's no doubt that he could keep up a most complete, learned 
argument, knowing no more about the subject than the single word 
"chemistry" itself. Liebig would be astonished, of course, but in 
the eyes of the other listeners our gentleman might emerge the 
victor. For in terms of boldness the learned language of the Russian 
knows scarcely any bounds. Here there arises a phenomenon that 
exists only in the soul of the Russian educated classes: in that soul, 
as soon as it finds itself in public, not only is there no doubt of its 
own intelligence but there is not even any doubt of its own complete 
erudition, if the rnaner comes to erudition. One might understand 
the rnaner of intelligence; but as concerns one's erudition, I should 
think that each person ought to have the most accurate information 
on the subject. . . .  
Of course, al this happens only in public when there are strangers 
around. But at home and in his own mind . . . .  Well, at home and 
in private not a single Russian cares about his own education or 
erudition; he never even raises the question . . . .  And if he should 
raise it, then most likely even in private he would decide the rnaner 
in his favor, although he would have the most complete information 
about his own erudition. 
Not long ago I myself, in the course of a two-hour trip in a 
railway car, happened to hear a whole treatise on classical languages. 
One person spoke and everyone else listened. The speaker was a 
gentleman whom none of the passengers knew, a portly, middle­
aged man of restrained and lordly maner, whose words came slowly 
and weightily. He aroused everyone's interest. It was obvious from 
his very first words, not only that was he speaking on this subject 
for the first time, but that this was perhaps the first time he had 
even thought about it, so that it was merely a brilliant improvisation. 
He entirely rejected classical education and called its introduction 
into Russia "historical and fatal idiocy." That was the only harsh 
expression he pennined himself, however; the tone he chose was 
too elevated and did not permit him to become heated, out of 
contempt alone for the topic. The bases on which his argument 
rested were the most elementary ones, admissible only in a thirteen­
year-old schoolboy, and almost the same ones on which certain of 
our newspapers base their campaign against classical languages, 
i.e., "Since all works in Latin have been translated we don't need 

Something about Lying 
27 5  
the Latin language," and so on and so forth. He produced an 
extraordinary impression in our railway car; many-ladies in par­
ticular-thanked him on leaving for the pleasure he had given them. 
I am convinced that he went away with the greatest respect for 
himself. 
These days in public (whether it be in railway cars or somewhere 
else) conversations are very different from those of years gone by; 
now people want to listen and want someone to instruct them on 
all political and social topics. It's true that public conversations in 
Russia are begun only with great strain; at first, everyone holds 
back for a long time before they decide to say anything, but once 
they begin, they sometimes become so passionate that one almost 
has to restrain them physically. More restrained and responsible 
conversations, and those which one might call more elevated and 
private, revolve for the most part around the stock exchange and 
matters of government, but from a confidential, "insider's" point 
of view that claims knowledge of higher secrets and motives un­
known to the ordinary public. The ordinary public listens meekly 
and respectfully, while the windbags rise in their esteem. Of course, 
scarcely any one of them believes the others, but they part almost 
always quite content and even a little grateful to one another. You 
can manage to travel pleasantly and happily on our railways if you 
have the ability to allow the others to fib and believe them as much 
as possible; in that case you, too, will be allowed to tell a few with 
effect should you be tempted to do so; the benefit, thus, is mutual. 
But as I have already said, there are general, momentous, essential 
topics of conversation in which everyone takes part, and not only 
for the purpose of passing time pleasantly. I repeat: people have 
an urge to learn and to understand contemporary problems; peo­
ple-particularly women and particularly mothers of families-seek 
and yearn for someone to teach them. It is remarkable that with 
all this most curious and significant longing for counselors and 
guides in public affairs, with all this noble striving, people are too . 
easily satisfied, and sometimes in the most unexpected manner; 
they believe everything; they are very poorly prepared and 
equipped-much more poorly than your most vivid imagination 
could have conceived a few years ago, when it was more difficult 
to draw a precise conclusion about our Russian society than it is 
now when we have more facts and information at hand. One can 
state positively that every windbag with relatively decent manners 
(our public, alas, still has a prejudiced weakness for decent manners 

A Writer's Diary 
despite the education that is being spread further and further 
through feuilletons) can gain the upper hand and convince his 
listeners of whatever he pleases, earning their gratitude and de­
parting with deep respect for himself. The one necessary condition, 
of course, is that he be a liberal; that goes without saying. On 
another occasion, also on the train and also not long ago, I happened 
to hear a whole treatise on atheism. The speaker, a gentleman who 
might have been an engineer with good social connections but who 
had a gloomy look and a unhealthy need for listeners, began with 
monasteries. He did not know the first thing about the question 
of monasteries: he took the existence of monasteries as something 
inseparable from the dogmas of faith; he imagined that monasteries 
were supported by the state and cost the treasury dear, and, for­
getting that monks comprise a completely free association of per­
sons just as do other organizations, he demanded in the name of 
liberalism that they be abolished as tyrannies of some sort. He 
ended with a complete and limitless atheism based on the natural 
sciences and mathematics. He kept referring to the natural sciences 
and mathematics without, however, citing a single fact from these 
sciences in the entire course of his dissertation. Once again, he 
was the only one who spoke, while the others only listened. "I 
shall teach my son to be an honest man and that's all," he stated 
in conclusion, in the full and obvious assurance that good deeds, 
morality, and honesty are things that are given and absolute, de­
pendent on nothing, and which you can always find in your pocket 
when the need arises, without any trouble, doubts, or confusion. 
This gentleman also had unusual success. In the railway car were 
officers, elderly men, ladies, and grown children. On parting they 
thanked him warmly for the pleasure he had afforded them, and 
one lady-the mother of a family, smartly dressed and quite pretty­
declared with a charming giggle that now she was quite convinced 
that in her soul there was "nothing but vapor." This gentleman 
also must have departed feeling unusual respect for himself. 
This self-respect, now, confuses me. The fact that there are fools 
and windbags will surprise no one, of course; but this gentleman 
was obviously no fool. Neither was he a scoundrel or a cheat; it 
is very possible that he was an honest man and a good father. He 
simply understood nothing at all of those questions which he un­
dertook to solve. Would he not, surely, an hour or a day or a month 
later, think to himself: "My friend, Ivan Vasilevich (or whatever 

Something about Lying 
277 
his name is), you've been arguing here, but truly you don't un­
derstand anything about the subject you've been discussing. Why, 
you realize that better than anyone. You've just been referring to 
the natural sciences and mathematics, but you know full well that 
you've long forgotten the scant bit of math you took in your technical 
school, and even there you didn't know it very well; and you never 
did have any notion of the natural sciences. So how could you talk? 
How could you teach people? Why, you yourself realize that you 
were only telling tales, and yet you're still proud of yourself. 
Shouldn't you be ashamed?" 
I'm convinced that he might ask himself all these questions, 
despite the fact that, perhaps, he's wrapped up in "business" and 
doesn't have any time for idle questions. I'm also thoroughly con­
vinced that these questions, if only in passing, have entered his 
mind. But he wasn't ashamed; his conscience didn't trouble him! And 
it's that lack of conscience in the educated Russian that for me is 
truly a phenomenon. Never mind that it is so common and so 
frequent among us and that everyone has grown accustomed to it 
and learned to live with it; it still remains a surprising and amazing 
fact. It testifies to the indifference toward the judgment of one's 
own conscience, or-which is the same thing-to such exceptional 
lack of self-respect that you fall into despair and lose all hope that 
anything independent and beneficial to the nation can ever come 
from such people and such a society. The public-meaning outward 
appearance, the European fa\ade, the law given by Europe once 
and for all-this public crushes every Russian: in public he is a 
European, a citizen, a knight, a republican, with a conscience and 
with his own solidly established opinion. At home and in his own 
mind: "You can whip me if you like, but I don't give a damn for 
all these opinions!" Lieutenant Pirogov, who forty years ago was 
whipped by Schiller, the locksmith, was a terribly prophetic figure, 
the prophecy of a genius who had foreseen the future with dreadful 
insight, for there are a countless number of these Pirogovs, so many 
that one cannot whip them all. Remember that immediately after 
the incident the lieutenant ate a puff-pastry and that same evening 
made a great impression dancing the mazurka at the birthday party 
of a certain eminent official. What do you think: when he was 
cutting capers on the dance floor and straining his so recently 
abused limbs to perform the steps, was he thinking of how he had 
been whipped only two hours earlier? Certainly he was thinking 

A Writer's Diary 
of that. And was he ashamed? Certainly he was not! When he 
woke up the next morning he probably "said to himself: "Aw, to 
hell with it! What's the point of starting anything if no one will 
find out?" This "What's the point of starting anything" suggests, 
on the one hand, a great capacity to come to terms with virtually 
anything and, at the same time, such a breadth of our Russian 
nature that before such qualities even the Unlimited grows pale and 
dims. Two hundred years of being unaccustomed to even the 
slightest independence of character and two hundred years of de­
spising one's own Russian face have stretched the Russian con­
science to such fatal dimensions, from which . . .  well, what do you 
think you could expect from it? 
I am convinced that the lieutenant was capable of reaching such 
limits, or such limitlessness, that, perhaps, during the mazurka he 
declared his love to his lady, the host's eldest daughter, and made 
her a formal proposal of marriage. The figure of this young miss, 
fluttering with her cavalier in a charming dance and not knowing 
that he had been whipped only an hour earlier and that this meant 
nothing to him at all, is infinitely tragic. And what do you think 
if she had found out and the proposal were made anyway? Would 
she have married him (under the condition, of course, that no one 
else would find out)? Alas, she certainly would have married him! 
And yet the huge majority of our women can still be excluded 
from the number of Pirogovs and all the "limitless" ones. One 
sees more and more prominently in our women the qualities of 
sincerity, perseverance, seriousness, and honor, a longing for truth 
and sacrifice. Indeed, all these things were always stronger in Rus­
sian women than in men. That is beyond doubt, even despite today's 
exceptions. Women are less given to lying and many do not lie at 
all, while there are scarcely any men who do not lie (I am speaking 
about the present moment in our society). Women are more per­
severing and patient in work; they are more serious than men and 
want to work in order to do something, not merely to seem to do 
something. Can we not, perhaps, expect that our women will do 
great things for us? 

16 
One of Today's Falsehoods 
Some of our critics have noted that in my latest novel, The Devils, 
I used the story of the well-known Nechaev affair; but at the same 
time they stated that I did not include specific portraits in my 
novel, nor did I make a literal reproduction of the Nechaev story; 
they said that I took a phenomenon and attempted only to explain 
how it could arise in our society, and this in the sense of a social 
phenomenon, not in an anecdotal sense, and not merely as an 
account of a particular incident in Moscow. For my part, I may 
say that all of this is quite correct. In my novel I do not touch 
personally upon the notorious Nechaev or his victim, Ivanov. My 
Nechaev character is, of course, unlike the actual Nechaev. I wanted 
to pose the question and, as clearly as possible, provide an answer 
to it in the form of a novel: how is it possible in our changing and 
astonishing society of today to have not a Nechaev but Nechaevs, 
and how does it happen that these Nechaevs eventually acquire their 
own Nechaevists? 
And so, recently-a month ago in fact-I read in The Russian 
World the following curious lines: 
. . .  we think that the Nechaev case ought to convince us that students 
in Russia do not get mixed up in such lunacy. An idiotic fanatic such 
as Nechaev could find proselytes only among the idle and under­
developed and not among young people involved in studies. 
And further: 
. . .  the more so that only recently the Minister of Education (in Kiev) 
stated that after an inspection of educational institutions in seven 
districts he could say that "in recent years aur yaung people regard their 
studies with incamparably greater seriausness and study much more, and 
much nwre diligently. " 
279 

280 
A Writer's Diary 
By themselves-judging entirely independently-these lines do 
not signify very much (I hope the author will pardon me for saying 
so). But they contain a distortion and an old, tiresome lie. The 
complete and basic idea here is that if Nechaevs occasionally do 
surface among us, then they absolutely must be idiots and fanatics; 
and if they also manage to find followers, then it absolutely must 
be "cmly among the idle and underdeveloped and not among young 
people involved in srudies." I don't know just what the author of 
the little article in The Russian World meant to prove by this dis­
tortion: did he want to flaner our srudents? Or, to the contrary, 
did he, through this sly maneuver, try, by seeming to flaner them, 
to trick them a little-but with the most honest intentions, for their 
own good; I mean did he use for this end the well-known method 
that governesses and nurses apply to little children: "Look, chil­
dren, how those bad crearures are shouting and fighting; they'll 
certainly be punished for their bad behavior. But you, now, are 
such dear, sweet, good children; you sit up straight while you're 
eating; you don't swing your feet under the table; and for that you'll 
certainly be given some sweets"? Or, finally, did the author simply 
want to "defend" our srudents from the government and use for 
this end a means which, perhaps, he considers extraordinarily sly 
and subtle? 
Let me say frankly: although I posed all these questions, the 
personal aims of the author of the little article in The Russian World 
do not arouse the slightest interest in me. And so as to make my 
point absolutely clear, I will even add that the falsehood and tire­
some old distortion in the idea expressed by The Russian World I 
am inclined to consider in the present instance as something ac­
cidental and unpremeditated: I mean that the author of the article 
himself believed his own words fully and accepted them for the 
truth with that elevated simplicity which in any other case would 
be most laudable and even touchingly disarming. But aside from 
the fact that a falsehood taken as truth always has a most dangerous 
appearance (even though it may appear in The Russian World)­
aside from that, one can't help but be struck by the fact that never 
before has it appeared in such a stark, precise, and artless form 
as in this linle article. Truly, there are some people who, if made 
to bow down and worship God, would break their foreheads. So 
it is from that point of view that it is interesting to trace the 
development of this falsehood and clarify it as well as possible, for 

One of Today's Falsehoods 
2 8 1 
we shall wait a long time before finding another example of such 
artless candor! 
For longer than anyone can remember in our pseudoliberal times 
it has been the accepted rule of our newspaper press to "defend 
our young people": from whom? from what? The answers to those 
questions sometimes remain in a fog of uncertainty, and thus the 
matter takes on a most ridiculous and even comic aspect, especially 
when it involves attacks on other organs of the press in the serise 
that "we're more liberal than you are, you see; you are attacking 
young people and so you must be more reactionary." I'll note in 
parentheses that that same little article in The Russian World con­
tains an accusation plainly directed at The Citizen: we are sup­
posedly making a blanket accusation against students in Petersburg, 
Moscow, and Kharkov. Leaving aside the fact that the author of 
the article knows full well himself that we never made any such 
wholesale accusation, I would simply ask him to explain what he 
means by a wholesale accusation against young people. I don't 
understand this at all! It means, of course, to dislike for some 
reason all young people as a whole, and not even young people so 
much as young people of a certain age! What kind of muddled 
thinking is this? Who can put any stock in such an accusation? 
It's clear that both the accusation and the defense have been made 
off the cuff, as it were, without even taking much thought. It's 
worth pondering this: "I've demonstrated that I am liberal, that 
I praise our young people and take to task those who don't praise 
them-that's enough to keep our subscribers happy, and the mat­
ter's done with, thank goodness!" Indeed, "the matter's done 
with," for only the bitterest enemy of our young people could 
undertake to defend them in this way and to come up with such 
an astounding distortion (accidentally-! am now more than ever 
convinced) as did the naive author of the little article in The Russian 
World. 
The whole importance of this matter lies in the fact that this 
technique is not the invention of The Russian World alone but one 
common to many organs of our pseudoliberal press, and there, 
perhaps, it is used in not so naive a fashion. Its essence, in the 
first place, is in wholesale praise of our young people, in everything 
and in every instance, and in crude attacks on all those who may 
on occasion permit themselves to take a critical attitude even toward 
youth. The technique is based on the absurd assumption that young 

282 
A Writer's Diary 
people are still so immature and so fond of flattery that they will 
not understand and will accept everything at face value. And, in 
truth, things have reached the stage where very many of our young 
people (I firmly believe not all of them, by any means) really have 
come to like this crude praise, demand flattery, and are prepared 
to accuse without discrimination all those who do not indulge them 
in everything and at every step, particularly in some situations. 
The damage done by this is still only temporary, however; with 
age and experience the views of our young people will change as 
well. But there is also another side to the falsehood, which involves 
direct and material damage. 
This second aspect of the technique of "defending our young 
people from society and from the government" consists in the 
simple denial of the fact, a denial that is sometimes crude and 
brazen: "There is no fact," they say. "There never was and there 
never could have been; he who says there was is therefore slandering 
our youth and is therefore the enemy of our youth! "  
That is the technique. I repeat, the bitterest enemy of our young 
people could not have invented anything more prejudicial to their 
direct interests. This I certainly wish to prove. 
By denying the fact at all costs one can achieve amazing results. 
Well, gentlemen, what are you going to prove and how are you 
helping the matter when you begin asserting (and why-God only 
knows) that young people who are "led astray"-those, that is, 
who can be led astray (even by Nechaev)-must absolutely consist 
only of "the idle and underdeveloped," those who do not study at 
all; in short, that they must be loafers with the very worst ten­
dencies? In such a fashion, by isolating the case and by removing 
it from the sphere of those who do study and reducing it only to 
"the idle and underdeveloped," you thus indict in advance these 
unfortunate people and disavow them once and for all: "You your­
selves are to blame; you're rowdy and lazy and haven't learned to 
sit quietly at the table." By isolating the case and depriving it of 
the right to be examined in the context of the whole (and it is 
precisely here that the only possible defense of these unfortunate 
"lost sheep" lies), you thus not only sign the final sentence against 
them, as it were, but even deprive them of compassion itself, for 
you flatly assert that their very errors were caused only by their 
despiCable qualities and that these youths, even without committing 
any crime, must arouse contempt and disgust. 
On the other hand, what would happen if we suddenly found 

One of Today's Falsehoods 
that those involved in some case or other were by no means under­
developed rowdies who swing their feet under the table, were by 
no means only idlers but, on the contrary, were diligent, ardent 
young people who were in fact studying and who possessed good 
hearts but who had only been set off on a wrong tendency? (Please 
understand this phrase "set off on a tendency": wherever in Europe 
could you now find more uncertain shifting among all sorts of 
tendencies than in Russia today?) And so, according to your theory 
of "idlers and underdeveloped people," these new "unfortunates" 
appear as thrice guilty: "They were given the proper means; they 
finished their education; they worked hard-they have no justifi­
cation! They are three times less deserving of compassion than 
idle, underdeveloped people!" That is the result that comes directly 
from your theory. 
Please, gentlemen (I am speaking in general and not only to the 
writer from The Russian World), on the basis of your "denial of 
the fact" you assert that the Nechaevs absolutely must be idiots, 
"idiotic fanatics." Is that really so? Is that just? In the present 
instance I set Nechaev aside and say "Nechaevs," in the plural. 
Yes, among the Nechaevs there can be creatures who are very 
shadowy, very dismal and misshapen, with a thirst for intrigue and 
power of most complex origins, with a passionate and pathologically 
premature urge to express their personalities, but why must they 
be "idiots?" On the contrary, even the genuine monsters among 
them may be very well developed, extremely clever, and even ed­
ucated people. Or do you think that knowledge, a course of train­
ing, a few facts picked up in school (or even in university) form 
the soul of a youth so thoroughly that with the receipt of his diploma 
he at once acquires an unfailing talisman that once and for all 
enables him to recognize the truth and avoid temptations, passions, 
and vices? And so, by your way of thinking, all these youths who 
complete their studies at once become something like a multitude 
of little popes with the power of infallibility. 
And why do you suppose that the Nechaevs must absolutely be 
fanatics? Very often they are simply scoundrels. "I am a scoundrel, 
not a socialist," says one Nechaev. True, he says that in my novel 
The Devils, but I assure you that he could have said it in real life. 
These scoundrels are very crafty and have thoroughly studied the 
magnanimous aspect of the human soul-and most often the soul 
of youth-so as to be able to play on it as on a musical instrument. 

A Writer's Diary 
And do you really think that the proselytes whom some such Ne­
chaev could gather in Russia must absoluteiy consist only of loafers? 
I don't believe that; not all of them would be. I myself am an old 
"Nechaevist"; I also stood on the scafold condemned to death, 
and I assure you that I stood in the company of educated people. 
Almost that whole company had graduated from the highest insti­
tutions of learning. Some of them, later on, when everything had 
passed, distinguished themselves by making remarkable contribu­
tions to specialized fields. No, gentlemen, the Nechaevists do not 
always come only from idlers who have never studied anything. 
I know that you wil doubtless reply that I wasn't a Nechaevist 
at al but only one of the Petrashevsky Circle (although I think 
that name is incorrect, since a far greater number-compared with 
those who were standing on the scaffold but who were members 
of the circle the same as we-remained absolutely untouched and 
undisturbed. True, they never even knew Petrashevsky, but this 
long-past story was not at al about Petrashevsky in any case. That 
is all I wanted to note). 
But let that be; I was a member of the Petrashevsky Circle, then. 
How do you know that the members of that circle could not have 
become Nechaevists, i.e., set off on Nechaev's path, in the event 
that things had taken such a tum? Of course, one couldn't even have 
imagined that at the time: how could things have ever taken such 
a tum? Times then were completely different. But let me say one 
thing about myself alone: a Nechaev I probably could never have 
become, but a Nechaevist-well, of that I can't be sure; perhaps I 
could have become one . . .  in the days of my youth. 
I spoke of myself just now in order to have the right to speak 
about others. Nonetheless, I will go on talking only about myself, 
and if I do mention others then it is in general, impersonally, and 
in a completely abstract sense. The case of the Petrashevsky Circle 
is such an old one and belongs to such ancient history that probably 
no harm will come from my recalling it now, the more so that I 
do it in such an elusive and abstract way. 
There was not a single "monster" or "scoundrel" among the 
Petrashevsky Circle (whether we speak of those who stood on the 
scaffold or those who remained untouched-it's all the same). I 
think that no one can refute this statement. That there were ed­
ucated people among us-that, too, as I have already noted, is not 
likely to be disputed. But there were not many among us who 
could resist that well-known cycle of ideas and concepts that had 

One of Today's Falsehoods 
then taken such a firm hold on young society. We were infected 
with the ideas of the then theoretical socialism. Political socialism 
did not exist in Europe at that time, and the European ringleaders 
of the socialists even rejected it. 
It was in vain that Louis Blanc had his face slapped and his hair 
pulled (as if deliberately, he had hair that was very thick and black) 
by his colleague-members of the National Assembly, the deputies 
of the right, from whose hands Arago (the astronomer and member 
of the government, now deceased) tore him on that unhappy morn­
ing in May of 1 848 when a mob of impatient and hungry workers 
broke into the Chamber. Poor Louis Blanc, who had been a member 
of the Provisional Government for a time, had certainly not incited 
them: he had only given a lecrure in the Luxembourg Palace, on 
the "right to work," to these wretched and hungry people who 
had been deprived of their livelihood as a result of the revolution 
and the republic. It is true that since he was still a member of the 
government his lecrures in that sense were extremely indiscreet 
and, of course, absurd. Considerant's journal, just like Proudhon's 
articles and pamphlets, tried to spread among these hungry, des­
titute workers a complete loathing for the right of hereditary private 
property, among other things. There is no doubt that from all this 
(i.e., from the impatience of hungry people inflamed by theories 
of furure bliss) there later arose political socialism, whose essence, 
despite all the goals it proclaims, still consists only in the desire 
for the universal robbery of all the property-owning classes by the 
have-nots, and then "let things happen as they will." (For as yet 
they have not properly decided anything about the kind of society 
that will replace the current one; all they are certain of is that the 
present has been a total failure-and to date that is the entire formula 
of political socialism.) But in those days the matter was still seen 
in the rosiest and most blissfully moral light. It is really true that 
at the time this nascent socialism was being compared-even by 
some of its ringleaders-with Christianity, and was taken as merely. 
a correction and improvement of the latter, in accordance with the 
spirit of the age and civilization. All these new ideas of the time 
had tremendous appeal for us in Petersburg; they seemed to be 
sacred and moral in the highest degree and, most of all, they seemed 
to be universal-the furure law of all humanity without exception. 
Even well before the Paris revolution of 1848 we were caught up 
by the fascinating power of these ideas. Even in 1846 Belinsky had 
initiated me into the whole truth of this coming "regenerated world" 

286 
A Writer's Diary 
and into the whole sanctity of the future communistic society. Al 
these convictions of the immorality of the very foundations (Chris­
tian ones) of contemporary society and of the immorality of religion 
and the family; of the immorality of the right to private property; 
of the elimination of nationalities in the name of the universal 
brotherhood of people and of contempt for one's fatherland as 
something that only slowed universal development, and so on and 
so forth-all these things were influences we were unable to resist 
and which, in fact, captured our hearts and minds in the name of 
something very noble. In any case, the whole topic seemed a ma­
jestic one that stood far above the level of the prevailing ideas of 
the day, and that was precisely what was so seductive. Those of 
us-that is, not only those of the Petrashevsky Circle alone but 
those in general who were then infected but who later on utterly 
rejected all these visionary ravings, all this gloom and horror being 
prepared for humanity supposedly to regenerate it and restore it 
to life-those of us at the time still did not know the causes of our 
illness and therefore were stil unable to struggle against it. And 
so why, then, do you think that even murder a Ia Nechaev would 
have stopped us-not all of us, of course, but at least some of us­
in those frenetic times, surounded by doctrines that had captured 
our souls, in the midst of the devastating events in Europe at the 
time-events that we, neglecting our own country, followed with 
feverish anxiety? 
There can be no doubt whatever that the murderer Nechaev 
poruayed the monstrous and repulsive murder of Ivanov in Moscow 
to his' victims, the "Nechaevists," as a political matter, useful to 
the future "common and great cause." Otherwise one simply canot 
comprehend how a few youths (whoever they might have been) 
could have agreed to such a dismal crime. Once again, in my novel 
Thi Devils, I attempted to depict those diverse and multifarious 
motives by which even the purest of hearts and the most innocent 
of people can be drawn into committing such a monstrous offense. 
And therein lies the real horror: that in Russia one can commit 
the foulest and most villainous act without being in the least a 
villain! And this happens not only in Russia but all over the world, 
and it has happened since time began, in times of transition when 
people's lives are being thoroughly unsettled, when there are doubts 
and denials, skepticism and uncertainty in fundamental social con­
victions. But this is more possible in Russia than anywhere else, 
particularly in our time, and this trait is the most unhealthy and 

One of Today's Falsehoods 
melancholy one of our present age. The possibility of considering 
oneself-and sometimes even being, in fact-an honorable person 
while committing obvious and undeniable villainy-that is our 
whole affliction today! 
What, in particular, are young people-in comparison with peo­
ple of other ages-being defended from which makes you, the 
people who defend them, demand that almost as soon as they have 
done something and studied diligently they show a steadfastness 
and maturity of conviction which even their fathers did not possess 
and which today is less evident than ever? Our young people of 
the educated classes, raised in families where one most often en­
counters dissatisfaction, impatience, crude ignorance (despite the 
level of education of these classes), and where genuine education 
is almost everywhere replaced by an insolently negative attitude 
copied from others; where material concerns hold sway over every 
higher idea; where children are brought up without any grounding 
in their native soil, with no natural truth, with that disrespect or 
indifference toward their native land and that scornful contempt 
for the People which has become so common in recent times-is 
it here, from this wellspring, that our young people are to draw 
the truth and integrity of conviction to guide them on their first 
steps in life? This is where the source of the evil lies: in the tradition; 
in the legacy of ideas; in our national, age-old stifling in ourselves 
of any kind of independent thought; in the notion of the high status 
of a European, unfailingly with the proviso of disrespect to oneself 
as a Russian! 
But probably you won't put any stock in these very general 
remarks of mine. "Education," you say; "hard work." "Lazy, 
underdeveloped people," you repeat. Keep in mind, gentlemen, 
that all these exalted European teachers of ours-our light and our 
hope-all these Mills and Darwins and Strausses sometimes have 
a very strange view of the moral obligations of a person of today. 
And yet these are not idlers who have learned nothing, and they 
are not rowdy children who swing their feet under the table. You'll 
laugh and ask me why I took it into my head to mention these 
names in particular. It's because when one speaks of our intelligent, 
ardent young students it's difficult even to imagine that they could 
escape these names as they take their first steps in life. Can a 
Russian youth remain indifferent to the inflt: !nee of these leaders 
of progressive European thought and others like them, and in 

288 
A Writer's Diary 
particular to the Russian aspect of their teachings? Please allow 
me this funny phrase "the Russian aspect of their teachings" be­
cause a Russian aspect of their teachings realy does exist. It consists 
of those conclusions drawn from their teachings that take on the 
form of an invincible axiom, conclusions that are drawn only in 
Russia; in Europe, as people say, the possibility of these conclusions 
is not even suspected. People will tell me, perhaps, that these 
thinkers are certainly not propagating evil notions; that, for ex­
ample, even if Strauss does hate Christ and has set himself the 
life's goal of mocking and despising Christianity, he nevertheless 
worships humanity as a whole and his teaching is as elevated and 
noble as can be. It's very possible that all this is true and that the 
goals of all today's leaders of progressive European thought are 
philanthropic and magnificent. But what I believe to be certain is 
this: if you were to give all these grand, contemporary teachers full 
scope to destroy the old society and build it anew, the result would 
be such obscurity, such chaos, something so crude, blind, and 
inhuman that the whole structure would collapse to the sound of 
humanity's curses before it could ever be completed. Once having 
rejected Christ, the human mind can go to amazing lengths. That's 
an axiom. Europe, or at least the highest representatives of her 
thought, rejects Christ; we, as we know, are obliged to copy Europe. 
There are historical moments in the lives of people in which 
obvious, brazen villainy of the crudest sort can be considered no 
more than greatness of soul, no more than the noble courage of 
humanity tearing itself free from its chains. Do you really need 
examples of this? Are there not thousands of examples? Tens of 
thousands? Hundreds of thousands? . . .  It's a complicated and im­
mense topic, of course, and it's very difficult to take it up in an 
article like this; but nevertheless, in the final analysis I think that 
my own proposition might also be considered: that even an honest 
and open-hearted boy, even one who does well in school, may, 
sometimes, become a Nechaevist . . .  again, of course, assuming he 
happens to come across a Nechaev; that's a sine qua non . . . .  
We of the Petrashevsky Circle stood on the scaffold and listened 
to our sentences without the least bit of repentance. Obviously, I 
cannot testify for all of us; but I think that I'm not mistaken in 
saying that at that moment, if not each one of us, then the great 
majority would have deemed it dishonorable to renounce our con­
victions. This is a matter from the distant past, and therefore, 

One of Today's Falsehoods 
perhaps, one might also ask the question: could that stubbornness 
and lack of repentance not be merely the signs of a bad nature, 
signs of underdeveloped and rowdy children? No, we were not 
rowdy children and perhaps were not even bad young people. The 
sentence of death by firing squad that was read to us at first was 
certainly not pronounced as a joke; almost all the condemned were 
convinced that the sentence would be carried out and underwent 
at least ten dreadful, infinitely terrible minutes expecting to die. 
During these final moments, some of us (I know this for certain) 
instinctively withdrew into ourselves and, in examining our whole, 
still so young lives, did repent of certain of our meaner actions 
(those which lie lifelong in secret on the conscience of every person); 
but that deed for which we had been condemned, those ideas and 
those notions which possessed our spirits, we saw as not only 
requiring no repentance but even somehow as purifying us in a 
martyrdom for which we would be forgiven much! And so it con­
tinued for a long time. It was not the years of exile and not the 
sufferings which broke us. On the contrary: nothing broke us, and 
our convictions only supported our spirits by the awareness of a 
duty fulfilled. No, it was something else which changed our views, 
our convictions, and our hearts. (I permit myself, of course, to 
speak only of those of us whose change of conviction became known 
and who themselves testified to this in one way or another.) This 
"something else" was the direct contact with the People, the broth­
erly union with them in common misfortune, the awareness that 
we ourselves had become as they, equal to them, and even placed 
on the very lowest of their levels. 
I repeat that this did not happen very quickly, but gradually and 
after a very long, long time. It was not pride and not vanity that 
stood in the way of confession. And yet I was, perhaps, one of 
those (I again am speaking only of myself) who found it easiest 
to return to the root of the People, to discover the Russian soul, 
to recognize the People's spirit. I came from a family that was 
Russian and pious. As far back as I can remember I recall my 
parents' love for me. In our family we knew the Gospels virtually 
from our earliest childhood. I was only ten years old when I already 
knew almost all the main episodes from Karamzin's Russian history, 
which our father read aloud to us in the evenings. Each visit to 
the Kremlin and the Moscow cathedrals was a solemn event for 
me. Others, perhaps, did not have the kinds of memories I had. 

290 
A Writer's Diary 
I very often ponder the question and ask it now: what are the chief 
impressions that today's young people gain from their childhood? 
And if even I, who naturally could not haughtily pass by that new, 
fateful milieu into which misfortune thrust us and could not regard 
the spirit of the People as it manifested itself before me with only 
a superficial, haughty glance-if I, I am saying, found it so difficult 
to convince myself at last of the falsehood and injustice of almost 
all that we had previously regarded as light and truth, then what 
of the others, who were even more deeply alienated from the People, 
whose alienation was hereditary and acquired from their fathers 
and grandfathers? 
It would be very difficult to tell the story of the rebirth of my 
convictions, the more so because it is not that interesting, perhaps; 
and somehow it is not appropriate for a feuilleton article . . . .  
Gentlemen who defend our young people: will you take into 
account that milieu and that society in which these young people 
grow up and ask yourselves: can there be anything in our time 
which is less protected from certain influences? 
First of all, pose the question: if the very fathers of these young 
people are not better, not firmer, and not healthier in their con­
victions; if from their earliest childhood these children have en­
countered in their own families nothing but cynicism, haughty and 
indifferent (for the most part) negation; if the words "native land" 
have only been uttered before them with a mocking intonation and 
all those who brought them up regarded Russia's cause with scorn 
or indifference; if the noblest among their fathers and educators 
spoke only to them of "universally human" ideas; if even in child­
hood their nurses were dismissed because they read the Prayer to 
the Virgin Mary over their cradles-then tell me: what can one ask 
of these children, and is it humane when one is defending them­
if any such defense is needed-to escape by a mere denial of the 
fact? 
Not long ago I happened to find the following entrefilet in the 
newspapers: " The Kama-Volga Gazette reports that recently three 
high-school students in their third year at the Second Kazan High 
School have been charged with a crime connected with their proposed 
flight to America. " (St. Petersburg Gazette, November 13). Twenty 
years ago the news of some third-year high-school students running 
off to America would have seemed utter nonsense to me. But the 

One of Today's Falsehoods 
fact alone that now this doesn't seem like nonsense but something 
I can understand-in that alone I can see its justification! 
Justi[tcation! Good Lord, can one use that word? 
I know that these are not the first such students and that others 
have run off even before, and they did so because their elder 
brothers and fathers had run off. Do you remember Kel'siev's story 
of the poor officer who fled on foot, via Tornio and Stockholm, to 
Herzen in London, where the latter found work for him as a 
compositor in his printing shop? Do you remember Herzen's own 
story of that cadet who set off for the Philippine Islands, I think, 
to set up a commune and who had left Herzen 20,00 francs for 
future emigrants? And yet all that is already ancient history! Since 
then, old men, fathers, brothers, young women, and guards officers 
have run off to America to experience "free labor in a free 
country." . . .  Probably the only ones who haven't tried it are sem­
inary students. Can we blame little children such as these three 
high-school students if their poor heads were turned by the grand 
ideas of "free work in a free country" and the commune and the 
common-European man? Can we blame them if all this rubbish 
seems a religion to them, while emigration and betrayal of one's 
native land seems a virtue? And if we do blame them, then to what 
extent? That's the question. 
In order to support his idea that only layabouts and idling de­
fectives become involved in "such lunacy" in Russia, the author 
of the article in The Russian World cites the well-known and en­
couraging remarks of the Minister of Education, who said not long 
ago in Kiev that he had been convinced, after an inspection of 
educational institutions in seven districts, that "in recent years our 
young people regard their studies with incomparably greater seriousness 
and study much more, and much more diligently. " 
These are encouraging words, of course, words in which, per­
haps, lies our only hope. The educational reform carried out during 
the present reign contains almost all our future possibilities, and 
we know it. But the Minister of Education himself, if I recall, 
stated in that same speech that we have long to wait before we shall 
see the final results of the reform. We always believed that our 
young people were quite capable of taking a more serious attitude 
toward their studies. But meanwhile we are still blanketed by such 
a fog of false ideas; we and our young people are surrounded by 
so many mirages and prejudices, while our whole social life-the 
lives of the fathers and mothers of these young people-takes on 

292 
A Writer's Diary 
a stranger and stranger aspect, so that om; cannot help but look 
for any and all ways to lead us out of our confusion. One of those 
ways is for us to be less callous, not to be ashamed when someone 
calls us on occasion a citizen and . . .  once in a while to tell the 
truth, even though, to your way ofthinking, it may be insufficiently 
liberal. 

A Writer's Diary 
I 8 7 6 


[Announcement] 
Subscriptions to A Writer's Diary for 1 876 
In the coming year F. M. Dostoevsky's publication, A Writer's 
Diary, will appear monthly in separate issues. 
Each issue will be composed of sixteen to twenty-four pages of 
small print in the format of our weekly newspapers. But this will 
not be a newspaper; all twelve issues (for January, February, March, 
etc.) will form a whole, a book written by a single pen. It will be 
a diary in the literal sense of the word, an account of impressions 
actually experienced each month, an account of what was seen, 
heard, and read. Of course, some stories and tales may be included, 
but preeminently it will be about actual events. Each issue will 
come out on the last day of the month and will be sold separately 
in all bookstores for twenty kopecks. But those wishing to subscribe 
to the whole year's edition will enjoy a discount and will pay only 
two rubles (not including delivery and mailing); the cost with 
mailing and home delivery will be two rubles, fifty kopecks. 
Subscriptions from local subscribers in Petersburg are being ac­
cepted in A. F. Bazunov's bookstore, near the Kazan Bridge, house 
No. 30, and in M. P. Nadein's "Store for Out-of-Towners," 44 
Nevsky Prospect. In Moscow: at the Central Bookstore, Nikolsky 
Street, Slavyansky Bazaar Building. 
Those from outside the capitals are kindly requested to deal solely 
with the author, who may be reached at the following address: 
Fedor Mikhailovich Dostoevsky, Apt. 6, Strubinsky House, Greek 
Street, by the Greek church, St. Petersburg. 
295 


January 


1 
1 .  In Place of a Foreword. On the Great and Small Bears, 
on Great Goethe's Prayer, and, Generally, on Bad 
Habits 
. . .  At least Khlestakov, when he was spinning his lies to the Mayor, 
was still just a tiny bit apprehensive that they might grab him and 
throw him out ofthe drawing room. Our contemporary Khlestakovs 
are afraid of nothing and lie with complete composure. 
Nowadays they all are completely composed. Composed and per­
haps even happy. Scarcely anyone takes stock of himself; everyone 
acts "naturally," and sees this as complete happiness. Nowadays, 
just as before, vanity eats away at everyone, but yesterday's vanity 
would enter timidly, casting feverish glances about, looking intently 
at others' reactions: "Did I make the right sort of entrance? Did 
I say the right thing?" But nowadays when someone enters a room 
he is firmly convinced that everything belongs to him alone. And 
if it turns out not to be his alone, he doesn't even get angry but 
resolves the matter at once. Haven't you heard about notes like 
this: "Dear Papa, I am twenty-three years old and I still have 
accomplished nothing. I am certain that I will never amount to 
anything, so I have decided to end my life . . . .  
" 
And he shoots himself. But here at least we can understand 
something: "What is there to live for if not for pride?" he says. 
But another fellow will take a look around and go off and shoot 
himself in silence, solely because he hasn't the money to acquire 
a mistress. And that is the act of a total swine. 
The newspapers assure us that this happens because such people 
think too much. "He spends a long time thinking quietly, and 
suddenly he hits on just the thing he had been aiming for all along." 
My conviction is quite the contrary: he doesn't think at all; he 
299 

300 
A Writer's Diary 
simply isn't capable of formulating an idea; he is as benighted as 
a savage, and if he conceives a longing for something, it comes 
from deep within him and not from conscious thought. It's the 
behavior of an utter swine, and there is nothing liberal about it. 
And there is not a moment of Hamlet's pondering "that dread 
of something after death . . . .  " 
And there is something terribly strange about this. IS such 
thoughtlessness really a part of the Russian character? I say thought­
lessness, not senselessness. Don't believe, then; but think, at least. 
Our suicide doesn't have even a shadow of a suspicion that he is 
called I and is an immortal being. It seems he hasn't even heard 
a thing about that. And yet he's by no means an atheist. Remember 
the atheists of times gone by: when they lost their faith in one 
thing, they at once began to believe passionately in something else. 
Remember the passionate faith of Diderot, Voltaire . . . .  But among 
us they are a complete tabula rasa, and it's not a matter of Voltaire 
at al: our fellow just had no money to acquire a mistress, and 
nothing more. 
When young Werther ends his life, he regrets, in the last lines 
he left, that he will never again see "the beautiful constellation, 
the Great Bear," and bids it farewell. Oh, how that linle touch 
reveals Goethe, who was only then beginning his career! Why did 
young Werther feel so deeply about these constellations? Because 
every time he contemplated them he realized that he was no mere 
atom or nonentity before them, and that the whole infinitude of 
divine, mysterious wonders were by no means beyond his thought, 
nor beyond his consciousness, nor beyond the ideal of beauty that 
lay in his soul, and that, accordingly, they were equal to him and 
revealed his kinship with the infinity of being . . .  and that for al 
the happiness of experiencing such a grand idea, an idea that 
revealed who he was, he was obliged only to his image as a human 
being. 
"0 Great Spirit, I thank Thee for the human image that Thou 
hast given me." 
And that should have been great Goethe's prayer throughout his 
life. We, however, take the human image that has been given to 
us and smash it to pieces, quite simply and without any of these 
German tricks; and as for the Great Bear, or the Linle Bear for 
that matter-well, no one would think of bidding them farewell; 
and if anyone did think of it, he wouldn't do it: that would be just 
too embarrassing. 
"Now what are you on about?" an astonished reader asks. 

January 
30 1  
"I just wanted to write a foreword, because you simply can't do 
without one altogether." 
"If that's the case then you'd better make clear what your ten­
dency is and what your convictions are. Explain: what sort of man 
are you, and how did you make so bold as to announce this Writer's 
Diary?" 
But that's very difficult, and I can see that I'm not much of a 
hand at writing forewords. Writing a foreword is perhaps as difficult 
as writing a letter. As far as liberalism is concerned (instead of the 
word "tendency" I'll simply use the word "liberalism")-as far as 
liberalism is concerned, the well-known "Mr. X," in a recent 
feuilleton in which he commented on how the press greeted the 
new year of 1876, recalls in passing, and not without sarcasm, that 
everything went off rather liberally. I'm pleased that he was sar­
castic. In truth, our liberalism lately has been transformed every­
where into either a trade or a bad habit. I mean, in itself it certainly 
would not be a bad habit, but among us it somehow turned out 
that way. It's strange, even: our liberalism, it seems, belongs to 
the category of quiescent liberalisms; quiescent and tranquil which, 
in my opinion, is not very nice, because quietism least of all, it 
seems, is compatible with liberalism. And yet, in spite of all this 
tranquility, there are undeniable signs appearing everywhere that 
very gradually the notions of what is liberal and what is not are 
disappearing altogether in our society; and in that respect people 
are becoming thoroughly confused; there are examples of even 
extreme cases of such confusion. In a word, our liberals, instead 
of becoming more free, have bound themselves up with liberalism 
as with ropes, and so I too, taking advantage of this interesting 
occasion, can pass over the details of my liberalism in silence. But 
in general I will say that I consider myself more liberal than anyone, 
if only because I have no wish whatsoever to become quiescent. 
Well, that's enough about that. As to the type of man I am, I 
would say the following about myself: "Je suis un homme heureux 
qui n'a pas !'air content," i.e., "I am a happy man who isn't 
satisfied with everything . . . .  " 
With that I finish my foreword. I only wrote it for the sake of 
form, anyway. 
2. A Future Novel. Another "Accidental Family" 
There was a Christmas tree and a children's party at the Artists' 
Club, and I went to have a look at the children. Even formerly I 

302 
A Writer's Diary 
always watched children, but now I pay particular attention to 
them. For a long time now I have had the goal of writing a novel 
about children in Russia today, and about their fathers too, of 
course, in their mutual relationship of today. The "poem" or 
"idea" is ready and it was the first thing to be created, as should 
always be the case with a novelist. I will take fathers and children 
from every level of Russian society I can and follow the children 
from their earliest childhood. 
A year and a half ago, when Nikolai Alekseevich Nekrasov asked 
me to write a novel for Nows of the Fatherland, I almost began my 
Fathers and Sons; but I held back, and thank God I did, for I was 
not ready. In the meantime I wrote only A Raw Youth, this first 
attempt at my idea. But here the child had already passed his 
childhood and appeared only as an unprepared person, timidly yet 
boldly wanting to take his first step in life as quickly as possible. 
I took a soul that was sinless yet already tainted by the awful 
possibility of vice, by a premature hatred for its own insignificance 
and "accidental" nature; tainted also by that breadth of character 
with which a still chaste soul already consciously allows vice to 
enter its thoughts, cherishes it and admires it in shameful yet bold 
and tempestuous dreams-and with all this, left solely to its own 
devices and its own understanding, yet also, to be sure, to God. 
All such are the miscarriages of society, the "accidental" members 
of "accidental" families. 
We read in the newspapers not long ago of the murder of a 
woman named Perova and of the suicide of her murderer. She lived 
with him; he worked in a printer's shop but had lost his job; she 
rented an apartment and took in lodgers. Quarels began. Perova 
asked him to leave her. The murderer was a man of thoroughly 
modern character. "If I can't have her then no one can." He gave 
her his word that he would leave her, then stabbed her barbarically 
at night, deliberately and with premeditation; then he cut his own 
throat. Perova left two children, boys of twelve and nine, whom 
she had borne illegitimately, but not by the murderer and even 
before she knew him. She loved them. They both witnessed the 
terrible scene on the evening of the murder when he tormented 
their mother with reproaches until she fell into a faint; they begged 
her not to go to his room, but she went. 
The newspaper Voice appeals to the public to help the "unfor­
tunate orphans," one of whom, the elder, attends High School No. 
5; the other is still at home. Here is yet another "accidental family," 

January 
yet other children with dark shadows cast over their young souls. 
This dismal picture will remain in their souls forever and might 
painfully undermine youthful pride from the very days when "all 
the impressions of existence were new to us." The result will be 
an inability to cope with life's problems, early pangs of vanity, a 
blush of false shame for their past, and a dull, sullen hatred for 
people; and this, perhaps, may last a lifetime. May the Lord bless 
the future of these innocent children, and may they never cease to 
love their poor mother without reproach and shame for their love. 
And we absolutely must help them. On that score our society will 
respond nobly and with sympathy. Surely they will not have to 
leave their school once they have begun it. And the elder, appar­
ently, will not leave school and his future seems already arranged; 
but what of the younger? Surely we won't just collect some seventy 
or a hundred rubles and then forget about them? Thanks to The 
Voice for reminding us of these unfortunates. 
3· The Christmas Party at the Artists' Club. Children 
Who Think and Children Who Are Helped Along. A 
"Gluttonous Boy." "Oui" Girls. Jostling Raw Youths. A 
Moscow Captain in a Hurry. 
Of course I'm not going to describe in detail the Chrisunas party 
and the dancing at the Artists' Club: all that was done long ago 
at the proper time, and I read about it myself with much pleasure 
in other feuilletons. I will say only that prior to this affair I had 
not been to a single social event anywhere for far too long and had 
been leading a solitary life for a considerable time. 
First the children, all in charming costumes, performed their 
dances. It's interesting to observe how the most complex concepts 
are implanted quite imperceptibly in a child and to realize that one 
who is still unable to connect two thoughts sometimes may have 
an excellent grasp of life's most profound matters. One German 
scholar suggested that when a child completes his first three years 
of life he has already acquired fully a third of the ideas and knowl­
edge that he will take to his grave as an old man. There were even 
six-year-olds at the Artists' Club, but I am certain that they already 
fully understood the reasons they had come here, adorned in such 
fine costumes, while at home they went about bedraggled (and 
given the means of the middle class of society today, they certainly 

A Writer's Diary 
would be bedraggled). Besides that, they probably already under­
stand that this is exactly how it must be, that this is by no means 
an exception but a normal law of nature. Of course, they can't 
express that in words, but they know it inwardly, even though it 
is a very complex notion. 
The smallest children were my favorites; they were very charming 
and quite at ease. The older ones were at their ease too, but with 
a certain boldness. Of course, the most free and easy and cheerful 
were those who will be mediocre and untalented in the future. This 
is a general rule: mediocrities are always free and easy, whether as 
children or as adults. The more gifted and exceptional among 
children are always more restrained, and if they are spirited, then 
they are always disposed toward leading the others and taking 
charge. It's a pity, too, that everything is made so easy for children 
nowadays-not only all their studies and acquisition of knowledge, 
but even their games and toys. The child scarcely begins to lisp 
his first words and at once people begin to make things easy for 
him. Our whole system of pedagogy these days is concerned with 
making things easier. There are times when making things easy 
does nothing for development but, to the contrary, can even promote 
dullness. Two or three ideas, two or three impressions deeply 
experienced in childhood through one's own effort (through one's 
own suffering as well, if you like) will lead the child much more 
deeply into life than the easiest school, which quite often produces 
people who are neither this nor that, neither good nor bad, who 
are not even depraved in their depravity or virtuous in their virtue. 
What, have the oysters come? Oh, joy! 
And off he rushes, gluttonous boy, 
To swallow . . . .  
Now this same "gluttonous boy" (Pushkin's only second-rate 
verse, because he wrote it quite without irony, and almost with 
praise) must be the result of something, mustn't he? He's a nasty 
fellow, and one we have no need of, and I am certain that an 
education made all too easy greatly facilitates the emergence of such 
a type; and we have more than enough of his sort already! 
Girls, still, are easier to understand than boys. Why is it that 
girls, almost up to the age of their maturity (but no further) are 
always more developed or seem more developed than boys of the 
same age? You can gain a particular understanding of girls while 
watching them dance: in some you can quickly see a future "oui" 

January 
girl who will never manage to get married despite all her wishes 
to do so. I call "oui" girls those who, until almost thirty years of 
age, answer only oui or non. On the other hand, there are some 
who, one can already see, will shortly get married, just as soon as 
they make up their minds to do so. 
It is even more cynical, in my view, to dress a girl who is all 
but grown up in a child's outfit at a dance; it is truly wrong, in 
fact. Some such girls, in their short little dresses and bare legs, 
stayed on to dance with the grownups after the children's ball had 
ended at midnight and the parents had begun to dance. 
Still, I found everything very much to my liking, and had I not 
been jostled about by the "raw youths," it all would have gone 
most satisfactorily. In fact, the adults were all elegantly polite, in 
keeping with the holiday, while the youths (not the children, but 
the raw youths-future young men, hordes of them, in all sorts of 
uniforms) jostled about intolerably with no apology, passing to and 
fro as if they had the right to behave this way. I must have been 
elbowed fifty times; perhaps they are taught to do that as a means 
of developing a free and easy manner. Nonetheless, having grown 
unaccustomed to social events, I was pleased with everything, in 
spite of the stifling heat in the room, the electric illumination, and 
the frenzied, imperious shouts of the master of ceremonies. 
The other day I picked up a copy of the Petersburg Gazette and 
read a report from Moscow about the various disturbances over the 
holidays in the Noblemens' Club, in the Circle of Artists, in the 
theater, at the masquerade, and elsewhere. If one is to believe the 
correspondent (for when a correspondent reports on vice he may 
intentionally keep silent about virtue), our society has never been 
more prone to scandal than at present. It is strange indeed: why 
is it that, since childhood and all through my life, no sooner do I 
find myself in a large holiday gathering of Russians than I at once 
begin thinking that they are only making a pretense and suddenly 
will jump up and commence a first-rate row, just as they might in 
their own homes. It's an absurd and fantastical notion, and how 
ashamed I was of it and how I reproached myself for it, even as 
a child! It's a notion that won't stand up to the slightest analysis. 
Oh, of course the shopkeepers and captains the honest correspon­
dent writes about (and I have complete faith in him) existed before 
and have always existed; they are perennial types; but still, they 
used to be more timid and hid their feelings, while now, every so 
often, such a fellow will pop up right on center stage, a fellow who 

A Writer's Diary 
is absolutely convinced he is asserting his new rights. Undeniably, 
in the last twenty years a terrific number of Russians suddenly 
imagined that, for some reason, they had become fully entitled to 
act disgracefully and that now it's a good thing and they will be 
praised for doing so and not thrown out. On the other hand, I also 
realize that it's remarkably pleasant (oh, for many, many people!) 
to stand up in the middle of a social gathering where everyone 
around-ladies, gentlemen, and even authorities-is so sweet­
tongued, polite, and treating one another as equals, as if this were 
really in Europe somewhere-to stand up amid these Europeans 
and suddenly bellow out something in the purest national idiom, 
to fetch someone a cuff on the ear, to blun out some obscenity to 
a young lady, and, in general, to commit some indecency right 
there in the middle of the hall: "There you are, that's what you 
get for two hundred years of Europeanism; but we're still here, 
just as we were; we haven't disappeared!" It's pleasant. Still, the 
savage will be wrong: he won't be acknowledged and will be thrown 
out. Who will throw him out? The police force? Certainly not­
not the police force, but some other savages just like him! That's 
where the force is. Let me explain. 
Do you know who probably most enjoys and appreciates this 
European and festive gathering of Russian society in European 
style? Why it's precisely the Skvoznik-Dmukhanovskys, the 
Chichikovs, and even, perhaps, the Derzhimordas; that is to say, 
those people who, at home and in their private lives are most 
completely "national." Oh, yes, they have their own social events 
and dances there, at home, but they have little appreciation or 
respect for them; what they appreciate is the Governor's ball, a 
ball with high society like the ones Khlestakov has told them about. 
But why? Precisely because they themselves are not like polite 
society. That's why our savage treasures European forms even 
though he knows very well that he, personally, will not change and 
will come home from the European ball just the same brawler he 
was before; but he's comforted by the thought that he's paid homage 
to virtue, even in the form of an ideal. Oh, he knows very well 
that all this is only a mirage; yet still, having attended the ball, 
he's assured himself that this mirage continues and is maintained 
through some invisible but extraordinary force; and that he himself 
didn't dare to come out to the middle of the hall bellowing some­
thing in the national idiom; and the thought that he had not been 
permitted to do so and will not be in the future he finds remarkably 

January 
pleasant. You will not believe how much a barbarian can come to 
love Europe; such love enables him also to participate in a cult, 
as it were. Doubtless he often cannot even define the meaning of 
this cult. Khlestakov, for instance, maintained that the cult con­
sisted of the hundred-ruble melons that were served at high-society 
balls. Perhaps Skvoznik-Dmukhanovsky, even now, keeps his faith 
in the watermelon, even though he eventually saw through Khle­
stakov and scorned him; yet he is happy to pay homage to virtue 
even in the form of the watermelon. This certainly isn't a matter 
of hypocrisy here but of the most genuine sincerity-a need, more­
over. Hypocrisy works well here, for what is hypocrisy? Hypocrisy 
is that very tribute which vice is obliged to pay to virtue-an 
enormously comforting thought for one who wants to remain vicious 
in practice yet still not break his link, in his heart at least, with 
virtue. Oh, vice is terribly fond of paying tribute to virtue, and 
that's a very fine thing; we ought to be satisfied with that much 
for the time being, should we not? And so the captain, bellowing 
in the middle of the hall in Moscow, continues to be only an 
exception and a man in a hurry-well, for the time being at least. 
Even "for the time being" is a comfort in this shaky age of ours. 
Thus the ball is something decidedly conservative, in the best 
sense of the word; and I'm definitely not joking when I say that. 
4· The Golden Age in Your Pocket 
Still, I also found the ball rather wearisome; not wearisome, exactly, 
but somewhat annoying. The children's ball ended and the parents' 
began, and Lord, what a poor thing it was! Everyone in new clothes, 
and no one knowing how to wear them; everyone celebrating, and 
no one happy; everyone full of pride, and no one knowing how to 
make the most of himself; everyone envious, and everyone silent 
and aloof. They don't even know how to dance. Look at that very 
short officer twirling over there (you're certain to encounter such 
a very short, furiously twirling officer at any middle-class ball) .. 
The entire technique of his dancing consists only in the almost 
brutish way he twirls and jerks his lady about and in his capacity 
to go on twirling thirty or forty ladies in a row and taking pride 
in it; but is there anything graceful in that? After all, a dance is 
almost a declaration of love (think of the minuet), while this fellow 
looks just as if he's in a brawl. And one quite fantastic and utterly 
improbable thought occurred to me: "What if all these dear and 

308 
A Writer's Diary 
respectable guests wanted, even for one brief moment, to become 
sincere and honest? How would this stufy hall be transformed 
then? What if each of them suddenly learned the whole secret? 
What if each one of them suddenly learned how candid, honest, 
and sincere he really was? What if he knew how much heartfelt 
joy, purity, noble feelings, goodwill, and intellect-never mind in­
tellect, but wit, most subtle and sociable-he had, and that each 
and every one of them shared these qualities? Yes, ladie˘ and 
gentlemen, all that exists within every one of you, and no one, not 
a single one of you knows anything about it! Oh, dear guests, I 
swear that each lady and gentleman among you is cleverer than 
Voltaire, more sensitive than Rousseau, incomparably more alluring 
than Alcibiades or Don Juan, or any Lucretia, Juliet, or Beatrice! 
You don't believe that you are that beautiful? But I give you my 
solemn word that neither in Shakespeare nor in Schiller nor in 
Homer, nor in all of them put together, can you find anything so 
charming as now, this very minute, you can find here in this very 
ballrom. What is Shakespeare! Here you would see something of 
which our wise men have not dreamed. But your trouble is that 
you yourselves don't know how beautiful you are! Do you know 
that each of you, if you only wanted, could at once make everyone 
in this room happy and fascinate them all? And this power exists 
in every one of you, but it is so deeply hidden that you have long 
ceased to believe in it. Do you really think that the golden age 
exists only on porcelain teacups? 
Don't frown at the words golden age, Your Excellency: I give you 
my word of honor that you won't be compelled to walk around in 
the costume of the golden age wearing only a fig leaf; you can 
keep your full general's uniform. I assure you that even people of 
general's rank can get into the golden age. You just have to try, 
Your Excellency, right now even; you're the senior rank, after all, 
and the initiative is yours. And you will see yourself what Piron's 
wit, so to speak, you could display, which would be a complete 
surprise to you. You're laughing; you don't believe it? I'm glad I 
made you laugh, and yet my whole outburst just now is not a 
paradox but the complete truth . . . .  And your whole trouble is that 
you don't believe it. 

2 
1. The Boy with His Hand Out 
Children are a strange lot; I dream of them and see them in my 
fancies. In the days before Christmas and on Christmas Eve itself 
I kept meeting on a certain street corner a little urchin who could 
have been no more than seven. In the terrible cold he was wearing 
clothes more fit for sumer, but he did have some sort of old rag 
wrapped around his neck, which meant that someone had dressed 
him before sending him out. He was wandering "with hand out"; 
that's a technical term meaning to go begging, a term coined by 
such boys themselves. There are many like him; they hang about 
you, whining some well-rehearsed phrases. But this boy didn't 
whine; his speech was innocent and unpracticed and he looked 
trustingly into my eyes; obviously he was only beginning this pro­
fession. In answer to my questions he said that he had a sister who 
was out of work and il. Perhaps that was true, but only later did 
I learn that there are hordes of these urchins: they are sent "with 
hands out" even in the most terrible cold, and if they collect 
nothing, they probably can expect a beating. Once a boy has col­
lected a few kopecks, he returns with red, numbed hands to some 
cellar where a band of "dodgers" are drinking. These are people 
who, "quitting work at the factory on Saturday night, return to 
work no earlier than Wednesday evening." In the cellars their 
hungry and beaten wives drink with them; their hungry babies 
cry here too. Vodka, filth, and depravity, but vodka above all. With 
the kopecks he has collected in hand, the urchin is at once sent 
to a tavern and he brings back more vodka. Sometimes, for the 
fun of it, they pour half a bottle into his mouth and roar with 
laughter when, his breath catching, he falls to the floor scarcely 
conscious: " . . .  and pitilessly he poured and poured/The horrid 
vodka into my mouth . . . .  
" 

3 1 0  
A Writer's Diary 
When he gets older he's quickly packed off to a factory some­
where, but he's forced once again to bring all that he earns back 
to the dodgers, and they drink it up. But even before they get 
factory jobs these children become fuly fledged criminals. They 
roam about the city and know places in various cellars into which 
they can crawl to spend the night unoticed. One boy slept several 
nights in succession in a basket in the quarters of a janitor who 
never even noticed him. It is only natural that they become thieves. 
Thievery becomes a passion even among eight-year-olds, who some­
times even have no awareness of the criminality of their actions. 
In the end they bear it all-the hunger, cold, beatings-only for 
one thing, for freedom. And they run away from the dodgers to 
take up a vagrant's life on their own. A wild creature such as this 
sometimes knows nothing at all-neither where he lives, nor what 
nation he comes from; whether God exists, or the tsar. There are 
even stories told about them that are hard to believe, yet they are 
facts. 
2. The Boy at Christ's Christmas Party 
But I am a novelist and one "story," it sems, I made up myself. 
Why do I say "it sems" when I know very well that I made it 
up? Yet I keep imagining that it realy happened somewhere, some­
time, and happened precisely on Christmas Eve in a cenain huge 
city during a terrible cold spell. 
I dreamed there was a boy-stil very small, about six or even 
younger-who awoke one morning in the damp and cold cellar 
where he lived. He was wearing a wretched wrapper of some sort 
and he was trembling. His breath escaped in a white cloud and, 
while he sat, bored, in the corner on a trunk, he would let this 
white vapor out of his mouth and amuse himself by watching it 
billow up. But he was very hungry. Several times that morning he 
had approached the bed on which his sick mother lay on a mattress 
as thin as a pancake, a bundle beneath her head to serve as a 
pillow. How did she come to be here? Probably she had come with 
her boy from another city and suddenly fell il. The landlady of 
this wretched tenement had been picked up by the police two days 
ago; the other tenants had all gone off, it being the holiday season, 
leaving but one dodger who had been lying in a drunken stupor 
for the last twenty-four hours, having been unable even to wait for 
the holiday. In another comer of the rom an old woman of eighty 

January 
3 1 1  
groaned with rheumatism. She had once worked somewhere as a 
children's nurse but now was dying alone, moaning, grumbling, 
and complaining at the boy so that he had become frightened of 
approaching her corner. In the entry way he managed to find some 
water to quench his thirst, but nowhere could he find a crust of 
bread; again and again he went to wake his mother. At last he 
grew frightened in the darkness; the evening was well advanced, 
but still no candle had been lit. When he felt his mother's face he 
was surprised that she made no movement and had become as cold 
as the wall. "And it's dreadful cold in here," he thought. He stood 
for a time, absently resting his hand on the dead woman's shoulder; 
then he breathed on his fingers to warm them, and suddenly his 
wandering fingers felt his cap that lay on the bed; quietly he groped 
his way out of the cellar. He would have gone even before but he 
was afraid of the big dog that howled all day long by the neighbor's 
door on the stairway above. But the dog was no longer there, and 
in a thrice he was out on the street. 
Heavens, what a city! He had never seen anything like it before. 
In the place he had come from there was such gloomy darkness at 
night, with only one lamppost for the whole street. The tiny wooden 
houses were closed in by shuners; as soon as it got dark you 
wouldn't see a soul on the street; everyone would lock themselves 
in their houses, only there would be huge packs of dogs-hundreds 
and thousands of dogs-howling and barking all night. Still, it was 
so nice and warm there, and there'd be something to eat; but 
here-Dear Lord, if only there was something to eat! And what a 
ranling and a thundering there was here, so much light, and so 
many people, horses, and carriages, and the cold-oh, the cold! 
Frozen vapor rolls from the overdriven horses and streams from 
their hot, panting muzzles; their horseshoes ring against the paving 
stones under the fluffy snow, and everyone's pushing each other, 
and, Oh Lord, I'm so hungry, even just a linle bite of something, 
and all of a sudden my fingers are aching so. One of our guardians 
of the law passed by and averted his eyes so as not to notice the 
boy. 
And here's another street-look how wide it is! I'll get run over 
here for sure. See how everyone's shouting and rushing and driving 
along, and the lights-just look at them! Now what can this be? 
What a big window, and in the room behind the glass there's a 
tree that stretches right up to the ceiling. It's a Christmas tree, 
with oh, so many lights on it, so many bits of gold paper and 

3 1 2  
A Writer's Diary 
apples; and there's dolls and little toy horses all around it; children 
are runing around the rom, clean and- dressed in nice clothes, 
laughing and playing, eating and drinking something. Look at that 
girl dancing with the boy, how fine she is! And you can even hear 
the music right through the glass. The little boy looks on in amaze­
ment and even laughs; but now his toes are aching and his fingers 
are quite red; he can't bend them any more, and it hurts when he 
tries to move them. The boy suddenly thought of how much his 
fingers hurt, and he burst into tears and ran off, and once more 
he sees a rom through another window, and this one also has 
trees, but there are cakes on the tables, all sorts of cakes-almond 
ones, red ones, yellow ones; and four rich ladies are sitting there 
giving cakes to anyone who comes in. The door is always opening 
to let in all these fine people from the street. The boy crept up, 
quickly pushed open the door, and went in. Heavens, how they 
shouted at him and waved him away! One of the ladies rushed up 
to him and shoved a kopeck in his hand; then she opened the door 
to let him out on the street again. How frightened he was! And 
the kopeck rolled right out of his hand and bounced down the 
stairs: he couldn't bend his red fingers to hold on to it. The boy 
ran off as quickly as he could, but had no notion of where he was 
going. He felt like crying again, but he was afraid and just kept 
on runing, breathing on his fingers. And his heart ached because 
suddenly he felt so lonely and so frightened, and then-Oh, Lord! 
What's happening now? There's a crowd of people standing around 
gaping at something: behind the glass in the window there are thre 
puppets, little ones dressed up in red and gren and looking just 
like they were alive! One of them's a little old man, sitting there 
like he's playing on a big violin, and the others are standing playing 
on tiny fiddles, wagging their heads in time to the music and looking 
at one another; their lips are moving and they're talking, realy 
talking, only you can't hear them through the glass. At first the 
boy thought that they were alive, but when he finally realized that 
they were puppets he burst out laughing. He had never seen such 
puppets before and had no idea that such things existed! He still 
felt like crying, but it was so funny watching the puppets. Suddenly 
he felt someone grab him from behind: a big brute of a boy stood 
beside him and suddenly cracked him on the head, tore off his 
cap, and kicked at his legs. The boy fell down, and the people 
around him began shouting; he was struck with terror, jumped to 
his feet and ran off as fast as he could, wherever his legs would 

January 
take him-through a gateway into a courtyard where he crouched 
down behind a pile of wood. "They won't find me here, and it's 
god and dark as well." 
He sat there, cowering and unable to catch his breath from fear, 
and then, quite suddenly, he felt so good: his hands and feet at 
once stopped aching and he felt as warm and cozy as if he were 
next to the stove. Then a shudder passed over him: "Why I almost 
fell asleep!" How nice it would be to go to sleep here: "I'll sit 
here for a bit and then go back to have a look at those puppets," 
he thought, and grinned as he recalled them. "Just like they were 
alive! . . .  " Then suddenly he heard his mother singing him a song 
as she bent over him. "Mamma, I'm going to sleep; oh, how nice 
it is to sleep here!" 
Then a quiet voice whispered over him: "Come with me, son, 
to my Christmas party." 
At first he thought that it was still his mamma, but no-it couldn't 
be. He couldn't see who had called him, but someone bent over 
him and hugged him in the darkness; he stretched out his hand . . .  
and suddenly-what a light there was! And what a Christmas tree! 
It was more than a tree-he had never seen anything like it! Where 
can he be? Everything sparkles and shines and there are dolls 
everywhere-but no, they are all girls and boys, only they are so 
radiant and they all fly around him, kissing him, picking him up 
and carrying him off; but he's flying himself; and he sees his 
mother looking at him and laughs joyously to her. 
"Mama! Mamma! How lovely it is here, mamma!" cries the 
boy; and he kisses the children again and wants at once to tell 
them about the puppets behind the glass. "Who are you, boys and 
girls?" he asks, laughing and feeling that he loves them all. 
"This is Christ's Christmas party," they answer. "On this day 
Christ always has a Christmas pany for those little children who 
have no Christmas tree of their own . . . .  " And he learned that all 
these boys and girls were children just like him, but some had 
frozen to death in the baskets in which they had been abandoned 
on the doorsteps of Petersburg officials, others had perished in the 
keeping of indifferent nurses in orphans' homes, still others had 
died at the dried-up breasts of their mothers during the Samara 
famine, and yet others had suffocated from the fumes in third-class 
railway carriages. And now they are all here, all like angels, all 
with Christ; and He is in their midst, stretching out His hands to 
them, blessing them and their sinful mothers . . . .  And the mothers 

A Writer's Diary 
of the children stand apan, weeping; each one recognizes her son 
or daughter; and the children fly to theiŽ; mothers and wipe away 
their tears with their tiny hands, begging them not to weep because 
they are so happy here . . . .  
Down below, the next morning, the porters found the tiny body 
of the runaway boy who had frozen to death behind the woodpile; 
they found his mother as well . . . .  She had died even before him; 
they met in God's Heaven. 
So why did I make up a story like that, so little in keeping with 
the usual spirit of a sober-minded diary, and a writer's diary at 
that? All the more since I promised stories preeminently about 
actual events! But that's just the point: I keep imagining that al 
this could really have happened-! mean the things that happened 
in the cellar and behind the woodpile; as for Christ's Christmas 
party-well, I really don't know what to say: could that have hap­
pened? That's just why I'm a novelist-to invent things. 
3· A Colony of Young Offenders. Dark Individuals. The 
Tranformation of Blemished Souls into Immaculate 
Ones. Measures Acknowledged as Most Expedient 
Thereto. Little and Bold Friends of Mankind. 
On the third day of the holiday I saw all these "fallen" angels, a 
whole fifty of them altogether. Please don't think I'm joking when 
I call them that; there can be no doubt that these are children who 
have been "wronged." Wronged by whom? Who is to blame, and 
how, and for what? For the moment these are but idle questions 
for which I have no answer. We'd best get down to business. 
I paid a visit to the colony for young offenders that's located 
beyond the Powder Works. I had been wanting to go there for a 
long time but hadn't managed; then, unexpectedly, I had some free 
time and found some good people who offered to show me every­
thing. We set off on a mild, rather overcast day, and once past the 
Powder Works we drove right into a forest; in the forest is the 
colony. How lovely it is in winter in a snow-covered forest; how 
fresh, how pure the air, and how isolated it is here. Some thirteen 
hundred acres of forest have been donated to the colony, which 
consists entirely of a few attractive wooden houses set some distance 
apart from each other. The whole colony has been built with do­
nated money; each house cost some three thousand rubles, and in 

January 
3 1 5  
each house lives a "family." A family is a group of twelve to 
seventeen boys, and each family has its tutor. The plan is to have 
up to seventy boys, judging from the size of the colony, but at 
present, for some reason, there are only about fifty. I must admit 
that the colony had been generously endowed, and the yearly ex­
penses for each young offender are considerable. It's odd, too, that 
the sanitary conditions in the colony, as was recently reported in 
the newspapers, are not entirely satisfactory: there has been a good 
deal of illness of late, even though, it would seem, the air is fine 
and the children are well looked after. We stayed in the colony for 
several hours, from eleven in the morning right until twilight, but 
I came to see that one visit was not enough to take in everything 
and comprehend it all. The director invited me to come and spend 
two days with them; and that's a very tempting offer. 
The director, P. A. R-sky, is known in the world of belles-lettres; 
his articles appear occasionally in The European Messenger. He 
greeted me most cordially and courteously. The office keeps a book 
in which visitors enter their names if they choose. I noticed many 
well-known names among those inscribed; this suggests that people 
know about the colony and take an interest in it. In spite of all 
his courtesy, the esteemed director is, it seems, a man of great 
reserve, even though he emphasized almost with delight the positive 
features of his colony while somewhat playing down all those things 
that were not so pleasant or not yet put right. I hasten to add that 
this reserve-or so it seemed to me-derives from his most ardent 
love for the colony and for the project he has taken on. 
All four tutors (I think there are four-one for each family) are 
by no means old people; they are young, in fact, and receive some 
three hundred rubles a year in salary; almost all of them are sem­
inary graduates. They live full-time with their pupils and even wear 
almost the same clothes-a kind of blouse with a belt. The dor­
mitories were empty when we toured. It was a holiday, and the 
children were off playing somewhere; but it was all the more con­
venient to inspect the facilities. There is no luxury, nothing su­
perfluous resulting from the excessive kindness or humane feelings 
of the donors and founders of the institution. Such a thing could 
happen very easily, and it would be a major error. The folding iron 
cots, for instance, are the simplest kind; the sheets are made from 
rather coarse linen; the blankets are also of the plainest variety, 
but are warm. The tutors get up early, and they and all the pupils 
tidy and clean the dormitories and wash the floors when necessary. 

A Writer's Diary 
I caught a certain scent near some of the beds, and learned some­
thing almost incredible: some of the pupils (not many, but some 
eight or nine), not even the very young ones but those aged twelve 
or thirteen, simply wet their beds in their sleep. When I asked 
whether this was the result of some ailment, I was told that it was 
not; it happened simply because the children were uncivilized; 
when they are admitted they are in so savage a state that they 
cannot even comprehend that they can and must behave differently. 
But if that's the case, then where must they have been before? In 
what wretched slums must they have been raised, and what people 
must they have dealt with! There is scarcely a peasant family so 
impoverished that it would not teach a child how to behave in such 
a case and where even the smallest child would not know what to 
do. So what sort of people has such a young offender encountered? 
How bestially indifferent must they have been toward his very 
existence! Yet this is an actual fact, and I consider it of the greatest 
significance. Please don't laugh at my inflating this nasty linle detail 
to such dimensions: it is much more serious that it might seem. 
It indicates that there truly are individuals so dark and dreadful 
that every trace of their humanity and civic duty has disappeared. 
When one realizes that, one can also understand what such a tiny, 
savage soul will become when forsaken and rejected by the human 
community this way. Yes, these children's souls have witnessed 
some gloomy scenes and they are accustomed to strong impressions 
that will remain with them for ever, of course, and will recur in 
terrible dreams for the rest of their lives. And so those who would 
reform and educate such children must struggle with these terrible 
impressions; they must eradicate them and implant new ones-an 
enormous task. 
"You will not believe the savage state some of them are in when 
they come here," P.A. told me. "There are some who know nothing 
of themselves or of their place in society. Such a boy has been 
wandering around the streets scarcely knowing what he is doing, 
and the only thing on earth he knows and can make any sense of 
is his freedom-the freedom to wander about, half dead from cold 
and hunger, but only to wander freely. There is one small boy 
here, no more than ten, and even now he is utterly unable to get 
along without stealing. He steals aimlessly, not for profit, but me­
chanically, simply to steal." 
"So how do you hope to reform such children?" 
"Through work, a completely different way of life, and through 

January 
3 1 7 
fair treatment. And finally there's the hope that in three years their 
old weaknesses and habits will be forgotten of their own accord, 
simply through the passage of time." 
I inquired whether there were not yet other notorious and nasty 
adolescent habits among the boys. I would remind you, by the way, 
that the boys here ranged in age from ten to seventeen, even though 
only children under fourteen are supposed to be admitted for 
treatment. 
"Oh, no; we give no chance for such nasty habits to exist," P.A. 
quickly replied. "The tutors are always with them and watch con­
stantly for things like that." 
But I found this difficult to believe. There are several boys in 
the colony who are from the division of young offenders, now 
abolished, that used to be located in the Lithuanian Castle. I visited 
that prison three years ago and saw these boys. Then I learned 
from absolutely reliable sources that perversion in the Castle was 
rampant, and that those vagabond children who were admitted but 
not yet infected with this perversion and who initially loathed it 
eventually submitted to it almost against their will because their 
fellows made fun of their chastity. 
"And have you had many recidivists?" I inquired. 
"Not so many; there were only eight among all those released 
from the colony." (Yet this is still a goodly number.) 
I note that the pupils are released primarily as tradesmen, and 
that preliminary accommodation is found for them. Formerly the 
passports issued by the colony were a great handicap to them. But 
now the means have been found to issue them passports from which, 
at first glance at least, one cannot tell that the bearer is from the 
colony of young offenders. 
"On the other hand," P.A. hastened to add, "there are some 
among those released who even now cannot forget about the colony, 
and whenever there's a holiday, they'll most certainly come to spend 
some time and visit us." 
And so the surest means of reform, of transforming a soul that · 
has been dishonored and defamed into one that is serene and honest, 
is work. The day in the dormitory begins with work, and then the 
pupils go to the workshops. In the metal working and carpentry 
shops I was shown the things they had crafted. These articles are 
good, considering everything, and will naturally improve greatly 
when things are better organized. They are sold for the pupils' 
benefit, and in such a manner each one accumulates something for 

3 1 8  
A Writer's Diary 
the day of his release. The children are busy with their work in 
the morning and afternoon but they do not tire; it sems that work 
truly does produce a rather strong effect on them moraly: they 
strive to outdo one another and take pride in their success. 
Another means fur their spiritual development is, of course, the 
system introduced in the colony whereby the boys mete out their 
own justice. Each one guilty of an offense is tried by a court of 
the whole "family" to which he belongs, and the boys either acquit 
him or sentence him to punishment. The only punishment is being 
excluded from games. Those who do not submit to the judgment 
of their fellows are punished by total exclusion from the colony. 
For that they have their "Peter-and-Paul Fortress," as the boys call 
it, a special, isolated hut equipped with cells for those temporarily 
isolated. However, it sems that confinement in the "Fortress" 
depends exclusively on the director. We visited this fortress; at that 
time there were two boys confined in it. I note that this confinement 
is carried out with great caution and solicitude and is imposed fur 
something particularly serious and inveterate. Each of the two was 
kept in his own small rom under lock and key, but we did not 
get to se them. 
This self-administered justice in essence is a god thing, of 
course, but it smacks of something literary. There are many proud 
children-proud in a god sense-who can be hurt by the "dem­
ocratic" power of boys and offenders like themselves, so that they 
may not even gain a proper understanding of this power. There 
may be personalities who are much more talented and clever than 
the others in the "family," and they may be stung by vanity and 
hatred of the majority decision; and the majority is almost always 
mediocre. And do the boys who sit in judgment truly understand 
what they are doing? On the contrary, isn't it likely that, as always 
and inevitably happens among children in all schools, childish 
"parties" will form among them, parties grouped around rival boys 
who are a bit stronger and smarter than the others and who set 
the tone and lead the others around as if on a string? They are 
still children, after all, and not adults. Finally, will those who are 
convicted and who suffer punishment subsequently regard their 
former judges in the same simple, brotherly fashion as they did 
before? Doesn't this self-administered justice destroy the sense of 
comradeship? Of course, this is a means of educating and de­
veloping and is based on and was devised with the notion that 

January 
3 1 9 
these previously delinquent children, by having the right of self­
administered justice, will accustom themselves to the law, to self­
restraint, and to justice, about which they had hitherto known 
nothing; that it will ultimately develop a sense of duty in them. 
These are al beautiful and subtle ideas, but to some extent they 
can be said to cut both ways. As far as punishment is concerned, 
of course, the most effective of restraints has been chosen-the 
deprivation of one's freedom. 
Let me insert here, by the way, one odd rwta bene. The other 
day I happened to hear a very surprising observation about corporal 
punishment, which has now been abolished in all our schools: 
"We've now abolished corporal punishment everywhere in the 
school, and it's a fine thing we did; but what were the repercussions 
of that? Just that now we have many more cowards among our 
young people, as compared with the past. They've begun to fear 
even the slightest physical pain, the least sufering or deprivation, 
even any kind of insult, any sting to their vanity, so much so that 
some of them, as we have seen, hang or shoot themselves when 
faced with the slightest threat or some difficult lesson or exami­
nation." Several actual instances of this can in fact best be explained 
solely by the cowardice of the young people when faced with some­
thing threatening or unpleasant; still, this is a strange point of 
view on the matter, and the observation is original at least. I set it 
down for the record. 
I saw all the boys at dinner. The dinner was very simple but 
nourishing, abundant, and prepared excellently. We sampled it with 
pleasure before the boys arrived; and yet the cost of food for each 
boy is only fifteen kopecks a day. They serve soup or cabbage stew 
with beef, and have porridge or potatoes for a second course. When 
they get up in the morning they have tea and bread, and bread 
and kvass between dinner and supper. The boys are well fed; they 
take turns serving at the table. Once they had taken their places 
at the table they sang, extremely well, the prayer "Thy Nativity, 
0 Christ Our Lord." One of the tutors teaches them to sing the 
prayers. 
Here at dinner, when all the boys were gathered together, I was 
most interested in studying their faces. Their faces were not too 
bold or brazen; they were simply faces that would not be taken 
aback by anything. Scarcely a single face could be described as 
dull (although I was told there were dullards 1mong them; former 

320 
A Writer's Diary 
inmates of the foundling home were most prominent in this cate­
gory). On the contrary, there were even some very intelligent faces. 
Some faces were ugly, but not physically 
.
so; all their features were 
nearly handsome, but in some faces there was something that would 
not reveal itself. There were not very many joyous faces, yet the 
pupils were very much at ease with their superiors and with anyone 
else, although not at ease in quite the same way as other children 
whose hearts are more open. And probably a great number of them 
wanted to slip away from the colony at once. Many of them, 
evidently, try not to let their secrets slip out inadvertently-that 
much can be seen from their faces. 
The tutors treat the boys humanely and are courteous to the point 
of delicacy (although they know how to be strict when necessary); 
but I think this treatment in some cases does not touch the boys' 
hearts and of course does not touch their intellects. They address 
them using the formal you, even the smallest boys. This you sounded 
somewhat artificial to me, a little unnecessary. Perhaps the boys 
who come here see this only as a case of "the gentlemen having 
a bit of fun." In short, this you is perhaps a mistake, even a rather 
serious one. It seems to me that it puts a certain distance between 
the children and the tutor; there is something formal and bureau­
cratic in that you, and it is a bad thing if some boy takes it as an 
expression of contempt. After all, how can he, who has seen such 
outlandish sights and heard the most unatural cursing, who has 
lived by unrestrained thievery-how can he believe that suddenly 
he merits such treatment from a gentleman? In a word, the familiar 
thou would, in my opinion, more closely reflect the real truth in 
this case; but as it stands, everyone seems to be playacting a little. 
It's much bener, after all, if the children would finally realize that 
the tutors are not their instructors but their fathers, and that they 
themselves are only naughty children who must be reformed. How­
ever, this you perhaps may not spoil the boys, and when he later 
winces on hearing a thou, or even the curses that he inevitably will 
hear the very day of his release from the institution, then he will 
sigh for his colony even more tenderly. 
Among the things that still need to be put right, particularly 
prominent is reading. I was told that the children like reading very 
much; that is, they like listening to someone read aloud on holidays 
or when they have spare time. There are, apparently, good readers 
among them. I heard only one of them, and he read well; they say 
that he loves to read aloud to the others and have them listen to 

January 
32 1  
him. But among them are-also those who are barely literate and 
totally illiterate. And the things they read! In one of the families 
after diner I saw a book by some sort of author lying on the table; 
and they read how a certain Vladimir conversed with some Olga 
on various profound and strange topics, and how later the inevitable 
environment "shattered their existence." I saw their "library"; it 
is a cupboard containing Turgenev, Ostrovsky, Lerrnontov, Push­
kin, and so on; there are several useful travel stories, etc. The 
whole collection is haphazard and has also been donated. Once 
reading has been permitted, it can have a remarkable formative 
influence, of course; but I also know that if all Russia's educative 
forces, led by all the pedagogical councils, wanted to determine or 
stipulate what children in such circumstances ought to be given to 
read, then of course they would have to adjourn before they ever 
reached a conclusion; for this is a very difficult problem, and its 
final solution wil not come from some meeting. On the other hand, 
our literature has absolutely no books which the People can un­
derstand. Neither Pushkin nor the Sevastapol Tales nor Evenings 
on a Farm nor the tale of Kalashnikov or Koltsov (particularly 
Koltsov) is at al understood by the People. Of course, these boys 
are not the People but are God only knows who-such human 
specimens as almost escape classification: to what category and type 
do they belong? But even if they did understand something, they 
still would be utterly incapable of appreciating it because all this 
wealth would drop on them out of the blue, as it were; their past 
lives have simply not prepared them for this. And what of the 
muckraking writers and satirists? Is this the sort of spiritual in­
fluence needed by these poor children who have seen so much filth 
already? Perhaps these little people have no wish at all to laugh at 
others. Perhaps these souls, obscured by darkness, would open 
themselves with joy and tenderness to the most naive, elementary, 
and artless impressions; to things utterly childish and simple, at 
which today's secondary-school student, of the same age as these 
delinquent children, would smile condescendingly and pull a face. 
There is also a school, quite in its infancy, but there are plans 
to organize it better in the very near future. Drawing and painting 
are scarcely taught. There is no religious instruction at all: there 
is no priest. But they will have a priest of their own when their 
church is completed. This wooden church is now being built. The 
leaders of the colony and the builders are proud of it. Its architecture 
is truly not bad, but it is done in the somewhat official, markedly 

322 
A Writer's Diary 
Russian style that has become boring. I note, by the way, that 
religious instruction in schools-whether for. delinquents or for our 
other primary schools-must certainly be entrusted to no one other 
than a priest. But why could not even primary schoolteachers tell 
simple stories from the Bible? I won't dispute the fact that one can 
find truly bad people among the great multitude of village school­
teachers; but if one of them wants to teach atheism to a boy, he 
can do it without teaching church history; he need only tell him 
about the duck and "what it is covered with." On the other hand, 
what do we hear of our clergy? Oh, I certainly don't want to offend 
anyone, and I am sure that the school for delinquents will have 
the worthiest of priests to tend it; however, what have almost al 
our newspapers been writing about lately with particular zeal? They 
have printed the most unpleasant facts about clergy who were giving 
religious instruction in schools and who, by the dozens, quit the 
schools and refused to teach in them unless they were given extra 
pay. I don't dispute that "he who labors is worthy of his payment," 
but this eternal whining about extra pay grates on the ear and 
lacerates the heart. Our newspapers take the side of the whiners, 
as I do myself; yet I still dream of those ancient zealots and preach­
ers of the Gospel who traveled barefoot and naked, enduring beat­
ings and sufferings and preaching Christ without any additional 
pay. Oh, I'm not an idealist; I understand all too well that times 
are different now. But would it not be gratifying to hear that our 
spiritual educators had increased their goodwill by even an iota 
before increasing their salaries? I repeat: please don't be offended. 
Everyone knows very well that the spirit has not run dry in the 
hearts of our clergy and that there are ardent workers among them. 
And I am already convinced that just such a one will work in the 
colony. But it would be better if the boys were simply told stories 
from the Bible without any "official" moral; for the time being 
that would be enough for religious instruction. A series of pure, 
holy, beautiful pictures would work powerfully on these souls which 
thirst after beautiful impressions . . . .  
Still, I said farewell to the colony with a cheerful heart. There 
may be things in need of fixing up, yet there are facts which indicate 
substantial progress toward achieving its goals. Let me tell you 
about two of them by way of conclusion. When I was in the colony 
one of the pupils, a lad of about fifteen, was confined in the 
"Fortress." Before coming here he had been held for some time 
in the prison of the Lithuanian Castle while the division of young 

January 
offenders was still located there. He was sentenced to join the colony 
but tried to escape from it twice, I believe; he was caught both 
times, once outside the colony itself. At last he stated flatly that 
he would not submit to the rules of the institution, and for this he 
was put into solitary confinement. At Christmas his relatives 
brought him some presents, but he was not allowed to have them 
because he was being kept in confinement; a tutor confiscated them. 
The boy was terribly offended and much affected by this, and when 
the director visited him he began to complain bitterly, harshly 
accusing the tutor of confiscating the parcel of gifts for his own 
use; at the same time he spoke angrily and sarcastically about the 
colony and his fellow pupils, making accusations against al of them. 
"I sat down and had a serious talk with him," P.A. told me. "He 
maintained a gloomy silence the whole time. Two hours later he 
suddenly sent for me again, begging me to come and see him; and 
what do you think he did? He rushed to me, his eyes full of tears, 
utterly shaken and transformed; he began to repent and to reproach 
himself; he also told me things that had happened to him previously 
and that he had kept hidden from everyone; he told me his secret­
that he had long been addicted to a most shameful habit from which 
he could not free himself, and that this tormented him. In short, 
it was a complete confession. I spent two hours with him," P.A. 
added. "We had a real talk; I advised him of certain methods to 
help him struggle with his habit, and so on." 
When P.A. told me this he deliberately passed over the content 
of their conversation; but you will have to agree that it is a gift to 
be able to enter into the sick soul of a deeply embittered young 
offender who has never had any notion of the truth. I confess I 
would very much like to know all the details of that conversation. 
Here is another fact: every tutor in every family not only sees that 
the pupils tidy the dormitory and wash and clean it but also joins 
them in the work. They wash the floors on Saturdays; the tutor 
not only demonstrates how this is to be done but himself sets to 
washing the floor with the boys. This is a most thorough under­
standing of one's vocation and one's human dignity. Would you 
ever find such an attitude to one's work among bureaucrats, for 
example? And if, indeed, these people resolve to unite the colony's 
goals with their own private aims in life, then, of course, the matter 
will be "fixed up," even despite some theoretical errors, if such 
should occur initially. 
A man who has seen a good deal of life said to me the other 

A Writer's Diary 
day: "Heroes-thaJ:'s what you ncm:lists are loking fOr. And when 
you can't find any heroes among us Rusians, you start to grumble 
at the whole country. Let me tell you a little story: ooce upon a 
time, a good while ago now, during the reign of the late emperor, 
there lived a government official who served first in St. Petersburg 
and then in Kiev, I think, where he died. Now on the surface of 
it, that would sem to be his whole life's story. Yet, what do you 
think? This humble and quiet little fellow all his l.ifi: sufered such 
inner torments cm:r serfdom, cm:r the fact that in Rusia a man 
created in the likenes and image of God could be so slavishly 
dependent on a man such as himself, thai: he began to scrape and 
save out of his own meager salary, denying his wife and children 
almost the necesities of life; and when he managed to acumulate 
enough he would buy some serfs fredom from his landowner. Of 
course, it would take him ten years to fre one man. In the course 
of his whole life be managed in this way to redem about thre or 
four people, and when he died he left nothing to his family. This 
all happened without publicity, quietly, unknown to everyone. What 
son of hero can he be, of course! He's 'an idealist of the fOrties' 
and nothing more; perhaps even ridiculous and not very skilful, 
because he thought thai: be could strugle against all this evil with 
only his own petty, individual effon. Yet stil, it sems thai: our 
Potugins ought to be a bit more charitable toward Rusia and not 
throw mud at her for anything and everything." 
I am setting down this little story here (it's not entirely relevant, 
I suppose) only because I have no reason to doubt its authenticity. 
Yet these are the son of people we ned! I am terribly food of 
this ridiculous type of pety oflicial who seriously imagines thai: be, 
with his microscopic efforts and stuborn persisteoce, is capable 
of aiding the common cause without waiting for some widespread 
campaign and general initiative. That's the kind of little man who 
might be very useful in a colony of young offenders as well . . . .  
Oh, naturaly, working under better-educated and higher super­
visors . . . .  
Hol.vever, I spent only some fi:w hours in the colony, and there 
was much thai: I might have cooceived wrongly or mised or ben 
mistaken about. In any case, I find thai: the means fOr making 
blemished souls cm:r into imaculate ones are stil insuficient. 

3 
r .  The Russian Society for the Protection of Animals. The 
Government Courier. Demon-Vodka. The Itch for 
Debauch and Vorobev. From the End or from the 
Beginning? 
In no. 359 of The Voice I happened to read of the celebration of 
the tenth anniversary of the Russian Society for the Protection of 
Animals. What a kind and humane society this is! As far as I 
understand, its main idea is almost entirely conveyed in these words 
from the speech of the Society's president, Prince A. A. Suvorov: 
"In fact, the task of our new charitable institution seemed all the 
more difficult because the majority was unwilling to see in the 
protection of animals those same moral and material benefits for 
humans as derive from their kind and sensible treatment of domestic 
animals." 
And in fact the Society is concerned not only about poor dogs 
and horses; man, too-Russian man-needs to humanize and "im­
age himself' 1 and this is something which the Society for the 
Protection of Animals can undoubtedly promote. Once the peasant 
has learned to have pity for his animals, he will begin to have pity 
for his wife. And therefore, although I am very fond of animals, 
I am delighted that the worthy Society values people even more 
than animals-people who have become coarse, inhumane, semi­
barbaric, and who are seeking the light! Any means of enlight­
enment are precious, and one can only wish that the Society's idea 
I. To image oneself is an expression heard among the People; it means to give 
an image, to restore in man his human image. One who has been drinking for a 
long time is told, with reproach: "You ought to image yourself." I heard this from 
the convicts. [Dostoevsky's note) 
32 5 

A Writer's Diary 
in fact becomes one means of enlightenment. Our children are 
raised and grow up encountering many disgusting sights. They se 
a peasant who has grossly overloaded his can lashing his wretched 
nag, who gives him his living, across the eyes as she struggles in 
the mud; or, something I myself saw not very long ago, for instance: 
a peasant was hauling calves to the slaughterhouse in a large cart 
in which he had loaded about ten of the creatures; he climbed into 
the cart with an air of utmost calm and sat down upon a calf. He 
found a soft seat there-just like a sofa with springs-but the calf, 
its tongue hanging out and its eyes bulging, may have drawn its 
last breath even before it reached the slaughterhouse. I am sure 
that this scene didn't trouble anyone on the street: "Doesn't 
matter-it's going to be slaughtered anyway." But scenes such as 
these undoubtedly brutalize and corrupt people, especially chil­
dren. It's true that the worthy Society has already been attacked; 
I have heard people make fun of it more than once. I've heard 
mention, for example, of the time about five years ago when the 
Society laid charges against a cabman for mistreating his horse. 
He was fined fifteen rubles, I think. And that, of course, was a 
miscalculation, because after such a heavy fine many people truly 
did not know whom to pity: the cabman or his horse. Nowadays, 
it's true, the new law provides for a fine of not more than ten 
rubles. Then I heard about the Society's allegedly excessive con­
cerns for putting to death by chloroform stray, and thus harmful, 
dogs who had lost their owners. People noted that at a time when 
people are starving in the provinces struck by famine, such tender 
concern for dogs might sem to grate on the ear. But objections 
such as these do not stand up to criticism. The aim of the Society 
is more enduring than the vicissitudes of day-to-day living. It is 
based on something splendid and true which sooner or later must 
take rot and triumph. Nevertheless, looking at it from another 
point of view, it would be extremely desirous that the activities of 
the Society and the aforementioned "vicissitudes of day-to-day liv­
ing" should enter into a mutual equilibrium, so to say; then, of 
course, it would be easier to chart that salvational and charitable 
course the Society should follow in order to achieve abundant and, 
above all, practical results that would truly achieve.its purpose . . . .  
Perhaps I am not expressing myself clearly; I shall tell you a little 
story which really happened and hope that by its graphic account 
I can convey more clearly what I want to express. 
This happened to me a long, long time ago-in my "prehistoric" 

January 
period, as it were-in 1837 to be precise. It happened on the road 
from Moscow to St. Petersburg; I was then only fifteen years old. 
My elder brother and I and our late father were traveling to St. 
Petersburg where the two of us were to enroll in the Chief Engi­
neering School. It was May, and it was very warm. We were 
traveling without changing horses, almost at a walking pace, and 
we would spend two or three hours at each posting station. I recall 
how weary we finally became of this journey, as it dragged on for 
almost a week. My brother and I were eager to enter a new life 
and were terribly prone to dreaming of the "beautiful and the 
sublime" (this phrase was still fresh then and was spoken without 
irony). And how many such beautiful phrases existed and circulated 
at that time! We believed passionately in something, and although 
we both knew very well everything that was required for the math­
ematics examination, we dreamed only of poetry and poets. My 
brother wrote verses-three a day-and even on the road I was 
continually composing in my mind a novel from Venetian life. Only 
two months earlier Pushkin had died, and my brother and I had 
agreed on the road that when we arrived in St. Petersburg we would 
at once stop off at the scene of his duel and seek out his former 
aparunent to see the room in which he had yielded up his spirit. 
And so it was that once, before evening, we stopped at an inn by 
a posting station-! don't remember the village, but I think it was 
in Tver Province; the village was large and prosperous. Within 
half an hour we were to make ready to leave, but in the meantime 
I was looking out the window and saw the following. 
Directly across the street from the inn was the station building. 
Suddenly a courier's troika came flying up to the station entrance 
and a government courier leapt out; he had on a full-dress coat 
with the little narrow flaps on the back that were worn then, and 
he wore a large tricornered hat with white, yellow, and, I think, 
green plumes (I forget this detail and could check it, but I seem 
to recall the flash of a green plume). The courier was a tall, ex­
tremely stout, and strong fellow with a purplish face. He ran into 
the station and, no doubt, knocked back a glass of vodka there. I 
recall that our driver said that such couriers always drink a glass 
of vodka at every station, since without it they couldn't stand up 
to "the punishment they have to take." In the meantime a new 
troika of fresh, spirited horses rolled up to the station and the 
coachman, a young lad of twenty or so, wearing a red shirt and 
carrying his coat on his arm, jumped onto the seat. The courier 

A Writer's Diary 
at once flew out of the in, ran down the steps, and got into the 
carriage. Before the coachman could even. start the horses, the 
courier stood up and, silently, without any word whatsoever, raised 
his huge right fist and dealt a painful blow straight down on the 
back of the coachman's neck. The coachman jolted forward, raised 
his whip, and lashed the shaft horse with all his might. The horses 
started off with a rush, but this did nothing to appease the courier. 
He was not angry; he was acting according to his own plan, from 
something preconceived and tested through many years of expe­
rience; and the terrible fist was raised again, and again it struck 
the coachman's neck, and then again and again; and so it continued 
until the troika disappeared from sight. Naturally the coachman, 
who could barely hold on because of the blows, kept lashing the 
horses every second like one gone mad; and at last his blows made 
the horses fly off as if possessed. Our coachman explained to me 
that all government couriers travel in almost the same fashion and 
that this particular one was universally known for it; once he had 
had his vodka and jumped into the carriage, he would always begin 
by beating, "always in that same way," for no reason whatsoever; 
he would beat in a measured maner, raising and lowering his fist, 
and "he'll keep using his fists on the coachman like that for nearly 
a mile, and then he'll quit. And if he gets to feeling bored, he 
might take it up again in the middle of the trip; then again, maybe 
God will prevent it. But he'll always start up again when they're 
getting close to the station: he'll start about a mile away, and you'll 
see his fist going up and down, and that's how they'll drive up to 
the station, so's everybody in the village can marvel at it. Your 
neck aches for a month afterward." When the young lad comes 
back people laugh at him: "Didn't that courier whack you across 
the neck, though! "  And the lad, perhaps, that very day will beat 
his young wife: "At least I'll take it out on you"; and perhaps 
also because she "looked on and saw it . . . .  " 
Doubtless it is cruel of the coachman to whip his horses that 
way: they come galloping into the next station worn out and barely 
able to breathe. But tell me, in truth, could any member of the 
Society for the Protection of Animals resolve to bring charges 
against that peasant for cruel and inhumane treatment of his horses? 
This disgusting scene has stayed in my memory all my life. I 
could never forget the courier, and for a long time thereafter I 
couldn't help but explain many of the shameful and cruel things 
about the Russian People in too one-sided a maner. You realize 

January 
329 
that I am talking about something that happened long ago. This 
little scene was like an emblem, so to say; something that very 
graphically demonstrated the link between a cause and its effect. 
Every blow that rained down on the animal was the direct result 
of every blow that fell on the man. At the end of the 184os, in the 
era of my most selfless and passionate dreams, I suddenly had a 
notion that if I should ever found a philanthropic society I would 
certainly have this courier's troika engraved on the society's seal 
as an emblem and an admonition. 
Oh, there's no doubt that times now are not what they were forty 
years ago, and couriers do not beat the People; but the People beat 
one another, having retained flogging in their courts. The point is 
not that, but in the causes that bring effects after them. The courier 
is gone, but on the other hand there is "demon-vodka." In what 
way can demon-vodka resemble the courier? It can do so very 
easily in the way it coarsens and brutalizes a man, makes him 
callous, and turns him away from clear thinking, desensitizes him 
to the power of goodness. A drunkard doesn't care about kindness 
to animals; a drunkard will abandon his wife and children. A 
drunken man came to the wife he had abandoned and whom, along 
with her children, he had not supported for many months; he 
demanded vodka and set to beating her to force her to give him 
still more vodka; the unfortunate woman, compelled to virtual 
forced labor (just recall what women's work is and what value we 
place on it now) and not knowing how to feed her children, seized 
a knife and stabbed him. This happened recently, and she will be 
brought to trial. But there is little point in telling you about her 
because there are hundreds and thousands of such cases-just open 
a newspaper. But the chief similarity between demon-vodka and 
the courier is certainly that it, just as fatally and irresistibly, towers 
over the human will. 
The worthy Society for the Protection of Animals comprises 750 
members, people who can be influential. Suppose it wanted to 
help reduce drunkenness among the People even a little and stop 
the poisoning of a whole generation by liquor! The strength of the 
People is fading away; the source of our future wealth is drying 
up; their intellect is bec01ning impoverished and their development 
retarded. And what will the children of today's People carry away 
in their Ininds and hearts when they grow up in the aboininations 
of their fathers? A fire broke out in a village; there was a church 
in the village, but the tavernkeeper came out and shouted that if 

330 
A Writer's Diary 
the villagers abandoned the church and saved his tavern, he would 
stand them a barrel of vodka. The church burned down, but the 
tavern was saved. These instances are still trivial compared with 
the countless horrors yet to come. If the worthy Society wished to 
assist, even in a small way, in eradicating these prime causes, it 
would, in so doing, both improve its own status and further its 
excellent campaign of education. Otherwise, how can they compel 
people to be compassionate when things are arranged precisely 
with the aim of destroying every trace of humanity in humans? 
And is it only liquor that incites and depraves the People in our 
remarkable times? It is as if the very atmosphere contains some 
sort of intoxicant, a kind of itch for depravity. An unprecedented 
distortion of ideas has begun among the People, along with a general 
worship of materialism. In this instance what I mean by materialism 
is the People's adoration of money and the power of the bag of 
gold. The notion has suddenly burst forth among the People that 
a bag of gold now is everything, that it holds every sort of power, 
and that everything their fathers have told them and taught them 
hitherto is all nonsense. It would be a great misfortune if this way 
of thinking should become firmly established among the People, 
and yet, how else are they to think? For example, the recent railway 
disaster in which over a hundred army recruits were killed on the 
Odessa line-do you really believe that such power will not have 
a corrupting effect on the People? The People see and marvel at 
such might-"They do whatever they like"-and they begin to 
doubt in spite of themselves: "So that's where the real power is; 
and that's where it has always been. Just get rich and you can have 
it all; you can do anything you like." There can be no notion more 
corrupting than this one. And it is in the very air and gradually 
is permeating everything. The People have no defense against this 
idea; they have no education, and there is no means whatsoever of 
exposing them to other opposing ideas. Over the whole of Russia 
there now stretch nearly twenty thousand versts of railways, and 
throughout this system even the most minor official stands as one 
who spreads these ideas; he appears to have total power over you 
and your fate, over your family, and over your honor should you 
happen to fall into his clutches on the railway. Not long ago one 
stationmaster, on his own authority and by his own hand, dragged 
a lady out of the railway carriage in which she was traveling and 
delivered her to some gentleman who had complained to this sta­
tionmaster that she was his wife and was running away from him-

January 
33 1 
and this without any judicial process and without any doubt that 
he had the right to do it. It is clear that this stationmaster, if he 
was in possession of his faculties, still must have become crazed 
by the notion of his own authority. Al these incidents and examples 
burst in on the People in a continual process of temptation; they 
see them every day and they draw the inevitable conclusions. In 
the past I was ready to condemn Mr. Suvorin for his incident with 
Mr. Golubev. I thought then that an innocent man should not be 
dragged into disrepute in such a fashion and have al the stirings 
of his soul described in the bargain. But now I have changed my 
view somewhat even on this incident. What business is it of mine 
that Mr. Golubev is not guilty! Mr. Golubev may be as pure as the 
driven snow, but still Vorobev is guilty. Who is this Vorobev? I 
have no idea; and I am certain that he does not even exist, but it 
is that same Vorobev who charges furiously over al the railway 
lines, who arbitrarily sets fares, who forcibly ejects passengers from 
railway carriages, who destroys trains, who allows goods to rot at 
stations for months on end, who brazenly inflicts damage on entire 
towns, provinces, the whole country, and who only shouts in a 
wild voice, "Clear the way, I'm coming!" But the chief thing this 
pernicious upstart is to be blamed for is that he has placed himself 
above the People as a seductive and fatal idea. However, why do 
I anack Vorobev? Is he the only such corrupting idea? I repeat: 
this new materialism and skepticism seems to be wafting through 
the air; we have begun to worship gratuitous gain, pleasure without 
labor; al sorts of deceit and villainy are committed in cold blood; 
people are murdered for the sake of a ruble in their pocket. I know 
very well that the past also had its share of terrible things, but 
certainly things are ten times worse now. What is most important 
is that this notion is circulating as if it were a doctrine or a faith. 
Two or three weeks ago in St. Petersburg a young lad, a cabbie 
who was scarcely of age, was driving an old couple at night; when 
he noticed that the man had passed out from drink, he drew his 
penknife and began stabbing the old woman. He was caprured, and 
the poor fool confessed at once: "I don't know how it happened 
and how the knife got into my hands." And, in truth, he really 
did not know. This is specifically a maner of the environment. He 
was caught up and drawn in-as if into a machine-by today's itch 
for debauchery, by the popular tendency of today: gratuitous gain. 
Why not give it a try, even with only a penknife? 
"No, we're not interested in the protection of animals these days; 

332 
A Writer's Diary 
that's only a scheme the gentlemen have thought up." I have heard 
that very same statement, but I totally reject jt. Not being a member 
of the Society myself, I am still ready to serve it and, I think, 
already am serving it. I don't know whether I expressed with even 
partial clarity my wish for that "equilibrium of the activities of the 
Society with the vicissitudes of day-to-day living" which I wrote 
of above; but understanding the humane and humanizing purpose 
of the Society, I am still deeply devoted to it. I could never un­
derstand the notion that only one-tenth of people should get higher 
education while the other nine-tenths of people should serve only 
as their material and means while themselves remaining in dark­
ness. I do not wish to think and live in any other way than with 
the belief that all our ninety million Russians (or however many 
will subsequently be born) will all someday be educated, human­
ized, and happy. I am fully convinced that universal education can 
harm none of us. I even believe that the kingdom of thought and 
light is possible to achieve here, in our Russia, even sooner, per­
haps, than anywhere else, for even now no one here will stand up 
for the idea that we must bestialize one group of people for the 
welfare of another group that represents civilization, such as is the 
case all over Europe. It is here, after all, that serfdom was vol­
untarily abolished by the upper classes with the will of the tsar at 
their head! And therefore, once more, I give a most warmheaned 
welcome to the Society for the Protection of Animals; I wanted 
only to express the thought that it would be a good thing if we 
were to begin taking action not always from the end but, partly at 
least, from the beginning. 
2. Spiritualism. Something about Devils. The 
Extraordinary Cleverness of Devils, If Only These Are 
Devils 
And now, however, I've covered a whole sheet with writing and 
there is no more room. And I had wanted to talk a bit about the 
war, about our border regions; I wanted to say something about 
literature, about the Decembrists, and about at least fifteen other 
topics. I see that I must write more succinctly and compress 
things-something to keep in mind in the days ahead. A word, by 
the way, about the Decembrists before I forget: in announcing the 
recent death of one of them, our journals stated that he apparently 

January 
333 
was one of the very last of the Decembrists; this is not quite 
accurate. Among the surviving Decembrists are Ivan Aleksan­
drovich Annenkov, the one whose original story was told in such 
distorted 
fashion 
by 
the 
late 
Alexandre 
Dumas-pere 
in 
his well-known novel Les Mimoires d'un maitre d'arrnes. Matvei 
Ivanovich Muravev-Apostol, the brother of the one who was exe­
cuted, is alive, as are Svistunov and Nazimov. Perhaps there are 
yet other survivors. 
In a word, there is much I shall have to put off until the February 
issue. But I would like to conclude the present January diary with 
something a bit more cheery. There is one very amusing and, most 
important, fashionable topic, and that is devils and spiritualism. 
In fact, something amazing is going on: people write and tell me, 
for instance, that a young man sits in an armchair, tucks up his 
feet, and the chair begins to dance around the room-and this is 
in St. Petersburg, the capital! Now why was it that no one ever 
did this before-dancing around the room while sitting in a chair 
with his legs tucked up? Instead, everyone just went on working 
and meekly earning their ranks. People insist that there's a lady 
somewhere in the provinces who has a house with so many devils 
in it that even Uncle Eddy's cabin doesn't have half as many. And 
don't we have devils of our own! Gogo! writes to Moscow from the 
next world and states positively that devils exist. I read the letter, 
and the style is his. He urges us not to summon them up, not to 
turn tables, and not to have anything to do with them: "Do not 
tease the devils, do not hob-nob with them; it is a sin to tease 
devils . . . .  If nervous insomnia begins to torment you by night, do 
not grow angry, but pray: this is the work of devils. Make the sign 
of the cross over your nightshirt and say a prayer." The voices of 
clergymen are raised advising even scientists to have nothing to do 
with "witchery" nor to study it scientifically. When even clergymen 
have spoken out, it means the thing has grown beyond a joke. But 
the whole problem is: are these really devils? Now this is a question 
the Committee of Inquiry into Spiritualism recently formed in St. 
Petersburg ought to resolve! Because if they finally do establish 
that these things are not the work of devils but of some sort of 
electricity or other, some new manifestation of universal energy, 
then total disillusionment would set in at once: "What a marvel," 
people would say, "and how boring! "  They would all drop spir­
itualism, forget about it at once, and go back to their own business 
as before. But in order to investigate the question of whether these 

3 34 
A Writer's Diary 
are devils at work at least one member of the committee must be 
able and have the opportunity to admit the existence of devils, 
even as a hypothesis. But it is hardly likely ·that even one member 
of the committee can be found who believes in devils, despite the 
fact that a terrific number of people who do not believe in God 
stil believe in the Devil, readily and happily. And therefore the 
question is beyond the committe's competence. My whole problem 
is that I simply canot believe in devils myself, and so it is a great 
pity that I have developed a very clear and astonishing theory of 
spiritualism, but one wholly founded on the existence of devils; 
without them my whole theory collapses of itself. And it is this 
theory that I, in concluding, wish to pas on to the reader. The 
fact is that I am defending devils: this time they are being unfairly 
anacked and treated as fols. Don't worry, they know what they 
are doing; that is just what I want to prove. 
In the first place, people write that spirits are stupid (by spirits 
I mean devils, the Unclea.il Power, for other than devils, what spirits 
can be at work here?); that when they are sumoned up and 
questioned (through table-turning), they only give silly answers, 
know no gramar, and have never communicated a new idea or 
passed on a single new discovery. Thinking that way is a grave 
mistake. What would happen, for instance, if the devils at once 
showed their power and overwhelmed humans with their discov­
eries? What if they suddenly revealed the electric telegraph (i.e., 
asuming it had not already ben invented) or passed on various 
secrets to people: "Dig in such-and-such a place and you'll find a 
treasure or find deposits of coal" (firewod, incidentally, is such a 
price these days). Still, al these things are just trifles! Of course, 
you understand that human science is still in its infancy and has 
not done much more than begin its work; about al it has accom­
plished is to get itself firmly on its feet. And now, suppose, suddenly 
a whole shower of revelations commences, of the order, say, that 
the sun stands still while the eanh revolves around it (because there 
are probably many discoveries of that magnitude, things which our 
wise men have not dreamt of, that stil await discovery). Suddenly 
al this knowledge would simply tumble down on humanity and, 
the main thing, it would come quite gratuitously, as a gift. What 
would happen to people then, I ask? Oh, of course, everyone would 
be in raptures at first. People would embrace one another in ecstasy; 
they would rush off to study these revelations (and that would take 
time); they would suddenly feel themselves overcome by happines 

January 
3 3 5 
and up to their necks in material blessings; perhaps they would 
walk or fly through the air, covering immense distances ten times 
faster than they now do by railway; they would extract fabulous 
harvests from the earth, create new organisms through chemistry; 
and there would be beef enough to supply three pounds per person, 
just as our Russian socialists dream-in short, eat, drink, and be 
merry. "And now," all the lovers of humanity would cry, "now 
that human needs are taken care of, now we will reveal our true 
potential! There are no more material deprivations, no more cor­
rupting environment, once the source of all flaws; now humans 
will become beautiful and righteous! There is no more ceaseless 
labor to try to feed oneself, and now everyone will occupy himself 
with sublime, profound thoughts and with universal concerns. Now, 
only now, has life in the higher sense begun! " And what clever 
and good people, perhaps, would give voice to such words, and 
the novelty of it al might attract still others until, at last, they 
would raise their voices in a common hymn: "Who can be likened 
unto this beast? Praise be to him who has brought fire down from 
the heavens! "  
. 
But such rapturous outpourings would scarcely be enough for 
even one generation! People would suddenly see that they had no 
more life left, that they had no freedom of spirit, no will, no 
personality, that someone had stolen all this from them; they would 
see that their human image had disappeared and that the brutish 
image of a slave had emerged, the image of an animal, with the 
single difference that a beast does not realize that it is a beast, but 
a human would realize that he had become a beast. And humanity 
would begin to decay; people would be covered in sores and begin 
to bite their tongues in torment, seeing that their lives had been 
taken away for the sake of bread, for "stones turned into bread." 
People would realize that there is no happiness in inactivity, that 
the mind which does not labor will wither, that it is not possible 
to love one's neighbor without sacrificing something to him of one's 
own labor, that it is vile to live at the expense of another, and thai 
happiness lies nor in happiness bur only in rhe auempr to achieve ir. 
People would be overcome by boredom and sickness of heart: 
everything has been done and there is nothing more to do; every­
thing has become known and there is nothing more to discover. 
There would be crowds of people seeking to end their lives, but 
not as they do now, in some obscure corner; masses of people 
would gather, seizing one another's hands, and suddenly destroy 

A Writer's Diary 
themselves by the thousands through some new method that they 
discovered along with all their other discoveries. And then, per­
haps, those who remained would cry out to God: "Thou art right, 
0 Lord: man does not live by bread alone!" Then they would rise 
up against the devils and abandon witchery . . . .  Oh, never would 
God send down such torments on humanity! And the kingdom of 
the devils would collapse! No, the devils won't make such a grave 
political error. They are sophisticated politicians and move toward 
their goal by a most subtle and logical route (I repeat: that is, if 
devils indeed do exist!). 
The fundamental principle of their kingdom is discord; that is, 
they want to found it on discord. Why do they specifically need 
discord here? Why, it's obvious: just remember that discord itself 
is a dreadful force; discord, after a long period of strife, drives 
people to folly; it dulls and distorts their reason and their feelings. 
In discord he who gives offense, once he realizes what he has done, 
does not go to be reconciled with the one he has offended, but 
says: "I offended him, and so I must take revenge on him." But 
the main thing is that the devils have the most thorough knowledge 
of the history of the human race and particularly remember all 
those things on which discord has been based. They know, for 
instance, that if in Europe sects exist that have broken away from 
Catholicism and continue up to now as religions, then this is only 
because blood was spilled because of them at one time. Should 
Catholicism, for example, come to an end, then all the Protestant 
sects would inevitably collapse as well: what would be left for them 
to protest against? Even now they are almost inclined to move into 
some sort of "humanism," or even simply to atheism, and people 
have remarked on that for some time now. And if these sects still 
continue to cling to life as religions, then it is because they still 
continue to protest. They protested even last year, and what a protest 
it was!-they took on the pope himself. 
Oh, of course in the final analysis the influence of the devils will 
prevail and they will crush humanity like a fly with their "stones 
rurned into bread." That is their principal goal, but they will 
undertake to fulfill it only after having first ensured that their furure 
kingdom will be safe from human rebellion and so guarantee its 
longevity. But how can humans be subdued? Of course: divide et 
impera (divide the enemy and you will conquer him). And for this 
they need discord. On the other hand, people will get tired of the 
stones turned into bread, and so something must be found for them 

January 
337 
to do so they won't get bored. And isn't discord a fine occupation 
for human beings! 
Now please observe how the devils introduce discord among us 
and, so to say, from the very first step begin spiritualism with 
discord. Our frenzied age makes this so much easier. Just look at 
how many believers in spiritualism among us have already been 
offended. People shout and laugh at them for believing in table­
turning, as if they had done or planed to do something dishonest; 
but still they carry on investigating the question despite the discord. 
How can they stop investigating it in any case? The devils start 
their work in a very roundabout way: they arouse curiosity but 
confuse people instead of explaining; they make people uncertain 
and openly laugh in their faces. An intelligent person, worthy of 
al respect, stands with a puzzled frown on his face and painfully 
seeks an answer: "Whatever can this be?" At last he is ready to 
give up and abandon his quest, but the laughter of the crowd grows 
louder, and the matter develops to the point where the believer has 
to continue despite himself, out of his own sense of pride. 
Before us, armed with al the weapons science has to offer, sits 
the Committee to Investigate Spiritualism. The public waits in 
anticipation, but what happens? The devils have no intention of 
offering any resistance; to the contrary, in a most disgraceful man­
ner they decide they will "pass." Seances are unsuccessful; deceit 
and trickery are exposed. Malicious laughter rings out from al 
sides; the committee retires with scornful glances; believers in spir­
itualism are thoroughly put to shame; a desire for revenge creeps 
into the hearts of both sides. Now, it would seem, the devils are 
gone for good, but no! No sooner have the scientists and sober­
minded people turned away than the devils at once perform some 
even more supernatural trick for the erstwhile believers, and once 
again they are convinced, now even more firmly than before. More 
temptation, more discord! Last sumer in Paris a certain photog­
rapher was brought to trial for various spiritualistic frauds; he would 
sumon up the dead and take their photographs; he was over­
whelmed with orders. But they picked him up, and he made a 
complete confession in court; he even brought in the lady who had 
been helping him by representing the spirits he sumoned up. 
And what do you think-were those whom the photographer de­
ceived convinced? Not in the least. One of them, apparently, said: 
"Three of my children have died, and I have no photos of them; 
but the photographer took their pictures, which all resemble my 

A Writer's Diary 
children, and I could recognize each one. What do I care if he's 
confesed to fraud? He has his reasons .for doing that, but I'm 
holding a fact in my hand, so leave me alone." This was in the 
newspapers. I don't know whether I reported all the details cor­
rectly, but the esence is accurate. Now imagine if such a thing 
happened here. No soner would the learned committee, its work 
finished and the wretched fraud exposed, turn its back than the 
devils would seize one of its most obdurate members-even, say, 
Mr. Mendeleev himself, who has exposed spiritualism in his public 
lectures-and catch him up at once in their nets, just as they caught 
Crokes and Olcon in their time. They would take him aside and 
lift him into the air for five minutes, materialize before him various 
dead people he had known, and do it all in such a maner that 
he could no longer have any doubts. And what would happen then, 
tell me? As a true scientist he would have to accept actual fact­
he, who has been giving lectures! What a picture, what a shame, 
what an uproar, what shouts and cries of indignation! Of course 
this is only a joke, and I am sure that nothing of this sort will 
happen to Mr. Mendeleev, although in England and in America it 
sems that the devils have acted precisely according to this plan. 
And what if the devils, having prepared the ground and planted 
sufficient discord, suddenly want to broaden the sphere of their 
activities and turn to something genuine and serious? They're an 
unpredictable lot with a strong sense of irony and could do some­
thing of that sort. For instance, what if they suddenly burst into 
the midst of the People, along with literacy, say? And our People 
are so defenseless, so given to ignorance and debauchery, and there 
are so few who can guide them in this sense, it sems! The People 
might put their faith in these new phenomena with a passion (they 
believe in Ivan Filippovich, after all). Then how their spiritual 
development would be delayed! What damage might be done, and 
for what a period of time! What an idolatrous worship of materi­
alism, and what discord; discord a hundred, a thousand times worse 
than before; and this is exactly what the devils need. And discord 
certainly will ensue, especially if spiritualism manages to provoke 
restrictions and persecution (and persecution would inevitably fol­
low from the rest of the People who do not believe in spiritualism). 
Then it would spread in an instant, like burning kerosene, and set 
everything ablaze. Mystical ideas love persecution; they are created 
by it. Every such persecuted idea is like that petroleum which the 
arsonists poured over the floors and walls of the Tuileries before 

January 
3 39 
the fire and which, in turn, could only feed the blaze in the building 
that was under guard. Oh, the devils know the force of a forbidden 
faith and they, perhaps, have already been waiting many centuries 
for mankind to trip over a turning table! Of course, they are 
governed by some sort of enormous unclean spirit of awesome 
power, more clever than the Mephistopheles whom Goethe made 
famous, as Yakov Polonsky tells us. 
I have been most definitely joking and having fun from the first 
word to the last; but this is what I would like to express in con­
clusion: if we regard spiritualism as something that bears within 
it some sort of new religion (and almost all, even the most sober­
minded among the spiritualists, are inclined to share even a little 
of that view), then something of what I have said above might be 
taken seriously. And therefore, may God grant speedy success to 
free study of the question from both sides. This alone will help to 
eradicate quickly the nasty spirit that is spreading about, and will, 
perhaps, enrich science by some a new discovery. But to shout at 
one another, to heap scorn on one another and ostracize one another 
for spiritualism, means, in my view, only to strengthen and dis­
seminate the idea of spiritualism in its worst sense. This is the 
beginning of intolerance and persecution. That's just what the 
devils want! 
3. A Word Apropos of My Biography 
The other day someone showed me a copy of my biography included 
in The Russian Encyclopedic Dictionary (Second Year, Volume 5, 
Book 2, 1875), published by Professor I. N. Berezin of St. Pe­
tersburg University and complied by Mr. V.Z. It is hard to imagine 
so many mistakes being made on one half-page. I was born not 
in 1818 but in 1822. My late brother, Mikhail Mikhailovich, the 
publisher of the journals Time and Epoch, was my elder brother, 
not younger than I by four years. After my term of hard labor, to 
which I was exiled in 1849 as a state criminal (Mr. V.Z. mentions 
not a word about the nature of my crime, saying only that "he 
was involved in the Petrashevsky affair," i.e., in God knows what 
sort of affair, since no one is obliged to know and remember the 
Petrashevsky affair, while the Encyclopedic Dictionary is intended 
for general reference; people might think that I was exiled for 
robbery). After my term of hard labor, by the will of the late 
emperor, I directly entered the army as a private soldier and after 

340 
A Writer's Diary 
thre years of service was promoted to officer's rank. I was never 
deported ("settled") to Siberia, as Mr. V . .Z. says. 
The order of my literary works is mixed up: tales that belong 
to the very first period of my literary activity are attributed in the 
biography to the latest period. There are many such mistakes, and 
I am not listing them al so as not to weary the reader; but I will 
point them al out if challenged. There are, however, outright fab­
rications. Mr. V.Z. states that I was the editor of the newspaper 
The Russuzn World; to that I declare that I was never the editor of 
The Russian World; furthermore, not a single line of mine has ever 
appeared in that worthy publication. I don't deny that Mr. V.Z. 
(Mr. Vladimir Zotov?) can have his own point of view and consider 
it unerly trivial, in a biographical account of a writer, to indicate 
accurately when he was born, what interesting experiences he has 
had, where, when, and in what order he published his works, which 
works can be his earlier and which his later, which periodicals he 
published, which ones he edited, and which ones he merely worked 
for. Just the same, one would wish for a little more good sense, 
only for the sake of accuracy. Otherwise, readers may think that 
al the articles in Mr. Berezin's dictionary have been put together 
in such a sloppy fashion. 
4· A Turkish Proverb 
Just in passing, I will insert here a Turkish proverb (a real one­
I haven't made it up): If you set off to a certain goal and keep 
stopping along the way to throw stones at every dog that barks at 
you, you will never reach your destination. 
As far as possible, I'll follow the advice of that wise proverb in 
my Diary, although I wouldn't want to tie myself down with prom­
ises beforehand. 

February 


1 
1. On the Fact That We Are All Good People. How 
Russian Society Resembles Marshal MacMahon 
The first issue of A Writer's Diary was well received; scarcely anyone 
abused it, at least scarcely anyone in literature-beyond that, I don't 
know. If there was any literary abuse then it passed unnoticed. 
The St. Petersburg Gazette hastened to remind its readers in an 
editorial that I have no love for children, adolescents, and the young 
generation, while in their feuilleton later on in the same issue they 
reprinted a whole story from my Diary, "The Boy at Christ's 
Christmas Party," a story that shows, at least, that I don't hate 
children totally. Still, none of that matters very much; the only 
thing I am concerned about is whether it is a good thing that I 
pleased everyone. Is that a good sign or a bad one? Could it be a 
bad sign? And yet-why not? Better take it as a good sign rather 
than a bad one and stop at that. 
And truly enough, we are al good people-apart from the bad 
ones, of course. But let me remark in passing that there may be 
no bad people among us at all, but only some useless ones. We 
haven't matured enough to be bad. Don't laugh, but stop and think: 
through lack of our own bad people (even though, as I've said, 
we have plenty of useless ones), there was a time when we would 
go so far as to idealize certain nasty types who appeared among 
our literary characters and who were largely borrowed from foreign 
literatures. It's not enough that we esteemed such people-we slav­
ishly tried to imitate them in real life and even bent over backward 
to model ourselves on them. Just recall: what a crowd of Pechorins 
we had who did so many nasty things in real life after they read 
A Hero of Our Time. The forefather of all these nasty types in 
Russian literature was Silvio from the story "The Shot," a character 
343 

344 
A Writer's Diary 
whom the straightforward and beautiful Pushkin borrowed from 
Byron. And Pechorin himself killed Grushnitsky only because he 
didn't cut a fine enough figure in his dress coat, and wasn't regarded 
as a very dashing hero by the ladies at high-society balls in St. 
Petersburg. If in the past we valued and respected these evil wretch­
es, then it was only because they appeared to be people whose 
hatred was unfaltering, as opposed to us Russians, who, as we all 
know, are people whose hatred is shon-lived; this is a trait we have 
always panicularly disliked in ourselves. Russian people are in­
capable of long and serious hatred-not only hatred of others but 
even of vices, of the darkness of ignorance, of despotism, obscur­
antism, and all those other retrograde things. We Russians are at 
once ready tc make peace, even at the first opponunity-isn't that 
so? In fact, just stop and think: what do we have to hate one 
another about? For the wrongs we commit? Ah, but this is a most 
elusive, most delicate, and most unfair cause for hatred; it cuts 
both ways, in shon; at present, at least, we'd best not take it up. 
There remains hatred because of convictions; but here I'm utterly 
unconvinced that we can hate with any seriousness. At one time, 
for example, we had Slavophiles and Westernizers, and they did a 
lot of fighting with one another. But now, with the abolition of 
serfdom, the reforms of Peter I have been completed and a general 
sauve qui peur has ensued. And now we have the Slavophiles and 
the Westernizers suddenly in agreement on the same idea: that now 
we must expect everything from the People; that the People have 
arisen, are moving, and that they and only they will utter our 
ultimate word. The Slavophiles and Westernizers, it would sem, 
could have been reconciled at this point, but such was not the case: 
the Slavophiles believe in the People because they recognize in 
them their own panicular principles; the Westernizers, on the other 
hand, agree to believe in the People only on condition that the 
People have no principles of their own whatsoever. And so the 
fight goes on. What do you think of that? In fact, I don't think 
there even is a fight: fighting is fighting; love is love. And why 
couldn't those who are fighting be loving one another at the same 
time? Indeed, this son of thing happens very often in Russia when 
truly good people get into a fight. And how can you say we aren't 
good people (once again, aside from the useless ones)? You se, 
we fight for the chief and sole reason that the time has now suddenly 
become one not of theories and journalistic scufles but of action 
and practical decisions. Suddenly there is the need to say something 

February 
345 
positive-about education and pedagogy, about the railways, the 
zemstvos, the medical services, and so on. There are hundreds of 
issues, and the main thing is that we must now do this as quickly 
as possible so as not to delay maners; and since over the past two 
hundred years we al have become unaccustomed to any work and 
have all become unerly incapable of even the slightest practical 
activity, it is only natural that we al suddenly grabbed each other 
by the hair; and the less capable people felt themselves, the more 
furiously they entered the fray. What's wrong with this, I ask you? 
It's merely touching, and nothing more. Look at children: they 
fight precisely at an age when they haven't yet learned to express 
their ideas. Isn't that exactly what we are doing? And so? We 
shouldn't be at all discouraged by this; on the contrary, it only 
shows, to some extent at least, that we are fresh and, so to say, 
virginal. To be sure, we heap abuse on one another in every possible 
fashion in our literature, for instance, because we lack ideas: this 
is a ridiculous, naive practice one finds only among primitive peo­
ples; but yet, in truth, there is something almost touching here: 
precisely our lack of experience, our childish inability even to hand 
out abuse in proper fashion. I'm certainly not making a joke or 
being sarcastic: there exists everywhere among us an honest and 
radiant expectation of good (think what you like, but such is the 
case), a longing for the common cause and the common good, and 
this takes precedence over any egoism. It is a most naive longing, 
full of faith and not narrowly exclusive or based on feelings of 
caste; and if we do find some minor and infrequent examples of 
such exclusivity, then they are barely perceptible and universally 
scorned. This is very important, and do you know why? Because 
not only is it not something trivial, it in fact is a great deal. Well, 
that ought to be enough: why do we still need some sort of "un­
faltering hatred"? No one can doubt the honesty and sincerity of 
our society; these things are visible at the first glance. Look well 
and you will see that, first of all, we place our faith in an idea, in 
an ideal, while personal, earthly benefits come only later. Oh, nasty 
people manage even among us to get their business done, in quite 
the opposite sense, and these days more than ever before, it seems. 
Yet these useless people never shape our public opinion and are 
not our leaders; on the contrary, even when enjoying honors, they 
were more than once compelled to conform totally to the image of 
idealistic, young, impractical, and poor people whom they thought 
to be ridiculous. In that respect our society resembles the People, 

A Writer's Diary 
who also value their faith and their ideals above al that is worldly 
and transient; and that, in fact, is our society's main point of contact 
with the People. This idealism does credit both to society and the 
People; lose it and we will not buy it back at any price. Even 
though our People are weighed down by vice-now more than 
ever-they have never been without ideals, and even the greatest 
scoundrel among the People would never say, "One must do as I 
do." On the contrary, he always believed and regretted that he was 
doing something wrong and knew there was something far better 
than he and his deeds. The People do have ideals-firmly held 
ones; and that is the most imponant thing: circumstances will 
change, things wil improve, and the People, perhaps, wil simply 
shed their vices, while their radiant principles wil remain, even 
stronger and more sacred than ever before. Our young people want 
to do heroic deeds and make sacrifices. The young lad of today, 
about whom so many different things are said, often worships the 
naivest kind of paradox and is willing to sacrifice everything on 
earth for it-his fate and his very life; but that is solely because 
he considers his paradox to be the truth. It is only because he is 
not enlightened: when the light comes, other points of view wil 
appear of their own accord and the paradoxes wil disappear; yet 
his purity of heart will not vanish; the desire for sacrifices and 
heroic deeds that now burns so radiantly in him will not die out. 
And this is our strong point. But of course there is another matter 
and another question: what precisely do al of us who sek the 
common good and who join together in the longing for the success 
of the common cause-what do we se as the means to accomplish 
our aim? We must admit that here we have not managed to bring 
our voices into harmony, and so in that respect our society today 
is very much like Marshal MacMahon. On one of his journeys 
through France not long ago, the worthy marshal, in one of his 
speeches of response to some mayor or other (the French are terribly 
fond of al these speeches of welcome and speeches of response), 
expressed the view that his entire policy could be sumed up in 
the words "love of country." This view was voiced at a time when 
al France, so to say, was straining in expectation of what he would 
say. It was a strange view; a laudable one, to be sure, but sur­
prisingly vague, because that same mayor might reply to the mar­
shal that there are some kinds of love which can drown one's 
country. But the mayor made no objection, of course, because he 
feared the reply would be:-"J'y suis et j'y reste!" a phrase beyond 

February 
347 
which, it seems, the worthy marshal will not go. But even so, this 
is stil just like our society: we al join in love, if not of our country 
then of the common cause (the words themselves are unimportant). 
But in what we se as the means to this end, and not only means 
but the common cause itself-in that we are as vague as Marshal 
MacMahon. And so, even though I pleased some readers and much 
appreciate the fact that hands have been extended to me, so to say, 
I can still see that there will be strong disagreements over details 
later, for I canot agree with everyone and everything, no matter 
how obliging I might be. 
2. On Love of the People. An Essential Contract with the 
People 
I wrote, for instance, in the January issue of the Diary that our 
People are coarse and ignorant, devoted to darkness and depravity, 
"barbarians, awaiting the light." Meanwhile, I've only just read 
in Fraternal Aid (an anthology published by the Slavic Committee 
in aid of the Slavs fighting for their freedom)-in an article by the 
late and unforgettable Konstantin Aksakov, a man dear to every 
Russian-that the Russian people have long been enlightened and 
"educated." What can I say? Was I troubled by my apparent 
disagreement with the opinion of Konstantin Aksakov? Not in the 
least; I completely share that view, and have had warm sympathy 
for it for a long time. So how can I reconcile such a contradiction? 
But the point is just that it can be very easily reconciled, I think; 
but to my astonishment others think that these two notions are 
ireconcilable. One must know how to segregate the beauty in the 
Russian peasant from the layers of barbarity that have accumulated 
over it. Through the circumstances of nearly the whole of Russian 
history, our People have been so dedicated to depravity, and so 
corrupt, led astray, and continually tormented, that it is a wonder 
they have survived preserving their human image at all, never mind 
preserving its beauty. But, indeed, they have also preserved the 
beauty of their image. He who is a true friend of humanity, whose 
heart has even once throbbed for the suferings of the People-he 
will understand and overlook all the impenetrable deposits of filth 
that weigh down our People and will be able to find diamonds in 
this filth. I repeat: judge the Russian People not by the abomi­
nations they so frequently commit, but by those great and sacred 
things for which, even in their abominations, they constantly yearn. 

A Writer's Diary 
Yet not al of the People are villains; there are true saints, and 
what saints they are: they are radiant and illuminate the way for 
us al! I have a kind of blind conviction that there is no such 
scoundrel and villain among the Russian People who would not 
recognize that he is low and vile; but there are others who can 
commit some vile act and even exalt themselves for it, raising their 
villainy into a principle and maintaining that in it lies l'Ordre and 
the light of civilization; such unhappy people end by believing that 
sincerely, blindly, even honestly.) No, do not judge our People '6:Y 
what they are, but by what they .. would like to become.'Their ideals 
are powerful and sacred; it is these ideals that have preserved our 
People through centuries of torment; these ideals have fused with 
the People's soul since time immemorial and have conferred upon 
it the blessings of frankness, honor, sincerity, and a broad mind, 
receptive to everything; and al this is combined in a most attractive, 
harmonious fashion. And if, along with this, there is so much filth, 
then the Russian himself grieves over it al the more and believes 
that it is al only extrinsic and temporary, a delusion of the Devil, 
and that the darkness will end and one day the eternal light will 
shine forth. I will not remind you of the People's historical ideals, 
of their saints-Sergei, Theodosius of Pechersk, even Tikhon of 
Zadonsk. Incidentally, are there many of us who know about Ti.k­
hon of Zadonsk? Why is it that we know absolutely nothing of 
this and take an oath never to read anything? Are we short of time? 
Believe me, gentlemen, you would be astonished at the beautiful 
things you would learn. But I'll tum, rather, to our literature: 
everything in it of true beauty has been taken from the People, 
begining with the meek and simple type, Belkin, created by 
Pushkin. Why, everything we have comes from Pushkin. His turn­
ing to the People at such an early stage of his career was so 
unprecedented and astonishing; it provided a point of view which, 
in those days, was so astonishingly novel that it can only be ex­
plained, if not by a miracle, then by the remarkable magnitude of 
his genius, which, I might add, even now we are incapable of 
appreciating. I will not mention the purely national types that have 
appeared in our time, but think of Oblomuv, think of Turgenev's 
Nest of Gentlefolk. In the latter, of course, it's not the People, yet 
everything that is lasting and beautiful in Turgenev's and Gon­
charov 's characters comes from the fact that through them the 
writers came into contact with the People; this contact with the 
People gave them exceptional powers. They borrowed the People's 

February 
349 
simplicity, purity, meekness, breadth of outlook, and lack of malice, 
as opposed to al that was twisted, false, extrinsic, and slavishly 
borrowed. Don't be astonished that I have suddenly begun to speak 
about Russian literature. The service our literature has performed 
is that almost all of its best representatives paid homage to the 
People's truth and acknowledged the People's ideals as truly beau­
tiful even before our intelligentsia did (note that). However, liter­
ature often had little choice but to accept these ideas as exemplary. 
It is true, I think, that artistic feeling rather than goodwill was at 
work here. But enough of literature for the moment; I took up the 
topic only apropos of the People in any case. 
The question of the People and our view of them, our present 
understanding of them, is our most important question, a question 
on which our whole future rests; one might even say it is the most 
practical question at the moment. However, the People are still a 
theory for all of us and still stand before us as a riddle. All of us 
who love the People look at them as if at a theory and, it seems, 
not one of us loves them as they really are but only as each of us 
imagines them to be. And even if the Russian people eventually 
were to turn out to be not as we imagined them, then we all, despite 
our love for them, would likely renounce them at once with no 
regrets. I am speaking about al of us, including even the Slavo­
philes, who, perhaps, would be the first to renounce them. As for 
me, I won't hide my convictions because I specifically want to 
define more clearly the further tendency my Diary will take and 
so avoid misunderstandings, so that each one of you might know 
beforehand whether it is worth extending a literary hand to me or 
not. This is what I think: we are hardly so good and so beautiful 
that we could set ourselves up as an ideal for the People and demand 
that they become absolutely like us. Don't be surprised at hearing 
the question posed from such an absurd angle. In fact, we have 
never posed the question any other way: "Who is better, we or 
the People? Are the People to follow us, or are we to follow them?" 
This is what everyone is saying now, everyone who has even the 
tiniest thought in his head and some concern in his heart for the 
common cause. And so I reply frankly: it is we who ought to bow 
down before the People and wait for everything from them, both 
ideas and the form of those ideas; we must bow down before the 
People's truth and acknowledge it as the truth, even in the terrible 
event that some of it comes from the Lives of the Saints. To put it 
briefly: we must bow down like prodigal children who have been 

350 
A Writer's Diary 
away from home for two hundred years but who, however, have 
returned still Russians (and in that, incident:ally, is our great merit). 
But, on the other hand, we should bow down on only one condition, 
and that is a sine qua non: the People must accept much of what 
we bring with us. We canot utterly anihilate ourselves before 
them and their truth, whatever that truth might be. Let that which 
is ours remain with us; we will not give it up for anything on earth, 
even, at the very worst, for the joy of unity with the People. If 
such does not happen, then let us both perish on our separate 
ways. Yet certainly it will happen; I am completely convinced that 
this sami!thing which we brought with us truly exists-it is not a 
mirage but has an image and a form and a weight. Nonetheles, 
I repeat once more: there is much ahead of us that is an enigma, 
so much that even the expectation is frightening. People predict, 
for example, that civilization will ruin the People: events supposedly 
will take such a course that, along with salvation and light, so 
much untruth and deceit will enter in; there will be so much tumult 
and such filthy habits will develop that only in generations to 
come-in two hundred years, if you like-will the good seds 
sprout, while something dreadful awaits our children and us, per­
haps. Is that how you se it, gentlemen? Are the People consigned 
to pass through yet a new phase of depravity and falsehood such 
as we passed through when inoculated with civilization? (I think 
no one will disagre that we began our civilization directly with 
depravity.) I would like to hear something more reassuring on this 
account. I am very much inclined to believe that our People are 
such an enormity that al such new, muddy torrents, should they 
burst forth from somewhere and overflow, wil simply dissipate by 
themselves. And on this, give me your hand; let's work together, 
each through his own "microscopic" actions, so that the cause may 
advance more directly and with fewer mistakes. It is true that we 
ourselves have no ideas how to do anything in this area; we only 
"love our country," will not agre on the means, and will quarel 
many times yet; still, if we've already agred that we are good 
people, then, whatever may happen, things will finaly work them­
selves out in the end. That's my credo. I repeat: we have here a 
two-hundred-year period of being unaccustomed to any work and 
nothing more than that. And through being unused to work we 
have ended our "period of culture" by everywhere ceasing to un­
derstand one another. Of course, I am speaking only of serious 

February 
3 5 1 
and sincere people-it's only they who fail to understand one an­
other; opportunists are a different matter: they have always un­
derstood one another . . . .  
3· The Peasant Marey 
But reading all these professions de foi is a bore, I think, and so 
I'll tell you a story; actually, it's not even a story, but only a 
reminiscence of something that happened long ago and that, for 
some reason, I would very much like to recount here and now, as 
a conclusion to our treatise on the People. At the time I was only 
nine years old . . . .  But no, I'd best begin with the time I was 
twenty-nine. 
It was the second day of Easter Week. The air was warm, the 
sky was blue, the sun was high, warm, and bright, but there was 
only gloom in my heart. I was wandering behind the prison bar­
racks, examining and counting off the pales in the sturdy prison 
stockade, but I had lost even the desire to count, although such 
was my habit. It was the second day of "marking the holiday" 
within the prison compound; the prisoners were not taken out to 
work; many were drunk; there were shouts of abuse, and quarrels 
were constantly breaking out in all corners. Disgraceful, hideous 
songs; card games in little nooks under the bunks; a few convicts, 
already beaten half to death by sentence of their comrades for their 
particular rowdiness, lay on bunks covered with sheepskin coats 
until such time as they might come to their senses; knives had 
already been drawn a few times-all this, in two days of holiday, 
had worn me out to the point of illness. Indeed, I never could 
endure the drunken carousals of peasants without being disgusted, 
and here, in this place, particularly. During these days even the 
prison staff did not look in; they made no searches, nor did they 
check for alcohol, for they realized that once a year they had to 
allow even these outcasts to have a spree; otherwise it might be 
even worse. At last, anger welled up in my heart. I ran across the 
Pole M-cki, a political prisoner; he gave me a gloomy look, his 
eyes glittering and his lips trembling: "Je hais ces brigands!" he 
muttered, gritting his teeth, and passed me by. I returned to the 
barrack despite the fact that a quarter-hour before I had fled it 
half-demented when six healthy peasants had thrown themselves, 
as one man, on the drunken Tatar Gazin and had begun beating 

3 52 
A Writer's Diary 
him to make him settle down; they beat him senselessly with such 
blows as might have killed a camel; but they knew that it was not 
easy to kill this Hercules and so they didn't hold back. And now 
when I returned to the baracks I noticed Gazin lying senseless on 
a bunk in the comer showing scarcely any signs of life; he was 
lying under a sheepskin coat, and everyone passed him by in 
silence: although they firmly hoped he would revive the next morn­
ing, still, "with a beating like that, God forbid, you could finish 
a man off." I made my way to my bunk opposite a window with 
an iron grating and lay down on my back, my hands behind my 
head, and closed my eyes. I liked to lie like that: a sleeping man 
was left alone, while at the same time one could daydream and 
think. But dreams did not come to me; my heart beat restlessly, 
and M-cki's words kept echoing in my ears: "Je hais ces brigands! "  
However, why describe my feelings? Even now at night I sometimes 
dream of that time, and none of my dreams are more agonizing. 
Perhaps you will also notice that until today I have scarcely ever 
spoken in print of my prison life; I wrote Notes from the House of 
the Dead fifteen years ago using an invented narrator, a criminal 
who supposedly had murdered his wife. (I might add, by the way, 
that many people supposed and are even now quite firmly convinced 
that I was sent to hard labor for the murder of my wife.) 
Little by little I lost myself in reverie and imperceptibly sank 
into memories of the past. Al through my four years in prison I 
continually thought of all my past days, and I think I relived the 
whole of my former life in my memories. These memories arose 
in my mind of themselves; rarely did I sumon them up con­
sciously. They would begin from a certain point, some little thing 
that was often barely perceptible, and then bit by bit they would 
grow into a finished picture, some strong and complete impression. 
I would analyze these impressions, adding new touches to things 
experienced long ago; and the main thing was that I would refine 
them, continually refine them, and in this consisted my entire 
entertainment. This time, for some reason, I suddenly recalled a 
moment of no apparent significance from my early childhood when 
I was only nine years old, a moment that I thought I had completely 
forgotten; but at that time I was particularly fond of memories of 
my very early childhood. I recalled one August at our home in the 
country: the day was clear and dry, but a bit chilly and windy; 
sumer was on the wane, and soon I would have to go back to 
Moscow to spend the whole winter in boredom over my French 

February 
353 
lessons; and I was so sorry to have to leave the country. I passed 
by the granaries, made my way down into the gully, and climbed 
up into the Dell-that was what we called a thick patch of bushes 
that stretched from the far side of the gully to a grove of trees. 
And so I make my way deeper into the bushes and can hear that 
some thirty paces away a solitary peasant is plowing in the clearing. 
I know he's plowing up the steep side of a hill and his horse finds 
it heavy going; from time to time I hear his shout, "Gee-up!" I 
know almost all our peasants, but don't recognize the one who's 
plowing; and what difference does it make, anyway, since I'm quite 
absorbed in my own business. I also have an occupation: I'm 
breaking off a switch of walnut to lash frogs; walnut switches are 
so lovely and quite without flaws, so much better than birch ones. 
I'm also busy with bugs and beetles, collecting them; some are 
very pretty; I love the small, nimble, red-and-yellow lizards with 
the little black spots as well, but I'm afraid of snakes. I come 
across snakes far less often than lizards, however. There aren't many 
mushrooms here; you have to go into the birch wood for mush­
roms, and that's what I have in mind. I liked nothing better than 
the forest with its mushrooms and wild berries, its insects, and its 
birds, hedgehogs, and squirrels, and with its damp aroma of rotting 
leaves that I loved so. And even now, as I write this, I can catch 
the fragrance from our stand of birches in the country: these im­
pressions stay with you all your life. Suddenly, amid the deep 
silence, I clearly and distinctly heard a shout: "There's a wolf!" 
I screamed, and, beside myself with terror, crying at the top of 
my voice, I ran out into the field, straight at the plowing peasant. 
It was our peasant Marey. I don't know if there is such a name, 
but everyone called him Marey. He was a man of about fifty, heavy­
set, rather tall, with heavy streaks of gray in his bushy, dark-brown 
beard. I knew him but had scarcely ever had occasion to speak to 
him before. He even stopped his little- filly when he heard my cry, 
and when I rushed up to him and seized his plow with one hand 
and his sleeve with the other, he saw how terrified I was. 
"It's a wolf!" I cried, completely out of breath. 
Instinctively he jerked his head to look around, for an instant 
almost believing me. 
"Where's the wolf?" 
"I heard a shout . . . .  Someone just shouted, 'Wolf" . . .  I 
babbled. 
"What do you mean, lad? There's no wolf; you're just hearing 

3 54 
A Writer's Diary 
reassuring me. But I was al a-tremble and clung to his coat even 
more tightly; I suppose I was very pale as well. He looked at me 
with an uneasy smile, evidently concerned and alarmed for me. 
"Why you took a real fright, you did!" he said, wagging his 
head. "Never mind, now, my dear. What a fine lad you are!" 
He stretched out his hand and suddenly stroked my cheek. 
"Never mind, now, there's nothing to be afraid of. Christ be 
with you. Cross yourself, lad." But I couldn't cross myself; the 
corners of my mouth were trembling, and I think this particularly 
struck him. He quietly stretched out a thick, earth-soiled finger 
with a black nail and gently touched it to my trembling lips. 
"Now, now," he smiled at me with a broad, almost maternal 
smile. "Lord, what a dreadful fuss. Dear, dear, dear!" 
At last I realized that there was no wolf and that I must have 
imagined hearing the cry of "Wolf." Still, it had been such a clear 
and distinct shout; two or three times before, however, I had imag­
ined such cries (not only about wolves), and I was aware of that. 
(Later, when childhood passed, these hallucinations did as well.) 
"Well, I'll be off now," I said, making it seem like a question 
and looking at him shyly. 
"Off with you, then, and I'll keep an eye on you as you go. 
Can't let the wolf get you!" he added, still giving me a maternal 
smile. "Well, Christ be with you, off you go." He made the sign 
of the cross over me, and crossed himself. I set off, looking over 
my shoulder almost every ten steps. Marey continued to stand with 
his little filly, looking after me and nodding every time I looked 
around. I confess I felt a little ashamed at taking such a fright. 
But I went on, still with a good deal of fear of the wolf, until I 
had gone up the slope of the gully to the first threshing barn; and 
here the fear vanished entirely, and suddenly our dog Volchok came 
dashing out to meet me. With Volchok I felt totally reassured, and 
I turned toward Marey for the last time; I could no longer make 
out his face clearly, but I felt that he was still smiling kindly at 
me and nodding. I waved to him, and he returned my wave and 
urged on his little filly. 
"Gee-up," came his distant shout once more, and his little filly 
once more started drawing the wooden plow. 
This memory came to me all at once-I don't know why-but 
with amazing clarity of detail. Suddenly I roused myself and sat 

February 
3 5 5  
on the bunk; I recall that a quiet smile of reminiscence still played 
on my face. I kept on recollecting for yet another minute. 
I remembered that when I had come home from Marey I told 
no one about my "adventure." And what kind of adventure was 
it anyway? I forgot about Marey very quickly as well. On the rare 
occasions when I met him later, I never struck up a conversation 
with him, either about the wolf or anything else, and now, suddenly, 
twenty years later, in Siberia, I remembered that encounter so 
vividly, right down to the last detail. That means it had settled 
unnoticed in my heart, all by itself with no will of mine, and had 
suddenly come back to me at a time when it was needed; I recalled 
the tender, maternal smile of a poor serf, the way he crossed me 
and shook his head: "Well you did take a fright now, didn't you, 
lad!" And I especially remember his thick finger, soiled with dirt, 
that he touched quietly and with shy tenderness to my trembling 
lips. Of course, anyone would try to reassure a child, but here in 
this solitary encounter something quite different had happened, 
and had I been his very own son he could not have looked at me 
with a glance that radiated more pure love, and who had prompted 
him to do that? He was our own serf, and I was his master's little 
boy; no one would learn of his kindness to me and reward him 
for it. Was he, maybe, especially fond of small children? There 
are such people. Our encounter was solitary, in an open field, and 
only God, perhaps, looking down saw what deep and enlightened 
human feeling and what delicate, almost feminine tenderness could 
fill the heart of a coarse, bestially ignorant Russian serf who at 
the time did not expect or even dream of his freedom. Now tell 
me, is this not what Konstantin Aksakov had in mind when he 
spoke of the advanced level of development of our Russian People? 
And so when I climbed down from my bunk and looked around, 
I remember I suddenly felt I could regard these unfortunates in 
an entirely different way and that suddenly, through some sort of 
miracle, the former hatred and anger in my heart had vanished. I 
went off, peering intently into the faces of those I met. This dis­
graced peasant, with shaven head and brands on his cheek, drunk 
and roaring out his hoarse, drunken song-why he might also be 
that very same Marey; I cannot peer into his heart, after all. That 
same evening I met M-cki once again. The unfortunate man! He 
had no recollections of any Mareys and no other view of these 
people but "Je hais ces brigands! "  No, the Poles had to bear more 
than we did in those days! 

2 
1 .  Apropos of the Kroneberg Case 
I think that everyone knows about the Kroneberg case, which was 
heard about a month ago in the St. Petersburg District Court, and 
that everyone has read the accounts and the comments about it in 
the newspapers. It is a most interesting case, and the accounts of 
it were remarkably passionate. Since I am writing a month after 
the fact, I do not intend to take up all the details of it, but I feel 
a need to say my word apropos as well. I am certainly not a lawyer, 
but there was so much falsehood here on all sides that even a non­
lawyer can see it. Cases such as this spring up unexpectedly some­
how and only confuse society and, it seems, even the judges. But 
since such cases also involve our common and most precious in­
terest, one can see why they touch a nerve, and sometimes one 
cannot help but discuss them even though a month (i.e. , a whole 
eternity) may have passed. 
Let me refresh your memory about the case: a father had whipped 
his child, a girl of seven, with excessive cruelty; according to the 
charge, he had treated her cruelly before this as well. A stranger­
a lower-class woman-could not stand the screams of the tortured 
girl who, for a quarter of an hour (according to the charge), had 
cried out, "Papa! Papa! "  while being beaten with a switches. The 
switches, according to the testimony of an expert, turned out not 
to be switches but Spirzruren-that is, proper sticks-absolutely 
unthinkable to be applied to someone of seven. They were displayed 
in court, by the way, as material evidence, and everyone could see 
them, even Mr. Spasovich himself. Among other things, the charge 
noted that when someone told the father before he began beating 
his child that he ought at least to break off a branch from the stick, 

February 
3 5 7  
the father replied, "No, it's more effective this way." I t  was also 
disclosed that the father himself almost fell into a faint after beating 
her. 
I recall the first impression produced on me by the issue of The 
Voice in which I read the beginning of the case, the first account 
of it. It happened sometime after nine in the evening, quite by 
chance. I had spent the whole day at the printer's and had had no 
chance to look through The Voice earlier, and knew nothing about 
this new case. When I had read the article I decided that in spite 
of the late hour I simply had to find out that same evening about 
the further course of the trial, supposing that it might have already 
ended that same day, a Saturday, and knowing that newspaper 
accounts are always delayed. I decided that I would at once go to 
see a certain man whom I knew very well by reputation but scarcely 
at all personally, counting on the fact that, for certain reasons, he 
would be more likely to know the outcome of the trial than any 
of my other acquaintances, and that he himself might well have 
been in the courtroom. I was not mistaken: he had been in court 
and had only just returned. I found him at home sometime after 
ten o'clock, and he told me of the acquittal of the defendant. I 
was angry at the court, at the jurors, and at the defense lawyer. 
This was three weeks ago now, and I have changed my opinion in 
many respects after reading the reports in the newspapers and 
hearing several reliable outside opinions. I am very pleased that I 
need no longer regard the defendant-father as a villain who enjoys 
torturing children (such types do exist), and that it was really only 
a matter of "nerves," and that he was only "unskilled at raising 
children," as his lawyer put it. The main thing I wish to do now 
is only to draw attention in some detail to the speech the defense 
lawyer made in court so as to show more clearly the kind of false 
and absurd position in which a prominent, talented, private in­
dividual may be put solely because of the false manner in which 
the case itself was originally built. 
What is false here? First, take the girl, a child: he "tormented, 
tortured" her, and the judges want to protect her-now that seems 
to be something truly noble, but what happens? Why, they almost 
destroyed al her future happiness, and perhaps they have destroyed 
it! In fact, what if the father had been convicted? The prosecution 
put the case in such a way that in the event of a guilty verdict the 
father could have been sent to Siberia. What, we might well ask, 

3 5 8 
A Writer's Diary 
would remain in the heart of that daughter, now a child who 
understands nothing, for the rest of her life; even in the event that 
for the rest of her life she were wealthy and "happy"? Would not 
the family have been destroyed by the court itself, an institution 
which, as we all know, is intended to preserve the sanctity of the 
family? Now consider yet another feature of the case: the girl is 
seven years old-what impression might she have at such an age? 
The father was acquitted and not exiled, and that is a good thing 
(although I think it was inappropriate for the spectators to applaud 
the jurors, and apparently there was loud applause); still, the girl 
was dragged into court; she made an appearance; she saw it all, 
heard it all, and herself admitted: "Je suis voleuse, menteuse." 
The secret vices of this little child (only seven years old!) were 
revealed by adult, serious, even humane people before al the spec­
tators-how monstrous! Mais il en reste tuujuurs quelque chose, for 
the rest of her life, don't you see that? And it will remain not only 
in her heart but, perhaps, be reflected in her fate as well. She has 
been touched by something in that courtroom, by something vile 
and pernicious, and it has left its mark on her forever. And, who 
knows, perhaps in twenty years someone will say to her, "You 
appeared in criminal court when you were only a child." However, 
once more I realize that I am not a lawyer and will not be able to 
express al this, so I'd better turn directly to the speech of the 
defense lawyer: al these erroneous premises reveal themselves there 
with striking clarity. Mr. Spasovich defended the accused; he is a 
man of talent. Wherever his name is mentioned, people always say, 
"He is a man of talent." I'm very pleased at that. I note that Mr. 
Spasovich was assigned to the defense by the court, and so one 
might say that he conducted his defense under a certain compul­
sion . . . .  However, once again I find myself beyond my competence 
and I say no more. But before I turn to the aforementioned and 
remarkable speech, I would like to insert a few remarks about 
lawyers in general and about talented ones in particular; I want to 
convey to the reader some of my own impressions and my own 
perplexity, so to say, which of course may not be at all serious in 
the eyes of competent people; but then I am writing my Diary for 
myself, and these thoughts have settled solidly in my head. I admit, 
however, that they may not even be thoughts; yet they are feelings 
at any rate . . . .  

February 
359 
2. Something on Lawyers in General. My Naive and 
Hasty Assumptions. Something on Talented People in 
General and in Particular 
However, two points specifically about lawyers. I've only just picked 
up the pen and already I feel afraid. I blush in advance for the 
naivete of my questions and assumptions. It would be far too naive 
and innocent on my part to expound, for instance, on what a useful 
and pleasant institution the bar is. Take a man who has committed 
a crime but who knows nothing of the law; he's ready to confess, 
but a lawyer comes along and proves to him not only that he has 
done nothing wrong, but that he's a regular saint. He cites the 
laws that apply to his case and digs out precedents of the Senate's 
Court of Appeal that suddenly put the case in a whole new light, 
and he ends by pulling the wretched fellow out of the hole. Now 
that's a most pleasant thing! Granted, some might disagree and 
object that this is just a bit immoral. But now take an innocent 
man, completely innocent, a simple fellow, yet there is a good deal 
of evidence that the prosecutor has assembled in such a way that 
it would seem the man will be condemned for someone else's crime. 
Besides, the man is ignorant; he hasn't a clue about the law and 
can only stand there mumbling, "I didn't know anything; I didn't 
do anything," and this finally gets on the nerves of both the jury 
and the judges. But a lawyer comes along who has cut his teeth 
on the law, he cites the applicable section and a precedent of the 
Senate's Court of Appeal, confuses the prosecutor, and, sure 
enough, the innocent man is acquitted. Say what you will, but this 
is useful. What could an innocent man in Russia do without a 
lawyer? 
All these, I repeat, are naive remarks, and everyone has heard 
them before. But it's still an extraordinarily pleasant thing to have 
a lawyer. I myself experienced this once when I was editing a 
newspaper and, unintentionally, through an oversight (which could 
happen to anyone), passed for publication a news item that should 
have appeared only with the permission of the Minister of the 
Imperial Court. And all of a sudden I learned that I was to be 
brought to trial. I had no intention of conducting any defense; my 
"guilt" was obvious even to me. I had transgressed a clearly stated 
law, and there could be no legal dispute about it. But the court 
appointed a lawyer for me (a man I knl'w slightly and who had 
been a member of a certain society to which I once belonged). He 

A Writer's Diary 
suddenly anounced to me that not only was I not guilty but that 
what I had done was absolutely right, and that he was fuly de­
termined to defend me with every means at his disposal. Of course, 
I was pleased to hear that; but when it came to the trial, I confess 
that the impression I got was not at all what I expected: I watched 
and listened to my lawyer speak, and the thought that I, completely 
guilty, might suddenly walk out as totally innocent was so amusing, 
and also so appealing, that I must say this half-hour in court was 
among the most entertaining I have ever spent; but then I wasn't 
a man of the law and so I didn't realize that I was completely 
innocent. I was convicted, of course: literary men are judged harsh­
ly; I paid a twenty-five-ruble fine and, in addition, spent two days 
in the jail on Haymarket Square, where I passed the time most 
pleasantly and, to some extent, even usefully, becoming acquainted 
with certain people and certain things. However, I see that I have 
gonen far off the topic; let me return to serious matters once more. 
It is a highly moral and touching thing when a lawyer applies 
his effort and talent in defense of the unfortunate; he is a friend 
to humanity. But then the thought occurs to you that he is know­
ingly defending and justifying a guilty person and, besides that, 
he can do nothing else, even if he wanted to. People will reply 
that the court canot deprive any criminal of legal assistance and 
that an honest lawyer in such an event will always remain honest, 
for he will always find and determine the true degree of his client's 
guilt and will only prevent his client from being punished more 
harshly than his crime warants, etc., etc. Al that is true, even 
though the proposition also smacks of the most boundless idealism. 
It seems to me that avoiding falsehood and preserving his integrity 
and conscience is just as difficult for a lawyer, generally speaking, 
as it is for any person to anain a state of bliss. We have already 
heard, have we not, how lawyers addressing a jury in court do 
everything but swear an oath that they undertook to defend a client 
solely because they were totally convinced of his innocence. When 
you hear an oath such as this, the meanest sort of suspicion in­
evitably creeps into your mind: "Suppe he's lying and is just 
doing it for the money?" And in fact the result often has been that 
a client defended with such ardor turned out to be completely, 
undeniably guilty. I don't know-have we had cases where lawyers, 
wishing to play to the end their role as people unerly convinced 
of the innocence of their client, have fainted when the jurors 
brought in a "guilty" verdict? But that they have shed tears, it 

February 
seems, is something that has already happened in our still-so-new 
courts. Say what you will, but here in this whole institution, beyond 
all those wtdeniably beautiful things, lies something rather sad. In 
truth, one can imagine the shouts of "Shyster! " and "Blood­
sucker! "; one recalls the popular saying "A lawyer is a hired 
conscience"; but the main thing, aside from all this, is that one 
calls to mind a most absurd paradox: that a lawyer can never act 
according to his conscience, that he cannot help but toy with his 
conscience, even if he does not want to do so, that he is a man 
doomed to be dishonest, and that, finally, the most important and 
most serious thing in al this is that such a sad state of affairs has 
been, as it were, written into law by someone and something so 
that it is considered not an aberration but, on the contrary, even 
a most normal order of things. 
Let's leave this topic, however; everything tells me that I have 
taken up a topic that is wrong for me. And I'm sure that juris­
prudence has long ago resolved al these puzzling issues to every­
one's complete satisfaction, and that I am the only one who is 
wtaware of it. I will speak, rather, about talent; at least I am a 
linle bit more competent here. 
What is talent? Talent, first of all, is a most useful thing. Literary 
talent, for example, is the ability to say or express well what a 
mediocrity would say and express poorly. You will say that first of 
all one needs a set of views and only then the talent. All right, I 
agree: I didn't intend to speak about artistic value, but only about 
certain qualities of talent in general. The qualities of talent, in 
general, are remarkably varied and sometimes simply impossible 
to handle. In the first place, talent oblige, "talent has an obligation," 
but to do what? Sometimes to do the worst things. An insoluble 
question arises: does the talent possess the person or the person 
his talent? It seems to me, as far as I have followed and observed 
people of talent both alive and dead, that it is very rare to find a 
person capable of handling his gift and that, on the contrary, the 
talent almost always enslaves its possessor, taking him, as it were, 
by the scruff of the neck (indeed, it often happens in just such a 
degrading fashion) and carrying him off far, far away from his 
proper path. Somewhere in Gogo! (I've forgotten where) a certain 
liar began to tell a story and might, perhaps, have told the truth, 
"but certain details popped up, all by themselves" in the story so 
that there was just no way he could tell the truth. I mention that, 
of course, only by way of comparison, although there really are 

A Writer's Diary 
those who have a specific talent for lying. The novelist Thackeray 
depicts one such socialite liar and wag who, however, moved in 
polite society and idled away his time in the company of one lord 
or another; Thackeray says that this man liked to leave a burst of 
laughter behind him whenever he went out the door of someone's 
house, and so he saved his best sally or witticism til the end. Do 
you know, I think it is very dificult to remain and to preserve 
yourself as an honest person when you have to be so concerned 
about saving your sharpest witticism til the end so as to leave a 
burst of laughter behind you. Such concern itself is so trivial that 
it must finally drive out everything serious from a person. And 
besides, if one has not saved a witticism for one's exit, then it has 
to be invented, and for the sake of a winy word, "one spares 
neither mother nor father." 
People will say that if this is what has to be done then it's scarcely 
possible to go on living. That's true. Yet you must agree that every 
talent always has this almost ignoble, excessive sensitivity of re­
sponse to one's audience which is always ready to lead even the 
soberest of persons astray; "Whether 'tis the beast that roars in 
the thick forest" or whatever else might happen, the fellow is at 
once ready to take flight; he's flushed with the emotions that well 
up within him and is utterly carried away. When I was speaking 
to Belinsky on one occasion, he compared this "responsiveness" 
with "depravity of talent" and had nothing but scorn for it, per­
ceiving, of course, in its antithesis suficient spiritual fortitude to 
keep the responsiveness under control, even in the most ardent 
poetic frame of mind. Belinsky was referring to poets, but almost 
all talented people have a bit of the poet in them, after all-even 
carpenters, if they are talented. Poetry is, so to say, the inner fire 
of every talent. And if even a carpenter can be a poet, then surely 
a lawyer can as well, in the event that he also has talent. I don't 
at all dispute the fact that, given rigidly honest principles and 
spiritual fortitude, even a lawyer can keep his "responsiveness" 
under control; but there are cases and circumstances when a person 
just cannot resist: "certain details will just pop up, all by them­
selves," and the person will get carried away. Gentlemen, all the 
things I am saying here about this sensitivity of response are not 
really trivialities; however simple they might seem, they are a maner 
of extraordinary importance in everyone's life, even in yours and 
mine: look into it more carefully and consider, and you will see 
that it extremely difficult to remain an honest person precisely 

February 
because of this excessive and pampered "responsiveness" that com­
pels us to lie without ceasing. However, the words "honest person" 
I understand here only in the "higher sense," so that you may 
remain quite calm and not get upset. Anyway, I am sure no one 
will get upset at what I am saying. Let me go on. Does any one 
of you, gentlemen, recall Alphonse Lamartine, the former head of 
the Provisional Government during the February Revolution of 
1848? People say that he found nothing more pleasant and delightful 
than to deliver endless speeches to the people and to the various 
deputations that were then coming from towns and villages all over 
France to introduce themselves to the Provisional Government in 
the two months following the proclamation of the Republic. He 
delivered, perhaps, several thousand such speeches at that time. 
He was a poet and a man of talent. His whole life was full of 
innocence, and that innocence was combined with a handsome and 
most imposing appearance created, so to say, to provide keepsakes. 
I am certainly not equating this historic figure with those types of 
poetically inclined responsive people who are born dewy-eyed, al­
though he did write Hamwni£s poetiques et religi£uses, an unusual 
volume of endlessly protracted verses in which three generations 
of young misses graduating from institutes became bogged down. 
On the other hand, he later wrote an extraordinarily talented book, 
A History of the Girondists, which won him popularity and ultimately 
the post, if one can call it that, of head of the Provisional Gov­
ernment-and that was when he delivered such a number of endless 
speeches, reveling in them and floating about in some sort of never­
ending rapture. One talented wit pointed at him at the time and 
cried: "Ce n'est pas l'homme, c'est une lyre!" ("That's not a man, 
that's a lyre! "). 
That was a high compliment, but a very sly one, for what could 
be more ridiculous, tell me, than comparing a man with a lyre? It 
reverberates the moment you touch it! It goes without saying that 
one cannot compare Lamartine, that man endlessly speaking in 
verses, that orator-lyre, to any of our smart lawyers who are cunning 
even in their innocence, always in control of themselves, never at 
a loss, and always enriching themselves. Could they possibly not 
know how to play their lyres? Yet is this true? Is it really true, 
ladies and gentlemen? People have a weakness for praise and they 
are "responsive"; they are even cunning as well. Instead of the 
business with the sensitive lyre, some of our talented lawyers may 
be faced-in an allegorical sense-with the same sort of thing as 

A Writer's Diary 
happened to one of our Moscow merchants. His papa gave up the 
ghost, leaving him a certain capital (or, as he would say, "cap- ' i­
ta!"). But his mamma was also carrying on some business in her 
own name and she got into difficulties. He had to help out his 
mamma, which meant paying out a lot of money. Our young mer­
chant dearly loved his mamma, but he hesitated: "Still, we just 
can't get along without the money. We couldn't give up the money 
'cause there's just no way folks like us can get by without money." 
So he didn't give her anything, and mamma was dragged off to 
jail. You may take this as an allegory and replace money with 
talent-the two are even similar-and the result is as follows: "Still, 
we can't get along without creating a flash and making a big im­
pression; there's just no way we can get by unless we create a flash 
and make a big impression." And this can happen even to the 
most serious and honest lawyer of talent, even at the very moment 
he undertakes to defend a case that sickens his conscience. I read 
once that in France, many years ago now, a lawyer became con­
vinced during the course of a trial that his client was guilty, and 
when it came time for his defense speech, he simply rose, bowed 
to the court, and silently took his seat again. I think that could 
not happen here: "How can I not win, if I am a talent; can I, 
myself, really destroy my reputation?" So it follows that a lawyer 
should fear not only money as a temptation (the more so that he 
never fears money in any case); he should fear the power of his 
own talent. 
Still, I'm sorry I wrote all this: you know very well that Mr. 
Spasovich, too, is a remarkably talented lawyer. His speech in this 
case, I believe, is a masterpiece of art; but still, it left an almost 
foul taste in my mouth. You see: I begin by being completely 
sincere. But the whole fault here lies in the falsity of all the cir­
cumstances that arranged themselves around Mr. Spasovich in this 
case and from which he was prevented from extricating himself by 
the very force of things; that is my opinion, and so everything that 
was strained and forced in his position as a defense lawyer could 
not help but be reflected in his speech. The case was put so that 
in the event of a guilty verdict his client could have sufered an 
extreme and disproportionate punishment. The result would have 
been a disaster: a family destroyed, no one's interests upheld, and 
everyone unhappy. His client was accused of "torture" -that charge 
alone was dreadful. Mr. Spasovich began directly by rejecting any 
notion of torture. "There was no torture; the child was in no way 

February 
abused! "  He denied it all: the "spitzrutens," the bruises, the blows, 
the blood, the honesty of the prosecution's witnesses-absolutely 
everything-that's a remarkably bold tactic, an assault, if you will, 
on the conscience of the jury; but Mr. Spasovich is well aware of 
his own strength. He even repudiated the child and her tender 
years; he destroyed any pity for the child among his audience and 
tore it from their hearts by its very rot. The cries of "Papa! 
Papa!" "that went on for a quarter of an hour" while the child 
was being beaten (and even if they only lasted five minutes)-all 
this disappeared, while in the foreground appeared "an active little 
girl with a rosy face, laughing, sly, perverse, with secret vices." 
His audience all but forgot that she was seven years old. Mr. 
Spasovich cleverly confiscated her age as the thing most dangerous 
for him. Having destroyed all this, he naturally obtained an ac­
quittal; but what else could he have done? What if the jurors had 
found his client guilty? And so the force of things made it impossible 
for him to demur at the means and to handle the case with kid 
gloves. "Any means are good if they lead to a noble end." But let 
us take a detailed look at this remarkable speech; it's well worth 
a look, you will see. 
3· Mr. Spasovich's Speech. Clever Tactics 
From the very first words of his speech you sense that you are 
dealing with an exceptional talent, a real force. Mr. Spasovich at 
once reveals himself in full and is himself the first to point out to 
the jury the weak side of the case he has undertaken; he reveals 
its weakest point, the thing he fears most of all. (I am quoting this 
speech from The Voice, by the way. The Voice is a newspaper with 
such lavish means that it probably is able to keep a good stenog­
rapher at its disposal.) 
"Gentlemen of the jury," Mr. Spasovich says, "I am afraid not of 
the decision of the Appellate Coun nor of the charges brought by the 
Prosecutor .
. . . I am afraid of an abstract idea, a phantom; I am afraid 
that the crime-as it has been labeled-has a weak, defenseless creature 
as its object. The very words 'tonure of a child' arouse in the first 
place a feeling of great compassion for the child, and in the second 
place, a feeling of extreme indignation against the one responsible for 
its tonure." 
Very clever. Remarkable sincerity. The listener, his hackles 

A Writer's Diary 
raised, already prepared to hear something very clever, tricky, de­
ceptive, and who has only just said to himself, "Well now, mister, 
let's just see you try and put one over on me," is suddenly struck 
by the fact that this man barely has any defense. He who was 
supposed to be such a tricky fellow is looking for defense himself, 
and he's looking to find it in you, the very ones he was supposed 
to deceive! With such a tactic Mr. Spasovich at once breaks the 
ice of mistrust and already manages to insinuate himself just a tiny 
way into your heart. True enough, he talks about a phantom; he 
says that he is afraid only of this "phantom"; in other words, the 
thing he is afraid of is almost a prejudice; you haven't heard the 
rest of his speech, but you're already ashamed that you might be 
unfairly regarded as a man with prejudices, isn't that so? Very 
clever. 
"Gentlemen of the jury, I am not a proponent of the rod," continues 
Mr. Spasovich. "I am fully aware that a sysrem of education may be 
iPilrCHluced" (don't worry, these are al such new expressions and are 
borrowed wholesale from various pedagogical manuals) "in which 
corporal punishment wil be eliminated. Nonetheless, I no more ex­
pect that corporal punishment be completely and unconditionally 
eliminated than I do your ceasing to function in court because criminal 
acts and violations of that truth which must prevail in both the family 
and the state should come to an end." 
So the whole case, it seems, centers on the use of a switch, not 
a bundle of switches, and not the "spitzrutens." You look closely 
and you listen-but no, the man is speaking seriously; he isn't 
joking. Al the fuss, it seems, began over a little switch applied to 
a child and over the question of whether or not the switch should 
be applied. Hardly worth gening together in court over something 
like that. It's true enough that he's not a proponent of the rod; he 
tells you that himself, but still: 
"In the normal state of afairs, normal measures are employed. In 
the present instance a clearly abnormal measure has ben employed. 
But if you examine closely the circumstances that evoked that measure, 
if you take into consideration the nature of the child, the temperament 
of the father and the aims that led him to punish the child, then you 
will understand a great deal in this instance; and once you understand, 
you will pardon him, because with a profound understanding of the 
case much will inevitably become clear and sem natural and not in 
ned of penal retribution. Such is my task-to clarify the case." 

February 
So, you can see, it's "punishment," not "torture"-he says so 
himself, and so it's only a case of a father being tried for beating 
his child a little too hard. What sort of times are we living in 
anyway? But if you go more deeply into the case . . .  but that's just 
the point: neither the court nor the prosecutor knew how to go 
more deeply into the case. And once we, the jury, examine it, we 
simply acquit him because "a profound understanding leads to ac­
quittal"-he says so himself-and so only we, sitting on the jurors' 
bench, have this profound understanding! "Dear Mr. Spasovich must 
have been so anxious to see us jurors; why he's worn himself out 
dealing with the courts and the prosecutors!" In short: "Flatter 
them, flatter them! "-it's an old technique, often used but still so 
reliable. 
After this Mr. Spasovich turns directly to outlining the history 
of the case and begins ab ovo. Of course I won't quote him word 
for word. He relates the whole history of his client. Mr. Kroneberg, 
you see, is a man of learning: he studied first at university in 
Warsaw, then in Brussels where he took a liking to the French, 
then again in Warsaw where in 1867 he graduated from the Central 
School with a Master of Law degree. In Warsaw he made the 
acquaintance of a certain lady some years older than himself, had 
a liaison with her but parted because he could not marry her; but 
when he went away he did not know that he had left her pregnant. 
Mr. Kroneberg was distressed and sought some diversion. He en­
tered the ranks of the French army during the Franco-Prussian 
War and took part in twenty-three battles; he was awarded the 
Legion of Honor and retired as a second lieutenant. At that time, 
of course, every last Russian was also hoping for a French victory; 
we seem to have little heartfelt love for the Germans, although we 
are prepared to respect them intellectually. When he returned to 
Warsaw, he again met that same lady whom he had so much loved; 
she was already married and told him for the first time that he had 
a child and that the child was now in Geneva. The mother had 
gone to Geneva at the time in order to have her child and had left 
it with some farmers, whom she paid to look after it. As soon as 
Mr. Kroneberg learned of his child, he wanted to provide for it. 
At this point Mr. Spasovich makes several stern and liberal remarks 
about the strictness of our legislation concerning illegitimate chil­
dren, but at once consoles us with the fact that "within the bound­
aries of the empire there is a country, the Kingdom of Poland, that 
has its own special laws." In short, in that country one can adopt 

A Writer's Diary 
an illegitimate child more easily and conveniently. Mr. Kroneberg 
"wished to do the maximum the law allowed for the child, even 
though at that time he had no means of his own. But he was certain 
that in the event of his death his relatives would care for the little 
girl who bore the name Kroneberg, and that if worse came to worst 
she, as the daughter of a knight of the Legion of Honor, might 
be taken into one of the state institutions of France to be educated." 
Then Mr. Kroneberg took the girl from the Geneva farmers and 
placed her in the home of Pastor de Combe, also of Geneva, where 
she was to be educated; the pastor's wife was the girl's godmother. 
Thus passed the years from 1872 to 1874. At the begining of 
1875 Mr. Kroneberg's circumstances changed, and he traveled to 
Geneva once more and brought his daughter back to St. Petersburg. 
Mr. Spasovich tells us, by the way, that his client is a man with 
a keen desire to have a family. Once he almost married, but the 
wedding was called off; one of the biggest obstacles was precisely 
his refusal to hide the fact that he had a "natural daughter." This 
is only the first "little drop"; Mr. Spasovich adds nothing more, 
yet you already understand that Mr. Kroneberg has paid a price 
for his good deed of recognizing as his own a daughter whom he 
did not have to recognize and whom he could have abandoned to 
the farmer's family forever. So it follows that he had some cause 
for complaint, so to speak, against this innocent creature; at least, 
that is the way it appears. But Mr. Spasovich is most accomplished 
at making such slight, subtle, seemingly fleeting but unremitting 
insinuations; he is unrivaled in this, as you shall see when we 
proceed further. 
Further, Mr. Spasovich suddenly begins to speak of Miss Jessing. 
Mr. Kroneberg met Miss Jessing in Paris, you see, and in 1874 
he brought her back to St. Petersburg with him. '"You can judge,' 
Mr. Spasovich anounces suddenly, 'the extent to which Miss Jess­
ing does or does not resemble those women of the demimoruk with 
whom gentlemen form only short-lived liaisons. She is not Kro­
neberg's wife, of course, but their relationship excludes neither love 
nor respect.' " 
Well, that is a matter of opinion, I suppose, and it is their business 
and none of ours. But Mr. Spasovich is absolutely determined to 
get us to respect her. '"Have you seen an instance when this woman 
treated the child cruelly? Did the child not love her? She wanted 
to do all she could for the child . . . .  ' "  
The whole point is that the child called this lady maman, and it 

February 
was from the lady's trunk that the child took the prune for which 
she was beaten so. So you mustn't think that Jessing hates the 
child and that she made false accusations so as to turn Kroneberg 
against her. Of course we don't think that; we think even that this 
lady has no cause to hate the child: the child has been taught to 
kiss the lady's hand and to call her maman. It emerges that this 
lady was frightened by the "spitzrutens" and even implored Kro­
neberg (unsuccessfully) to break off one dangerous twig before the 
beating. Mr. Spasovich states that it was even Jessing who gave 
Kroneberg the idea to take the child from de Combe in Geneva: 
" '  Kroneberg at that time still had no definite notion of taking the 
child, but decided to go to Geneva to have a look at her . . . .  
' " 
This piece of information reveals a great deal, and we must keep 
it in mind. It turns out that at that time the child was not very 
much on Mr. Kroneberg's mind and that he had no heartfelt need 
whatever to keep her with him. "'In Geneva he was astounded: 
the child, whom he visited unexpectedly and unanounced, was 
found to be sullen and unsociable and did not recognize her father. ' "  
Take special note of the phrase "did not recognize her father." 
I have already said that Mr. Spasovich is most accomplished at 
tossing off such little phrases; it would seem that he simply let 
this phrase slip out, yet at the end of his speech it shows its real 
purpose and bears its fruit. If she "did not recognize her father," 
it means that the child was not only sullen but also perverse. All 
this will be needed later on; we shall see eventually that Mr. Spa­
sovich, who tosses off these little phrases here and there, will at 
last utterly destroy your illusions about this child. Instead of a little 
creature of seven, instead of an angel, you will see before you an 
"active" girl, sly, a cry-baby, hard to manage, a girl who cries as 
soon as she is made to stand in the corner, who is "a great one 
for bawling" (such language!), who lies, who steals, who is untidy, 
and who has a nasty, secret vice. The whole tactic is to destroy 
somehow your sympathy for her. It's human nature, after all: you 
have no pity for one whom you dislike, for whom you feel an 
aversion; and Mr. Spasovich fears your compassion more than any­
thing; otherwise, when you take pity on her you might put the 
blame on her father. This is the essential falsehood on which the 
case rests. Of course, all the arrangement of these remarks, all 
these facts he collects to hold over the child's head are, when taken 
individually, of no consequence at all, and you will undoubtedly 
see that for yourselves in time. There is no person, for example, 

370 
A Writer's Diary 
who could not know that a three- or even four-year-old child aban­
doned by someone for three years would certainly forget that per­
son's face, forget every last detail about that person and that time; 
everyone knows that a child's memory at that age extends no further 
than a year, or even nine months. Any father and any doctor will 
confirm this. The blame here rests rather with the ones who aban­
doned the child for so many years, and not with the child's perverse 
nature, and, of course, a juror will also understand that, should 
he find the time and the inclination to think and consider carefuly; 
but he has no time to consider carefully, he is impressed by the 
irresistible pressure of talent; Mr. Spasovich's carefully arranged 
remarks hover over him: the point is not in each fact taken sep­
arately, but in the whole, in the conglomeration of facts, so to 
speak-and say what you will, but all these trivial facts, taken 
together, at last do produce a hostile feeling toward the child. Il 
en reste taujours quelque chose-an old and well-known technique, 
especially when the facts are arranged with skill and studied 
purpose. 
I shall jump ahead and present yet another such example of Mr. 
Spasovich's art. For instance, using the same technique at the end 
of his speech, he absolutely destroys at a stroke the most telling 
witness against his client, Agrafena Titova. Here it's not even a 
maner of the arrangement of facts; here he merely seized upon one 
short phrase and exploited it. Agrafena Titova is Mr. Kroneberg's 
former maid. It was she, together with Uliana Bibina, the porter's 
wife at the dacha in Lesnoe that Mr. Kroneberg was renting, who 
first instituted the charge of torturing the child. I might say, by 
the way, that in my view this Titova, and particularly Bibina, are 
almost the most sympathetic people in the whole case. They both 
love the child. The child was bored. She had only just been brought 
here from Switzerland, and she scarcely saw her father. The father 
was busy looking after the affairs of a railway company and would 
leave the house in the morning and return late in the evening. 
Returning home in the evening and learning of some childish prank 
the girl had committed, he would whip her and slap her face (these 
facts were established and were not denied by Mr. Spasovich); as 
a result of this cheerless life, the poor girl grew withdrawn and 
became more and more dejected. "The girl just sits by herself now 
and will speak to no one"-these are the very words spoken by 
Titova when she brought her complaint. One hears not only a deep 
sympathy in these words but also perceives the discerning view of 

February 
37 1 
a good observer, a view that expresses her own private torment 
over the sufferings of this tiny, abused creature of God. After that 
it is only natural that the girl should come to love the servants, 
the only ones who showed her love and tenderness, and that she 
should sometimes run downstairs to visit the porter's wife. Mr. 
Spasovich blames the child for this and attributes her vices to the 
"corrupting influence of the servants." Note that the girl spoke 
only French, and that Uliana Bibina, the porter's wife, could not 
understand her well, and so she grew to love her simply out of 
pity and sympathy for the little child, a trait so characteristic of 
our common People. 
"One evening in July" (the indicunent states), "Kroneberg again 
began to beat the girl, and on this occasion he whipped her for so 
long and she cried so dreadfuly that Bibina was alarmed, fearing that 
the child might be beaten to death. Therefore she jumped from her 
bed dressed only in her nightgown, ran to Kroneberg's window, and 
shouted that he stop beating the child or she would send for the police; 
at this point the beating and the crying ceased . . . .  
" 
Can you picture this mother hen standing before her chicks and 
spreading her wings to defend them? These poor hens who defend 
their chicks sometimes become almost frightening. When I was a 
child in the country I knew a little peasant lad, the son of the 
servants, who was terribly fond of tormenting animals and partic­
ularly liked to slaughter chickens whenever some were needed for 
our dinner. I remember he used to climb on the straw rof of the 
barn to look for sparrows' nests: when he found a nest he would 
at once begin wringing off their heads. But can you imagine-this 
torturer had a dreadful fear of a mother hen, and when she, furious, 
would stand in front of him with outspread wings, defending her 
chicks, then he would always hide behind me. And so it was that 
three days later this poor mother hen once more could not restrain 
herself and went off to complain to the authorities, taking along a 
bundle of the switches used to beat the girl and some bloodstained 
linen. Here you must keep in mind how averse our common people 
are to law courts and how afraid they are of becoming involved 
with them, hoping only that they themselves will not be dragged 
into court. But she did go, and went to lodge a complaint on behalf 
of a stranger, a child, knowing that in any case she would earn no 
personal benefit but only unpleasantness and bother. And so it is 
these two women to whom Mr. Spasovich refers when he speaks 

372 
A Writer's Diary 
of the "corrupting influence of the servants on the child." Moreover, 
he seizes upon the following little fact: the child, as you wil se 
further, had been accused of theft. (You wil see later how skilfuly 
Mr. Spasovich transformed the one prune the child took without 
permission into the theft ofbanknotes.) But the girl did not confess 
to theft at first and even stated that "she had taken nothing from 
them." 
"The girl responded with stubborn silence" (says Mr. Spasovich); 
"then, several months later, she told of how she wanted to take som£ 
money for Agrafena. Had he (i.e., the girl's father) investigated the 
circumstances of the theft more carefully, he would, perhaps, have 
come to the conclusion that the bad habits the girl had developed 
must be attributed to the influence of the people around her. The 
girl's refusal to answer in itself testifies to the fact that she did not 
want to betray those with whom she was on good terms." 
"She wanted to take some money for Agrafena"-that's the 
phrase! "A few months later" the girl, of course, invented a story 
that she wanted to take some money for Agrafena. This was either 
a total fabrication or was done at someone else's prompting. After 
all, she stated in court: "Je suis voleuse, menteuse," when she had 
never stolen anything except a single prune; and for those several 
months the irresponsible child was made to believe that she had 
stolen; they made her believe this without even trying to do so 
deliberately, simply because she continually heard everyone around 
her saying every day that she was a thief. But even if it were true 
that the child wanted to take some money for Agrafena Titova, 
then it by no means follows that Titova herself taught her and 
influenced her to steal money. Mr. Spasovich is artful; under no 
circumstances will he say this directly; he could not slander Titova 
in this way unless he had direct and solid evidence; yet immediately 
after the girl's remark that she "wanted to take some money for 
Agrafena," he slips in his own suggestion that "the bad habits the 
girl had developed must be attributed to the influence of the people 
around her." And, of course, that's suficient. Into the heart of the 
juror creeps the notion: "So we know the character of both principal 
witnesses; it was for them that she stole, then, and it was they who 
taught her to steal. What is their testimony worth after that?" No 
one could possibly avoid thinking such a thought once it had been 
expressed in such circumstances. And so the dangerous testimony 
has been crushed and destroyed precisely when Mr. Spasovich 

February 
373 
needs it to be destroyed-right at the end of his speech where it 
can have decisive influence and effect. Say what you like, but this 
is artfully done. Indeed, the lawyer placed in such a tight situation 
has a difficult job; what else could he do? He must save his client. 
Still, as we say, these are only the flowers; the berries are yet to 
come. 
4· The Berries 
I have already said that Mr. Spasovich denies that the girl was 
treated cruelly in any way or that she was tortured; he will not 
even take such suggestions seriously. Moving on to the "catastrophe 
of July 25," he begins directly to count the welts and bruises, 
every little scar and scab and every piece of flayed skin; then he 
places them all on the balance: "so many ounces-there was no 
torture!" -such is his view and his method. The press has already 
pointed out to Mr. Spasovich that such counting of welts and scars 
is irrelevant and even absurd. But in my view all of this book­
keeping must definitely have made a deep impression on the jury 
and on the public: "What precision," they think. "How thorough 
the man is! "  I am convinced that some of those who listened to 
him must have been particularly pleased to learn that information 
about a certain welt was requested specially from de Combe in 
Geneva. Mr. Spasovich triumphantly points out that there was no 
broken skin: "'Despite the wholly unfavorable opinion of Mr. Laos­
berg' (the doctor who examined the girl on July 29 and whose 
opinions Mr. Spasovich treats with extreme sarcasm) 'toward 
Kroneberg, I am borrowing many facts from his statement of July 
29 for my defense. Mr. Lansberg certified that there was no broken 
skin on the posterior of the girl's body but unly some dark-purple 
subcutaneous spots and red streaks . . . .  
' " 
Only! Note that little word. And, most importantly, five days 
after her ordeal! I could testify to Mr. Spasovich that these dark­
purple subcutaneous spots disappear very quickly and pose not the 
least threat to life; nonetheless, does that mean they do not con­
stitute cruelty, suffering, torture? 
"The spots were found most prominently on the left ischial region, 
spreading also to the left hip. Finding no signs of trauma nor even 
any scratches, Mr. Lansberg testified that the streaks and spots rep­
resented no danger to life. Six days later, on August s, the girl was 

374 
A Writer's Diary 
examined by Professor Florinsky, who found no spots but only streaks, 
some shon and others longer; but he maintained that these streaks 
represented no serious injury, although he admitted that the punish­
ment had been harsh, especially in view of the instrument used to 
punish the child." 
I will inform Mr. Spasovich that in the prisoners' wards of the 
hospital in Siberia I happened to se the backs of prisoners who 
had just been administered five hundred, a thousand, and even two 
thousand blows with "spitzrutens" (the prisoners had been forced 
to pass through ranks of soldiers armed with the sticks). I saw this 
several dozen times. Believe me, Mr. Spasovich, some backs had 
swollen up nearly two inches (literally), and imagine how little flesh 
there is on the back. They were precisely this dark-purple color 
with a few scratches that seeped blood. You may be sure that not 
one of our expert medical men nowadays has seen anything of this 
sort (and where could we se it in our time?). These convicts, if 
they had received no more than a thousand blows, would arrive 
always maintaining a most sanguine air, although they were ap­
parently in a highly agitated state; but even that lasted only for 
the first two hours. None of them, as far as I can remember, lay 
or sat down during those first two hours but would only pace about 
the ward with a wet sheet over their shoulders, sometimes heaving 
a shudder of their whole body. The only treatment they received 
was a bucket of water, in which the punished man would dip the 
sheet when it dried out on his back. As I recall, they all wanted 
to be discharged from the ward as soon as possible (because they 
had been locked up for a long time preliminary to their trial, while 
others simply wanted to arange an escape at the first opportunity). 
And here is a fact for you: such men were almost always discharged 
on the sixth, at most on the seventh day after their punishment, 
because during that time the back had almost always completely 
healed, aside from a few comparatively minor traces. But in ten 
days, for example, everything had always disappeared entirely. 
Punishment with the "spitzrutens" (i.e. , in fact always with sticks), 
if not inflicted excessively-i.e. , no more than two thousand blows 
at a time-never presented the slightest įat to life. To the con­
trary, I heard all the prisoners at hard labor and the military 
prisoners (and they had seen a thing or two!) say regularly that 
switches are more painful ("they have more of a bite") and are 
incomparably more dangerous, because one could bear even more 

February 
37 5 
than two thousand blows of the "spitzrutens," but one might die 
after only four hundred blows of a switch; five or six hundred at 
a time meant almost certain death-no one could endure it. And 
so now I ask you, Mr. Defense Attorney: even though these sticks 
did not pose a threat to life and did not cause even the slightest 
injury, do you really believe that such a punishment was not cruel? 
Do you really believe that this was not a case of torture? Did this 
linle girl not sufer and cry, "Papa! Papa! "  for a quarter of an 
hour under the dreadful sticks that lay on a table in the court? 
Why do you deny her sufering and her torture? 
But I have already said why there is such a tangle here; I'll repeat 
it again: the fact is that in our Code of Punishments, as Mr. Spasovich 
states, there is "ambiguity, deficiency, omissions" in the way "tor­
ture" is understood and defined. 
" . . .  Therefore the Governing Senate has determined, in those same 
decisions cited by the prosecution, that, on the other hand, torture 
and torment are to be understood as those infringements upon the 
person or upon the sanctity of the individual that are accompanied 
by cruel treatment. In the opinion of the Senate, a case of torture or 
torment must necessarily involve an extreme and more protracted 
degree of suffering than an ordinary beating, even a severe beating. 
If the beating cannot be called severe (and a case of torture must be 
more severe than a severe beating), and if not a single expert-apart 
from Mr. Lansberg, who repudiated his own conclusion-could call 
this a severe beating, then the question is lw can the concepts of 
IOT!ure and cruelty be appli£d to the actions of my cli£nr? I submit thor 
this is impossible." 
And so we see the point. There is ambiguity in the Code of 
Punishments, and Mr. Spasovich's client could, if convicted of tor­
ture, fall under one of the most severe articles of the law, an article 
which in any case is inapplicable given the measure of his crime, 
an article which brings with it a punishment unerly incommen­
surate with his "action." Well, it would seem that our confusion 
could be cleared up quite simply: "The child was tortured, but 
not in such a manner as defined by law, i.e. , not more severely than 
a severe beating, and therefore my client cannot be convicted of 
torture." But no, Mr. Spasovich is prepared to yield nothing; he 
wants to prove that there was no torture at all, neither legal nor 
illegal, and no suffering, none at all! But tell me, please, what is 
it to us that the torture and cruel treatment of this child do not 

A Writer's Diary 
conform to the exact legal definition of torture? The law is incom­
plete; you said so yourself. The child stil suffered, after all: did 
she not suffer? Was she not, in fact, tortured in the true sense of 
the word? Have we been so distracted from the essence of the case? 
Indeed, Mr. Spasovich undertook to do just that; he is determined 
to distract us: the child, he says, on the very next day was 
"playing," she "attended a lesson." I don't think she was playing. 
Bibina, to the contrary, testifies that when she examined the girl 
before going to lay a complaint, "the girl was weeping bitterly and 
kept saying, 'Papa! Papa!"' Heavens! Such small children are so 
impressionable and so pliant! And so what if she did, perhaps, go 
out and play the next day, still with the bluish-purple spots on her 
body? I have seen a five-year-old boy, almost dying from scarlet 
fever, utterly weakened and exhausted, yet still lisping that he had 
been promised a doggie and asking that all his toys be placed on 
his bed-"Just so I can have a look at them." But Mr. Spasovich 
attains the summit of his art when he "appropriates" entirely the 
child's age! He keeps telling us about some girl, perverse and 
corrupt, caught stealing more than once, with a secret vice in her 
soul, and he seems to forget entirely (and we do as well) that the 
case concerns an infant who is only seven, and that same flogging 
that lasted a quarter of an hour with those nine "spitzrutens" of 
rowan wood would probably have been ten times easier for an adult 
and even for a fourteen-year-old than it was for this poor, tiny 
creature! You cannot help but ask why Mr. Spasovich is doing all 
this? Why must he so stubbornly deny the girl's suffering? Why 
must he lavish almost all his art on this and contort himself so as 
to distract us? Can it really all be only because of a lawyer's vanity? 
"Not only will I save my client's neck, I'll prove that the whole 
case is utterly ridiculous and nonsensical and that a father is being 
tried only because he once administered a beating to a nasty linle 
girl." But I have already said that he needs to destroy any sympathy 
you might have for her. And even though he has reserved a good 
many resources to do that, he still fears that the child's sufferings 
will evoke in you-who knows?-humane feelings. And these same 
humane feelings are a threat to him: what if you get angry at his 
client? He needs to crush your humane feelings in advance, to 
distort them and ridicule them; in a word, he has to undertake 
what might seem an impossible task, impossible because of the 
very fact that you have before you the utterly clear, precise, com­
pletely frank testimony of the father, who makes a firm and truthful 
admission that he tortured the child: 

February 
377 
"'On July 25, irritated by my daughter,' the father testified, 'I beat 
her with this bundle of sticks; I beat her severely and, this time, I 
beat her for a long time, beside myself, unaware of what I was doing, 
with whatever was at hand. ' Whether the sticks broke during this last 
beating he does not know, but he remembers that they were longer 
when he began beating the girl." 
It's true that in spite of this testimony the father still did not 
admit at the trial that he was guilty of torturing his daughter, and 
he declared that until July 25 he had always administered light 
punishments. I note in passing that the notion of lightness and 
severity here is a subjective one: blows to the face of a seven-year­
old infant that cause a bloody nose-something that is denied nei­
ther by Kroneberg nor by his defense attorney-evidently are con­
sidered light punishment by both. Mr. Spasovich has some other 
priceless tricks to perform in this line, a good many of them. For 
example: "You have heard that the marks on the girl's elbows were 
almost certainly caused only by her being held down by the arms 
while the punishment was administered." 
Listen to that: only by her being held down. They must have 
held her down well to cause bruises! Oh, of course Mr. Spasovich 
does not come right out and say that all this is beautiful and smelling 
of roses; here, for example, is another nice little argument: 
"They say that this punishment goes beyond the bounds of what is 
normal. Such a definition would do very well if we could define what 
a normal punishment is. But since there is no such definition, anyone 
would find it difficult to say whether it exceeded the bounds of nor­
mality" (and this after the father's testimony that he beat her for a 
long time, unaware of what he was doing and beside himself!!.'). "Let 
us grant that this is so. But what does this mean? That this punishment 
is one that, in the majority of cases, should not be administered to 
children. But there can be exceptional cases with children. Do you 
not admit that a father's authority, in exceptional cases, may be so 
disposed that the father must use a more severe measure than is 
normal, one unlike those normal measures that are applied daily?" 
And that is all that Mr. Spasovich agrees to give up. This whole 
case of torture he reduces only to "a more severe measure than is 
normal"-but he repents even of this concession: at the end of his 
speech he takes it all back and says: "A father is being tried, but 
for what? For abuse of his authority; but where, I ask you, is the 
limit to that authority? Who can determine how many blows a 

378 
A Writer's Diary 
father may administer, and in what cases he may administer them, 
so long as he causes no injury to the child's organism?" 
Meaning without breaking the child's leg, is that it? And so long 
as he doesn't break the child's leg he can do anything he likes? 
Are you serious, Mr. Spasovich? Are you serious in saying you do 
not know where the limit of this power lies and "how many blows 
a father can administer and in what circumstances he can administer 
them"? If you don't know, I'll tell you where that limit lies! The 
limit of his authority is that he must not take a tiny, seven-year­
old creature who canot be held responsible for al her "vices" 
(vices which ought to be corrected in a diferent maner entirely)­
one must not, I say, take a creature who has the countenance of 
an angel, who is incomparably purer and less sinful than you and 
I, Mr. Spasovich, less sinful than all those who were present in 
the courtrom and who judged and condemned this girl-he must 
not, I say, flog her with nine "spitzrutens" of rowan wood, flog 
her for a quarter of an hour without heeding her cries of "Papa! 
Papa! "  cries that almost drove a simple peasant woman, the porter's 
wife, into a frenzy of madness; he must not, at last, frankly confess 
that "I beat her for a long time, beside myself, wtaware of what 
I was doing, with whatever was at hand!"-he must not be beside 
himself, because there is a limit to all rage, and even rage at a 
seven-year-old irresponsible infant for a single prWle and a broken 
crochet hook! 
Yes, indeed, you are a skilled attorney; but there is a limit to 
everything, and if I weren't aware that you are saying all this by 
design and only shaming for all you are worth in order to save 
your client, I would add one more thing specifically for your benefit: 
there is a limit even to every "lyre" and to a lawyer's "respon­
siveness." That limit is not letting your own eloquence carry you 
up to the Pillars of Hercules as your eloquence has carried you, 
Mr. Defense Attorney! But alas, you were only sacrificing yourself 
for the sake of your client, and it's not my right to talk to you 
about limits; I am only amazed at the magnitude of your sacrifice! 
5. The Pilars of Hercules 
But we see the real Pillars of Hercules when Mr. Spasovich reaches 
the "just wrath of the father." 
"When this bad habit" (i.e. , lhe habit of lying) "became evident 

February 
379 
in the girl," Mr. Spasovich continues, "coupled with all her other 
flaws, and when the father learned that she was sttaling, he was truly 
enraged. I think that every one of you would have been just as enraged, 
and I think that to victimize a father for punishing his child severely, 
but with good reason, does a disservice to the family and a disservice 
to the state, because the state is only strong so long as it rests on the 
strong family . . . .  If the father became incensed, he was entirely within 
his rights . . . .  " 
Wait now, Mr. Defense Attorney, for the moment I won't raise 
any objections to the word "stealing" you used, but let us talk a 
little bit about this "just wrath of the father." What about her 
upbringing from the age of thre in Switzerland by the de Combes, 
where you yourself testify the girl was corrupted and acquired some 
bad habits? At her age how could she be held to blame for her 
bad habits? If such is the case, then where is the justness in the 
father's wrath? I maintain that the girl is not in the least responsible 
in this case, even if we admit that she had some bad habits, and 
whatever you say, you cannot dispute the fact that a seven-year-old 
child cannot be held responsible for her actions. She still does not 
have and cannot have enough intelligence to perceive her own 
wrong. Why none of us-perhaps not even you, Mr. Spasovich­
are saints, despite the fact that we have more intelligence than a 
seven-year-old child. How can you, then, impose this burden of 
responsibility on such a tiny creature, a burden that you yourself 
are unable to bear? Remember the words "for they bind heavy 
burdens and grievous to be borne." You will say that it is our duty 
to correct children. But listen: we ought not to exalt ourselves above 
children; we are worse than they. And if we teach them something 
to make them better, then they also teach us much and also make 
us better by our very contact with them. They humanize our souls 
by their mere presence in our midst. And so we ought to treat 
them and their angelic images with respect (assuming that we have 
anything to teach them). We must respect their innocence, even 
when they have some perverse habit; we must respect their lack 
of responsibility, their touching defenselessness. You argue, to the 
contrary, that blows on the face until the blood flows, when dealt 
by a father, are just and cause no offense. This child had some 
sort of scab in her nose, and you say: "Perhaps the blows on the 
face accelerated the discharge of blood from the scrofulous scabs 
in her nostril; but this does not mean the child was harmed: there 
would have been bleeding a little later even if there had been no injury. 

A Writer's Diary 
This bleeding, therefore, can in no way be prejudicial to Kroneberg. 
At the moment he hit her he might not have remembered nor even 
known that the child had frequent nosebleeds. " 
"Might not have remembered; might not have known! "  Do you 
really suppose Mr. Kroneberg might deliberately have struck her 
in a sore spot? Of course he didn't know. And so your own tes­
timony tells us that the father did not know of his child's illness, 
yet you support his righr to beat the child. You claim that the 
father's striking the child on the face caused no harm. Well, perhaps 
this did cause no harm to a tiny seven-year-old, but what of the 
emotional damage to that child? You, Sir, in your entire speech 
never mentioned the moral and emotional damage done to the child, 
but spoke the whole time only of the physical pain. Why was she 
struck across the face, after all? What are the causes for such terrible 
anger? Is she really a hardened criminal? This little girl, this crim­
inal, will now run off to play at "robbers" with the boys. You are 
dealing here with a child who is only seven years old, and you 
should never lose sight of that fact in this case; why it's all a 
mirage, the things you are saying! Do you know what it means to 
abuse a child? Their hearts are ful of innocent, almost unconscious 
love, and blows such as these cause a grievous shock and tears that 
God sees and will count. For their reason is never capable of 
grasping their ful guilt. Have you sen or heard of little children 
who were tormented, or of orphans, say, who were raised among 
wicked strangers? Have you sen a child cowering in a comer, 
trying to hide, and weeping there, wringing his hands (yes, wring­
ing his hands-I've sen it myself) and beating his chest with his 
tiny fut, not knowing himself what he is doing, not clearly un­
derstanding his own guilt or why he is being tormented but sensing 
all too well that he is not loved? I know nothing about Mr. Kro­
neberg personally; I canot and do not wish to enter into his soul 
and his heart, nor those of his family, because, not knowing him 
at all, I might do him a great injustice, and so I base my judgment 
solely on your words and statements, Mr. Advocate. You said in 
your speech that Mr. Kroneberg was "not good at raising children"; 
I think that is the same as saying he is an inexperienced father or, 
to put it bener, he is unaccustomed to fatherhood. Let me explain: 
these little creatures only enter into our souls and anach themselves 
to our hearts when we, having begonen them, watch over them 
from childhood without leaving them from the time of their first 
smile; and then we continue to grow into one another's souls every 

February 
day, every hour, all through our lives. Now that is the family; that 
is something sacred! A family, after all, is also created, not provided 
ready-made, and there are no rights and no obligations that are 
provided ready-made here; they all derive one from the other. Only 
then is it solid, and only then is it sacred. The family is created 
by a ceaseless labor of love. However, you, Sir, admit that your 
client made two logical errors (only logical ones?), and that one of 
them, incidentally, was that he "' . . .  acted overzealously. He sup­
posed that one could eradicate at once, with one stroke, all the evil 
that had been sown and had taken root in the hean of the child 
over the years. But that cannot be done; one must act slowly and 
have patience.' " 
I swear that not much of that patience would have been needed 
because this tiny crearure is only seven years old! Once again we 
find these seven years, the seven years that disappear entirely from 
your speech and from your considerations, Sir! "She was stealing," 
you exclaim. "She was a thief! " 
"On July 2 5 the father arrives at the dacha and for the first time 
learns to his surprise that the child has been rummaging in Jessing's 
trunk, that the child has broken a hook" (a crochet hook, that is­
not a lock of some kind) "and was trying to get at the money. I wonder, 
gentlemen, if you could react with indifference to such behavior by 
your daughter? 'But why was she punished?' you ask. 'Can one really 
inflict such strict punishment for a few prunes and some sugar?' I 
submit that from prunes to sugar, from sugar to loose change, from 
loose change to banknotes is a straight path and an open road!" 
Let me tell you a little story, Sir. A father who earns his money 
through hard work is sitting at his desk. He is a writer, just as I 
am, and he is writing. After a while he puts down his pen and 
his daughter, a girl of six, comes up to him; she begins telling 
him that he must buy her a new doll and then a carriage, a real 
carriage with horses; she and her doll and her nurse would get in 
the carriage and go to visit Dasha, her nurse's granddaughter. "And 
then, papa, you should buy me . . .  " etc., etc. There's no end to 
the things she wants. She's only just invented and imagined all 
these things while playing with her doll in the corner. These six­
year-old infants have an amazing imagination, and that is a fine 
thing: it helps them develop. The father listens with a smile. 
"Ah, Sonia dear," he says suddenly, half in jest, half in sorrow, 
"I would buy you all these things, but where would I get the 
money? You don't know how difficult it is to get money! "  

A Writer's Diary 
"This is what you do, papa," exclaims Sonia, with a very serious, 
confidential air. "You take a pot and a shovel and you go into the 
woods and dig under a bush; you'll find some money; put it into 
the pot and bring it home." 
I assure you that this little girl is certainly not stupid, but that 
is her concept of how one gets money. Do you really think that 
our seven-year-old has gone much beyond this six-year-old in her 
concept of money? Of course, she perhaps has already learned that 
one cannot dig up money from under a bush; but where money in 
fact comes from, what laws it follows, what banknotes are, and 
stock shares, and concession rights-this she scarcely knows. Come 
now, Mr. Spasovich: can you really say that the girl was trying to 
get at the money? That expression and the meaning anached to it 
are applicable only to an adult thief who understands what money 
is and how it is used. And even if a little girl like this had taken 
some money, it would certainly not be a case of theft but only a 
bit of childish mischief like taking the prune, because she has no 
idea of what money is. Yet you try to tell us that it won't be long 
before she's taking banknotes and shout that "this is a threat to 
the state! "  Is it permissible, after this, to consider the flogging this 
girl was subjected to as just and justifzable? But she wasn't even 
touching the money and never took a penny of it. She was only 
rumaging in the trunk where the money was; she broke a crochet 
hook but took nothing else. What good was the money to her? 
Was she planning to run off to America with it, or maybe get a 
railway concession? You were the one who mentioned banknotes, 
after all: "It's not far from sugar to banknotes." So why should 
she shrink at the thought of a railway concession? 
Haven't you reached the Pillars of Hercules, Sir? 
"She has a vice, a nasty, secret vice . . . .  " 
Now just wait a moment, you who would prosecute her! Was 
there no one among you who sensed how monstrous, how incon­
ceivable this scene was? A tiny little girl is brought out before 
people-serious, humane people; the child is humiliated; her "se­
cret vices" are spoken of aloud! And what does it maner that she 
does not yet understand her own disgrace and admits: "Je suis 
voleuse, menteuse"? Say what you like-this is inconceivable and 
intolerable; this is falsehood that cannot be endured. And who 
could be so bold as to say that she "stole," that she "was trying 
to get at" the money? Can such words be unered about an infant 
like this? Why is she besmirched by people discussing aloud her 

February 
"secret vices" for the whole court to hear? Why was she splashed 
with so much filth and left with a stain that will never disappear? 
Oh, acquit your client, Sir, as quickly as you can, if only to lower 
the curtain as soon as possible and preserve us from this spectacle. 
But leave us, at least, our pity for this infant; do not judge her 
with such a serious air, as if you yourself believed in her guilt. 
This pity is our treasure, and it is a terrible thing to tear it out of 
our society. When a society ceases to pity its weak and oppressed, 
it will itself be afflicted; it will grow callous and wither; it will 
become depraved and sterile . . . .  
"But if I leave you your pity, your great pity may convict my 
client." 
And that, indeed, is the situation. 
6. The Family and Our Sacred Ideals. A Concluding Note 
about a Certain Modern School 
Mr. Spasovich makes a pointed remark in conclusion: " 'In con­
cluding I will permit myself to say that in my opinion the whole 
case against Kroneberg has been put quite incorrectly so that the 
questions that will be put to you are utterly impossible to answer."' 
Now that's clever: the whole essence of the case is here, and this 
is the cause of all its falsity. But Mr. Spasovich adds still a few 
more rather solemn words on the subject: "I submit that you al 
acknowledge the fact of the family and the fact of paternal au­
thority . . . .  " Earlier he was shouting that "the state can only be 
strong when it rests on the strong family." 
Here I, too, will permit myself to insert just a few words, and 
those just in passing. 
We Russians are a young people; we are only just beginning to 
live, although we have existed for a thousand years; but a big ship 
is meant to sail on a long journey. We are a fresh people, and we 
do not hold sacred ideals quand meme. We love our sacred ideals, 
but only because they are, in fact, sacred. We do not uphold them 
simply as a means of supporting l'Ordre. Our sacred ideals persist 
not because of their utility but because of our faith in them. We 
will even refuse to defend any sacred ideals in which we no longer 
believe, unlike the ancient priests who, in the twilight of paganism, 
defended the idols which they had long since ceased to consider 
as gods. Not a single one of our sacred ideals is threatened by free 
inquiry, but this is precisely because they are strong in reality. We 

A Writer's Diary 
love the sacred ideal of the family when it is sacred in reality, and 
not only because the state rests firmly upon it. And when we believe 
in the strength of the family, we wil have nothing to fear if oc­
casionally some bad examples of the family come to light, and we 
will not be frightened even if cases of abuse of parental authority 
are publicized and prosecuted. We will not defend this authority 
quand mime. The sacred ideal of a genuinely sacred family is so 
solid that it will never be shaken by this but will grow even more 
sacred. But in every instance there is a limit and a measure, and 
this we are also prepared to accept. I am not a lawyer, but in the 
case of Kroneberg I canot help but se something deeply false. 
Something is wrong here; something else must have happened here, 
despite the very real guilt. Mr. Spasovich is certainly correct when 
he speaks about the way the question was put; but this does not 
settle anything. Perhaps we need a profound and independent ex­
amination of our laws on this point so as to fil in the gaps and 
make the laws conform to the nature of our society. I can't decide 
what we need here; I'm not a lawyer . . . .  
Still, I canot help but cry out: indeed, establishing the legal 
profession was an excellent thing but somehow also a sad one. I 
said that at the begining and I repeat it. This is how it sems to 
me, and only because I am not a lawyer; that is my whole trouble. 
I keep imagining some son of modem school in which people are 
trained to have agile minds and arid heans, a school in which every 
healthy feeling is distoned when the occasion demands distortion; 
a school that teaches every possible method of personal attack, 
made without fear or punishment, continually and unrelentingly, 
based on need and demand, whose techniques have been elevated 
to the level of a principle and (because we have so little experience 
here) have acquired a luster of heroism that is universaly applauded. 
So tell me, am I trying to discredit the legal profession and the 
new couns? God forbid: I would only like us al to become a little 
better than we are. This is a most modest wish, but, alas, a most 
idealistic one. I am an incorrigible idealist; I am seking sacred 
ideals; I love them, and my hean thirsts after them because I have 
ben so created that I canot live without sacred ideals; still, I 
would like our ideals to be a bit more sacred-otherwise, is there 
any point in worshipping them? One way or another I've managed 
to spoil my February Diary by dwelling excessively in it on a sad 
topic, simply because it made such an impression on me. But, il 
faut avoir le courage de son opinion, and I think that this wise French 
saying could serve as a gUide to many who are seking answers to 
their questions is this confused time of ours. 

March 


1 
1 .  How True Is the Notion That "The Ideals May Be 
Base So Long as the Reality Is Good"? 
I read the following comment in Mr. Gamma's "Leaflet" (The 
Voice, no. 67) on my remarks about the People in my February 
Diary: 
Nevenheless, we find in the space of one month two sharply opposed 
views about the People from the same writer. And this is not some 
farcical little play but a painting at a traveling exhibition: this is a 
verdict on a living organism; this amounts to twisting the knife in a 
man's body. Mr. Dostoevsky tries to excuse his real or imagined 
contradictions by inviting us to judge the People "not by what they 
are but by what they would like to become." The People, you see, 
are the vilest son of rabble in acruality; however, their ideals are good. 
These ideals are "powerful and sacred," and have "saved the People 
through cenruries of suffering." Excuses of that sort don't make one 
feel very good! Hell itself is paved with good intentions, after all, 
and Mr. Dostoevsky knows that "faith without works is dead." How 
have these ideals become public knowledge, in any case? Who has 
the gift of prophecy or the knowledge of the human heart to penetrate 
and decipher them if the reality contradicts and is unworthy of these 
ideals? Mr. Dostoevsky justifies our People in the sense that "they 
may take the odd bribe, but at least they don't imbibe." One need 
not take this much further to arrive at the moral: "Better let our 
ideals be base, so long as our reality is good." 
The most important thing in this excerpt is Mr. Gamma's ques­
tion "How have these ideals (the People's, that is) become public 
knowledge?". I categorically refuse to answer such a question, for 
no matter how much Mr. Gamma and I were to discuss the topic 

A Writer's Diary 
we would never come to an agreement. This is a long-standing 
dispute and a most important one for us. Dll the People have ideals 
or do they not?-this is a question of life and death for us. This 
argument has been going on far too long already and is now at the 
point where these ideals have become as bright and as obvious as 
the sun for some people, while others do not see them at all and 
have, in fact, refused to see them. Which side is right will not be 
decided by us, but it will be decided, perhaps, rather soon. Recently 
a number of voices were raised saying that there can be nothing 
conservative in Russia because we have "nothing worth conserv­
ing." Indeed, if we have no ideals of our own, is it worth concerning 
ourselves with this matter and trying to conserve anything? Well, 
if people are pacified by this thought, good luck to them. 
"The People, you see, are the vilest sort of rabble, but their 
ideals are good." I did not make that statement or express that 
thought. I am replying to Mr. Gamma solely in order to make my 
position clear. In fact, I said just the opposite: "there are true 
saints among the People, and what saints they are: they give off 
light and illuminate the way for us all." They do exist, my respected 
commentator friend, they truly do exist, and blessed is he who is 
able to discern them. I think that here, that is to say in these 
particular words, there isn't the least bit of ambiguity. Besides, 
ambiguity does not always come from the fact that a writer is unclear 
but sometimes from quite opposite reasons . . . .  
As far as the moral with which you conclude your remarks is 
concerned-" Let our ideals be base so long as our reality is good"­
let me point out to you that this is a hope that can never be realized: 
without ideals-that is, without at least some partially defined hopes 
for something better-our reality will never become better. One 
can even state positively that there will be nothing but even worse 
abominations. In my way of seeing things, at least, there is a chance 
left: if things are not attractive now, then with a clear and conscious 
desire to become better (i.e., with ideals of something better), we 
may indeed one day collect ourselves and become better. At least 
this is not so impossible as your proposal to become better with 
"base" ideals, that is to say, having base aspirations. 
I hope that these few words of mine do not make you angry, Mr. 
Gamma. Let us remain, the both of us, with our own opinions 
and await the denouement; I assure you that that denouement, 
perhaps, is not far off at all. 

March 
2. A Hundred-Year-Old Woman 
"I was really very late that morning," a lady told me the other 
day, "and it was almost noon when I left home; to make matters 
worse, there were so many things to be done. I had to stop in at 
two places on Nikolaevsky Street, one not far from the other. At 
the first place, going into an office, I met this really old woman 
near the gate, and she looked so old and bent as she walked along 
with her cane; but I just couldn't tell how old she was. She went 
as far as the gate and sat down on the porter's bench at the corner 
to rest. I walked past and only caught a glimpse of her. 
"Ten minutes later I come out of the office; two doors down the 
street is the store where I ordered some shoes for Sonia last week, 
and since I was passing I went to pick them up; but I look and 
see that same old woman now sitting by that building, sitting on 
another bench and looking at me; I smiled at her, went into the 
store, and got the shoes. Well, three or four minutes passed, I went 
on along to the Nevsky, and-who do I see but my little old lady, 
now at another building, sitting by the gate again, but now she's 
not on a bench-she's managed to find a cosy spot on a projecting 
bit of the foundation, since there was no bench by this gate. I 
couldn't help but pause in front of her, wondering why it was that 
she stopped and sat down in front of every building. 
'"Are you tired, my good woman?' I asked. 
'"I do get tired, my dear; I'm always getting tired. It's a warm 
day, I'm thinking, and the sun's shining; so why don't I go and 
have dinner at my granddaughters'.' 
'"So you're on your way to have dinner?' 
" 'Indeed I am, my dear.' 
'"But you'll scarcely make it at the pace you're going.' 
'"Oh, I'll make it. I'll go on a bit and then take a rest, and 
then get up and walk a bit more.' 
"Looking at her I got terribly curious. She was a tiny little thing, 
neat but dressed in old clothes, a townswoman probably, with a 
cane and a pale, yellow face, colorless lips, and her skin stretched 
dryly over her bones like a mummy. But she sits there smiling, 
the sun shining right on her. 
" 'You must be pretty well on in years, Granny,' I ask, trying to 
make a little joke. 
" 'A hundred and four, my dear, one hundred and four years old, 

390 
A Writer's Diary 
that's all' (she was joking now) . . . .  'And where might you be 
going?' 
"She looks at me, laughing, pleased, I imagine, to have someone 
to talk to; only it seemed odd to me that this hundred-year-old 
would be concerned to know where I was going. 
'"Look at this, Grany,' said I, laughing as well. 'I picked up 
some shoes for my little girl in the store and I'm taking them 
home.' 
'"What tiny wee shoes they are. She's a little one, your girl? 
Now that's good. And do you have other wee ones?' 
"And again she's all smiles as she looks at me. Her eyes are dim 
with scarcely any life left in them, and yet they seem to radiate 
warmth. 
" 'Granny, please take five kopecks from me and buy yourself a 
roll,' and I give her the coin. 
'"Now why should I need five kopecks? Never mind, I'll take 
it with thanks.' 
'"There you are, Grany. Take it with my good wishes.' 
"She took the coin. It was dear she'd not been reduced to 
begging, but she took the coin with such dignity, not at al like 
charity but as if from politeness or the goodness of her heart. And, 
who knows, maybe she was very pleased that someone should strike 
up a conversation with her, an old woman, and not only talk to 
her but even show some loving concern for her. 
'"Well, good-bye, Granny,' I say. 'I hope you reach your grand­
daughters' without trouble.' 
'"I'll manage it, my dear, don't worry. And you get back to your 
granddaughter,' the old woman said (in error), forgetting that I had 
a daughter, not a granddaughter, and thinking, evidently, that ev­
eryone had granddaughters. I went on and turned to look at her 
for the last time; I see that she's risen and is slowly, painfully 
tapping her cane as she makes her way down the street. Perhaps 
she'll stop to rest ten more times along the way before she reaches 
her granddaughters' place to have dinner. And where might that 
place be? Such a strange old woman." 
I had listened to the story that morning-indeed, it wasn't even 
a story but only some sort of impression of a meeting with a 
hundred-year-old woman (and in fact how often do you meet a 
hundred-year-old woman, let alone one so full of inner life?)-and 
had forgotten it entirely, but then, late at night, I was reading an 
article in a magazine and when I set the magazine aside I suddenly 

March 
39 1 
recalled that old woman, and for some reason I at once I sketched 
in an ending to the story of how she reached her own folks to have 
dinner: there emerged another, perhaps quite plausible little scene. 
Her granddaughters, and perhaps her great-granddaughters (still, 
she calls them all granddaughters) are probably tradespeople of 
some sort, married women, of course, or else she would not be 
going to have dinner with them. They live in a basement and 
maybe they rent a barber's shop as well; they are poor people, of 
course, yet they eat well and observe the proprieties. It was probably 
past one o'clock when the old woman managed to get there. They 
weren't expecting her, yet they probably greeted her quite warmly. 
"Well, and here's Maria Maximovna! Come in, come in, and 
welcome to you, servant of God!" 
The old woman comes in, laughing a bit, while the linle bell at 
the door goes on ringing sharply and shrilly for a long time. Her 
granddaughter is probably the barber's wife; he, the barber, is not 
yet an old man-about thirty-five, perhaps-and has the dignity of 
his trade, even though the trade may be a frivolous one; and of 
course he's wearing a frock coat as greasy as a pancake; that's 
caused by the pomade, I suppose, but I never saw a barber dressed 
any other way. And the collars on their coats always look as if they 
had been rolled in flour. Instantly three little children-a boy and 
two girls-run in to their great-grandmother. Such very aged women 
almost always have some very close kinship with children: they 
themselves become very much like children in their hearts, and 
sometimes exactly the same. The old woman sat down; someone 
else, perhaps a guest or someone on business-a man of forty or 
so and acquainted with the barber-was just getting ready to leave. 
In addition they have a nephew staying with them, the son of his 
sister, a lad of about seventeen who wants to find work in a printer's 
shop. The old woman crosses herself and sits down, looking at the 
guest. 
"Oh, but I'm tired out! Now who's this you have here?" 
"Do you mean me?" asks the guest, laughing. "Don't tell me 
you didn't recognize me, Maria Maximovna! Why, a couple of 
years ago you and I were planning to go out into the woods to look 
for mushrooms." 
"Oh, now I know who you are. What a tease! I know who you 
are, only I just can't place your name, but I remember. Oh, I'm 
just worn out." 
"Well now, Maria Maximovna, I've been wanting to ask you 

392 
A Writer's Diary 
why it is that a venerable old lady like yourself just doesn't sem 
to grow at all?" the guest teases. 
· 
"Go on with you," laughs the grandmother, evidently pleased. 
"I'm a good man, Maria Maximovna." 
"And it's worthwhile to talk to a good man. Ah, Heavens, I 
can't sem to catch my breath. I se you've already had an overcoat 
made for little Seriozha." 
She points at the nephew. 
The nephew, a chubby, healthy little fellow, gives a broad smile 
and moves closer. He is wearing a new gray coat that still gives 
him a thril to put on. He will only be able to wear it with equa­
nimity in a week or so, but now he is constantly examining the 
cuffs and the lapels and checking himself in the mirror; he feels 
particularly proud of himself. 
"Come on, now, turn around and show us," chaners the barber's 
wife. "Look at that, Grany, what a job we did; six rubles exactly. 
They were telling us over at Prokhorych 's that it's not worth starting 
the job for less; you'd regret it afterward, they said; but there's no 
end of wear in this one. Just feel that material! Turn around now! 
Look at that lining-feel the strength of it! Turn around, you! And 
so the money goes, Grany. Our last kopeck's drained away." 
"Oh, Heavens, everything's so dear these days there's just no 
way of making ends meet. You'd bener not talk to me about things 
like that, it just upsets me," Maria Maximovna remarks fervently, 
still out of breath. 
"Yes, enough of that," says the husband. "We ought to have a 
bite to eat. Maria Maximovna, I can see that you've really got 
yourself tired out." 
"Oh, I certainly have, my dear. It's a warm day, and the sun's 
shining, so I think why not pay them a visit . . .  what's the point 
of lying around? Ah! And I met a nice lady on the way, a young 
woman, who'd bought some shoes for her wee children. 'Now why 
are you so tired, Granny?' she asks me. 'Here's five kopecks for 
you, buy yourself a roll . . . .  ' And you know, I took the five 
kopecks . . . .  
" 
"Come on, Granny, you'd bener have a linle rest before we do 
anything else. Why is it you're so short of breath today?" the 
husband says suddenly, with particular concern. 
Everyone is looking at her; she has suddenly become very pale, 
and her lips have gone quite white. She also looks around at every­
one, but her gaze seems somehow dull. 

March 
393 
"So, I think . . .  some gingerbread for the children . . .  that five 
kopecks . . . .  " 
Once more she stops, trying to catch her breath. Everyone sud­
denly falls silent for about five seconds. 
"What is it, Grany?" says the husband, bending over her. 
But the grandmother gives no reply; there is silence for another 
five seconds. The old woman seems to grow even more pale and 
her face suddenly seems to shrink. Her eyes stop moving and the 
smile freezes on her lips; she looks straight ahead but apparently 
sees nothing. 
"We ought to get a priest!" the guest says suddenly in a quiet 
voice behind them. 
"Yes . . .  but . . .  I think it may be too late," murmurs the 
husband. 
"Grandmother! Listen, Grandmother! " the barber's wife, sud­
denly alarmed, calls out to the old woman; but the grandmother 
is motionless, her head leaning to one side. Her right hand, which 
rests on the table, holds the five kopecks, while her left hand has 
remained on the shoulder of her eldest great-grandson Misha, a 
boy of about six. He stands stock still, staring at his great-grand­
mother with huge, astonished eyes. 
"She has passed on!" says the husband, slowly and with dignity, 
stooping and crossing himself unobtrusively. 
"She has indeed! I could just see her fading away," the guest 
says tenderly, with a catch in his voice. He is quite shaken and 
looks around at everybody. 
"My Lord, such a thing! What are we to do now, Makarych? 
Should we have her taken away?" the wife says excitedly, deeply 
upset. 
"What do you mean, away?" her husband solemnly replies. 
"We'll look after everything ourselves; she's part of your family, 
is she not? But we'll have to go off and report it." 
"A hundred and four years, think of that! "  says the guest, 
squirming in his chair and growing more and more moved. He 
even blushes furiously. 
"Yes, these last years she even began forgetting life itself," re­
marks the husband even more solemnly and soberly as he looks 
for his cap and puts on his coat. 
"And only a minute ago she was laughing and so cheerful! Look 
at the coin in her hand! 'Gingerbread,' she said. What a life we 
have!" 

394 
A Writer's Diary 
"Well, shall we go, then, Petr Stepanych?" the host interrupts, 
and they both leave. There is no mourning, of -course, for a woman 
such as this. One hundred and four years old and "she passed on 
without pain or regrets." The barber's wife sends to the neighbor 
women for help. They rush over at once, almost pleased to hear 
the news, sighing and exclaiming. First of all, of course, the sam­
ovar is put on. The children crowd into a corner, looking at the 
dead grandmother with astonished faces. No matter how long Misha 
lives he will always remember the old woman and how she died, 
forgetting her hand on his shoulder. And when he dies not a single 
person on the whole earth will remember or will realize that once 
upon a time there was such an old woman who lived out her hundred 
and four years, how and why no one knows. Why remember any­
way? It doesn't matter. Millions of people pass away like this: they 
live unnoticed and they die unnoticed. But maybe only at the very 
moment of the deaths of these hundred-year-old men and women 
there is something that seems touching and peaceful, something 
that seems even solemn and calming: even these days, a hundred 
years can have a strange effect on people. May God bless the lives 
and deaths of simple, good people! 
Well, still, this is just an inconsequential little scene without a 
story. True enough, one sets out to recount something with a bit 
of interest in it from the things heard in the course of a month, 
but when you sit down to write it turns out to be quite impossible 
to retell or is irrelevant, or it's simply a case of "not telling every­
thing you know," and so in the end you're left with only little 
things such as this with no story to them . . . .  
3· Dissociation 
But still, I'm supposed to be writing about "the things I have 
seen, heard, and read." At least it's a good thing that I didn't limit 
myself with a promise to write about everything I have "seen, heard, 
and read." And I keep hearing things that are stranger and stranger. 
How can I convey them, when they all go off on their separate 
ways and simply refuse to arrange themselves into one neat bundle! 
Indeed, I keep thinking that we have begun the epoch of universal 
"dissociation." All are dissociating themselves, isolating themselves 
from everyone else, everyone wants to invent something of his own, 
something new and unheard of. Everybody sets aside all those 
things that used to be common to our thoughts and feelings and 

March 
395 
begins with his own thoughts and feelings. Everybody wants to 
begin from the beginning. The links that once united us are broken 
without regret, and everyone acts on his own accord and finds his 
only consolation in that. If he doesn't act, then he would like to. 
Granted, a great many people don't undertake anything and never 
will, yet they still have torn themselves away and stand apart, 
looking at the torn place and waiting idly for something to happen. 
Everyone in Russia is waiting for something to happen. Meanwhile, 
there is scarcely anything about which we can agree morally; every­
thing has been or is being broken up, not even into clusters but 
into single fragments. And the main thing is that sometimes this 
is done with the simplest and most satisfied manner. Take, for 
instance, our contemporary man of leners-one of the "new 
people," I mean. He begins his career and will have nothing to 
do with anything that came before; what he has comes from himself, 
and he acts by himself. He preaches new things and flatly sets as 
his ideal a new word and a new man. He knows neither European 
literature nor his own; he has read nothing, nor will he take up 
reading. Not only has he not read Pushkin and Turgenev, he has 
scarcely even read his own people, that is Belinsky and Dobroliu­
bov. He depicts new heroes and new women, and their whole 
novelty consists in the fact that they confidently take their tenth 
step having forgotten about the nine preceding ones, and so they 
suddenly find themselves in the most false situation one can con­
ceive; and they perish so that the reader may be edified and enticed. 
The falseness ofthe situation comprises the entire edification. There 
is very little new in all this; to the contrary, there is an extraordinary 
lot of worn-out old castoffs. But that's not the point at all; the point 
is that the author is completely convinced that he has spoken his 
new word, that he is acting independently, that he has dissociated 
himself; and, of course, this pleases him a good deal. This linle 
example, however, is old and trivial; but the other day I heard a 
story about one of these "new words." There was a certain "ni­
hilist" who did his denying and his suffering and, after gening 
into many scrapes and even spending time in prison, he suddenly 
found religious feeling in his heart. And what do you think he 
immediately did? He instantly "isolated and dissociated himself''; 
promptly and gingerly he steered clear of our Christian faith, dis­
posed of all our legacy from the past, and quickly invented his 
own faith, also Christian, yet "his very own." He has a wife and 
children. He does not live with his wife, and his children are looked 

A Writer's Diary 
after by others. Recently he ran off to America, very likely to 
preach his new faith there. In a word, everyone is on his own, 
doing things his own way. Can they all only be trying to appear 
original or be pretending to be so? By no means. We are now 
living in a period that is more concerned with truth than reflection. 
Many, and perhaps very many, are truly sorrowing and suffering; 
they have indeed, and in the most serious fashion, broken all their 
former links and they are compelled to begin from the beginning, 
for no one gives them light. And our wise men and intellectual 
leaders only nod in agreement, some of them out of Judaical fear 
("Why not let him go to America?" they say; "running off to 
America is something liberal, after all"), while others are simply 
making money off them. And so our fresh energies perish. You 
might say that these are still only two or three facts that don't mean 
anything; that, on the contrary, everything is undoubtedly more 
solidly integrated and united than before; that banks, societies, and 
associations are coming onto the scene. But can you really and 
truly hold up as an example this crowd of triumphant Jews and 
kikes that has thrown itself on Russia? Triumphant and full of 
enthusiasm, because nowadays there have appeared even kikes full 
of enthusiasm, both of the Hebraic and the Orthodox persuasions. 
Just think: our newspapers write that even they are isolating them­
selves and that, for instance, the foreign press will make even more 
fun of the congresses of representatives of our Russian land banks 
because of "the secret sessions of the first two congresses, asking, 
not without irony: in what manner and by what right have the 
Russian land-credit institutions the boldness to make a claim on 
the public's trust when their secret sessions, held behind carefully 
guarded Chinese walls, hide everything from the public, thereby 
making it obvious that something unsavory is being cooked 
up . . . .  " 
So it seems that even these gentlemen are isolating themselves, 
shutting themselves up, and devising something of their own to 
be done their way, not the way it is done in the rest of the world. 
The business about the banks I slipped in as a joke, however: 
that's not my topic at the moment. I'm speaking only about "dis­
sociation." How can I better explain my thought? By the way, I'll 
mention a few ideas about our corporations and associations that 
come from a certain manuscript. It's not one of mine but was sent 
to me and has never been published. The author addresses his 
opponents in the provinces: 

March 
397 
You say that the anels, associations, corporations, cooperatives, 
trading companies and all these other associations are based on man's 
inborn sense of sociability. Defending the Russian artel, which has 
still been researched far too linle to be spoken of positively, we believe 
that all these associations, corporations, etc., are only unions of some 
against others, unions founded on the sense of self-preservation evoked 
by the struggle for survival. Our opinion is supported by the history 
of the origin of these unions, which were first formed by the poor 
and weak against the wealthy and strong. Subsequently, the latter 
began to employ the same weapon against their opponents. History 
indeed testifies that all these unions originated out of fraternal enmity 
and were based not on the need for social intercourse, as you suppose, 
but on the feeling of fear for one's survival or on the wish for gain, 
profit, or benefit, even at the expense of one's neighbor. When we 
examine the strucrure of all these progeny of utilitarianism, we see 
that their main concern is to organize firm control of everyone over 
all and of all over everyone-to put it simply, wholesale espionage 
arising from the fear that one person may cheat another. All these 
associations, with their internal controls and their external activity 
that envies everything outside them, present a striking parallel with 
what is happening in the world of politics, where the murual relations 
of nations are characterized by an armed peace, broken by occasional 
bloody clashes, while their internal life is one of endless factional 
strife. How can one speak of communion or love in such a case? Is 
that not why such instirutions take root so poorly in Russia? We still 
live too expansively, so that we still have insufficient basis to take up 
arms against one another; we still have too much affection for and 
faith in one another, and these feelings hinder us from setting up the 
control and murual espionage that is required when all of these as­
sociations, cooperatives, trading, and other companies are established. 
With insufficient control they cannot work and inevitably go bankrupt. 
So should we lament these defects of ours as compared with our 
better-educated Western neighbors? No: for we, at least, can perceive 
in these defects our wealth; we can see that the feeling of unity, without 
which human societies cannot exist, is still effective among us, even. 
though it acts unconsciously on people and leads them not only to 
do great deeds, but also, very often, to do great wrong. Yet one in 
whom this feeling is not yet dead is capable of everything, provided 
that the feeling can be transformed from something unconscious and 
instinctual into a conscious force, one that would not toss him this 
way and that by the blind caprice of chance but would direct him 
toward the realization of rational aims. Without this feeling of unity 

A Writer's Diary 
and mutual love, of communion among people, nothing great is con­
ceivable because society itself is inconceivɬble. 
So the author, you see, perhaps is not entirely condemning these 
associations and corporations; he is simply stating that their present 
governing principle consists only in utilitarianism, and in espionage 
as well, and that this is certainly not a unity of people. This is all 
something youthful, fresh, theoretical, and impractical, yet in prin­
ciple it is absolutely correct and is written not only with sincerity 
but with suffering and distress. Note the common trait: the whole 
issue in Russia now depends on the first step, on the practice, but 
everyone to the last man is shouting and worrying only about 
principles, so that the practice has, willy-nilly, fallen into the hands 
of the Israelites alone. The history of the manuscript from which 
I took the above excerpt is as follows. The worthy author (I don't 
know if he is a young man or one of those young old men) published 
one small item in a certain provincial publication, while next to it 
the editor printed his own note of qualification, which partly dis­
agreed with the author. Then, when the author of the item wrote 
a whole article (not a very long one, however) to refute the editor's 
note, the latter refused to print it under the pretext that it was 
"more of a sermon than an article." Then the author wrote to me, 
forwarding the rejected article and asking that I read it, think about 
it, and express my opinion in my Diary. First, I thank him for his 
confidence in my opinion; and second; I thank him for the article, 
because it has given me a great deal of satisfaction: rarely have I 
read anything more logical, and although I am unable to include 
the whole article, I used the preceding excerpt with an intention 
I do not hide: the fact is that in its author, who pleads for a genuine 
unity of humans, I also noted a certain "dissociationist" flourish, 
specifically in those parts of the manuscript which I will not venture 
to quote but which are so "dissociated" that one rarely meets the 
like. And so it is not only the article but also the author himself 
who bears out my thought of the "dissociation" of individuals and 
the remarkable, virtually chemical decomposition of our society 
into its constituent elements, a process that has begun suddenly in 
our time. 
I might add, however, that if nowadays everybody is "on his 
own and by himself," then there still is some link with what has 
gone before. Indeed, this link absolutely must exist, even if all 
might seem to be uncoordinated and full of mutual misunderstand­
ing, and it is most interesting to follow this link. To put it briefly 

March 
399 
(although the comparison is an old one), our educated Russian 
society reminds me most of all of that ancient bundle of twigs 
which is strong only so long as the twigs are bound together; but 
as soon as the bonds are broken, the whole bundle flies apart into 
many weak stalks that the first wind will carry off. And so it is 
just this kind of bundle that has come apan and been scattered in 
our Russia. Isn't it true that our government, all through the twenty­
year period of its reforms, never enjoyed the full suppon of its 
intelligentsia? On the contrary, did not the vast majority of young, 
fresh, precious talents go off on some tangent, toward a dissociation 
full of scorn and threats? And this happened precisely because, 
instead of taking the first nine steps, they immediately took the 
tenth one, forgetting that the tenth step without the preceding nine 
will in any case cenainly become only an illusory one, even if it 
meant anything on its own. What is most painful is that only one 
in a thousand of these "solitudinarians," perhaps, understands 
anything about the meaning of this tenth step, while the others 
have only been listening to common rumors and gossip. The result 
is a farce: the egg the hen laid was sterile. Have you ever seen a 
forest fire during a hot sununer? What a pitiful, sad sight it is! 
How much valuable material perishes in vain, how much energy, 
fire, and heat are used up for nothing and disappear without a 
trace, having accomplished no useful purpose. 
4· Musings about Europe 
"But in Europe, in fact everywhere, isn't it just the same? Haven't 
the forces that should unite people over there and on which we so 
relied-haven't they turned into a pathetic mirage? Isn't the dis­
integration and dissociation over there even worse than our own?" 
These are questions that a Russian cannot help but confront. In­
deed, what real Russian doesn't think about Europe first of all? 
Yes, at first glance the situation there probably seems even worse 
than ours; but the historical causes for the dissociations are more 
evident; yet that probably makes the picture there all the more 
doleful. But the fact that in Russia it is so difficult to uncover any 
sort of logical reason for our dilemma and to pick up all the loose 
ends of our torn threads-precisely that fact contains a cenain 
consolation for us: people will finally fathom that our loss of energy 
is premature and not something conforming to historical law, that 
it is half-anificial and induced; and, in the end, perhaps, people 

400 
A Writer's Diary 
will want to come to an accord. So there is still hope that the 
bundle of twigs can be bound together ożce more. But over there 
in Europe they are beyond any tying together of the twigs. Ev­
erything there has become dissociated, not in our way but maturely, 
clearly, and distinctly; there the groups and units are living out 
their last days and they know it; no one wants to give anything 
up to anyone else and would rather die than yield. 
By the way, everyone in Russia is talking about peace now. 
Everyone predicts a lasting peace; everyone sees a clear horizon 
al around, with new alliances and new forces. Even the establish­
ment of a republic in Paris is seen as a sign of peace; even the 
fact that this republic was established by Bismarck is seen as a sign 
of peace. People see great promises of peace in the accord between 
the great powers of the Orient, while some of our newspapers have 
suddenly begun to regard the present turmoil in Herzegovina, about 
which they were only recently expressing apprehension, as a definite 
indicator of the stability of European peace. (Is that not, I wonder, 
also because the key to the Herzegovinian question also turned up 
in Berlin and turned up in Prince Bismarck's own key case?) But 
the French Republic brings us the most joy. By the way, why is 
it that France still continues to stand in the foreground in Europe, 
despite Berlin's victory over her? The most trivial event in France 
still arouses more sympathy and attention in Europe than sometimes 
even a major event in Berlin. There is no question that this country 
has always been the one to take the first step, make the first 
experiment, be the first to initiate an idea. And that is why everyone 
surely expects the "beginning of the end" to come from here as 
well: who can take this fatal and final step if not France? 
And that is why, perhaps, more irreconcilable "dissociations" 
have taken shape in this "advanced" country than anywhere else. 
Peace is utterly impossible there until the very "end." When they 
greeted the Republic, everyone in Europe said that it was essential 
for France and for Europe because only a republic could rule out 
a war of revenge with Germany; only a republic, among all the 
governments that had recently been making claims to govern 
France, would neither risk nor desire to undertake such a war. Yet 
this is only a mirage, and the Republic was proclaimed precisely 
to make war, if not with Germany then with an even more dangerous 
rival, a rival and enemy for all Europe: communism. And now, 
with the Republic, this rival will rise up much sooner than under 
any other form of government! Any other government would have 

March 
40 1  
reached an agreement with it and thus postponed the denouement; 
but a republic will yield nothing to it and will itself be the first to 
challenge and compel its rival to do banle. And so let no one state 
that "the Republic means peace." In fact, who was it who pro­
claimed the Republic this time? All the bourgeoisie and small­
property owners. How long have they been such solid republicans? 
Was it not they who until now were most afraid of a republic, 
seeing in it only disorder and a single step toward the communism 
they so dread? During the first revolution the Convention broke 
up the large land holdings of the French emigres and the church 
into small allotments and began selling them off becaus.e of the 
continual financial crisis of the time. This measure enriched a vast 
number of Frenchmen and allowed them, eighty years later, to pay 
a five-billion contribution without scarcely even a frown. But while 
it fostered a temporary prosperity, this measure paralyzed demo­
cratic aspirations for years and years by enormously increasing the 
army of landowners and by passing France over into the boundless 
power of the bourgeoisie, the prime enemy of the demos. Had they 
not taken this measure, the bourgeoisie would never have been able 
to maintain their power in France for so long once they had replaced 
the former rulers, the nobility. But the result was to provoke the 
implacable hatred of the demos; the bourgeoisie itself diverted the 
natural course of democratic aspirations and transformed them into 
hatred and a thirst for revenge. The dissociation of political parties 
has reached the point where the entire organism of the state has 
been utterly ruined, so that there is no longer even the possibility 
of restoring it. If France still hangs on as some apparent whole, 
it is only due to that law of nature which states that even a handful 
of snow cannot melt before its appointed time. It is this illusion 
of wholeness that the unhappy bourgeois (and many naive people 
in Europe as well) continue to accept as the living force of an 
organism, deceiving themselves with hope and at the same time 
trembling with fear and hatred. But in essence the integrity of the 
society has disappeared once and for all. The oligarchs are only 
concerned with the interests of the wealthy; democracy, only with 
the interests of the poor; but the interests of society, the interests 
of all and the future of France as a whole-no one there bothers 
about those things except the dreamer-socialists and the dreamer­
positivists who extol science and expect it to solve everything-that 
is, to provide a new sense of unity and a new set of founding 
principles for the social organism, ones that are mathematically 

402 
A Writer's Diary 
solid and unshakeable. But science, in which people have so much 
faith, is scarcely capable of tackling this ·maner right now. It's 
dificult to conceive that it already has suficient knowledge of 
human nature to institute new laws fOr the social organism without 
making an error; and since this problem must be solved without 
hesitation or delay, the question arises of itself: is science prepared 
to undenake such a task al emu, supposing that it is within its 
means as it develops in the future? (I will not, at the moment, state 
flatly that this task really is beyond the powers of human science 
no matter how advanced it becomes.) Since science itself will prob­
ably not respond to such an appeal, it follows that at present the 
whole movement of the demos is being governed in France (and 
everywhere else in the world) only by the dreamers, and the dream­
ers are governed by al sons of speculators. Besides, aren't there 
dreamers in science as well? It is true that the dreamers tok over 
the movement by right, for they were the only ones anywhere in 
France who were concerned about the unity of al and about the 
future; and so the sucesion in France pases on moral grounds, 
so to say, to them, despite al their evident weaknes and fantastical 
notions, and everyone senses this. But the most terrible thing here 
is that, apan from al these fantastic notions, there has appeared 
a most cruel and inhuman tendency, not a fantastic one but some­
thing quite real and historicaly inevitable. It's al expresed in the 
saying: "ote toi de I.a, que je m'y mene" ("step aside so that I 
can take your place!"). Millions of the demos (apan from far too 
few exceptions) have as their primary aim and principal aspiration 
the plunder of property owners. But one canot blame the im­
poverished: the oligarchs themselves have kept them in darknes 
to such an extent that, apan from the most insignificant exceptions, 
al these millions of unhappy and blind people doubtles do have 
a most naive belief that they wil enrich themselves precisely 
through such plunder and that this is the whole content of the 
social idea which their leaders preach to them. In any case, how 
can they understand their dreamer-leaders or the prognosticarions 
about science? Nevertheles, they will cenainly win, and if the 
wealthy do not yield in time, then terrible things will ensue. But 
no one will yield in time, perhaps because the time for concesions 
has already pased. And inded, the impoverished themselves don't 
even want concesions and are not wiling to come to any acord 
now, even if they were given everything; they will continue to think 

March 
that they are being deceived and cheated. They want to senle scores 
themselves. 
The Bonapartes kept themselves in power by promising the pos­
sibility of reconciliation with the impoverished, and they even made 
some microscopic movements in that direction; but their efforts 
were always underhanded and insincere. The oligarchs lost faith 
in them, however, and the demos doesn't trust them a bit. As far 
as government by kings is concerned (the senior line), it can es­
sentially offer the proletariat only the Roman Catholic religion as 
a means of salvation, and this is something that not only the demos 
but also the vast majority in France have long ignored and do not 
wish to know. I have even heard that spiritualism has lately been 
spreading among the proletariat with extraordinary power, at least 
in Paris. The junior line of kings (the Orleans line) has become 
the object of hatred by even the bourgeoisie, although at one time 
this dynasty was considered the natural leader of French property 
owners. But their incompetence became evident to everyone. Nev­
ertheless, the property owners had to save themselves; they had, 
urgently and without fail, to find themselves leadership for the 
great and final banle with the terrible foe of the future. Conscious­
ness and instinct whispered the real secret to them, and they chose 
a republic. 
There is a political and maybe even a natural law that states that 
two powerful and near neighbors, however friendly they may be, 
always end by wanting to destroy one another and that sooner or 
later they bring this desire into action. (We Russians as well ought 
to think a bit more about this law of powerful neighbors.) "From 
a red republic runs a straight line to communism" -that's the notion 
that has struck fear into the French property owners until now. 
And so much time had to pass before suddenly, in a huge majority, 
they at last realized that the nearest of neighbors will be the bitterest 
of enemies simply through the principle of self-preservation. In 
fact, even though a red republic is such a close neighbor to com­
munism, what, indeed, can be more hostile and more radically 
opposed to communism than a republic, even the bloody republic 
of 1793? In a republic, the republican form stands above all else­
"La republique avant tout, avant Ia France." In a republic, all 
hopes are in form alone: let there be "MacMahonia" instead of 
France, but let it at least be called a republic: that is the charac­
teristic of the present "victory" of the republicans in France. And 

A Writer's Diary 
so they seek salvation in form. On the other hand, what business 
does communism have with the republican form when its very basis 
denies not only every form of government but even the state itself, 
even all contemporary society? It took the mass of Frenchmen 
eighty years to conceive of this direct opposition, this mutual an­
tithesis of two forces; but at last they did conceive of it and-they 
gave their approval to the republic: against their enemy they finally 
set its most dangerous and most natural rival. When the republic 
makes its transition to communism it will cenainly not want to 
destroy itself. In its essence the republic is the most natural ex­
pression and form of the bourgeois idea, and the whole of the 
French bourgeoisie is the child of the republic; it was created and 
organized by the republic alone during the first revolution. So, in 
that fashion, dissociation has been accomplished once and for all. 
People might say that war is still a long way off. It is hardly that 
far away. Perhaps it's even better not to want the denouement 
postponed. Socialism has corroded Europe even now, but by then 
it will have undermined it completely. Prince Bismarck knows this, 
but in far too German a fashion he puts his trust in blood and 
iron. But what can you do here with blood and iron? 
5 . An Expired Force and the Forces of the Future 
People will say: but still, there's not the least cause for alarm at 
present; everything is clear; everything looks bright; we have 
"MacMahonia" in France; we have the great accord of powers in 
the Orient; military budgets everywhere are swelling enormously­
isn't that peace? 
What about the pope? He'll die one of these days, and then 
what? Do you think that Roman Catholicism will consent to die 
along with him to keep him company? Oh, never has Catholicism 
longed so intensely to live as now! However, can our prophets do 
other than laugh at the pope? We haven't even bothered to raise 
the question of the pope and have reduced it to insignificance. And 
meanwhile this is a "dissociation" too enormous and too full of 
boundless and incompatible aspirations to permit their renunciation 
for the sake of world peace. And for what, and for whose benefit 
should they be renounced? For humanity's sake? Catholicism has 
considered itself to be above all of humanity for a long time now. 
Until now it has been consoning only with the powerful of the 
earth and has been counting on them until the last moment. But 

March 
that moment has now come, it seems, for cenain, and Roman 
Catholicism will surely abandon those who have dominion over the 
earth, who, however, have themselves betrayed Catholicism and 
who undertook to persecute it throughout Europe a long time ago; 
that persecution has now, in our time, been at last fully organized. 
There's nothing surprising here: Roman Catholicism itself has made 
turnabouts that were even sharper: once, when it was necessary, 
it sold Christ without hesitation in exchange for eanhly power. 
Having proclaimed as dogma that "Christianity canot survive on 
the eanh without the earthly power of the pope," it thereby pro­
claimed a new Christ, unlike the former one, one who has yielded 
to the third temptation of the Devil-the temptation of the king­
doms of the world: "All these things will I give Thee if Thou wilt 
but fall down and worship me!" Oh, I have heard strong objections 
to this idea; people have argued that faith and the image of Christ 
even now continue to live in all their former truth and purity in 
the hearts of many Catholics. No doubt this is true, but the largest 
wellspring has been muddied and poisoned beyond restoration. 
Besides, it is only very recently that Rome proclaimed its assent 
to the third temptation of the Devil in the form of a firm dogma, 
and therefore we have not been able to see all the direct conse­
quences of this enormous decision. It is wonh noting that the 
proclamation of this dogma, this revelation of "the whole secret" 
happened precisely at the moment when united Italy was already 
knocking at the gates of Rome. Many in Russia found that amusing, 
saying that "there was a lot of anger but not much force . . . .  " Only 
one can hardly say there wasn't much force. No, people like that, 
capable of such decisions and such rurnabouts, cannot die without 
a struggle. People may object that this has always been the way in 
Catholicism-by implication, at least-and that accordingly there 
has been no revolution at all. Indeed; yet there always was the 
secret: for many cenruries the papacy pretended to be satisfied with 
its tiny dominion, the Papal States, but this was done just for the 
sake of allegory. What is most significant is that the seed of the 
principal ideal was concealed within the allegory under the papacy's 
cenain and constant hope that this seed would eventually grow in 
the future into a luxuriant tree that would spread its branches over 
the whole eanh. And so, at the very last moment, when the last 
acre of his worldly dominion was being taken away, the lord of 
Catholicism, seeing his death coming, suddenly arises and pro­
claims to the world the whole truth about himself: "Did you think 

A Writer's Diary 
I was content with only the title of the Sovereign of the Papal 
States? But know that I always considered myself lord over all the 
earth and over al earthly kings, and not only their spiritual ruler 
but their earthly ruler as well, their true lord, sovereign, and em-
. peror. This is I-the king of kings and the lord of lords, and to 
me alone on earth belong the destinies, the ages, and it is for me 
to detennine the time; and this I now proclaim to al in the dogma 
of my infallibility." Say what you like, but there is a force here; it 
is majestic and not absurd; it is the resurection of the ancient 
Roman idea of world domination and unity, which never died in 
Roman Catholicism; it is the Rome of Julian the Apostate, not of 
a conquered Christ but of one who conquers in a new and final 
battle. In such manner the sale of the true Christ in exchange for 
worldly kingdoms was completed. 
And in Roman Catholicism it will be completed and finalized in 
fact. I repeat, this awesome army has eyes too sharp not to discern 
at last where real force now exists, a force on which it can base 
itself. Having lost the kings as its allies, Catholicism will surely 
rush to the demos. It has tens of thousands of tempters, wise and 
clever psychologists and seers of the human heart, dialecticians and 
confessors, while the people everywhere are simple and kind. Be­
sides, in France, and now even in many other places in Europe, 
although the people may hate religion and scorn it, they still have 
not the slightest knowledge of the Gospels-not in France, at least. 
All of these psychologists and sers of the human heart will rush 
to the people and bring them their new Christ, one who consents 
to everything, the Christ who was proclaimed at the last impious 
conclave in Rome. "Yes, friends and brethren," they will say, "al 
your concerns have already long been met in our book, and your 
leaders have stolen it al from us. If previously we spoke to you a 
little differently, it was only because until now you were like little 
children, and it was too soon for you to know the truth; but now 
the time has come for your truth as well. You must know that the 
pope has the keys of Saint Peter and that faith in God is only faith 
in the pope who has been placed for you on the earth by God 
himself in His stead. The pope is infallible, and divine power has 
been given to him; and he is the lord of ages and it is to him to 
detennine the time. He has decided that your time has come as 
well. Formerly the main force of religion lay in humility, but now 
the time of humility has passed; and the pope has the power to 
cancel it, for all power has been granted to him. Yes, you are al 

March 
brothers, and Christ himself commanded you all to be brothers; if 
your elder brothers do not want to accept you, then take up sticks 
and go into their houses and compel them by force to be your 
brothers. Christ has long awaited the repentance of these sinful 
elder brothers of yours, and now He grants you permission to 
proclaim: "Fraternite ou Ia mort" ("Be my brother, or off with 
your head! "). If your brother does not want to give you half his 
possessions, then take them all, for Christ has long awaited his 
repentance, and now the time has come for anger and vengeance. 
Know also that you are innocent of all your past and future sins, 
for all your sins have arisen only because of your poverty. And if 
your former leaders and teachers have already made this known to 
you, then know that although they spoke the truth, they had no 
authority to tell you this before the appointed time, for that authority 
is possessed by the pope alone, and it comes from God himself. 
The prof is that these teachers of yours led you nowhere but to 
punishments and still worse miseries, and everything they under­
took failed of itself. Besides, they have all been cheating you so 
that with your help they might appear strong and then sell them­
selves even more dearly to your enemies. But the pope will not 
sell you because there is no one more powerful than he, and he is 
the first among the first. Only believe: not in God, but in the pope 
alone and in the fact that only he is the earthly king, while the 
others will disappear because their time has come. Rejoice now, 
and be glad, for the earthly paradise has come; you will all be rich 
and, through your riches, you will be righteous, because all your 
desires will be satisfied and you will have no more reason to do 
evil." These are flattering words, but no doubt the demos will 
accept the offer: they will see a great unifying force in this unex­
pected ally, a force that agrees to everything and hinders nothing, 
a real and historical force instead of leaders, dreamers, and spec­
ulators, in whose practical abilities-indeed, sometimes in whose 
honesty-even now they have not the least confidence. Suddenly, 
here, there is both a ready point where the force can be applied 
and a lever put into their hands; the whole mass need only lean 
on it and move it. Will the people not move it? Are they not a 
mass? To crown the whole maner, they are once more given a faith, 
and thereby the hearts of many are set at rest, for too many of 
them have long been heartsick without God . . . .  
I have spoken about all this once already, but I spoke only in 
passing in a novel. I hope my presumption will be forgiven, but 

408 
A Writer's Diary 
I am certain that all this will surely come to pass in western Europe 
in one form or another; that is to say, Catholicism, will fling itself 
into democracy, into the people, and will abandon the eanhly kings 
because they have already abandoned Catholicism. All those in 
power in Europe already despise it because it appears to be too 
impoverished and defeated, but they still do not regard it in such 
a comic aspect and situation as do our political journalists, in all 
their naivete. Yet Bismarck, for example, would not have oppressed 
Catholicism so had he not sensed in it a terrible, approaching enemy 
of the immediate future. Prince Bismarck is a man who is too proud 
to waste so much force against a comically weak enemy. But the 
pope is stronger than he. I repeat: now the papacy is, perhaps, 
the most terrible of all the "dissociations" that threaten the peace 
of the whole world. And there are many things that threaten the 
peace. Never before has Europe been so filed with so many ele­
ments of enmity as in our time. It is just as if everything has been 
undermined and stuffed with gunpowder and is only awaiting the 
first spark . . . .  
"So of what concern is this to us? That's all over in Europe, not 
in Russia." The concern for us is that Europe will start knocking 
at our door, crying for us to come and save her when the final 
hour of her "present order of things" strikes. And she will demand 
our help as if by right, demand it with a challenge and a command; 
she will tell us that we, too, are Europe; that we, accordingly, have 
just the same "order of things" as she has; that it was not in vain 
that we copied her for two hundred years and boasted of being 
Europeans; that in saving her we thereby will save ourselves as 
well. Of course, we might not be disposed to settle the rnaner 
exclusively in favor of one side; but are we capable of such a task, 
and have we not forgotten long ago every notion of what constitutes 
our true "dissociation" as a nation and what comprises oir true 
role in Europe? Not only do we not understand such things now, 
we do not even entertain such questions, and even to listen to them 
we consider a sign of stupidity and backwardness. And if Europe 
really does come knocking at our door for us to rise up and go 
save her Ordre, then, perhaps, and only then, will we understand 
for the first time-all of us suddenly at once-to what degree we 
have always been unlike Europe, despite our two hundred years 
of wishing and dreaming of becoming Europe, wishing and dream­
ing that sometimes found such passionate expression. Perhaps even 
then we won't understand, for it will be too late. And if such is 

March 
the case, then of course we shall be unable to understand what 
Europe needs from us, what she asks from us, and how, in fact, 
we could help her. Should we not, on the contrary, set off to pacify 
the enemy of Europe and the European order with that same blood 
and iron as Prince Bismarck? Oh, then, in the event of such a 
victory, we could boldly congratulate ourselves on being completely 
European. 
But all this lies ahead of us, all this is just a collection of fantasies, 
while the present day is all so, so bright! 

2 
1 .  Don Carlos and Sir Watkin. More Signs of "The 
Beginning of the End" 
I was most interested to read of the arrival of Don Carlos in 
England. People always say that real life is dull and monotonous; 
they tum to art and fantasy for diversion; they read novels. For 
me the opposite is true: what could be more fantastic and surprising 
than real life? What can be even more improbable than real life 
sometimes is? A novelist could never imagine possibilities such as 
real life offers every day by the thousand in the guise of the most 
ordinary things. There are times when no fantasizing could come 
up with the like. And what an advantage over the novel! Just try 
to invent an episode in a novel such as happened to, say, the lawyer 
Kupernik; concoct it yourself, and the following Sunday a critic 
in his column would prove to you clearly and beyond dispute that 
you are talking nonsense and that things like that never happen in 
real life and, most important, that they never can happen due to 
this reason and that reason. And, in the end, embarrassed, you 
would agree with him. But then someone gives you an issue of The 
Voice and suddenly you read in it the whole episode of our marks­
man-and what happens? At first you read in amazement-in ter­
rible amazement, such that you canot believe what you are reading; 
but as soon as you have read through to the final period, you put 
down the newspaper, and suddenly, not knowing why yourself, you 
say at once, "Yes, it all absolutely must have happened this way." 
And some people might even add, "I had a feeling something like 
that would happen." Why a newspaper produces such a different 
impression from a novel I don't know, but such is the privilege of 
real life. 
Don Carlos makes his calm and majestic entry into England as 
410 

March 
4 1 I 
a guest after all the blood and butchery "in the name of the King, 
the Faith, and the Madonna." Now here's a figure, here's another 
example of "dissociation!" Could anyone invent something like 
that? By the way, do you remember what happened to Count 
Chambord (Henry V) two years ago? He's another king, a legiti­
mist, who was making his claim to the French throne at the same 
time that Don Carlos was making his claim in Spain. They can 
consider each other relatives, being of the same lineage and the 
same ancestry, but what a difference between them! One is firmly 
bound up in his own convictions, a melancholy, elegant, humane 
figure. Count Chambord, at that fatal moment when he really could 
have become king (only for an instant, of course) was never tempted 
by anything; he never gave up his "white banner," and thereby 
proved that he was a true and magnanimous knight, almost a Don 
Quixote, an ancient knight with a vow of chastity and poverty, a 
figure worthy of bringing his ancient and royal lineage to a majestic 
end (majestic and just a touch absurd, for life does not exist without 
absurdity). He rejected power and the throne simply because he 
wanted to become the king of France not merely for himself but 
for the salvation of his country; and since in his view that salvation 
could not be reconciled with the concessions demanded of him (the 
concessions were quite within his means), he did not want to rule. 
How different from the recent Napoleon, a wily old fox and a 
proletarian, a man who promised everything, gave away everything, 
and cheated everyone just to attain power. I made a comparison 
between Count Chambord and Don Quixote just now, but this is 
the highest praise I know. It was Heine, wasn't it, who told of 
how, when reading Don Quixote as a child, he burst into tears on 
reaching the pJace where the hero was overcome by the wretched 
and commonsensical barber Samson Carrasco. There is nothing 
deeper and more powerful in the whole world than this piece of 
fution. It is still the final and the greatest expression of human 
thought, the most bitter irony that a human is capable of expressing, 
and if the world came to an end and people were asked somewhere 
there: "Well, did you understand anything from your life on earth 
and draw any conclusion from it?" a person could silently hand 
over Don Quixote: "Here is my conclusion about life; can you 
condemn me for it?" I don't claim that the person would be right 
in saying that, but . . . .  
Don Carlos, a relative of Count Chambord, is also a knight, but 
in this knight one can see the Grand Inquisitor. He has spilled 

4 1 2  
A Writer's Diary 
rivers of blood ad majorem gloriam Dei and in the name of the 
Madonna, that meek supplicant for humanity, the "swift intercessor 
and helper," as our People call her. Proposals were made to him, 
just as they were to Count Chambord, and he also rejected them. 
This happened soon after Bilbao, it seems, and immediately after 
his great victory when the commander of the Madrid army perished 
in battle. Then Madrid sent emissaries to him: "What would he 
say if they allowed him to enter Madrid? Would he not offer some 
little program for the possible opening of negotiations?" But he 
haughtily declined any notion of negotiations and did so, of course, 
not only from pride, but also from the principle that was so deeply 
entrenched in his soul: he could not accept emissaries from the 
belligerents and he, a "King," could not enter into any sort of 
agreements with the "revolution"! In a few concise words-almost 
hints, but clear hints-he made it known that "a king himself 
knows what he must do when he arrives in his capital," and he 
added nothing more. Naturally they quickly turned away from him 
and soon summoned King Alfonso. The favorable moment was 
lost, but he continued to wage war; he wrote manifestos in an 
elevated and majestic style, and he himself was the first to believe 
in them totally; haughtily and majestically, he shot a number of 
his generals "for treason" and put down rebellions of his exhausted 
troops; and-one must do him justice as a warrior-he battled to 
the last inch of territory. Now, as he left France for England, he 
stated in a gloomy and haughty letter to his French friends that 
he was "satisfied with their service and support, and that serving 
him they served themselves, and that he was always ready to bare 
his sword once more at the summons of his unfortunate country." 
Don't worry, we haven't seen the last of him. By the way, this 
letter to his "friends" casts a little glimmer of light on the riddle 
of who supplied the means and the money for this dreadful man 
(young and handsome, they say) to wage war so stubbornly and 
for such a long time. These friends, it would seem, are powerful 
and numerous. Who might they be? It's most likely that his biggest 
supporter was the Catholic church, since he was its last hope among 
the kings. Otherwise, no friends could have collected so many 
millions for him. 
Note that this man who haughtily and flatly rejected any com­
promise with "revolution" went to England knowing full well that 
he would seek hospitality in that free and freethinking country, a 

March 
revolutionary country by his definition. What a peculiar combi­
nation of ideas! And so when he arrived in England he was involved 
in a trivial but characteristic incident. He boarded the boat in 
Boulogne, intending to land at Folkestone; but that same boat was 
also taking to England certain guests, members of the Boulogne 
municipal government, whom the English had invited to the peace­
ful celebration of the opening of a new railway station in Folkestone. 
A crowd of Englishmen--notables, elegantly dressed ladies, guilds, 
and deputations of various societies with banners and bands-was 
waiting on the shore to greet the French visitors, among whom 
was also the deputy from the Department of Pas-de-Calais. A 
member of parliament, Sir Edward Watkin, happened to be there, 
and he was accompanied by two other members of parliament. 
When he learned that Don Carlos was among the passengers who 
had arrived, he approached him at once to introduce himself and 
pay his respects; he accompanied him to the station with the greatest 
courtesy and found a place for him in a private compartment. But 
the rest of the crowd was not so courteous: whistling and hissing 
were heard when Don Carlos passed by to board the train. Sir 
Edward was deeply offended by such behavior on the part of his 
compatriots. He himself wrote about it in a newspaper, toning 
down his account of the "guest's" rude reception as best he could. 
He tells of how it was only one chance happening that was to blame 
for it all; had it not been for that, everything would have turned 
out differently: 
. . .  At the moment (he writes) we came onto the platform and Don 
Carlos raised his hat in reply to the cries of several persons who 
greeted him, the wind unfurled the banner of the Odd Fellows As­
sociation; on the banner appeared a picture of Charity protecting 
children and the device: "Remember the Widows and Orphans! "  The 
effect was sudden and striking: a murmur came from the crowd, but 
it expressed sorrow rather than outbursts of anger. Although I regret 
the incident, I must say that no crowd, having assembled for a happy 
celebration and suddenly encountering, face to face, the chief actor 
in a bloody, fratricidal war, could have displayed such courtesy as was 
exhibited by the vast majority of the people of Folkestone. 
What a strange outlook; what solid faith in one's own opinion; 
what jealous pride in one's own people! Many of our liberals might 
regard Sir Edward's behavior as almost base-a low attempt to 

4 1 4 
A Writer's Diary 
ingratiate himself with a famous person or an effon to advance his 
own interests in some petty way. But Sir Edward does not think 
as we do: oh, he knows very well that the newly arrived guest was 
the main actor in a bloody and fratricidal war; but meeting him 
is a means of satisfying his patriotic pride and serving England to 
the best of his ability. When he, in the name of England and in 
his capacity as a member of parliament, extends his hand to a 
tyrant stained scarlet with blood, he thereby says to him in effȶct: 
"You are a despot, a tyrant, yet you have come to seek refuge in 
a land of fredom; that was what could be expected; England 
accepts all and is not afraid to give refuge to anyone: entree et sortie 
libres; welcome." And it was not only the rudeness of "a small 
section of the crowd that had gathered" that offended him, but 
also the fact that, in the unrestrained feeling, in the whistles and 
hisses, he saw a lapse in that sense of personal dignity which ought 
to be the inalienable possession of every true Englishman. Over 
there on the Continent, or among humans generally, it may be 
considered an excellent thing when people do not restrain their 
offended feelings and publicly brand a villain with scorn and whis­
tles, even if he is their guest. That's all very well for some Parisian 
or Gennan, but an Englishman is obliged to behave differently. At 
moments like that he ought to be calm and collected, a gentleman, 
and not express his own opinion. It would be much better if the 
guest never found out what those who greeted him were thinking; 
and it would be best of all if every one were to stand stil with his 
hands behind his back, as befits an Englishman, casting a glance 
ful of chilly dignity at the new arrival. A few polite exclamations, 
but done quietly and in moderation, would not have hun, either: 
the guest would at once have realized that this was only custom 
and etiquette and that even if he were as wise as Solomon he could 
not arouse any particular excitement among us. But now, with all 
the shouts and whistles, the guest will think that this is only a 
mindless street mob such as one finds on the Continent. This 
reminds me, by the way, of a lovely little story I read not long 
ago-where and by whom I don't recall-of Marshal Sebastiani and 
a cenain Englishman. It happened at the begining of the century 
during the reign of Napoleon I. Marshal Sebastiani, an irnponant 
figure of the time, wanted to show some kindness to an Englishman 
(the English at that time were held in disdain because of their 
continual and stubborn war with Napoleon). After heaping praise 

March 
upon the English, the marshal said very graciously, "If I were not 
a Frenchman, I would like to become an Englishman." 
The Englishman listened but, not the least bit touched by this 
gracious remark, replied, "And if I were not an Englishman, I 
would still like to become an Englishman." 
So in England all Englishmen respect themselves in this same 
way, perhaps only because they are Englishmen. This in itself, it 
would seem, should be enough to provide a solid bond to unite 
people in that country: the bundle of twigs is strong. In actuality, 
however, things are the same there as everywhere else in Europe: 
there is a passionate desire to live and a loss of a higher purpose 
for living. I will cite here, as another example of originality, the 
view of a certain Englishman on his own religion, Protestantism. 
Remember that the English, in the overwhelming majority, are a 
highly religious nation: they crave a faith and seek it continuously, 
but instead of a religion, and despite their official Anglican faith, 
they are divided into hundreds of sects. This is what Sydney Dobell 
says in his recent article "Thoughts on Art, Philosophy and 
Religion": 
Catholicism is (potentially) great, beautiful, wise, powerful, one of 
the most consistent and congruous constructions man has made; but 
it is not educational and will, therefore, die; nay, must be killed as 
pernicious in proportion to its excellence. 
Protestantism is narrow, ugly, impudent, unreasonable, inconsistent, 
incompatible: a Babel of logomacy and literalism: a wrangling club 
of half-thinking pedants, half-taught geniuses, and untaught egotists 
of every type: the nursery of conceit and fanaticism: the holiday 
ground of all the "fools rush in." 
But it is educational and therefore it will live; nay, must be fed and 
housed, cared for and fought for, as the sine qua non of the spiritual 
life of Man. 
What absolutely impossible ideas! But meanwhile thousands of 
Europeans seek their salvation in statements such as these. In fact, 
can a society which, seriously and fervently, arrives at such con­
clusions about human spiritual needs be truly healthy? "Protes­
tantism, don't you see, is primitive, ugly, shameless, narrow, and 
stupid; but it is educational and so it must be preserved and de­
fended! "  In the first place, what a utilitarian outlook on a question 
such as this! A matter to which everything else should take second 

A Writer's Diary 
place (if, indeed, Sydney Dobell is concerned about religion at all) 
is, on the contrary, examined here only from the point of view of 
its benefit to an Englishman. And, of course, such a utilitarian 
outlook is equal to the noneducational narrowness and restriction 
of Catholicism, which this Protestant so vigorously condemns. And 
aren't these words similar to other remarks of those "profound 
thinkers in matters of state and politics" of all countries and peo­
ples, thinkers who sometimes utter exceedingly wise statements 
like the following: "There is no God, of course, and religion is 
nonsense, but religion is needed for the masses because this is the 
only way to restrain them." The one difference, really, is that at 
the basis of this wise statesman's view is only cold, hard-hearted 
depravity, while Sydney Dobell is a friend of humanity and is 
concerned only for its immediate benefit. Still, his view on that 
benefit is valuable: the entire benefit, you see, lies in the fact that 
the doors are left wide open to all sorts of opinions and conclusions; 
there is entree et sortie libres to both mind and heart; nothing is 
locked away, nothing is kept protected, nothing is finished: you 
must swim in the boundless sea and save yourself as you please. 
This opinion is a broad one, however, as broad as this boundless 
sea, and, of course, "nothing's to be seen amid the waves"; yet 
this is a national point of view. Oh, there is deep sincerity here, 
but isn't it true that this sincerity seems to border on despair? His 
method of reasoning is also characteristic; the things people over 
there are thinking, writing, and worrying about are characteristic, 
too: do you think those Russians who write on current topics, for 
instance, would take up their pens on such fantastic subjects and 
give them such prominence? One could even say that we Russians 
are people with much greater realism, with a deeper and more 
sensible view of things than any of these Englishmen. But the 
English are ashamed neither of their own convictions nor of our 
opinion of them; one sometimes finds something even deeply touch­
ing in their extraordinary sincerity. Here, for example, is what one 
observer, who pays close attention to these things in Europe, told 
me about the nature of certain totally atheistic doctrines and sects 
in England: 
You enter a church and see the magnificent service, the expensive 
vestments, censers, solemnity, silence, and reverence of those praying. 
The Bible is read, and everyone approaches and kisses the sacred 
book with tears and with love. But what is this, in fact? This is the 

March 
church of the atheists. All those praying do not believe in God; their 
absolute dogma and absolute condition for joining this church is athe­
ism. Why do they kiss the Bible, listen reverently to readings from 
it, and weep over it? Because once they have rejected God they have 
begun to worship "Humanity." Now they believe in Humanity; they 
have deified Humanity and they worship it. And what was more 
precious to humanity through the course of so many centuries than 
this sacred book? They bow down before it because of its love for 
humanity and because of humanity's love for it. It has worked on 
behalf of mankind for so many centuries; it has enlightened humanity 
like the sun and poured out power and life upon it. And even though 
"its sense has now been lost," those who love and worship mankind 
cannot be ungrateful and forget those good things the Bible has done 
for them . . . .  
There is much here that is touching, and there is much enthu­
siasm. It really is a matter of deification of humanity and the 
passionate need to manifest love for it; but yet, what an urge there 
is for prayer and worship; what a longing for God and faith these 
atheists have; what despair, what sorrow is here; what a funeral 
ceremony instead of a living, radiant life overflowing with the fresh 
spring of youth, strength, and hope! But whether this is a funeral 
or a new, emerging force is still a question for many. I'll permit 
myself to make an excerpt from my recent novel, A Raw Youth. 
I only learned about this "Church of the Atheists" in the last few 
days, long after I had finished and published my novel. I also wrote 
about atheism, but this was only the dream of a Russian of our 
times, one of the men of the forties-those former landowner­
progressives, noble and passionate dreamers who, at the same time, 
had that most Russian breadth of outlook on life in actual practice. 
This landowner himself also has utterly lost his faith and also 
worships humanity "as befits a Russian progressive person." He 
tells of his dream of humanity in the future, when every notion of 
God will have vanished, something that, in his view, will certainly 
happen all over the world. 
"I imagine, my dear," he began with a pensive smile, "that the 
battle is already over and that the struggle is abating. After the cursing, 
the mud slinging, and the jeering, a lull has descended and people 
have found themselves alone as they wished: the former grand idea 
has abandoned them; the great source of strength which has nourished 
them until now has been receding like a majestic, inviting sun; but 

4 1 8  
A Writer's Diary 
this was, as it were, humanity's last day. And people suddenly realized 
that they had been left quite alone, and at.once they felt a great sense 
of being orphaned. My dear boy, I never could imagine people as 
ungrateful and srupid. The people, having become orphaned, at once 
would begin to draw closer and more lovingly toward one another; 
they would grasp each other's hands, understanding that now they 
and they alone constiruted everything for one another. The grand 
notion of immortality would disappear and it would have to be re­
placed. And in each person that whole grand superabundance of love 
for the One who was Immortality would now be directed toward 
narure, toward the world, toward people, toward every blade of grass. 
They would come irresistibly to love the earth and life in proportion 
to their gradual realization of their own transience and mortality, and 
now with a special love, unlike their former one. They would begin 
to perceive and discover in narure such phenomena and such mysteries 
as they had not dreamed of formerly, for they would look at narure 
through new eyes, with the look of a lover gazing at his beloved. They 
would awaken and hasten to kiss one another, eager to love, knowing 
that their days were short and that this was all that was left to them. 
They would work for one another, and each would give away all he 
had to the others and only in so doing would he be happy. Every 
child would know and feel that everyone on earth was his father and 
mother. "Tomorrow may be my last day," each one would think as 
he watched the setting sun; "I may die, but still, they will all remain 
and their children after them." And the thought that they would 
remain, loving one another and trembling for one another, would take 
the place of the notion of meeting them beyond the grave. Oh, they 
would make haste to love so as to quell the great sorrow in their hearts. 
They would be bold and proud of themselves, but would become 
meek before one another; each would tremble for the life and happiness 
of every other. They would become tender to one another and would 
not be ashamed of it, as they are now; they would be kind to each 
other, as children are. When they met they would gaze on one another 
with a profound and meaningful hok, and in that look there would 
be love and sorrow . . . .  
" 
Isn't it true that this fantasy contains something similar to what 
already exists in the "Church of the Atheists?" 
2. Lord Radstock 
A few words apropos of these sects. I have heard that Lord Radstock 
is here in St. Petersburg at this very moment, the same Lord 

March 
Radstock who spent a whole winter preaching among us three years 
ago and who also created something in the nature of a new sect. 
At that time I happened to hear him preaching in a certain "hall" 
and, I recall, I didn't find anything special in him: he did not 
speak particularly well, nor particularly badly. Yet he works mir­
acles over human hearts; people flock to hear him; many are deeply 
moved: they seek out the poor so as to do good deeds for them 
and almost reach the point of giving away their possessions. How­
ever, this may be happening only among us in Russia; it seems he 
is not so prominent abroad. However, it would be unfair to say 
that the whole force of his charm lies only in the fact that he is a 
lord and an independent person preaching what we might call a 
"pure, gentleman's" religion. True enough, all these sectarian 
preachers always destroy, even if they did not set out to, the image 
of faith provided by the church and supply their very own. Lord 
Radstock's real success is based exclusively on our "dissociation," 
on our detachment from the soil and from our nation. It turns out 
that we, that is, the intelligentsia of our society, now comprise some 
sort of linle foreign nation of our own-a very small, insignificant 
one, but still having its own customs and its own prejudices that 
are taken for originality; and so it turns out that we now even have 
a longing for our own religion as well. It's difficult to say what 
Lord Radstock's teaching is really about. He is an Englishman, 
but people say that he is not a member of the Anglican church 
and has broken with it; he preaches something of his own. Such 
a thing is so easy in England: there, just as in America, there are 
more sects, perhaps, than among our own "dark people." There 
are sects such as the Jumpers, the Shakers, the Convulsionaries, 
the Quakers awaiting the millennium, and, finally, the Flagellants 
(a universal and very ancient sect)-there are simply too many to 
list. Of course, I'm not making fun when I speak of these sects 
together with Lord Radstock, but he who has departed from the 
true church and thought up his own, no matter how respectable it 
may appear, will undoubtedly end the same way these sects do. 
Lord Radstock's admirers should not frown at this: the philosoph­
ical basis of these same sects, these Shakers and Flagellants, some­
times contains remarkably profound and powerful ideas. Tradition 
has it that in her home in the Mikhailovsky Castle in the 1 82os, 
Mme. Tatarinova and her guests, such as one government minister 
of the day, used to twirl and speak prophecies along with the 
enserfed servants. So there must have been some power of thought 

420 
A Writer's Diary 
and feeling if such an "unnatural" union of believers could be 
created; and Tatarinova 's sect was, evidently, also part of the Flagel­
lants or of one of its innumerable branches. I have never heard 
any accounts of people twirling and speaking prophecies with Lord 
Radstock. (Twirling and speaking prophecies is a most indispen­
sable and ancient attribute of almost all these Western and Russian 
sects, at least of an overwhelming majority of them. And the Tem­
plars, too, whirled and spoke prophecies and also had their element 
of flagellation and were burned at the stake for it, although later 
they were lauded and glorified by French thinkers and poets before 
the first Revolution.) I have heard only that Lord Radstock preaches 
particularly about "the descent of grace" and that, in the words 
of one informant, Lord Radstock has "Christ in his pocket"; that 
is, he treats Christ and His grace with extraordinary levity. I must 
confess that I didn't understand the reports of people throwing 
themselves down on cushions and awaiting some sort of inspiration 
from on high. Is it true that Lord Radstock wants to go to Moscow? 
It would be a good thing if this time none of our clergy expressed 
their approval of his sermons. Nevertheless, he produces remark­
able conversions and arouses magnanimous feelings in the hearts 
of his followers. However, that is as it should be: if he is indeed 
sincere and is preaching a new faith, then, of course, he is possessed 
by all the spirit and fervor of the founder of a sect. I repeat, here 
we have our lamentable dissociation from one another, our igno­
rance of our own People, our rupture with nationality, and, above 
all, our weak, barely perceptible knowledge of Orthodoxy. It is 
remarkable that, with only a few exceptions, there is scarcely a 
word about Lord Radstock in our press. 
3· A Word or Two about the Report of the Scholarly 
Commission on Spiritualistic Phenomena 
Are the spiritualists another "dissociation?" I think they are. The 
spiritualism that we see developing among us threatens to become 
a most dangerous and despicable "dissociation," in my view. In­
deed, "dissociation" is disunity; it is in this sense I say that our 
nascent spiritualism contains powerful elements that can only con­
tribute to the already growing and progressive disunity of the Rus­
sian people. How absurd and annoying I find it to read some of 
our thinkers who write that our society is asleep or is lazily and 
indifferently drowsing. To the contrary: we have never seen such 

March 
42 1  
unrest, such rushing this way and that, such questing for something 
to rely on morally, as we do these days. Every little idea, no matter 
how absurd, can count on certain success so long as it suggests 
even the slightest hope of solving something. And this success is 
always confined to the "dissociation" of some other new handful 
of people. So it is with spiritualism. And imagine my disappoint­
ment when I finally read in The Voice the report of the well-known 
commission, about which there has been such a hue and cry, on 
the spiritualistic phenomena that were observed all through the 
winter in the home of Mr. Aksakov. You see, I was just waiting 
and hoping that this repon would crush and destroy this indecent 
(in its mystical sense) new doctrine. It is true that we still, ap­
parently, have not seen any new doctrines, and we are still only 
"making observations." But is that really the case? It's a pity that 
at the moment I have neither the time nor the space to expound 
my idea in detail; but in the following, April, number of my Diary 
perhaps I will venture to take up the topic of spiritualism once 
more. However, I may be condemning the commission's report 
unfairly: the repon is not to blame, of course, for the fact that I 
had built such high hopes on it and was expecting from it something 
quite impossible which it could never provide. But in any case, 
the repon fails in its exposition and in its form. The report is 
framed in such a manner that its opponents will undoubtedly seize 
upon its "biased" (and so a very unscientific) attitude to its subject, 
even though the commission may not have had such bias as to 
justify the charge. (There was a certain amount of bias, but we 
really can't avoid that). But the text is certainly poorly framed. For 
example, the commission permits itself to draw conclusions about 
cenain spiritualistic phenomena (the materialization of spirits, for 
instance), which, by its own admission, it had never witnessed. 
We may suppose that it did this with an edifying purpose, to draw 
a moral, so to say, by jumping the gun in the interests of society 
so as to save frivolous people from going astray. It is a worthy idea, 
but scarcely an appropriate one in the given instance. Still, what 
of it? Could the commission itself, composed of so many learned 
people, have seriously hoped in its very first effort to suppress such 
a silly idea? Alas, if the commission had produced even the most 
obvious and direct proofs of trickery, even if it had caught and 
exposed people in the act of producing fakeries, seizing them by 
the arms, as it were (which, of course, never happened)-even 
then, no one who is now an enthusiast for spiritualism would have 

422 
A Writer's Diary 
believed it, nor would those who only want to take a mild interest 
in it, because there is a primordial law of nature stating that, where 
mystical notions are concerned, even strictly mathematical profs 
carry no weight whatsoever. And here, in our nascent spirirualism, 
the mystical idea alone is foremost, believe me-and what can you 
do about that? Faith and mathematical prof are two irreconcilable 
things. There's no stopping someone who makes up his mind to 
believe. Besides, the profs in this case are far from mathematical. 
Nevertheless, the report might still have ben useful. It might 
certainly have been useful for all those who had not yet been led 
astray and who were still indiferent to spirirualism. But now, given 
this "urge to believe," the urge is supplied with a new weapon. 
The overly scornful and haughty tone of the report could have been 
toned down as well; indeed, when reading it one might think that 
both esteemed parties had a personal quarel for some reason during 
the course of their observations. This will not influence the masses 
favorably toward the report. 
4· Isolated Phenomena 
But there is also another category of phenomena, a rather curious 
one, especially when it appears among young people. It's true that 
as yet these are isolated phenomena. Along with stories of a few 
unfortunate young people who "go to the People," we begin to 
hear stories of another type of young person altogether. These new 
young people are also restless; they write you leners or come in 
person with their problems, their articles, and their unexpected 
ideas, but they are not at all like those young people whom we 
have grown accustomed to meting. Thus, there are some grounds 
for supposing that among our young people a certain movement 
is begining that is quite the reverse of the former one. Well, 
perhaps we should have expected it. In fact, whose children are 
they? They are the very children of those "liberal" fathers who, 
at the begining of Russia's renaissance during the present reign, 
semed to tear themselves away en mase from the common cause, 
imagining that in so doing they were serving Progres and Lib­
eralism. And yet-since all this is largely a thing of the past-were 
there many genuine liberals then? Were there many truly suffering, 
pure, and sincere people such as Belinsky, for example (his intellect 
aside), who was then not long deceased? To the contrary, in the 
majority they were still only a coarse mass who were peny in their 

March 
423 
atheism and serious in their turpitude; in essence, they were the 
same greedy and petty tyrants who boasted of their liberalism, in 
which they contrived to find only the right to be dishonest. And 
just remember the things that were said and the beliefs that were 
expressed then; recall the abominations that were often held up as 
examples of honor and valor. It was, in essence, only a filthy 
alleyway into which an honest idea had strayed. And it was just 
at this point that the liberation of the peasants came along, and 
with it the disintegration and "dissociation" of our educated society 
in every possible sense. People did not recognize one another, and 
the liberals did not recognize their own liberalism. And how many 
melancholy misunderstandings followed, and how many grievous 
disillusionments! The most shameless reactionaries sometimes sud­
denly pushed their way forward as progressives and leaders, and 
they were successful. What could many of the children of that time 
see in their fathers? What memories of childhood and youth could 
they have? Cynicism, mockery, and merciless attacks on the first 
tender, sacred manifestations of belief in the children; and then the 
often open debauchery of their fathers and mothers, done confi­
dently and from the doctrine that this is how it should be, that such 
are genuine, "sane" relationships. Add to this a great number of 
families that suffered financial ruin, and the result is impatient 
dissatisfaction and impressive words that hide only egotistical, petty 
spite over material reverses. Oh, our young people eventually were 
able to puzzle all this out and make sense of it! And since our 
young people are pure, serene, and magnanimous, then naturally 
it could happen that some of them did not want to follow in the 
footsteps of fathers such as these, and they rejected their "sane" 
admonitions. So it was that such "liberal" education was able to 
product: results that were not at all liberal, in some instances at 
least. So perhaps it is these very young people, these "raw youths," 
who are now seeking new paths in life and who are beginning by 
flatly rejecting that cycle of ideas they find so hateful and which 
they first encountered in childhood, in the wretched nests of their 
own parents. 
s. On Yury Samarin 
And the steadfast men of conviction are passing away. Yury 
Samarin, a man of immense talent and unshakeable convictions, 
a man who did most useful work, has died. There are people who 

A Writer's Diary 
command the respect of everyone, even of those who do not agree 
with their convictions. The New Times printed a very characteristic 
story about him. Not that long ago, at the end of February, while 
passing through St. Petersburg, Samarin read the article by Prince 
Vasilchikov, "The Black Soil Lands and Their Future," in the 
February issue of Notes of the Fatherland. This article made such 
an impression on him that he did not sleep the whole night: "It's 
a very fine and true article," Samarin said to a friend the next 
morning. "I read it yesterday evening, and it made such an im­
pression on me that I could not get to sleep. All night long I kept 
seeing a terrible picture of the arid, treeless wasteland into which 
our central black soil region is being transformed because of con­
tinuous and unhindered deforestation." 
"Are there many among us who lose sleep worrying about their 
motherland?" New Times adds. I think that we still will find some, 
and, who knows, perhaps now, judging by our alarming situation, 
there will be even more of them than before. We have always had 
enough worriers, in every sense imaginable, and we are certainly 
not asleep, as some would have it. The point, however, is not that 
we have worriers; it lies in the manner in which they think, and 
in Yury Samarin we lost a steadfast and deep thinker; that is a 
loss indeed. The old forces are departing, and we are still too 
bedazzled by the new ones, the people of the future, to make out 
what they are . . . .  

April 


1 
1. The Ideals of a Stagnant, Vegetative Life. Kulaks 
and Bloodsuckers. Superior People Who Drive 
Russia Forward 
The March issue of The Russian Messenger of this year contains a 
"criticism" of me by Mr. A., i.e., Mr. Avseenko. There's no use 
in my answering Mr. Avseenko: it's difficult to conceive of a writer 
who has a poorer grasp of his subject. However, if he had grasped 
his subject, the result would be the same. Everything in the article 
that touches on me revolves around the theme that it is not we, the 
people of culture, who ought to bow down before the People-for 
"the ideals of the People are predominantly the ideals of stagnant, 
vegetative life"-but, on the contrary, it is the People who ought 
to receive enlightenment from us, the cultured, and adopt our way 
of thinking and our likeness. In short, Mr. Avseenko was very 
displeased with what I said about the People in the February Diary. 
I suppose that there is only one misunderstanding here, for which 
I am to blame. This misunderstanding ought to be cleared up, but 
answering Mr. Avseenko is literally impossible. What, for example, 
can one have in common with a man who suddenly says the fol­
lowing things about the People: 
It was on their shoulders [i.e., on the People's shoulders], on their 
endurance and self-sacrifice, on their vital strength, ardent faith, -and 
magnanimous disregard for their own interests that Russia's inde­
pendence, strength, and capacity for a historic mission were founded. 
They have preserved the purity of the Christian ideal for us, displaying 
heroism that is both lofty and humble in its grandeur, and have 
perpetuated those beautiful traits of the Slavic nature which, when 
reflected in the hearty sounds of Push kin's poetry, cuntinually thereafter 
nourished the living stream of our literature . . . .  
" 

A Writer's Diary 
And so, no sooner had he written that (or copied from the Slav­
ophiles, rather) than on the very next page Mr. Avseenko states 
just the reverse about that same Russian Poople: 
The fact is that our People have not provided us with any ideal of a 
dynamic personality. Al those beautiful things we perceive in them and 
which our literature, to its great credit, has taught us to love in them, 
are only on the level of elemental being-a self-contained, idyllic [?] 
way of life or passive existence. No soner does an active, energetic 
personality emerge from the People than its charm usually vanishes, 
and most often this manifestation of individuality assumes the unat­
tractive form of the bloodsucker, the kulak, the stupid and petty tyrant. 
The People still do not have active ideals, and to place one's hopes 
in them means to begin from an unknown and perhaps imaginary 
quantity. 
And to say all that immediately after stating on the preceding 
page that Russia's independence was founded "on the shoulders 
of the People, on their endurance and self-sacrifice, on their vital 
strength, ardent faith, and magnanimous disregard for their own 
interests!" But really, in order to display this vital strength they 
could not be merely passive! And to create Russia they could not 
help but use their strength! To show their magnanimous disregard 
for their own interests, they certainly had to work magnanimously 
and actively in the interests of others, that is, in the common, 
brotherly interest. In order "to bear on their shoulders" Russia's 
independence, they could certainly not sit passively on the spot; 
they surely had to get up and move, even a little, and at least take 
a step; they had to do some little thing, at least. Yet Mr. Avsenko 
at once adds that no sooner do the People begin to do something 
then they at once assume "the unattractive features of the blood­
sucker, the kulak, or the stupid and petty tyrant." So it turns out 
that it is the kulaks, the bloodsuckers, and the petty tyrants who 
have borne Russia on their shoulders. Thus all these saintly met­
ropolitans of ours (who defended the People and who built the 
Russian land), all our pious princes, all our boyars, our men of 
state who toiled and who served Russia to the point of sacrificing 
their lives and whose names history has reverently preserved-all 
of them were only bloodsuckers, kulaks, and petty tyrants! I may 
be told, perhaps, that Mr. Avseenko was not talking about people 
of years gone by, but about people now; that it is a matter of 
history, and all happened long ago, in some Stone Age or other. 

April 
But if that's the case, then have our People undergone some total 
transformation? What kind of contemporary people is Mr. Av­
seenko talking about, anyway? When did they have their begin­
ning? From the time of Peter the Great's reforms? From the period 
of culture? From the final establishment of serfdom? But if that's 
the case, then the cultured Mr. Avseenko is betraying himself; then 
everybody will tell him: "What was the use of bringing you culture, 
so that in return you could corrupt the People and transform them 
merely into kulaks and cheats?" Do you really possess this "gift 
of seeing only the dark side" to that degree, Mr. Avseenko? Can 
it really be that our People, who were enserfed specifically for the 
sake of your culture (at least according to General Fadeev), now, 
after their two hundred years of slavery, deserve from you, a man 
who has been able to acquire culture, only this coarse insult about 
kulaks and cheats instead of gratitude or even compassion? (I set 
no store by the fact that you praised them on one page, because 
you canceled it all on the next page.) It was for you that for two 
hundred years they were bound hand and foot, so that Europe's 
intellectual tradition might be delivered to you, and so now that 
you have acquired this European intellect (?), you stand, hands on 
hips, before those who are bound hand and foot, looking down on 
them from the height of your culture, and suddenly come to the 
conclusion that they are "bad and passive and have shown little 
ability to act (these, the bound ones), but have displayed only 
certain passive virtues which, though they have nourished our lit­
erature with living juices, are not worth a penny in essence because 
as soon as the People do begin to act, they at once turn out to be 
kulaks and swindlers." No, I should not have replied to Mr. Av­
seenko, and if I did so it was only as an admission of my own 
mistake, about which I will explain below. Nevertheless, since I 
have taken up the subject I feel it is relevant to provide the reader 
with some idea about Mr. Avseenko. As a writer he represents a 
minor cultural type which is most interesting to observe and which 
has a certain wider meaning; and that is not a good thing at all. 
2. Minor Cultural Types. Damaged People 
Mr. Avseenko has been writing criticism for a long time, for some 
years now, and I confess that I still had some hopes for him: "If 
he writes long enough," I thought, "he'll finally say something." 
But I did not know him very well. My error continued right up 

430 
A Writer's Diary 
to the October 1874 issue of The Russian Messenger where, in his 
article on Pisemsky's comedies and dramas, he suddenly came out 
with the following: " . . .  Gogol caused oui writers to pay too little 
attention to the inner content of their works and to rely too heavily 
on the artistic element alone. Such an attitude toward the task of 
literature was very common in our literature of the 184os; and that 
is partly the reason why this literature was lacking in innercontenl[!]." 
So the literature of the 184os was lacking in inner content! Never 
in my whole life did I expect to hear such news. This is the same 
literature that gave us Gogol's complete works, his comedy The 
Marriage (lacking in inner content-bah!), that later gave us his 
Dead Souls (lacking in inner content-why the man could have said 
anything else, even the first thing that came into his head, and it 
would still have made more sense than this). Then the 184os pro­
duced Turgenev with his Hunter's Sketches (and are these lacking 
in inner content?), and then Goncharov who, in the forties, wrote 
his Oblomuv and published its best episode, "Oblomov's Dream," 
which all Russia read with delight! This is the same literature that 
gave us, finally, Ostrovsky; but it is specifically Ostrovsky's types 
that provoke Mr. Avsenko, in this same article, to his coarsest 
insults: 
Due to external reasons, the world of government officials was not 
entirely available as a subject of theatrical satire; and so our comedy 
rushed off al the more eagerly to the world of the merchants of 
Zamoskvorechie and the Apraksin Coun, to the world of pilgrims 
and matchmakers, drunken clerks, bailifs, psalm singers, and citified 
peasants. The range of comedy became incredibly narowed to mere 
imitation of drunken or iliterate jargon and the repnxluction of the 
savage maners of coarse, offensive characters and types. Genre works 
were enthroned on stage, but not the warm, happy bourgeois [?] genre 
which is sometimes so appealing on the French stage [Does he mean 
those linle farces where one character crawls under a table and another 
tries to drag him out by the leg?]; what we have is coarse genre, 
unclean, and repulsive. Some writers, such as Mr. Ostrovsky, for 
example, brought much talent, emotion, and humor into this literature, 
but in general our theater reached a low point in terms of content, 
and it quickly became obvious that it lul rrolhing 10 say to the educated 
portion of society and nothing in common with them. 
And so Ostrovsky lowered the level of the stage; Ostrovsky had 
nothing to say to the "educated" elements of society! It follows 

April 
43 1 
that the society that delighted in Ostrovsky on the stage and de­
voured his writings was an uneducated one. Oh, yes, you see 
educated society used to go to the Mikhailovsky Theater to see that 
"warm, happy, bourgeois genre which sometimes is so appealing 
on the French stage." But Liubim Tortsov is "coarse, unclean." 
It would be interesting to know which educated society Mr. Av­
seenko is talking about. There is nothing dirty about Liubim Tor­
tsov: he is "pure in spirit"; but what is dirty, perhaps, is the place 
where this "warm bourgeois genre that sometimes is so appealing 
on the French stage" holds sway. And what does he mean by saying 
that the artistic element excludes inner conrenr? On the contrary: 
artistry promotes content to the highest degree. Gogol may be weak 
in his Selected Correspondence, yet he is characteristic; but Gogol, 
in those passages in Dead Souls where he ceases to be an artist 
and begins to convey his own views directly, is simply weak and 
not even characteristic. But his Marriage and his Dead Souls are 
his most profound works, the richest in inner content, precisely 
because of the artistically rendered characters who appear in them. 
These portrayals, so to say, almost overburden the mind with the 
most profound and agonizing problems; they evoke the most dis­
turbing thoughts in the Russian mind, and one feels it will be a 
long time before we will be able to cope with them; indeed, will 
we ever be able to cope with such thoughts? And Mr. Avseenko 
shouts that Dead Souls has no inner content! But take Woe from 
Wir: it achieves its power only from its brilliant, artistically rendered 
types and characters, and it is the labor of artistry alone that 
provides the whole inner content of this work; just as soon as 
Griboedov abandons his role as an artist and begins to convey his 
own ideas from his own intellect (through the mouth of Chatsky, 
the weakest character in the play), he at once sinks to a most 
unenviable level, far lower than even the representatives of the 
intelligentsia of the day. The level of Chatsky's moralizing is far 
lower than the comedy itself, and it consists in part of the most 
errant nonsense. All the profundity, all the content of a work of. 
art thus resides only in its types and its characters. And this is 
almost always the case. 
So the reader can see the sort of critic he is dealing with. And 
I can already hear you asking: why do you bother with him, then? 
I repeat: I want only to correct my own negligence, and I am 
dealing with Mr. Avseenko now, as I said above, not as a critic 
but as a distinct and curious literary phenomenon. We have here 

432 
A Writer's Diary 
didn't understand Mr. Avseenko. I don't mean his articles-these 
I never could understand and, in any case, there is nothing in them 
to understand or not understand. I gave up on him altogether after 
that same article in the October 1874 issue of The Russian Messenger, 
wondering all the while, however, how pieces by such a confused 
writer could appear in a journal as serious as The Russian Messenger. 
But then suddenly something quite amusing happened, and I sud­
denly understood Mr. Avseenko at once: at the beginning of the 
winter he suddenly began publishing his novel The Milky Way. 
(And why did the publication of the novel stop?) This novel sud­
denly clarified for me the whole nature of Avseenko as a writer­
type. It's not fitting that I speak specifically about the novel: I 
myself am a novelist and I shouldn't criticize a colleague. And so 
I won't criticize the novel at all, the more so that it provided me 
with a few genuinely happy moments. For example, the young 
hero, a prince, is sitting in a box at the opera and is sniveling for 
all to hear because the music has touched his tender feelings; a 
lady from the beau monde, deeply moved by his sobs, keeps pes­
tering him: "You're crying? You're crying?" But that's really not 
the point; the point is that I grasped the essence of this writer. 
Mr. Avseenko as a writer represents a figure who has lost his 
presence of mind in his worship of high society. To put it briefly, 
he has prostrated himself and is worshiping the gloves, carriages, 
perfumes, pomades, silk dresses (especially the moment when a 
lady takes her seat in an armchair and her dress rustles around her 
feet and her body), and finally, the servants who greet their mistress 
when she returns from the Italian opera. He writes about all this 
constantly, reverently, piously, and devoutly; in short, it is as if he 
were celebrating some kind of Mass. I heard (perhaps it was said 
in fun) that he began this novel with the aim of correcting Leo 
Tolstoy, who depicted high society too objectively in his Anna 
Karenina; one ought to have depicted it more devoutly, on one's 
knees, as it were. And of course it would not be worth mentioning 
this at all unless, I repeat, it had not brought to light a completely 
new cultural type. It turns out that the critic Avseenko sees the 
whole point of our culture-its whole achievement, the whole cul­
mination of the two-hundred-year period of our debauchery and 
our sufering-in carriages, in pomade, and particularly in the 
manner in which servants go out to greet their mistress; and he 
admires these things, without a hint of mockery. The seriousness 

April 
433 
and sincerity of his admiration constitute a most curious phenom­
enon. The most important thing is that Mr. Avseenko, as a writer, 
is not alone; even before him we had the "merciless Juvenals in 
calico dickeys," but never with such a degree of reverence. Granted, 
they are not all like that, but my problem is that, little by little, 
I have at last become convinced that there are even an extraordinary 
number of such representatives of culture in literature and in life, 
although not in such a rigid and pure type. I admit, it was as if 
the light had finally dawned on me. And then, of course, I could 
understand the disparaging remarks about Ostrovsky and about 
the "warm, happy, bourgeois genre which is sometimes so ap­
pealing on the French stage." Well-it's really not Ostrovsky and 
not Gogol and not the 184os that are at issue here (who needs 
them, anyway?); what's at issue is simply the Mikhailovsky Theater 
in St. Petersburg that is patronized by the people of high society 
who come driving up to it in their cariages. That's all it is; that's 
what has seized his imagination with such merciless force; it has 
seduced him and sent his mind into a whirl from which it will 
never recover. I repeat once more: one mustn't regard this from 
only a comic point of view; it's much more interesting than that. 
In short, there is much here that is caused by a particular mania, 
an almost pathological weakness, one might say, for which one 
must make allowances. Let's take an example: a high-society car­
riage is going to the theater; just look how it rolls along and how 
the light from the lanterns shines through the carriage window, 
casting a romantic glow over the lady sitting within. This is no 
longer the subject for a pen, it is a prayer, and one must have a 
deep feeling for it! Of course, many of them are showing off before 
the People with something apparently much loftier than gloves; 
among them are even many ultraliberals, almost republicans, and 
yet, once in a while, you'll see the glove-worshiper emerge. This 
debility, this mania for the charms of high society with its oysters 
and hundred-ruble watermelons served at balls, this mania, no 
maner how innocent it may seem, has even given rise to a special 
sort of confirmed advocate of serfdom among those who never 
owned serfs in their lives. But once they have accepted carriages 
and the Mikhailovsky Theater as the culmination of the cultured 
period of Russian history, they suddenly became advocates of serf­
dom by conviction; and although they haven't the least intention 
of restoring it, they at least can spit upon the People quite openly 

434 
A Writer's Diary 
and with the air of the fulest culrural right. These are the very 
ones who shower the most astonishing accusations on the People: 
he who has ben in bondage for two hundred years is taunted for 
his passivity; the por man who has ben squezed for his quit­
rent is accused of slovenlines; he who has never ben taught is 
accused of lacking education; he who has ben beaten with a stick 
is blamed for having coarse maners; and sometimes they are ready 
to blame him for not having his hair pomaded and trimed by a 
barber on Bolshoi Morskoi Stret. This is by no means an exag­
geration; it is literally so, and the whole point is that it is not an 
exaggeration. Their disgust for the People is utterly furious, and 
if they sometimes do praise the People-well, then it is done as a 
matter of politics; simply for the sake of decency they pick out a 
few resounding phrases in which they understand nothing, because 
they contradict themselves a few lines later. By the way, I remember 
an incident now that happened to me two and a half years ago. I 
was taking the train to Moscow and struck up a conversation at 
night with a landowner who was sitting next to me. As far as I 
could tell in the darknes, he was a wizened little man of about 
fifty with a red and rather swollen nose; I think he also had 
something wrong with his fet. He was a very respectable type­
in maners, in conversation, in his opinions-and he even spoke 
quite sensibly. He spoke of the dificult and uncertain situation of 
the nobility, of the remarkable economic disorganization al over 
Rusia, and he spoke almost without malice but held a stem view 
of the subject; and he interested me intensely. And what do you 
think? Suddenly, in pasing and quite unawares, he anounced 
that he considered himself incomparably superior to the peasant 
in a physical sense and that this, of course, was a fact beyond 
dispute. 
"You mean to say, in other words, as an example of a cultivated 
and educated person?" I said, trying to make clear his meaning. 
"No, not at al. Not only my moral narure but my physical narure 
as well is superior to the peasant's; my body is better and finer 
than a peasant's, and this is the result of our many generations of 
development into a superior type." 
There was no point in arguing with him: this weak little man 
with a red, scrofulous nose and ailing fet (perhaps he had gout, 
the nobleman's ailment) considered himself in good conscience to 
be physically, in bЌ superior to and more attractive than a peas­
ant! I repeat, he bore no malice whatsoever. But you must agre 

April 
435 
that this amiable man ,  even in his amiability, might, were he given 
an opportunity, commit some terrible injustice to the People, quite 
innocently, calmly, and in good conscience, precisely as a result 
of his contemptuous view of the People, a view that was almost 
unconscious and existed almost independently of him. 
Nonetheless, it is essential that I set right my own negligence. 
I was writing at that time about the People's ideals and about the . 
fact that we, "like prodigal children returning home, ought to bow 
down before the People's truth and await from it alone our ideas 
and the form of those ideas. But, on the other hand, the People 
should take from us something of what we have brought with us; 
that this something truly does exist; that it is not a mirage, but has 
an image and a form and a weight; and that, should the reverse 
hold true, should we not come to an agreement, then it is better 
that we part and perish separately." And it was all that, I now see, 
that seemed unclear. First, people began asking: what ideals do 
the People have to which we should bow down? Second, what do 
I have in mind when I speak of the precious thing we brought 
with us and which the People must accept from us sine qua non? 
And would it not be easier, finally, if the People were to bow down 
to us, and not vice versa, solely because we are Europe and we 
are cultured, and they are only Russian and passive? Mr. Avseenko 
answers this question affirmatively; however I am replying now not 
only to Mr. Avseenko, but to all those "cultured" people who did 
not understand me, beginning with the "merciless Juvenals in 
calico dickeys" right up to the gentlemen who recently anounced 
that we have nothing at all worth preserving. And so, to business. 
If I had not tried to express myself succinctly at that time and had 
gone into more detail, then, of course, you could still have disagreed 
with me, but my ideas would not have been distorted and called 
unclear. 
3· Confusion and Inaccuracy in the Points at Issue 
It is plainly stated that the People possess no Truth whatsoever, 
but that Truth exists only in culture and is preserved by the highest 
levels of cultured people. To be quite honest, I accept this dear 
European culture of ours in its highest sense, but not in the sense 
of cariages and servants only; I accept it specifically in the sense 
that we, compared to the People, have developed morally and 
spiritually, have become humanized and humane, and in so doing, 

A Writer's Diary 
to our credit, we have become quite distinct from the People. 
Having made such a dispassionate declaration, I at once pose myself 
the question: "Are we indeed so good and so faultlessly cultured 
that we can toss aside our People's culture and worship our own? 
And, finally, just what did we bring from Europe for the People?" 
Before answering such questions, let us, in the interests of orderly 
discussion, exclude any mention of science, industry, and other 
such things in which Europe justly can take pride over our country. 
Excluding these things is quite just, for this is not the question at 
the present time; moreover, this science is over there, in Europe, 
while we ourselves, i.e., the upper levels of cultured people in 
Russia, are still not much noted for our science, despite our two 
hundred years of schooling; and so it is still too early to bow down 
to us cultured people on account of our science. So science certainly 
does not constitute any essential and irreconcilable difference be­
tween both classes of Russian people, i.e., between the common 
people and the upper cultured strata, and to say that science is the 
principal, fundamental difference between us and the People is, I 
repeat, quite untrue and would be a mistake; we must seek the 
difference in something else entirely. Besides, science is a matter 
of common concern, and is the invention of no single nation in 
Europe; all peoples, beginning from the ancient world, played their 
part and shared the legacy. For its part, the Russian People were 
never the enemy of science; indeed, it began penetrating Russia 
even before Peter the Great. Tsar Ivan IV did everything he could 
to conquer the Baltic coast thirty years before Peter. Had he con­
quered it and taken possession of its harbors and ports, then he 
would inevitably have had to begin building his own ships just as 
Peter did; and since one cannot build ships without science, then 
science from Europe would have inevitably appeared then, just as 
it did under Peter. Our Potugins may try to dishonor the People 
by sneering that the Russians have invented nothing but the sam­
ovar, but Europeans will not likely join the chorus. It is al too 
clear and comprehensible that everything happens according to 
well-known laws of nature and of history and that it is not intel­
lectual weakness or the limited capacities of the Russian People or 
shameful laziness that have been the cause of our scant contribution 
to science and industry. One type of tree may mature in so many 
years, while another type takes twice as long. Everything here 
depends on how nature and circumstances have placed a people, 

April 
437 
and what it had to accomplish first. There are geographical, eth­
nographical, political, and a thousand other reasons, all of them 
clear and precise. No one of good sense would reproach and shame 
a thirteen-year-old because he isn't twenty-five. "Europe," people 
claim, "is more active and clever than the passive Russians, and 
therefore she has acquired science while the Russians haven't." But 
while Europe was acquiring her science, the passive Russians were 
giving evidence of an activity that was no less striking: they were 
founding a kingdom and consciously unifying it. For a whole thou­
sand years they fought off cruel enemies who would have fallen 
upon Europe had it not been for the Russians. The Russians were 
colonizing Ǟe farthest corners of their boundless motherland; the 
Russians were defending and strengthening their borders, and did 
so in ways that we cultured people could not now match; to the 
contrary, we may yet weaken our borders. At last, after a thousand 
years, there emerged there a kingdom and a political entity without 
parallel in the world, so much so that England and the United 
States, the only other states which still have a strong and original 
form of political unity, may be far behind us. Well, in Europe, 
under different political and geographical circumstances, there arose 
science instead. But at the same time as science developed, the 
moral and political health of Europe weakened almost everywhere. 
Thus everyone has his own accomplishments, and we still cannot 
say who should be envious of whom. We'll acquire science in any 
case, but can we tell what will happen to Europe's political unity? 
The Germans, perhaps, only fifteen years ago might have agreed 
to trade half their scientific renown for that strength of political 
unity which we had long possessed. The Germans have now 
achieved a strong political union, at least as they define it, but at 
that time the German Empire did not yet exist and they envied 
us-without showing it, of course-despite their scorn for us. And 
so there is no point in posing the question about science and 
industry; the question is, specifically: in what way have we, the 
cultured people, become morally and essentially superior to the 
People when we returned from Europe? What priceless treasure 
did we bring them in the guise of our European culture? Why are 
we clean, while the People are still dirty? Why are we all, while 
the People are nothing? I propose that there is an enormous lack 
of clarity among us cultured people on these questions, and that 
very few of the "cultured" could answer them correctly. On the 

A Writer's Diary 
contrary, there is a total muddle here, with people asking with a 
sneer why a pine tree does not mature in seven years but requires 
seven times that long to grow to ful height. Such questions are so 
common and so usual that one often hears them not only from the 
Potugins but even from those who have progressed much further. 
I won't even mention Mr. Avseenko. And now it's time to address 
directly the question posed at the beginning of the chapter: are we 
indeed so fine and so faultlessly cultured that we can cast aside 
the People's culture and bow down to our own? And if we bear 
something with us, then what is it, exactly? I shall state plaiu.ly in 
reply that we are much worse than the People, and worse in almost 
all respects. 
We hear that as soon as an active man appears from among the 
People he becomes a kulak and a swindler. (It's not only Mr. 
Avseenko who says that; in general, Mr. Avseenko never has any­
thing new to say.) In the first place, this isn't true; and in the 
second place, do we not find the same kulaks and swindlers all 
the time among cultured Russians? And there probably are even 
greater numbers of them here, and it is all the more shameful 
because t.ltey have acquired culture while the People have not. But 
what's most important is that one simply canot argue that when­
ever an active person does appear among the People he usually 
becomes a kulak and a cheat. I do not know where those who 
maintain this grew up, but since childhood and all through my life 
I have seen something quite different. I was only nine years old 
when once, I recall, on the third day of Easter week, sometime 
after five in the afternoon, our whole family-father, mother, broth­
ers, and sisters-were sitting at our round table having tea; we 
happened to be talking about the country and how we would all 
go there for the summer. Suddenly the door opened and on the 
threshold appeared our house serf, Grigory Vasilev, who had only 
just arrived from the country. In the absence of the masters he had 
even been charged with the management of the estate; and now, 
instead of an imposing "foreman," always dressed in a German 
frock coat, there appeared a man in an old peasant coat and bast 
shoes. He had come on foot from the estate and he said not a word 
when he entered the rom. 
"What's wrong?" cried my father in alarm. "What is it?" 
"The estate has burned down," Grigory Vasilev announced in 
his deep voice. 
I shall not describe what ensued; my father and mother were 

April 
439 
working people and not wealthy, and this was the present they 
received for Easter! It turned out that everything had burned to 
the ground: the peasants' huts, the granary, the bam-even the 
seeds for spring sowing perished, with some of the cattle and one 
peasant, Arkhip. In our initial fright we imagined that this meant 
total ruin. We fell on our knees and began to pray; my mother 
wept. And then suddenly up stepped our nurse, Alena Frolovna, · 
who worked for us on salary (she was not a serf but a Moscow 
townswoman). She had raised and cared for all us children. At that 
time she was a woman of about fony-five with a serene, happy 
disposition; and she always told us such marvelous fairy tales! She 
had not drawn her salary from us for many years: "I don't need 
it," she would say. A sum of about five hundred rubles had ac­
cumulated and had been invested at a pawnbroker's: "It might 
come in handy in my old age." And suddenly she whispered to 
Mama: "If you need some money, take what I have; I've got no 
use for it . . . .  " 
We didn't take her money and managed without it. But let me 
ask you: to which type did this humble woman belong, a woman 
who passed on long ago in a home for the aged where her money 
was very useful? I don't suppose that people like her can be in­
cluded among the kulaks and swindlers; and if they cannot, then 
how is one to explain what she did: was it only something "on the 
level of elemental being-a self-contained, idyllic way of life and 
passive existence," or did she display something rather more en­
ergetic than mere passivity? It would be most interesting to hear 
how Mr. Avseenko would answer that. People will scornfully reply 
that this is an isolated case; but in the course of my life I myself 
have managed to remark many hundreds of such instances among 
our common people; and I know full well that there are also other 
observers who can regard the People without spitting on them. Do 
you not recall how, in Aksakov's Family Chronicle, the mother with 
tears in her eyes implored the peasants to take her to her sick child 
over the thin, spring ice on the broad Volga at Kazan, when for 
some days already none of them had dared set foot on the ice, 
which was breaking up and which was carried downstream only a 
few hours after they did cross it? Do you remember the charming 
description of this crossing and how later, when it was over, the 
peasants did not even want to accept any money, realizing that they 
had done it all for the sake of a mother's tears and for Christ our 
God. And this happened during the very dllrkest period of serfdom! 

440 
A Writer's Diary 
Tell me, are these still isolated instances? And if they are worthy 
of praise, then is it only "on the level of elemental being-a self­
contained, idyllic way of life and passive existence? "  Is that realy 
true? Are these only isolated, random facts? This active risking of 
one's own life out of compassion for a mother's grief-can that be 
considered mere passivity? Was it not, on the contrary, due to 
Truth, the People's Truth; did it not happen because of compassion 
and all-forgivingness and the breadth of vision of the People; and this 
in the most barbaric period of serfdom? But the People don't even 
know religion, you will say; they can't even say a prayer; they 
worship a wooden plank and mumble some nonsense about Holy 
Friday and Florus and Laurus. To this I reply that you have got 
such notions simply because you continue to hold the Russian 
People in contempt, a habit that stubbornly persists in the typical 
cultured Russian. We have some two dozen liberal and salacious 
anecdotes about the People's religion and about their Orthodoxy, 
and we relish the mocking stories of how the priest hears an old 
woman's confession or how a peasant says his prayers to Friday. 
If Mr. Avseenko truly understood what he wrote about the People's 
religion that saved Russia and had not simply copied it from the 
Slavophiles, then he would not have insulted the People this way 
by calling virtualy al of them "kulaks and bloodsuckers." That, 
of course, is just the point: these men haven't the slightest un­
derstanding of Orthodoxy, and therefore they will never have the 
slightest understanding of our People. The People know Christ, 
their God, even better than they know ours, perhaps, although 
they never attended school. They know because for many centuries 
they endured much suffering, and always in their grief, from the 
beginning until this day, they would hear of this God-Christ of 
theirs from their saints who worked for the People and who de­
fended the Russian land to the point of laying down their lives­
from these same saints whom the People still revere, keeping their 
names fresh in their memories and praying over their graves. Be­
lieve me, in this sense even the darkest strata of our People are 
much better educated than you, in your cultured ignorance of them, 
suppose; perhaps they are more educated than you are yourself, 
even though you may have mastered the catechism. 
4· The Beneficent Swiss Who Liberates a Russian Peasant 
Here is what Mr. Avseenko writes in his March article. I want to 
be completely dispassionate, and therefore I'll permit myself to 

April 
441 
include this very long quotation so that you won't accuse me of 
picking out only a few isolated sentences. Besides, I believe that 
these same words of Mr. Avseenko express the common opinion 
Westemizers now hold of the Russian People, so I am very pleased 
to have an opportunity to respond . 
. . . It is i.mponant for us to know the conditions under which our 
educated minority first looked closely over that wall that separated it 
from the People. No doubt the things that were revealed to its eyes 
made a striking impression and in many respects met the inner needs 
that were evident in the minority. People who were not satisfied with 
being the foster children of Western civilization found there ideals 
that were totally diferent from European ones but that were still 
beautiful. People who were disenchanted and, as the expression of 
the time had it, were tom in two by this bonowed culture found there 
simple, integral characters, a strength of faith that recalled the early 
years of Christianity, the austere vigor of patriarchal life. As we said 
earlier, the contrast between the two ways of life must have produced 
a remarkable effect that was hard to resist. People wanted to refresh 
themselves in the untroubled waves of this elemental existence, to 
breathe the pure air of the fields and forests. The best people were 
struck by the fact that in this stagnant life, to which not only the 
notion of education but even of simple literacy was foreign, could be 
found traits of such spiritual grandeur that the enlightened minority 
had to bow down before them. Al these impressions created an enor­
mous need for closer contact with the People. 
But what exactly did they mean by this contact with the People? 
The ideals of the People were only clear because the life of the People 
flowed its course at an infinitely remote distance from the life of the 
educated; because the conditions and the content of the two ways of 
life were utterly different. Just recall that those of linle education who 
have lived very close to the People have long since met this need for 
contact practically and materially; they have found no sign of these 
beautiful Popular ideals and are finnly convinced that the peasant is 
a dog and a scoundrel. This is very i.mponant because it shows to 
what extent, in practice, the educational impact of the People's ideas 
is weak and how vain it is to expect salvation from them. To under­
stand these ideals and elevate them to the level of the pearl of creation 
demands a cenain high level of culture. Therefore we consider our­
selves fully justified in saying that this bowing down to popular ideals 
was a product of the European culture we assimilated and that without 
it the peasant would have remained to this day a dog and a scoundrel 
in our eyes. It follows that the primary evil, a common evil for us 

442 
A Writer's Diary 
and the People, was not a matter of "culture," but of the weaknes 
of cultural principles, of the insuficiency of our "culture." 
What a surprising and unexpected conclusion! Here, in this clever 
selection of words, the most important conclusion is that the prin­
ciples of the People (and Orthodoxy with them, because in esence 
all the principles of the People have emerged entirely from Or­
thodoxy) have no cultural efficacy and not the slightest educative 
significance, so that in order to get all these things we had to go 
off to Europe. You se, it was not because "those of little education 
who have lived very close to the People" stil never saw any of the 
"beautiful Popular ideals" and continued to be firmly convinced 
that the peasant was a "dog and a scoundrel"; it was not because 
they had already ben corrupted to the tips of their fingers by 
culture, despite their own lack of education and despite the fact 
that they had already broken fre from the People, although they 
lived in close proximity to them-it was because there was still not 
enough culture, you se. The main thing here is the malicious 
insinuation that the principles of the People have little educational 
significance and the conclusion that, accordingly, they can take us 
nowhere, while culture leads us everywhere. As far as I am con­
cerned, I stated a long time ago that we began our European culture 
with debauchery. But in saying that I must stress specifically the 
following: these same people of little education who have still man­
aged to acquire some culture, even if only porly and superficially, 
even if only in a few aspects of their behavior, in a new set of 
prejudices, or in a new set of clothes-these same people, without 
exception, begin precisely by expressing scorn for their former 
milieu, their People, and even their religion, sometimes even to 
the point of hatred. Such is the case with certain superior "counts' 
lackeys," wretched little clerks who have pushed themselves into 
the ranks of the nobility, and so on. They have even more scorn 
for the People than do the bigwigs, who are much more thoroughly 
cultured; and there is certainly no need to be surprised by that, 
as Mr. Avsenko is. In the first issue of my Diary in January, I 
recalled one of my impressions from childhood: the picture of the 
courier who was beating a peasant. This courier, no doubt, was 
close to the People; he spent his whole life on the highway, yet he 
scorned and beat the peasants. Why? Because he was already far, 
far removed from the People, even though he may have lived close 
to them. There is no doubt whatsoever that he had not a shred of 

April 
443 
higher culture; yet he did get a courier's uniform with a tailcoat 
that gave him the right to beat people widtout restraint, "as much 
as he felt like." And he was proud of his uniform and considered 
himself immeasurably superior to a peasant. The landowner, whose 
estate was some hundred paces from the peasants' huts, was placed 
in almost the same position; it was not a matter of a hundred paces, 
however, but of the fact that this man had already tasted of the 
corruption of civilization. He was close to the People-a mere 
hundred paces away-but a huge gulf lay in these hundred paces. 
This landowner might never have acquired more than a drop of 
culture, but this drop was enough to corrupt him thoroughly. This 
must have been true of the majority of cases at the begining of 
the reform period. But I can state very definitely that, here as well, 
Mr. Avseenko has little more idea than an infant: not all, certainly 
not all people of little education were corrupted, nor did they 
despise the People even in those days; to the contrary, there were 
others on whom the People's principles never ceased to have a 
remarkable educational influence. Such a group survived from the 
reforms of Peter the Great and has continued to flourish right up 
to our time. There were many, even a very great many, who tasted 
of this culture and who returned again to the People and the People's 
ideals without losing their culture. Later on, the stratum of the 
Slavophiles, people who were already fully at home in European 
civilization, emerged from this group of "faithful." But it was not 
the high European civilization of the Slavophiles that led them to 
remain faithful to the People and the People's principles, not at 
all; on the contrary, it was the inexhaustible, ceaseless educative 
work of the People's principles on the minds and development of 
this stratum of genuinely Russian people, who by virtue of their 
innate qualities were capable of resisting the force of civilization 
without being personally anihilated. This was a stratum that goes 
back, I repeat, to the very begining of the reforms. I dare say 
that many of our Slavophiles appeared as if they had fallen straight 
from the sky; and they canot trace their origins to the protest 
against everything that was wrong and fanatically exclusive in Pe­
ter's reforms. But once more I repeat that there were also people 
of little culture who never thought of the People as dogs and scoun­
drels. They never lost their Christianity and looked on the People 
as a younger brother, not as a dog. But our cultured people scarcely 
know about this, and if they do know then they scorn these facts 
and do not take them into account, and they never will, because 

444 
A Writer's Diary 
these people of little culture who clung to their Christianity would 
flatly contradict the basic and prevailing thesis that the People's 
principles fail as a means of education. They would then have to 
agree that it was not the People's principles that were so weak and 
powerless to educate but, on the contrary, that culture was already 
entirely corrupted even though it was only in its early stage, and 
therefore it succeeded in ruining a multitude of infirm people. 
(Infirm people are always in the majority.) Mr. Avseenko therefore 
directly concludes that "the evil, the primary evil, a common evil 
for us and the People, was not a matter of 'culture,' but of the 
weakness of cultural principles,'' and therefore we had to run quick­
ly to Europe to put the finishing touches to our culture so that we 
should no longer regard the peasant as a dog and a scoundrel. 
And that was what we did: we went to Europe ourselves and 
brought back teachers. Before the French Revolution, in the days 
of Rousseau and of Catherine the Great's correspondence with Vol­
taire, having Swiss teachers was much in fashion. " . . .  And the 
Swiss who brings culture to us al."' 
"Come, take the money, but enlighten us and make us hu­
mane" -there truly was such a fashion at that time. Turgenev, in 
his Nest of Gentlefolk, has a superb little description of a nobleman's 
son who returns to his father's estate after acquiring his culture in 
Europe. He boasted of his humaneness and his education. His 
father began reproaching him for seducing and dishonoring an 
innocent servant girl, and the son said to him, "Never mind, I'll 
mary her." Do you remember the picture of the father picking 
up his stick and setting after the son who, in his blue English 
tailcoat, tasseled bots, and tight elkskin trousers, scampered away 
through the garden and the threshing barn as fast as his legs would 
cary him? Although he escaped, he did mary the girl a few days 
later, partly in the name of Rousseau's ideas, which were floating 
about in the air at that time, but mainly because of a whim, because 
of an infirmity of convictions, wil, and feelings, and because of 
a bruised ego: "Just look at me,'' he says, "se what a sort I am!" 
•I think the verse is by Count Khvostov. I eve n  remember the quauain in which 
the poet enumerates al the peoples of Europe: 
Turk, Persian, Prussian, Frank, and vengeful Spaniard, 
The son of Italy, the German, son of science, 
The son of commerce, watching o'er his goods [i.e., the English], 
And the Swiss who brings culture to us al. 
[Dostoevsky's note) 

April 
445 
Later on he lost respect for his wife; he tormented her by going 
away; he treated her with the greatest contempt, and abandoned 
her. He lived to an old age and died a completely cynical, malicious, 
petty, useless old fellow who spent his last moments cursing and 
shouting to his sister, "Glashka, you fool, bring me some broth!" 
How channing this story of Turgenev's is, and how true! And yet 
this was a man of some real culture. But this is not what Mr. 
Avseenko means: he demands genuine culture, i.e., the culture of 
our own time, the kind that finaly acculturated our Petersburg 
landowners to the point where they could sob over Anton Goremyka 
and then go off and liberate the peasants with land and decide to 
address these erstwhile dogs and scoundrels with the formal you. 
Such progress! Later on, after closer study, it was determined that 
these landowners who sobbed over Anton Goremyka had not the 
slightest comprehension of the People, their way of life, or their 
principles; that they regarded the Russian peasants almost as some 
French villagers or shepherdesses on porcelain teacups. When the 
government began its long and arduous labor to liberate the peas­
ants, some of the opinions of these highly placed landowners were 
striking in their almost anecdotal ignorance of the subject, the 
countryside, the life of the People, and everything else that was 
connected with the People's principles. Meanwhile, Mr. Avseenko 
specificaly states that it was European culture that enabled us to 
comprehend the People's ideals, while the ideals themselves are 
without any educative significance. Supposedly, one had to go to 
Paris to comprehend the ideals of our People, or at least go to some 
second-rate little farce at the Mikhailovsky Theater, one to which 
cariages keep driving up. Still, let us grant that progress and an 
understanding of Russian principles came to us only from Europe; 
let it be so. Praise be to culture! "There it is-genuine culture­
see what it does to people," exclaims the crowd of Avseenkos! 
"And what can any of your wretched 'Popular principles,' with 
Orthodoxy at their head, mean before that? They have no educative 
significance. Down with them!" 
Let's assume this is so. But then, gentlemen, please give me an 
answer to just this one question: why didn't these teachers of ours­
the Europeans, al these beneficent Swiss, who taught us to liberate 
the peasants with land-why didn't they liberate anyone over there 
in Europe, even without land, even as naked as their mothers bore 
them, and do so everywhere? Why was it that liberation in Europe 
came not from the owners, the barons, and the landlords, but from 

A Writer's Diary 
uprising and rebellion, fire and sword, and rivers of blood? And 
if anyone in Europe was liberated without rivers of blood, then it 
was always done on proletarian principles, so that the newly lib­
erated became absolute slaves. And we shout that we learned about 
liberation from the Europeans! "We acquired culture," people say, 
"and so we stopped treating the peasant like a dog and a scoundrel." 
But why is it, then, that in France and everywhere else in Europe 
any proletarian, any worker who owns nothing, is still treated like 
a dog and a scoundrel? And this, of course, you canot dispute. 
Of course, the law says that you can't call him a dog and a scoundrel; 
but still you can do whatever you like to him just as if he were a 
dog and a scoundrel; the cleverly written law only demands that 
the approp1iate measure of civility be observed. "I'll be civil, but 
I won't give you any bread, even though you may starve like a 
dog"-this is how things are in Europe now. How can it be? What 
sort of contradiction is this? How is it that they taught us the very 
opposite notion? No, gentlemen, it is obvious that something quite 
different happened here, and not at all the way you say it did. 
Judge for yourselves: if it was only the effect of culture that led 
us to stop treating the peasant like a dog and a scoundrel, then 
we certainly would have liberated him on the basis of culture as 
well, i.e., on proletarian principles, just as our teachers in Europe 
did. "Be off now, dear brother," we would have said. "Enjoy your 
freedom in the nakedness in which you were born, and think it 
an honor." That's precisely how the People were liberated in the 
Baltic provinces. And why? Because the Baits are Europeans, while 
we are only Russians. It thus turns out that we accomplished this 
task like Russians and not at all like cultured Europeans; and we 
liberated the People with land only to the amazement and horror 
of our European teachers and all the beneficent Swiss. Indeed, they 
were horrified: voices in Europe were raised in alarm, don't you 
remember? They even started shouting something about commu­
nism. Do you remember what the late Guizot said about the lib­
eration of our People? He told one Russian: "After what you have 
done, how can you expect us not to be afraid of you?" No, gen­
tlemen, we liberated the People with land not because we had 
become cultured Europeans, but because we saw ourselves as Rus­
sians with the tsar at our head, exactly as the landowner Pushkin 
dreamed forty years ago when, at that very time, he cursed his 
European upbringing and turned to the principles of the People. 
It was in the name of these same principles of the People that the 

April 
447 
Russian People were liberated with land, not because Europe taught 
us to do it; on the contrary, it was precis('j oecause we suddenly, 
for the first time, resolved to bow down before the People's truth. 
This was not only a great moment in Russian life, in which cultured 
Russian people for the first time resolved to do something original, 
but it was also a prophetic moment in Russian life. And, perhaps, 
that prophecy will come to pass very soon . . . .  
But . . .  I must break off here for the moment. I see that this 
article is going to take up all the space in the Diary. And so, until 
the following, May, issue. And of course I'll leave the most im­
portant part of my explanation for the May issue. Let me list for 
the record the things that will go into it. I want to point out the 
total bankruptcy and even the insignificance of precisely this aspect 
of our culture, an aspect which some people regard, to the contrary, 
as our light, our sole salvation and our crowning glory before the 
People, and from whose height they spit upon the People and 
consider themselves fuly justified in doing so. For to heap praise 
on these "principles of the People," to delight in them and in the 
same breath to say that they have no power, no educative signifi­
cance, and that they are all only "passivity," means to spit on these 
principles. To assert, as does Mr. Avseenko, that the People are 
no more than "wanderers who have still not chosen which road to 
travel" and that "to expect thought and form from this riddle, 
from this sphinx which has not yet found either thought or form 
for itself, is an irony"-to assert that, I say, means only that one 
knows nothing about one's subject, i.e., knows nothing about the 
People. I want specifically to point out that the People are by no 
means as hopeless, by no means as easily swayed and lacking in 
form as is our cultured stratum, in which all these gentlemen take 
pride as Russia's most precious two-hundred-year-old acquisition. 
Finally, I would like to point out that a solid core has been preserved 
within our People, a core that will save them from the excesses 
and aberrations of our culture and will persist even through the 
process of education which will soon occur, so that the image and 
form of the Russian People will survive undamaged. And if, indeed, 
I did say that "the People are an enigma," then it was not at all 
in the sense in which these gentlemen took my meaning. Ultimately, 
I wish to explain fully my view of that confusing question which 
emerges of itself out of this little war of worcis. As I put it in my 
February Diary: "If we, the cultured Russian strata, are so weak 

A Writer's Diary 
and easily swayed as compared to the People, then what can we 
bring them that is so precious that they should bow down before 
it and accept this treasure from us sine qua non?" It is this aspect 
of our culture-which we must regard as a treasure but which al 
these gentlemen until now have totally ignored-that I wish to point 
out and explain. And so, until the May issue. As far as I am 
concerned, I can imagine nothing more absorbing and more urgent 
than these questions; I don't know how you, the reader, feel. But 
I promise to do my very best to be concise, and I shall even try 
to make no more references to Mr. Avseenko. 

2 
1 . Something on Political Questions 
Everyone is talking about current political questions and taking a 
great interest in them; indeed, how can one help but be interested? 
One very serious man whom I ran into by chance asked me sud­
denly, in dreadful earnest, "Well, is there going to be a war?" I 
was quite astonished: although I follow curent affairs very closely, 
as we al do now, I had never heard the question of the inevitability 
of war raised. And it seems that I was correct: the newspapers 
announce the coming imminent meeting of the three chancellors 
in Berlin, and, of course, that endless question of Herzegovina will 
then be settled, most likely in a manner most acceptable to Russian 
sentiment. I admit I was not particularly troubled by the statement 
of this Baron Rodich a month ago; indeed, I was somewhat amused 
when I first read it. His remarks did cause a bit of a row later. 
Yet I think that Baron Rodich had no intention of provoking anyone; 
there wasn't even any "politics" in what he said; he simply made 
a slip of the tongue when he came out with this nonsense about 
Russian impotence. I even believe that before he spoke of our 
impotence he thought to himself: "If we are stronger than Russia 
then Russia must be totally impotent. And we really are stronger, 
because Berlin will never surrender us to Russia. Oh, Berlin may 
let us get into a scrap with Russia, but only for her own enjoyment 
and to see who gains the upper hand and what sort of resources 
each of us has. But if Russia wins and pins us to the wall, Berlin 
will tell her 'Stop! '  And Berlin would never permit any real injury­
at least no truly serious injury-to be inflicted on us, although some 
small damage might be done. And since Russia will not resolve to 
go against both us and Berlin, the maner will be settled without 
doing us any great harm; yet we have a chance to win a great deal 
449 

450 
A Writer's Diary 
if we beat Russia. And so on the one hand we have a chance of 
winning a great deal, and on the other hand we have little to lose 
if Russia defeats us. This is very good, very politic. And Berlin 
is our friend; she loves us deeply because she wants to take our 
German possessions from us; and she certainly wil take them, and 
perhaps quite soon. But since this is the cause of her great love 
for us, she wil certainly compensate us for the German possessions 
she seizes and in their place wil give us the right to rule over the 
Turkish Slavs. Berlin wil certainly do that, because it will be much 
to her advantage: if we gain the Slavs as compensation, we will 
still be nowhere near to rivaling Berlin in strength; but if Russia 
gains the Slavs, Russia wil be superior to Berlin. That is why we, 
not Russia, will get the Slavs; that is why I could not resist and 
said it in my speech to the Slavic leaders. We must prepare them 
bit by bit for the proper ideas . . . .  " 
It's quite possible that these are not only Rodich's ideas and that 
they are shared by the Austrians generally. And, of course, there 
is such a chaotic siruation there. Just imagine the Slavs coming 
under Austrian rule and Austria at once trying to Germanify them, 
even after having lost her own German possessions! It's true 
enough, however, that in Europe it is not only Austria who is 
inclined to believe, first, in Russia's impotence and, second, in 
Russia's avidity to bring the Slavs under her rule as soon as possible. 
The most complete revolution in Russia's political life wil come 
precisely when Europe becomes convinced that Russia has no desire 
to bring anything under her rule. Then a new era will begin, both 
for us and for the whole of Europe. This conviction of Russia's 
disinterest, should it come, will at once renew and change the whole 
face of Europe. Ultimately this conviction will come about, but not 
as the result of any assurance from us: until the very end, Europe 
wil not believe any of our assurances and will keep on looking at 
us with hostility. It is dificult to imagine the depth of their fear 
of us. And if they fear us, then they must also hate us. Europe 
dislikes us imensely, and has never liked us; she has never con­
sidered us as one of her own, a fellow European, but always only 
as an annoying newcomer. That is why she is sometimes so fond 
of consoling herself with the thought that Russia supposedly is 
"still impotent." 
And it is a good thing that she is inclined to think that way. I 
am convinced that the most terrible disaster would have befallen 

April 
45 1 
Russia had we been victorious in the Crimean campaign, for ex­
ample, and gained the upper hand over the allies! Once they saw 
how strong we are, everyone in Europe would have at once risen 
up against us with a fanatical hatred. Of course, had they been 
beaten, they would have signed a peace treaty that was unfavorable 
to them, but no peace could ever have been achieved in actual fact. 
They would immediately have begun preparing for a new war with 
the aim of anihilating Russia; most important, the whole world 
would have been behind them. The year 1863 would then have 
cost us more than an exchange of caustic diplomatic notes: on the 
contrary, a general crusade against Russia would have begun. More­
over, some European governments would certainly have used this 
crusade to settle their internal affairs, so that it would have been 
advantageous to them in all respects. The revolutionary parties and 
al those who were dissatisfied with the French government of the 
day, for example, would have quickly come to the side of the 
government in view of its "most sacred ideal"-the expulsion of 
Russia from Europe-and the war would have been a popular one. 
But Fate was looking out for us in tipping the scales in favor of 
the allies while preserving and even magnifying all our military 
honor so that we were able to bear this defeat. In a word, we 
endured the defeat, but the burden of victory over Europe we would 
never have been able to endure, despite all our vitality and strength. 
In just the same way Fate saved us once before, at the beginning 
of the century, when we threw off Napoleon's yoke from Europe; 
Fate saved us specifically by giving us Prussia and Austria as allies. 
Had we then been victorious alone, Europe would no sooner have 
recovered from Napoleon than-without Napoleon-she would im­
mediately have thrown herself on us once more. But things hap­
pened differently, thank God: Prussia and Austria, whom we 
liberated, quickly took all the honor of victory for themselves, and 
later on-nowadays, that is-they flatly claim that they were vic­
torious by themselves, while Russia only hindered them. 
And in general our European fate has so placed us that we simply 
cannot make conquests in Europe even if we had the ability to do 
so: this would be something highly dangerous and not at all in our 
best interest. They might "forgive" us some of our private, do­
mestic victories-the conquest of the Caucasus, for example. But 
the first war with Turkey, under the late emperor, and our settling 
affairs in Poland, which followed shortly thereafter, came very close 

452 
A Writer's Diary 
to causing an explosion all over Europe. They have evidently now 
"forgiven" us our recent acquisitions in central Asia, but the frogs 
are still croaking over there, and they won't settle down. 
Nonetheless, the course of events will probably very soon change 
the way in which the European nations regard Russia. In my last 
Diary in March, I set forth a few of my musings about Europe's 
immediate future. But I can say (and this is not musing but almost 
a certainty) that even in the immediate and, perhaps, the very near 
future Russia will prove to be stronger than anyone else in Europe. 
This will happen because the great powers in Europe will be de­
stroyed for one very simple reason: they will al be rendered im­
potent and undermined by the unsatisfied democratic aspirations 
of an immense part of their own lower-class subjects-their pro­
letariat and their paupers. This simply cannot happen in Russia: 
our demos is content, and the farther we go, the more satisfied it 
will become, for everything is moving toward that end via the 
common mood or, to put it better, the general consensus. And 
therefore there will remain but one colossus on the continent of 
Europe-Russia. This will happen, perhaps, even much sooner 
than people think. The future of Europe belongs to Russia. But 
the question is: what will Russia do in Europe then? What role 
will she play in it? Is she prepared for this role? 
2. A Paradoxicalist 
By the way, a word or two about war and rumors of war. I know 
a man who is a paradoxicalist. I have known him for a long time. 
He is an obscure person with an odd character: he is a dreamer. I 
shall certainly talk about him in more detail sometime. But now 
I recall how once, some years ago, he got into an argument with 
me about war. He defended war in general and did so, perhaps, 
solely out of his love of paradox. I can tell you that he is a civilian 
and the most peaceable, affable person you could find on earth 
and here in Petersburg. 
"It is an outrageous notion," he said, in passing, "that war is 
the scourge of mankind. On the contrary, it is a most useful thing. 
There is only one form of war that is hateful and truly pernicious: 
that is a civil, fratricidal war. It paralyzes and shatters the state; 
it always goes on too long; and it brutalizes the people for centuries 
on end. But a political, international war brings only benefit in 
every respect, and thus it is absolutely essential." 

April 
453 
"Wait now-a nation goes against another nation, and people set 
out to kil one another-what is essential in that?" 
"Everything is, and to the highest degree. But in the first place, 
it's a lie that people set forth to kil one another; this is never 
uppermost in their minds. On the contrary, they set out to sacrifice 
their own lives; that must be uppermost in their minds. And that 
is something altogether different. There is no idea more elevated 
than sacrificing one's own life while defending one's brothers and 
one's fatherland or even simply defending the interests of one's 
fatherland. Humanity canot live without noble ideas, and I even 
suspect that humanity loves war precisely in order to be a part of 
some noble idea. It is a human need." 
"But does humanity really love war?" 
"Of course it does. Who is in low spirits in time of war? Quite 
the contrary: everyone is ful of cheer, their spirits rise, and there 
is no mention of the usual apathy or boredom you hear of in 
peacetime. And then, when the war ends, how people love to 
reminisce about it, even if they were defeated! And don't believe 
those who, when they meet during time of war, shake their heads 
and say to each other: 'Such a calamity. We've come to this!' 
They're only being polite. In reality, everyone is a festive mood. 
Do you know, there are some ideas one finds terribly difficult to 
admit having. People will call you a beast and a reactionary and 
condemn you; they fear these ideas. No one dares to praise war." 
"But you're talking about noble ideas and about humanizing. 
Can't there be noble ideas without war? On the contrary, in peace­
time there is even more scope for such ideas to flourish." 
"No, it's quite the reverse. Nobility perishes during periods of 
prolonged peace, and in its place appear cynicism, indifference, 
boredom, and, most of all, an attitude of malicious mockery-and 
that almost as an idle pastime, not for any serious purpose. I can 
say positively that a prolonged peace hardens people's hearts. Dur­
ing such a prolonged peace the social balance always shifts to the 
side of all that is stupid and coarse in humanity, principally toward 
wealth and capital. Immediately after a war honor, philanthropy, 
and self-sacrifice are respected, valued, and highly regarded; but 
the longer the peace lasts, the more these beautiful, noble things 
grow pale, wither, and die off, while everyone is in the grip of 
wealth and the spirit of acquisition. In the end, the only thing left 
is hypocrisy-hypocrisy of honor, self-sacrifice, and duty; these 
things may continue to be respected despite all the cynicism, but 

454 
A Writer's Diary 
only formally, in fine words. There wil be no genuine honor, but 
the formulas wil remain. When honor becomes a formula, it dies. 
A prolonged peace produces apathy, mean-spirited ideas, depravity, 
a dulling of the feelings. Pleasures do not grow refined but coarsen. 
Crude wealth canot take delight in nobility but demands less 
elevated and more imediate pleasures, i.e., the most direct sat­
isfaction of the urges of the flesh. Pleasures become carnivorous. 
Sensuality evokes lechery, and lechery is always cruel. You canot 
deny all this, because you canot deny the main fact: that the social 
balance during a prolonged peace in the end always shifts toward 
crude wealth." 
"But science, the arts-can they truly flourish in wartime? And 
these are great and noble ideas." 
"Ah, but this is where I catch you. Science and the arts flourish 
particularly in the immediate postwar period. War renews and 
refreshes them; it stimulates and strengthens thought and gives it 
some impetus. But a long peace, on the other hand, wil stifle even 
science. There's no doubt that the punuit of science demands a 
cenain nobility, even self-denial. But can many of these scientists 
survive the pestilence of peace? False honor, self-love, and sen­
suality wil catch them up as well. Just try to cope with a passion 
like envy, for example: it is crude and vulgar, but it also wil find 
its way into the noblest bean of a scientist. He, too, will want to 
participate in the general prosperity and glamour. Compared to the 
triumph of wealth, what can the triumph of some scientific dis­
covery mean, unless it is something as sensational as the discovery 
of the planet Neptune, for example? Now what do you think: wil 
there be many left who are truly devoted to humble toil? On the 
contrary, there will be a desire for fame, and so charlatanism wil 
invade science; there wil be the punuit of the sensational; and 
there will be utilitarianism above all, because there wil be a desire 
for wealth as well. The same wil be true of art: the same punuit 
of the sensational, the ultrarefined. Simple, clear, noble, and 
healthy ideas wil no longer be in fashion: something much meatier 
wil be in demand; simulated passions wil be in demand. Little 
by little the sense of measure and harmony wil be lost; distoned 
feelings and passions wil appear-the so-called ultrarefinement of 
the feelings which in esence is only their vulgarization. Art in­
evitably fals victim to this at the end of a prolonged peace. Had 
war never existed on this earth, art would have completely died. 
Al the best ideas of art are provided by war and by strugle. Think 

April 
455 
of tragedy, look at statues: here is Corneille's Horace; here is the 
Apollo Belvedere overpowering a monster . . . .  " 
"And what about the Madonnas; what about Christianity?" 
"Christianity itself recognizes the fact of war and prophesies that 
the sword shall not pass until the end of the world: this is quite 
remarkable and striking. Oh, there's no doubt that in the highest 
sense, in the moral sense, it rejects war and demands brothe.rly 
love. I myself shall be the first to rejoice when the swords are beaten 
into plowshares. But the question is: when is this going to happen? 
And is it worth beating the swords into plowshares at present? The 
peace of today is always and everywhere worse than war, so much 
worse that it even becomes immoral in the end to support the 
peace. It is nothing to value, nothing worth preserving; it is shame­
ful and vulgar to preserve it. Wealth and vulgarity give birth to 
indolence, and indolence gives birth to slaves. In order to keep 
slaves in their servile state, one must take away their free will and 
their opportunity to better themselves. For can you not help but 
feel the need to have a slave, even though you may be the most 
humane sort of person? I note as well that during a period of peace 
cowardice and dishonesty take rot. Man by nature is terribly 
inclined to cowardice and shameless acts, and he himself knows 
this very well. And that, perhaps, is why he is so fond of war: he 
senses a medicine in it. War fosters brotherly love and unites 
nations." 
"How does it unite nations?" 
"By forcing them to respect one another. War refreshes people. 
Love for one's fellow human beings develops best on the field of 
battle. It's a strange fact, indeed, that war does less to rouse people's 
anger than peace. In fact, something that could be considered a 
political outrage in time of peace, some treaty that demanded too 
much, some political pressure, some demand couched in arrogant 
language-of the sort that Europe made of us in 1863-all these 
things rouse people's anger much more than open warfare. Think 
back: did we hate the French and the English during the Crimean 
campaign? Not in the least; in fact we seemed to grow closer to 
them, almost as if they had become our kin. We were interested 
to hear their views on our courage in battle; we treated their pris­
oners with great kindness; during times of truce our soldiers and 
our officers left their forward positions and almost embraced the 
enemy; they even drank vodka together. Russia was delighted to 
read about this in the newspapers, yet it did not prevent us from 

456 
A Writer's Diary 
puning up a magnificent fight. A spirit of chivalry was fostered. 
And I won't even bring up the material losses of war: everyone 
knows the law by which things seem to come to life with renewed 
vigor in the postwar period. The economic forces of the country 
are stimulated ten times more than before, just as if a storm cloud 
had poured down an abundant rain on the parched earth. Everyone 
at once lends a hand to those who have suffered during the war, 
while in peacetime whole provinces can die of hunger before we 
get around to doing anything or donating a few rubles." 
"But don't the People suffer more than anyone else in wartime? 
Don't they suffer the ruination and bear burdens that are inevitable 
and incomparably greater than those borne by the upper levels of 
society?" 
"Perhaps, but only temporarily. Yet they do gain much more 
than they lose. It is specifically for the People that war has the 
finest and the most sublime consequences. Say what you like: you 
may be the most humane person, yet you stil consider yourself 
above the common folk. These days who measures soul against 
soul by a Christian standard? The standard is money, power, and 
strength, and the common folk as a mass know this very well. This 
isn't exactly envy; there is some oppressive feeling of moral ine­
quality here that is extremely painful for the common person to 
live with. You can liberate them however you like and write any 
sort of laws you choose, but inequality canot be ended in today's 
society. The only medicine is war. It is only a palliative, and it is 
instantaneous, but it brings comfort to the People. War raises the 
spirits of the People and their awareness of their own dignity. War 
makes everyone equal in time of battle and reconciles the master 
and the slave in the most sublime manifestation of human dignity­
the sacrifice of life for the common cause, for everyone, and for 
the fatherland. Do you really think that the masses, even the most 
benighted masses of peasants and beggars, do not feel this urge 
for an active display of noble feelings? And how can the mass show 
its nobility and its human dignity in time of peace? We look at 
isolated noble acts among the common People, barely condescend­
ing to take notice of them, sometimes with a skeptical smile, some­
times simply not believing what we've seen. And when we do 
acknowledge the heroism of some isolated individual, we at once 
make a fuss as if it were something utterly unusual; the result is 
that our astonishment and our praise amount to contempt. All this 
disappears of its own accord in time of war and there ensues the 

April 
457 
complete equality of heroism. Blood that has been shed is an im­
portant thing. A noble exploit that is shared creates the most solid 
bond between unequal classes. The landowner and the peasant 
were closer to each other on the battlefield in I 8 I 2 than they were 
while living on some peaceful estate in the country. War gives the 
masses a reason to respect themselves, and therefore the People 
love war: they compose songs about it, and for many years thereafter 
they are eager to hear stories and legends about it . . . .  Blood that 
has been shed is an important thing! Say what you like, but war 
in our time is necessary; without it the world would have collapsed 
or, at least, would have been transformed into some sort of slime, 
some squalid muck ful of putrefaction . . . .  " 
I gave up the argument, of course. There is no point in arguing 
with dreamers. There is, however, one very strange fact: people 
are now beginning to argue and raise issues that, it would seem, 
were long ago resolved and consigned to the archives. These things 
are al being dug up once more. And what's most important is that 
this is happening everywhere. 
3. Just a Bit More about Spiritualism 
Once again I don't have enough space left for a proper article about 
spiritualism, and once again I must postpone it to another issue. 
However, back in February I attended a spiritualists' seance con­
ducted by a "genuine" medium, and this seance impressed me 
rather strongly. Others who were present have already commented 
on it in the press, so that it seems I have nothing left to pass on 
beyond my own personal impressions. But I didn't want to write 
anything about it until now, and I have concealed my impressions 
from the reader these two whole months. I will say in advance that 
my impression was of a most peculiar sort and scarcely had anything 
to do with spiritualism. My impression arose from something else 
that only came to light apropos of spiritualism. I am very sorry 
to have to postpone it again, all the more because now I have the 
wge to talk about it, whereas previously I found it rather distasteful. 
This distaste arose from an almost morbid sense of doubt. I did 
tell some of my friends about the seance at the time; one person, 
whose opinions I value greatly, heard me out and then asked if I 
intended to describe it in the Diary. I replied that I still did not 
know. And suddenly he remarked, "Don't write about it." He 
added nothing more, and I did not press him but I caught his 

458 
A Writer's Diary 
drift: he would have been displeased, apparently, if I should some­
how have promoted the spread of spiritualisāt. At the time I was 
particularly struck by this, because in my remarks about the Feb­
ruary seance I had, to the contrary, dismissed spiritualism with 
sincere conviction. Yet this person, who hates spiritualism, must 
have discerned in my account something that seemed to place it in 
a favorable light despite all my attempts to dismiss it. That is why 
I refrained from discussing it in print until now-precisely out of 
my sense of doubt and lack of self-confidence. But now, I think, 
I have complete confidence in myself and have cleared my doubts. 
Besides, I am convinced that no article of mine could work either 
to support or destroy spiritualism. Mr. Mendeleev, who is delivering 
his lecture in Solianoi Gorodok at the very moment I am writing 
these lines, probably looks at the matter differently and is lecturing 
with the noble intent of "crushing spiritualism." It's always pleas­
ant to listen to lectures with such admirable tendencies; yet I think 
that whoever wants to put his faith in spiritualism will not be 
stopped by lectures or even by entire commissions, while those 
who do not believe, at least if they truly do rwt want to believe, 
will not be swayed by anything. That was precisely the conviction 
I took away from the February seance at A. N. Aksakov's; it was, 
at least, my first strong impression then. Up to that time I had 
simply rejected spiritualism, i.e., in essence I was perturbed only 
by the mystical sense of its doctrine. (I was never able compler£ly 
to reject spiritualistic phenomena, with which I had had some 
acquaintance even before the seance with the medium, nor can I 
now-especially now-after having read the report of the Scholarly 
Commission on Spiritualism.) But after that remarkable seance I 
suddenly surmised-or rather, I suddenly discovered-not only that 
I do not believe in spiritualism but that I haven't the least wish to 
believe in it, so that there is no evidence that will ever cause me 
to change my views. That is what I took away from the seance and 
later came to understand. And, I confess, this impression was 
almost gratifying because I had been a little apprehensive on my 
way to the seance. I might add that this is not merely a personal 
matter: I think there is something that applies to us all in this 
observation of mine. I have a sense of some special law of human 
nature, common to all and pertaining specifically to faith and dis­
belief in general. I somehow came to understand then-specifically 
through experience, specifically through this seance-what power 
disbelief can uncover and develop within you at a given moment, 

April 
459 
absolutely despite your own will, although it may be in accordance 
with your secret desire . . . .  The same thing is probably true of faith. 
That's what I wanted to talk about. 
And so, until the next issue. But now, let me add a few more 
words to supplement what I have already said in the March issue 
regarding that same Report of the Commission that is now well 
known to us all. 
I said a few words then about the unsatisfactory nature of the 
report and about how it might even be damaging to its own cause. 
But I did not say the most important thing. I shall now try to 
amplify this briefly, the more so that this is a very simple matter. 
The commission did not want to concede the most important need 
in this affair, the need of the society that was awaiting its decision. 
The commission, it seems, had so little concern for society's need 
(otherwise one would have to suppose that it was simply unable 
to understand that need) that it even failed to understand that "some 
little crinoline springs flashing in the darkness" are not enough to 
dissuade anyone and will not establish anything after people have 
already been harmed. When one reads the report it certainly begins 
to appear that these scholars of ours assumed a spiritualism that 
existed in Petersburg only in A. N. Aksakov's apartment and 
seemed to know nothing at all of that avid interest in spiritualism 
which has sprung up in our society and of the grounds on which 
spiritualism has begun to spread specifically among us Russians. 
In fact they did know all this; they just ignored it. Everything 
indicates that they regarded all this in the same way as those private 
individuals who, when hearing about the our society's fatal mania 
for spiritualism, can only sneer and giggle, and that only in passing, 
believing it scarcely worth serious thought. But once they were 
organized into a commission, these scholars became public figures 
and not private individuals. They were given a mission, and that 
fact, it seems, they did not take into account; they took their seats 
at the spiritualist's table while continuing as private individuals 
just as before, that is to say, laughing, sneering, and giggling, and 
also, perhaps, a little angry at having to concern themselves se­
riously with such a ridiculous thing. 
Well, let us grant that this whole house, this whole apartment 
of A. N. Aksakov was strung out with springs and wires, while 
the medium had some sort of little machine between her feet to 
make clicking noises (this clever little theory was later advanced 

A Writer's Diary 
in print by N. P. Wagner). But every "serious" spiritualist (oh, 
don't laugh at that word; it's true-this is quite serious) will ask 
as he reads the repon: "How is it that in my own house, where I 
know everyone-children, wife, family, acquaintances-perfectly 
well, how is it that these same things can happen in my house? 
The table rocks and rises up; we hear sounds; we get intelligent 
answers to our questions. I know very well and am completely 
convinced that there aren't any little machines or wires in my house 
and that my wife and children will not try to deceive me." The 
main point is that there are already quite a number of people-all 
too many of them, even-in Petersburg, Moscow, and Russia gen­
erally who wil say or think this. And the commission should have 
thought about that, even if it meant descending from its scholarly 
heights; we have something like an epidemic, after all, and these 
people need to be helped. But the commission's haughtiness will 
permit no such thoughts: "It's simply a matter of frivolous and 
poorly educated people, and that's why they believe in it." "Very 
well," a serious and alarmingly convinced spiritualist continues to 
insist (for they are now still in their initial period of wonder and 
anxiety-it's such a new and unusual matter), "let's suppose that 
I am frivolous and poorly educated. Still, I have no such little 
machine making clicking noises anywhere in my house, and that 
I know very well; I don't even have the means to buy such amusing 
instruments; where to get them and who sells them and such like 
is, God knows, a total mystery to me. So what makes these clicking 
noises in my house and where do these sounds come from? You 
say that we ourselves are pressing on the table unconsciously. I 
assure you that we are not so childish as that; we watch one another 
carefully, very carefuly, to see that we are not pushing the table 
ourselves. We are conducting experiments, with curiosity and 
objectivity . . . .  " 
"We have no answer for you," concludes the commission, now 
somewhat peeved. "You are being deceived just as all the others 
are; everyone is being deceived, and you are all fools. So it must 
be; so speaks Science; we are Science." 
Well, that's not an explanation. "No, obviously something else 
is going on here," the convinced spiritualist will conclude "seri­
ously." "It can't be all trickery. That may be true of Madame 
Claire, but I know my own family: there is no one in my house 
who would play such tricks." And spiritualism carries on. 
Just now I read in New Times the account of Mr. Mendeleev's 

April 
first lecture at Solianoi Gorodok. Mr. Mendeleev solidly affirms, 
as an established fact, that: "tables move and emit tapping sounds 
at spiritualist seances, both when hands are placed on the tables 
and when they are not. One can, with the help of a special alphabet, 
create from these sounds whole words, sentences and utterances 
that always bear the stamp of the mentality of that medium who 
is conducting the seance. This is a fact. Now we must explain who 
is doing the knocking and how. The following six hypotheses are 
set forth in explanation." 
This is the most important point: "Who is doing the knocking 
and how?" And then six hypotheses which have already been made 
in Europe are set forth. It would seem that all six of these would 
be enough to dissuade even the most "serious" spiritualist. But 
for the honest spiritualist who wants to explain the maner, what is 
most interesting is not the fact that there are six hypotheses, but 
which of them Mr. Mendeleev himself believes. What does he say, 
and what was our commission's conclusion? Our own views are 
closer and more authoritative for us, while who knows what is going 
on over there in Europe or in the American States! It is evident 
from the rest of the account of the lecture that the commission has 
nevertheless accepted the hypothesis of conjuring tricks; and not 
just simple conjury, in fact, but preconceived deception with linle 
machines held between the feet that make clicking noises (this, I 
repeat, according to the evidence of N. P. Wagner). But this is not 
enough; this scientific "haughtiness" is not enough for our spiri­
tualists, not enough even in the event that the commission was co"ect. 
And this is the whole problem. Besides, who knows? Perhaps a 
"seriously" convinced spiritualist is right when he concludes that 
if spiritualism really is nonsense, then there still is something else 
at work here apart from gross deception, something that should 
be treated more gently, more delicately, so to say, because, after 
all, "his wife, his children, his friends would not deceive him," 
and so on and so on. Believe me, he has his own views on the 
maner, and you are not going to change his mind. He knows very 
well that not everything here is "deliberate deception." He has 
already convinced himself of that. 
In fact, everything else that the commission has to say is almost 
as presumptuous as this: "They are frivolous people," the com­
mission says, "and they themselves are unconsciously pushing the 
table, and that is what makes it rock; they want to deceive them­
selves, and so the table makes tapping sounds; their nerves are 

A Writer's Diary 
frayed; they sit there in the dark; it's an accordion playing; little 
hooks have been placed in their shirtsleeves" (this, at least, is what 
Mr. Rachinsky supposes); "they lift the table with the tips of their 
feet," etc., etc. And still this will convince none of those who want 
to be led astray. "Come now, for Heaven's sake, my table must 
weigh seventy pounds; I can't even move it with the tip of my foot 
and there is no way I could raise it up into the air. Anyway, that 
sort of thing just can't be done, unless by some sort of fakir or 
magician or your Mrs. Claire with her little crinoline machine. But 
I don't have any of those magicians or equilibrists in my family." 
To put it briefly, spiritualism is, without a doubt, a great, extraor­
dinary fallacy of the stupidest kind, an aberrant doctrine and a 
form of ignorance; but the problem is that not everything around 
the spiritualists' table happens as simply, perhaps, as the com­
mission would have us believe, and one canot call every single 
spiritualist a fraud and a fool. This will only insult them all per­
sonally and so will achieve nothing. One should regard this fallacy, 
I think, within the context of our curent social conditions, and 
therefore find a diferent tone and technique. We must give par­
ticular consideration to the mystical significance of spiritualism, 
which is the most harmful thing that can be; but the commission 
gave no thought at all to this facet of spiritualism. Of course, the 
commission would not have had the ability to stamp out this evil 
in any case; but at least it could-using other less naive and pre­
sumptuous methods-have instilled some respect for its conclusions 
in spiritualists as well, and it could have had a powerful influence 
on those followers who are still wavering. But the commission 
evidently considered any approach to the matter other than as a 
form of legerdemain (and not simple legerdemain but deliberate 
deception) to be an insult to its scientific dignity. Every assumption 
that spiritualism is something and not merely gross deceit and trick­
ery the commission found unthinkable. Indeed, what would people 
in Europe say about our scientists then? And so, by flatly assuming 
that all that had to be done here was to expose the fraud and no 
more, the scientists have thereby given their conclusions the ap­
pearance of being predetermined. Believe me, some clever spiri­
tualist (I assure you that there are also clever people who think 
deeply about spiritualism-they are not all stupid)-some clever 
spiritualist will read the newspaper account of Mr. Mendeleev's 
public lecture and se the following: "One can, with the help of 
a special alphabet, create from these sounds whole words, sentences 

April 
and utterances that always bear the stamp of the mentality of that 
medium who is conducting the seance. This is a fact." And when he 
reads that, he will most likely think to himself: "This inevitable 
'stamp of the mentality of the medium,' now, is very likely the 
most important point in the whole investigation, and the conclusion 
should have been made on the basis of the most careful experiments; 
but here is our commission, which only just sat down to do its 
task (and how long did they spend on it?), when they at once 
determined that this is a fact. A fact, indeed! Perhaps it relied in 
this instance on some German or French opinion, but in that case 
where is the commission's own experience? This is only an opinion, 
not a conclusion drawn from its own experience. They could not 
reach a conclusion about the answers given by tables 'corresponding 
to the mentality of the medium' on the basis of Mrs. Claire alone 
and make it a general fact. Indeed, they have scarcely examined 
the higher, intellectual, cerebral aspect of Mrs. Claire, but have 
only found a linle machine that emits clicks; and even that was 
located in an altogether different place from her brain. Mr. Men­
deleev was a member of the commission, and when he delivered 
his lecture he spoke, as it were, representing the commission. No, 
such a quick and hasty conclusion by the commission on such an 
important point of inquiry and using such trivial experiments-this 
is too presumptuous and is, as well, scarcely scientific . . . .  " 
Indeed, people may think that. So such haughty superficiality 
in certain conclusions will give society and, most of all, those 
spiritualists who are already convinced a reason to hold even more 
strongly to their fallacies: "Presumption," they will say, "pride, 
prejudice, preconceived ideas. They're much too grumpy! . . .  " 
And spiritualism will carry on. 
P.S. I have just read the account of Mr. Mendeleev's second 
lecture on spiritualism. Mr. Mendeleev is already saying the com­
mission's report has had a salutary influence on writers: "Suvorin 
no longer is such a believer in spiritualism as before; Boborykin, 
too, has evidently been cured, or at least is on the road to recovery. 
Finally, Dostoevsky in his Diary has made a recovery as well: in 
January he was inclined toward spiritualism, but in March he 
attacks it. It seems that the 'Report' has had something to do with 
this." So, it seems the esteemed Mr. Mendeleev thought that I was 
praising spiritualism in January. I wonder if that was because of 
the devils? 

A Writer's Diary 
Mr. Mendeleev must be an unusually kindly man. Just imagine: 
after having crushed spiritualism in two lectures, he .sets to praising 
it in the conclusion of his second lecture." And what do you think 
he praises it for? "Honor and glory to spiritualists." (Well now! 
We've gotten to the point of honor and glory, but why so suddenly?) 
"Honor and glory to the spiritualists," he said, "for emerging as 
honorable and bold fighters for what they consider the truth, with­
out fear of prejudices! "  It's evident that this was said out of pity 
and, so to say, from a sense of tact caused by a surfeit of his own 
success; but I don't know whether it came out tactfully. This is 
just the way in which the proprietors of boarding schools sometimes 
attest to the qualities of their pupils before their parents: "Now 
while this young man cannot boast of the same intellectual capac­
ities as his elder brother, and even though he won't go far, still he 
is pure in hean and is always very reliable." Imagine what the 
younger brother thinks when he hears this! Mr. Mendeleev also 
praised the spiritualists (and once more with "honor and glory") 
for taking an interest in the soul in this materialistic age of ours. 
They may be a bit shaky in the sciences, he says, but they are 
firm in the faith, they believe in God. The esteemed professor, it 
seems, is a great one for a joke. But if he has said this out of 
naivete and not as a joke, then he must be quite the opposite: he 
must have no sense of humor at all. . . .  
4· On Behalf of One Deceased 
I read with a heavy hean the story appearing in New Times and 
reprinted from The Cause, a story that casts shame on the memory 
of my brother Mikhail Mikhailovich, the founder and publisher of 
the journals Time and The Epoch, who died twelve years ago. I 
quote the story in full: 
In 1862, when Shchapov no longer wanted to deal with the Notes 
of the Fatherland of the time and the other journals had been tem­
porarily suspended, he sent his article "The Runners" to Time. That 
autumn he was in great financial need, but the late editor of Time, 
Mikhail Dostoevsky, held up the payment due to Shchapov for a long 
time. The cold weather set in, and Shchapov did not even have warm 
clothes. Finally he lost his temper and sumoned Dostoevsky, where­
upon the following scene took place: "Please try to be patient, dear 
Afanasy Prokopevich; I'll bring you all your money in a week," said 
Dostoevsky. "But can't you understand, I need the money now!" 

April 
"Why must you have it now?" "I don't have a warm overcoat; I don't 
even have any warm clothes." "I'U teU you what: I know a tailor 
who'U give you what you need on credit. I'll pay him later out of 
your money." And Dostoevsky took Shchapov to a Jewish tailor who 
supplied the historian with an overcoat of sons and a waistcoat and 
trousers of most dubious quality and for which he was billed very 
dearly, something which later caused even the impractical Shchapov 
to complain. 
This is from Shchapov's obituary in The Cause. I don't know 
who wrote it; I haven't yet asked the people there and haven't read 
the obituary itself. As I said above, I am taking it from New Times. 
My brother died a long time ago: the matter thus is an old, 
obscure one; it is difficult to defend him, and there are no witnesses 
to the incident described. The accusation, thus, is unsubstantiated. 
But I state flatly that this whole story is ridiculous, and if there 
are some things in it that have not been invented, then at least all 
the facts are distorted and the truth has been very badly mangled. 
I shall demonstrate this as best I can. 
First of al, I declare that I took no part in my brother's financial 
affairs concerning the journal or in his previous business dealings. 
Although I worked with my brother in editing Time, I had no 
connection with any monetary matters. Still, I know very well that 
the journal Time had a brilliant success by the standards of the 
day. I also know that not only did the journal not incur debts to 
writers but that, to the contrary, it constantly advanced large pay­
ments to contributors. This I certainly do know and witnessed 
many times. And the journal was not short of contributors: they 
came of their own accord and sent in great numbers of articles, 
beginning even from the first year we published. One need only 
look through the issues of Time over the whole two and one-half 
years of its life to see that a huge majority of the literary figures 
of the day took part in it. That would not have been the case had 
my brother not paid contributors or, more precisely, had he treated 
them dishonorably. However, many people even now can testify to 
the advance payment of substantial sums of money. This did not 
happen in some dark corner. Many of those who once worked, 
and worked quite closely, with the journal and who are still living 
wil, of course, not refuse to attest to how, in their view and to 
their recollection, my brother managed the journal's affairs. Briefly, 
then, my brother could not have "held back payment to Shchapov," 
particularly if Shchapov were without proper clothes. If Shchapov 

A Writer's Diary 
had summoned my brother, it was not because he "lost his temper" 
over nonpayment, but specifically because-he was asking for money 
in advance like many others. Many letters and notes from contrib­
utors to the editor have been preserved, and I do not lose hope 
that Shchapov's notes will be found among them. Then the nature 
of their relationship will be clarified. Aside from this, however, the 
fact that Shchapov was then most likely asking for money in advance 
is doubtless more in accord with the truth and with all the rec­
ollections and accounts of how Time was managed and published; 
and, I repeat, one could collect many such accounts even now, 
fourteen years later. Despite his good business sense, my brother 
was rather vulnerable to requests and did not know how to say no: 
he would advance money, sometimes without even the hope of 
receiving in return an article for the journal. I witnessed this and 
could mention certain names. But my brother had other experiences 
as well. One of our regular contributors asked him for a six-hundred­
ruble advance, and the very next morning went off to serve in the 
Western Provinces where government officials were then being re­
cruited; and there he stayed, sending neither articles nor money. 
But what is most remarkable is that my brother did not take a 
single step to recover the money, despite the fact that he had a 
document in his hands. Only many years later, after his death, did 
my brother's family manage to recover the money from this person 
(a man of means) through a lawsuit. This was a publicly tried case, 
and the precise details of it are available. I wanted only to show 
how easily and readily my brother sometimes advanced money and 
that a man such as he would not have held back payment to a 
writer in need. The person who wrote Shchapov's obituary, when 
listening to my brother's conversation with Shchapov, might simply 
not have known specifically which money was at issue: money owed 
by my brother or money which he had advanced. It is also quite 
possible that my brother suggested that Shchapov order clothes on 
credit from a tailor he knew. This is a very simple matter: not 
wanting to refuse Shchapov help, he might, for his own reasons, 
have preferred this means rather than giving Shchapov a direct 
monetary advance . . . .  
Finally, I don't recognize my brother's manner of speaking in 
the story quoted: he would never have spoken in such a tone. This 
is not him at all. My brother never tried to ingratiate himself with 
anyone. He could not hover over another person, dripping honeyed 
phrases and sweet words. And of course he would never have 

April 
permined anyone to say to him: "Can't you understand, I need 
the money now!" The author of this anecdote has, in the course 
of fourteen years, somehow transformed and rewrinen these words 
into full-scale reminiscences in accordance with a point of view we 
all know very well. Let everyone who remembers my brother (and 
there are many) recall whether he ever spoke in such a fashion. 
My brother was an exceptionally decent man and he conducted 
himself like the gentleman he truly was. He was highly educated, 
a gifted writer, an expert on European literatures, a poet, and a 
well-known translator of Schiller and Goethe. I cannot conceive 
how such a man could grovel before Shchapov as this "anecdote" 
suggests. 
Let me cite one more fact about my late brother, one that is little 
known, I think. In 1849 he was arested over the Petrashevsky 
afair and spent two months imprisoned in the fortress. When two 
months had passed, several persons (quite a number, in fact) were 
freed as innocent and uninvolved in the case. And this truly was 
so: my brother had taken no part either in the secret society of 
Petrashevsky or of Durov. Nevertheless, he anended Petrashevsky's 
"evenings" and borrowed books from the society's secret library, 
which was located in Petrashevsky's house. At that time he was a 
Fourierist and was studying Fourier with a passion. So it was that 
during these two months in the fortress he could in no way consider 
himself out of danger and count on being let off. The facts that 
he was a Fourierist and that he used the library were discovered, 
and of course he could expect a term of exile-if not in Siberia 
then in some remote area-as a suspicious person. And many of 
those freed after two months surely would have been exiled (and 
this I can state for certain) had they not been let off by command 
of the late emperor. I learned of this at the time from Prince 
Gagarin, who was conducting the whole investigation into the Pe­
trashevsky case. At least I learned then of the facts of my brother's 
release; Prince Gagarin told me of it in order to raise my spirits, 
having had me brought specially from the casemate to the com- . 
mandant's house where the case was being heard. I was alone, a 
bachelor and childless; but when my brother went to the fortress 
he left a frightened wife and three children in his apartment; his 
eldest child was then only seven, and the family were left penniless 
as well. My brother loved his children tenderly and ardently, and 
I can imagine what he went through during those two months! Yet 
he gave no testimony that might have compromised others in order 

A Writer's Diary 
to ease his own lot, even though he could have said things; although 
he took no pan in anything, he stil ̊ a  great deal. Are there 
many who would act that way in his place, I ask you? I ask the 
question frankly because I know what I am talking about. I know 
and have sen how people react to such adversities, so I am not 
looking at this merely from a theoretical point of view. People may 
jUdge this act of my brother as they like, yet he refused to do 
anything contrary to his convictions even to save himself. This is 
no mere unsubstantiated statement: I can suppon everything that 
I say with the most accurate evidence. Meanwhile, every day and 
every hour for two months my brother was tormented by the thought 
that he was destroying his family, and he suffered in thinking of 
those thre dear little creatures and what awaited them . . . .  And 
now people want to show such a man in collusion with some Jew 
tailor to cheat Shchapov so that he and the tailor might share the 
profit and put a few rubles in their pockets! What uner rubish! 

May 


1 
1. From a Private Letter 
People ask if I am planning to write about the Kairova case. I have 
already had several letters asking this question. One letter is es­
pecially characteristic and was not, apparently, written for publi­
cation; still, I'll venture to quote a few lines of it while preserving 
strict anonymity, of course. I hope that my worthy correspondent 
will not complain; I'm quoting him only because I am convinced 
of his complete sincerity, which I can fully respect . 
. . . It was with a feeling of the deepest repugnance that we read 
about the Kairova case. This case reveals, as in the focU5 of a lens, 
a picture of the carnal instincts which the leading personage of the 
case (Kairova) developed under the influence of her milieu: her 
mother, during pregnancy, abandoned herself to drink; her father was 
a drunkard; her brother lost his mind because of drink and shot 
himself; a cousin murdered his wife; her father's mother was insane. 
And this was the milieu that gave birth to a despotic person with 
unbridled carnal urges. Even those who prosecuted the case were 
baffled by her and had to ask themselves whether she was insane. 
Some of the experts positively denied this, while others admitted the 
possibility of insanity, not in her personally, but in her actions. Yet 
it is not insanity that one sees through this whole trial; it is a woman 
who has reached the extreme limits of rejection of everything sacred: 
for her there exists neither the family nor the rights of another 
woman-not only that woman's right to a husband but to her very 
life: al these things exist for herself and her carnal lusts alone. 
She was acquitted, perhaps, on grounds of insanity, and we must 
thank God for that! At least moral depravity was attributed not to 
intellectual progress but to the category of mental illnesses. 
However, in the "lower section of the courtrom, filled exclusively 
with ladies, applause broke out" (Stock Exchange News). 
471 

472 
A Writer's Diary 
What was the applause for? Was it for the acquinal of an insane 
woman, or was it for the triumph of an uacontrolled, passionate nature, 
for the cynicism the woman personifies? 
Ladies applaud! Wives and mothers applaud! They ought to weep 
and not applaud the spectacle of such desecration of the feminine 
ideal . . . .  
[N.B. I omit several very harsh lines here.) 
Will you really pass over this case in silence? 
2. A New Regional Voice 
It is too late to bring up the story of Kairova (which, I think, 
everyone already knows), and in any case I can give no special 
significance to my remarks on such typical phenomena of today's 
life, and amid such typical public feeling. But it still would be 
worth saying a few words apropos of this "case," late though they 
may be. For nothing ever comes to an end, and so nothing can 
ever be too late; every event continues and takes on new forms, 
even though it may have finished its initial stage of development. 
But the main thing, again, is that I hope my correspondent forgives 
me for quoting parts of his letter. Judging only by the letters I 
receive personally, I could draw a conclusion about one extremely 
important fact of our Russian life which I have already hinted at 
indirectly not long ago: namely, that everyone is restless, everyone 
wants to participate in everything, everyone wants to express an 
opinion and state his views; the one thing that I canot make up 
my mind about is whether each person wants to dissociate himself 
through his opinions or join his voice in one common, harmonious 
choir. This letter from the provinces is a private one, but I remark 
here in this connection that our provinces truly want to live their 
own kinds of lives and almost emancipate themselves altogether 
from the capitals. I am not the only one who has remarked on this, 
and it was stated in the press long before I said it. For two whole 
months now I have had lying on my desk a literary anthology, The 
First Step, published in Kazan; and some comment really ought 
to be made about it, precisely because it comes with the specific 
intention of stating a new point of view, not a view from the capital 
city, but a regional and "urgently necessary" view. Well, these are 
all only new voices in the old Russian choir; therefore they are 
useful and, at least, interesting. This new tendency must stem from 
something, after all. It is true of all these proposed "new voices" 

May 
473 
that none, in essence, has yet spoken up; yet perhaps we really 
may hear something from our regions and border areas that we 
have never heard before. Judging theoretically and in the abstract, 
it should happen this way: from the time of Peter the Great to the 
present, Petersburg and Moscow have been leading Russia; but 
now, when the role of Petersburg and the cultural period of "the 
window cut through to Europe" have come to an end-now . . . .  
But that's just the question: have the roles of Petersburg and Mos­
cow really been played out? As I see it, if these roles have changed, 
they have changed very little; and even formerly, all through those 
one hundred and fifty years, were Petersburg and Moscow really 
leading Russia? Was that how things were in actual fact? Was it 
not, to the contrary, the whole of Russia that flowed and crowded 
into Petersburg and Moscow for the entire century and a half so 
that, in essence, the country has been leading itself, constantly 
renewing itself with this fresh flow of new forces from her regions 
and fringes, in which, I might note in passing, the problems were 
exactly the same as those of all the Russians in Moscow or Pe­
tersburg, in Riga or in the Caucasus, or anywhere else. If one 
judges by theory and by principle, after all, what two things could 
be more opposed to one another than Petersburg and Moscow? 
Petersburg in fact was founded in opposition to Moscow and her 
whole idea, as it were. And yet these two centers of Russian life in 
essence have comprised but one center; and this was true imme­
diately, from the very beginning, from the very time of Peter's 
reforms, despite certain traits that set the two cities apart. Exactly 
in the same way, those things that originated and developed in 
Petersburg quickly and exactly as independently originated, were 
consolidated and developed in Moscow, and vice versa. There was 
one soul, and not only in these two cities, but in any two cities 
anywhere in Russia so that all over Russia and in every place there 
existed the whole of Russia. Oh, we realize that each corner of Russia 
can and should have its local peculiarities and the complete right 
to foster them; but are these peculiarities such as to threaten spir­
itual dissolution or even simply confusion of some sort? On the 
whole, what lie ahead of us are "unknown waters," but this point 
I think is clearer than anything else. In any case, God grant that 
everything that can develop does develop-at least every good thing; 
this is the first point. The second and main point is: God grant 
we do not lose our sense of unity, no matter what blessings, prom­
ises, and treasures are given in exchange; it is bener that we are 

474 
A Writer's Diary 
together than apart, and this is the main thing. We will hear a 
new voice, of this I have no doubt; yet I-do not think that anything 
very new and distinctive will be said by our regions and fringe 
areas, not at the moment at least, and nothing unprecedented or 
hard to tolerate. The Great Russian is only now begining to live, 
only now rising up to utter his word, perhaps to the whole world. 
And therefore I think that Moscow, this center for the Great Rus­
sian, will live for a long time yet, and God grant it be so. Moscow 
has still not been the third Rome, yet the prophecy must be fulfilled 
because "there will be no fourth Rome." The world canot get by 
without its Rome. And Petersburg is now more than ever at one 
with Moscow. I admit that, when I say "Moscow" here, I mean 
not so much the city itself as I do a kind of allegory, as it were, 
so that there is no cause for any Kazan or Astrakhan to feel of­
fended. But we are happy to see their anthologies, and if a Second 
Seep should make its appearance, then so much the better, so much 
the better. 
3. The Court and Mrs. Kairova 
However, we've strayed far from the Kairova case. I wanted only 
to draw my correspondent's attention to the fact that, although I 
agree with his view on the "depraved instincts and despotic lack 
of restraint of her urges," I still find the opinions of my worthy 
correspondent to be overly harsh; there is not even any point to 
his harshness (for he all but admits that the woman is insane); he 
also exaggerates unduly, the more so that he finishes by acknowl­
edging the influence of the environment almost to the point of ad­
mining the futility of struggling against it. As for me, I am just 
happy that Kairova was released; I am only unhappy that she was 
acquitted. I am happy she was released, even though I don't for 
a moment believe she is insane, despite the views of some experts: 
accept this as my personal opinion, which I will not force on anyone 
else. Besides, if this poor woman is not insane, one feels even more 
pity for her. If she is insane, then "she knew not what she did"; 
but if she is not, how will she be able to go off bearing such a 
burden of torment! A murder, at least when it is not committed 
by some "Jack of Hearts," is a difficult and a complex thing. These 
several days of her indecision after the lawful wife of Kairova 's 
lover returned to him; her sense of insult that kept seething away 

May 
475 
day after day; her resentment that grew stronger every hour (oh, 
Kairova is the offender here-I still haven't lost my senses-but 
what is all the more pitiable is that in her fall she could not even 
understand that it was she who was the offender and kept seeing 
and feeling exactly the opposite!); and finally, this last hour before 
the "deed," at night, on the stairs, holding the razor that she had 
bought the day before-say what you will, but this is all rather 
difficult to bear, especially for such a disorderly and unstable soul 
as Kairova! The burden is too much for her; one seems to hear 
her groans as she is crushed by it. And then, ten months of trib­
ulations, madhouses, experts. How they dragged her about here 
and there and everywhere, and all the while this wretched, heinous 
criminal, completely guilty, represents in essence something so 
lacking in seriousness, so careless, so totally uncomprehending and 
unaccomplished, trivial, licentious, incapable of self-control, and 
mediocre-and so she was to the very last moment of the verdict, 
so that it somehow was a relief when she was let off. It's a pity 
only that this could not have been done without acquitting her 
because-say what you like-it caused a scandal. I think that Mr. 
Utin, her attorney, should certainly have sensed an acquittal corning 
and so could have limited himself simply to setting forth the facts 
rather than starting in to sing praises to the crime, because he 
almost sang praises to the crime, after all. . . .  That's just the point: 
we have no sense of measure in anything. In the West, Darwin's 
theory is a brilliant hypothesis; in Russia it has long become an 
axiom. In the West the notion that crime is very often only an 
illness makes a good deal of sense because people there discriminate 
carefuly among crimes; but in Russia this same notion makes no 
sense at all because we do not discriminate at all, and everything, 
every sort of nasty villainy committed even by a Jack of Hearts 
we also accept almost as an illness and-alas!-people even see 
something liberal in this! Of course, I'm not talking about serious 
people (although do we have many serious people in that sense?). 
I'm talking about the man in the street, about the untalented 
mediocrities, on the one hand, and about the scoundrels who trade 
in liberalism on the other, and these latter people are ones who 
couldn't care a fig for anything, so long as it is or seems to be 
liberal. As far as the attorney Utin is concerned, he "sang praises 
to crime" probably imagining that as an attorney he could do 
nothing else-and this is just how undeniably clever people get 

A Writer's Diary 
caried away and achieve results that aren't clever at all. Had the 
jurors been in different circumstances, i.e., had they had the op­
portunity of pronouncing a different verdict, then I think they 
probably would have taken exception to Mr. Utin's exaggerations, 
so that he would have weakened his client's case. But the fact was 
that they literally were unable to bring in a different verdict. Some 
newspapers commended them for it, while others, I've heard, cen­
sure them. I think there is no place here either for praise or for 
blame: they simply brought in the verdict they did because they 
were unerly unable to bring in any other. Judge for yourselves; 
this is what we read in the newspaper account: 
In accordance with the request of the prosecution, the following 
question was put by the coun: "Did Kairova, having premeditated her 
act, inflict on Alexandra Velikanova, with intent to take her life, several 
wounds with a razor on her neck, head and chest, but was prevented 
from the ultimate consummation of her intent of murdering Velikanova 
by Velikanova herself and her husband?" The jury answered this 
question in the negative. 
Let us pause here. This is the answer to the first question. But 
really, can one give an answer to a question posed that way? Who, 
and whose conscience, will undertake to answer such a question 
in the affirmative? (It's true that it's equally impossible to answer 
in the negative, but we are discussing only the jury's affirmative 
decision). One can only give an afirmative answer to a question 
posed that way if one has supernatural, divine omniscience. Indeed, 
even Kairova herself might have no idea of whether she would 
slash her rival to death or not, and yet the jury was asked positively: 
"Would she have murdered her had they not stopped her?" When 
she bought the razor the day before, she might well have known 
why she bought it but still might not have known whether she 
would anack her with it, never mind whether she would slash her 
to death. Most likely she hadn't the slightest idea of this even when 
sining on the steps with the razor in her hand, while just behind 
her, on her own bed, lay her lover and her rival. No one, no one 
in the world could have had the slightest idea of this. Moreover, 
even though it may seem absurd, I can state that even when she 
had begun slashing her rival she might still not have knov.m whether 
she wanted to kill her or not and whether this was her purpose in 
slashing her. Note, please, that I certainly am not arguing here 
that she was acting unconsciously; I don't even admit the slightest 

May 
477 
element of insanity. To the contrary: it is very likely that at the 
moment when she was slashing her rival she knew what she was 
doing, but whether she consciously, having milde it her purpose, 
wanted to take her rival's life-of this she may well have not had 
the least idea. For Heaven's sake, don't think this is absurd: she 
could be slashing with the razor, in anger and hatred, with not 
the slightest thought of the consequences. Judging by the character 
of this disorderly and tormented woman, it likely happened exactly 
that way. And note that the whole fate of this unfortunate woman 
hung on the jury's answer (an affirmative one, say) to the question 
of whether she would have gone through with the murder and, 
most important, whether she attacked her rival with the deliberate 
intent to kill her. She would be ruined, condemned to forced labor. 
How can a jury take such a burden on their conscience? And so 
they answered in the negative because they had no alternative an­
swer to give. You might say that Kairova's crime was not something 
premeditated, not a rational or bookish one, but simply "women's 
business," very uncomplicated, very simple; her rival was lying on 
Kairova's own bed as well. But is it that way and that simple? 
What if she had passed the razor across Velikanova's throat once 
and then cried out, shuddered, and ran off as fast as she could? 
How do you know that this might not have happened? And if it 
had happened, it's very likely that the affair would never have come 
to court. But now you've been pinned to the wall and are being 
forced to make a definite answer: "Would she have murdered Ve­
likanova or not?" And of course this is done so that your answer 
will determine whether or not she is exiled. And the slightest 
variation in your answer corresponds to whole years of imprison­
ment or forced labor! And what if she made one slash and then 
took fright and turned the razor on herself and, indeed, perhaps 
even killed herself right there? And what, finally, if she not only 
had not taken fright but had flown into a frenzy when she felt the 
first spurts of hot blood and not only murdered Velikanova but 
even begun to abuse the body, cutting off the head, the nose, the 
lips; and only later, suddenly, when someone took that head away 
from her, had realized what she had done? I am asking this because 
it all could have happened and could have been done by this very 
same woman and sprung from the very same soul, in the very same 
mood and under the very same circumstances; I say this because 
I somehow sense that I am not mistaken. And so how could one 
answer such a tricky question from the court? This isn't a family 

A Writer's Diary 
conversation armd the tea table, after all: someone's fate is being 
decided here. Posing questions in this way tuns the strong risk of 
getting no answer at al. 
Yet you may respond that if such were the case, we would never 
be able to charge or try anyone for murder or attempted murder 
so long as the crime was not brought to completion or the victim 
survived. No, I think that there is no cause for alarm here because 
there are very obvious cases of murder where, though the crime 
was never completed (even because of the criminal's own wil), it 
is still quite evident that they were wtdertaken solely with the intent 
ro murder and could have had no other purpose. But I repeat the 
most important thing: for this we have the conscience of the jury, 
and that is something great and important; that is the good service 
rendered by the new courts, and that conscience truly will prompt 
the jury to a new decision. If a person feels within himself, at such 
an important moment, the resolve to answer firmly, "Yes, guilty," 
then in al likelihood he will not be mistaken about the criminal's 
guilt. At least mistakes have happened so rarely as to be anecdotal. 
Only one thing is desirable: that the conscience of the jury be truly 
enlightened, truly firm, and strengthened by a civic sense of duty; 
that it should avoid being diverted toward one side or the other, 
i.e., toward harshness or pernicious sentimentality. It's also true 
that this second hope, i.e, the avoidance of sentimentality, is rather 
difficult to achieve. Everyone is capable of sentimentality; it's such 
an easy thing and requires no effort; sentimentality is so profitable 
these days; sentimentality with the right tendency will make even 
an ass look like a refined man . . . .  
The second question posed to the jury-"Did she inflict these 
wowtds with the same intent, in a state of frenzy and passion?"­
could likewise be answered only negatively, i.e., "No, she did not"; 
for here again the phrase "with the same intent" signifies "with 
the premeditated intention of taking Velikanova's life." It became 
especially difficult to answer this because "frenzy and passion" in 
the vast majority of cases exclude "premeditated intention." And 
so this second question of the court seems even to contain an 
element of the absurd. 
However in the court's third question-"Did Kairova act in a 
clearly established state of mental derangement?" -there is a rather 
larger element of the absurd, for the first two questions and the 
third are mutually exclusive. If the jury had answered the first two 
questions in the negative,_ or even if they had simply left them 

May 
479 
Wlanswered, it would then have been Wldear what was being asked 
and even what the word "act" meant, i.e., what sort of act are 
they asking about and how do they define it? The jury had no 
rom at all to modify their answer because of their duty to answer 
only yes or no and nothing in between. 
Finally, the fourth question of the court-"lf she was not acting 
Wlder the influence of mental derangement, is she guilty of the 
aforesaid crime?"-was naturally also left Wlanswered by the jury 
in view of the fact that it only repeated the first two questions. 
So it was that the court ler Kairuva off. The jury's answer, "No, 
she did not inflict . . .  " also contains an absurdity, of course, for 
it is repudiated by the very fact that woWlds were inflicted, a fact 
which no one disputes and which is obvious to all. But the jury 
foWld it dificult to give any other answer because of the way the 
question was put. But at least one could not say that in letting 
Kairova off, or at least in "pardoning" her, the court vindicated 
the defendant; but Mr. Utin certainly does justify the act of this 
criminal, and he almost finds it right and good. This is hard to 
believe, but this is what happened. 
4· The Defense Attorney and Kairova 
I am not going to analyze Mr. Utin's speech; it was not even a 
very good one. There was a terrific lot of high-flown language, 
various "feelings," and that conventionally liberal humaneness to 
which almost everybody resorts nowadays in "speeches" and in 
literature and which sometimes even the most complete nonentity 
(so that Mr. Utin is not at all apropos here) uses in order to give 
his writing an air of decency to ensure it "passes." The more that 
time goes by, the more this conventionally-liberal humaneness be­
trays itself in Russia. And everybody knows now that it is all no 
more than a handy crutch to lean on. I should have thought that 
this would scarcely even be popular nowadays-Wllike the situation 
ten years ago-yet just look at how naive people are, especially 
here in Petersburg! And our naivete is just what the aspiring ca­
reerist wants. The careerist doesn't have the time to study the 
"case," for example, and think carefully about it. Besides, almost 
all of them have grown callous over the years as their successes 
have piled up; they have already paid their dues to the humanitarian 
cause and have earned their humanitarian's badge, so to say, so 

A Writer's Diary 
they feel no need to spend still more time fussing over the mis­
fortunes of some suffering and muddled linle soul of a silly client 
who has thrust herself upon them. In many of their breasts there 
has long ceased to beat a real heart; there is only a little scrap of 
something official and bureaucratic. And so such a person hires a 
little stock of conventional words and phrases, trivial thoughts and 
feelings, gestures and opinions suitable for all furure emergencies; 
all of them, of course, are in the latest liberal fashion. And then, 
for a long time, for the rest of his life, he can sink into a state of 
blissful repose. And he almost always gets away with it. I repeat, 
this definition of the most current kind of careerist is certainly not 
meant to be applied to Mr. Utin: he is talented, and his feelings, 
most likely, are narural ones. Yet he did insert an excessive number 
of ringing phrases into his speech, something that compels one to 
suspect not exactly a lack of taste but certainly a careless and, 
perhaps, not even an entirely humane attitude to the case in ques­
tion. It must be admitted that the more talented our attorneys are, 
the busier they are; accordingly, the less time they have. Had Mr. 
Utin had more time, he would, in my view, have treated this case 
with more heartfelt feeling; and had he had more feeling, he would 
have been more circumspect and would not have burst forth with 
dithyrambs for what in essence is a most vulgar intrigue; he would 
not have indulged in high-flown phrases about "aroused lionesses 
whose cubs are being taken away"; he would not have attacked 
the victim of the crime, Mrs. Velikanova, with such naive fury; 
he would not have reproached her for not being slashed to death 
(he almost did that!); and he would not, at last, have uttered his 
most unexpected pun on Christ's words from the Gospels about 
the woman taken in adultery. However, it's possible that in reality 
all this did not happen this way, and Mr. Utin delivered his speech 
with a completely serious air. I was not in the courtroom; but 
judging by newspaper accounts, there seems to have been a certain 
lack of orderliness . . . .  In short, there was a very serious absence 
of deliberation and, beyond that, much that was comical. 
From virtually the beginning of the speech I was baffled and 
unable to understand whether Mr. Utin was serious in thanking 
the prosecutor for a summation that was not only "brilliant and 
talented, eloquent and humane," but at the same time was more 
a speech for the defense than for the prosecution. There is no doubt 
that the prosecutor's speech was eloquent and humane, just as it 

May 
was liberal to the highest degree; on the whole, these gentlemen 
spend a terrific lot of time heaping praise on each other while the 
jury listens. But having praised the prosecutor for his defense, Mr. 
Utin failed to carry his original approach to its logical conclusion 
by launching into an accusation of his client, Mrs. Kairova, instead 
of defending her. That's a pity, because it would have been very 
amusing and perhaps would have suited the case. I even think that 
the jury would not have been overly surprised, because it's difficult 
to surprise our jurors. This innocent observation of mine, of course, 
is only a joke: Mr. Utin did not prosecute, he defended, and if his 
speech had its faults, then they were, to the contrary, specifically 
that his defense was too passionate; in fact, he overdid things, 
something which, as mentioned above, I attribute to a certain 
preliminary carelessness in his attitude to the case. "Never mind, 
when the time comes I'll be able to get away with it by throwing 
around a few fine words; that's enough for this . . .  'gallery."' That, 
no doubt, is how some of our busiest attorneys are thinking more 
and more often these days. Mr. Utin, for instance, goes well out 
of his way to present his client in as ideal, romantic, and fantastic 
a light as possible, though there was no need whatever to do that: 
Mrs. Kairova is even easier to understand without these extra 
touches; but the defense lawyer played to the jurors' bad taste, of 
course. Everything about her is ideal; her every step is extraor­
dinary, noble, gracious, while her love is something burning, a 
poem of epic proportions! To take one example: Kairova, who had 
never been on the stage, suddenly signs a contract as an actress 
and goes off to a distant corner of Russia, Orenburg. Mr. Utin 
does not maintain or insist that this action "revealed her usual 
placid temper and self-sacrifice"; but "here we see," Mr. Utin 
continues, "a kind of idealism, an eccentricity of a sort, and chiefly 
a renunciation of her self. She needed this work in order to help 
her mother, and so she accepts a position for which she is not at 
all suited, leaves Petersburg, and sets off on her own to Orenburg," 
etc., etc. Well, what are we to make of this? It would seem that 
nothing very special or amazing has happened; many a person 
travels here or there, and many a poor young girl who is pretty, 
unfortunate, and talented accepts a position away from her home 
that is far worse than the one Mrs. Kairova obtained. But the 
defense attorney, as you can see, turns this into some sort of sacrifice 
of self-renunciation, and an acting contract is virtually transformed 

A Writer's Diary 
into a feat of heroism. His spech continues in the same fashion. 
Kairova very soon "becomes intimate" with Velikanov, the man­
ager of the troupe. His business was in a bad state: "she works 
to obtain a subsidy for him and manages to get him released." 
Once again, what's special about that? There's many a woman, 
especially one with as lively and active a nature as Kairova has, 
who would start a campaign in such a case for the sake of a man 
who was dear to her after she had become romantically involved 
with him. Then there began scenes with Velikanov's wife. Having 
described one such scene, Mr. Utin remarks that from that moment 
his client considered Velikanov "her own," and saw him as her 
creation, her "beloved child." I have heard, by the way, that this 
"beloved child" is tal, stout, and built like a grenadier, with hair 
curling down the back of his neck. In his speech Mr. U tin maintains 
that she regarded him as "her child," as her "creation"; that she 
wanted "to raise him up and ennoble him." Mr. Utin, evidently, 
rejects the notion that Mrs. Kairova could anach herself to Veli­
kanov without this special aim in mind; in the meantime, however, 
this "beloved child," this "creation" was not ennobled in the least 
but, on the contrary, sank lower and lower as time went by. 
To put it briefly, Mr. Utin's voice is always pitched far too high 
to be appropriate to these people and these events, so that one 
sometimes simply has to marvel. The adventures begin; the "be­
loved child" and Kairova come to Petersburg; then he goes to 
Moscow to look for work. Kairova writes him sincere, heartfelt 
leners; she is filled with passion and feelings, while he is simply 
unable to write a good lener and from this point of view is terribly 
"ignoble." "These leners," Mr. Utin observes, "contain the first 
appearance of that little cloud that later covered the whole sky and 
produced the storm." But Mr. Utin cannot express himself in terms 
any simpler; this is his style throughout. Finally Velikanov returns 
once more, and once more they are living in Petersburg (martiale­
ment, of course)-and then suddenly comes the most important 
episode of the romance: Velikanov's wife arrives, and Kairova 
"roused herself like a lioness whose cub is being taken away." We 
really have a lot of eloquence at this point. Were it not for this 
eloquence, of course, we would have even more pity for this poor, 
foolish woman who is trapped between a husband and wife and 
who does not know what to do. Velikanov turns out to be "treach­
erous," simply a weak man. At one point he is deceiving his wife 
by assuring her of his love; then he leaves the dacha to go to 

May 
Petersburg to se Kairova and mollify her with the news that his 
wife will soon be going abroad. Mr. Utin depicts the love of his 
client not only as something appealing but even edifying and, one 
might say, highly moral. Kairova, you see, even intended to ap­
proach Mrs. Velikanova with a proposal to give her back her own 
husband altogether (and so, obviously, she thought she had full 
rights to him). "If you want him, take him; if you want to live 
with him, then do so; but either you must leave here or I will. 
Decide one way or the other." That's what she intended to say, 
but I don't know whether she actually said it. But no one made 
any decision, and instead of leaving herself (if she really wanted 
so badly to somehow end the affair), Kairova only seethed and 
rushed frantically about, asking no questions and awaiting no im­
probable solutions. "To give him up without a struggle would not 
be the act of a woman," Mr. Utin suddenly observes. Well, then, 
why all the talk about these various intentions, questions, and 
"proposals?" "She was dominated by passion," Mr. Utin explains 
to the court, "her mind was consumed and destroyed by jealousy, 
which drove her to play this dreadful game." And then: "jealousy 
turned her reason to dust and nothing of it remained. How could 
she have kept herself under control?" Things continued this way 
for ten days. "She languished; she had fits of fever and could not 
eat or sleep; she rushed to Petersburg and to Oranienbaum, and 
thus, when she was in such a state of torment, the ill-stared 
Monday of the 7th of July arrived." On that ill-starred Monday 
the woman, worn out by her torments, arrived at her dacha and 
was told that Velikanov's wife was there; she comes to the bedroom 
and . . . .  
Gentlemen of the jury, is it possible for the woman to remain calm? 
One would have to be made of stone; one would have to be without 
a hean. The man she passionately loves is in her bedrom, in her 
bed, with another woman! This was too much for her to bear. Her 
emotions burst fonh like a raging torrent that destroys everything in 
its path; she rushed about, enraged; she was capable of destroying 
everything around her (!! !). If we try to ask this torrent what it was 
doing and why it was causing such damage, could it answer us? No, 
it would give no answer. 
Just listen to all those fine phrases and all those "emotions"! 
"As long as it's hot they'll surely find some flavor in it." But let 
us pause at these words: they are deplorable; and even worse, they 
are the very foundation of Mr. Utin's defense. 

A Writer's Diary 
I am only too ready to agree with you, Mr. Utin, that Kairova 
could not have remained calm during the scene you described; but 
this is simply because she is Kairova-i.e, a weak woman, perhaps; 
a very good-hearted woman, perhaps; maybe even a likable and 
afectionate woman (however, at this point I know about these 
qualities of hers only from your speech); yet at the same time she 
is a loose woman, is she not? I don't mean that she is loose in the 
sense of being depraved: she is an unfortunate woman, and I will 
not insult her, al the more that I cannot undertake to judge her 
on this point. I mean only the looseness of her mind and her heart, 
which I think is undeniable. And so it was because of this looseness 
that at the fatal moment she could not settle the matter any dif­
ferently than the way she did; it was not because "one would have 
to be made of stone; one would have to be without a heart" to do 
anything else, as you said, Mr. Utin. Just think, sir, that when 
you say that, you are, as it were, refusing altogether to admit any 
other clearer, more noble and magnanimous outcome. And if there 
had been a woman who at such a moment were capable of throwing 
away the razor and finding another solution to the problem, then 
it follows that you would have caled her not a woman but a stone, 
a woman without a heart. And so you did "almost sing praises to 
the crime," as I said before. Of course, you were caried away, 
and this was certainly noble of you; but it is a pity that such rash 
words are uttered from the still new tribunes of our society. You 
must pardon me, sir, for taking your words so seriously. But then, 
stop and think: there are superior types and superior ideals among 
women. There is no disputing the fact that these ideals have existed 
and do exist in reality. And what if even Mrs. Kairova herself at 
the last moment, with the razor in her hand, had suddenly looked 
clearly at her own fate (don't worry, this sometimes is quite possible, 
and precisely at the last moment), recognized her own misfortune 
(for loving such a man is a misfortune), recognized all her shame 
and disgrace, all her degradation (for in fact it is not only "nobility 
and self-denial" that one finds in such "women taken in adultery," 
Mr. Utin, but much falsehood, shame, vice, and degradation as 
well)? What if she had suddenly sensed within her a woman res­
urected into a new life who at the same time recognized that she, 
after al, was the offender, and even more, that by leaving this man 
she might truly ennoble him? And, having felt all this, she had 
gotten up and left, tears pouring from her eyes, saying, "What 
have I come to?" Well, what if this really had happened even to 

May 
Mrs. Kairova? Would you really not have taken pity on her? Would 
your undeniably good hean not have responded to her? Would you 
have called this woman, who suddenly was resurrected in heart 
and in spirit, a stone, a creature without a hean? Would you have 
used our new tribune, to which we all still listen so eagerly, publicly 
to place your stigma upon her? 
I hear voices, however: "You must not demand this from every 
woman; this is inhuman!" I know, and I make no such demand. 
I shuddered when I read the pan where she sat hidden, listening 
by the bed; only too well can I imagine what she underwent in 
this final hour, her razor in hand. I was very, very happy when 
Mrs. Kairova was let off. I whisper to myself the majestic words, 
"For they bind heavy burdens, and grievous to be borne." But He 
who said those words also added, when He forgave the guilty 
woman, "Go forth and sin no more." That means that He still 
called the sin a sin; He forgave it, but He did not justify it. But 
Mr. Utin says, "She would not have been a woman but a stone, 
a creature without a hean," so that he does not even understand 
how she could have acted differently. I merely timidly venture to 
observe that evil must still be called evil, despite any humane 
feelings, and must not be raised almost to the level of a heroic 
deed. 
S· The Defense Attorney and Velikanova 
And if you are going to proclaim your humanitarian principles, 
then you might spare a little pity for Mrs. Veli.kanova. He who 
has too much pity for the offender probably has no pity left for 
the offended. Meanwhile, Mr. Utin would deny Mrs. Veli.kanova 
even her status as victim of a crime. I think I am certainly not 
wrong in concluding that throughout his speech Mr. Utin was 
constantly on the verge of saying something bad about Mrs. Veli­
kanova. I admit that this technique is a most naive and, I think, 
a most awkward one; it is too pritnitive and hasty. People will 
probably say, Mr. Utin, that you are humane only toward your own 
clients, i.e., as a function of your job; but is that really so? For 
instance, you certainly fastened upon and used that "savage, ter­
rible" scene when an angry Mrs. Velikanova said aloud that she 
would "kiss the dear hands and feet of anyone who would rid her 
of such a husband"; and when Kairova, who was there, replied at 
once, "I'll take him," Mrs. Velikanova's response was, "Go right 

A Writer's Diary 
ahead." After you told us this facr, you even observed that it was 
from this very moment that Kairova began to regard this gentleman 
as her own and began seeing him as her creation and "her beloved 
child." That's all very naive. In the first place, what is "savage 
and terrible" here? The scene itself and the words spoken are 
nasty, to be sure, but if you alow the possibility of overlooking 
even the razor in Kairova's hands and acknowledging that she could 
not have remained calm-and I believe you completely here-then 
how can you not overlook the impatient, albeit foolish, outburst of 
an unhappy wife! You yourself acknowledge that Mr. Velikanov is 
an intolerable man, so much so that the very fact of Kairova's love 
for him is itself sufficient demonstration of her insanity. So then 
why are you surprised when Mrs. Velikanova talks about kissing 
"the dear hands and feet"? With an intolerable person the rela­
tionship itself often becomes intolerable, and intolerable statements 
sometimes slip out. Yet that is only someri11U!s and only just a phrase. 
And I must admit that if Mrs. Kairova seriously believed that the 
wife was indeed giving up her husband and that she henceforth 
had the right to regard him as her own, she must have had an 
exceptionally fine sense of humor. It probably al happened some­
how differently. And you needn't look down your nose so at a few 
words of some poor, depressed person. In families like this (and 
not only in ones like this-you wouldn't believe where these things 
go on) even worse things are said. Sometimes there is poverty, a 
heavy burden of life, and under their weight family relationships 
inevitably grow coarse so that things are said which Lord Byron, 
for example, would never have said to his Lady Byron, even at the 
moment of their final rupture, or, say, as Arbenin to Nina in 
Lermontov's Masquerade. Of course there is no excuse for this sort 
of shoddy behavior, even though it is only shoddiness, mauvais ron, 
impatience, while the heart remains, perhaps, even better than 
before; so that if one regards such matters from a more common­
place point of view, the result will truly be more humane. Mrs. 
Kairova's response-"I'll take him"-is much worse, in my view: 
there is a terrible insult to the wife here; there is torment, the 
direct mockery from a triumphant mistress who has stolen a hus­
band away from his wife. You, Mr. Utin, make some truly ven­
omous remarks about this wife. For example, in expressing your 
regret that she did not appear in court but sent a doctor's certificate 
saying she was unwell, you remark to the jury that if she had 
appeared, her testimony would have lost all its significance because 

May 
the jury would have seen a healthy, strong, attractive woman. But 
in the case at hand what concern of yours are her beauty, her 
strength, and her good health? You go on to state: "Gentlemen of 
the jury! What sort of a woman is this who comes to her husband, 
who is living with another woman, who comes to the home of her 
husband's mistress knowing that Mrs. Kairova is living there? She 
decides to spend the night and retires to Kairova 's bedroom, to 
Kairova's bed . . . .  This is beyond my comprehension." It may be 
beyond your comprehension, but you are still being too aristocratic 
and-unjust. And do you realize, Mr. Utin, that your client may 
have gained a good deal when Mrs. Velikanova did not appear in 
court? Many bad things were said about Mrs. Velikanova in court­
about her character, for instance. I don't know anything about her 
character, but for some reason the fact that she did not testify even 
appeals to me. She did not testify, perhaps, out of the pride of an 
offended woman, or perhaps even because she wanted to spare her 
husband. For no one can say why she did not testify . . . .  But in 
any case it is obvious that she is not one of those individuals who 
love to tell publicly of their passions and describe their feminine 
feelings to al and sundry. And who knows, perhaps if she had 
testified she would have had no trouble at all in explaining why 
she spent the night in the apartment of her husband's mistress, 
an act which you find so amazing and which you say casts particular 
shame on her. I think that she spent the night not at Kairova 's 
but at the apartment of her repentant husband who had invited 
her there. And there are no grounds whatsoever to conclude that 
Mrs. Velikanova counted on Kairova's continuing to pay for this 
apartment. She perhaps even found it difficult to determine, im­
mediately after her arrival, who was paying for the apartment and 
who was its owner. The husband asked her to come to him, so it 
would seem that the apartment was the husband's. And it is highly 
probable that this is just what he told her; he was deceiving both 
of them at the time, after all. The very same thing applies to your 
fine points about the bedroom and the bed. Here some tiny thread, 
some apparently unerly insignificant detail could perhaps have 
explained it all at once. In general, it seems to me that everyone 
was unjust toward this poor woman, and I'm given to think that 
had Velikanova caught Kairova in the bedroom with her husband 
and killed her with a razor, then she would have gained nothing 
in her dreadful status as legal wife apart from squalor and a term 
of forced labor. Can you really say, as you did, Mr. Utin, that 

A Writer's Diary 
Velikanova lost nothing in this case because a only few days after 
the incident she appeared on the stage and then performed all 
winter long, while Kairova was incarcerated for ten months? We 
have no less pity for your poor client than you do, but you must 
agree that Mrs. Velikanova has endured more than a little. Never 
mind what she lost as a wife and a self-respecting woman (the latter 
is something I have no right to take away from her); but just 
imagine, Mr. Utin-you, the subtle jurist who so clearly revealed 
himself as a humane person in his speech-just imagine how much 
she must have endured that terrible night! She endured several 
minutes (far too many minutes) of mortal fear. Do you know what 
mortal fear is? One who has not had a close confrontation with 
death has difficulty in understanding it. She was awakened at night 
by the razor of the woman who wanted to murder her as the razor 
passed across her throat; she saw the infuriated face bending over 
her; she fought off her attacker, while Kairova continued slashing 
at her; naturally, she must have been convinced in these first savage, 
impossible moments that she had been fatally slashed and that 
death was inevitable. That's unbearable, after all; it's a delirious 
nightmare, but a nightmare while awake and so a hundred times 
more painful. It's almost the same as a death sentence being read 
to one tied to the stake for execution while they pul the hood over 
his head . . . .  Merciful Heavens, Mr. Utin-you regard even torment 
like that as insignificant! Can it be that not one of the jurors smiled 
when he listened to that? And what of the fact that Mrs. Velikanova 
was performing onstage two weeks later? Does that make the horror 
that she had to endure two weeks earlier any less, or does it lessen 
the guilt of your client? We had a case not long ago of a stepmother 
who threw her six-year-old stepdaughter out of a fourth-floor win­
dow, but the child got up quite unharmed. Does that in any way 
alter the cruelty of the crime, and did this little girl truly not sufer 
at all? By the way, I can't help but imagine how a defense attorney 
would defend this stepmother: he could cite her hopeless situation, 
the fact that she was recently married against her wil or by mistake 
to a widower. We would have pictures of the impoverished lives of 
impoverished people, their endless labor. She, a simple, innocent 
woman who, like an inexperienced girl (especially given our manner 
of child rearing!), married thinking that there were only joys await­
ing her thereafter; but instead of joys she has the washing of dirty 
linen, cooking, bathing the child-"Gentlemen of the jury, it is 
only natural that she should conceive a hatred for this child"-

May 
(who knows, we might even find such a "defense attorney" who 
would begin to blacken the child's character and seek out some 
nasty, hateful qualities in this six-year-old!)-"in a moment of de­
spair, in a passing fit of madness, scarcely knowing what she was 
doing, she seizes the girl and . . . .  Gentlemen of the jury, who among 
you would not do the same? Which one of you would not have 
thrown the girl out the window?" 
What I'm saying, of course, is only a caricarure, but if one should 
undertake to compose such a speech, then one really might say 
something rather similar, precisely in this manner, i.e., precisely 
in the maner of this caricarure. And what is truly shocking is that 
it really does resemble a caricarure, whereas the act of this monster­
stepmother is truly bizarre; perhaps it really should be given a 
detailed and deep analysis that might even serve to lighten the case 
against this criminal woman. And so one sometimes gets annoyed 
at the naive and worn-out techniques that are coming into use for 
various reasons among our most talented lawyers. On the other 
hand, one thinks as follows: the tribunes of our new courts are 
truly a school of ethics for our society and our People. This is the 
school in which our People learn truth and morality; how, then, 
can one listen indifferently to the things one hears from these 
tribunes? But sometimes one hears most innocent and amusing 
jokes. Mr. Utin cited the following words from the Gospels as 
applying to his client: "She loved much, and much is forgiven 
her." That's very nice, of course, the more so as Mr. Utin knows 
very well that Christ did not at all have that kind of love in mind 
when he forgave the woman taken in adultery. I think it a sacrilege 
to refer here to this great and touching place in the Gospels. Yet 
I cannot refrain from referring to a very minor yet rather char­
acteristic observation I made not long ago. This observation, of 
course, has nothing to do with Mr. Utin. Ever since my childhood, 
when I was a military cadet, I have noticed that many "raw 
youths"-high-school pupils (some), military school cadets (more), 
former cadets (most of all)-have truly been instilled with the notion 
from their school days that Christ forgave the woman for that sort 
of love, that is, precisely for her amorousness or, to be more precise, 
for her excess of amorousness; that he forgave her what we might 
call this attractive debility. Even now one encounters this conviction 
among very many people. I recall that a few times I even seriously 
asked myself the question: why is it that these boys are so inclined 
to interpret this part of the Gospels in this way? Is their religious 

490 
A Writer's Diary 
instruction really so careless? Yet they have a rather good under­
standing of the other parts of the Gospels. ·  I concluded, finally, 
that the reasons were probably more physiological, so to say: given 
the undeniably good nature of Russian boys, they probably also 
have that particular excess of youthful energy which comes to the 
fore whenever they look at a woman. Yet I feel that this is nonsense 
and should not have been mentioned at all. I repeat, Mr. Utin of 
course knows very well how this text should be interpreted, and 
I have no doubt that he was only making a joke at the end of his 
speech; but what his point was I don't know. 

2 
1. Something about a Certain Building. Some 
Appropriate Thoughts 
Lies and falsehood, that's what we have on all sides, and that's 
what is sometimes so hard to bear! 
And just at the very time the case of Mrs. Kairova was being 
tried, I happened to visit the Foundling Home, a place I had never 
before visited and one I had long wanted to see. Thanks to a doctor 
I know, we were able to look at everything. However, I will give 
you my impressions in detail later on; I did not even take any notes 
and record any facts or figures; from the first step it became clear 
that it was impossible to examine everything on a single occasion 
and that it was well worth returning here again and again. This is 
what my most worthy guide, the doctor, and I resolved to do. I 
even intend to take a trip to the villages to see the Finnish women 
who have been given care of the infants. Accordingly, my descrip­
tion is still to come, but for now there are only flashes of my 
recollections: the monument to Betskoi; a series of splendid wards 
in which the infants are kept; the remarkable cleanliness (which 
hinders nothing); the kitchens; the barn where the calves are pre­
pared for vaccination; the dining roms; the groups of little children 
around the table; groups of five- and six-year-old girls playing at 
horses; a group of adolescent girls of perhaps sixteen and seventeen, 
former pupils of the home, who are preparing to be children's 
nurses and who are trying to complete their education. The latter 
already have some knowledge and have read Turgenev; they have 
a clear view of things and speak very nicely with you. But it was 
the supervisors who made the best impression on me: they have 
such a kindly air (and they weren't putting it on just for our visit), 
and had such calm, good-natured, and intelligent faces. Some of 
491 

492 
A Writer's Diary 
them, evidently, are educated. I was also very interested to hear 
that the monality rate among the infants brought up in the home 
(in this building, that is) is incomparably lower than that of infants 
outside who are raised in families; the same cannot be said of 
infants placed in villages, however. I saw, finally, a rom downstairs 
where mothers bring their infants to leave them here forever . . . .  
But this is all for later. I remember only that I gazed at these 
nursing infants with a particular and, probably, rather strange look. 
As absurd as it may be, they seemed to me to be terribly bold, so 
that, I recall, I even smiled inwardly at my thought. In fact, here 
you have a child who was born somewhere and brought to this 
place-yet just look at him crying, squaling, and declaring that 
his litde chest is healthy and that he wants to live; his litde red 
arms and legs thrash about and he keeps crying as if he had the 
right to disturb you this way; he seeks the breast as if he had a 
right to it and a right to be cared for; he demands care as if he 
had exactly the same right as those other children with families. 
So people drop everything and run to him: what an arogant fellow 
he is! And to be sure, I say this in all seriousness; you look around 
and right away, like it or not, the thought comes that what if he 
realy does offend someone? And what if someone should suddenly 
decide to take him in hand and say, "Lok here, you litde tyke, 
do you think you're the son of a prince or something?" And surely 
they must have to take them in hand. This isn't some idle fancy 
of mine. Children are even thrown out of windows, and once some 
ten years ago another stepmother, I think (I've forgotten, but it 
would be better if she were a stepmother), got tired of dragging 
around a child, born of the former wife, that was continually crying 
from some sort of pain; she went up to the boiling, bubbling 
samovar, held the child's litde hand right under the tap . . .  and 
opened it. It was in all the newspapers at the time. She certainly 
knew how to take the child in hand, the dear woman! I don't know 
what kind of a sentence she got, or, indeed, if she was even tried. 
Don't you think she "deserves every sort of clemency"? Sometimes 
these litde brats can make a dreadful fuss, after all, and get on 
your nerves; and then there's the whole business of poverty and 
doing the washing, and so on. On the other hand, there are some 
mothers who may still "take in hand" a squaling child but do it 
much more humanely: an "interesting" and attractive young girl 
will crep into some dark comer; and suddenly she has a fainting 
spell and can remember nothing more; suddenly-just how, no one 

May 
493 
can tell-her little child, an arrogant, squalling little fellow, just 
accidentally gets into the water and chokes. Choking, still, is more 
pleasant than the samovar tap, isn't that so? You can't even pass 
judgment on one like that; she's a poor, deceived, sympathetic girl; 
she ought to be eating candies, but suddenly she has a fainting fit, 
and besides, if you think of Marguerite in Fausr (some of these 
jurors are uncommonly well educated), then there is simply no way 
one can pass judgment on her; one even ought to take up a sub­
scription for her. Thus one even rejoices over all these babies for 
managing to find their way here, to this building. And I admit 
that at the time some very idle thoughts and ridiculous questions 
kept coming into my mind. For example, I would ask myself­
and I truly wanted to find out-precisely when these children begin 
to learn that they are worse than everyone else, that is, that they 
are not the same children as "those others" but are much worse 
and are alive not by any right but only, so to say, out of a sense 
of humanity? It's impossible to determine that without a great deal 
of experience, a great deal of observation of the babies, but a priori 
I still decided and am convinced that they find out about this 
"sense of humanity" very early, so early one can scarcely believe 
it. In fact, if the child were to develop only by means of scientific 
aids and scientific games and to get its knowledge of the world 
from such "scientific" questions as "Why does the duck have 
feathers?" then, I think, it would never reach the depth of un­
derstanding-so terrifying that one can scarcely believe it-through 
which by quite unknown means it manages to understand certain 
ideas that would seem to be quite beyond it. A five- or six-year­
old child sometimes knows things about God or about good and 
evil that are so amazing and are of such surprising profundity that 
one can't help but conclude that Nature has given this child some 
other means of acquiring knowledge, one that not only is unknown 
to us but which, on a pedagogical basis, we even ought to reject. 
Oh, of course the child doesn't know the facts about God, and if 
a clever jurist were to examine the six-year-old on his notions of 
good and evil, the result would be merely laughable. But you need 
only be a little more patient and attentive (for it's worth being so), 
overlook the child's ignorance of certain facts, admit certain ab­
surdities, try to get at rhe essence of his understanding, and you will 
at once see that he knows as much about God, perhaps, as you, a 
clever lawyer who sometimes is carried away by haste; perhaps he 
knows much more than you do about good and evil and about what 

494 
A Writer's Diary 
is shameful and what is laudable. To those terrible, difficult ideas 
which are acquired so unexpectedly and in· such a mysterious man­
ner I would add, for the children here, this initial but utterly 
unshakeable conviction that stays with them for their whole lives: 
that they are "worse than al the others." And I am certain that 
the child learns this not from his nurses and guardians; moreover, 
it lives without seeing these "other children" and is thus unable 
to make comparisons. Yet when you look closely you will see that 
it already knows a terrific amount, that it has already figured out 
a great deal with a most unecessary precocity. Of course, I've 
launched into speculations, but at the time I simply was unable to 
manage the rush of my thoughts. For example, the following aph­
orism suddenly popped into my head: if fate has deprived these 
children of a family and of the joy of growing up with parents 
(because not al parents throw their children out the window, after 
al, or scald them with boiling water)-then does it not reward 
them in some other way? They are raised in this magnificent build­
ing, for instance; they are given a name, then an education, and 
even the highest education possible; they are seen through uni­
versity, and then found a position and set on a life's path; and this 
is done by the whole state, so to say, taking them in as children 
of the community or the state. True enough, if we are going to 
forgive, then we should forgive completely. And then I thought to 
myself: some people will probably say that this means encouraging 
vice, and will take offense. But what a silly idea: to think that 
these lovely girls will deliberately stan bearing one child after 
another just as soon as they hear that their children will be sent 
to university. 
"No," I thought, "we must forgive them and forgive them com­
pletely. If we are going to do it, then we must go al the way!" It 
is true that many-very many-of our most honest and industrious 
people will be envious and that some will think: "How is it that 
I have worked like an ox al my life and have never done a single 
wrong thing; I loved my children and struggled al my life to give 
them an education and make them good citizens, but I have failed. 
I haven't even been able to put them al the way through high 
school. And now I've got a cough and am short of breath, and if 
I die next week then it's good-bye to my dear children, al eight 
of them! They'll al leave school at once and take to wandering 
the streets or go to work in a cigarette factory; and that's the best 

May 
495 
they can expect out of life . . . .  But these little outcasts will finish 
university and find good positions. And to top it all off, I'm the 
one who, directly or indirectly, has been contributing each year to 
support them! "  
There is no doubt that someone will deliver this monologue; but 
in fact what contradictions does it contain? In fact, how did every­
thing get aranged so as to eliminate all accord? Just think: what 
could be more legitimate and fair than this monologue? And yet, 
at the same time, it is highly illegitimate and unfair. Thus it's 
legitimate and illegitimate at the same time-what a muddle! 
I can't resist telling you some of the other things that I was 
thinking about at the time. For example: "We may forgive them, 
but will they forgive us?" Now that's also something to think about. 
There are some creatures of a superior type, and they will forgive; 
others, perhaps, will want revenge-on whom and for what they 
will never figure out and will never understand, yet they will take 
revenge. But let me say the following about "vengeance on society" 
on the part of these "outcasts," should such occur: I am convinced 
that this vengeance will always be something negative rather than 
direct and positive. No one will take revenge directly and con­
sciously, and he himself will not even guess that he craves revenge; 
to the contrary, if they are only given an education, a great many 
of those who emerge from this building will emerge ardently seeking 
to be respectable, to be parents with their own families. Their 
ideal will be to build a nest of their own and to make a name for 
themselves, to gain some prestige, to bring up children, love them, 
and, in bringing them up, to do so without resorting to this building 
or to help from the state. And in general their first rule will be to 
forget even the way back to this building and to forget its very 
name. On the contrary, this new head of a family will be happy 
and will see his own babies through university at his own expense. 
Well-this is a longing for a bourgeois, established order that will 
stay with him all his life; and what will this be: servility or the 
highest form of independence? I think it will more likely be the 
latter; yet all through his life his soul will still remain not entirely 
independent; it will not quite be the soul of a master, and therefore 
there will be much in it that is not entirely attractive, although it 
may be totally honest. Complete spiritual independence is achieved 
through quite different means . . . .  But we'll discuss that later; it's 
also a long story. 

A Writer's Diary 
2. One Inappropriate Thought 
I said "independence" just now. But do we love independence?­
that's the question. And what do we mean by independence? Could 
we find two people who would understand it in the same way-in 
fact, I'm not sure if we have even one such idea in which anyone 
seriously believes. Our average, unexceptional person, rich or poor, 
doesn't like to think about anything and so, without paying much 
mind to it, simply indulges in a little vice while he has the strength 
and the interest. People who are bener than the average "disso­
ciate" themselves in little groups and give the appearance of be­
lieving in something; yet it seems they force themselves to do it 
and do so only as an amusement. There are also particular people 
who have seized upon the formula "The worse, the bener," and 
are working out its implications. There are, finally, paradoxicalists, 
who are occasionally very honest but on the whole rather untal­
ented; these, especially if they are honest, most often end by suicide. 
And, in truth, suicides lately have become so common that people 
don't even talk about them any more. The Russian land seems to 
have lost the capacity to hold people on it. And how many truly 
honest people-and honest women in particular-there are among 
them! Our women are begining to make their presence felt and, 
perhaps, will save a great deal; I'll say more about that later. Women 
are perhaps our great hope and will serve the whole of Russia in 
her fateful moment. But this is the problem: we have a lot of honest 
people, a terrific lot of them; I mean to say that they are good 
rather than honest, but none of them knows the meaning of honesty 
and hasn't the least shred of belief in any expression of honesty; 
they even reject its clearest expressions from the past, and that is 
the case almost everywhere and with everyone. Should that surprise 
us? But the so-called living force, the vital sense of existence, 
without which no society can live and no land endure, is vanishing 
away, God knows where. So why was it that in this building I set 
to thinking about suicides, looking at this nursery and at these 
infants? Now that really is an inappropriate thought. 
We have many inappropriate thoughts, and it is they that crush 
us. Here in Russia an idea falls on a person like a huge boulder 
and half crushes him; there he is, squirming under it, unable to 
get free. Some people accept living crushed, while others do not, 
and they kill themselves. Extremely characteristic is the long lener, 
published in New Times, of a girl who commined suicide. She was 

May 
497 
twenty-five, and her name was Pisareva. She was the daughter of 
landowners who had once been prosperous; but she came to Pe­
tersburg and paid her dues to progress by becoming a midwife. 
She got through the course, passed the examination, and found a 
position as a zemstvo midwife. She herself states that she was never 
in need and was able to earn a rather good living. But she got 
tired, very tired, so tired that she wanted to rest. "Where better 
to rest than in the grave?" She had really become terribly tired! 
This poor girl's whole letter simply exudes fatigue. The letter is 
even
. 
cranky and impatient: just leave me alone, I'm tired. "Don't 
forget to have them pull off my new blouse and stockings; I have 
some old ones on my night table. Have them dress me in those." 
She doesn't write take off but pull off, and it's all like that-in 
terrible impatience. All these sharp words come from being im­
patient, and the impatience from fatigue; she even uses some abu­
sive language: "Did you really think that I would come home? 
Why the hell would I go there?" Or: "Now, Lipareva, forgive me 
and may Petrova forgive me as well" (it was in her apartment the 
girl took poison) "especially Petrova. I'm doing a filthy, swinish 
thing . . . .  " She evidently loves her family, but she writes: "Don't 
let Lizanka know, or else she'll tell her sister and they'll come 
here and start sniveling. I don't want anyone sniveling over me, 
but a family never fails to do that when one of them dies." Snivel, 
she writes, and not weep-all that obviously comes from impatient 
fatigue: hurry up and get it over with as quickly you can, and let 
me rest! There is a terrible, agonizing amount of disgusted and 
cynical unbelief in her: she has no faith in Lipareva or Petrova, 
whom she loves so. This is how the letter begins: "Don't lose your 
heads, don't start moaning. Get a grip on yourselves and read this 
to the end. And then decide what's the best thing to do. Don't 
frighten Petrova. Maybe nothing will come of it but a good laugh. 
My residence permit is on top of the trunk." 
Only a good laugh! The thought that they would laugh at her, at 
her wretched body-and who else but Lipareva and Petrova! And 
that thought flashed through her mind at such a moment! That's 
dreadful! 
It is truly strange how concerned she is with the arrangements 
for disposing of that little sum of money she left: "This bit of 
money must not be taken by my relatives; this bit is to go to 
Petrova; the twenty-five rubles that the Chechetkins gave me for 
my trip should be returned to them." This importance she attributes 

A Writer's Diary 
to money is, perhaps, the last echo of the main prejudice of her 
life-"that these stones be made bread." In. sum, one ses here the 
conviction that guided her whole life, i.e. , "if everyone were pro­
vided for, everyone would be happy; there would be no poor people 
and no crimes. There would be no crimes whatsoever. Crime is a 
pathological condition resulting from poverty and from an unhappy 
environment," etc., etc. This is the entire petty, well-worn, and 
very typical, self-enclosed catechism of convictions to which such 
people so faithfuly devote themselves in life (despite the fact that 
they so quickly grow bored with their convictions, as well as their 
lives). For them, such convictions take the place of everything: a 
living life, the link with the earth, belief in truth-simply every­
thing. Evidently, having lost al belief in the truth and al faith in 
duty, the tedium of life tired her. In short, there was a complete 
loss of any higher ideal of existence. 
And the poor girl died. I'm not going to snivel over you, you 
por thing, but let me at least have pity for you; allow me that, 
please. Let me wish that your soul be resurected into a life where 
you will not be bored. You people who are kind and good and 
honest (and you have al of these qualities!)-where are you going, 
and why has the dark, solitary grave become so attractive to you? 
Just look: there is a bright spring sun in the sky, the buds are 
forming on the trees, and you have grown tired before you have 
lived. How can your mothers, who raised you and who looked at 
you so fondly when you were still tiny children, help but mivel 
over you? Think how much hope is invested in a tiny child! I've 
just been seing how these "outcast" children in the Foundling 
Home want so much to live; how they declare their right to live! 
You were also such an infant and you wanted to live; and your 
mother remembers that; and when she now compares your dead 
face with that laughter and joy she saw and remembers on your 
tiny infant's face, how can she help but break out "sniveling," and 
how can you reproach her for doing so? Just now I was shown a 
little girl, Dunia; she was born with a crippled leg, or rather with 
no leg at al; instead of a leg she had something that looked like 
a cord dangling down. She is only a year and a half old, healthy, 
and very pretty; everyone cuddles her, and she nods and smiles to 
everyone and babbles to anyone who comes near. She stil is not 
aware of the problem with her leg; she doesn't know that she is a 
freak and a cripple. But is she also destined to develop a hatred 

May 
499 
for life? "We'll make her an artificial leg and give her a crutch, 
and when she learns to walk she won't notice the difference," said 
a doctor as he cuddled her. May God grant she doesn't notice the 
difference. No, to grow tired, to come to hate life and thus to hate 
everyone-oh, no, that cannot be. This pitiful, monstrous, pre­
maturely born generation squirming under the boulders that have 
fallen on them will disappear; a new and great idea will start to 
shine like the sun; erratic minds will grow firm, and everyone will 
say, "Life is good; it is we who have been bad." I'm not accusing 
anyone when I say that we have been bad. I see that peasant woman 
over there, that rough wet-nurse who is only "hired milk," suddenly 
kiss a child, one of those very "outcast" children! I never thought 
that the wet-nurses here would kiss these children; why, to see this 
alone would have made the trip here worthwhile! And she kissed 
the child and didn't notice that I was watching her. Do you think 
they are paid to love these children? They are hired to feed the 
children, but they're not required to kiss them. Children who are 
raised by Finnish women in villages have it worse, so I'm told, 
but some of the women become so attached to their nurslings that 
they are in tears when they have to return them to the home; and 
then come especially from far away to look at them, bringing them 
linle presents from the village and "sniveling over them." No, this 
isn't a matter of money: "the family, after all, always wants to 
snivel," as Pisareva concluded in her suicide note, and so these 
women come to snivel and bring their poor presents from the 
village. These are not merely hired breasts, taking the place of the 
breasts of the mother, this is motherhood; this is that "living life" 
of which Pisareva had grown so tired. But is it true that the Russian 
land no longer holds Russian people on it? Why, then, do we see 
right at hand a life that is in the full flower of health? 
And of course there are many babies here also born of that 
interesting sort of mother who will sit on the steps of a dacha, 
honing a razor for her rival. In conclusion I will say: these razors 
may be nice things in their way, but I was very sorry that I came 
here, to this building, at a time when I was following the trial of 
Mrs. Kairova. I know nothing at all of Mrs. Kairova's life story 
and I certainly cannot, nor have I the right, to connect her in any 
way to this building. But this whole romance of hers and this whole 
eloquent analysis of her passions at the trial somehow lost any 
power they had for me and destroyed any of my sympathy for her 

sao 
A Writer's Diary 
once I left this building. I admit this quite frankly, because perhaps 
that was the reason I wrote so unsympathetically about Mrs. Kai­
rova's "case." 
3· A Democratic Spirit, for Certain. Women 
I feel I have to answer yet another letter from a reader. In the last 
(April) issue of the Diary, when I spoke of political matters, I 
mentioned in passing something we might call a fantasy: 
. . .  Russia wil prove to be stronger than anyone else in Europe. 
This wil happen because the great powers in Europe will be destroyed 
for one very simple reason: they will al be rendered impotent and 
undermined by the unsatisfied democratic aspirations of an immense 
part of their own lower-class subjects-their proletariat and their pau­
pers. This simply canot happen in Russia: our demos is content, 
and the further we go the more satisfied it will become, for everything 
is moving toward that end via the common mood or, to put it better, 
the general consensus. And therefore there will remain but one colossus 
on the continent of Europe-Russia. 
In reply to this view, my correspondent cites one most curious and 
instructive fact and provides it as his reason for doubting that "our 
demos is satisfied and content." My worthy correspondent will 
understand all too well (should he chance to read these lines) why 
I canot now discuss this fact that he has passed on and reply to 
him, although I do not lose hope in the possibility of discussing 
this same fact in the very near future. But now I wish to give only 
a word of explanation about the demos, the more so that I have 
been informed of other opinions that likewise do not agree with 
my conviction that our "demos" is content. I want merely to direct 
my opponents' attention to one line in the passage from the April 
issue quoted above: " . . .  because everything moves toward that end 
via the common mood or, to put it better, the general consensus." 
In fact, had my opponents not shared in this common mood or, 
rather, consensus, then they would have let my words slip past 
without objecting to them. And therefore this mood certainly must 
exist; it certainly is democratic and certainly is disinterested; more­
over, it is universal. It's true that one canot believe everything in 
the democratic declarations one hears these days and that they 
contain a good deal of journalistic double-dealing. People get car­
ried away, for example, in making exaggerated attacks on opponents 

May 
501 
of democracy, of whom, by the way, we now have very few. Still, 
the honest, disinterested, forthright, and frank democratic feelings 
of the majority of Russian society canot be doubted at al. In that 
respect, we, perhaps, have displayed or are beginning to display 
something that has not yet been displayed in Europe, where dem­
ocratic feelings have so far generaly been evidenced only from 
below; in Europe democracy is still struggling, while the (sup­
posedly) vanquished upper classes are still stubbornly resisting. 
Our upper classes were not vanquished; our upper classes them­
selves became democratic or, rather, became allied with the People; 
who can deny that? And if that is so, then you yourselves will agree 
that our demos can expect a happy future. And if our present 
contains much that is unattractive, then at least it is permissible 
to cherish great hopes that the temporary ills of the demos will 
certainly be healed under the steady and continuing influence of 
such enormous principles (for I cannot cal them otherwise) as the 
gen£ral democratic mood and gen£ral consensus for such healing among 
all Russians, begining from the very top. That was the sense in 
which I meant that our demos is content and "the funher we go, 
the more content it will be." Say what you like, but it's hard not 
to believe that. 
And in conclusion I want to add one more word about the Russian 
woman. I have already said that she contains one of our great hopes, 
one of the pledges of our renewal. The renaissance of the Russian 
woman in the last twenty years is undeniable. The upsurge in her 
strivings has been lofty, frank, and fearless. This upsurge has 
inspired respect from the very first; it has at least caused people 
to think, despite several superfluous irregularities that have turned 
up in this movement. Now, however, one can already make an 
accounting and not fear to reach a conclusion. The Russian woman 
has chastely ignored obstacles and mockery. She has firmly declared 
her wish to participate in the common cause and has applied herself 
to it not only disinterestedly but even self-denyingly. The Russian 
man, in these last decades, has become terribly prone to the vices 
of acquisition, cynicism, and materialism; woman has remained 
much more purely devoted than he to the idea and to serving the 
idea. In her eagerness for higher education she has displayed seri­
ousness and patience and showed an example of the greatest cour­
age. A Writer's Diary has given me the means to see the Russian 
woman at closer hand; I have received some remarkable letters; 
they ask me, who knows so little, "What is to be done?" I value 

502 
A Writer's Diary 
these questions, and by being frank I try to compensate for my 
lack of knowledge in answers. I regret"that there is so much that 
I canot and have not the right to say here. I se, however, some 
flaws as well in today's woman, and the principal flaw is her 
extraordinary dependence on certain specifically masculine notions, 
her capacity to accept these as given and to believe in them without 
question. I am speaking by no means of al women; but this flaw 
also testifies to the good qualities of her heart: she values above 
all spontaneity of feeling and a living word, but principally and 
above all she values sincerity; and having put her faith in sincerity, 
sometimes sincerity that is not genuine, she is caried away by 
certain opinions, and sometimes caried away too far. In the future, 
higher education could do a great deal to help this . By permitting, 
sincerely and completely, higher education for women along with 
all the rights that this bestows, Russia would once more take an 
enormous and original step ahead of all Europe in the great cause 
of the regeneration of humanity. God grant that the Russian woman 
might also grow less tired and become less disillusioned than the 
tired Miss Pisareva, for example. Let her, rather, assuage her own 
grief like Shchapov's wife, through self-sacrifice and love. But both 
Mrs. Shchapova and Miss Pisareva are painful and memorable 
phenomena-the former because of her high level of feminine en­
ergy that reaped such a por reward, the latter as a por, tired, 
withdrawing, succumbing, and vanquished woman . . . .  

June 


1 
1. The Death of George Sand 
The type for the May issue of the Diary had already been set, and 
it was being printed when I read in the newspapers of the death 
of George Sand. She died on May 27 (June 8 by the European 
calendar), and so I was not able to say a word about her passing. 
And yet merely reading about her made me realize what her name 
had meant in my life, how enraptured I had been with this poet 
at one time, how devoted I was to her, and how much delight and 
happiness she once gave me! I write each of these words without 
hesitation because they express quite literally the way things were. 
She was entirely one of our (I mean our) contemporaries-an idealist 
of the 1 830s and 1 840s. In our mighty, self-important, yet un­
healthy century, filled with foggy ideals and impossible hopes, hers 
is one of those names that emerged in Europe, "the land of sacred 
miracles," and drew from us, from our Russia which is forever 
creating itself, so many of our thoughts, so much of our love, so 
much of the sacred and noble force of our aspirations, our "living 
life," and our cherished convictions. But we must not complain 
about that: in exalting such names and paying them homage, we 
Russians served and now serve our proper mission. Do not be 
surprised at these words of mine, particularly when said about 
George Sand, who is still, perhaps, a controversial figure and whom 
half, if not nine-tenths of us, have already managed to forget; yet 
she still accomplished her task among us in days gone by. Who, 
then, should assemble around her grave to say a word in remem­
brance if not we, her contemporaries from all over the world? We 
Russians have two homeland.s: our own Russia and Europe, even 
if we call ourselves Slavophiles (and I hope the Slavophiles won't 
be angry at me for saying so). We need not dispute this point. The 
505 

so6 
A Writer's Diary 
greatest of all the great missions that the Russians realize lies ahead 
of them is the common human mission; it is service to humanity 
as a whole, not merely to Russia, not merely to the Slavs, but to 
hwnanity as a whole. Think about it and you will agree that the 
Slavophiles recognized that very thing, and that is why they called 
on us to be more rigorous, more firm, and more responsible as 
Russians: they clearly understood that universality is the most im­
portant personal characteristic and purpose of the Russian. How­
ever, all this needs to be explained much more clearly: the fact is 
that service to the idea of universality is one thing, while traipsing 
frivolously around Europe after voluntarily and peevishly forsaking 
one's native land is something unerly opposed to it, yet people 
continue to confuse the two. No, this is not the case at all: many, 
very many of the things we took from Europe and transplanted in 
our own soil were not simply copied like slaves from their masters 
as the Potugins always insist we should; they were inoculated into 
our organism, into our very flesh and blood. There are some things, 
indeed, that we lived through and survived independently, just as 
they did there in the West, where such things were indigenous. 
The Europeans absolutely refuse to believe this: they do not know 
us, and for the moment this is all to the bener. The essential 
process-which eventually will astonish the whole world-will take 
place all the more imperceptibly and peacefuly. Part of that very 
process shows clearly and tangibly in our attitude toward the lit­
eratures of other peoples. For us-at least for the majority of our 
educated people-their poets are just as much ours as they are for 
the Europeans in the West. I maintain and I repeat: every European 
poet, thinker, a.,d humanitarian is more clearly and more intimately 
understood and received in Russia than he is in any other country 
in the world save his own. Shakespeare, Byron, Walter Scon, and 
Dickens are more akin to the Russians and bener understood by 
them than they are by the Germans, for example, despite the fact 
that we have not a tenth of the translations of these writers that 
Germany, with its abundance of books, has. When the French 
Convention of 1793 bestowed honorary citizenship au poete allemand 
Schiller, ['ami de l'humaniti, it did something admirable, grand, 
and prophetic; yet it did not even suspect that at the other end of 
Europe, in barbaric Russia, that same Schiller was far more "na­
tional" and far more familiar to the Russian barbarians than he 
was to France, not only the France of the time but subsequently 
as well, all through our century. This was an age in which Schiller, 

June 
507 
the citizen of France and l'ami de l'humaniti, was known in France 
only by professors of literature, and not even known by all of them, 
and not known well. But he, along with Zhukovsky, was absorbed 
into the Russian soul; he left his mark on it and all but gave his 
name to a period in the history of our development. This Russian 
attitude to world literature is a phenomenon whose extent is scarcely 
found among other peoples anywhere in world history. And if this 
quality is truly our distinctively Russian national trait, then surely 
no oversensitive patriotism or chauvinism could have the right to 
object to it and not desire, on the contrary, to regard it primarily 
as a most promising and prophetic fact to be kept in mind as we 
speculate about our future. Oh, of course many of you may smile 
when you read of the significance I attribute to George Sand; but 
those who find it amusing will be wrong: a good deal of time 
separates us from those events, and George Sand herself has died 
as an old woman of seventy having, perhaps, long outlived her 
fame. But everything in the life of this poet that constituted the 
"new word" she uttered, everything that was "universally human" 
in her-all of this at once created a deep and powerful impression 
among us, in our Russia at the time. It touched us, and thus it 
proved that any poet and innovator from Europe, anyone who 
appears there with new ideas and new force, cannot help but be­
come at once a Russian poet, cannot but influence Russian thought, 
cannot but become almost a Russian force. However, I do not mean 
to write a whole critical article about George Sand; I intended only 
to say a few words of farewell to the deceased by the side of her 
fresh grave. 
2. A Few Words about George Sand 
George Sand appeared in literature when I was in my early youth, 
and I am very pleased that it was so long ago because now, more 
than thirty years later, I can speak almost with complete frankness. 
I should note that at the time her sort of thing-novels, I mean­
was all that was permitted; all the rest, including virtualy every 
new idea, and those coming from France in particular, was strictly 
suppressed. Oh, of course it often happened that they weren't able 
to pick out such "ideas," and indeed, where could they learn such 
a skill? Even Metternich lacked it, never mind those here who tried 
to imitate him. And so some "shocking things" would slip through 
(the whole of Belinsky slipped through, for instance). And then, 

sos 
A Writer's Diary 
as if to make up for Belinsky (near the end of the period, in 
particular) and be on the safe side, they began to forbid almost 
everything so that, as we know, we were left with little more than 
pages with blank lines on them. But novels were still permitted at 
the begining, the middle, and even at the very end of the period. 
It was here, and specifically with George Sand, that the public's 
guardians made a very large blunder. Do you remember the verse: 
The tomes of Thiers and of Rabaut 
He knows, each line by line; 
And he, like furious Mirabeau 
Hails Liberty divine. 
These are very fine verses, exceptionally so, and they will last 
forever because they have historic significance; but they are all the 
more precious because they were written by Denis Davydov, the 
poet, literary figure, and most honorable Russian. But even if in 
those days Denis Davydov considered Thiers, of all people (on 
account of his history of the revolution, of course) as dangerous 
and put him in a verse along with some Rabaut fellow (such a man 
also existed, it seems, but I don't know him), then there surely 
could not have been much that was permitted officially then. And 
what was the result? The whole rush of new ideas that came through 
the novels of the time served exactly the same ends, and perhaps 
by the standards of the day in an even more "dangerous" form, 
since there probably were not too many lovers of Rabaut, but there 
were thousands who loved George Sand. It should also be noted 
here that, despite all the Magnitskys and the Liprandis, ever since 
the eighteenth century people in Russia have at once learned about 
every intellectual movement in Europe, and these ideas have been 
at once passed down from the higher levels of our intellectuals to 
the mass of those taking even a slight interest in things and making 
some effon to think. This was precisely what happened with the 
European movement of the 183os. Very quickly, right from the 
begining of the thinies, we learned of this immense movement 
of European literatures. The names of the many newly fledged 
orators, historians, publicists, and professors became known. We 
even knew, though incompletely and superficially, the direction in 
which this movement was heading. And this movement manifested 
itself with particular passion in art-in the novel and above all in 
George Sand. It is true that Senkovsky and Bulgarin had warned 
the public about George Sand even before her novels appeared in 

June 
509 
Russian. They tried to frighten Russian ladies, in particular, by 
telling them that she wore trousers; they tried to frighten people 
by saying she was depraved; they wanted to ridicule her. Senkovsky, 
who himself had been planning to translate George Sand in his 
magazine Reader's Library, began calling her Mrs. Yegor Sand in 
print and, it seems, was truly pleased with his witticism. Later 
on, in 1848, Bulgarin wrote in The Northern Bee that she indulged 
in daily drinking bouts with Pierre Leroux somewhere near the 
city gates and participated in "Athenian evenings" at the Ministry 
of the Interior; these evenings were supposedly hosted by the Min­
ister himself, the bandit Ledru-Rollin .  I read this myself and re­
member it very clearly. But at that time, in 1848, nearly the whole 
of our reading public knew George Sand, and no one believed 
Bulgarin. She appeared in Russian translation for the first time 
around the middle of the thirties. It's a pity that I don't recall 
when her first work was translated into Russian and which it was; 
but the impression it made must have been all the more startling. 
I think that the chaste, sublime purity of her characters and ideals 
and the modest charm of the severe, restrained tone of her narrative 
must have struck everyone then as it did me, still a youth-and 
this was the woman who went about in trousers engaging in de­
bauchery! I was sixteen, I think, when I read her tale L'Uscoque 
for the first time; it is one of the most charming among her early 
works. Afterward, I recall, I had a fever all night long. I think I 
am right in saying, by my recollection at least, that George Sand 
for some years held almost the first place in Russia among the 
whole Pleiad of new writers who had suddenly become famous and 
created such a stir all over Europe. Even Dickens, who appeared 
in Russia at virtualy the same time, was perhaps not as popular 
among our readers as she. I am not including Balzac, who arrived 
before her but who produced works such as Euginie Gratukt and 
Pere Goriot in the thirties (and to whom Belinsky was so unfair 
when he completely overlooked Balzac's significance in French 
literature). However, I say all this not to make any sort of critical 
evaluation but purely and simply to recall the tastes or-the-mass 
of Russian readers at that time and the direct impression these 
readers received. What mattered most was that the reader was able 
to derive, even from her novels, all the things the guardians were 
trying so hard to keep from them. At least in the mid-forties the 
ordinary Russian reader knew, if only incompletely, that George 
Sand was one of the brightest, most consistent, and most upright 

5 10 
A Writer's Diary 
representatives of the group of Western "neVf people" of the time, 
who, with their arrival on the scene, began to refute directly those 
"positive" achievements which marked the end of the bloody 
French (or rather, European) revolution of the preceding century. 
With the end of the revolution (after Napoleon I) there were fresh 
attempts to express new aspirations and new ideals. The most 
advanced minds understood al too well that this had only been 
despotism in a new form and that al that had happened was "6te 
toi de Ia que je m'y mene"; that the new conquerors of the world, 
the bourgeoisie, turned out to be perhaps even worse than the 
previous despots, the nobility; that Liberti, Egaliti, Fratemiti 
proved to be only a ringing slogan and nothing more. Moreover, 
certain doctrines appeared which transformed such ringing slogans 
into unerly impossible ones. The conquerors now pronounced or 
recalled these three sacramental words in a tone of mockery; even 
science, through its briliant representatives (economists) came with 
what seemed to be its new word to support this mocking attitude 
and to condemn the utopian significance of these three words for 
which so much blood had been shed. So it was that alongside the 
triumphant conquerors there began to appear despondent and 
mournful faces that frightened the victors. At this very same time 
a truly new word was pronounced and hope was reborn: people 
appeared who proclaimed directly that it had been vain and wrong 
to stop the advancement of the cause; that nothing had been 
achieved by the change of political conquerors; that the cause must 
be taken up again; that the renewal of humanity must be radical 
and social. Oh, of course, along with these solemn exclamations 
there came a host of views that were most pernicious and distorted, 
but the most important thing was that hope began to shine forth 
once more and faith again began to be regenerated. The history 
of this movement is well known; it continues even now and, it 
seems, has no intention of coming to a halt. I have no intention 
whatever of speaking either for or against it here, but I wanted 
only to define George Sand's real place within that movement. We 
must look for her place at the very begining of the movement. 
People who met her in Europe then said that she was propounding 
a new status for women and foreseeing the "rights of the fre wife" 
(this is what Senkovsky said about her). But that was not quite 
correct, because she was by no means preaching only about women 
and never invented any notion of a "free wife." George Sand be­
longed to the whole movement and was not merely sermonizing 

Jtme 
5 1 1  
on women's rights. It is true that as a woman she naturally preferred 
portraying heroines to heroes; and of course women all over the 
world should put on mourning in her memory, because one of the 
most elevated and beautiful of their representatives has died. She 
was, besides, a woman of almost unprecedented intelligence and 
talent-a name that has gone down in history, a name that is des­
tined not to be forgotten and not to disappear from European 
humanity. 
As far as her heroines are concerned, I repeat that from my very 
first reading at the age of sixteen I was amazed by the strangeness 
of the contradiction between what was written and said about her 
and what I myself could see in fact. In actual fact, many, or at 
least some, of her heroines represented a type of such sublime 
moral purity as could not be imagined without a most thorough 
moral scrutiny within the poet's own soul; without the acceptance 
of one's full responsibility; without an understanding and a rec­
ognition of the most sublime beauty and mercy, patience, and 
justice. It is true that along with mercy, patience, and the recog­
nition of one's obligations there was also an extraordinary pride in 
this scrutiny and in protest, but this pride was precious because 
it stemmed from that higher truth without which humanity could 
never maintain its high moral ideals. This pride is not a feeling of 
hostility quand mime, based on the fact that I am supposedly better 
than you and you are worse than I; it is only a sense of the most 
chaste impossibility of compromise with falsity and vice, although, 
I repeat, this feeling excludes neither universal forgiveness nor 
mercy. Moreover, along with the pride came an enormous respon­
sibility, voluntarily assumed. These heroines of hers sought to make 
sacrifices and do noble deeds. Several of the girls in her early works 
particularly appealed to me; these were the ones depicted, for 
example, in what were called at the time her Venetian tales (in­
cluding L'Uscoque and Aldini). These were of the type that cul­
minated in her novel Jeanne, a brilliant work which presents a 
serene and, perhaps, a final solution to the historical question of 
Joan of Arc. In a contemporary peasant girl she suddenly resurrects 
before us the image of the historical Joan of Arc and graphically 
makes a case for the actual possibility of this majestic and marvelous 
historical phenomenon, a task quite characteristic of George Sand, 
for no one but she among contemporary poets, perhaps, bore within 
her soul such a pure ideal of an innocent girl, an ideal that derives 
its power from its innocence. In several works in succession we 

5 1 2  
A Writer's Diary 
find al these girl characters engaged in the same task and exem­
plifying the same theme (however, not only girls: this same theme 
is repeated later in her magnificent novel La Marquise, also one of 
her early works). We see depicted the upright, honest, but inex­
perienced character of a young female having that proud chastity, 
a girl who is unafraid and who canot be stained by contact with 
vice, even if she were suddenly to find herself in some den of 
iniquity. The need for some magnanimous sacrifice (which sup­
posedly she alone must make) strikes the heart of the young girl, 
and, without pausing to think or to spare herself, she selflessly, 
self-sacrificingly, and fearlessly takes a most perilous and fateful 
step. The things she sees and encounters subsequently do not 
trouble or frighten her in the least; to the contrary, courage at once 
rises up in her young heart, which only now becomes fully aware 
of its power-the power of innocence, honesty, purity. Courage 
doubles her energy and shows new paths and new horizons to a 
mind that had not fuly known itself but was vigorous and fresh 
and not yet stained by life's compromises. In addition to this, there 
was the irreproachable and charming form of her poem-novels. At 
that time George Sand was particularly fond of ending her poems 
happily, with the triumph of innocence, sincerity, and young, fear­
less simplicity. Are these images that could trouble society and 
arouse doubts and fears? To the contrary, the strictest fathers and 
mothers began permitting their families to read George Sand and 
could only wonder, "Why is everyone saying these things about 
her?" But then voices of warning began to be heard: "In this very 
pride of a woman's quest, in this irreconcilability of chastity with 
vice, in this refusal to make any concessions to vice, in this fear­
lessness with which innocence rises up to struggle and to look 
straight into the eyes of the offender-in all this there is a poison, 
the future poison of women's protest, of women's emancipation." 
And what of it? Perhaps they were right about the poison; a poison 
really was being brewed, but what it sought to destroy, what had 
to perish from that poison and what was to be saved-these were 
the questions, and they were not answered for a long time. 
Now these questions have long been resolved (or so it seems). 
It should be noted, by the way, that by the middle of the forties 
the fame of George Sand and the faith in the force of her genius 
stood so high that we, her contemporaries, all expected something 
incomparably greater from her in the future, some unprecedented 

June 
5 1 3 
new word, even something final and decisive. These hopes were 
not realized: it turned out that at that same time, that is, by the 
end of the forties, she had already said everything that she was 
destined to say, and now the final word about her can be said over 
her fresh grave. 
George Sand was not a thinker, but she had the gift of most 
clearly intuiting (if I may be permitted such a fancy word) a happier 
future awaiting humanity. All her life she believed strongly and 
magnanimously in the realization of those ideals precisely because 
she had the capacity to raise up the ideal in her own soul. The 
preservation of this faith to the end is usually the lot of all elevated 
souls, al true lovers of humanity. George Sand died a deiste, firmly 
believing in God and her own immortal life, but it is not enough 
to say only that of her: beyond that she was, perhaps, the most 
Christian of all her contemporaries, the French writers, although 
she did not formally (as a Catholic) confess Christ. Of course, as 
a Frenchwoman George Sand, like her compatriots, was unable to 
confess consciously the idea that "in all Creation there is no name 
other than His by which one may be saved"-the principal idea 
of Orthodoxy. Still, despite this apparent and formal contradiction, 
George Sand was, I repeat, perhaps one of the most thoroughgoing 
confessors of Christ even while unaware of being so. She based 
her socialism, her convictions, her hopes, and her ideals on the 
human moral sense, on humanity's spiritual thirst, on its striving 
toward perfection and purity, and not on the "necessity" of the 
ant heap. She believed unconditionally in the human personality 
(even to the point of its immortality), and she elevated and ex­
panded the conception of it throughout her life, in each of her 
works. Thus her thoughts and feelings coincided with one of the 
most basic ideas of Christianity, that is, the acknowledgment of 
the human personality and its freedom (and accordingly, its re­
sponsibility). From here arise her acknowledgment of duty and 
rigorous moral scrutiny to that end, &long with a complete awareness 
of human responsibility. And there was not a thinker or writer iri 
the France of her time, perhaps, who understood so clearly that 
"man does not live by bread alone." As far as the pride in her 
scrutiny and her protest are concerned, I repeat that this pride 
never excluded mercy, the forgiveness of an offense and even lim­
itless patience based on compassion toward the one who gave of­
fense. On the contrary, in her works George Sand was often 
attracted by the beauty of these truths and often created incarnations 

A Writer's Diary 
of the most sincere forgiveness and love. They write that she died 
as an admirable mother who worked to the' end of her life, a friend 
to the local peasants, deeply beloved by her friends. It seems she 
was somewhat inclined to set great store by her aristocratic origins 
(she was descended on her mother's side from the royal house of 
Saxony), but, of course, one can state firmly that if she saw aris­
tocracy as something to be valued in people, it was an aristocracy 
based only on the level of perfection of the human soul: she could 
not help but love the great, she could not reconcile herself with 
the base and compromise her ideas; and here, perhaps, she may 
have shown an excess of pride. It is true that she also did not like 
to ponray humble people in her novels, to depict the just but 
pliant, the eccentric and the downtrodden, such as we meet in 
almost every novel of the great Christian Dickens. On the contrary, 
she proudly elevated her heroines and placed them as high as 
queens. This she loved to do, and this trait we should note; it is 
rather characteristic. 

2 
1 .  My Paradox 
Again a tussle with Europe (oh, it's not a war yet: they say that 
we-Russia, that is-are still a long way from war). Again the 
endless Eastern Question is in the news; and again in Europe they 
are looking mistrustfully at Russia . . . .  Yet why should we go run­
ning to seek Europe's trust? Did Europe ever trust the Russians? 
Can she ever trust us and stop seeing us as her enemy? Oh, of 
course this view will change someday; someday Europe will bener 
be able to make us out and realize what we are like; and it is 
certainly worth discussing this someday; but meanwhile a somewhat 
irrelevant question or side issue has occurred to me and I have 
recently been busy trying to solve it. No one may agree with me, 
yet I think that I am right-in part, maybe, but right. 
I said that Europe doesn't like Russians. No one, I think, will 
dispute the fact that they don't like us. They accuse us, among 
other things, of being terrible liberals: we Russians, almost to a 
man, are seen as not only liberals but revolutionaries; we are sup­
posedly always inclined, almost lovingly, to join forces with the 
destructive elements of Europe rather than the conserving ones. 
Many Europeans look at us mockingly and haughtily for this-they 
are hateful: they cannot understand why we should be the ones to 
take the negative side in someone else's affair; they positively deny 
us the right of being negative as Europeans on the grounds that 
they do not recognize us as a part of "civilization." They see us 
rather as barbarians, reeling around Europe gloating that we have 
found something somewhere to destroy-to destroy purely for the 
sake of destruction, for the mere pleasure of watching it fall to 
pieces, just as if we were a horde of savages, a band of Huns, 
ready to fall upon ancient Rome and destroy its sacred shrines 

s 1 6  
A Writer's Diary 
without the least notion of the value of the things we are demol­
ishing. That the majority of Russians have really proclaimed them­
selves liberals in Europe is true, and it is even a strange fact. Has 
anyone ever asked himself why this is so? Why was it that in the 
course of our century, virtualy nine-tenths of the Russians who 
acquired their culture in Europe always associated themselves with 
the stratum of Europeans who were liberal, with the left-i.e., 
always with the side that rejected its own culture and its own 
civilization? (I mean to a greater or a lesser degree, of course: what 
Thiers rejects in civilization and what the Paris Commune of 1871 
rejected are very different things). And like these European liberals, 
Russians in Europe are liberals "to a greater or lesser degree" and 
in many different shades; but nonetheless, I repeat, they are more 
inclined than the Europeans to join directly with the extreme left 
at once rather than to begin by dwelling among the lesser ranks 
of liberalism. In shon, you'll find far fewer Thierses than you will 
Communards among the Russians. And note that these are not 
some crowd of ragamufins-not all of them, at least-but people 
with a very solid, civilized look about them, some of them almost 
like cabinet ministers. But Europeans do not trust appearances: 
"Granez le russe et vous verrez le tanare," they say (scratch a 
Russian and you'll find a Tatar). That may be true, but this is 
what occurred to me: do the majority of Russians, in their dealings 
with Europe, join the extreme left because they are Tatars and have 
the savage's love of destruction, or are they, perhaps, moved by 
other reasons? That is the question, and you'll agre that it is a 
rather interesting one. The time of our tussles with Europe is 
coming to an end; the role of the window cut through to Europe 
is over, and something else is beginning, or ought to begin at least, 
and everyone who has the least capacity to think now realizes this. 
In shon, we are more and more beginning to feel that we ought 
to be ready for something, for some new and far more original 
encounter with Europe than we have had hitheno. Whether that 
encounter will be over the Eastern Question or over something else 
no one can tell! And so it is that all such questions, analyses, and 
even surmises and paradoxes can be of interest simply through the 
fact that they can teach us something. And isn't it a curious thing 
that it is precisely those Russians who are most given to considering 
themselves Europeans, and whom we call "Westernizers," who 
exult and take pride in this appellation and who still taunt the 

June 
5 1 7  
other half of the Russians with the names "kvasnik" and "zipun­
nik?" Is it not curious, I say, that these very people are the quickest 
to join the extreme left-those who deny civilization and who would 
destroy it-and that this surprises absolutely no one in Russia, and 
that the question has never even been posed? Now isn't that truly 
a curious thing? 
I'll tell you frankly that I have framed an answer to this question, 
but I don't intend to try to prove my idea. I shall merely explain 
it briefly in an effort to bring forth the facts. In any case, it cannot 
be proven, because there are some things which are incapable of 
prof. 
This is what I think: does not this fact (i.e., the fact that even 
our most ardent Westernizers side with the extreme left-those who 
in essence reject Europe) reveal the protesting Russian soul which 
always, from the very time of Peter the Great, found many, all too 
many, aspects of European culture hateful and always alien? That 
is what I think. Oh, of course this protest was almost always an 
unconscious one; but what truly maners here is that the Russian 
instinct has not died: the Russian soul, albeit unconsciously, has 
protested precisely in the name of its Russianess, in the name of 
its downtrodden and Russian principle. People will say, of course, 
that if this really were so there would be no cause for rejoicing: 
"the one who rejects, be he Hun, barbarian, or Tatar, has rejected 
not in the name of something higher but because he himself was 
so lowly that even over two centuries he could not manage to make 
out the lofty heights of Europe." 
People wil certainly say that. I agree that this is a legitimate 
question, but I do not intend to answer it; I will only say, without 
providing any substantiation, that I unerly and totally reject this 
Tatar hypothesis. Oh, of course, who now among all us Russians, 
especially when this is all in the past (because this period certainly 
has ended)-who, among all us Russians can argue against the 
things that Peter did, against the window he cut through to Europe? 
Who can rise up against him with visions of the ancient Muscovy 
of the tsars? This is not the point at all, and this is not why I 
began my discussion; the point is that, no maner how many fine 
and useful things we saw through Peter's window, there still were 
so many bad and harmful things there that always troubled the 
Russian instinct. That instinct never ceased to protest (although it 
lost its way so badly that in most cases it did not realize what it 

5 1 8  
A Writer's Diary 
was doing), and it protested not because of its Tatar essence but, 
perhaps, precisely because it had preserved something within itself 
that was higher and better than anything it saw through the 
window . . . .  (Well, of course it didn't protest against everything: 
we received a great many fine things from Europe and we don't 
want to be ungrateful; still, our instinct was right in protesting 
against at least half of the things.) 
I repeat that all this happened in a most original fashion: it was 
precisely our most ardent Westernizers, precisely those who strug­
gled for reform, who at the same time were rejecting Europe and 
joining the ranks of the extreme left . . . .  And the result: in so doing 
they defined themselves as the most fervent Russians of all, the 
champions of old Russia and the Russian spirit. And, of course, 
if anyone had tried to point that out to them at the time, they 
would either have burst out laughing or been struck with horror. 
There is no doubt that they were unaware of any higher purpose 
to their protest. On the contrary, all the while, for two whole 
centuries, they denied their own high-mindedness, and not merely 
their high-mindedness but their very self-respect (there were, after 
all, some such ardent souls!), and to a degree that amazed even 
Europe; yet it turns out that they were the very ones who proved 
to be genuine Russians. It is this theory of mine that I call my 
paradox. 
Take Belinsky, for example. A passionate enthusiast by nature, 
he was almost the first Russian to take sides directly with the 
European socialists who had already rejected the whole order of 
European civilization; meanwhile, at home, in Russian literature, 
he waged a war to the end against the Slavophiles, apparently for 
quite the opposite cause. How astonished he would have been had 
those same Slavophiles told him that he was the most ardent de­
fender of the Russian truth, the distinctly Russian individual, the 
Russian principle, and the champion of all those things which he 
specifically rejected in Russia for the sake of Europe, things he 
considered only a fantasy. Moreover, what if they had proved to 
him that in a certain sense he was the one who was the real 
conservative, precisely because in Europe he was a socialist and a 
revolutionary? And in fact that is almost the way it was. There 
was one huge mistake made here by both sides, and it was made 
first and foremost in that all the Westernizers of that time confused 
Russia with Europe. They took Russia for Europe, and by rejecting 
Europe and her order they thought to apply that same rejection to 

June 
5 19 
Russia. But Russia was not Europe at all; she may have worn a 
European coat, but beneath that coat was a different creature al­
together. It was the Slavophiles who tried to make people see that 
Russia was not Europe but a different creature altogether when 
they pointed out that the Westernizers were equating things that 
were dissimilar and incompatible and when they argued that some­
thing true for Europe was entirely inapplicable to Russia, in part 
because all the things the Westernizers wanted in Europe had 
already long existed in Russia, in embryo or potentiality at least. 
Such things even comprise Russia's essence, not in any revolu­
tionary sense but in the sense in which the notions of universal 
human renewal should appear: in the sense of divine Truth, the 
Truth of Christ, which, God grant, will someday be realized on 
earth and which is preserved in its entirety in Orthodoxy. The 
Slavophiles urged people to study Russia first and then draw con­
clusions. But it was not possible to study Russia then and, in truth, 
the means to do so were not available. In any case, at that time 
who could know anything about Russia? The Slavophiles, of course, 
knew a hundred times more than the Westernizers (and that was 
a minimum), but even they almost had to feel their way, engaging 
in abstract speculation and relying mainly on their remarkable 
instincts. Learning something became possible only in the last 
twenty years: but who, even now, knows anything about Russia? 
At most, the basis for study has been set down, but as soon as an 
important question arises we at once hear a clamor of discordant 
voices. Here we have the Eastern Question coming up again: well, 
admit it, are there many among us-and who are they?-who can 
agree on this question and agree on its solution? And this in such 
an important, momentous, and fateful national question! But never 
mind the Eastern Question! Why take up such big questions? Just 
look at the hundreds, the thousands of our internal and everyday, 
current questions: how uncertain everyone is; how poorly our views 
are established; how linle accustomed we are to work! Here we see 
Russia's forests being destroyed; both landowners and peasants are 
cuning down trees in a kind of frenzy. One can state positively 
that timber is being sold for a tenth of its value: can the supply 
last for long? Before our children grow up there will be only a 
tenth of today's timber on the market. What will happen then? 
Ruination, perhaps. And meanwhile, try to say a word about cur­
tailing the right to destroy our forests and what do you hear? On 
the one hand, that it is a state and a national necessity, and, on 

520 
A Writer's Diary 
the other, that it is a violation of the rights of private property­
two opposite notions. Two camps will at onc·e form, and one still 
doesn't know where liberal opinion, which resolves everything, will 
side. Indeed, will there be only two camps? The matter will drag 
on for a long time. Someone made a winy remark in the current 
liberal spirit to the effect that there is no cloud without a silver 
lining, since cutting down all the Russian forests would at least 
have the positive value of eliminating corporal punishment: the 
district courts would have no switches to beat errant peasants. This 
is some consolation, of course, yet somehow it is hard to believe: 
even if the forests should disappear altogether, there would always 
be something to flog people with; they'd start importing it, I 
suppose. Now the Yids are becoming landowners, and people shout 
and write everywhere that they are destroying the soil of Russia. 
A Yid, they say, having spent capital to buy an estate, at once 
exhausts al the fertility of the land he has purchased in order to 
restore his capital with interest. But just try and say anything against 
this and the hue and cry will be at once raised: you are violating 
the principles of economic freedom and equal rights for al citizens. 
But what sort of equal rights are there here if it is a case of a clear 
and Talmudic status in statu above all and in the first place? What 
if it is a case not only of exhausting the soil but also of the future 
exhaustion of our peasant who, having been freed from the land­
owner will, with his whole commune, undoubtedly and very quickly 
now fall into a far worse form of slavery under far worse land­
owners-those same new landowners who have already sucked the 
juices from the peasants of western Russia, those same landowners 
who are now buying up not only estates and peasants but who have 
also begun to buy up liberal opinion and continue doing so with 
great success? Why do we have all these things? Why is there such 
indecisiveness and discord over each and every decision we make? 
(And please note that: it is true, is it not?) In my opinion, it is 
not because of our lack of talent and not because of our incapacity 
for work; it is because of our continuing ignorance of Russia, of 
its essence and its individuality, its meaning and its spirit, despite 
the fact that, compared with the time of Belinsky and the Slavo­
philes, we have had twenty years of schooling. Even more: in these 
twenty years of schooling the study of Russia has in fact been 
greatly advanced, while Russian instinct has, it seems, declined in 
comparison with the past. What is the reason for this? But if their 
Russian instinct saved the Slavophiles at that time, then that same 

June 
52 1  
instinct was present in Belinsky as well, and sufficiently present 
so that the Slavophiles might have considered him their best friend. 
I repeat, there was an enormous misunderstanding on both sides 
here. Not in vain did Apollon Grigorev, who also sometimes had 
rather acute insights, say that "had Belinsky lived longer he would 
certainly have joined the Slavophiles." He had a real idea there. 
2. Deduction from My Paradox 
And so, people will ask me: "Do you mean that when any Russian 
turns into a European Communard he thereby at once becomes a 
Russian conservative?" No, it would be too risky to come to a 
conclusion like that. I wanted only to observe that this idea, even 
if taken literally, contains a drop of the truth. So much of this has 
happened with no conscious awareness, while on my part I may 
be placing too much faith in the continuity of Russian instinct and 
in the living power of the Russian spirit. But let that be; I know 
myself that this is a paradox. Here is what I would like to place 
before you by way of conclusion: it is also a fact and a deduction 
from that fact. I said above that Russians are noted in Europe for 
their liberalism and that at least nine-tenths of them side with the 
left, the extreme left, just as soon as they come into contact with 
Europe . . . .  I don't insist on that figure-perhaps it isn't a maner 
of nine-tenths of them; I insist only on the fact that there are 
incomparably more liberal Russians than illiberal ones. But there 
are also illiberal Russians. Yes, indeed, there are and there always 
have been such Russians (you know the names of many of them), 
who not only did not reject European civilization but, to the con­
trary, paid such homage to it that they lost their last scrap of Russian 
instinct; they lost their Russian personality and their Russian lan­
guage; they changed homelands, and if they didn't take on foreign 
citizenship, then at least they went on living in Europe for whole 
generations. But it is a fact that all such people (in contrast to the 
liberal Russians, in contrast to their atheism and Communardism) 
sided with the right, the extreme right, and became terrible, Euro­
pean conservatives. 
Many of them changed their religion and went over to Catholi­
cism. Aren't they conservatives? Aren't they the extreme right? Yet 
note, please: they are conservatives in Europe, but, contrary to 
what we might expect, they reject Russia entirely. They became 
Russia's enemies and would annihilate her! And so this is what it 

522 
A Writer's Diary 
meant for a Russian to be refashioned into a genuine European 
and to become a genuine child of civilization. this is a remarkable 
fact that has been derived from two hundred years of experience. 
The deduction is that a Russian who has become a real European 
cannot help but become at the same time a natural enemy of Russia. 
Is that what was wanted by the people who opened up the window 
to the West? Is that what they had in mind? And so we found two 
types of civilized Russians: the European Belinsky who, while 
denying Europe, turned out to be Russian to the highest degree 
despite all the mistaken views he expressed about Russia; and the 
fundamentally native, ancient Russian Prince Gagarin who, on 
becoming European, found it necessary not only to embrace Ca­
tholicism but to skip directly into the ranks of the Jesuits. Now 
which one of them, tell me, is the greater friend of Russia? Which 
one of them remained the more Russian? And does not this second 
example (from the extreme right) support my original paradox that 
the Russian European socialists and Communards are above all 
non-European and will end by becoming fundamental, good Rus­
sians again once the misunderstanding has been cleared up and 
once they have learned something of Russia? Second, it is utterly 
impossible to turn a Russian into a genuine European and have 
him remain even a little bit Russian. And if such is the case, then 
it follows that Russia, too, is something independent and distinctive, 
utterly unlike Europe and important in its own right. Europe itself, 
perhaps, is not at all unjust in condemning the Russians and mock­
ing their revolutionary tendencies. It means that we are revolu­
tionaries not merely for the sake of destroying things we have not 
built, like the Huns and the Tatars, but for some other purpose 
of which we still, to be sure, are unaware (and those who do know 
keep it to themselves). In short, we are revolutionaries, so to say, 
out of some internal necessity, even out of conservatism . . . .  But 
this is all something transitory, some irrelevant side issue, as I have 
already said. At the moment the stage is occupied by the eternally 
insoluble Eastern Question. 
3· The Eastern Question 
The Eastern Question! Which of us did not experience some rather 
unusual feelings this month? What a lot of different views there 
were in the newspapers! And what confusion in some heads, and 
what cynicism in some judgments, and what good, honest alarm 

June 
in some hearts, and what an uproar among some Yids! One thing 
is certain: there is nothing to fear, although there were many who 
were trying to frighten us. Indeed, it was hard to imagine so many 
cowards in Russia. Russia has intentional cowards, to be sure, but 
they, it seems, erred in the date and now even for them it is too 
late to show cowardice and there is little benefit in it: they will 
have no success. But even the intentional cowards know their lim­
itations and will not demand dishonor from Russia as they did in 
times gone by, when Ivan the Terrible sent ambassadors to King 
Stefan Batory and demanded that they submit even to beatings so 
long as they were able to plead successfully for peace. In short, 
public opinion has, it seems, declared itself and will not agree to 
beatings for the sake of peace of any sort. 
Prince Milan of Serbia and Prince Nicholas of Montenegro, trust­
ing in God and in their own just cause, have come out against the 
Sultan. When you read these lines there already may be news of 
some significant encounter, or even of a decisive battle. The maner 
will proceed quickly now. The indecisiveness and delay of the major 
powers, England's diplomatic eccentricity in refusing to agree to 
the conclusions of the Berlin conferences, the revolution in Con­
stantinople and outburst of Moslem fanaticism that followed sud­
denly thereafter, and, finally, the terrible massacre by bashibazouks 
and Circassians of sixty thousand peaceful Bulgarians, including 
old men, women, and children-all this at once set things ablaze 
and led to war. The Slavs have many hopes. If one considers all 
their forces, they have as many as one hundred and fifty thousand 
fighting men of whom more than three-quarters are capable troops 
of the regular army. But the main thing is their spirit: they march 
with faith in their own just cause and in their victory, whereas the 
Turks, despite their fanaticism, are sorely lacking leaders and in 
a great state of confusion; it will be no great surprise if this con­
fusion turns into panic after the first encounters. I think that one 
can already predict that if there is no interference from Europe, 
the Slavs will surely be victorious. Evidently, Europe has decided 
not to interfere, but it is difficult to say that there is anything firm 
and decided in European politics at the present moment. In view 
of the immense question that has suddenly arisen, they all seem 
to have quietly resolved to wait and postpone their final decision. 
We hear, however, that the alliance of the three great Eastern powers 
is continuing; personal meetings of the three monarchs are contin­
uing as well, so that noninterference in the struggle of the Slavs 

A Writer's Diary 
from this side is, for the moment, certain. England, which has 
isolated herself, is looking for alies: the question is, wil she find 
them? If she does find an ally, then it seems it will not be in 
France. In short, all of Europe will be watching the struggle of 
Christians with the Sultan without interfering in it, but . . .  only for 
the moment, until the time when . . .  the legacy is divided. But is 
this legacy a possibility? Will there still be any legacy? If God 
grants success to the Slavs, then what limit will Europe set on their 
success? Wil she permit the sick man to be dragged completely 
off his bed? The latter is very difficult to imagine. To the contrary, 
after a new and solemn concilium will Europe not decide on some 
new means of curing his ailments? . . .  Thus the efforts of the Slavs, 
even in the event of a very major success, may be rewarded only 
by rather weak palliatives. Serbia has entered the field relying on 
her own strength, but of course she realizes that her ultimate fate 
depends entirely on Russia. She knows that only Russia will pre­
serve her from ruin in the event of a great disaster and that Russia 
herself, by means of her strong influence, will help her preserve 
the maximum benefit possible in the event of success. She knows 
this and relies on Russia, but she also knows that the whole of 
Europe is now watching Russia with concealed mistrust and that 
Russia's situation is a difficult one. In short, everything remains 
in the future; but how will Russia act? 
Is this a question? This cannot help but be a question for every 
Russian. Russia will act honorably-that is the entire answer to this 
question. Let England's prime minister distort the truth before 
Parliament for political reasons and tell it officially that the massacre 
of sixty thousand Bulgarians came at the hands, not of the Turks, 
nor of the bashibazouks, but at the hands of Slavic emigrants. And 
let the entire Parliament, for political reasons, believe him and 
tacitly give approval to his lie. Nothing of the sort can or should 
happen in Russia. Some will say that Russia cannot, in any event, 
act directly against her own best interest. But where is Russia's 
interest here? Russia's best interest is precisely to act even against 
her best interest if necessary; to make a sacrifice, so as not to violate 
justice. Russia cannot betray a great idea which has been her legacy 
from past centuries and which she has followed unswervingly until 
now. This idea is, among other things, one of the unity of aU the 
Slavs; but such unity is based not upon seizure of territory or on 
violence; it is done as service to the whole of mankind. Indeed, 
when and how often did Russia act out of a policy of direct benefit 

June 
to herself? To the contrary, through the whole Petersburg period 
of her history did she not more often unselfishly serve the interests 
of others? This is something that would astonish Europe if Europe 
were able to see clearly and did not always look at us mistrustfully, 
suspiciously, and hatefully. On the whole, no one in Europe has 
any belief in unselfishness at all, never mind Russian unselfish­
ness-they will sooner believe in dishonesty or stupidity. But we 
have nothing to fear from their opinions: Russia's whole power, 
her whole personality, so to say, and her whole future mission lie 
in her self-denying unselfishness. It is only a pity that this power 
has sometimes been rather misdirected. 
4· The Utopian Conception of History 
The whole century and a half that followed Peter's reforms was 
nothing more than a period of living in contact with all the human 
civilizations and of making their history and their ideals our own. 
We studied and learned to love the French, the Germans, and all 
the rest as if they were our brothers, despite the fact that they never 
loved us and had made up their minds that they never would. But 
that was the essence of our reform and of everything that Peter 
did: in the course of a century and a half we derived from it a 
broadening of our outlook that perhaps has no precedent in any 
other nation in either the ancient or the modern world. Pre-Petrine 
Russia was active and strong, although she developed slowly in a 
political sense. She worked out her own form of unity and set about 
consolidating her border regions. She understood implicitly that 
she bore within her a precious thing-Onhodoxy-that no longer 
existed anywhere else and that she was charged with preserving 
the truth of Christ, the real truth, the genuine image of Christ 
which had been obscured in all the other religions and in all the 
other nations. The best Russians of the time believed that this 
precious gift, this truth-eternal, inherent in Russia, and given to 
her to preserve-could somehow relieve their consciences of the 
obligation to acquire any other form of enlightenment. Moreover, 
Moscow came to believe that any closer contact with Europe could 
even have a harmful, corrupting influence on the Russian mind 
and on the Russian idea; that it could diston Onhodoxy itself and 
lead Russia on to the road to perdition, "in the manner of all other 
nations." So it was that ancient Russia, isolated within herself, was 
prepared to be unjust: unjust to humanity in her decision passively 

A Writer's Diary 
to keep her treasure, her Orthodoxy, to herself and to isolate herself 
from Europe-from humanity, that is-in the manner of certain 
religious sectarians who will not eat from the same dish as you and 
consider it a sacred duty for each to keep his own cup and spoon. 
This is a fair comparison, because prior to Peter we had evolved 
almost this very sort of political and spiritual relationship to Europe. 
With Peter's reforms came an enormous broadening of our outlook 
and this, I repeat, constitutes Peter's whole great achievement. This 
also constitutes that same precious gift of which I have already 
spoken in one of the preceding issues of my Diary. It is a precious 
gift which we, the higher cultured level of Russia, are bringing to 
the People after our century-and-a-half absence from Russia and 
which the People, once we ourselves have acknowledged their truth, 
should accept from us as a sine qua non, "without which it will 
be impossible to unite the People and the cultured classes and 
everything will come to ruin." What is this "broadening of out­
look," what does it consist of, and what does it signify? It is not 
a matter of enlightenment in the strict sense of the word, and it 
is not science; neither is it a betrayal of the moral principles of 
the Russian People in the name of European civilization. No, it is 
specifically something characteristic of the Russian People alone, 
for a reform such as Peter's has never taken place anywhere else. 
It is really and truly our almost brotherly love for other nations, 
which derived from our century and a half of contact with them; 
it is our need to serve humanity in every way, even if sometimes 
at the expense of our own best and major immediate interests; it 
is our reconciliation with their civilizations, our comprehension and 
our excusing of their ideals when these ideals were not in harmony 
with our own; it is our acquired capacity to discover the truth 
contained in each of the civilizations of Europe or, more correctly, 
in each of the personalities of Europe, despite the fact that they 
contain much with which we cannot agree. It is, finally, our need 
to be just above all and to seek only the truth. In short, it perhaps 
is the beginning, the first step toward that active application of our 
gift, our Orthodoxy, to the universal service of humanity for which 
it was intended and which, in fact, constitutes its very essence. So 
it was that from Peter's reform there came a broadening of our 
former idea, the Russian Muscovite idea; there came an expanded 
and strengthened conception of that idea: through the reform we 
became aware of our universal mission, our personality, and our 
role in humanity, and we could not help but become aware that 

June 
527 
this mission and this role were unlike those of other nations, for 
among them each individual nationality lives only for itself and in 
itself, while we, now that the time has come, will begin directly 
by becoming the servant of all for the sake of universal reconcil­
iation. And there is no shame in this whatsoever; to the contrary, 
it is what makes us great, because it all leads to the ultimate unifying 
of humanity. He who would be first in the Kingdom of God must 
become the servant of al. This is how I understand Russia's destiny 
in its ideal form. The first step of our new policy appeared of itself 
after Peter's reform: this first step had to consist in the uniting of 
al of Slavdom, so to say, under the wing of Russia. And this 
process of unification is not for seizing territory, nor for committing 
violence, nor for crushing the other Slavic personalities beneath 
the Russian colossus; it is for restoring them and placing them in 
their proper relationship to Europe and to humanity; it is for giving 
them, at last, the opportunity for relief and rest after their innu­
merable and centuries-long sufferings; it is for renewing their spirits 
and, once they have found new strength, for enabling them to 
contribute their own mite to the treasury of the human spirit so 
that they can utter their own word to civilization. Oh, of course 
you may laugh at all these "daydreams" about Russia's destiny, 
but still, tell me: is this not precisely the basis on which all Russians 
want the Slavs to be resurrected, precisely for their complete per­
sonal freedom and for the restoration of their spirit? But it is 
certainly not so that Russia may acquire them politically and use 
them to enhance her own political might (although Europe suspects 
the latter). This is so, is it not? And accordingly, this lends weight 
to at least some of my "daydreams," does it not? It follows that 
for this same purpose Constantinople must, sooner or later, be 
ours . . . .  
Heavens, what a mocking smile would appear on the face of 
some Austrian or Englishman if he had the opportunity to read 
al these daydreams I have just written down and if he were to read 
as far as such a positive conclusion: "Constantinople, the Golden 
Horn, the most critical political area in the world-is this not a 
seizure of territory? " 
Yes, I answer, the Golden Hom and Constantinople-all that will 
be ours, but not for the sake of merely annexing territory and not 
for the sake of violence. And in the first place it will happen of 
its own accord precisely because the time has come, and if the 
time has not yet arrived just now, then it is truly at hand, as all 

528 
A Writer's Diary 
the signs indicate. This is a natural result; this is something decreed 
by Nature herself, as it were. If this has llot happened before, it 
is simply because the time was not yet ripe. People in Europe 
believe in some son of "Testament of Peter the Great." This is no 
more than a forged document concocted by the Poles. But had Peter 
then hit upon the notion of seizing Constantinople rather than 
founding Petersburg, then it seems to me that he would have aban­
doned the idea after some thought, even if he had had sufficient 
strength to crush the Sultan, precisely because the maner was stil 
inopponune and might even have led to Russia's ruination. 
If in Finnish Petersburg we couldn't avoid the influence of neigh­
boring Germans (who, despite their usefulness, paralyzed Russian 
development before its true path had been clearly revealed), then 
how, in the huge and distinctive city of Constantinople with its 
remnants of a mighty and ancient civilization-how could we have 
avoided the influence of the Greks, a nation far more subtle than 
the coarse Germans, a nation with whom we have much more in 
common than the Germans, who are unerly unlike us? The throne 
would have at once been surounded by throngs of courtiers; they 
would have become educated and learned soner than the Russians; 
they would have enchanted Peter himself, not to mention his im­
mediate successors, exploiting his weak point by demonstrating 
their knowledge and skil in seamanship. In shon, they would have 
gained political power in Russia; they would have at once dragged 
her off on some new Asiatic road, into another son of seclusion, 
and of course the Russia of that time would not have survived it. 
The development of Russia's strength and her sense of nationhood 
would have been halted in their course. The mighty Great Russian 
would have remained in isolation in his gloomy and snowy North, 
serving as no more than raw material for the renewal of Tsargrad, 
and ultimately, perhaps, the Russian would have found it unec­
essary even to follow Constantinople. The South of Russia would 
have fallen entirely into the clutches of the Greeks. Orthodoxy itself 
might even have divided into two entirely separate worlds: one in 
a renewed Tsargrad, the other in old Russia . . . .  In shon, the maner 
would have ben most untimely. Now, however, things are quite 
different. 
Now Russia has already spent time in Europe and is herself 
educated. The principal thing is that she has become aware of all 
her power and has in truth become powerful; she also has become 
aware of where her real strength lies. Now she understands that 

June 
529 
Tsargrad can certainly not be ours as Russia's capital, but two 
cenruries ago, had Peter seized Tsargrad, he could not have done 
other than transfer his capital there, and this would have been a 
fatal move since Tsargrad is not in Russia and could not have become 
Russia. Had Peter been able to resist making this error, then his 
immediate successors would not have been able to resist. And if 
Tsargrad can now be ours not as Russia's capital, then neither can 
it be ours as the capital of Slavdom as a whole, as some people 
imagine. Slavdom as a whole, without Russia, would exhaust itself 
there in struggling with the Greeks, even if it could manage to 
create some sort of political unity from its various entities. But to 
leave Constantinople as a legacy to the Greeks alone is now utterly 
impossible: we must not give them such a critical point on the 
globe; this would be altogether too generous a gift to them. But 
the whole of Slavdom with Russia at its head-oh, of course, that 
is a different matter entirely. Whether it is a proper matter is another 
question. Would this not look like a Russian political annexation 
of the Slavs, something we surely have no need of? And so in the 
name of what, in the name of what moral right could Russia make 
a claim on Constantinople? What lofty purpose could we use as a 
basis to demand it from Europe? On just this lofty purpose: as 
leader of Orthodoxy, as its protector and guardian, a role set out 
for Russia since Ivan III, who placed as an emblem the double­
headed eagle of Tsargrad above the ancient coat of arms of Russia, 
but a role revealed clearly only after Peter the Great, when Russia 
realized that she had the power to fulfill this mission and in fact 
became the actual and sole guardian both of Orthodoxy and of the 
nations who profess it. This is the reason and the right to ancient 
Tsargrad, one that would be clear and inoffensive even to the Slavs 
who guard their independence most jealously, or even to the Greeks 
themselves. This would be the means to reveal the essence of the 
political relationships that must inevitably ensue in Russia toward 
all the other Orthodox nationalities, Slavic and Greek alike: Russia · 
is their protector and even, perhaps, their leader, but not their 
ruler; she is their mother, but not their mistress. And if she should 
become their sovereign at some time, then it would be only be 
because they would have proclaimed her so, allowing themselves 
to keep all those things by which they would define their own 
independence and individuality. And so, sometime, even the non­
Orthodox European Slavs might join such a union, for they them­
selves would see that such a unity under Russia's protection means 

530 
A Writer's Diary 
only the consolidation of the independent individuality of each, 
while without this immense unifying force they, perhaps, would 
again exhaust themselves in mutual strife and discord, even if they 
should one day achieve political independence from the Moslems 
and the Europeans to whom they now belong. 
"What's the point of playing with words?" people will say. 
"What is this 'Orthodoxy?' Where can one find here any such 
idea, any such right to unify the nations? And is this not a purely 
political union like al the others, even though it may be based on 
the broadest foundations, like those of the United American States 
or perhaps broader still?" That is a question which may be put, 
and I will answer it. No, it will not be like that, and this is not 
playing with words; there cruly will be something special and un­
precedented here; it will be not merely a political union, and cer­
tainly not a maner of political anexation and violence (the only 
way in which Europe can conceive of something like this). And it 
will not be done merely in the name of some merchants' wheeling 
and dealing, personal gain, and al those eternal, unchanging, and 
idolized vices cloaked in an official Christianity in which no one 
aside from the mob can truly believe. No, it will be a true exaltation 
of the truth of Christ, which has been preserved in the East, a 
true, new exaltation of the cross of Christ and the ultimate word 
of Orthodoxy, at whose head Russia has long been standing. It 
will be a temptation for al the mighty of this world who have been 
triumphant until now and who have always regarded al such "ex­
pectations" with scorn and derision and who do not even com­
prehend that one can seriously believe in human brotherhood, in 
the universal reconciliation of nations, in a union founded on prin­
ciples of universal service to humanity and regeneration of people 
through the true principles of Christ. And if believing in this "new 
word," which Russia at the head of a united Orthodoxy can uner 
to the world-if believing in this is a "utopia" worthy only of 
derision, then you may number me among these utopians, and 
leave the ridicule to me. 
"But," people may still object, "it is utopian indeed to imagine 
that Russia will ever be permicctd to stand at the head of the Slavs 
and enter Constantinople. You can dream about it, but these are 
still only dreams! " 
Is that really so? Russia is powerful, and perhaps much more 
powerful than she herself may suppose. Aside from that, have we 
not seen, even in recent decades, mighty empires rise to power in 

June 
53 1 
Europe, one of which has disappeared like dust and ashes, swept 
away in a day by the winds of God, while in its place arose a new 
empire whose might, it seemed, had never been equaled on eanh? 
Who could have predicted this? If such revolutionary changes are 
possible, and if they happen in our time and before our very eyes, 
then can the human mind predict without error the outcome of the 
Eastern Question? What real basis is there to despair of the resur­
rection and the unity of the Slavs? Who can know the ways of 
the Lord? 
s. About Women Again 
Almost al the newspapers have changed to sympathizing with the 
Serbs and Montenegrins who have risen up for the liberation of 
their brothers, while educated society, and now even the People, 
avidly follow the successes of the insurgent troops. But the Slavs 
need help. Apparently reliable news has come that the Turks are 
being very actively, though anonymously, aided by the Austrians 
and the English. In fact the aid is scarcely even anonymous. The 
Turks are being provided with money, weapons, shells, and-men. 
There are many foreign officers in the Turkish army. A mighty 
English fleet stands at Constantinople . . .  out of political consid­
erations, but more likely-just in case. Austria already has assem­
bled an enormous army-also just in case. The Austrian press reacts 
angrily toward the rebelling Serbs and-toward Russia. It should 
be noted that if Europe presently regards the Slavs so unfeelingly, 
then naturally it is because the Russians are also Slavs. Otherwise 
the Austrian newspapers would not be so afraid of the Serbs, who 
in military terms count for next to nothing before Austrian might, 
and would not be comparing Serbia with Piedmont . . . .  
And therefore Russian society must again help the Slavs, though 
only with money and some supplies, of course. General Cherniaev 
has already sent word to Petersburg that the medical services in 
the whole of the Serbian army are extremely poor: there are no 
doctors or medicines and little treatment available for the wounded. 
In Moscow the Slavic Committee has launched an energetic appeal 
to the whole of Russia for aid to our insurrectionary brothers, and 
all the committee's members, together with an immense crowd of 
people, went to the church of the Serbian community for a solemn 
service of prayer for victory of the Serbian and Montenegrin forces. 
Petersburg newspapers are beginning to publish declarations of 

532 
A Writer's Diary 
support from private citizens and are receiving their donations. 
The movement is evidently growing, despite the so-called dead 
season of sumer. But it is dead only in Petersburg. 
I was about to conclude my Diary and was already checking the 
profs when a young girl unexpectedly called on me. I had met 
her in the winter after I had begun publishing my Diary. She wants 
to take a rather dificult examination and is energetically preparing 
for it; she'll pass it, of course. She's from a wealthy family and 
doesn't lack means, but is very concerned about her education. 
She would come to ask my advice on what to read and what to 
pay particular attention to. She has been visiting me about once a 
month, staying no more than ten minutes; she would speak only 
of her own affairs, but briefly, modestly, almost shyly, showing 
remarkable trust in me. Yet I could also see she had a very resolute 
nature, and it seems I was not mistaken. This time she came to 
me and said directly: "People are needed to tend the sick in Serbia. 
I have decided to postpone my examination for the time being so 
I can go look after the wounded. What do you think?" 
And she looked at me almost timidly, yet her look told me clearly 
that she had already made her decision and that it was an absolutely 
firm one. She wanted some parting words of approval from me, 
however. I cannot convey all the details of our conversation lest I 
might in some small way violate her anonymity; I am passing on 
only its general content. 
I suddenly felt very sorry for her-she is so young. It would have 
been quite pointless to frighten her with the difficulties, the war, 
the typhus in the field hospitals; this would mean only pouring oil 
on the flames. Here was a pure case of longing for sacrifice, for 
some noble feat, for some good deed; most significant and most 
precious was her total lack of conceit and self-infatuation; she 
wanted only to "look after the wounded" and to be of help. 
"But do you know anything about treating wounded soldiers?" 
"No, but I've been collecting information and have been to the 
Committee. Those who enlist are given two weeks to prepare, and 
of course I'll manage." 
And she will, of course; here the word is equal to the deed. 
"Listen," I told her, "I don't want to frighten you or dissuade 
you, but consider my words well and try to weigh them in your 
conscience. You have grown up in surroundings quite different from 
those you'll encounter there; you've seen only good society and 
have met people only in that calm state of mind where they remain 

June 
533 
within the bounds of etiquette. But the same people at war, in 
crowded conditions, in hardship and labor, may change utterly. 
Suppose you spend a whole night tending the sick; you've worn 
yourself out and are so exhausted that you can barely stand, when 
a doctor-a very good man at heart, perhaps, but tired and over­
strained after just amputating a number of arms and legs-turns 
to you in irritation and says: 'All you do is make a mess of things; 
you can't do anything! If you've taken on this job, then do it 
properly! '  and so on. Won't you find that hard to bear? Yet you 
certainly have to expect that sort of thing, and what I'm suggesting 
is only a tiny part of what's ahead of you. Real life often surprises 
us. And finally, are you certain that, even with all your resolve, 
you'll be able to cope with looking after the wounded? Might you 
not faint at the sight of some death, some wound or operation? 
This happens despite one's will, unconsciously . . . .  " 
"If I'm told that I'm doing things wrong and not working prop­
erly, then I'll certainly understand that this doctor is himself ir­
ritable and tired; it's enough to know in my own heart that I'm 
not to blame and have done everything properly." 
"But you're still so young; how can you be certain what you'll 
do?" 
"What makes you think I'm young? I'm already eighteen; I'm 
not so young at all . . . .  " 
In short, it was impossible to dissuade her: she was ready to go 
off the very next day, in any case, regretting only that I did not 
approve of what she was doing. 
"Well, God be with you," I said. "Go on; but come back just 
as soon as the thing is finished." 
"Of course. I have to take my examination. But you'll never 
believe how happy you've made me." 
She went away radiant and, of course, she will be there in a 
week. 
At the beginning of this Diary, in the article about George Sand, 
I wrote a few words about the young female characters I had found 
particularly appealing in the stories uf her earliest period. Well, 
this girl was just like one of them. She had just the same sort of 
direct, honest, but inexperienced young feminine character, along 
with that proud chastity which is unafraid and which cannot be 
stained even by contact with vice. This girl felt the need for sac­
rifice, for undertaking a task that seemed to be asked of her spe­
cifically; she had the conviction that she must first begin herself, 

534 
A Writer's Diary 
with no excuses, to do al those fine things that we expect and 
demand from others. This is a conviction which is genuine and 
moral to the highest degree, but which, alas, is most often char­
acteristic only of youthful purity and innocence. But the main thing, 
I repeat, is that here there is only a cause and not the slightest 
element of vanity, conceit, or infatuation with one's own heroism, 
something that we very often se among today's young people, even 
among mere adolescents. 
After she had left I could not help but think once more about 
the need for higher education for women in Russia, a need that is 
most urgent at this moment in particular, in view of the serious 
pressure among today's women to be active, to be educated, and 
to participate in the common cause. I think that the fathers and 
mothers of these daughters ought themselves to insist on it for their 
own sake, if they love their children. In fact, it is only higher 
learning that is serious, attractive, and powerful enough to settle 
what is almost an agitation that has begun among our women. Only 
science can provide answers to their questions, strengthen their 
intellects, and take their heterogeneous thoughts under its wing, 
as it were. As far as this girl was concerned, though I had pity 
for her youth (and even though I was unable to stop her in any 
case), I rather think that this journey might even be of some value 
to her in a sense: this is not the world of books or abstract con­
victions after all; it is an immense experience that awaits her, an 
experience that perhaps God Himself, in His immeasurable god­
ness, fated for her in order to save her. Here a lesson in the living 
life is being prepared for her; before her stands the possibility of 
expanding her ideas and her views; she will have something to 
remember all her life, something precious and beautiful in which 
she participated, something that will compel her to value life and 
not weary of it before she has lived, as did the unfortunate suicide 
Pisareva of whom I spoke in my last, May, Diary. 

July 
August 


1 
1. Going Abroad. Something about Russians in 
Railway Carriages 
I haven't chatted with the reader for two months now. Once I had 
brought out the June issue (marking six months of my publication), 
I immediately boarded a train and set off for Ems-oh, not to have 
a rest but for the reasons people usually go to Ems. And of course 
all this is extremely personal and private; but the fact is that I 
sometimes write my Diary not only for the public but for myself 
(that's probably why it occasionally contains some rough spots and 
surprising ideas-I mean ideas quite familiar to me and which I've 
been inwardly elaborating for a long time but which seem to the 
reader to have sprung up unexpectedly and unconnected to what 
has preceded them); and so how can I fail to include my trip abroad 
as well? Oh, of course, had it been up to me, I would have set 
off for somewhere in the south of Russia, 
Where bounteous meadows, fertile soil 
Demand but trifling, easy toil, 
Reward the plowman and restore 
His seed a hundred-fold or more; 
Where herds of mares run proud and free 
O'er boundless plain and verdant lea; 
Heard only is the muted roar 
Of breakers crashing on the shore. 
But, alas, it seems that things are quite different there now from 
the time when the poet dreamed of that area. The plowman's easy 
toil, or even his hard labor, is rewarded by a good deal less than 
a hundredfold yield. Even the mares, apparently, should now be 
spoken of in a much less extravagant tone. Incidentally, not long 
537 

A Writer's Diary 
ago I found an article in the Moscow News about the Crimea, the 
expulsion of the Tatars, and the general "'desolation" of the region. 
The Moscow News advances the bold notion that it is pointless to 
grieve over the Tatars: let them be expelled and set up colonies of 
Russians in their place. I cal this a bold notion indeed: it is one 
of those ideas or issues I spoke about in my June Diary, where I 
said that as son as something like this comes up "we at once hear 
a chorus of discordant voices." It's difficult to decide whether every­
one in Russia wil agree with this view of the Moscow News, a 
view with which I agree wholeheartedly because I myself have long 
held just that view on the "Crimean question." There are certainly 
some risks attached to such a view, and we still do not know whether 
liberal opinion, which decides everything, wil fall into line with 
it. It is true that the Moscow News expresses the wish "not to shed 
tears over the Tatars," etc., not only because of the political aspect 
of the maner and not only to strengthen our border areas, but also 
because of the economic needs of the region. The newspaper states 
as facts that the Crimean Tatars have demonstrated their inability 
to work the soil of the Crimea properly and that the Russians, 
specifically the South Russians, would be much bener at this, 
pointing to the Caucasus as prof. On the whole, if the resettlement 
of Russians in the Crimea (gradually, of course) should require 
latge expenditures by the state, then I think this would be a very 
possible and very profitable course of action. In any case, if Rus­
sians do not occupy these areas, the Yids wil certainly fall upon 
the Crimea and ruin the soil of the region . . . .  
It is a long trip from Petersburg to Berlin-almost two days­
and so I took along two pamphlets and a few newspapers just in 
case. And I truly meant "just in case," because I have always been 
afraid of being left in a crowd of strange Russians of our educated 
class, wherever it may be-in a railway carriage, a steamship, or 
in any kind of public gathering. I admit this is a weakness and 
blame it, above all, on my own suspicious nature. When I am 
abroad among foreigners I always feel more at ease: there, when 
some foreigner wants to get somewhere he heads straight to his 
destination, but our Russian goes on looking around the whole 
time, thinking, "What wil people say about me?" He may look 
decisive and unshakeable, but in actual fact there is no one more 
uncertain and lacking in self-confidence. If a Russian stranger 

July and August 
539 
begins a conversation with you, it is always in an extremely con­
fidential and friendly manner; but from the first word he utters 
you can see his deep mistrust and even his underlying suspicious 
irritation, which will burst out in the form of some biting or even 
downright rude remark the moment he finds something not to his 
liking, and this despite all his "good upbringing." What's signif­
icant is that this can happen for the very slightest of reasons. Every 
one of these people seems to want to avenge himself on someone 
else for his own insignificance, yet he may not be an insignificant 
person at all-sometimes just the reverse. There is no person who 
will say oftener than a Russian: "What do I care what people say 
about me?" or "I don't worry a bit about public opinion." And 
there is no person who is more afraid than a Russian (again, I 
mean a civilized Russian), who has more fear and trepidation of 
public opinion and of what people will say or think of him. This 
comes precisely from his deep-seated lack of self-respect, which, 
of course, is concealed behind his boundless egotism and vanity. 
These two opposing factors are always present in almost every 
educated Russian, and he is also the first to find them intolerable, 
so that each one of them bears his own "hell" in his soul, as it 
were. It is especially awkward to meet a Russian stranger abroad 
somewhere, face to face (shut up with him in a railway car, for 
instance), so that there is no possibility of running away should 
something disastrous happen. And yet, it would seem, "it's so nice 
to meet a fellow countryman on foreign shores." And the conver­
sation almost always begins with that very phrase. Once he's found 
out that you're a Russian, your fellow countryman will be certain 
to begin: " So you're a Russian? How nice to meet a fellow coun­
tryman on foreign shores. I'm here as well . . . .  " And then at once 
come some candid remarks in a most cordial and, so to say, broth­
erly manner appropriate to two compatriots who have embraced 
each other on some foreign shore. But don't be misled by the 
manner: although your compatriot may be smiling, he already has 
his suspicions of you, and that's obvious from his eyes, from the 
little lisp he has when he speaks, and from the careful way he 
stresses his words. He's sizing you up; he's certainly afraid of you 
already; he already wants to tell you some lies. And, indeed, he 
can't help but regard you suspiciously and tell lies simply because 
you are also a Russian and he, willy-nilly, is measuring himself 
against you; and also, perhaps, because you really deserve such 
treatment. It's worth noting as well that a Russian stranger abroad 

540 
A Writer's Diary 
(more often when abroad, and indeed almost always when abroad) 
wil always, or at least frequently, hasten to put in after the first 
thre sentences he uners that he has only just met so-and-so or 
has only just heard something from so-and-so, i.e., from some 
prominent or famous Russian personage. But he brings up this 
person in the nicest and most familiar maner, as if he were one 
of his friends and one of yours as well: "You know him, of course. 
The por fellow has been making pilgrimages from one local med­
ical luminary to another. They send him off to watering places, 
and the fellow is absolutely worn out. You know him, do you not?" 
If you reply that you don't know him at all, the stranger will at 
once find something personally offensive in this circumstance: 
"Surely you didn't think that I wanted to boast of my acquaintance 
with a prominent person?" You can already read that question in 
his eyes, and yet that may be precisely what he wanted to imply. 
And if you reply that you do know the person, he will take even 
more offense; but just why that is I truly don't know. In short, 
insincerity and animosity grow on both sides; the conversation 
suddenly breaks off, and you fall silent. Your compatriot suddenly 
turns away from you. He is prepared to go on chaning the whole 
while with some German baker sining opposite, as long as he 
doesn't speak to you, and he does this specifically so that you will 
notice it. Having begun in such a friendly fashion, he now will 
have nothing more to do with you and rudely ignores you altogether. 
When night comes he stretches out on the cushions if there is rom 
enough, almost puning his feet on you or perhaps even deliberately 
puning his fet on you; and when the journey is over he leaves the 
cariage without even nodding good-bye. "Why did he take such 
offense?" you think to yourself, saddened and greatly confused. 
Best of all is an encounter with a Rusian general. The Rusian 
general abroad is most concerned with ensuring that none of the 
Russians he mets ventures to address him in a maner inappro­
priate to his rank, trying to take advantage by assuming that "we're 
abroad, and so we're all equal." And so, for instance, when he's 
traveling he sinks into a stem, marmorial silence from the very 
begining. So much the bener: he doesn't disturb anyone. By the 
way, a Russian general sening off for foreign parts is sometimes 
very fond of puning on a civilian suit he's ordered from the best 
tailor in Petersburg. And when he arives at the spa, where there 
are always so many preny ladies from all over Europe, he is very 
fond of making a show. When the season is over he takes particular 

July and August 
54 1 
pleasure in being photographed in civilian clothes so that he can 
give out pictures to his friends in Petersburg or use one to gladden 
the heart of a devoted subordinate. But in any case, keeping a book 
or a newspaper on a journey is a great help, particularly to ward 
off Russians: it tells them, "I'm reading; leave me alone." 
2. Something on Petersburg Baden-Badenism 
I began reading and immediately carne upon an article in The Stock­
Exchange News that takes me to task for my July Diary. However, 
despite the tongue-lashing, the article is wrinen in a rather kindly­
but not too kindly-manner. The columnist, Mr. B., makes a terrific 
lot of jokes at my expense, politely but condescendingly, because 
I filled the article with paradoxes and "took Constantinople." "And 
so Constantinople has already been taken," he says, "mysteriously, 
magically, but taken nonetheless. We were never involved in a war 
of conquest, yet the city belongs to us for the simple reason that 
it ought to belong to us." Come now, my dear Mr. B., you've made 
that up: I certainly didn't take Constantinople in the current war 
"in which we were never involved"; I said that this would happen 
in time and added only that it might be within a very short time. 
And who knows: perhaps I wasn't mistaken after all. And it's not 
my fault if the Russia and her mission that you see from Petersburg 
has now shrunk to the dimensions of some Baden-Baden or even 
the Fiirstenturn of Nassau where I now sit and write these lines. 
You seem to think that it's only Petersburg that will go on and on. 
But even now there are the beginnings of a protest against Pe­
tersburg in certain elements of the provincial press (and in fact the 
protest is not even against Petersburg but against people like you 
who have senled in there and "dissociated" yourselves from the 
rest of the country). The provinces have their own new ideas to 
express. And perhaps they will express something, particularly 
when they get over their anger; at the moment, though, their anger 
hinders them from saying very much. The idea of Constantinople 
and of the future of the Eastern Question as I set it forth is an old 
one and by no means some Slavophile concoction. In fact, the idea 
is not an old but an ancient one, a Russian historical idea, and 
therefore something real, not fantastic; it began with Ivan III. 
Whose fault is it that you now see Baden-Baden everywhere and 
in everything? I'm not talking about you alone, after all. If it were 
a maner of just you, I would never have opened my mouth. But 

542 
A Writer's Diary 
a lot of Baden-Badenism has set in generally in Petersburg, not 
just in you. I understand what it was that· so shocked you: it is 
Russia's future destiny among the family of nations, about which 
I concluded: "this is how I understand Russia's destiny in its ideal 
form. "  This irritated you. The future, the near future of humanity, 
is full of dreadful problems. The leading intellects, both our own 
and Europe's, have long agred that we stand on the eve of the 
"final denouement." And here you are, ashamed that Russia, too, 
might have a role to play in this denouement, ashamed even at the 
proposition that Russia might venture to uner its own new word 
in the general cause of humanity. For you this is something shame­
ful, but for us it is an article of faith. And it is even the faith that 
Russia will uner, not only its own, but perhaps the final word as 
well. This is something that every Russian should and, indeed, 
must believe if he is a member of a great nation and a great union 
of people; if, finaly, he is a member of the great family of man. 
Do you think it bizare that I ventured to propose that the principles 
of the People of Russia and her Orthodoxy (by which I mean the 
idea of Orthodoxy, which is not compromised in any way) contain 
pledges that Russia can uner her new word of the living life in the 
future of humanity? As far as your remarks on the Slavophiles are 
concerned, one must know something about them in order to dis­
cuss them. And who knows anything about them now? Everyone 
relies mainly on hearsay and faulty memory. People in Russia now 
have forgotten a good deal; they have long lost much of the learning 
they had, but they haven't acquired any new learning. I made a 
grave error in begining directly from the end and stating the result, 
the final word of my faith. It's a mistake to express your views to 
the end. And so you jer, "Oh, everyone's ashamed to talk about 
that, but he does; so let's ridicule him!" Leaving some things 
unsaid is bener and more advantageous. One can write and write, 
throwing out hints but never expressing oneself fully: in this way 
one can gain great respect; one can even win renown as a thinker 
without ever having an idea. But I don't want to do that. My 
readers will reproach me-and I know it-for "responding to criti­
cism," as they have already reproached me more than once. This 
is not a reply to one person, however, but to many. There is a fact 
here. If I do not respond, then at least I have to point out that 
fact. 

July and August 
543 
3· On the Pugnacity of the Germans 
Just as soon as we entered German territory and were locked into 
our compartment, all the six Germans with us immediately began 
talking among themselves about the war and about Russia. I found 
that curious, for although I knew there was widespread discussion 
of Russia in the German press at that very moment, I still didn't 
think that it was being discussed on the street as well. These were 
by no means "upper" Germans; I don't think there was a single 
baron there, and not even one German army officer. And they 
weren't discussing "higher" politics but only the current strength 
of Russia, predominantly her military strength, and her strength 
only at the given, present moment. With solemn and even rather 
haughty equanimity, they told one another that never before had 
Russia's armaments been in such a weak state, and so on. One 
pompous and strapping German traveling from Petersburg declared 
with the tone of a genuine expert that we had no more than two 
hundred and seventy thousand barely decent repeating rifles; our 
others were only some sort of adaptations of older models, so that 
the total sum of our repeating rifles would be no more than a half­
million. He claimed that we still had supplies of no more than 
sixty million metal cartridges, i.e. , only enough for sixty shots per 
soldier if one considers the whole wartime army to be a million 
strong; apart from that, he claimed that these cartridges were poorly 
made. Their discussion was rather jolly, however. I should note 
that they knew that I was a Russian, but judging from my few 
words with the conductor, they apparently concluded that I knew 
no German. But although I speak German badly, I do understand 
it. After a certain time I considered it my "patriotic duty" to 
object. As calmly as possible, so as to fit into their mood, I noted 
that all their facts and figures were exaggerated for the worse; that 
even four years ago the armaments of our military forces had reached 
a highly satisfactory level, and that since then they had been even 
further expanded, since the build-up of armaments had continued 
uninterrupted; that we now took second place to no one. They 
heard me out attentively, despite my poor German, and they even 
prompted me whenever I couldn't think of a German word or 
stumbled over one, nodding to show they understood. (N.B. If 
you speak German badly, then the bener educated your listener is, 
the more easily he will understand you. It's quite another maner 
with people on the street or servants, for example: they are slow 

544 
A Writer's Diary 
to understand, even though you may have missed only one word 
in a whole sentence and especially if, instead of some commonly 
used word, you use another, less common one. In this case they 
sometimes won't understand you at al. I don't know if that's the 
case with Frenchmen and Italians, but there are accounts of the 
Russian soldiers at Sevastopol who spoke with French prisoners 
in the Crimea [also using gestures, of course] and were able to 
understand them. It follows that, had they known even only half 
the words the Frenchmen used, they would have understood them 
completely.) The Germans did not disagree with anything I said; 
they only smiled at my words, not haughtily but even with approval, 
completely assured that I, as a Russian, spoke only in defense of 
Russian honor. But it was obvious from their eyes that they didn't 
believe a word I was saying and that their opinions were unchanged. 
Five years ago, in 1871, they were not nearly so polite, however. 
I was living in Dresden then and I recall seeing the Saxon trops 
return after the war. The city arranged for them to make a triumphal 
entry and gave them an ovation. I recall, however, these same troops 
a year earlier when they were only just marching off to war: sud­
denly, on all the street corners and in all the public places of 
Dresden appeared a poster that stated in huge leners: Der Krieg 
is erkliirt! (War is declared!). I saw these troops then and could 
not help but admire them: what vigor in their faces, what serene, 
happy, and at the same time solemn, expressions they wore! They 
were all young men, and looking at some company that marched 
past, one could not help admiring their remarkable military bear­
ing, their orderly step, their straight, exact ranks, yet at the same 
time the unusual sort of freedom with which they marched; this 
was something I had not seen before in soldiers; it was a conscious 
sense of purpose that was expressed in every gesture, in every step 
of these fine young men. It was obvious that no one was driving 
them off to war, but that they were going of their own accord. 
There was nothing mechanical here, nothing of the corporal and 
his stick; and these were Germans, those same Germans from whom 
we, beginning with Peter the Great, had borrowed the corporal 
and his stick as we developed our own military. No, these Germans 
marched along without any stick, as one man, with a total sense 
of purpose and with complete confidence in their victory. The war 
was a popular one: the citizen radiated from the soldier and, I 
confess, I felt very uneasy for the French even though I was still 

July and August 
545 
firmly convinced that they would give the Germans a thrashing. 
You can imagine how these same soldiers entered Dresden a year 
later, after finally gaining victories over the French who had hu­
miliated them so many times for a whole century. Then add to 
that the usual German boastfulness-their national propensity to 
boast without measure when they have some sort of success, a 
boastfulness which even in trivial things reaches the point of child­
ishness and which in the German always is transformed into 
arrogance-a rather unattractive national trait that is almost aston­
ishing among them. Compared with any other nation, this one has 
too much to boast about to display such peniness. As it turned 
out, the honor of this victory was such a novelty that they themselves 
didn't expect it. And in fact they were so caught up in their own 
triumph then, that they even began insulting the Russians. There 
were many Russians in Dresden at that time, and many of them 
reported later that as soon as anyone, even a shopkeeper, struck 
up a conversation with a Russian-even if the Russian had only 
come into the shop to buy something-he would at once try to 
insert some remark into the conversation such as, "Now that we've 
settled scores with the French, it's time to take on you Russians." 
This anger at the Russians welled up of itself among the people 
then, despite everything being said in the newspapers, which un­
derstood Russia's policy during the war-a policy without which 
the victor's laurels might have slipped from their grasp. It is true 
that this was the first glow of an unexpected military success, but 
the fact is that in the glow of this success they at once thought of 
the Russians. This animosity toward the Russians, which appeared 
almost involuntarily, astonished even me at the time, although I 
have known all my life that, always and everywhere, since the very 
time of the German Suburb in Moscow, the German has had little 
love to spare for the Russian. A certain Russian lady, Countess K. , 
who lived in Dresden at the time, was sitting at one of the seats 
designated for spectators during this triumphal ovation for the 
troops entering the city; behind her a few gloating Germans began 
to abuse Russia in the worst sort of way. "I turned to them and 
said a few salty peasant words of my own," she told me later. They 
fell silent: the Germans are very polite to ladies, but had it been 
a Russian man they would not have let him get away with it. I 
myself read in our newspapers at the time that drunken bands of 
our own Petersburg Germans provoked quarrels and fights while 

A Writer's Diary 
off drinking somewhere with our soldiers, and that they did this 
specifically out of "patriotism." IncidentaHy, the majority of Ger­
man newspapers now are filled with the most furious outbursts 
against Russia. The Voice, referring to the fury of the German press, 
which would have its readers believe that Russia wants to seize the 
East and the Slavs so that, strengthened, she could launch an attack 
on European civilization, remarked not long ago in one of its 
editorials that this whole furious chorus is all the more astonishing 
in that it was raised as if deliberately, immediately after the amiable 
congresses and meetings of the three emperors, and that this, to 
say the least, is strange. A very subtle remark. 
4· The Very Last Word of Civilization 
Indeed, something is gathering in Europe that seems unavoidable. 
The Eastern Question is growing and swelling like waves of the 
tide and may, in fact, end by carrying off everything so that no 
spirit of peace, no good judgment, no firm resolve not to ignite a 
war will withstand this pressure of circumstances. But most im­
portant is that even now a terrible fact has come to light and that 
this fact is the last word of civilization. This last word has been 
uttered and has become clear; it is now known and it is the result 
of eighteen whole centuries of development, of the entire human­
ization of mankind. All of Europe, at least all of its foremost 
representatives, are these very same peoples and nations who cried 
out against slavery; who ended the trade in Negro slaves; who 
ended their own despotic systems; who proclaimed the rights of 
man; who created science and astounded the world with its power; 
who brought life and delight to the human soul with art and its 
sacred ideals; who kindled rapture and faith in people's hearts, 
promising them justice and truth in the near future. Yet these same 
peoples and nations suddenly all (almost all) at this moment turn 
their backs on the tnillions of unfortunate creatures-Christians, 
human beings, their own brothers who are living in dishonor and 
perishing-and who go on waiting, waiting with hope and impa­
tience till they are all crushed like reptiles, like insects; till at last 
all these desperate appeals for help which so anoy and disturb 
Europe fall silent. The victims are regarded precisely like reptiles, 
insects, or even worse: tens, hundreds of thousands of Christians 
are being wiped away like pernicious scabs; they are being torn 
from the face of the earth, roots and all. Sisters are being violated 

July and August 
547 
before the eyes of their dying brothers; infant children are being 
tossed in the air and caught on the point of a bayonet before the 
eyes of their mothers; villages are being annihilated, churches 
smashed to splinters; there is a wholesale obliteration of everything, 
and by a savage, repulsive Moslem horde, the sworn enemy of 
civilization. This is a systematic extermination; this is not some 
band of robbers that has sprung up by chance during the confusion 
and disorder of war but still fears the law. No, here there is a 
system at work, a method of war undertaken by a vast empire. 
The robbers are acting by decree, by orders of ministers and rulers 
of the state, by orders of the Sultan himself. And Europe, Christian 
Europe, a great civilization, looks on impatiently . . .  "until these 
insects are exterminated! "  Moreover, in Europe these facts are 
disputed and denied in national parliaments; people do not believe 
them, or pretend not to believe them. Every one of these national 
leaders knows (in his heart) that all this is true, and they are all 
vying to divert one another's attention: "This is not true; it never 
happened; it's an exaggeration; they themselves have slaughtered 
sixty thousand of their own Bulgarians to blame it on the Turks." 
"Your Excellency, she flogged herself! " The Khlestakovs and 
Skvoznik-Dmukhanovskys are in real trouble! But why is al this 
happening? What are these people afraid of? Why do they refuse 
to see and hear, but only lie to themselves and disgrace themselves? 
Well, you see, it's because Russia is involved here: "Russia will 
be strengthened, gain control of the East, Constantinople, the Med­
iterranean, seaports, trade. Russia will fling herself upon Europe 
like a barbarian horde and 'destroy civilization'" (that same civi­
lization which tolerates such barbarities!). That is what people are 
now shouting in England and in Germany, and once again every 
last one of them is lying; they themselves do not believe a single 
word of these accusations and apprehensions. These are all only 
words designed to rouse hatred among the masses. In Europe at 
present there is not a single person with any education and capacity 
for thought who could believe that Russia wants to destroy civili­
zation and is capable of doing so. They may not believe in our 
disinterestedness; they may attribute all sorts of bad intentions to 
us: that is understandable; but what is difficult to believe is that 
they, after so many indications and experiences, could still believe 
that we are more powerful than all united Europe together. It is 
difficult to believe that they would not know that Europe is twice 
as powerful as Russia, even if we held Constantinople in our grasp. 

A Writer's Diary 
They ought to know that Russia's strength is exceptional only at 
home when she is defending her land from an invader, but she is 
four times weaker when she attacks. Oh, they know all this very 
well, but they make believe and keep fooling everyone and them­
selves as well, simply because in England they have some merchants 
and manufacturers who are morbidly suspicious and morbidly 
greedy when defending their own interests. But even these people 
know very well that Russia, even under the most favorable con­
ditions, would still not be able to surpass their industry and com­
merce and that this is still a maner that will not be decided for 
centuries. But even the slightest expansion of someone else's trade, 
the slightest development of someone else's sea power, and at once 
they are ful of alarm, panic, and worry about their profits; and it 
is because of this that their whole "civilization" suddenly turns 
out to be no more than a soap bubble. Well, and what of the 
Germans? Why has their press suddenly taken alarm? For the 
Germans, it is because Russia stands at their backs and binds their 
hands; it was because of Russia that they missed the opportune 
moment to wipe France from the face of the earth once and for 
all so as never to have to worry about her again. "Russia is hindering 
us; Russia must be driven back behind her boundaries, and how 
can we do that when, on our other side, France is still sound?" 
Indeed, Russia is at fault simply for being Russia, and the Russians 
simply for being Russians, i.e., Slavs. Europe hates the Slavic tribe, 
les esc/aves, or slaves, as they say, and the Germans have so many 
of these slaves: they might rebel, who can tell? And so eighteen 
centuries of Christianity, humanization, science, and progress sud­
denly turn out to be rubbish, a schoolchild's fable, a copybook 
maxim, the moment the weak spot is touched. But the problem, 
the horror is that this is "the last word of civilization," and that 
this word has been unered, and unered without shame. Oh, don't 
bother pointing out that in Europe, indeed, in England herself, 
voices were raised in protest and appeals were made to collect money 
for the people who were being slaughtered. But that's all the sadder; 
these are individual instances that only prove their impotence 
against their general, state, national tendency. The person who 
seeks answers is left in confusion: where is the truth? Is the world 
really so far away from it? When will the strife cease? Will humans 
ever join together, and what is preventing them from doing so? 
Will Truth ever be strong enough to overcome the corruption, 
cynicism, and egotism of people? Where are the truths that have 

July and August 
5 49 
been elaborated and acquired with such painful effort? Where is 
the love of humanity? And are these, indeed, truths? Are they not, 
perhaps, only exercises for "higher" feelings, for oratory and for 
keeping schoolchildren in hand? But once there is a deed to be 
done, a real deed, a practical deed, everything is pushed aside and 
the ideals are sent to the Devil! Ideals are nonsense, poetry, pretty 
verses! And is it not true that the Yid has again enthroned himself 
everywhere; indeed, that he has not only "enthroned himself 
again," but has never ever ceased to reign?* 
*This article was written in July. [Dostoevsky's note.] 

2 
1 .  Idealist -Cynics 
I wonder if anyone remembers the article on the Eastern Question 
by the unforgettable professor and unforgettable Russian, Timofei 
Nikolaevich Granovsky, an article he wrote, apparently, in 185s, 
right in the midst of our war with Europe when the siege of 
Sevastopol had already begun? I took it with me on the train and 
reread it specifically with a view to the Eastern Question, which 
has now come up once more. This old, respectable article struck 
me as unusually interesting, much more so than the first time I 
read it, when I agreed with it totally. What I particularly noted 
this time was, first, the view of the People held by a Westemizer 
of that time; second, and most important, what I might call the 
psychological content of the article. I canot resist sharing my 
impression with the reader. 
Granovsky was the very purest of the people of that time; he 
was something irreproachable and truly fine. He was an idealist of 
the 1840s in the highest sense, and he certainly had his own par­
ticular, highly original, and subtle shading among our "advanced" 
people of a certain stripe. He was one of our most honorable Stepan 
Trofimovichs (the idealist of the forties whom I portrayed in my 
novel The Devils and whom our critics found to ring true. I love 
my Stepan Trofimovich, after all, and deeply respect him); and he 
perhaps lacked any of the comic traits that are rather characteristic 
of this type. But I said that I was struck by the psychological 
significance of the article and found that notion very amusing. I 
don't know if you'll agree, but when our Russian idealist, a re­
nowned idealist who knows that everyone thinks of him only as 
an idealist, a "patented" proponent, so to speak, of "the sublime 
and the beautiful" -when such a person suddenly finds it necessary 
s s o  

July and August 
5 5 1 
to offer or announce his opinion on some maner (I mean on some 
"real," practical, curent maner-not on poetry of some sort, but 
on an important and serious maner, almost a civic one); and when 
he must not merely make a statement in passing, but express a 
decisive, conclusive judgment that will have some influence, then 
through some miracle he is abruptly and totally transformed into 
a confirmed, prosaic realist; even more, he becomes a cynic. More­
over, it is the absence of poetry, the very cynicism of the thing, 
in which he takes most pride. He offers his opinion and almost 
clucks his tongue in doing so. Ideals are shoved aside; ideals are 
nonsense, poetry, preny verses; in their place is only "the hard 
truth of life." But instead of telling this hard truth, he always 
overdoes things to the point of cynicism. He seeks the hard truth 
in cynicism and presumes to find it there. The coarser, the drier, 
the crueler-the more real he thinks it is. Why is that so? Because 
in such a case our idealist is always ashamed of his idealism. He's 
ashamed and afraid that he'll be told: "Well, you're an idealist; 
what do you understand of practical maners? Go ahead and preach 
about the beautiful, but let us senle these practical matters." Even 
Pushkin had this trait: more than once the great poet was ashamed 
that he was only a poet. Perhaps this trait can be found among 
other nationalities as well, but I doubt it. I doubt, at least, that 
it's found to the same degree as among us. In other countries, 
everyone has long been used to working, and they have managed 
to sort themselves out through centuries of having people with 
professions and significance of their own, and almost everyone over 
there knows, understands, and respects himself, in terms of both 
his profession and his significance. In Russia, on the other hand, 
owing to our two-hundred-year lack of habit of any practical activity, 
things are somewhat different. Even people such as Pushkin and 
Granovsky cannot escape a deeply concealed lack of self-respect. 
And, in fact, when he found it necessary suddenly to transform 
himself from a professor of history into a diplomat, this most 
innocent and upright of men went to amazing lengths in his pro­
nouncements. For example, he unerly denies even the possibility 
that Austria might be grateful to us for helping her in her dispute 
with the Hungarians and literally saving her from collapse. And 
he denies this not because Austria is "crafty" and we should have 
been able to see this in advance; no, he sees no craftiness whatsoever 
and flatly concludes that Austria could have done nothing else. But 
that's not enough for him: he concludes flatly that she shuuld have 

552 
A Writer's Diary 
done nothing else and she should have acted just as she did; ac­
cordingly, our hopes for her gratitude are nothing more than an 
unforgivable and ridiculous lapse in our foreign policy. A private 
person, apparently, is one thing, and a state something else. A 
state has its higher, imediate aims and its own advantages to 
consider; to expect gratitude to the point of a state's sacrificing its 
own interests is simply ridiculous. "Austrian craftines and in­
gratitude," he says, "have become a truism for us. But to speak 
of gratitude or ingratitude in political matters shows only that one 
does not understand them. The state is not a private individual; 
it canot sacrifice its own interests out of gratitude, the more so 
that in political maners magnanimity itself is never disinterested" 
(i.e. , it shouldn't be disinterested, is that what he means? That's 
exactly the notion). In shon, the respectable idealist said a lot of 
terribly clever things, but what's most imponant about them is 
that they are realistic: we can do more than write preny linle verses, 
you se! . . .  That's clever, to be sure, even though it's not new but 
has been with us as long as there have been diplomats on the earth; 
yet to justify Austria's action with such fervor, and not only to 
justify it, but to prove plainly that she should have acted in no other 
way-well, say what you like, but this is like cuning your mind 
in two. There is something here that one simply canot agre with, 
something that prohibits agrement, despite this unusual, practical, 
and political faculty which our historian, poet, and high priest of 
the beautiful has so suddenly and unexpectedly displayed. With 
this admission of the sanctity of proximate advantage, of direct and 
quick profit, of the justice of spining upon honor and conscience 
so long as one can tear off a chunk of wool, one can truly go a 
long way. Why, if you like you can use this to justify Menernich 's 
policy: it's a maner of the higher and real aims of state. But, indeed, 
do only practical advantages and immediate profit make up a na­
tion's genuine interests and therefore also its "higher" policy, as 
opposed to al these "Schilleresque" sentiments, ideals, and what 
not? This is the question. On the contrary, isn't the best policy 
for a great nation precisely one based on honor, magnanimity, and 
justice, even if it may sem to go against the interests of the state 
(but in practice it never does)? Did our historian really not know 
that great and honorable ideas (not only profit and a handful of 
wool) ultimately triumph among peoples and nations despite al 
the apparent absurd impracticality of these ideas and despite al 
their idealism, which is so humiliating in the eyes of the diplomats 

July and August 
5 5 3  
and the Menernichs? That a policy of honor and disinterestedness 
is not only higher but, perhaps, the most advantageous policy for 
a great nation, precisely because it is great? The policy of immediate 
practicality and endless rushing about to seek greater profit and 
achieve more practical aims exposes the triviality, the inner weak­
ness, and the unhappy condition of the state. The diplomatic mind, 
the practical mind, and the pragmatic benefit are always inferior to 
truth and honor, while truth and honor always end triumphant. 
And if they have not ended triumphant, then they will, for this is 
what people have eternally and inevitably desired and continue to 
desire. When the slave trade was abolished, were there not profound 
and highly intelligent objections that this "abolition" was imprac­
tical, that it would harm the most vital and essential interests of 
peoples and states? Things reached the point where trade in Negroes 
was held up even as something morally essential; it was justified 
by natural racial differences, and people concluded that the Negro 
was scarcely a human . . . .  When England's North American col­
onies revolted against her, did not people in practical England cry 
out for years on end that the liberation of these colonies from 
England's control would mean the ruin of England's interests; that 
it would be a dreadful setback, a calamity? When our own peasants 
were liberated, did we not hear those same cries in many places? 
Did not the "profound and practical minds" say that the state was 
setting off on the wrong path, an unknown and terrible path; that 
this would shake the very foundations of the state: that our higher 
policy that looks after realistic interests should not be based only 
on fashionable economic considerations and theories unproven by 
experience and, indeed, on "sentimentality"? But why look so far 
away? We have the Slavic Question before us: why not abandon 
the Slavs altogether? Although Granovsky insists that we want the 
Slavs only to increase our power and that we act only for our 
practical advantage, I think that here he made a slip. What sort 
of practical advantage will we have with them, even in the future, 
and how will they help us expand our power? Through the Medi­
terranean, some time in the future? Or through Constantinople, 
"which they will never give us?" Why this is nothing more than 
a crane flying across the sky; even if we did manage to catch it, 
we would only earn ourselves more trouble, a thousand years of 
trouble. Is this prosperity? Is this the view of a wise man? Is this 
genuine, practical interest? We shall have only fuss and trouble 
with the Slavs, especially now when they are still not ours. Because 

554 
A Writer's Diary 
of them, Europe has ben looking askance at us for a hundred 
years, and now she is not only looking aska.D.ce but-at the least 
sign of movement from us-will at once draw her sword and aim 
her canon at us. Let us simply abandon them once and for all 
so as to reassure Europe for good. But we should not abandon 
them pure and simple: Europe may, even then, not believe that 
we have abandoned them. Accordingly, we must do it with some 
prof: we ourselves must fall upon them and crush them in broth­
erly fashion so as to suppon Turkey. "So, dear brother Slavs, the 
state is not a private individual; it canot sacrifice its own interests 
out of magnanimity; didn't you know that?" And how many ad­
vantages, practical, genuine, and immediate-not some rosy dreams 
of the future-would Russia at once derive from this! The Eastern 
Question would at once be solved; Europe would regain her trust 
in us, at least for the moment; and as a result our military budget 
would be reduced, our credit restored, our ruble would rise to its 
real value. And that's not all: why this crane of ours would not fly 
away anywhere; it would just go on hovering over us! Now we'll 
have to stifle a few twinges of conscience and bide our time; after 
all, "the state is not a private individual; it canot sacrifice its own 
interests," but eventually . . . .  Well, if the Slavs are destined not to 
manage without us, then they themselves will join us when the 
time comes; then we will again cling to them with love and broth­
erhood. However, Granovsky finds that very thing as well in our 
policy. He assures us specifically that our policy has done nothing 
but oppress the Slavs through the last hundred years, "denouncing 
them and betraying them to the Turks," so that our Slavic policy 
was always one of annexation and violence; indeed, it could be 
nothing else. (Does he mean that that was how it should have ben? 
He justifies others for such a policy, after all, so he should justify 
us as well.) But was this really always our policy on the Slavic 
Question? Has it really not ben clarified even now? Those are the 
questions! 
2. Should One Be Ashamed of Being an Idealist? 
Granovsky, of course, was a proud man, but I think that a sense 
of pride-even injured pride-must have ben a common feature 
of all able people at the time; this was precisely because they had 
no work to do and no possibility of finding some occupation. They 
were longing for work, one might say. Things reached the point 

July and August 
5 5 5  
where those who seemed to have some occupation (a professor, for 
instance, or a man of letters, a poet, even a great poet) set linle 
store by it, not merely because of the constraints in which they 
found themselves and their professions, but also because almost 
every one of them tended to see within himself the rudiments of 
some other occupation that he felt was higher, more useful, more 
"civic" than the one he was pursuing. The injured pride of our 
finest progressive and capable people (of some of them, at least) 
strikes one even now, and it stems from these same reasons. (How­
ever, I am speaking only of certain capable and talented people; 
I will pass over for the moment the unbecoming, insufferably ir­
ritated conceit and vanity of so many of today's untalented and 
trivial "activists" who imagine themselves geniuses, even though 
this phenomenon is particularly striking at the present time.) This 
longing for activity, this eternal quest for activity, which stems 
exclusively from our two centuries of inactivity-an inactivity that 
has reached the point where now we do not even know what ap­
proach to take to work (indeed, we do not even know where to 
find an occupation and what it consists of)-is a terrible irritant 
for us. We see conceit-sometimes even indecent conceit, judging 
by the man's moral level-which makes him almost ridiculous. But 
all this arises specifically because this high-minded, moral person 
himself is often incapable of defining himself and determining his 
strong points and his significance; of discovering his own specific 
gravity, so to say, and finding his own real value through practical 
work. Had he been able to discover this, he, as one filled with the 
loftiest of sentiments, would naturally not consider it degrading to 
admit that he had no capacity for certain things. At the present 
time he is quick to take offense, and in his touchiness he often 
undertakes work for which he is unsuited. Granovsky's article, I 
repeat, is written very cleverly, although it contains some political 
errors that were later confirmed by facts in Europe. I could point 
them out, of course, but that's not what I want to talk about; in 
any case, I'm not setting out to pronounce judgment on Granovsky 
for these things. What struck me this time was just the remarkable 
irritability of the article. Oh, I don't attribute its irritability to his 
pride, and I am not attacking the well-known tendentiousness of 
the article. I understand only too well the "topicality" that is 
reflected in this piece, the feeling and the sorrow of a citizen. There 
are, at last, moments when even the most just person cannot be 
dispassionate . . .  (alas, Granovsky did not live to see the liberation 

ss6 
A Writer's Diary 
of the peasants and never conceived of it even in his fundest 
dreams!). No, I am not atacking that; but why did he look so 
scornfuly on the People in this "Eastern Question" of his and 
refuse to give them their due? He refuses altogether to recognize 
the People's participation and their thought in this maner. He states 
positively that the People had no opinion whatsoever in the Slavic 
Question and in the war at the time but only felt the burden of 
levies and providing recruits. Evidently the People were not even 
supposed to have an opinion. Granovsky writes: 
Fim it is necesary to dismis the notion that this war (i.e., from 
1853 to 1855) is a holy war. The government anempu:d to convince 
the People that it was mart:hing in defense of the rights of the Christian 
churt:h and their fi:l.law believers. The defenders of Onhodoxy and 
the Slavic nationalities joyfuly raised this barner and preached a crusade 
against the Moslems. Bus the age of crvsades hod pa.sul; in OUT rime 
no one wil maJu a mm:re to !Ufmd the Holy SepulcJrre [or to defend the 
Slavs either?); no one regards the Molunrme.dan.s as eremal foes of Chris­
rimrily; the keys to the temple of Bethlehem serve only as a preu:xt 
fOr achieving political aims. [In anolher place, he says this directly 
about the Slavs.) 
Of course, we too are prepared to agre that Rusian policy in 
regard to the Slavic Question in this last century was perhaps 
sometimes not beyond reproach; at some moments it may have ben 
much to restrained and cautious, and therefure cenain impatient 
people found it insincere. Perhaps there was excesive concern fur 
immediate interests, ambiguity caused by cenain external diplo­
matic presures, half-measures, and hesitations; but, in esence and 
on the whole, Russia's policy was scarcely concerned only with 
bringing the Slavs under her control and so increasing her own 
strength and political significance. No, of course, this is not how 
it was, and in essence our policy, even through the whole Petersburg 
period of our history, was hardly ever at odds with the Slavic, i.e., 
Eastern Question and with our most ancient historical covenants 
and traditions and the views of the People. And our government 
always knew very well that as son as our People beard its sumons 
in this cause, the People would answer it wholeheanedly; and 
therefOre the Eastern Question, in its true esence, was always a 
question fur the People. But Granovsky does not admit this at al. 
Oh, Granovsky bad a dep love fur the People! In his article he 
grieves and laments over their suferings in the war and the burdens 

July and August 
5 57 
they had to carry. Indeed, can people such as Granovsky feel other 
than love for the People? This compassion and this love reveal all 
his beautiful soul; but at the same time they inadvertently reveal 
the view of the People of this confirmed Westernizer, a man always 
prepared to see the embryo of something beautiful in the People, 
but only "passively" and on the level of a "self-contained, idyllic 
way of life." But as far as the People's real and possible activity 
is concerned-"of that it is best not to speak." For him, our People 
in any circumstances are only an inert, mute mass. And this is 
hardly surprising: almost all of us at that time believed him. That 
is why I simply do not dare to "attack" Granovsky and wish only 
to point my finger at his time, not at him. This article made the 
rounds then and it had an influence. And that's just the point: I 
was struck most of all by the parallel between the remarkable point 
of view of this remarkable article and the present moment today. 
No, today even the Westernizer Granovsky might be astonished 
and, perhaps, might even believe. The People's voluntary sacrifices 
and contributions for the Orthodox Slavs; the donations by Old 
Believers who send medical detachments from their communities; 
the donations of artel workers who send their last pennies; the 
donations sent by community decision from entire villages; the 
donations made by soldiers and sailors from their salaries; and 
finally, the Russian people of all classes who go to fight for their 
oppressed Slavic brethren and to shed their blood-no, this is 
something that is evident and that cannot be called passive, some­
thing that one has to take into account. The movement has been 
made manifest and one can no longer dispute it. Women-prom­
inent ladies-are on the streets collecting for the Slavic brethren. 
The People solemnly and tenderly look at this phenomenon that 
is utterly new to them: "So, they're all gathering together again; 
that means we're not always going our separate ways; it means 
we're all the same Christians." That is certainly what the People 
feel and perhaps what they already think. And, of course, news 
reaches them as well; they listen to newspapers being read to them· 
and are themselves already beginning to read them. And of course 
they have heard and have prayed in church for the repose of the 
soul of Nikolai Alexeevich Kireev, who gave his life for the cause 
of the People; and, who knows, perhaps they will compose their 
own folk song about this death and sacrifice: 
And though he fell, yet will he live, 

5 58 
In hearts and minds throughout our land; 
No end more glorious than this, 
A sacrifice both bold and grand 
That he, a brave and noble soul 
Made fur the People, one and al. 
A Writer's Diary 
Yes, "he died for the People," and not for the Slavic People 
alone but for the common, Orthodox, Russian cause as well, and 
the People will always understand that. No, our People are not 
materialists nor yet so corrupt in spirit as to think only of their 
day-to-day advantages and positive interests. They are joyous in 
spirit when a great purpose is set before them, and they will accept 
it as their spiritual bread. And do the People now, at the present 
moment, not know and understand that the ultimate development 
of this Slavic cause may threaten even us with war or ignite some 
conflict? Then, of course, requisitions and burdens will be their 
lot just as in the Eastern war of twenty years ago. But look at them 
now: are they afraid of anything? No; one ses among our People 
a good deal more spiritual and practical strength than various "ex­
perts" suggest. Granovsky would have done better to leave this 
opinion to others-to that horde of "experts on the People" and, 
perhaps, to some of our literary men who wrote about the People 
but remained al their lives only foreigners who have made a study 
of the Rusian peasant. 
In conclusion, I repeat: the idealist in Russia often forgets that 
idealism is by no means a shameful thing. Both the idealist and 
the realist, as long as they are honest and magnanimous, have the 
same esence-love for humanity-and the same object-the human 
being; it is only that the furms of representation of that object are 
diferent. There is no ned to be ashamed of one's idealism: it is 
the same path to the same goal. Thus idealism, in esence, is just 
as practical as realism and can never disappear from the earth. 
The Granovskys should not be ashamed that they exist specifically 
to preach "the beautiful and the sublime." And if even the 
Granovskys should feel ashamed and, dreading the mocking and 
haughty wise men of the Areopagus, become virtual alies of the 
Mettemichs, then who will be our prophets? And the laisroriln 
GranDf!sky should not be ignorant of the fact that the most precious 
thing of al is for peoples to have and preserve ideals, and that 
some sacred idea, no matter how unsubstantial, impractical, ideal, 
and absurd it might first appear in the eyt:S of the wise men, will 

July and August 
5 59 
always find some Areopagite and some "woman called Damaris" 
who from the very beginning will place her faith in who propounds 
it and will join this glorious cause without fear of breaking with 
her wise men. And so a small, untimely, and impractical "absurd 
little notion" will grow and multiply and ultimately conquer the 
world, while the wise men of the Areopagus keep silent. 
3· The Germans and Labor. Inexplicable Tricks. On Wit 
Ems is a bedazzling and fashionable place. Sick people, mainly 
those with chest ailments ("catarrh of the pulmonary tract") come 
here from all over the world and are treated with great success at 
the mineral springs. As many as fourteen or fifteen thousand visit 
Ems in sumer, mainly wealthy people, or at least those with 
sufficient means not to stint themselves over their own health. But 
there are poor people as well who come here on foot to be treated. 
There are about a hundred of these, and perhaps they do not really 
come on foot but use some other means of transportation. I was 
very interested in the fourth-class cars that have been set up on the 
German railways, although I don't know if they are a feature of 
all the railways. During a stop on the way, I asked the conductor 
(almost all the conductors on the German railways are not only 
very capable but are attentive and kind to the passengers as well) 
to explain to me what this fourth class was. He showed me an 
empty car-l mean one without any seats, only walls and a floor. 
It turned out that the passengers had to stand up. · 
"Perhaps they sit on the floor?" 
"Oh yes, of course, they do as they like." 
"And how many places are there in a car?" 
"Twenty-five." 
Making a rough estimate of the dimensions of the empty car for 
twenty-five people, I concluded that they must certainly have to 
stand up, and shoulder to shoulder as well. Thus, if twenty-five 
people-that is, the full capacity-were crowded into the car, not 
a single one of them would be able to sit down, even if he wanted 
"to do as he liked." Of course, they would have to carry their 
baggage with them; however, they would probably have only some 
small bundles. 
"On the other hand, you know, the fares are only half as much 
as third class, and that is a great boon to a poor man." 
Well, that truly does mean something. And so these poor people 

s6o 
A Writer's Diary 
who come to Ems not only take the cure but are maintained at the 
expense of . . .  well now, at whose expense I don't know. As soon 
as you arive at Ems and take roms at a hotel (and in Ems al 
the buildings are hotels) you will certainly be called upon on your 
second or third day by two people, one after the other, collecting 
donations and carrying little books. These are people of humble, 
patient appearance but having their own sense of personal dignity. 
One of them collects for the maintenance of these same impover­
ished sick people. Attached to his book is a printed proclamation 
from the doctors of Ems to their patients that urges them not to 
forget about the poor. You make a contribution that is within your 
means and write your name down in the book. I looked through 
the book and was struck by how small the contributions were: one 
mark, half a mark, rarely thre marks, and very rarely five marks. 
Yet it would seem that people in Ems are not overly pestered by 
appeals for contributions: aside from these two collectors, there 
were no others. While you are making your contribution and writing 
down your name, the official (I'll call him an official) meekly stands 
in the middle of your rom. 
"Do you collect a lot over the season?" I asked. 
"About a thousand talers, mein Hen; but that's far too little when 
you look at what's needed. There are a lot of them-as many as a 
hundred people-and we provide for them completely, with treat­
ment, food, drink, and accommodation." 
That truly is a small sum: a thousand talers is three thousand 
marks; if there are as many as fourteen thousand visitors, then how 
much does each one donate? There must be some who give nothing 
at al, who refuse and have the collector thrown out (and there are 
such, and they do literally throw out the collector, as I learned later). 
Yet the visitors form a dazzling society, remarkably dazzling. Just 
go out for a walk while they are drinking their mineral water or 
listening to the band and take a look at them. 
By the way, as early as last spring I read in our newspapers that 
we Russians had donated very little for the Slavic rebels (of course, 
these statements were made before the most recent donations). 
Compared with us, the Europeans had contributed much more. 
These figures did not even include Austria, which alone has con­
tributed many (?) millions of guldens to support the unfortunate 
families of the insurgents, tens of thousands of whom have made 
their way into Austrian territory. The accounts say that in England, 
for instance, people have contributed much more than we have, 

July and August 
and the same is true even of France and Italy. But say what you 
will, I do not believe in the enormity of these European contri­
butions for the Slavs. A lot has been said about England, but I 
would be interested to know the real sum of her contributions, a 
figure which, it seems, no one can yet state accurately. As far as 
Austria is concerned, from the very beginning of the rebellion she 
had in mind the acquisition of a part of Bosnia (discussions have 
already begun about this in the diplomatic world), and so contrib­
uted not entirely disinterestedly but with an eye to her future 
interests; and her contribution came not from the people but from 
the state treasury pure and simple. Even the "many" millions of 
guldens mentioned are subject to some doubt, I think. There were 
contributions or, to put it better, appropriations, but whether they 
were in fact of any great help will be determined only sometime 
in the future. 
The second official-I mean the collector of donations in Ems­
who always calls after the first one, is collecting for "bltidige Kin­
der," i.e. , for retarded children. There is an institution for them 
here. And of course the idiot-children in the institution come not 
only from Ems; indeed, it would be indecent for such a small town 
to give birth to so many idiots. A sum from public funds is ap­
propriated for the institution, but evidently it is necessary to resort 
to voluntary donations as well. Some luminary or magnificent lady 
is cured and restored thanks to the local mineral springs and, if 
not exactly out of gratitude to the place then at least as a token of 
remembrance, she leaves two or three marks for the poor, aban­
doned, unfortunate little creatures. In this second book the con­
tributions are also one or two marks; sometimes, but very rarely, 
the sum of ten marks stands out. This second official collects up 
to fifteen hundred talers in a season: "But it used to be better; 
they used to give more," he added sadly. One donation in this book 
stood out in particular; it was, so to say, a donation made with 
some purpose in mind: S pfennigs (I '12 silver kopecks). This re­
minded me of the donation for a monument to Lermontov that was 
entered in a book in Piatigorsk by a certain Russian State Councilor: 
he had donated one kopeck, silver and signed his name. This was 
mentioned in the newspapers about a year ago, although the donor's 
name wasn't published. But I think it should have been published: 
he had signed his name, after all, and perhaps he did so thinking 
specifically of becoming famous. But the State Councilor evidently 
intended to display his intellectual strength, his point of view and 

A Writer's Diary 
tendency; he was protesting against an, against the insignificance 
of poetry in our age of "realism," steamships, and railways, i.e., 
against all the things that every ragtag, third-rate liberal shouts 
about (he doesn't shout so much as simply parrot someone else's 
liberal ideas, in fact). But this one, the first, local bliidige, what 
did he want to express with his five pfennigs? I really don't know 
which tendency this should be ascribed to. Blodige Kinder are little 
unfonunate creatures, the castoffs of the poorest families: are they 
really a subject for witticisms? "And if you give a poor man but 
one glass of water, even this will be credited to you in the Kingdom 
of Heaven." And yet, what am I saying? A glass of water in Ems, 
of course, costs no more than five pfennigs to be sure, and so even 
for five pfennigs one can get into Paradise. He was just figuring 
out the minimum price of admission: "Why pay any more?" He's 
only a child of the times; these days, as they say, you can't put 
anything over on people. 
Since my first visit to Ems three years ago, and from my very 
first day, I was interested in one thing, and it continues to interest 
me every time I come. The two most popular mineral springs in 
Ems, despite the fact that there are several others, are the Krenchen 
and the Kesselbrunen. A building has been erected over the 
springs; a balustrade divides them from the public. Several girls 
stand behind this balustrade-three for each spring-and they are 
pleasant, young, and neatly dressed. You hand them your glass, 
and they at once fill it with water. In the two morning hours set 
aside for drinking, thousands of patients come to these balustrades; 
during these two hours each patient drinks several glasses of water­
two, three, four, or however many have been prescribed for him. 
The same thing happens during the evening drinking hours. And 
so each of these three girls fills and hands out an enormous number 
of glasses of water during a two-hour period. Yet this is done with 
total order-calmly, methodically, and without haste, so that you 
are never delayed; and what I find most amazing is that each of 
these girls possesses an all but supernatural ability to keep track 
of things. When you first arrive you need only say to her once: 
"Here is my glass; I need so many ounces of the Krenchen and 
so many ounces of milk," and she will not make a single mistake 
during your whole month of treatment. Aside from that, she knows 
you by sight and can pick you out in the crowd. People crowd in 
tightly, several rows deep, and everyone is holding out a glass; the 

July and August 
girl will take six or seven glasses at once, fil all of them in some 
fifteen seconds, and without spilling a drop or breaking them, will 
return each one without a mistake. She holds out the glass to you 
and knows that out of a thousand glasses, this one is yours and 
that one is someone else's; she remembers how many ounces of 
water you need, how many ounces of milk, and how many glasses 
you are supposed to drink. There is never the least error; I kept 
a close watch and made enquiries. And this is most surprising 
when you consider that there are several thousand patients here. 
It may very well be that this is a most ordinary thing and no cause 
for astonishment, but for me, now in my third year here, it is 
something almost inexplicable; I still regard it as some inexplicable 
feat of magic. Although it is ridiculous to be amazed at everything, 
this is one problem I am absolutely unable to solve. Evidently, one 
can only conclude that these German girls have exceptional mem­
ories and the ability to keep track of things very quickly; and yet, 
perhaps, it may only be that they are accustomed to work, a job 
that they have been learning since early childhood, and so, one 
can say, they have triumphed uver work. As far as work itself is 
concerned, the Russian who studies the matter here also finds 
himself much perplexed. Living a month in the hotel (although, 
strictly speaking, it's not a hotel-every house here is a hotel, and 
the majority of them, aside from a few large ones, are simply 
apartments with maid service and meals by arrangement), I was 
simply amazed at the servants. In the hotel where I lived there 
were twelve apartments, al occupied, and some holding entire 
families. Each one of them is ringing for the maid, demanding 
something, and everyone must be looked after or served something; 
the maid must run up the stairs many times a day. And for al 
that, the hotel's entire staff of servants consisted of one girl of 
about nineteen. In addition, the proprietress has this same girl run 
errands and do various tasks: she must go buy wine for someone's 
dinner; run to the pharmacy for someone else; go to the laundry 
for a third; and to the shop for the proprietress herself. The pro- . 
prietress, a widow, had three small children, and they also had to 
be looked after and dressed for school in the mornings. Every 
Sunday all the floors in the hotel had to be washed; each room 
had to be cleaned daily, including a change of bed and table linen; 
and whenever a guest left, his whole apartment had to be washed 
and cleaned at once without waiting until Sunday. This girl went 
to bed at half-past eleven, and in the morning the proprietress rang 

A Writer's Diary 
a bell to wake her up at exactly five o'clock. I am telling you quite 
literally how it all happened and am not eltaggerating in the least. 
Add the fact that she works for a most modest wage, inconceivable 
to us in Petersburg, and is required to be neatly dressed as well. 
Note that she seems in no way to feel humiliated or downtrodden: 
she is cheerful, bold, and healthy, with a remarkably contented air 
and an imperturbable calm. No, people in Russia do not work like 
that. No servant girl would undertake such a regime of hard labor, 
however high the wage. Moreover, she would not work as the 
German girl did: a hundred times she would forget something, spill 
something, fail to bring something, break something, make mis­
takes, get angry, and talk back to her employer. During a whole 
month in Ems, however, there was absolutely nothing to complain 
about. I find that astonishing, and I, as a Russian, really don't 
know whether this is cause for praise or blame. However, I'll take 
a chance and praise it, although there is something here to think 
about. Here in Germany everyone has accepted his status as it is 
and has come to terms with it, neither envying nor supposing that 
things could be otherwise, apparently-at least in the vast majority 
of cases. But work is still attractive: established work that has been 
structured over the course of centuries; work with designated meth­
ods and techniques; work that is given to everyone almost from 
the day of his birth. And therefore everyone knows how to approach 
his job and master it completely. Everyone knows his job here, 
although everyone knows only his job. I say that because everyone 
works here-not only maidservants but their employers as well. 
Lok at a German civil servant, one who works in a post office, 
say. Everyone knows what the Russian civil servant is like, par­
ticularly the one who deals with the public every day: he is angry 
and irritable, and if his irritation isn't always displayed obviously, 
then it is concealed and you can tell that by looking at his face. 
He has a face as haughty and proud as Jupiter. This is particularly 
evident in the pettiest little fellows among them, such as those who 
sit and issue various documents to the public, who take your money 
and give you a ticket, etc. Just look at him when he's busy, "on 
the job": a crowd gathers, a line forms, everyone is eager to get 
his document, his answer, his receipt, his ticket. But this fellow 
just doesn't pay the least attention to you. At last your turn comes; 
you stand there, talking to him, but he isn't listening; he isn't 
looking at you; he's turned around and is talking to the civil servant 
sitting behind him; he's taken a piece of paper and is checking 

July and August 
something, although you are quite ready to suspect that this is only 
for show and he has no need whatsoever to check anything. But 
you're prepared to wait and . . .  he gets up and goes away. And 
suddenly the clock strikes and the office hours are over-clear off, 
people! Compared with the German, our civil servant spends far 
fewer hours per day at his job. Boorishness, inattentiveness, care­
lessness, hostility to the public only because it is the public and, 
above all, the attitude of the petty Jupiter. He absolutely has to 
show you that you are dependent on him: "Just look at me, now; 
you can't do anything to me standing there behind the balustrade, 
but I can do anything I like to you. And if you get angry, I'll call 
the guard and have you thrown out." He has to take revenge for 
an insult of some sort, to take revenge on you for his own insig­
nificance. Here in Ems there are usually two or at most three people 
working in the post office. There are months during the height of 
the season (in June and July, for example) when there are thousands 
of visitors here, and you can imagine how much mail there is and 
how much work the post office has to do. Aside from some two 
hours for lunch and so on, they are busy the whole day through. 
They have to collect mail and send it off; a thousand people come 
to ask for general delivery letters or to inquire about something. 
To serve each person he must look through whole heaps of letters; 
he listens to each, provides each with information or an explanation, 
and does all this patiently, kindly, politely, while still preserving 
his personal dignity. From some insignificant little creature he 
becomes a real person and not vice versa . . . .  When I arrived in 
Ems I spent a long time impatiently waiting for a letter and inquired 
every day at General Delivery. One morning, as I was coming back 
from drinking my daily dose of mineral water, I found this letter 
on the table in my rom. It had only just arrived and the postal 
worker, remembering my name but not knowing where I lived, 
made a special check in the printed listing of the names and ad­
dresses of all who arrive here; then he sent me the letter by special 
messenger, despite the fact that it was addressed "General De· 
livery." And he did all this only because when I inquired the day 
before he had noticed that I was extremely anxious. Now would 
any of our postal workers do that? 
As far as German sharp-wittedness and calculation are concerned 
(topics that carne to mind apropos of what I said about German 
work just now), several different opinions exist. The French, who 
even formerly had no love for the Germans, always found and still 

s66 
A Writer's Diary 
find the German mind to be rather slow but not, of course, dull. 
They perceive in the German mind a kind of tendency, always and 
in everything, to avoid the direct approach and, on the contrary, 
a constant wish to resort to something intermediary, to make of a 
single thing something containing two distinct parts. As far as we 
Russians are concerned, we have always had a lot of anecdotes 
about the slowness and dullness of the Germans, despite our sincere 
admiration of their learning. But it seems to me that the Germans 
have only too much distinctiveness, a national character that is too 
stubborn, even to the point of haughtiness, a character that some­
times can make one indignant and therefore often lead one to wrong 
conclusions about them. However, living with them, particularly 
as a foreigner newly arived in Germany, can produce some truly 
strange first impressions. 
On the way from Berlin to Ems, the train stopped for four 
minutes at one station. It was nighttime; I had grown weary of 
sitting in the carriage and wanted to take a walk, if only a short 
one, and to smoke a cigarette in the fresh air. Everyone in the 
carriages was asleep, and no one got out of the whole long train 
but me. But the bell rang and suddenly I realized that in my usual 
absent-minded way I had forgotten the number of my carriage, 
whose door I had closed when I got out. There were, perhaps, 
only a few seconds remaining, and I was about to go to the con­
ductor, who was at the other end of the train, when suddenly I 
heard someone calling "Psst, psst!" from the window of a carriage. 
Well, I thought, that must be my cariage. It is true that the 
Germans, in their small compartments holding a maximum of eight 
persons, do look out for one another during a journey. If there is 
a stop at a large station where dinner or supper is available, the 
German will certainly make sure to awaken his sleeping neighbor 
so that he won't have cause to regret sleeping through his supper, 
etc. And so I thought that this was one of my companions who 
had awakened and was calling me after noticing that I had lost my 
place. I went up to the window where a concerned German face 
was thrust out. 
" Was suchen Sie?" (What are you looking for?) 
"My carriage. Wasn't I with you? Is this my carriage?" 
"No, this isn't your carriage and you weren't sitting here. But 
where is your carriage?" 
"That's just the problem; I've lost it!" 
"I don't know where it is either." 

July and August 
And it was only at the very last second that the conductor appeared 
and showed me my carriage. One might ask why this German 
called me and asked me questions. But once you've lived in Ger­
many for a while, you soon realize that any German would act in 
just the same way. 
About ten years ago I arrived in Dresden, and on the very next 
day as I came out of the hotel I set off directly for the picrure 
gallery. I did not ask the way: the Dresden picrure gallery is one 
of the most remarkable places in the world, and I thought that any 
passing citizen of the educated class would certainly be able to 
point out the way for me. And so when I passed one certain street 
I stopped a German who had a most serious and educated 
appearance. 
"Could you tell me, please, where the picrure gallery is?" 
"The picture gallery?" The German stopped and considered my 
question. 
"Yes." 
"The Ro-yal Picrure Gallery?" (He put particular emphasis on 
the word Royal.) 
"Yes." 
"I don't know where that gallery is." 
"But . . .  is there any other gallery here?" 
"No, none whatsoever." 

3 
1. Russian or French? 
What a lot of Russians there are at these German spas, particularly 
the fashionable ones such as Ems! On the whole, the Russians are 
terribly fond of taking cures. Even the main contingent of patients 
coming to the "Wunderfrau," who has a sanatorium near Munich 
(without waters, however), is from Russia, so they say. For the 
most part, though, this Frau is frequented by solid citizens-the 
generals of society, so to say-who have sent their urine specimens 
ahead of them from Petersburg and who have had places reserved 
in her institution ever since the winter. This Frau is formidable 
and obstinate. But in Ems the Russians can be most easily distin­
guished by their manner of speaking, that is, by that Russo-French 
dialect which is characteristic only of Russia and has begun to 
astonish even foreigners. I say that it "has begun," yet until now 
we have heard it only praised. I know, people will tell me that it's 
terribly passe to arrack Russians for their French and that both the 
topic and its moral lesson are far too outworn. What surprises me, 
though, is not that the Russians do not speak Russian among 
themselves (and it would even be strange if they did); what surprises 
me is that they imagine they speak good French. Who put that 
silly notion into our heads? There's no doubt at all that it persists 
only because of our ignorance. Russians who speak French (that 
is, the overwhelming majority of educated Russians) are divided 
into two general categories: those who speak undeniably bad 
French, and those who imagine that they speak like true Parisians 
(our whole higher society), but who in fact speak just as badly as 
those of the first category. Russians of the first category can go to 
absurd lengths. I myself, for instance, while on a lonely evening 
walk on the banks of the Lahn, met two Russians, a man and a 
568 

July and August 
lady; they were elderly people who were conversing with a most 
preoccupied air about some family matter that evidently was very 
important to them and that deeply absorbed and even disturbed 
them. They spoke in an agitated way, but in French and very 
badly, bookishly, using dead, awkward phrases; they were some­
times terribly hard-pressed to express an idea or some nuance of 
an idea, so that the one would often prompt the other impatiently. 
They went on prompting one another, but it never occurred to 
them to begin expressing themselves in Russian; on the contrary, 
they preferred to express themselves badly and even risk being 
misunderstood, just as long as they could do it in French. I was 
struck by this; it seemed to me to be patently absurd, yet I've 
encountered the same thing a hundred times in my life. The main 
thing here is that it is probably not a matter of preference-even 
though I said just now that they "preferred to speak French"-or 
of choice of language: they simply speak abominable French by 
custom and habit, never even posing the question of which language 
is the more convenient to speak. What is also disgusting about this 
awkward, artificial language they speak is their coarse, awkward, 
equally artificial pronunciation. The French spoken by Russians 
of my second category-the language of higher society, that is-is 
likewise distinguished above all by its pronunciation: it seems as 
if it really is a Parisian speaking, yet there's something quite wrong. 
The falsity is evident from the very first sound, particularly in the 
exaggerated, strained manner of pronunCiation, in the crude manner 
of imitation, in the exaggerated gutturals and grasseyement-in the 
indecent pronunciation of the "r," in fact-and finally, in the moral 
aspect: the haughty self-satisfaction with which they make these 
guttural sounds, the childish boastfulness-which they don't even 
bother to conceal-with which they parade before one another their 
imitation of the language of the gan;on of a Petersburg hairdresser. 
All this self-satisfied servility is repulsive. You may well say that 
this is all old hat, but it continues to astonish simply because living 
people, in the flower of their health and strength, decide to speak 
in an emaciated, colorless, sickly language. Of course, they them­
selves do not realize how worthless and impoverished that language 
is (not French, I mean, but the language they speak) and, because 
their thoughts are not fully developed but sketchy and impover­
ished, they are still quite happy with the medium they've chosen 
for expressing these sketchy little thoughts. They haven't the ca­
pacity to comprehend that once they have been born and raised in 

570 
A Writer's Diary 
Russia they will never degenerate entirely into Frenchmen, despite 
the fact that under the influence of their French nurses they lisped 
their very first words in French, subsequently practiced it with 
tutors, and used it in society; they do not realize that this is why 
this language of theirs must always sound dead and not alive; that 
it is not a natural but an artificial, fantastic, and preposterous 
language precisely because they so stubbornly accept it as a genuine 
one. In short, it is not French at all, because the Russians, like 
anyone else, have never been able to master all the fundamental, 
inherent elements of living French because they were not born as 
Frenchmen; they master only the alien jargon they have been given 
and, at most, some hairdresser's insolent phrases and subsequently, 
perhaps, some insolent ideas as well. This is like a stolen language, 
and therefore not one of these Russian Parisians is, even once in 
his life, able to generate in this stolen language a single expression 
of his own or a single new, original word that might be taken up 
and come into currency on the street-something which any hair­
dresser's garŁon is able to do, however. In one of his novels Turgenev 
tells the story of one such Russian in Paris; the fellow enters the 
Cafe de Paris and shouts: "Gart;on, bifteck aux pommes de terre! "  
Another Russian, who had already managed to imitate the new 
manner of ordering a steak, arrives and shouts: "Gart;on, bifteck­
pommes!" The Russian who had shouted his order the old-fash­
ioned way, "aux pommes de terre," is in despair over his ignorance 
and his missing this new expression "bifteck-pommes," and is 
afraid that now, perhaps, the garŁons may look at him scornfully. 
The author, evidently, took this story from an actual event. The 
Russian Parisians, groveling slavishly before the forms of the lan­
guage and the opinion of the garŁons, are naturally just as enslaved 
to French ideas. So it is that they themselves condemn their poor 
heads to the pathetic fate of never ever containing a single idea of 
their own. 
Yes, to discuss the harm of assimilating from earliest childhood 
a foreign language in place of one's own native one is certainly a 
ludicrous and old-fashioned topic, and naive to the point of in­
decency; but it seems to me that it has by no means become so 
outworn that one should not attempt to express one's own opinion 
about it. Indeed, there is no such old topic on which one could 
not say something new. I, of course, make no claim to anything 
new (how could 1!), but I take the risk if only to clear my conscience; 

July and August 
57 1  
still, I will say something. I also would like to set down my ar­
guments in a rather more accessible manner, in the hope that some 
dear mamma from higher society might read me. 
2. What Language Should a Future Person of 
Consequence Speak? 
I would ask the dear mamma whether she knows what language 
is and what the purpose of the word is. There is no doubt that 
language is the form, the body, the outer casing of thought (of 
course, this doesn't explain what thought is); it is, so to say, the 
ultimate and concluding word of organic evolution. It follows that 
the richer the material and the forms I acquire to express thought, 
the more fortunate I will be in life; the more distinctly and com­
prehensibly I will express myself-both to myself and to others; 
the more powerful and successful I will be; the more quickly I will 
be able to tell myself what I want to say; the more profoundly I 
will be able to express my thought and the more profoundly I will 
be able understand what I wanted to say; the stronger and calmer 
I will be in spirit; and, of course, the wiser I will be. And again, 
does dear mamma know that even though a person's thoughts are 
capable of moving at the speed of electricity, he will never actually 
think at such speed but much, much more slowly-although it will 
be much more quickly than he speaks. Why is this? It is because 
he has no choice but to think in some language. And in truth, we 
may not be aware that we are thinking in a language, but this is 
so; and if we do not think in words, i.e., by pronouncing words 
mentally, at least, then we still think using the "elemental, fun­
damental power of that language" in which we prefer to think, if 
I may express it that way. It is understood that the more flexibly, 
the more richly, the more diversely we master the language in which 
we choose to think, the more easily, diversely, and richly we will 
express our ideas in it. In essence, why is it that we study European 
languages-French, for instance? In the first place, it is simply to 
read French, and in the second place, it is to be able to speak to 
Frenchmen when we meet them; but it is cenainly not to speak 
to other Russians or to ourselves. For any higher life, for any true 
depth of thought, a foreign, borrowed language will not be enough 
precisely because it will always remain foreign to us; for this one 
needs the native language into which one has been born. But it is 

5 72 
A Writer's Diary 
right here that we run into an obstacle: Russians, at least Russians 
of the highest classes, have for the most part long since ceased to 
be born into a living language but only later acquire some sort of 
artificial one; they are almost in school before they learn Russian, 
and then only through the grammar. Oh, of course if one has 
enough desire and diligence one can finally reeducate oneself and 
even learn, to some extent, the living Russian language after having 
been born into a dead one. I knew a certain Russian writer who 
made a name for himself and who had not only mastered the Russian 
language, after having no knowledge of it, but had also mastered 
the Russian peasant-and then he wrote novels of peasant life. Such 
comic cases have occurred more than once in Russia, sometimes 
even on a very serious level: the great Pushkin, by his own ad­
mission, was also compelled to reeducate himself and study both 
the language and the spirit of the People; he learned, by the way, 
from his old nurse, Arina Rodionovna. The expression "to learn 
the language" is particularly appropriate for us Russians because 
we, the upper class, are to such an extent cut off from the People, 
i.e., from the living language ("language" and "people" are syn­
onyms in Russian, and what a rich, profound thought lies therein!). 
But people may say that if you have to study a living language, 
then is it not all the same whether it is Russian or French? But 
the point is that the Russian language is still easier for a Russian, 
despite the presence of the French governess and the other cir­
cwnstances, and we must take advantage of that fact while there 
is time. To master this Russian language in a more natural manner, 
without particular strain, and not only theoretically (when I say 
theoretically here I mean, of course, not only schoolroom grammar), 
one must absolutely acquire it from a Russian nurse in childhood, 
following the example of Arina Rodionovna, without fear that the 
nurse will pass on various prejudices to the child such as the "three 
whales." (Heavens above, what if those whales should stay with 
the child all life long!) Moreover, we must not be afraid of the 
common people and even servants, against whom some "experts" 
warn parents. And then, in school the child must absolutely mem­
orize some classics of our literature, beginning from its earliest 
period-the chronicles, the epic legends, and even some works from 
Church Slavonic. And he must particularly commit these to mem­
ory, despite the fact that learning things by heart is considered to 
be so old-fashioned. By mastering in this way our native language-

July and August 
5 7 3  
the language in which we think-as well as possible, that is, suf­
ficiently well so that it resembles something living, and by accus­
toming ourselves to thinking in this language, we shall derive the 
benefit of our particular Russian capacity to learn European lan­
guages and be multilingual. In fact, it is only by mastering fully 
the original material-one's native language, that is-that we shall 
have the capacity to master fully the foreign language as well, but 
not before. Then, unbeknownst to ourselves, we shall borrow cer­
tain alien forms from the foreign language and, again without our 
even being aware of it, we shall harmonize them with the forms 
of our own thought, and thereby expand it. We should be aware 
of one significant fact: we, in our still unorganized and youthful 
language, are able to convey the most profound forms of the spirit 
and the thought of the European languages: the European poets 
and thinkers can all be translated into and conveyed in Russian, 
and some of them have already been translated to perfection. At 
the same time, there is a mass of material in the Russian folk 
language and many works of our literature that are still unerly 
impossible to translate and to convey in the European languages, 
and especially in French. I cannot help laughing when I recall one 
translation (now a great rarity) of Gogo! into French. It was done 
in the mid-184os in Petersburg by M. Viardot, the husband of the 
well-known singer, in collaboration with a Russian who is now 
rightly famous but who then was still only a young novice writer. 
What resulted was not Gogo! but only a jumble of nonsense. Push­
kin in many ways is also untranslatable. I think that if one were 
to translate something like the Narrative of Archpriest Avvakum, 
the result would also be nonsense or, to put it better, nothing would 
come of it. Why is that so? It's a terrible thing to say, after all, 
that the European spirit is, perhaps, not as versatile as ours but 
is more self-enclosed and particular, despite the fact that that spirit 
has certainly been elaborated with more detail and clarity than 
ours. But if that is a terrible thing to say, then at least one cannot 
but admit with hope and a joyous spirit that the spirit of our 
language is certainly a versatile one, rich, universal, and all-en­
compassing, for in its still disorganized forms it can already convey 
the gems and treasures of European thought; and we sense that 
they are conveyed faithfully and precisely. It is of such "material" 
that we deprive our children-and for what? Certainly it is to make 
them unhappy. We scorn such material; we lOnsider it the coarse 

5 74 
A Writer's Diary 
language of the street in which it is indecenJ to express the feelings 
or thoughts of polite society. 
By the way, it is exactly five years ago that we had our so-called 
classical reform of education. Mathematics and the two ancient 
languages, Latin and Greek, were acknowledged as the best means 
to mental and even spiritual development. This is not something 
that we alone acknowledged or invented: it is a fact, and an in­
contestable fact, derived from the experience of the whole of Europe 
over the course of centuries, and we merely adopted it. But the 
point here is this: along with the much intensified teaching of these 
two ancient languages and mathematics, the teaching of Russian 
has been all but suppressed. The question arises as to how, by 
what means, and through what material will our children master 
the forms of these two ancient languages if Russian is neglected? 
Can it be that the very mechanics of teaching these two languages 
(and by teachers who are Czechs as well) will provide the force to 
develop our children? In any case, one cannot cope with the me­
chanics without a parallel, extremely intense, and thorough teaching 
of the living language. The whole power for moral development of 
these two languages-these two most elaborated forms of human 
thought which over centuries have raised the entire barbaric West 
to the summit of development and civilization-this whole power, 
naturally, is not being used by our new schools precisely because 
of their neglect of Russian. Or is it the case, perhaps, that our 
reformers considered that we do not need to study Russian at all, 
except to learn where to write the letter "yat," because we are born 
into it? But that's just the point: we, the upper classes of Russian 
society, are no longer born into the living Russian language and 
have long since ceased to be. We will not have our living language 
until we merge completely with the People. But I've gotten carried 
away: I meant to begin speaking with our dear mammas, and I've 
gotten onto the classical reform in education and merging with the 
People. 
Our dear mammas, of course, are bored listening to all this; 
mamma waves her little hand in indignation and turns away with 
a mocking smile. Mamma really doesn't care in which language 
her little boy thinks; if it's Parisian, then so much the better: "It's 
more elegant, more clever, and more tasteful." But she doesn't even 
realize that to do this one must be entirely reborn as a Frenchmait, 
and with the French governesses and tutors one still can't achieve 
this great boon but will only reach the first station along this road, 

July and August 
5 7 5  
that is, to cease being a Russian. Oh, dear mamma doesn't know 
the poison with which she infects her child from the age of two 
when she hires a French governess for him. Every mother and 
father knows, for example, about one terrible childish physical habit 
that begins in some unforrunate children almost as early as the age 
of ten and that, if left unchecked, can sometimes transform them 
into idiots, into enervated, decrepit old men while still in their 
youth. I will venture to say flatly that the governess-meaning the 
French language from early childhood, from the first childish bab­
blings-is in the moral sense just the same as is this terrible habit 
in the physical sense. It's all very well if the child is naturally dull 
or disinclined to go beyond the bounds of mediocrity: then he will 
live out his life in French, taking nothing seriously, with only 
cramped little thoughts, and with the mentality of a hairdresser; 
and he will die without even being aware that he lived his life a 
fool. But if he is a person of ability, a person with ideas in his 
head and magnanimous impulses in his heart, can he be happy? 
Without mastering the material to organize all the profundity of 
his thought and the questings of his spirit, having all his life a 
dead, sickly, stolen language with timid forms learned by rote, 
forms which are coarse and which do not expand for him, he will 
constantly agonize because of the unceasing effort and strain-both 
intellectual and moral-of expressing himself and his soul. (Heavens 
above! is it so difficult to understand that this is not a living, natural 
language?) He himself will be pained to realize that his thoughts 
are incomplete, frivolous, and cynical-cynical precisely because 
they are incomplete, the result of the insignificant, trivial forms in 
which they have been encapsulated all his life; he will become 
aware, at last, that even his heart has been corrupted. Corruption 
comes from anguish as well. Oh, of course his career will not 
suffer: all his sort who are born with French governesses have been 
unalterably designated by their mammas as future persons of con­
sequence and live with the pretension that they are absolutely in- · 
dispensable. He will make his mark, issue his directives, and urge 
others on to do great deeds; he will introduce new procedures and 
will know how to get things done. In short, he will very often be 
pleased with himself, especially when he gives long speeches com­
posed of other people's thoughts and other people's phrases and 
which will have plus de noblesse, que de sinceriti. But still, if he is 
any kind of a man at all, he will not be har py on the whole. He 
will forever be suffering as if from some sort of impotence, just 

A Writer's Diary 
like those prematurely aged young men ˹hose nasty habits have 
sapped their strength before its time. But, alas, will any mama 
believe me when I say that all these misfortunes can arise from the 
French language and the French governess! I can anticipate that 
more than just one mamma will tell me that I have exaggerated; 
and yet, strictly speaking, I have told the truth without exagger­
ation. They will object that, to the contrary, it is all the better that 
one lives in a foreign language; that one can get by more easily, 
more pleasantly, more smoothly that way; that it is precisely these 
questions and questings that one must avoid; and that is the French 
language specifically that promotes all this, not because it is French, 
but because it is foreign and assimilated in place of one's native 
language. "What do you mean? This brilliant young man, a salon 
charmer and wit-will he be unhappy? He's so well-dressed, so 
well-groomed, so healthy, with such an aristocratic complexion and 
such a charming rose in his buttonhole?" Mamma smiles haughtily. 
And yet, even without that (I mean without an upbringing in 
French), the vast majority of educated Russians are even today 
nothing other than intellectual proletarians, creatures with no 
ground beneath their feet, no native soil or principles; they are 
cosmopolitans whose minds are neither here nor there, borne about 
by all the winds of Europe. And yet this fellow who has been 
worked over by French governesses and tutors is, even in the best 
cases and even if he does have thoughts about something and can 
feel something, in essence still nothing more than a young man 
wearing exquisite gloves who perhaps has already swallowed a few 
fashionable ouvrages but whose mind wanders in eternal shadow 
and whose heart longs for nothing more than argent. I repeat: of 
course he will become a person of consequence in his country; 
he'll attain the rank (in Russia the designation of a person of 
consequence begins with the rank of Privy Councilor); in any case, 
who should be a person of consequence if not he? Well, I've said 
enough to mamma for the moment; but only to mamma . . . .  

1 .  What Effects the Cure When Taking the Waters: The 
Water or the Bon Ton? 
I do not intend to describe Ems; besides, there are already some 
very detailed descriptions of Ems in Russian, such as Doctor 
Hirschorn's linle book Ems and Its Healing Springs, published in 
St. Petersburg. You can get all the information you need there, 
beginning with medical facts about the springs right down to the 
tiniest details of life in the hotels, hygiene, walks, the town itself, 
and even the people who come here. As for me, I'm incapable of 
describing these things, and if I were compelled to do so, now 
that I have returned home, I would recall first of all the bright 
sun, the truly picturesque gorge of the Taunus in which Ems is 
situated, the immense and well-dressed crowd of people from all 
over the world, and my own deep, deep sense of isolation in that 
crowd. And yet, despite the isolation, I even love such a crowd, 
but in a special way, of course. I even found an acquaintance among 
that crowd, a Russian, that very same paradoxicalist who once, 
some time ago, defended war in an argument with me and found 
in war all the truth and justice that one cannot find in contemporary 
society (see the April issue of my Diary). I have already said that 
he is most humble and civilian in appearance. Everyone knows 
that we Russians or, to be more precise, we who live in Petersburg, 
have arranged our lives so that we visit and do business sometimes 
with God knows what sorts of people, and although we do not 
forget our friends (can a resident of Petersburg ever forget anyone 
or anything?), we can go quite calmly for years on end without 
ever seeing them. My friend was also taking the waters in Ems. 
He is about forty-five years old, or perhaps younger. 
"You're right, you know," he told me. "You develop a certain 
577 

A Writer's Diary 
fondness for this crowd here and can't even tell why. In fact, one 
likes a crowd anywhere-a fashionable crowd, of course, the cream 
of society. You needn't hobnob with anyone from this society, but 
on the whole there's stil nothing on earth that's better." 
"Oh, come now . . . .  " 
"I'm not going to argue with you, not at all," he agreed hastily. 
"When a better society comes into being and people consent to 
live more sensibly, we'll have no regard at al for today's society 
and won't even give it a thought; it will only be a couple of words 
in the history of the world. But now-today-can you conceive of 
anything better to take its place?" 
"Can we realy conceive of nothing better than this idle crowd 
of well-off people, people who, if they weren't now jostling one 
another at the mineral springs, probably would have no idea of 
what to do with themselves and how to waste another day? There 
are some fine individual personalities, that's true; you can stil find 
them even in this crowd. But as a whole-as a whole, this crowd 
doesn't deserve particular praise, let alone particular attention! . . .  " 
"You're speaking like a confirmed misanthrope or simply fol­
lowing the fashion. You say: 'They wouldn't know what to do with 
themselves and how to waste their day!' Believe me, every one of 
them has his things to do, even things on which he's wasted his 
whole life, not just one day. Each one of them can't be blamed 
because he's unable to make a paradise of his life and suffers in 
consequence. I enjoy watching al these suffering people laugh." 
"Aren't they laughing out of politeness?" 
"They're laughing because of the habit that crushes them all and 
compels them to participate in playing at paradise, if you want to 
call it that. They don't believe in paradise; they have to force 
themselves to play the game, but they still play it and so find 
diversion. The habit has already become too ingrained. There are 
some here who have taken this habit as a very serious thing, and 
so much the better for them, of course: they are already living in 
a real paradise. If you love them all (and you ought to), then you 
ought to rejoice that they have the opportunity to rest and forget 
themselves, if only in a mirage." 
"But you're making fun of them. And why should I love them?" 
"Why, they are humanity, and there is no other; how can you 
not love humanity? Over the past decade it's been impossible not 
to love humanity. There is one Russian lady here who is a great 
lover of humanity. And I'm .not making fun at al. To put an end 

July and August 
579 
to this topic, I'll conclude by telling you frankly that every society 
of bon ton-this one, this fashionable crowd-has a number of 
positive qualities. For example: every fashionable society is good 
in that, even though it may look like a caricature, it is in closer 
touch with nature than any other society, even agriculrural ones, 
which mostly all still live in a quite unnatural fashion. Now I'm 
not talking about factories, armies, schools, universities: all those 
are the ultimate in unnaturalness. The people here are the freest 
of all because they are the richest of all, and therefore they can at 
least live as they choose. Oh, of course they are in touch with 
nature only insofar as decorum and bon ton permit. To open oneself, 
to dissolve oneself, to reveal oneself totally to nature, to this golden 
ray of sun, for example, that shines down from the blue sky on us 
sinners without discriminating between those who are worthy of it 
and those who are not-that would doubtless be indecorous, at least 
in the degree which the two of us or some poet might want at this 
moment; the little steel lock of bon ton is set over every heart and 
every mind, as it was before. Still, one cannot but agree that bon 
ton has taken just a tiny step on the road to contact with nature, 
not only in our century but even in our generation. I have observed 
this and I can conclude that the further we go into our century, 
the more we realize and agree that contact with nature is the very 
latest word in progress of every sort, be it science, reason, common 
sense, good taste, or exquisite manners. Go into that crowd and 
lose yourself in it: you see joy and good cheer on their faces. They 
all speak to one another in a gentle manner; they are unusually 
polite, kind, and unusually cheerful. Just think, the entire hap­
piness of that young man with a rose in his buttonhole lies in 
raising the spirits of that stout lady of fifty. In fact, what is it that 
compels him to try so hard to please her? Can he really want her 
to be happy and cheerful? Of course not; and he probably has 
some particular and very private reasons for making such efforts, 
reasons that are none of our business. But the most important thing 
is this: it is probably only bon ton that can compel him to do this, 
without any special, private reasons, and that is an extremely im­
portant fact; it shows the degree to which bon ton in our age can 
overcome even the wild nature of some young fellow. Poetry pro­
duces Byrons, and they produce the Corsairs, the Childe Harolds, 
the Laras; but just look how little time has gone by since they 
appeared, and already all these characters have been cast aside by 
bon ton, recognized as the very worst kind of society. And that's 

sso 
A Writer's Diary 
even more true of our own Pechorin or the Captive of the Caucasus: 
they have turned out to be altogether m.auvais ton; they're only 
Petersburg officials who had a brief moment of social success. And 
why have they been cast aside? Because these characters truly are 
evil, impatient, and quite openly concerned only with themselves, 
so that they disrupt the harmony of bon ton, which, above all, has 
to maintain the appearance that each is living for everyone else and 
everyone for each. Look at them over there, bringing flowers. There 
are bouquets for the ladies and single roses for the buttonholes of 
the gentlemen; and just look at how beautifully tended those roses 
are, how well chosen, sprayed with water! No young maid of the 
fields will ever choose or cut anything more elegant for the young 
lad she loves. But these roses are brought here for sale at five and 
ten German groschen apiece, and the maid of the fields has had 
nothing to do with them at all. The golden age is still to come, 
while now we have the age of enterprise. But what concern is it 
of yours? Does it matter at all? They are beautiful and finely 
dressed, and the scene looks truly like paradise. Does it make any 
difference whether it is 'real paradise' or 'just like paradise'? Now 
think about what is happening here: what good taste we see; what 
a fine idea this is! What is better suited to taking the waters, that 
is, to a hope of regaining one's health, than flowers? Flowers are 
hopes. How much taste there is in that notion. Remember the 
verses: 'And why take ye thought for raiment? Consider the lilies 
of the field, how they grow . . .  and Solomon in al his glory was 
not arrayed like one of these. Wherefore . . .  shall God not more 
clothe you?' I don't remember it exactly, but what wonderful words! 
All the poetry of life is there, all the truth of nature. But until the 
truth of nature is made manifest and people in their simplicity and 
joy of hean adorn one another with the flowers of genuine human 
Iove-all this can be bought and sold for five groschen without any 
love. And again I say: does it make any difference to you? I think 
it's even better this way because, in truth, there are some kinds 
of love that make you take to your heels, for they demand too much 
nobility; but here you pull out five groschen and you're done with 
it. And still, in reality, we have something very like the golden 
age; and if you're a man with imagination, then you're satisfied. 
No, the wealth of the present day ought to be encouraged, even 
though at other people's expense. It provides luxury and bon con, 
things the rest of humanity can never give me. I can look at a 
beautiful picture here that brings me joy, and joy always costs 

July and August 
money. Gladness and joy have always been the most expensive 
things; yet I, a poor man, paying nothing, can also participate in 
the general joy, at least vicariously. Look: the band is playing, 
people are laughing, the ladies are dressed like no one ever dressed 
in the days of Solomon-and although this is all a mirage, you and 
I are still happy. Finally-and quite honestly-aren't I a decent 
man? (I am speaking only about myself.) But thanks to the mineral 
waters, here am I rubbing shoulders with the very creme de La 
creme. And what an appetite you'll have now to go and drink your 
wretched German coffee! That's what I call the positive aspect of 
good society." 
"Well, you're just making fun; and what you say isn't even new." 
"I am making fun, but tell me: has your appetite improved since 
you came here to take the waters?" 
"Of course it has, remarkably." 
"That means the positive aspect of bon ton is so powerful that 
it acts even on your stomach." 
"Oh, come now. That's the effect of the mineral water, not the 
bon ton." 
"And of the bon ton as well, unquestionably. And so we still do 
not know what has the most effect at the mineral springs: the 
waters or the bon ton. Even the local doctors are not sure which 
factor should be given more weight. And on the whole it's difficult 
to express the immense step medicine has taken in our age: it now 
can even produce ideas, while in the past it had only drugs." 
2. One on Whom Modern Woman Has Shown Favor 
Naturally I won't describe all my conversations with this man of 
the old school. I knew, however, that for him the most ticklish 
topic was women. And yet he and I once did get into a conversation 
about women. He remarked that I was staring very fixedly at 
something. 
"I'm staring at those Englishwomen, and there's a good reason 
for it. I took along two pamphlets for the journey here: one by 
Granovsky on the Eastern Question, and the other on women. 
There are some very fine, well-considered ideas in the pamphlet 
on women. But, just imagine, one sentence confused me utterly. 
The author writes: 'However, all the world knows what an English­
woman is. The Englishwoman typifies exalted feminine beauty and 
feminine spiritual qualities, and our Russian women cannot equal 

A Writer's Diary 
this type . . . .  ' Indeed? I canot agre with _that. Does the Eng­
lishwoman really represent such an exalted type in comparison with 
our Rusian women? I disagre with that profoundly." 
"Who wrote the pamphlet?" 
"Since I did not praise those things in the pamphlet that deserve 
praise, and since I quoted only this one sentence, with which I 
canot agre, I wil not mention his name." 
"The author must be a bachelor who has not yet managed to 
discover al the qualities of the Russian woman." 
"You may have meant that san:astically, but you were right about 
the 'qualities' of the Russian woman. Indeed, it's not for a Russian 
man to repudiate his women. How are our women inferior to others? 
I won't mention the ideals our poets have held up-begining with 
Tatiana-or the women of Turgenev or Tolstoy, even though those 
things themselves form a major piece of evidence: if our writers 
were able to incarnate ideals of such beauty in art, they must have 
taken them from somewhere; they weren't created out of nothing. 
Therefore, such women must exist in reality as well. I won't mention 
the wives of the Decembrists, for instance, or a thousand other 
examples that are well known. And how can we, who know Russian 
reality, not know of thousands of such women; how can we be 
unaware of the thousands of their unpublicized, unsen achieve­
ments, which sometimes take place in the worst of cin:umstances­
in such dark and terrible comers and slums, amid vices and horrors! 
In short, I don't intend to defend the right of the Russian woman 
to a lofty place among the women of Europe, but I wil say only 
this: I think it's true, is it not, that there must exist some sort of 
natural law among nations and nationalities whereby every man 
must first sek out and love women in his own nation and in his 
own nationality. And if a man begins placing the women of other 
nations above his own and becomes atracted primarily to them, 
then the time wil son come for that nation to disintegrate and 
the identity of that nationality to be weakened. Really and truly, 
something like that has already ben happening among us over the 
last hundred yean, in direct proportion to our alienation from the 
People. We have ben fascinated by Polish, French, and even Ger­
man women; and now there are those who place Enslishwomen 
above our own. I think that is a symptom which can offer us very 
little comfort. There are two possibilities here: either it is because 
of our spiritual divorce from our own nationality, or it is simply a 

July and August 
propensity for the seraglio. We must return to our woman; we must 
study her if we have lost our understanding of her . . . .  " 
"I would be happy to agre with you on all points, although I 
don't know if there exists such a law of nature or nationality. But 
let me ask you: why did you think I was being sarcastic when I 
remarked that the author of the pamphlet, as a bachelor, must not 
have had the opportunity to acquaint himself with all the lofty 
qualities ofthe Russian woman? There can't be the slightest element 
of sarcasm on my part because of the very fact that I myself, I 
may say, have been favored by a Russian woman. Yes, whatever I 
am and whatever you might think I am, I myself was at one time 
in my life the fiance of a Russian woman. This young lady had a 
station in life even higher than my own, so to say; she was sur­
rounded by admirers; she could take her pick, and she . . . .  
" 
"She chose you? Excuse me, I didn't know . . . .  
" 
"No, she made her choice, and I was the one rejected; but that 
was the whole point! I'll tell you frankly, until I was engaged, 
everything was fine, and I was happy merely in being able to see 
her most every day. Incidentally, I might say that the impression 
I produced was not, perhaps, completely unfavorable. I should also 
add that this young lady had a good deal of freedom in her own 
home. And so once, at an extraordinarily strange moment unlike 
any other I have known, I daresay, she suddenly gave me her word 
she would marry me. You wouldn't believe what I felt at that 
moment . . . .  It was all kept a secret between us, of course, but 
when I returned to my apartment, barely in my senses, the thought 
that I would be the possessor and the mate of such a dazzling 
creature simply crushed me like a weight. I cast my gaze over my 
furniture-all my wretched bachelor's belongings and what-nots that 
were, nonetheless, so necessary to me-and I grew so ashamed of 
myself, my position in society, my figure, my hair, my shabby 
things, and the limitations of my mind and my heart, that I was 
even prepared to curse my lot in life a thousand times at the thought 
that I, the most insignificant of men, should possess such treasures 
that suited me so linle. I am mentioning all this so as to express 
a rather obscure aspect of the truth about marriage or, rather, a 
feeling that unfortunately is all too rarely experienced by fiances: 
in order to marry, one must have an extraordinary stock of the 
most stupid pride in oneself. You know what I mean: this foolish, 
trivial pride, and all of it expressed in that unerly absurd tone to 

A Writer's Diary 
which a man of delicate feelings can never get accustomed. How 
can you compare yourself even for a moment with a creature like 
a young society lady? How can you compare with the refined per­
fection that reveals itself through her education, her curls, the 
ethereal fabric of her dresses, her dancing, her innocence, her 
artless yet charmingly sophisticated remarks and feelings? Just 
imagine: all this would be coming into my apartment, and there 
I'd be in my dressing gown-you're laughing? And yet, that's a 
terrible thought! Here's another problem: people will say that if 
you're afraid of such perfection and don't feel a worthy match for 
her, then you should choose some blowzy girl (as long as she's not 
morally blowzy). But of course there's no doing that: you refuse, 
even indignantly, and have no intention of lowering your sights. 
So I'll spare you the details; they were all in the same spirit. For 
example, when I lay down on my couch, helpless and in despair 
(and I must tell you that it was the most wretched couch in the 
whole world; I'd bought it at the flea market, and it had a broken 
spring), I had one trivial thought: 'So when I'm married I'll at 
last have some little bits of rags-from dressmaking or whatever­
! can use to wipe my pens.' Now what could be more ordinary 
than a thought like that, and what is so terrible about it? This idea 
flashed through my mind by chance, no doubt, just in passing­
this you can understand, because God knows what sorts of ideas 
can sometimes flash through the human soul, even at the moment 
when that soul is being dragged off to the guillotine. The thought 
probably came to me because I have an almost hysterical hatred 
of leaving my steel pens unwiped-something that no one else in 
the world bothers about. And what of it? I reproached myself 
bitterly for thinking such a thought at a moment like that: in view 
of the enormity of the event and the object, to dream of rags for 
pens, to find the time and the place for such a low, common idea­
'well, what can you be worth after something like that?' In short, 
I felt that my whole life would now be spent in self-reproach for 
my every thought and my every deed. And so when she suddenly 
told me, a few days later with a laughing face, that she had been 
joking and was in fact going to mary a certain man of high rank, 
1--1. .
. . However, at this point instead of joy I betray.ed such 
alarm, such an air of defeat, that she herself took fright and ran 
off to get me a glass of water. I set myself right, but my alarm 
served to help me: she realized how I loved her and . . .  how I 
regarded her, how very highly! regarded her . . . .  'And I thought,' 

July and August 
s s s  
she told me later, after she was maried, 'that you were so proud 
and educated and that you would only despise me terribly.' Since 
then I have had her as a friend, and I repeat: if anyone was ever 
favored by a woman, or more precisely, by a Russian woman, that 
man of course was I, and I will never forget it." 
"And so you became her friend?" 
"As dear a friend as anyone can be. But we see one another 
rarely-once a year, or even more seldom. Russian friends usually 
see one another once in five years; and many of them could not 
tolerate it more often than that. At first I did not call on them 
because her husband's position in society was higher than mine, 
but now-now she is so unhappy that I find it painful to look at 
her. In the first place, her husband is an old man of sixty-two, 
and a year after the wedding he was taken to court on some charge. 
He had to give up almost everything he owned in order to make 
good some deficiency in government funds. During the trial he 
lost the use of his legs, and now he's being wheeled about in a 
chair at Kreuznach, where I saw them both ten days ago. He is 
pushed about in the chair, while she is constantly at his right side 
fulfilling the lofty duty of the contemporary woman, all the while 
listening to his sarcastic reproaches, mind you. I found it so painful 
to look at her, or both of them, rather, because even now I don't 
know which of them to pity more. And so I promptly left them 
and came here. I'm very glad that I didn't tell you her name. To 
make matters worse, I had the misfortune even in that brief time 
to make her angry at me, perhaps forever, when I told her quite 
frankly my view of happiness and the duty of the Russian woman." 
"You couldn't have found a more opportune moment to do that, 
of course." 
"Are you criticizing me? But who else would have told her? I've 
always thought, rather, that the greatest happiness consists in know­
ing why one is unhappy. And, if you like, since we've come to the 
topic, I'll give you my views on happiness and on the duty of a 
Russian woman. I didn't manage to say all I wanted to in 
Kreuznach ." 
3· Children's Secrets 
But I shall stop here for the moment. I wanted only to portray 
this person and to give the reader some preliminary acquaintance 
with him. I felt that I should portray him only as a narrator; I'm 

ss6 
A Writer's Diary 
not fully in agreement with his views. I have already explained 
that he is a "paradoxicalist." His views on· "happiness and the 
duty of today's woman" are not even strikingly original, although 
he sets forth his views almost angrily; one would think that this 
is a very sore point with him. To put it simply, in his view a 
woman absolutely must marry and have as many children as pos­
sible if she is to be happy and fulfill all her obligations; she must 
have "not just two or three children, but six or ten, until she is 
worn out, utterly exhausted." "Only then will she attain a living 
life and come to know life in all its many manifestations." 
"Come now," I said. "She'd never get out of the bedroom!" 
"No, quite to the contrary! I can anticipate all your objections 
and know them all before you make them. I have weighed every­
thing: 'university, higher education, etc., etc.' Leaving aside the 
fact that among men, only one in ten thousand acquires any real 
learning, I ask you in all seriousness: in what way does university 
stand in the way of marriage and child-bearing? On the contrary, 
university absolutely must be available for all women, both for 
future scholars and for those who simply want an education; but 
later, after university, 'marry and bear children.' We still have not 
thought of anything in this world cleverer than bearing children, 
and so the more brains one can collect to do this, the better things 
will be. It was Chatsky, wasn't it, who said: 'Whoever lacked the 
wit/To bear children . . .  ?' And he said that simply because he 
himself was only a most uneducated Muscovite who spent his whole 
life proclaiming other people's ideas on European education, so 
that he wasn't even able to write a proper will, as it later turned 
out, and left all his estate to some unknown person, 'my friend, 
Sonechka.' This witticism about 'whoever lacked the wit' lasted 
for fifty years simply because for fifty years thereafter we had no 
educated people. Now, thank God, some educated people are be­
ginning to appear in Russia, and believe me, they will at once 
understand that having children and raising them is the principal 
and most serious job in the world; it always has been and has never 
ceased to be. 'Whoever lacked the wit . . .  ?' Just imagine! Well, 
it seems that it is lacking: women in Europe today are ceasing to 
bear children. I won't mention our own women, for the moment." 
"What do you mean, ceasing to bear children?" 
I ought to mention in passing that this man has one most un­
expected peculiarity: he loves children. He is, if you like, an amateur 
of children, small children specifically, tiny ones "who still dwell 

July and August 
in angels' ranks." He loves them so much that he will run after 
them. In Ems he even became quite notorious for this. He was 
most fond of taking walks along the avenues where children are 
taken out for walks. He would get acquainted with them, even 
with one-year-olds, and managed to have many of them recognize 
him; they would wait for him, laughing and stretching out their 
tiny hands. He would always question a German nurse about the 
age of the child, heap compliments on it and thus indirectly on 
the nurse as well, which she would find flattering. In short, this 
is a kind of passion with him. He was always in particular rapture 
when every morning on the avenues at the mineral springs there 
would suddenly appear among the people whole crowds of children 
going to school, nicely dressed, sandwiches in hand, with little 
knapsacks on their backs. I must admit that these crowds of chil­
dren were lovely, especially the youngest ones, the four-, five-, and 
six-year-olds. 
" Tel que vous me voyez, I bought two penny-whistles today," he 
told me one morning with a very pleased air. "But they're not for 
these schoolchildren; they're too grown-up. Only yesterday, how­
ever, I had the pleasure of meeting their teacher, the worthiest man 
you can imagine. No, I bought the whistles for two chubby little 
fellows, brothers, one three years old, the other two. The three­
year-old was taking his brother for a walk; they're both very clever. 
And they both stopped in front of a toy booth, their mouths wide 
open in that silly and sweet childish delight which is more charming 
than anything on earth. The shopkeeper, a sly German woman, at 
once understood why I was watching and immediately thrust a 
penny whistle at each of them. It cost me two marks. I can't 
describe how delighted the boys were, walking along and blowing 
on their whistles. That was an hour ago, but I just went back to 
check and they're still blowing their whistles. I told you once when 
referring to local society that it is still the best the world has to 
offer. I wasn't telling the truth, but you believed me, don't deny 
it. No, this is the best; this is perfection: these crowds of children 
of Ems with their sandwiches in hand, knapsacks on their backs, 
going off to school. . . .  The sun, the Taunus, the children, their 
laughter, their sandwiches, and the elegant crowd of all the milords 
and marquises in the world admiring the children-all of it together 
is charming. Have you noticed how the crowd admires them each 
time? That shows their good taste and their impulse for something 
serious. But Ems is stupid, Ems cannot help being stupid, and so 

sss 
A Writer's Diary 
it stil continues to bear children; Paris, on the other hand-Paris 
has already stopped." 
"What do you mean, stopped?" 
"In Paris there is an immense industry called Articles de Paris 
which, with silk, French wine, and fruits, has helped pay the five­
billion reparation. Paris holds that industry in such reverence and 
is so concerned with it that it forgets to produce children. And the 
rest of France follows Paris. Every year the minister solemnly 
reports to the Chambers that la population resre stationnaire. Little 
ones aren't being born, you see, and if they are born, they don't 
survive long. On the other hand, the minister adds approvingly, 
'old people thrive and live long in France.' But in my view, these 
old -- that fil the Chambers ought to pay their debt to nature. 
As if their longevity were anything to rejoice over, the doddering 
old fools." 
"I stil don't understand. What's your point about the Articles 
de Paris?" 
"It's very simple. However, you are a novelist and so perhaps 
you know a certain quite brainless and very talented French writer 
and idealist of the old school, Alexandre Dumas-fils? Several quite 
fine 'movements' have risen up in his wake. He demands that the 
French woman bear children. More than that: he has quite plainly 
announced to everyone the secret, which everyone already knows, 
that women in France of the prosperous bourgeoisie all bear two 
children apiece. They somehow contrive with their husbands to 
bear only two-no more, no less. Two children and then they go 
on strike. They all do that, and won't bear any more; this secret 
spreads with amazing speed. Two offspring means that the family 
line is continued, and besides, two children will inherit larger 
estates than six will-that's the first point. And the second point 
is that the woman preserves herself longer: her beauty is main­
tained, her health as well; she gains more time for socializing, 
dancing, buying dresses. And as far as parental love is concerned­
! mean, the moral aspect of the question-they say that one can 
love two children more than six, while six of them will misbehave, 
anoy their parents, and break things. Think of all the fuss with 
them! Just counting the cost of their shoes alone will make you 
exasperated! But the point is not that Dumas is angry; the point 
is that he has ventured frankly to anounce the existence of the 
secret: two children, he says, no more, no less, and you can go on 
living in wedded bliss; in short, that's the whole salvation. Malthus, 
who was so afraid of the world's growing population, would not 

July and August 
have proposed such measures even in his wildest dreams. And what 
can you say: it's such an attractive solution. As you know, France 
has a terrific number of property owners, with both an urban and 
a rural bourgeoisie. This is a godsend for them. It's their own 
invention. But this godsend is spreading beyond the borders of 
France as well. In another quarter-century or so you'll see even 
stupid Ems get wiser. I've heard that Berlin has grown very much 
wiser in this sense. But even though the number of children is 
decreasing, the French minister would not have noticed the dif­
ference if it had been limited only to the bourgeoisie, i.e., the 
prosperous class. But there was another aspect to the maner. The 
other aspect is the proletariat-eight, ten, maybe all twelve million 
of them-unbaptized and unwed people who live in 'rational re­
lationships' instead of marriage so as to 'escape tyranny.' They 
throw their children right out onto the street. These Gavroches are 
born and die off; if they do survive, they fill the foundling homes 
and the prisons for under-aged criminals. In his novel Le ̉ntre 
de Paris, Zola, whom we call a realist, made a very apt portrayal 
of contemporary marriage-or rather, cohabitation-among the 
working class in France. And note that the Gavroches are no longer 
French; but most remarkable of all is that the upper class as well­
those who are born as property owners, two apiece and in secret­
aren't French either. At least I venture to argue that; so that both 
aspects and both poles converge. The first result is this: France is 
beginning to cease to be France. (Is it really possible to say that 
these ten million consider France their fatherland?) I know that 
there will be people who say: 'So much the bener: the French will 
disappear and human beings will remain.' But are they really human 
beings? Let's suppose they are, but they are the savages of the 
future who will swallow up Europe. It is from them that the sense­
less rabble of the future-little by little, but certainly and surely­
is being produced. I think there's not the least doubt that a whole 
generation is physically degenerating, growing impotent and base. 
And the physical aspect drags morality behind it. These are the 
fruits of the reign of the bourgeoisie. I think that the whole reason 
behind it is the land, or rather the soil, the native soil and the way 
it is now divided into private property. So I'll explain that to you." 
4· The Land and Children 
"The land is everything," my paradoxicalist continued. "I make 
no distinction between the land and children, and this point will 

5 90 
A Writer's Diary 
emerge of itself from what I say. However, I am not going to develop 
the point for you: you will realize it if you think about it carefully. 
The point is that it all comes from a mistake in our management 
of the land. It may even be that all the rest, and all of humanity's 
other misfortunes as well, perhaps, come from that same mistake. 
Millions of paupers have no land, particularly in France, where 
there is little enough land to begin with; and so they have no place 
where they can give birth to children and are compelled to give 
birth in some cellar, and not to children but Gavroches, half of 
whom cannot name their own fathers, and the other half, perhaps, 
their own mothers. That's one side of the problem, and on the 
other side-the higher side if you like-there is also the error in 
land use; but it's quite different. It's an error of the opposite extreme 
tLat may even stem from the time of Clovis, the conqueror of the 
Gauls. The people on this side all have too much land; they have 
seized far more than they need and keep too strong a hold on it, 
giving up nothing. And so in both cases you have abnormality. 
Something must happen to change this; I know only that everyone 
should have land, and that children ought to be born on the land 
and not on the street. I truly don't know how this will be set right, 
but I know that at present there is nowhere there to give birth to 
children. I think that it's fine to work in a factory: a factory is 
also a legitimate business, and it is always set up alongside land 
that is already being worked: that's the way it's done. But every 
factory worker should know that he has his own Garden somewhere, 
with golden sun and vineyards, a place of his own or, rather, a 
communal Garden; and he should know that living there is his 
wife-a fine woman, not one from the street-who loves him and 
waits for him; and along with his wife are his children, who play 
at horsies and who all know their own father. Que diable, every 
decent and healthy little child is born with his own 'horsie,' and 
every decent father ought to know that, if he wants to be happy. 
This is where he'll bring the money he's earned; he won't drink 
it up in the tavern with some female of the species he's found on 
the street. In the worst cases (in France, for instance, where there 
is so little land), the Garden may not feed him and his family, so 
that he won't be able to manage without the factory; but he should 
know, at least, that his children will grow up there with the land, 
the trees, the quail they catch; they will go to school, and the school 
will be in a field; and he himself, when he has ended his working 
life, will still go there to take his rest and at last to die. And yet, 

July and August 
59 1 
who knows? Perhaps the Garden will be able to feed him; in any 
case, there's no cause to fear the factories-perhaps the factory will 
be built in the middle of the Garden. In short, I'm not sure how 
all this will happen, but it will happen; there will be a Garden. 
Mark my words: though it be a hundred years from now, remember 
that I explained it to you in Ems, in the middle of an artificial 
garden among artificial people. Humanity will be renewed in the 
Garden, and the Garden will restore it-that is the formula. Do 
you see how it happened? First there were castles and around them 
only mud huts; the barons lived in the castles and the vassals in 
the huts. Then the bourgeoisie began to arise in walled cities, 
slowly, microscopically. Meanwhile the castles came to an end and 
the capital cities of kings arose, large cities with royal palaces and 
halls for the courtiers; and so it was until our age. In our age came 
the terrible revolution, and the bourgeoisie prevailed. With it ap­
peared the terrible cities, which no one had even dreamt of. Hu­
manity had never seen cities of the sort that appeared in the 
nineteenth century. These are cities with crystal palaces, interna­
tional expositions, international hotels, banks, budgets, polluted 
rivers, railway platforms, and all that goes with them. Around them 
stand factories and mills. And now we await the third phase: the 
bourgeoisie will depart the scene and Regenerated Humanity will 
come to the fore. This new humanity will divide the land into 
communes and will begin to live in the Garden. 'It will be regen­
erated in the Garden, and the Garden will restore it.' And so it 
proceeds, from castles to cities to the Garden. If you want to hear 
all of my idea, then I think that children-I mean real children, 
I mean children of human beings-should be born on the land and 
not on the street. One may live on the street later, but a nation­
in its vast majority-should be born and arise on the land, on the 
native soil in which its grain and its trees grow. But now the entire 
proletariat of Europe is a creature of the street. But in the Garden 
the little children will be springing directly up from the earth, like 
Adams, and not going to work at the factories at the age of nine 
when they still want to play; they won't be breaking their backs 
over some lathe, deadening their minds before some common ma­
chine to which the bourgeois says his prayers; they will not exhaust 
and ruin their imaginations before endless rows of gas lamps, and 
ruin their morals through the depravity of the factory, which is 
such as was never seen in Sodom. And these are boys and girls of 
ten. That's terrible enough here; but it's happening in Russia, 

592 
A Writer's Diary 
where there is so much land and where factories are still only a 
joke, but wretched little towns exist wheretter there are three petty 
bureaucrats. And yet if there is any place where I can see the sed 
or the idea of the future, it is in Russia. Why is that? It's because 
we have had and still preserve among the People one principle: 
that the land for them is everything, and that they derive everything 
from the land; this is still what the huge majority of them believe. 
But the main thing is that this principle is the normal law of 
humanity. There is something sacramental in the land, in one's 
native soil. If you want humanity to be reborn into something 
better, if you want to make human beings out of creatures that are 
almost beasts, then give them land and you will achieve your aim. 
At least in Russia the land and the commune exist-in a most 
wretched state, I agree; but still they are an immense seed for the 
future idea, and that is my point. I think that order arises in the 
land and from the land, and this happens everywhere, throughout 
humanity. The whole order in every country, be it political, civil, 
or whatever, is always linked with the soil and with the character 
of agriculture in that country. The character in which agriculture 
has developed has determined the way everything else developed. 
If there is anywhere in Russia now where maximum disorder pre­
vails, it is in the area of land tenure, in the relationship between 
landowner and worker and among landowners themselves; it is in 
the very way the land is worked. And until al that is set right, 
do not expect anything else to be set right. I do not assign blame 
to anyone or anything: this is a matter of world history, and we 
realize it. I think that we have still paid very cheaply to end 
serfdom, thanks to the consent of the whole country. And it is on 
this consent that I stake everything else. This consent is, after al, 
one more principle of the People, another one of those same prin­
ciples which the Potugins still deny. Well, all these railways of 
ours, al our new banks and associations and credit institutions­
al these things, in my opinion, are still only dust and ashes; as 
far as the railways are concerned, I recognize only the strategic 
ones. All these things should have come about only after the land 
question had been properly settled; then they would have appeared 
naturally, but now it is only a matter of a game on the stock 
exchange, the stirrings of the Jew. You're laughing; you don't agree. 
Well, so be it. But just lately I was reading the memoirs of a certain 
Russian landowner written in the middle of this century; as far 

July and August 
593 
back as the 182os he wanted to set his peasants free. That was a 
rare novelty in those days. By the way, when he went to the country, 
he set up a school and began teaching the peasant children choral 
church music. When a neighboring landowner called on him and 
heard the choir, he said: 'That's a clever thing you've thought up; 
train them well and you'll surely find a buyer for the whole choir. 
People like that sort of thing and will pay good money for a choir.' 
So at a time when one could still sell choirs of young children 'for 
export' away from their mothers and fathers, freeing peasants was 
still cause for bafflement and amazement in our Russian land. And 
so he began telling the peasants about this new and curious thing; 
they heard him out and were amazed and frightened; they spent 
a long time talking it over among themselves, and then they came 
to him: 'Well, and what about the land?' 'The land is mine; you 
can have the huts and your farm buildings, but you will work the 
land for me each year and we'll share the harvest equally.' The 
peasants scratched their heads: 'No, it's better the old way; we 
belong to you, and the land belongs to us.' Of course this surprised 
the landowner: these, he thought, are a savage people, on such a 
lowly moral plane that they don't even want their own freedom­
freedom, this first blessing of a human being, and so on. Subse­
quently this saying or, rather, formula-'We are yours, but the land 
is ours'-became known to everyone and no longer caused any 
surprise. However, the most important thing is this: where could 
such an 'unnatural and utterly unique' notion of world history have 
come from, at least if one compares it to Europe? And bear in 
mind that it was just at this time that the war was raging most 
furiously among all our learned compatriots on the question: 'Do 
our People, in fact, have any principles that might be worthy of 
the attention of our educated classes?' No, indeed, sir: this means 
that the Russian from the very beginning could never imagine 
himself without land. But what is most surprising here is that even 
after serfdom the People kept the essence of that same formula, 
and the overwhelming majority of them still cannot conceive of 
themselves without land. Since they didn't want to accept freedom 
without land, it means that the land came first for them; it was 
the basis for everything else. The land is everything, and everything 
else derives from it-freedom, life, honor, family, children, order, 
the church-in short, everything that has any value. It's because 
of that same formula that the People have maintained such a thing 

594 
A Writer's Diary 
as the commune. And what is the commune? Sometimes a much 
heavier burden than serfdom! Everyone has his opinion about com­
munal land tenure; everyone knows what a hindrance it is to ec­
onomic progress alone. But at the same time, does it not contain 
the seed of something new and better, a future ideal that awaits us 
all? No one knows how it will come to pass, but we alone have it 
in embryo, and it will only happen among us because it will be 
realized not through war and rebellion but, once more, through a 
grand and universal consent. It will be through consent because 
even now great sacrifices are being made for it. And so children 
will be born in the Garden and they will be set right; no longer 
will ten-year-old girls drink cheap vodka in taverns with factory 
hands. It's a hard thing for children to grow up in our age, sir! I 
intended, after all, to talk to you only about children, and that's 
why I took up your time. Little children are the future, you see, 
and one only loves the future. Who worries about the present? Not 
I, of course, and probably not you either. And that's why one loves 
children more than anything else." 
5· An Odd Summer for Russia 
The other day I told this peculiar fellow of mine: "You keep talking 
about children, but just now in the Kursaal I read in the Russian 
papers (and I might say that all the Russians here are crowding 
around the newspapers now) a story about a Bulgarian mother. 
Entire districts have been massacred over there in Bulgaria. An old 
woman who survived in one village was found wandering through 
the ashes of her home, out of her mind. When they began ques­
tioning her, she did not reply in ordinary words but at once put 
her right hand to her cheek and began to sing. She sang improvised 
verses of how she once had had a home and family, a husband, 
children-six of them-and how her eldest children had children 
of their own, her little grandchildren. But cruel people came and 
by the wall they burned her old man to death, butchered her fine 
children, raped a young girl, and carried off another one, a beauty; 
they tore out the bellies of the infants with their sabers; then they 
set fire to the house and threw them al into the raging flames; 
and she had seen it all and heard the shrieks of the children." 
"Yes, I also read it," replied my peculiar friend. "It's truly 
remarkable. And in verse, that's the main thing. But in Russia, 
although our critics have sometimes had praise for poetry, they are 

July and August 
5 9 5  
generally inclined to the view that poetry is created more as a form 
of indulgence. It's interesting to be able to follow a spontaneous 
epic in its elemental conception. It's really a question of art." 
"Stop it; you're not being serious. However, I've noticed that 
you're not overly fond of discussing the Eastern Question." 
"No, I've also made a donation to the cause. But since you 
mention it, there is something about the Eastern Question that I 
don't care for." 
"What, specifically?" 
"Well, the great outpouring of love, for instance." 
"Come now; I'm sure . . . .  " 
"I know; I know; you needn't finish; and you're quite right. 
Besides, I sent in my contribution at the very beginning. You see, 
the Eastern Question up to now has been only a question of love, 
so to say, and it came from the Slavophiles. In fact, a lot of people 
have done very well from this outpouring of love, especially last 
winter with the Herzegovinians; there were even some careers made 
on it. Mind you, I'm not making accusations; besides, an out­
pouring of love in itself is an excellent thing, but a jaded old nag 
can be ridden to death, after al. That's just what I've been afraid 
of ever since spring, and so I was skeptical. Later in the sumer 
I was still concerned that this whole feeling of brotherhood might 
somehow wear off. But now-now I'm not afraid any more; Russian 
blood has been shed, and shed blood is an important thing, a 
unifying thing!" 
"But did you really think that our feeling of brotherhood would 
wear off?" 
"I did, indeed, sinner that I am. And how could one help it? 
But I don't believe that any longer. You see, even here in Ems, 
some six miles from the Rhine, we have news straight from Bel­
grade, in effect. Travelers have arrived who have heard Russia being 
accused in Belgrade. On the other hand, I myself have read in 
Temps and Dibats that after the Turks invaded Serbia people in 
Belgrade shouted, 'Down with Cherniaev!' Other correspondents 
and eye-witnesses claim, to the contrary, that this is all nonsense 
and that the Serbs simply worship Russia and expect everything 
from Cherniaev. You know, I believe both versions of the news. 
No doubt there were shouts of both kinds, and it could be no other 
way: Serbia is a young nation; it has no soldiers, and they do not 
know how to wage war; there is an unlimited amount of magna­
nimity, but no practicality at all. Cherniaev had to create an army 

A Writer's Diary 
there, but I'm sure that the overwhelming majority of the Serbs 
cannot conceive of the immensity of the task of creating an army 
in such a short time and under such conditions. They will under­
stand later, but by then it will be a matter of world history. Besides, 
I'm certain that even among some of the soundest and, so to say, 
most ministerial minds there are those who are convinced that 
Russia is holding back and looking for ways to seize them and so 
increase her own political power immensely. And so I was afraid 
that al this might pour cold water on our Russian sense of brotherly 
love. But it turned out to be the contrary, so much so that it was 
a surprise even to many Russians. The whole of the Russian land 
suddenly spoke up and suddenly said what was foremost in its 
mind. The soldier, the merchant, the professor, the saintly old 
woman-they al spoke with one voice. And there was not a single 
word, mind you, about seizing Serbia; as they said, it was all 'for 
the Orthodox cause.' It's not the few pennies for the Orthodox 
cause that matter, it's the fact that they themselves are willing to 
lay down their lives. And again, mind, these words 'for the Or­
thodox cause' are a truly extraordinary political slogan both for the 
present and for the future. One can even say that this is the slogan 
of our future. And the fact that there is not a sound from anywhere 
about 'anexation' is something most peculiar. Europe could never 
ever believe that, because she would have acted with no other aim 
than to seize Serbia; and so, strictly speaking, we mustn't even 
blame Europe for crying out against us, don't you think? In short, 
this time our final conflict with Europe has begun, and . . .  could 
it begin any other way than through a misunderstanding? For 
Europe, Russia is a puzzle, and Russia's every action is a puzzle; 
and so it will be until the very end. Yes, it has been a long time 
since the Russian land has so declared itself, so consciously and 
in agreement; and besides, we have truly found our kinsmen and 
brethren, and these are no longer merely fine words. And we found 
them not through the Slavic Committee but directly, through our 
whole land. And that is what surprises me; I never would have 
believed it. This accord of ours, universal and so suden, would 
be difficult to believe had anyone even foretold it. And yet what 
happened did happen. You were just talking about that unfortunate 
Bulgarian mother, but I know that another mother has come on 
the scene this sumer: Mother Russia has found her own new 
children, and we hear her great, plaintive voice crying out for them. 
And they truly are her children, and it truly is a great maternal 

July and August 
5 97 
lament for them. Once more there is a great political sign of things 
to come; mark it well: 'she is their mother, not their ruler! '  And 
should it happen that some new children who do not understand 
the matter grumble against her-for however brief a time-she 
should pay them no heed but continue to do her good work with 
endless and patient maternal love, as every genuine mother would 
do. This summer, you know-this sununer will be inscribed in 
our history. How many Russian misunderstandings were cleared 
up at once! How many Russian questions were answered at once! 
This summer was almost an epoch in the consciousness of Russians. 
6. Postscript 
"The Russian People are sometimes terribly terribly implausible. " 
I happened to hear this little phrase this sununer as well, and of 
course it was because the person who said it found so many of the 
things that happened over the sununer unexpected and, perhaps, 
even "implausible." However, what happened that was so new? To 
the contrary, had not all these things that had come to light lain 
long, even always, in the hearts of the Russian People? 
In the first place, the People's idea emerged and the People's 
feeling was expressed. The feeling was one of selfless love for their 
unfortunate and oppressed brethren, and the idea was "the Or­
thodox cause." And truly, in this alone something rather unexpected 
was expressed. Unexpected (although not for everyone, by any 
means) was the fact that the People had not forgotten their great 
idea, their "Orthodox cause"; they had not forgotten it over the 
course of two centuries of slavery, dismal ignorance, and-of late­
repulsive corruption, materialism, vile Jewry, and cheap vodka. In 
the second place, unexpected was the fact that the People's idea, 
the "Orthodox cause," found allies in almost all shades of opinion 
among the most educated levels of Russian society, from that same 
group which we had regarded as utterly alienated from the People. 
And note here as well the unusual enthusiasm and unanimity of 
almost all our press . . . .  The saintly old woman offers her few ko­
pecks and adds, "for the Orthodox cause." The journalist picks 
up this expression and sets it down in his newspaper with genuine 
reverence, and you can see that he himself supports this "Orthodox 
cause" with all his heart; you sense this when you read his article. 
Perhaps even those among us who do not believe in anything have 
at last understood what in essence Orthodoxy and "the Orthodox 

A Writer's Diary 
cause" mean to the Russian People. They have understood that 
this is by no means a religion based nierely on ritual, and on the 
other hand it is by no means some fanarisme religieux (as people 
in Europe are already begining to cal the present general move­
ment in Russia); they realize that it is precisely a matter of human 
progres and the humanization of all humanity, as understood by 
the Russian People. The People derive everything from Christ; 
they incarnate their whole future in Christ and Christ's truth and 
canot even conceive of themselves without Christ. The liberals, 
the doubting Thomases, the skeptics, as well as the proponents of 
social ideas, have all-or at least the majority of them-suddenly 
become ardent Russian patriots. That means, then, that they were 
patriots al along. But can we positively state that we did not know 
this until now? Have we not heard, to the contrary, so many bitter 
mutual reproaches that now have turned out to be futile in so many 
ways? We have found so many more Russians-genuine Russians­
than many of us who are also genuine Russians ever supposed. 
What is it that united these people or, more accurately, what is it 
that showed them that in the principal and essential things they 
had not even formerly ben disunited? But this is just the point: 
the Slavic idea, in its highest sense, has ceased to be only a matter 
of Slavophilism and has suddenly, as a result of the pressure of 
circumstances, entered the very heart of Russian society, made itself 
distinctly known in the general consciousness, while in its living 
feeling it has coincided with the movement of the People. But what, 
then, is this "Slavic idea in its higher sense"? It has become obvious 
to all what it is: it is, first of al (that is, before any historical, 
political, or other interpretations), the notion of sacrifice, the need 
to sacrifice even oneself for one's brethren, and a feeling of voluntary 
duty by the strongest of the Slavic tribes to intercede on behalf of 
a weaker one with the aim of making it equal to him in liberty 
and political independence, and thereby to found the great pan­
Slavic unity in the name of Christ's truth, that is, for the benefit, 
love, and service of al humanity and the defense of all the world's 
weak and oppressed. And this is by no means just a theory; to 
the contrary, the curent Russian movement, fraternal and selfless, 
goes as far as conscious willingness to sacrifice even one's own vital 
interests, even peace with Europe if need be. This has been shown 
as a fact; and can the uniting of the Slavs in the future occur with 
any other purpose than the defense of the weak and the service of 
humanity? This must happen, because the majority of the Slavic 

July and August 
599 
tribes have themselves been schooled and have developed only 
through suffering. We wrote above that we are amazed that the 
Russian People, in their slavery of serfdom, in their ignorance and 
oppression, never forgot their Orthodox duty, never sank irretriev­
ably into bestiality or became gloomy, self-absorbed egotists con­
cerned only for their own advantage. But probably this is just their 
narure as Slavs; that is, to ascend spiritually in their suffering, to 
strengthen themselves politically in their oppression; amid slavery 
and humiliation, to join together in love and in the truth of Christ. 
Emburdened by the weighty cross, 
Christ our Lord, in slavish dress 
Traversed thee all, my native soil; 
And everywhere the land did bless. 
And so it is because the Russian People themselves were op­
pressed and bore the burden of the cross for so many years that 
they did not forget their "Orthodox cause" and their suffering 
brethren; and they ascended in spirit and in heart, totally prepared 
to help the oppressed in every way possible. And this is what our 
higher intelligentsia understood in supporting the wishes of the 
People with all their hearts. And when they had expressed support, 
they suddenly and entirely felt themselves united with the People. 
The movement that caught up everyone was magnanimous and 
humane. The greatest happiness in the life of a nation is found in 
every higher and unifying idea, every true feeling that unites all. 
This happiness was bestowed upon us. We could not help but fully 
sense our increased accord, the clarification of many former mis­
understandings, our strengthened self-consciousness. A political 
idea, plainly perceived by society and by the People, was revealed. 
Perceptive Europe at once saw this and now follows the Russian 
movement with the greatest attention. Conscious political thought 
in our People is something totally unexpected for Europe. Europe 
senses something new with which she must reckon; we rose in her 
estimation. The talk and rumors that have long been growing in 
Europe of the political and social disintegration of Russian society 
as a national entity must certainly now be refuted in her eyes: it 
turned out that the Russians have the capacity for unity when 
needed. And the forces of disintegration themselves, should Europe 
continue to believe in them, must naturally now, in her view, move 
in another direction and assume another outcome. Yes, from this 
epoch henceforth there are many views that will have to change. 

6oo 
A Writer's Diary 
In short, this general Russian movement that expresses accord also 
testifies in a large way to our national ·maturity and canot but 
evoke respect. 
Russian officers are going to Serbia and giving up their lives 
there. The movement of Russian officers and retired Russian sol­
diers into Cherniaev's army has grown steadily and continues to 
grow progressively. People may say: "These are lost souls who had 
nothing to do at home and who went off simply in order to go 
somewhere; they are careerists and adventurers." But aside from 
the fact that (according to many accurate reports) these "adven­
turers" have received no monetary gain and that the majority of 
them have barely even managed to make their way to Serbia, some 
of them who had still been on active service must unquestionably 
have sufered a loss through retirement, temporary though it may 
be. But whoever they may be, what do we hear and read about 
them? They are dying by the dozens in battles and are carrying 
out their duty heroically; the young army of insurgent Slavs created 
by Cherniaev is already beginning to rely heavily on them. They 
are bringing glory to the Russian name in Europe, and through 
their blood they are uniting us with our brethren. This blood of 
theirs, heroically spilled, will not be forgotten and will be taken 
into account. No, they are not adventurers: they are consciously 
begining a new era. They are the pioneers of the Russian political 
idea, Russian desires, and Russian will, which they have made 
known to Europe. 
One more Russian personality has made itself known, calmly 
and even majestically: this is General Cherniaev. His military ac­
tions have to date proceeded with mixed success, but on the whole 
he still holds the evident advantage. He has created an army in 
Serbia; he has displayed a severe, firm, unshakeable character. 
Aside from that, when he went off to Serbia he risked all the 
military fame he had acquired in Russia and, accordingly, risked 
his future as well. In Serbia, as was shown only recently, he agreed 
to accept command only over a separate detachment and only re­
cently was confirmed in the post of commander-in-chief. The army 
with which he marched into battle consisted of militia men, new 
recruits who had never seen a rifle and peaceful citizens who had 
come straight from the plow. The risk was extraordinary, the chan­
ces of success doubtful: it was in truth a sacrifice for a great purpose. 
Having created the army, trained it, and organized it as best he 
could, General Cherniaev began to act more decisively and boldly. 

July and August 
601 
He succeeded in gaining a highly significant victory. Just recently 
he has been compelled to withdraw under pressure of an enemy 
three times stronger than himself. But he withdrew in time, keeping 
the army intact, not beaten but strong; and he has occupied a 
strong position that the "victor" did not dare attack. If one makes 
a proper assessment of the facts, it is obvious that General Cherniaev 
is only just beginning his main actions. His army, however, can 
no longer expect support from anywhere, whereas the enemy can 
increase its forces immensely. Besides, the political considerations 
of the Serbian government may do much to prevent him from taking 
his cause to its completion. Nonetheless, his character has shown 
itself firmly and clearly: his military talent is indisputable, while 
his character and lofty ideals have placed him at the sununit of 
Russian aspirations and aims. But the full story of General Cher­
niaev remains to be told in the future. It is noteworthy that since 
his departure for Serbia he has acquired remarkable popularity in 
Russia; his name is on everyone's lips. And this is not difficult to 
understand: Russia realizes that he has begun and continues a task 
which coincides with its very best and most heartfelt desires; by 
his action he made those desires known to Europe. Whatever might 
subsequently happen, he can already take pride in his activity, 
while Russia will not forget him and will love him. 


September 


1 
1 .  Piccola Bestia 
About seven years ago I happened to spend a whole sumer, right 
until September, in Florence. The Italians think that Florence has 
the honest sumer and the coldest winter of any city in Italy. The 
summer in Naples is considered far more tolerable than the one 
in Florence. And so once, in the month of July, a great commotion 
broke out in the apartment I was renting: two maidservants, with 
the landlady in the lead, rushed into the room shouting that they 
had just seen a piccola bestia scurrying into my room from the 
corridor and they absolutely had to find and kill it. The piccola 
bestia is a tarantula. So they set to searching under the chairs and 
tables, in al the corners, and in the furniture; they began sweeping 
under the cupboards and stamping their feet to frighten it, and so 
lure it into the open. At last they rushed into the bedrom and 
began hunting under the bed, in the bed, through the linen and . . .  
they never found it. They found it only the next morning when 
they were sweeping out the room and, of course, executed it at 
once; still, I had had to spend the preceding night in my bed with 
the most unpleasant awareness that the piccola bestia was spending 
the night along with me. People say that a tarantula bite is rarely 
fatal, although I did know of one instance during my time in 
Semipalatinsk, exactly fifteen years before Florence, when a Cos­
sack of the line died from a tarantula bite despite medical treaunent. 
For the most part, though, the victims escape with only a high 
fever or feverish attacks; in Italy, where there are so many doctors, 
the matter is perhaps even less serious. I don't know about these 
things, not being a doctor; but still I had a very anxious night. At 
first I tried to drive the thought from my mind; I even laughed, 
recalling and reciting aloud Kuzma Prutkov's didactic fable "The 
6os 

6o6 
A Writer's Diary 
Conductor and the Tarantula" (an absolute masterpiece of its kind); 
then I fell asleep. But my dreams were truly unpleasant ones. I 
didn't have a single dream of a tarantula, but there were other 
things-most unpleasant, painful, and nightmarish; I awoke fre­
quently, and only toward morning, when the sun had come up, 
did I sleep more soundly. Do you know why I remembered this 
little old story just now? It's because of the Eastern Question! . . .  
Yet I'm scarcely surprised: people are writing and saying the wil­
dest sorts of things about the Eastern Question these days! 
I think this is what has happened: along with the Eastern Ques­
tion some sort of piccola bestia has scurried into Europe's bedrooms 
and is keeping all the good people from settling down quietly-all 
those people who love peace, who love humanity and hope that it 
will flourish, all those who long for that bright moment when at 
least this elementary, crude strife among nations will come to an 
end at last. In fact, if you think carefully about it, it sometimes 
seems that with the final solution of the Eastern Question every 
other kind of political strife in Europe will be solved as well; that 
the phrase "Eastern Question" contains, perhaps unknown to it­
self, all of Europe's other political questions, misunderstandings, 
and prejudices. In short, something quite new would begin, and 
for Russia a whole new phase of development; for it is all too clear 
now that only with the final solution of this question could Russia­
for the first time in her history-at last come to an understanding 
with Europe and be understood by her. But some sort of piccola 
bestia is preventing all this happiness from being realized. The 
piccola bestia was always there, but now, with the Eastern Question, 
it scurries right into the bedrooms. Everyone is expectant and 
uneasy; some sort of nightmare hangs over everyone's head; every­
one has bad dreams. Who or what this piccola bestia is that produces 
such commotion-that no one can explain, because some kind of 
general madness has set in. Every person imagines it in his own 
way, and no one understands anyone else. And yet it seems that 
everyone has been bitten already. The bite of the piccola bestia 
quickly brings on the most extraordinary fits: people in Europe, 
it seems, now no longer understand one another, as in the days of 
the Tower of Babel; each one no longer even understands what he 
wants himself. There is only one thing that unites them all: they 
all immediately point to Russia; each one is certain that the ma­
licious vermin always emanate from there. Meanwhile, only in 
Russia is everything bright and clear-except, of course, for the 

September 
deep sorrow over her Eastern Slavic brethren-a sorrow which, 
however, illuminates the soul and elevates the heart. In Russia the 
Eastern Question always produces something quite the opposite 
of what it does in Europe: everyone here at once begins to under­
stand everyone else more clearly; each one truly realizes what he 
wants; and everyone senses that he agrees with everyone else; the 
very last peasant knows what he should yearn for, just as the most 
educated person does. We are all quickly united by the beautiful 
and noble feeling of selfless and noble aid to the brethren who have 
been nailed to the cross. But Europe does not believe this; Europe 
believes neither in Russia's nobility nor in her selflessness. It is 
this "selflessness" in particular that causes all the ignorance, all 
the temptation; it is the principal thing that causes the confusion­
the condition which everyone loathes and despises; and so no one 
wants to believe in Russia's selflessness; everyone is somehow drawn 
away from believing in it. Were it not for this "selflessness," the 
matter would in an instant be simplified tenfold and Europe would 
be able to understand it; but selflessness is a blank spot, an un­
known, a riddle, a mystery! Oh, people in Europe have been bitten! 
And, of course, those who have been bitten believe that the whole 
mystery lies in Russia alone which, they feel, wants to reveal noth­
ing but is proceeding steadily and persistently toward some goal 
of her own, moving slyly and quietly and deceiving everyone. For 
two hundred years now Europe has lived with Russia, which com­
pelled Europe to accept her into the European union of nations 
and into civilization; but Europe always looked askance at Russia, 
sensing something improper; it is as if Russia were a fateful riddle 
that appeared from God knows where but which must be solved 
at all costs. And so each time the Eastern Question, in particular, 
arises, Europe's ignorance and misunderstanding of Russia devel­
ops into something pathological, and nothing is solved: "Who is 
it and what is it, and when will we finally learn the answer? Who 
are they, these Russians? Are they Asiatics? Are they Tatars? It 
would be good if they were, for then the matter would be clear; 
but it seems that they are not. The point is that they are not Asiatics; 
the point is that we must admit to ourselves that they are not. And 
yet they are so unlike us . . . .  And what about this union of the 
Slavs? What's that for? What's its purpose? What will it tell us­
what new thing can this dangerous union tell us?" They end, as 
before and as always, by answering these questions according to 
their very own measure: "They want to appropriate new territory," 

6o8 
A Writer's Diary 
they say, "and that means conquest, treachery, deceit, the future 
extinction of civilization, a united Mongol-horde, the Tatars! . . .  " 
And yet, even this very hatred of Russia is insufficient to unite 
completely those who have been bitten: every time the Eastern 
Question comes up, the ostensible unity of Europe at once and all 
too obviously begins to collapse into its personal, distinctly national 
egoisms. All this comes from the mistaken notion that someone 
wants to seize and plunder something: "I should have some of 
this, too; otherwise they'll grab it all and I won't get a thing!" 
And so every time this fateful question appears on the scene, all 
the old political conflicts and ailments of Europe become inflamed 
and come to a head. Therefore everyone naturally wants to suppress 
the matter, at least temporarily. The main thing is to suppress it 
in Russia, to find some way of diverting her from it, to exorcise, 
bewitch, and frighten her. 
And so Viscount Beaconsfield, an Israelite by birth (ne d'Israeli), 
in his speech at one banquet, suddenly reveals a great secret to 
Europe: all these Russians who, with Cherniaev at their head, have 
rushed to Turkey to save the Slavs, are only a lot of socialists, 
communists, and communards. In short, they represent all the 
destructive elements with which Russia is supposedly so well 
stocked. "You may trust me, for I am Beaconsfield, after all, the 
Premier, as the Russian newspapers call me to give their articles 
added weight: I am the Prime Minister; I have secret documents, 
and so I know better than you; I know a great deal, in fact." That 
is what shines through every phrase of this Beaconsfield. I am 
certain that he thought up this name, worthy of a family album 
and reminiscent of our own Lenskys and Gremins, when he was 
soliciting the queen for his nobility; he's a novelist, after all. By 
the way, when I was writing about the mysterious piccola bestia a 
few lines above, a thought suddenly occurred to me: what if the 
reader imagines that I am trying to depict Viscount Beaconsfield 
in this allegory? But I assure you this is not the case: the piccola 
bestia is only an idea, not a person, and it would do too much 
credit to Mr. Beaconsfield, even though one has to admit that he 
is very similar to a piccola bestia. When he proclaimed in his speech 
that Serbia, having declared war on Turkey, took a dishonorable 
step and that the war Serbia is now waging is a dishonorable one­
so having spit in the face of the whole Russian movement and the 
whole upsurge of Russian spirit, having spit in the face of our 
sacrifices, our wishes, our earnest prayers (and he could not help 

September 
but know our feelings)-this Israelite, this new ajudicator of honor 
in England, continues as follows (I am not quoting literally): 
"Russia, of course, was pleased to rid herself of all her destructive 
elements by sending them off to Serbia, although she failed to 
realize that they would join forces there, merge, conspire, and 
acquire an organization; they will grow into a real force . . . .  " "Eu­
rope must take note of this new, menacing force," Beaconsfield 
stresses, threatening English farmers with the future socialism of 
Russia and the East. "In Russia they will take notice of my in­
sinuation about socialism," he also thinks to himself. "We have to 
give Russia a scare." 
A spider, to be sure, a piccola bestia; indeed, he is awfully like 
a spider, a shaggy little bestial And how nimbly he can scamper 
around! This massacre of the Bulgarians was something he per­
mitted, after all-and not just permitted-he plotted it himself; he 
is a novelist, and this is his chef-d'oeuvre. But he's seventy years 
old and the grave is not far off-he knows it himself. And how 
overjoyed he must have been at becoming a viscount; he certainly 
must have dreamt about this all his life, when he was still writing 
novels. What do these people believe in? How do they get to sleep 
at night? What dreams to they dream? What do they do when they 
are alone with their souls? Oh, their souls are no doubt full of the 
most refined things! . . .  Every day they eat such elegant dinners in 
the company of such refined and witty people; evenings they are 
the favorites of such charming ladies from the highest, most refined 
elements of society. Oh, their lives are beyond reproach; their 
digestion is excellent; their dreams are as light as infants'. Not long 
ago I read that the bashibazouks crucified two priests; the victims 
died after twenty-four hours of torment that exceeds all imagination. 
Although Beaconsfield at first denied in Parliament that there was 
any kind of torture at all-not even the slightest-he, of course, 
knows very well about all of this himself, even about these two 
crosses; "he has documents, after all." Doubtless he banishes these 
trivial, worthless, and even filthy, indecent pictures from his mind; 
but· those two blackened corpses hanging twisted on their crosses 
can pop into one's head at the most unexpected times-say, for 
example, when Beaconsfield is preparing for slumber in his richly 
appointed bedroom, smiling brightly as he recalls the brilliant 
evening he has just spent, the ball and all the charming, witty 
things he said to this gentleman and that lady. 
"Well," Beaconsfield will think, "the blackened corpses on those 

610 
A Writer's Diary 
crosses . . .  hmm . . .  well, of course . . . .  However, 'the state is not 
a private individual; it cannot sacrifice its own interests out of 
sensitivity, the more so that in political affairs magnanimity itself 
is never disinterested.' It's wonderful what beautiful sayings there 
are," Beaconsfield muses; "they even refresh the mind and, most 
important, they sound so elegant. Indeed, isn't the state . . . .  But 
I'd best go to bed . . . .  Hmm. Well, and what of those two priests? 
'Popes,' they call them, les popes. It's their own fault for turning 
up there, in any case. They ought to have hidden somewhere . . .  
under a sofa . . . .  Mais, avec votre permission, messieurs les deux cru­
cifies, I am terribly fed up with your stupid little adventure, et je 
vous souhaite la bonne nuit a tous les deux." 
And Beaconsfield falls asleep, sweetly, tenderly. He dreams all 
the while that he is a viscount, while around him are roses and 
lilies of the valley and the most charming ladies. Now he delivers 
a most charming speech: what bon mots! Everyone applauds. He 
has just destroyed the coalition . . . .  
And al these captains and majors of ours, old veterans of 
Sevastopol and the Caucasus, in their rumpled, worn, old frock 
coats with white crosses in their buttonholes (many of them were 
so described)-all these are socialists! There are some among them 
who will take a drink, of course; we've heard about that. The 
serviceman has a weakness for that, but it's certainly not socialism. 
On the other hand, look at how he dies in battle; what a fine figure 
he cuts, what a hero he is at the head of his battalion, bringing 
glory to the Russian name and through his example transforming 
cowardly recruits into heroes! Is this your idea of a socialist? Well, 
and what of these two young fellows whose mother led them by 
the hands (there was such a case, indeed)-are they communards? 
And this old warrior with a family of sons-does he really want 
to burn down the Tuileries? These old soldiers, these Cossacks 
from the Don, these parties of Russians who come with medical 
detachments and field chapels-do they really sleep, dreaming only 
of shooting an archbishop? These Kireevs, these Raevskys-are 
they all our destructive elements that are to make Europe shake in 
her boots? And Cherniaev, this most naive of heroes and our former 
publisher of the Russian World-is he the leading representative of 
Russian socialism? Phoo-this is beyond belief! If Beaconsfield only 
knew how silly this sounds in Russian and . . .  how shameful, then, 
perhaps, he would not have ventured to insert such a ridiculous 
passage in his speech. 

September 
6 1 1 
2. Words, Words, Words! 
There are certain opinions on solving the Eastern Question, ex­
pressed both here and in Europe, which are truly astounding. By 
the way, there are people in our own world of journalism who seem 
to have been bitten by the piccola bestia as well. Oh, I'm not 
planning to run through all my impressions-I don't have the stam­
ina for that. "Administrative autonomy" alone is enough to give 
you paralysis of the brain. You see, if we could manage to give 
Bulgaria, Herzegovina, and Bosnia equal rights with the Moslem 
population and also find the means to guarantee those rights, "then 
we certainly can see no reason why the Eastern Question cannot 
be solved," etc., etc. This opinion, as we know, enjoys particular 
influence in Europe. In short, they conceive a plan so complex 
that its realization would be more difficult than recreating the whole 
of Europe anew or separating water from earth or whatever you 
like; and yet they think that the matter is solved, and they are 
tranquil and satisfied. No, gentlemen, Russia agreed to this only 
in principle, but wanted to supervise the execution of such a plan 
herself, in her own way, and of course would not allow you phrase­
mongers to profit from it. "To grant autonomy?" "To find the 
right combination?" But how can this be done? Who is going to 
carry it out? Who is going to obey, and who is going to make them 
obey? Finally, who is ruling Turkey? Which parties and which 
forces? Is there, even in Constantinople (which is still more advanced 
than the rest of Turkey), even one Turk who in fact, by virtue of 
his inner conviction, could finally recognize a Christian subject 
with rights sufficiently equal to his own that something genuine 
could come from such an "autonomy?" I say, "is there even one 
person . . . .  " But if there is not even a single one, then how can 
anyone conduct talks and make agreements with such a people? 
The experts object: "We must establish some supervision and find 
the right combination." Well, just you try and find the combination! 
There are problems whose nature is such that they simply defy 
solution in the manner in which people at a given moment want 
to solve them. The Gordian knot could not be untied with fingers, 
yet people kept wracking their brains to try to untie it that way; 
but Alexander came and cut through the knot with a sword and 
so solved the riddle. 
Here's another example, a view expressed by a newspaper; this 
is not only the view of a newspaper, however, but is an old, dip­
lomatic view shared by a host of scholars, professors, newspaper 

6 1 2  
A Writer's Diary 
columnists, journalists, novelists, Westernizers, Slavophiles, etc., 
etc. It is this: Constantinople ultimately will belong to no one; it 
will be something in the order of a free, international city-a kind 
of "common place" in short. Its existence will be guaranteed by 
the European balance of power, and so on. In short, instead of a 
simple, direct, and clear solution-the only one possible-there 
appears some complex and unatural scholarly amalgam. But one 
need only ask: what is the European balance of power? This balance 
of power was supposed to exist until now among several of the 
strongest European powers-the five, say, of equal strength (i.e., 
there was a tactful assumption that they were of equal strength). 
And so the five wolves lie down in a circle, and in the middle sits 
the tasty morsel, Constantinople; and all five of them do nothing 
more than keep the others from seizing the prey. And this is what 
people call the chef d'oeuvre, the Meisterstiick that solves the prob­
lem! But does this solve anything at all? The point is that it is all 
based on a fundamental absurdity, on some fantastic fact that never 
existed, even on an unatural fact: the balance of power. Did a 
political balance of power ever exist on earth, in fact? Absolutely 
not! This is only a cunning formula once invented by cuning 
people to fool simpletons. And although Russia is not a simpleton, 
she is an honest person; and therefore, it seems, she was more 
prone than anyone else to believe in the indestructibility of the 
truths and the laws of this balance of power; many times she herself 
sincerely complied with them and served as their guarantor. In that 
sense, Europe has exploited Russia in a remarkably brazen maner. 
Yet it seems that none of the other "equal powers" took these laws 
of power balance seriously, although they observed the formalities 
up to a point-but only up to a point. When their calculations 
showed that some gain might be made, each one disrupted this 
balance with little concern for the consequences. What is most 
amusing is that these actions were always successful, and that a 
new "balance of power" immediately ensued. But when Russia, 
too, without disrupting anything, only took a little thought for her 
own interests, all the other members of the balance of power at 
once joined forces and moved on Russia, saying, "You are upsetting 
the balance." Well, the same thing will happen with an international 
Constantinople: the five wolves will be lying there, baring their 
teeth at one another, each one trying to come up with the proper 
combination: how to ally with its neighbors and, having killed off 
the other wolves, to divide the spoils in the most profitable manner. 

September 
6 1 3  
Is that really any solution? Meanwhile, cenain new schemes are 
arising among the guardian-wolves: suddenly one of these five 
wolves, the grayest of the lot, suffers some son of accident, and 
in a single day, in a single hour, is transformed from a wolf into 
the tiniest of lapdogs which can't even bark. And now you have 
the equilibrium utterly shaken! Besides, at some time in Europe's 
future the five equal powers might simply be reduced to two; and 
then-then where would your complex plan be, 0 Wise Men? . . .  
By the way, I would venture to express one axiom: "In Europe 
there will never be a moment and a political situation when Con­
stantinople is not someone's, i.e., when it does not belong to some­
one." That is the axiom, and it seems to me impossible that it 
could be otherwise. If you wil permit me a little joke, I would 
say that it is most likely that at the final and decisive moment the 
English wil suddenly seize Constantinople as they seized Gibraltar, 
Malta, and so on. And it will be precisely at a time when the great 
powers will stil be thinking about their balance. It is these same 
Englishmen now watching with such maternal concern over Tur­
key's inviolability who see the possibility of a great future and 
civilization for her; it is they who believe in her vital principles; 
and it is precisely they who, when they see that the matter has 
come to a head, wil gobble up the Sultan and Constantinople. 
This is so much in character for them, so much in their disposition; 
it is so in keeping with their eternal brazen arogance, with their 
policy of oppression, with their malice! Whether they will be able 
to hold on to Constantinople as they have Gibraltar is another 
question! Of course, at the moment this is al only a little joke, 
and I pass it on as such; still, it would not be a bad idea if we 
were to remember this little joke: it has a ring of truth about it . . . .  
3· Schemes and More Schemes 
And so all schemes are admitted for solving the Eastern Question 
except the clearest, soundest, simplest, and most natural one. One 
might even say that the more unatural the solution suggested, the 
more quickly public and common opinion grasps at it. Here, for 
example, is yet another "unatural thing": it is proposed that "if 
Russia were to declare publicly her disinterest to the whole of 
Europe, the matter would at once be solved and done with." Well, 
happy is he who believes this! Indeed, if Russia not only stated 
but even proved as well, de facto, her disinterest, then Europe 

A Writer's Diary 
would probably be even more confused. Well, suppose we take 
nothing for ourselves but simply do our goo(i deeds and return 
home having taken advantage of nothing, but only showing Europe 
that we are disinterested. Europe will find that still worse: "The 
more selflessly you have aided them, the more convincingly you 
have proved to them that you are making no encroachments on 
their independence; they will become all the more trusting and 
devoted to you-henceforth they will regard you as a sun, a sumit, 
a zenith, an empire. And what does it matter that they are auton­
omous and not your subjects? Still in their hearts they will consider 
themselves your subjects; unconsciously, involuntarily they will 
think this way." The very inevitability-sooner or later-of the 
Slavs' moral afiliation with Russia, the naturalness and legitimacy 
of this fact-this is what Europe finds so frightening; this is what 
constitutes her nightmare and her main dread for the future. On 
her part there are only forces and schemes, while on ours there is 
the law of nature, normality, kinship, truth; with whom, then, lies 
the future of the Slavic lands? 
And yet there is in Europe itself one scheme, based on a com­
pletely opposite principle and so probable that, perhaps, it may 
even have a future. This new scheme is also of English workman­
ship; it is, one might say, a corrective to al the mistakes and 
miscalculations of the Tory party. It is based on England itself at 
once bestowing its blessings on the Slavs, but with the aim of 
making them eternal enemies and haters of Russia. The proposal 
is to renounce the Turks at last, to destroy them as a hopeless, 
good-for-nothing people, and to form a union of all the Christian 
peoples of the Balkan peninsula with its center in Constantinople. 
The liberated and grateful Slavs would naturally be drawn to En­
gland as their savior and liberator, while she would "open their 
eyes to Russia." "There," England would say, "is your most bitter 
enemy; she, behind a mask of concern for you, dreams of swal­
lowing you up and depriving you of your inevitable and glorious 
political future." Thus, when the Slavs come to believe in Russia's 
duplicity, they will at once form a new and powerful bulwark against 
her, and then, "Russia will never even catch a glimpse of Con­
stantinople; they will never let her come here! "  
It's difficult even to invent anything more clever and, at first 
glance, more apt. The main thing is that it is so simple and based 
on actual fact. I have already mentioned this fact in passing else­
where. It consists of this: in parts of the Slavic intelligentsia and 

September 
6 1 5 
among certain of the highest representatives and leaders of the 
Slavs there truly exists a certain mistrust of Russia's motives, and 
therefore even an enmity toward Russia and the Russians. Oh, I 
am not talking about the masses of people. For the Slavic peoples, 
for the Serbs and for the Montenegrins, Russia still remains their 
sun, their hope, their friend, their mother and protectress, their 
future liberator! But the Slavic intelligentsia is another matter. Of 
course I am not talking about the whole of the intelligentsia; I will 
not venture or permit myself to speak of them all. But "even though 
it is by no means all of them, still among some of their most min­
isterial minds" (as I expressed it in my August Diary) "one can 
find those who imagine that Russia is duplicitous, is holding back 
and looking for ways of seizing them and swallowing them up." 
We should not conceal from ourselves the fact that even many 
educated Slavs, perhaps, do not love us at all. For example, they 
still consider us to be undeveloped in comparison with themselves­
all but barbarians. They &re even not interested in the achievements 
of our civic life, the organization of our society, our reforms, our 
literature. There may be a few very educated ones among them 
who know about Pushkin, but few of those who do know him there 
would be likely to accept him as a great Slavic genius. Very many 
of the educated Czechs, for example, are certain that they have 
already had forty poets like Pushkin. Aside from that, all these 
separate Slavic entities in their present condition are politically 
proud and ultrasensitive, like inexperienced nations who know little 
of life. Among such people the English scheme could have success 
if it could be set in motion. And it is hard to imagine that it would 
not be set in motion if, with a victory of the Whigs in England, 
the plan were to be placed on the agenda. And still, how artificial, 
unnatural, impossible, and full of lies this is! 
In the first place, how can such dissimilar, separate peoples as 
live in the Balkan peninsula be united, and with a center in Con­
stantinople? There are Greeks, Slavs, and Romanians here. To 
whom will Constantinople belong? A city for all. And then dis­
sension and strife, at least between the Greeks and the Slavs, to 
begin with (even assuming that the Slavs could be in agreement). 
People will say that a ruler can be appointed and an empire found­
ed; such, it seems, is proposed in this scheme. But who will be 
the emperor: a Slav, a Greek-surely not one of the Hapsburgs? 
In any case, dualisms and splits would at once begin. The main 
thing is that the Greek and Slavic elements cannot be united: both 

616 
A Writer's Diary 
these elements have immense, unerly exaggerated, and false dreams 
about the glorious political future that awaits them. No, if England 
really resolves to abandon the Turks, then she will arange things 
in a much more solid fashion. And I think this is the point when 
that scheme I mentioned earlier, as a joke, might occur, i.e., En­
gland herself will swallow up Constantinople "for the good of the 
Slavs." "I will create from you Slavs," England will say, "a union 
and a bulwark in the north against the northern colossus to keep 
him out of Constantinople, because once he seizes Constantinople 
he will seize you all. Then you will have no glorious political future. 
And you Greeks need not be alarmed either. Constantinople is 
yours; I specifically want it to be yours, and it is for that reason 
that I am occupying it. I am doing it only so as not to give it to 
Russia. The Slavs will defend it from the north, and I will defend 
it from the sea; and we will not let anyone in. I will only stay in 
Constantinople temporarily, until you become stronger and until 
you can form a solid and mature federated empire. But until that 
time, I am your leader and defender. I have occupied a good many 
places; I have Gibraltar and Malta; and I gave back the Ionian 
islands, didn't I . . .  ?" 
In short, if this piece of Whiggish workmanship could even gain 
curency it would be dificult, I repeat, to doubt its success; but 
success only temporarily, of course. Never mind that this temporary 
period might stretch on for many years, but . . .  it is all the more 
certain that the whole thing would collapse when it attained that 
natural limit; and then its collapse would be final, because this 
whole scheme is founded only on slander and unaturalness. 
It's falsity lies in its slander of Russia. There is no fog that can 
withstand the rays of truth. A time will come when even the Slavic 
peoples will comprehend the whole truth of Russian disinterest­
edness, and at that time their spiritual unity with us will come to 
pass. Our active unity with the Slavs began a very short time ago, 
after all; but now-now it will never cease and will continue to 
grow and grow. The Slavs will at last be convinced, despite all the 
slander, of Russia's kindred love for them. The irresistible charm 
of the great and powerful Russian spirit, as something akin, will 
work its way on them. They will realize that they canot develop 
spiritually in peny unions amid dissension and envy but only on 
a larger, all-Slavic scale. The enormity and might of the Russian 
union will no longer trouble and frighten them; on the contrary, 
they will be irresistibly attracted to it as to a center or a basic 

September 
6 1 7  
principle. Unity of faith will also serve as an extremely strong 
bond. Russian faith, Russian Orthodoxy, is everything that the 
Russian People consider most sacred; it contains their ideals and 
all the truth and justice of life. And what united the Slavic peoples, 
what did they live by, if not by their faith during their suffering 
under four hundred years of the Moslem yoke? They bore so many 
sufferings for the sake of their faith that this alone must have made 
it dear to them. Finally, Russian blood has already been shed for 
the Slavs, and blood is never forgotten. The crafty people have 
overlooked all this. The opportunity to slander Russia before the 
Slavs encourages their success and their faith in the solidity of that 
success. But such success is never eternal. Temporarily though, I 
repeat, it can be attained. This particular scheme may be put into 
effect if the Whigs win, and that should be kept in mind. The 
English will resolve to do it simply to warn Russia when the final 
deadline comes, as if to say: "We ourselves shall be able to do a 
few good deeds." 
A few words about the blood that has been shed, by the way. 
What if our volunteers at last smash the Turks and liberate the 
Slavs, without even a declaration of war? As we hear, so many 
Russian volunteers are arriving from Russia and donations are com­
ing so steadily, that, if this continues, Cherniaev may at last form 
a whole army of Russians. In any case, Europe and her diplomats 
would be quite astonished at such an outcome: "If they were able 
to overcome the Turks with only volunteers, then what would hap­
pen if the whole of Russia took up arms?" People in Europe would 
not overlook an argument like that. 
May God grant success to our Russian volunteers. We hear that 
dozens of Russian officers are again being killed in battles. The 
dear lads! 
It's not out of place to make one more little observation, a rather 
urgent one, in my opinion. Our newspapers, in keeping with the 
flow of Russian volunteers to Serbia and the many heroic deaths 
in battle, have recently begun collecting donations under a new 
category: "In aid of the families of Russians who have fallen in the 
war with the Turks for the liberation of the Balkan Slavs. " Donations 
have begun to come in. The Voice has already collected some three 
thousand rubles in this category, and the more donations the better, 
of course. The only thing that isn't quite right, in my opinion, is 
that this formula for contributions is not quite stated in sufficient 
detail. Contributions are collected only for the families of Russians 

6 1 8  
A Writer's Diary 
who have fallen in the war, etc. But what of the families of those 
wounded? Wil these realy get nothing? And these families, after 
all, may have a more difficult time than those of the fallen. The 
one who has fallen has fallen, and he is mourned; but the other 
comes back a cripple, armless, legless, or so seriously wounded 
that his health will constantly require intensive care and medical 
assistance. Aside from that, even though he may be crippled, he 
will still eat and drink; consequently, he is an extra mouth to feed 
in a poor family. Aside from that, it sems to me that this heading 
contains one serious error through lack of definition: "In aid of 
the families of Russians who have fallen, " etc. But there are families 
of means or at least ones in little need, and there are quite poor 
families who are in great need. If money is given to them all, then 
little will be left for those who are truly poor. And therefore it 
sems to me that this whole heading should be recast thus: "In 
aid of needy families of Russians who fell or were disabled in the war 
with the Turks for the liberation of the Balkan Slavs. " However, I 
am only setting forth my idea; and if someone else manages to for­
mulate it even more precisely, then, of course, so much the better. It 
would only be desirable that this category of donations should be 
filled as quickly and generously as possible. It is extremely helpful 
and absolutely essential; it can have a great moral influence on our 
noble volunteers who are fighting for the Russian idea. 
4· Dressing Gowns and Soap 
Among the various opinions on the Eastern Question I encountered 
one that was utterly queer. Not long ago a strange thing appeared 
in the foreign press: in heated, almost preposterous terms, the writer 
began to speculate about the effect on the rest of the world if 
Turkey were to be utterly crushed and pushed back into Asia. It 
turned out that this would be a disaster and a terrible trauma. 
There were even predictions of the rise of a new caliphate in Asia­
in Arabia somewhere; there would be a renewed surge of fanaticism, 
and the Moslem world would again fall upon Europe. More pro­
found thinkers limited themselves only to the opinion that seizing 
and expelling a whole nation from Europe into Asia in this way 
was something impossible and even unthinkable. When I read all 
this I was, for some reason, quite astonished, but I still had not 
divined what the real issue was. And suddenly I realized that all 
these diplomat-thinkers were in fact posing the question literally, 

September 
6 1 9 
i.e., that once the Turkish empire is politically crushed, the issue 
really seems to be one of the actual, literal physical removal of all 
these Turks and their transportation into Asia somewhere. I truly 
do not understand how such a notion could arise; but they certainly 
must have used it to frighten people at various banquets and meet­
ings: "There will be terrible repercussions from all this," they 
would say, "a real disaster." It seems to me, however, that absolutely 
nothing of this son could happen, and not a single Turk would 
need to be resettled in Asia. Something like this has already hap­
pened to us in Russia. When the Tatar Horde came to an end, the 
Duchy of Kazan suddenly grew in strength to the point that there 
was a time when it was even difficult to predict whether the Russian 
land would belong to the Christian or the Moslem world. This 
duchy ruled over what was then the Russian East; it had relations 
with Astrakhan and controlled the Volga, while on Russia's flank 
there appeared a superb ally for the duchy in the person of the 
Khan of the Crimean Horde, the dreadful bandit and despoiler 
from whom Moscow had suffered so much. It was a most critical 
situation, and the young tsar Ivan Vasilevich-not yet called Ivan 
the Terrible-decided to settle the Eastern Question of his day and 
seize Kazan. 
The siege was a terrible one, and Karamzin later described it 
with remarkable eloquence. The inhabitants of Kazan put up a 
desperate, magnificent, stubborn, tenacious, and persistent defense. 
But then the saps were blown, allowing crowds of Russians to 
storm the city, and Kazan was taken! And what do you think Tsar 
Ivan did when he entered Kazan? Did he annihilate every single 
inhabitant, as he did later in Novgorod the Great, to prevent them 
from ever bothering him again? Did he deport them all to the 
steppes of Asia? Certainly not. Not even one little Tatar urchin 
was exiled; everything stayed as it was, and the heroic inhabitants 
of Kazan, who had formerly been so dangerous, were pacified 
forever. And this happened in the simplest and most appropriate 
manner: no sooner had the Russians taken the city than they at 
once carried in the icon of the Virgin and held the first Orthodox 
service in Kazan since the city's founding. Then they laid the 
foundation for an Orthodox church, carefully collected the arma­
ments from the inhabitants, installed a Russian government, and 
sent the ruler of Kazan where he belonged. That's all that hap­
pened, and it all happened in a single day. A little while thereafter, 
the people of Kazan began selling us oriental dressing gowns, and 

620 
A Writer's Diary 
a little while after that-soap as well. (I think that it happened 
just in that order-first the dressing gowns .and then the soap.) 
And so the matter ended. The case of Turkey could be settled in 
exactly the same way should the happy thought of ending this 
caliphate politically only occur to someone. 
First of all, a mass would at once be sung in Saint Sophia; then 
the Patriarch would consecrate the cathedral once again; a bell 
would arrive from Moscow that very day, I think, and the Sultan 
would be sent to an appropriate place-and thus the matter would 
be ended. It's true that the Turks have a law-almost a Koranic 
dogma-that only Moslems and not Christian subjects can and 
should bear arms. Lately they have begun permitting Christians 
as well to own arms, but only after paying a high tax, thus even 
creating a new source of income for the state; those who do have 
arms are a comparatively very small number. Well, perhaps this 
one law could be reversed on the very first day, that is, the day 
of the first service in Saint Sophia, so that only the Infidels could 
and should bear arms, while the Moslems could not, even on pay­
ment of a tax. So that's all that's needed to ensure peace; and I as­
sure you that absolutely no more is necessary. A little time would 
pass and the Turks would also start selling us oriental dressing 
gowns; and in a little more time-soap as well, perhaps even better 
than Kazan soap. As far as agriculture (the tobacco and wine indus­
tries) is concerned, under new arrangements and new laws these ar­
eas would, I think, develop with such speed and such success that 
they could finally manage to pay off little by little even the former 
Turkish government's unpaid debts to Europe. In short, nothing 
would happen but the very best and most appropriate things; there 
would not be the least repercussions and, I repeat, not even a single 
Turkish urchin would have to be exiled from Europe. 
Nothing would happen in the East either. As far as a caliphate 
is concerned, one might be established somewhere in the steppes 
of Asia or in the desert. But to launch an attack on Europe in our 
time requires so much money, so many modern armaments, so 
many repeating rifles, so many supply trains, and so many factories 
and plants set up in advance, that not only Moslem fanaticism but 
even English fanaticism itself would be incapable of aiding the new 
caliphate in any way. In short, nothing would come to pass apart 
from the very best things. And may God grant that these best 
things to come to pass as quickly as possible; otherwise so many 
of the worst things could happen! 

2 
1 .  Outmoded People 
"The greatest happiness in the life of a nation is found in every 
higher and unifying idea, every true feeling that unites all. This 
happiness was bestowed upon us. We could not help but fully sense 
our increased accord, the clarification of many former misunder­
standings, our strengthened self-consciousness." 
That is what I said in the concluding article in my Diary of last 
August, and I believe that I was not mistaken. A genuine unifying 
feeling in the life of a nation is happiness indeed. If I was mistaken 
in anything, then it is only, perhaps, in that I exaggerated somewhat 
the level of our "increased accord and self-consciousness." But I 
am still not ready to take back even that. Anyone who loves Russia 
has long been sick at heart over the alienation of the upper levels 
of Russians from the lower ones-from the People and the lives of 
the People-which as an actual fact is now doubted by no one. It 
is this very alienation which has partially given way and weakened, 
in my view, under the impact of this year's genuine all-Russian 
movement on the Slavic question. Of course, one simply cannot 
conceive that our split from the People could be completely ended 
and healed over. It continues and will long continue, but historical 
moments such as those we have experienced this year doubtless 
promote "increased accord and clarification of misunderstandings." 
In short, they promote our clearer understanding of the People and 
of Russian life, on the one hand, and, on the other-the closer 
acquaintance of the People themselves with the strange folk they 
apparently regard as foreigners and not Russians-with the "mas­
ters," as they still call us. 
It must be admitted that the People even now, in all this general 
Russian movement of this year, have revealed in themselves a sound­
er, more precise and clear aspect of character than many of the 
62 1 

622 
A Writer's Diary 
intellectuals of our class. The People have expressed a direct, 
simple, and powerful feeling, a firm outlook, and-most impor­
tant-have done this with amazing communality and accord. No 
dispute ever arose among them about "Why, specifically, to help 
the Slavs. Must we help them? Who should be helped most, and 
who not at all? Will we not somehow compromise our moral stan­
dards and hinder our civic development by helping too much? With 
whom, at last, should we go to war? In fact, is it necessary to go 
to war?" Etc., etc. In short, our intelligentsia was beset by a 
thousand misunderstandings. This happened in particular in cer­
tain sections of our higher intelligentsia, specifically among those 
who still regard the People from the (sometimes quite imaginary) 
heights of European education; there, in these higher "isolated 
groupings" we saw some rather remarkable dissonances, uncer­
tainty, a strange lack of understanding of sometimes the simplest 
things, an almost ridiculous hesitation about what to do and what 
not to do, and so on. "Should we help the Slavs or not? And if 
we do help them, why should we do it? And what cause would be 
most moral and most attractive: this one or that one?" Al these 
things, which sometimes were strikingly bizarre, really did come 
to the surface, were heard in conversation, were evidenced in actual 
events, and were reflected in literature. But nothing of this sort 
was stranger than the article I read in The European Messenger of 
September of this year, in the "Survey of Domestic Life" section. 
The article deals specifically with the curent Russian movement 
and is written apropos of the fraternal aid to the oppressed Slavs; 
it endeavors to make a truly profound statement on this matter. 
The portion of the article that touches on the Russian People and 
society is not extensive-four or five pages-and so I will permit 
myself to make my way through these pages in sequence but without 
quoting everything, of course. In my opinion these little pages are 
remarkably interesting, and one might say they constitute a kind 
of document. My purpose will make itself evident at the end this 
undertaking, so that I think it will not even be necessary to draw 
any particular moral. 
However, by way of a brief forewarning I shall note only that 
the author of the article quite obviously subscribes to that outmoded 
theoretical Westernism which, a quarter-century ago, constituted 
in our society the very zenith of our intellectual forces. Now, how­
ever, it has become so outmoded that to encounter it in its pure, 

September 
pristine state is a rare event indeed. We might call these the left­
overs, the last Mohicans of theoretical Europeanizing that tore itself 
away from the People and from life. Although this Europeanizing 
in its time was the inevitable result of historical conditions, its 
legacy was, apart from a certain amount of benefit, an extraordinary 
amount of the most harmful, prejudicial nonsense, which continues 
its baleful influence even to this day. The principal historical con­
tribution of these people was negative: it lay in the extremity of 
their opinions, in the finality of their judgments (for they were so 
arrogant that the only judgments they pronounced were final ones), 
and in those ultimate limits to which they took their frenzied the­
ories. This extremism unintentionally promoted a sobering of 
minds and a rurning to the People, toward unity with the People. 
Now, after that whole quarter-cenrury and after a host of new, 
unprecedented facts since derived from a practical study of Russian 
life, these "last Mohicans" of the old theories unintentionally reveal 
their comic aspect, even despite their exaggeratedly dignified de­
portment. Their chief comic trait is their persistence in seeing 
themselves as youthful, as the sole guardians and, so to say, the 
trailblazers of the paths they believe Russian life ought to follow. 
But they have lagged so far behind that life that they can no longer 
recognize it at all; therefore they are living in a complete world of 
fantasy. That is why it is so interesting and edifying, at a moment 
of great excitement in society, to observe the degree to which this 
theoretical Europeanism has unnarurally split itself off from the 
People and society, to see the degree to which its views and its 
conclusions, at certain extraordinary moments of public life, while 
still remaining arrogant and haughty, are in essence weak, irres­
olute, obscure, and erroneous when compared with the clear, sim­
ple, firm, and unshakeable convictions of the People's mind and 
sentiments. However, let us turn to the article. 
One must, however, give due credit to the author of the article; 
he acknowledges, or rather, consents to acknowledge, the Popular 
and the public movement to help the Slavs; he acknowledges that 
it is even quite a sincere movement. Of course, how could he fail 
to acknowledge that! . . .  Still, for such an outmoded "European" 
as our author, this is no small achievement. Yet he still seems 
dissatisfied with something; for some reason he is displeased that 
this movement has begun. True, he doesn't in so many words state 
that he is displeased the movement has begun, but he grumbles 

A Writer's Diary 
and picks at details. It seems to me that Granovsky, one of the 
purest and earliest representatives of our Westemism, a man who 
in his time also wrote about the Eastern Question and about the 
Popular movement during the Crimean War of 1854-56-a move­
ment, however, that had only a few things in common with the 
present movement (see my article about Granovsky in my August 
Diary)-Granovsky, I say, would also have been dissatisfied at our 
curent Popular movement, and of course he would have preferred 
to see our People as the immobile, inert mass of former years rather 
than manifesting themselves in forms that are not yet fully developed 
and "primitive," inappropriate for our European age. On the 
whole, even though all these old theorists of the past loved the 
People (although I must say we don't know much about that), they 
loved them only to a certain extent-in theory, i.e., in those imag­
inative images and forms in which they would have liked to see 
them, which means, in essence, that they did not love them at al. 
However, in their defense it must be admitted that they never knew 
the People at all; indeed, they never found it necessary to know 
them or have anything to do with them. It was not that they distorted 
the facts, it was simply that they had no understanding of them 
whatever, so that many-all too many-times they attributed the 
purest gold of the People's spirit, thought, and profound, pure 
feeling directly to common vulgarity, ignorance, and obtuse Russian 
national idiocy. Had the People appeared before them even slightly 
other than in those aspects and images which they found appealing 
(for the most part, this was the aspect of a French mob in Paris), 
they might well have renounced them altogether. "First of al one 
must abandon any notion that this is a holy war," Granovsky ex­
claims in his brochure on the Eastern Question. "These days no 
one is going to be roused to set off on a crusade; such is not our 
age; no one will make a move to liberate the tomb of our Lord," 
etc., etc. The theoretician of The European Messenger says exactly 
the same thing: he doesn't like these categories either; he finds 
fault with them. He is very displeased, for instance, that our People 
and society are making contributions under a category which seems 
not to be of his choosing. He prefers a view more appropriate, so 
to say, to our age, a more enlightened view. But we have digressed 
once again. 
Let us omit the beginning of that portion of the article dealing 
with the Russian movement to aid the Slavs; it is a very charac­
teristic beginning, but we cannot pause at every line. This is what 
the author says further on; 

September 
2. Kifomokievism 
However, one cannot deny that among the many statements on this 
maner that have appeared in our newspapers, there were some that 
were rather peculiar and tactless. Omitting those which showed only 
the desire to exhibit the writer's own personality, since that is not 
important, we must note those which questioned the feelings of citizens 
of Russia who are not of Russian natiOrlality. This bad habit, unfor­
tunately, has still not left us, but the very essence of the point at issue 
demanded particular caution in respect to all nationalities forming 
panorihe general population of Russia. We also note that, on the 
whole, an excessively religious character should not be anributed to 
the movement to aid the Slavs, with constant mentions of "our fellow 
Orthodox believers." Those motives which can unite all Russian cit­
izens are quite sufficient to rouse Russian society to aid the Slavs; 
those motives which could drive them apan are unnecessary. If we 
are to explain our compassion for the Slavs principally by the fact 
that they are our fellow Orthodox believers, then how shall we regard 
those of our Moslem population who might begin collecting contri­
butions to aid the Turks or who declared their desire to serve in the 
Turkish army? . . .  The disturbances that have broken out in cenain 
regions of the Caucasus should remind us that the Orthodox Great 
Russian lives in a family; that although he may be the eldest son of 
Russia, he is not the only son. 
This passage alone ought to be enough to show the extent to 
which the theoretical Europeanism of certain "trailblazers," out­
moded but stubbornly persistent, is alienated from the public sense 
of things and the level of idle "Kifo-Mokievism" which that Euro­
peanism can reach in our time. The author poses to us-and is 
himself perplexed by-questions which, in their artificiality and 
affectation, in their fantastically theoretical nature, and, principally, 
in their uner pointlessness, are quite astonishing. "If we are going 
to contribute because of our common religion," he says, "then how 
shall we regard those among our Moslem population who might 
begin collecting contributions for the Turks or who express the 
wish to serve in the Turkish army?" Well, can one ask such a 
question in this case, and can one hesitate in the least in answering 
it? Every simple, uncorrupted Russian person will at once give 
you a most precise answer. Indeed, not only a Russian person, but 
any European as well, and any North American, will give you the 
clearest answer; only a European, before answering, would probably 
look at you with extreme astonishment. I will note, in passing, 

A Writer's Diary 
that on the whole our Russian Westernism (meaning our copying 
of Europe), in taking root on Russian soil, very often gradually 
takes on nuances that are not European at all; thus a certain Euro­
pean idea that has been borne to us by certain "trailblazers" some­
times cannot even be recognized, so much has it altered in being 
ground up with Russian theories and in being applied to Russian 
life-a life which, in the bargain, the theoretician does not know 
nor even finds it necessary to know. So, you see, "how shall we 
regard those among our Moslem population who . . .  " etc., etc. 
Well, it's very simple: in the first place, if we go to war with the 
Turks, and our Tatars, for example, begin sending the Turks money 
or enlisting in their army, then even before society responds I think 
the government itself will treat them as traitors to their country 
and, of course, will stop them in time. In the second place, suppose 
no war is declared but the Turks begin slaughtering the Slavs, with 
whom all Russians are equally in sympathy; in that case, if do­
nations were collected or volunteers for the Turks were found among 
Moslems, do you really think that any Russians could react without 
feeling insulted and angry? . . .  You seem to think that the whole 
problem lies in the religious nature of the contributions-that is, 
if the Russian began to help the Slav as a fellow Orthodox believer, 
then how could he, without violating civic equality and justice, 
forbid similar contributions by a Russian Tatar to help his fellow 
believer, the Turk? On the contrary, he may very well have the 
full right to do this even if he has no thought of becoming an 
enemy of the Tatar and going to war with him, while the Tatar, 
in helping the Turk, tears himself away from Russia; he becomes 
a traitor, and in entering the ranks of the Turks he goes directly 
to war with his country. Aside from that, if I, a Russian, contribute 
to a Slav who is waging war with a Turk, even though it may be 
out of common religious feelings, I am certainly not wishing for 
his victory over the Turk because the laner is a Moslem but only 
because he is slaughtering the Slav; whereas the Tatar who goes 
over to the Turkish side can do so only because I am a Christian 
and supposedly want to destroy Islam, whereas I have no wish 
whatsoever to destroy Islam but only want to defend my fellow 
believer. . . .  In helping the Slav I not only am not attacking the 
Tatar's faith, I am not even concerned about the Mohammedanism 
of the Turk himself: he can be as Moslem as he likes so long as 
he leaves the Slav alone. People may say at this point: "If you help 
your fellow believer against the Turk, then in so doing you are 

September 
going against the Russian Tatar and his faith because they have 
the shariah and the Sultan is the Caliph of all the Moslems. Chris­
tian subjects, according the Koran itself, cannot be free and cannot 
have rights equal to a Moslem; when the Russian helps him acquire 
equal rights, every Moslem sees him as opposing not just the Turk 
but the whole of Mohammedanism." But in such a case the insti­
gator of the religious war is the Tatar and not I; you must agree 
that this is an objection of a quite different kind and no tricky 
moves or categories will settle it . . . .  You seem to think that the 
whole problem stems from common religion and that if I concealed 
from the Tatar the fact that I was helping the Slav as my fellow 
believer and pretended, to the contrary, that I was helping the Slav 
under some other pretext-because he was oppressed by the Turk, 
let's say, and being denied his freedom, "this first blessing of 
man"-then the Tatar would believe me. But it's quite the contrary: 
I venture to assure you that in the eyes of any Moslem, helping 
the Christians against the Moslems under any pretext whatever is 
absolutely the same as if I helped the Christians because of their 
religion. Did you really not know that? Yet this is just what you 
say: "Those motives which can unite all Russian citizens are quite 
sufficient to rouse Russian society to aid the Slavs; those motives 
which could drive them apart are unnecessary . . . .  " That's just 
what you wrote about a common religion as a motive that drives 
people apart and about the Russian Moslems-and at once you 
explained it. You propose the "struggle for freedom" as the best 
and highest pretext or "motive," as you say, for Russian contri­
butions to the Slavs, and evidently you are quite convinced that 
"the struggle of the Slavs for freedom" will have much appeal to 
the Tatar and reassure him to the highest degree. But again, I 
assure you, the Russian Moslem who decides to go and help the 
Turks-if such a one exists-finds all motives the same, and no 
matter under which category the war began, in his eyes it will still 
be a religious war. But the Russian is not to blame, after all, if 
the Tatar sees things this way . . . .  
3· Continuation of the Preceding 
It bothers me a good deal that I had to go on at such length. If 
there had ever been a possibility of war between France and Turkey, 
and the Moslems who belonged to France-the Arabs of Algiers­
had become disturbed at the prospect, do you really think that the 

A Writer's Diary 
French would not have pacified them at once in a most energetic 
maner? Would they have worried about tlie Moslems' tender feel­
ings and shamefully hidden their best and most noble "motives" 
out of apprehension that their Moslems might somehow feel insulted 
and take offense? You write a moral injunction to the whole of 
Russia using words of such majesty: "The disturbances that have 
broken out in various regions of the Caucasus" (N. B.: you yourself 
thus admit that there have been some disturbances) "ought to 
remind us that the Orthodox Great Russian lives in a family, and 
that though he may be the eldest son of Russia, he is not the only 
son." I grant that this is stated majestically, but what is the Great 
Russian to do if the Caucasian peoples really do rise up? How is 
the eldest son in the family to blame if the Caucasian Moslem, the 
youngest son, is so sensitive about his faith and has such concep­
tions that when the eldest son opposes the Turk, the youngest son 
feels himself and the whole of Mohammedanism threatened? You 
are concerned lest the "eldest son in the family" (the Great Russian) 
somehow wound the feelings of his younger brother (the Tatar or 
the Caucasian). What humane and highly enlightened concern! You 
press the point that although the Orthodox Great Russian may be 
the eldest son, he is not the only son of Russia. May I ask, please, 
what you mean? The Russian land belongs to the Russians, to the 
Russians alone; it is a Russian land, and there is not a bit of Tatar 
land in it. The Tatars, the former oppressors of the Russian land, 
are outsiders here. But the Russians, having pacified them, having 
won back their land from them, having conquered the Tatars them­
selves, did not take vengeance on the Tatars for two centuries of 
torment; they did not humiliate them like the Moslem Turks have 
tormented and humiliated the Christians who had never done them 
any harm; on the contrary, the Russians gave the Tatars civil rights 
equal to their own, rights such as, perhaps, you will not encounter 
in the most civilized lands of the West, which you find so enlight­
ened. It may even be that the Russian Moslem sometimes enjoyed 
privileges even greater than the Russian, the owner and master of 
the Russian land . . . .  Neither did the Russian abuse the faith of 
the Tatar; he did not persecute or oppress him. Believe me, nowhere 
in the West, nor anywhere in the world, will you find such a broad, 
humane tolerance of the religions of others as in the heart of the 
real Russian. Believe me as well that it is rather the Tatar who 
prefers to keep apart from the Russian (this is precisely a result 
of the Tatar's Mohammedanism), and not the Russian who shuns 

September 
the Tatar. Anyone who has lived near the Tatars will confirm this. 
Nonetheless, the master of the Russian land is the Russian alone 
(the Great Russian, the Little Russian, the White Russian-they 
are all one), and so it will be for all time; and if the Orthodox 
Russian finds it necessary to go to war with the Moslem Turk, 
then believe me that the Russian will never permit anyone to veto 
this on his own land! To treat the Tatars with such delicacy that 
we fear to show them our most noble and spontaneous feelings that 
cause no offense to anyone-feelings of compassion for the tor­
mented Slav who happens to share our faith; and moreover, to take 
pains to hide from the Tatar everything that comprises our mission, 
our future and-principally-our responsibility-why this is a de­
mand that is ridiculous and hwniliating for the Russian . . . .  How 
am I offending the Tatar by having compassion for my own faith 
and my own fellow believers? How am I oppressing his religion? 
And how am I guilty if, in his perception, any war of ours with 
the Turks must be a religious war? The Russian, after all, cannot 
change the fundamental concepts ofthe whole of Mohammedanism. 
"Well, then," you say, "handle the matter delicately; keep it quiet 
and try not to offend him." But tell me, please, if he is that sensitive 
then may he not, perhaps, suddenly take offense at the fact that 
on the same street where his mosque stands there also stands our 
Orthodox church? Should we not tear it down so he won't be 
offended? Should the Russian flee from his own country? Should 
he not crawl under some table so he won't be seen or heard because 
his younger brother, the Tatar, lives in the Russian land? 
You said something about "questioning feelings." "We must note 
those [articles in Russian newspapers] which questioned the feelings 
of citizens of Russia who are not of Russian nationality. This bad 
habit, unfortunately, has still not left us, but the very essence of 
the point at issue demanded particular caution in respect to all 
nationalities forming part of the general population of Russia." 
What habit of ours is that? I venture to assure you that this is only 
a false note of the old theoretical liberalizing tendency which is 
incapable even of sensibly applying a liberal idea imported from 
Europe. No, indeed, sir, it is not for you and me to teach religious 
tolerance to the People or to give them lectures about freedom of 
conscience. In that respect they have something to teach you and 
the whole of Europe as well. You speak, however, about the news­
papers and Russian journalism. So what kind of questioning do 
you have in mind? And what deeply ingrained habit of ours are you 

A Writer's Diary 
lamenting so? The habit of our literatqre 'to "question" things? 
But that is also a fantasy of theoretical liberalism which is not 
justified by actual fact. I assure you that we have never denounced 
anyone in literature for his faith, nor even for any sort of local 
patriotic feelings. If in fact there were some separate instances of 
this at some time, then they are so isolated and exclusive that it is 
shameful and wrong to hold them up as general practice: "This 
habit has still not left us," you say. What is meant by denunciation 
or "questioning" anyway? There are facts which one cannot avoid 
mentioning. I don't know which articles you have in mind and 
what you are suggesting. I recall reading something about distur­
bances caused by incipient fanaticism in the Caucasus; but you 
yourself have just written about these disturbances as a factual event 
that has already occurred. I have heard that proponents of fanaticism 
have made their way from Turkey into the Crimea as well. Whether 
these disturbances in fact happened or did not happen is something 
I will not discuss at the moment; in truth, I myself do not know 
for certain. I will only ask you: if some newspaper did report such 
a rumor or even a such a fact, could this be called "questioning 
the feelings of our non-Orthodox population"? Well, let us suppose 
that these facts of disturbances really had happened; how can they 
be passed over in silence, and indeed, by a newspaper, which exists 
in order to inform us of the facts? This is how a newspaper can 
prevent a dangerous situation from arising. If it keeps silent and 
lets the matter develop-fanaticism, I mean-then both the fanatics 
and those Russians who live in proximity to them will suffer. Now 
if a newspaper deliberately publishes false information in order to 
make an accusation to the government and provoke persecution, 
then that, of course, would amount to "questioning" and denun­
ciation; but if the facts are accurate, is the newspaper to keep silent 
about them? In any case, who in Russia has ever oppressed out­
landers for their faith or even for their "religious sentiments," or 
even simply for their sentiments in the widest sense of the term? 
To the contrary: on that account we have almost always been very 
permissive, not at all like certain highly enlightened states in Eu­
rope. As far as religious sentiments are concerned, scarcely anyone 
persecutes our own sectarians nowadays, never mind those from 
other countries. And if there have been lately some few, quite 
singular instances of persecution of Stundists, then these instances 
were at once severely condemned by the whole of our press. By 
the way, maybe you think we should agree with certain German 

September 
newspapers that have accused us and continue to accuse us even 
now of tormenting and oppressing our Baltic Germans for their 
faith and their sentiments? It is truly a great pity that you did not 
specify the articles and provide some real evidence so that it would 
be completely clear which "questioning" you had in mind. You 
should be aware of and understand the usage of words and not 
play with terms such as "questioning." 
The main thing is that you dislike the category of "a common 
religion." "Help them from other motives," you say, "but not on 
account of a common religion." But, in the first place, this "mo­
tive" has not been made up and has not been deliberately chosen; 
it appeared and declared itself of its own accord; it was expressed 
by everyone at once. It is a historical motive, and this history 
continues to the present. You say: "We must not anribute a religious 
character to the movement to aid the Slavs with constant mentions 
of 'our fellow believers."' But what is one to do with history and 
with a genuine living life? Whether we should or should not at­
tribute religious significance, it comes of its own accord in any 
case. Consider this: the Turk slaughters the Slav because the laner, 
being a Christian, an infidel, dares to look for rights equal to the 
Turk's. Should a Bulgarian be converted to Islam, the Turk would 
at once cease tormenting him; on the contrary, he would at once 
recognize him as his own-so it is wrinen in the Koran. It follows 
that if the Bulgarians are being subjected to such cruel torment it 
is obviously because they are Christians; that is as clear as day. So 
how is the Russian going to avoid the "religious question" when 
he contributes to the Slav? Besides, a Russian would never think 
of avoiding it! In any case, apart from historical and current ne­
cessity, the Russian knows nothing higher than Christianity and 
cannot even conceive of anything higher. His whole land, all the 
commonality, the whole of Russia he has called Christianity, or 
Krestianstvo. Take a closer look at Orthodoxy: it is by no means 
only clericalism and ritual; it is a living feeling that our People 
have transformed into one of those basic living forces without which 
nations cannot survive. In Russian Christianity-real Russian 
Christianity-there is not even a trace of mysticism; there is only 
love for humanity and the image of Christ; those are the essentials, 
at least. In Europe people have long and quite rightly regarded 
clericalism with apprehension; particularly in some places where 
clericalism hinders the flow and flourishing of the living life and, 
of course, hinders religion itself. But is our quiet, meek Orthodoxy 

A Writer's Diary 
akin to the prejudiced, gloomy, conspiratQrial, aggressive, and cruel 
clericalism of Europe? How can it not be something close to the 
hearts of the People? The aspirations of the People are created by 
the whole of the People; they are not composed in the editorial 
offices of the press. "Should one or shouldn't one?"-but it will 
happen as it actually is happening. Further on you write: "The 
noble cause of freedom has sen the Russians among the ranks of 
its defenders. From this point of view alone, which is even more 
exalted than compassion for fellow believers and for those of com­
mon ancestry, the cause of the Slavs is a sacred one." You are 
correct, this is a very lofty motive, yet what does the motive of 
"common religion" express? Common religion here signifies the 
unfortunate, tormented person nailed to a cross, and it is because 
of his oppression that I rise up in anger. This means "lay down 
your life for the oppressed, for one dear to you; there is no deed 
more noble." This is what the motive of common religion expresses! 
Aside from that, I venture to observe-only in general, however­
that seeking out "categories" for good deeds is a dangerous thing. 
If I help a Slav as a fellow believer, for example, then this is not 
a category at all; it is only a designation of his historical situation 
at the given moment: "He is a fellow believer and so a Christian, 
and for that he is being oppressed and tormented." But if I say 
that I am helping him because of the "noble cause of freedom," 
in so doing I am exhibiting, as it were, the reasons for my help. 
And if one is to look for reasons for help, then the Montenegrins, 
for instance, and the Herzegovinians, who have displayed a nobler 
quest for freedom than the others, turn out to be more worthy of 
help than the rest. The Serbs are then somewhat less worthy, while 
the Bulgarians did not rise up for their freedom at all except in 
the begining, in some insignificant little groups at a few places 
in the mountains. They could only howl when the tormenters would 
take little children and, in the presence of their fathers and mothers, 
would cut a child's finger off every five minutes to prolong the 
agony; but they did not defend themselves; they could only wail 
in agony, as if demented, and kiss the feet of the torturers so that 
they would stop the torture and give them back their poor little 
children. Well, perhaps we shouldn't give these people much help 
because all they did was suffer; they did not elevate themselves to 
the noble cause of freedom, "this first blessing of man." But let's 
suppose that you do not think in such a base way; still you must 
admit that once you introduce reasons and "motives" for love of 

September 
your fellow man, you almost always arrive at rather similar opinions 
and conclusions. The best thing of all is to help simply because 
another person is unfortunate. Helping one's fellow believer means 
just that; I repeat: the phrase "fellow believer" for us is by no 
means some clerical rubric but only a historical designator. Believe 
me, our "common religion" also greatly loves and cherishes the 
noble cause of freedom; moreover, it is and will be prepared to die 
for that cause when necessary. But at the moment I am only speak­
ing out against the incorrect application of European ideas to Rus­
sian reality . . . .  
4· Fears and Apprehensions 
What is most amusing here is that our honorable theoretician dis­
cerns in the contemporary enthusiasm to help the Slavs a serious 
danger for us, and he does his best to warn us of it. He thinks 
that at a moment of self-delusion we are going to issue ourselves 
with a diploma to prove our maturity and then fall into peaceful 
slumber. This is what he writes: 
In this sense there is a danger in all those arguments, which we read 
so often, about aiding the Slavs-arguments such as the following: 
"these facts show a gratifying awakening of Russian society; they 
prove that Russian society has matured to the point of . . .  " etc. The 
tendency to admire ourselves in the mirror over international questions 
and declare sympathy for various nationalities, and then to sink into 
the slumber of a workman who has done his job, is so strong in us 
that all such arguments, even though they may contain a measure of 
truth, are positively dangerous. We did, after all, acclaim our readiness 
to make sacrifices at the beginning of the Crimean War; we celebrated 
our social maturity in the matter of our Chancelor's communiques in 
1863; and in the matter of the heartfelt reception we gave to the 
officers of the North American battleship; and in collecting aid for 
the Candiots; and over the ovation given to Slavic writers in Petersburg 
and Moscow. Read what the newspapers said at the time and you will 
be convinced that certain phrases are being repeated literally to­
day . . . .  We ask ourselves what was the result of all these "maturities" 
that we celebrated one after the other and whether those moments we 
celebrated did, in fact, move us forward? . . .  But we should remember 
that in following our inclinations we do not have the right to claim 
our "certificate of graduation . . . .  
" 
In the first place, nothing here, from the first word to the last, 

A Writer's Diary 
corresponds to actual reality. "The tendency to sink into the slum­
ber of a workman who has done his job is so great in us," etc. 
This "tendency to fall into slumber" is one of the most prejudiced 
and incorrect accusations of this outmoded theorizing that has such 
a great fondness for pontificating but little fondness for doing any­
thing; it is the theorists who enjoy their slumber and enjoy mor­
alizing; it is they who, in rapture over their own eloquence, are 
continually admiring themselves in the mirror. This prejudiced 
accusation, which now has become incredibly cliched, arose pre­
cisely at the time when the Russian, if he was slumbering by the 
stove or doing little else but playing cards, did so only because he 
was never given anything to do or allowed to do anything; he was 
prohibited from doing anything. But the moment some gaps ap­
peared in the fences that surrounded us, the Russian at once in 
fact displayed a feverish restlessness and impatience to get down 
to work; rather than any propensity for slumber, he even showed 
perseverance in his work. And if our work is still not proceeding 
with total success, then it's certainly not because it's not being 
done; it's because after the two-hundred-year period in which we 
lost the habit of working, we cannot so immediately acquire the 
capacity to understand what work means, to approach it properly, 
and to be able to undertake it. You merely continue to moralize 
and to rebuke the Russians because of past sins. I say this to the 
older theoreticians, who never deigned to come down from the 
heights of their grandeur, enter into Russian life and learn some­
thing from it, even, say, to check and correct their prejudiced views 
from days long past. 
But the apprehension fully worthy of K.ifa Mokievich is the one 
about the "graduation diploma." We'll give ourselves a diploma, 
he says, and then settle down and fall asleep. On the contrary: it's 
only the old theorizing that so long ago issued itself a diploma, 
the theorizing that is inclined to be enraptured with itself, to mor­
alizing, and to sweet semislumber; but such young, fine, unifying 
movements of the whole of society such as occurred this year can 
only rouse us to further development and accomplishment. Mo­
ments such as these leave only positive results. And where could 
you have gonen the notion that Russian society is so inclined toward 
self-praise and self-admiration in the mirror? All the facts contradict 
that. To the contrary: ours is the least self-assured and most inclined 
to self-criticism of any society in the world! . . .  Not only did we 
sympathize with the Slavs, we liberated the peasants. And just 

September 
look: has there ever in the history of the Russian people been a 
more skeptical moment, a moment of greater self-analysis, than 
these last twenty years of Russian life? In these years our lack of 
trust in ourselves went to pathological extremes, to impermissible 
self-mockery, to undeserved self-scorn; but we were far, far removed 
from rapture over our own accomplishments. You say that we also 
took pity on the people of Crete and welcomed a battleship; and 
each time we wrote about our own maturity and nothing came of 
that maturity. But after that you even cease to understand the 
commonest facts of life, not only of Russian life but of life every­
where. If we exaggerated a little then in our rejoicing over ourselves 
and our success, then surely that is quite a natural thing in a young 
society eager to live, a society that believes so strongly in life and 
takes its own mission seriously! This happens everywhere, always, 
and with every nation. Take any very ancient book and you will 
see that just such initial, youthful delight with one's success was 
a quality of even the most ancient peoples of the world and so has 
existed from the beginning of the world-given, of course, that 
these peoples were young and full of life and future promise. We 
might have had an excess of premature joy at our success and the 
fact that now we, at last, have given up card playing and that we, 
too, have begun working at something. But is that in any way 
dangerous, as our Jeremiah proclaims with alarm? To the contrary: 
these are the very people who take the real living life seriously and 
joyfully, with such feeling and such heart; these are the people who 
will not let themselves fall asleep from self-praise. Believe me, the 
life that has once been roused to action and has welled up like a 
fountain will not stop; rapture with oneself will pass away in an 
instant, and the stronger it was, the more surely there will ensue 
a salutary sobering, together with movement ever farther forward. 
But even though we will grow sober, we will still go on respecting 
our salutary, youthful, noble, and innocent rapture of recent days. 
You ask: "What was the result of these 'maturities'?" What do 
you mean? Perhaps the present moment is the result. Had there 
not been the excitement over the Cretans and the reception of the 
Slavic visitors, nothing might have happened now. Society has 
become more serious and acquainted with a certain cycle of ideas 
and views. For Heaven's sake, everything happens gradually on 
earth; indeed, nations are formed gradually, not born as sober­
minded young pedants. And what are you angry about? "We be­
come too carried away by this movement," you say; but premature 

A Writer's Diary 
prudence, the pedantry of youths playing the role of elders, is more 
dangerous. You do not like any sort of lively movement and prefer 
something more academic; well, what can I say? Such is your taste. 
h, of course, you at once cite the example of Europe: "France," 
rou say, "did not do for Italy what we are now doing for the Slavs; 
lbut did French society, after the liberation of Italy, begin to consider 
itself more mature than before?" That's what you write. But really, 
that's ridiculous! You find us a model of modesty in-France? 
'fhen, tell me, did not the Frenchman look at himself in the mirror 
ƪd admire himself? During the time of Napoleon, for example, 
rpey roused the hatred of the whole of Europe toward them for 
their intolerably proud ways, their boundless self-satisfaction and 
sanctimoniousness. In fact, that is how they always were, right up 
until 1871. But France is now a nation too disunited internally, 
and therefore it is rather difficult to examine her in that respect. 
But what would you say, for instance, about the English or, es­
pecially, the Germans? Do you mean to say that these don't like 
looking at themselves in the mirror? Don't they like boasting­
especially the Germans? And how accurate are your conclusions 
from history? "France," you say, "has not done for Italy what we 
are now doing for the Slavs . . . .  " I assure you that France herself 
has done absolutely nothing for Italy. Napoleon III liberated north­
em Italy for his own political considerations, and we have absolutely 
no way of knowing whether the French people would have liberated 
Italy themselves without Napoleon III and without his political 
considerations. At least it is very difficult to decide whether this 
liberation of the Italians would have occured solely for their lib­
eration and not for some sort of political anexation . . . .  It still 
seems to me that both Napoleon III and France herself have since 
been gazing upon the exploits of Cavour, who deceived them some­
what, without a lot of enthusiasm; and when the French govern­
ment's loud "Jamais!" was heard toward any further Italian claims 
on Rome, then the French people, perhaps, listened to this jamais 
with some sympathy. Oh, of course, it's true that France has still 
done more for Italy than the Russians have yet done for the Slavs; 
this matter is still not completed, and its further consequences are 
known only to God. But it is still difficult to admit that such a 
sincere movement of Russians for the Slavs, ful of love and already 
bolstered by feats of the greatest self-sacrifice, is in need of such 
supremely edifying examples of valor as the liberation of northern 
Italy by Napoleon III. . . .  However, you even set the Hungarians 

September 
as an example of magnanimity for the Russian People. The Hun­
garians are particularly fine and noble at the moment, are they not? 
What a narrow-minded hatred they display toward any thought of 
lightening the lot of the Slavs! What hatred for Russia! How did 
you ever think of such an example and such a people? . . .  
5 . Postscript 
Once again I must express my apologies for going on at such length, 
but in these words-quite innocent in themselves-of an author 
who is unquestionably intelligent and well-meaning, although some­
what outmoded, and in the tone in which these words are expressed, 
I once more seemed to hear voices from what may be the very near 
and perturbing future. For that reason I could not resist . . . .  Oh, 
of course these possible voices of the future have nothing in common 
with the voice from The European Messenger, but still I seemed to 
catch their sound. In fact, should it happen that this whole generous 
and noble Russian movement to aid the Slavs comes, through force 
of circumstances, to naught; should the cause not succeed; should 
everyone turn back and fall silent-oh, what new shouts would we 
hear then, and in what a triumphant, victorious tone. They would 
no longer be innocent but mocking, sarcastic, and celebrating their 
victory! Then voices, which at present seem temporarily silenced 
or are even singing in unison to the "noble impulse," would cry 
out unconstrainedly. They would laugh in the face of this noble 
impulse, and the people of the noble impulse would again be 
embarrassed and diffident, while many of the poor things would 
even believe and think, "Yes, we should have foreseen it." "Well, 
you true believers, did you achieve anything?" the victors would 
shout. "What came from your unity and from your 'unifying idea'? 
You valiant heroes were left with nothing! Intelligent people knew 
beforehand how this would end. Did you really think anything 
could come of it? The cause itself, in fact, isn't worth a candle. 
And you've given yourself a graduate's diploma. Well, gentlemen; 
are you more mature now? No, my friend, go off into your corner 
and snicker into your hand as you did before-that's an undertaking 
that will turn out better!" That's what will be heard, along with 
much, much more that can't be written down. And how much 
cynicism we would at once see again; how much mistrust in our 
own strength, mistrust in Russia herself. Once more they would 
begin singing a requiem over her! And how many gangs like the 

A Writer's Diary 
Jack of Hearts would appear! And how many young people of the 
purest heart would again flee from society˺ Once again, disunity! 
Once again, uncertainty! Incidentally, Viscount Beaconsfield, of 
course, knew very well that he was lying when he spoke about our 
destructive elements. Perhaps he even sensed that if we did have 
any destructive elements, then at present, with Russia's new up­
surge of enthusiasm, these would shift to a new course; and, of 
course, Viscount Tarantula would find such a thought most an­
noying. But now-should the the upsurge fail, I mean-the taran­
tula would rejoice; he would have good cause! But . . .  is this really 
near to the truth? Will this in fact come to pass? What a bad 
dream! A dream and nothing more . . . .  

October 


1 
1. A Case That Is Not as Simple as It Seems 
On October 1 5 the court reached its decision on the case of the 
stepmother who, some six months ago, in May, you may recall, 
threw her little six-year-old stepdaughter from a fourth-story win­
dow; the little girl, through some miracle, survived in good health. 
The stepmother, a peasant woman of twenty named Ekaterina Kor­
nilova, was married to a widower who, she testified, regularly 
quareled with her; he did not allow her to visit her relatives or 
allow relatives to visit her; he criticized her by comparing her to 
his late wife, claiming that the laner was a bener housekeeper, and 
so on. In short, he "drove her to the point where she could no 
longer love him ," and to get even with him she conceived the 
notion of throwing the daughter of his former wife out the window; 
this, in fact, she did. In sum, it would seem-apart from the 
miraculous survival of the child-to be a rather simple and clear­
cut story. The court regarded the case from this same "clear-cut" 
point of view and itself, in the simplest fashion, sentenced Ekaterina 
Kornilova, "being more than seventeen and less than twenty years 
of age when she commined the crime, to be exiled to hard labor 
for a term of two years and eight months and on completion of 
this sentence to be exiled permanently to Siberia." 
However, despite all its simplicity and clarity, there remains some­
thing in this case that seems not entirely clarified. The defendant 
(a rather preny young woman) went to trial in the late stages of 
pregnancy, so that a midwife had been summoned to the courtroom 
for any eventuality. Back in May, when the crime was commined 
(and when, accordingly, the accused was in her fourth month of 
pregnancy), I wrote in my May Diary (briefly and just in passing, 
however, while looking at the predictable and bureaucratic ways of 

A Writer's Diary 
our legal profession) the following words: "And what is truly shock­
ing . . .  is that the act of this monster-stepmother is truly bizarre; 
perhaps it really should be given a detailed and deep analysis that 
might even serve to lighten the case against this criminal woman." 
That is what I wrote then. Now please look at the facts. In the 
first place, the defendant herself admitted her guilt, and did so 
immediately after committing the crime; she reported it herself. 
Right at the police station she told of how, on the night before the 
crime, she had decided to kill her stepdaughter, whom she had 
come to hate out of resentment of her husband; but her husband's 
presence that evening prevented her from doing anything. The next 
day, however, when he had gone to work, she opened the window 
and moved all the flowerpots to one side of the windowsill; then 
she told the girl to climb onto the sill and look down through the 
open window. The girl did this, perhaps even eagerly; goodness 
knows what she expected to see below the window. When she had 
climbed up and knelt, looking out and clinging to the sides of the 
window, the stepmother lifted the girl's legs from behind and sent 
her tumbling out into space. After looking down on the fallen 
child, the woman (as she recounts it herself) closed the window, 
got dressed, locked the room, and went off to the police station to 
report what had happened. Those are the facts, and it would seem 
that nothing could be more straightforward; and yet, how fantastic, 
is it not? Our juries are still frequently accused of bringing in some 
truly fantastic acquittals. Sometimes even the moral feelings of 
people utterly unconnected with the case have been aroused. We 
realized that one could have mercy on the criminal, but that good 
could not be called evil in such an important and great matter as 
criminal justice; and yet there were acquittals of almost this kind, 
i.e., evil was almost acknowledged as good, or at least it almost 
reached that point. Either there was pseudosentimentality or a lack 
of understanding of the very principle of justice, a misunderstand­
ing of the fact that in court the first thing, the very first principle, 
is to define and specify, as far as possible, what is evil, and to 
proclaim it publicly as evil. And only then come the issues of easing 
the criminal's lot, concern for his rehabilitation, and so on. The 
latter are different problems, very profound and immense, but 
totally distinct from the business of the court; they belong to other 
areas of social life entirely, areas which, we must admit, have still 
not been properly defined and not even formulated in Russia, so 
that we perhaps have not yet pronounced our first word in these 

October 
areas of our public life. And, in the meantime, our courts confuse 
both these different ideas; the results, Heaven knows, are bizarre. 
Crime seems not to be acknowledged as crime at all; to the contrary: 
it sems that a public proclamation is made-and by the court, 
indeed-that there is no crime and that crime, don't you see, is 
only an illness caused by the abnormal state of society, a notion 
that in some specific instances and in some cenain categories is 
dazzling in its truth, but which is absolutely mistaken when applied 
as a whole and in general; for here there is a cenain line that cannot 
be crossed without altogether depriving people of their human 
image, without removing their very selfhood and life and reducing 
them to the level of a tiny bit of fluff whose fate hangs on the first 
breath of wind. In shon, this amounts to announcing that some 
new kind of science has just discovered some new kind of human 
nature. However, this new science does not yet exist and has not 
yet even begun. And so all these compassionate verdicts by juries­
verdicts in cases where a crime clearly proved and supponed by 
the criminal's full confession, was sometimes flatly denied: "He's 
not guilty; he didn't do it; he committed no murder" -all these 
compassionate verdicts (aside from some rare instances when they 
were really appropriate and correct) have caused astonishment 
among the People and aroused mockery and perplexity in society. 
And so now, just having read of the verdict on the fate of the 
peasant woman Kornilova (two years and eight months at hard 
labor), the thought suddenly occurred to me: "This is a time when 
they should have let her off; this time they should have said: 'There 
was no crime; she committed no murder; she did not throw the 
girl out the window.' " I will not, however, develop my ideas on 
the basis of abstractions or emotions. It simply seems to me that 
in this case there was a most legitimate legal ground for acquitting 
the accused: this is the fact that she was pregnant. 
Everyone knows that a pregnant woman (particularly when she 
is carrying her first child) is very often subject to cenain strange 
influences and impressions that take a strange and fantastic hold 
on her psyche. These influences sometimes-in rare instances, how­
ever-assume extraordinary, abnormal, almost bizarre forms. But 
despite the fact that they happen rarely (I mean the truly extraor­
dinary manifestations), in the present case the fact that they do 
happen, or even that they can happen, is more than enough for 
those who must decide the fate of a human being. Doctor Nikitin, 
who examined the woman (after the crime), stated that in his 

A Writer's Diary 
opinion Kornilova committed her crime consciously, although her 
angry state of mind and the possibility of a-fit of passion could be 
taken into account. But in the first place, what could the word 
consciously mean here? People rarely do anything unconsciously, 
apart from those who are insane or delirious or sufering from 
delirium. Even medicine surely recognizes that someone can com­
mit an act quite consciously but yet not be fully responsible for 
committing it. Take insane people, for instance: the majority of 
their insane acts are committed quite consciously, and those who 
commit them remember doing so. Moreover, they can give an 
account of what they have done, defend their actions, argue with 
you about them, and sometimes argue so logically that you may 
well be at a loss for an answer. I'm not a doctor, of course, but I 
can remember being told as a child about a certain Moscow lady 
who, whenever she was pregnant and during specific periods of 
her pregnancy, would acquire an unusual and irresistible passion 
for stealing things. She would steal things and money from friends 
she visited, from her own visitors, and even from the shops and 
stores where she made her purchases. Afterward, her family would 
return the stolen things to their owners. Yet she was a lady who 
was well-educated, from respectable society, and by no means poor; 
after these few days of strange passion had passed, the thought of 
stealing would never enter her head. At that time everyone, in­
cluding medical people, realized that this was only a temporary 
affect of her pregnancy. Still, of course, she stole consciously and 
with full awareness of what she was doing. She was completely 
conscious but simply was unable to resist this impulse when it came 
upon her. I must suppose that even now medical science can say 
little with certainty about such cases-I mean about their psycho­
logical aspect: which laws produce such crises, manias, and influ­
ences in the human psyche; what causes such fits of madness in a 
sane person; what precisely does consciousness mean here and what 
role does it play? There seems no doubt of the possibility of these 
influences and extraordinary manias during pregnancy, and that is 
sufficient . . . .  And what, I repeat, of the fact that these very ex· 
traordinary influences occur so rarely? For the conscience of one 
sitting in judgment in such cases it is enough to consider that they 
still may occur. Suppose, though, that people argue as follows: she 
did not go off to steal things like that lady or think up something 
very unusual to do; on the contrary, she did precisely the thing 
that was relevant 10 the case, i.e. , she simply took revenge on her 

October 
hated husband by trying to murder his daughter by his former 
wife, whose example the husband was always citing. Well, say what 
you like, but even though this may be comprehensible, it is still 
not simple; it may be logical, but you must agree that, had she not 
been pregnant, perhaps this logical thing would never have hap­
pened. It might have happened like this, for instance: left alone 
with her stepdaughter, abused by her husband and angry at him, 
she might have thought to herself in her fury, "What if I throw 
this wretched little girl out the window just to spite him?" She 
might have thought it, but she would not have done it. She would 
have sinned in mind but not in deed. But now, pregnant, she carried 
it out. The logic is the same in both cases, but the difference is 
immense. 
At least if the jury had acquitted the defendant they would have 
had something on which to base their verdict: "Although such 
pathological affects occur but rarely, they do occur. What if there 
was an affect of pregnancy in this case as well?" That is something 
to consider. At least in this case everyone would have understood 
the grounds for mercy and no doubts would have been aroused. 
And what of the possibility of an error? Surely an error on the 
side of mercy is better than an error on the side of punishment, 
the more so as there is no way of verifying anything in this case. 
The woman is the first to consider herself guilty; she confessed 
immediately after committing the crime, and she confessed again 
in court six months later. So she will go to Siberia, perhaps, in 
conscience and in the depths of her soul considering herself guilty; 
so she will die, perhaps, repenting in her final hour and considering 
herself a murderer. And never will it occur to her, nor to anyone 
else on earth, that there is a pathological affect that can arise during 
pregnancy and that it, perhaps, was the cause of it all, and that, 
had she not been pregnant, nothing would have happened . . . .  No, 
of two errors here, it is better to choose the error of mercy. One 
would sleep better afterward . . . .  And yet, what am I saying? A 
busy man cannot be thinking of sleep; a busy man has a hundred 
such cases, and he sleeps soundly when he crawls into bed, ex­
hausted. It's the idle man who encounters one or two such cases 
a year who has a lot of time to think. He's the one who might 
have such thoughts, from lack of anything better to do. In short, 
idleness is the mother of al vices. 
By the way, there was a midwife present in court, and just 
imagine: when they convicted the woman, they convicted along 

A Writer's Diary 
with her an infant not yet born. Don't you find that strange? But 
let's suppose that's not entirely true: still, you must agre that it 
seems very close to the truth, and indeed, the whole truth. In fact, 
here he is, condemned to Siberia before he's even born, along with 
his mother who has to look after him. If he goes with his mother, 
he loses his father; if the outcome of the case should be such that 
his father keeps him (I don't know whether the father can do that 
now), then the child loses his mother . . . .  In shon, in the first place 
the child loses his family even before he's born, and in the second 
place, when he eventually grows up, he'll learn everything about 
his mother and he'll . . . .  However, who knows what he'll do? It's 
best to take a simplified view of the case. Loking at it from such 
a point of view, all the phantasmagoria disappear. So it should be 
in life. I even think that all such things that seem so unusual are 
in actuality aranged in a most ordinary fashion, prosaic to the 
point of indecency. Just look, in fact: this Kornilov is now a wid­
ower again; he's also fre once more, since his mariage has ben 
anulled by his wife's exile to Siberia; his wife, or non-wife, will 
shortly bear him a son (because they will surely allow her to bear 
the child before she sets off), and while she is recuperating in the 
prison hospital or wherever they place her, Kornilov-and I'll stake 
a bet on this-will visit her in a most prosaic maner and-who 
knows-perhaps he will bring along this same little girl who flew 
out the window. And they will get together and talk about the 
simplest, most everyday things-about some wretched canvas cloth, 
about warm shoes or felt bots for the journey. Who knows, they 
may strike up a very close relationship now that they have ben 
divorced, whereas formerly they used to quarel. And they may 
never utter a word of reproach to one another but only sigh over 
their fate with compassion for one another. And that same little 
girl who flew out the window, I repeat, wil likely run errands 
every day from her father to her "sweet mumy," taking her fancy 
loaves of bread: "Here, Mumy," she'll say, "Daddy's sent you 
some tea and sugar as well, and tomorrow he'll come himself." 
The most tragic thing may be that when they bid one another 
farewell at the railway station they will break into wailing, just at 
the last minute, between the second and the third bell. The little 
girl will also begin to wail, her mouth gaping, as she looks at them; 
and each, one after the other, will probably fall down at the other's 
feet. "Forgive me, Katerina Prokofievna, my dearest," he'll say. 
"Don't think badly of me." And she will say to him: "And you 

October 
forgive me, Vasily Ivanovich (or whatever his name is), my dear; 
I'm guilty before you, and there's much to blame me for . . . .  " And 
now the infant, still being nursed-he will certainly be there as 
well-will raise his voice, whether she takes him along or leaves 
him with his father. In short, with our People the result will never 
be an epic poem, will it? They are the most prosaic people in the 
world, so that one is almost ashamed of them in that respect. Now 
just compare this with how it would happen in Europe: what 
passions, what vengeance, and what dignity there would be! Just 
try to describe this case in a story, event by event, beginning with 
a young wife of a widower, going on to throwing the girl out the 
window, up to the minute when she looked out to see whether the 
child had been hurt and at once went off to the police; then to the 
moment when she sat in court with the midwife, and right to those 
last words of farewell and bows and . . .  and imagine, I almost wrote, 
"And of course nothing would come of it," yet it might well turn 
out better than any of our poems and novels with heroes "with 
deep insight and lives torn asunder." Do you know, I simply don't 
understand why our novelists have to go off looking for material; 
here would be a subject for them. Why not just describe the whole 
truth, step by step? And yet, it seems, I forgot the old rule: what 
matters is not the subject but the eye. If there is an eye, a subject 
will be found; if there is no eye, if you are blind, you won't find 
anything in any subject. Oh, the eye is an important thing; what 
one eye sees as an epic poem, another sees as only a heap of . . . .  
Is it really not possible now to reduce this sentence on Kornilova 
somehow? Is there no way this could be done? Truly, there might 
be an error here . . . .  I just keep thinking that there was an error! 
2. A Few Remarks about Simplicity and Simplification 
Now, another topic. Now I would like to state something about 
simplicity in general. I recall a little thing that happened to me a 
long time ago. Some thirteen years ago, during what to some people 
was the height of our "time of troubles" and to others was most 
"straight and direct," one winter evening I dropped into a library 
on Meshchansky Street (as it was then called), not far from my 
home. I had decided to write a critical article and I needed to make 
some excerpts from a Thackeray novel. In the library I was served 

A Writer's Diary 
by a cenain young lady (she was then a young lady). I asked for 
the novel; she listened with a stern expression. 
"We don't keep such rubbish," she said before I had even fin­
ished, with inexpressible scorn, which, God knows, I didn't 
deserve. 
Of course, I wasn't surprised and realized what was the matter. 
Many things of the sort happened at that time, and they seemed 
to happen in a rush of rapture. An idea dropped onto the street 
and took on a most common, street-corner appearance. Pushkin 
was given a terrible going-over at that time, while "boots" were 
praised to the skies. Nevertheless, I stil attempted to talk it over 
with the girl. 
"Do you really consider Thackeray to be rubbish?" I asked, 
assuming a most humble air. 
"You ought to be ashamed for asking. The olden days are past; 
now there is rational demand . . . .  " 
With that I departed, leaving the young lady remarkably pleased 
with the lesson she had given me. But I was powerfully struck by 
the simplicity of her view, and it was just at that time that I began 
to ponder simplicity in general and our Russian haste for general­
ization in particular. Our capacity for being satisfied with the sim­
ple, small, and insignificant is striking, to say the least. People 
may object that this incident was trivial and insignificant; that the 
young lady was an uninformed and, more important, uneducated 
fool; that it was not worth recalling the incident; and that it was 
all too easy for the young lady to imagine that until she arrived 
the whole of Russia had been populated only by fools, but that 
now, suddenly, a lot of wise people had materialized and that she 
was one of them. I know al that myself; I also know that this 
young lady was straining her abilities in saying what she did-that 
is, about the "rational demand" and about Thackeray-and even 
then she had to use someone else's words-one could tell that from 
her face. But still this incident has stayed in my mind until now 
as a metaphor, as an kind of fable, almost even as an emblem. 
Think carefully about today's common opinions, about today's 
"rational demand," about today's flat judgments-not only upon 
Thackeray but upon the whole Russian People: what simplicity there 
is at times! What a straight-line approach; what quick satisfaction 
with the peny and insignificant as means of expression; what a 
general rush to set one's mind at rest as quickly as possible, to 
pronounce judgment so as not to have to trouble oneself any longer. 

October 
Believe me, this tendency will remain with us for a long time. Just 
look: everyone now believes in the sincerity and actuality of the 
People's movement of this year, and yet even this belief does not 
satisfy; something even more simple is demanded. One of the 
members of a certain committee related in my presence that he 
had received rather a lot of letters with questions such as the 
following: "Why are the Slavs so important now? Why are we 
helping the Slavs as Slavs? If the Scandinavians were in a similar 
position, would we be helping them as we are the Slavs?" In short, 
why this category "Slavs" (recall the concerns over the rubric 
"common faith" in The European Messenger that I spoke about in 
the last issue of my Diary). It would seem at first glance that this 
is not a case of simplicity at all, and not an urge for simplification; 
to the contrary, one can sense disquiet in these questions. But the 
simplicity in this case consists precisely in the effort to achieve 
nihil and a tabula rasa and so, in a way, to set one's mind at rest. 
For what is simpler and more restful than a zero? Note as well that 
in these questions one can catch the sound of "rational demand" 
and "you ought to be ashamed of yourself." 
There is no doubt that very many of our most intelligent and, 
so to say, our "highest" people were not at all pleased to hear this 
quiet and humble, yet firm and powerful, voice of our People. This 
was not because they failed to understand it; on the contrary, it 
was because they understood it all too well, to the point where it 
even caused them some perplexity. At least there are certain signs 
now that a strong reaction is beginning. I'm not talking about those 
innocent voices we heard even earlier, voices that could not help 
but grumble and disagree on old questions because of their beloved 
old principles. We hear, for example, that "we mustn't hurry so 
and get carried away with as crude and unenlightened a cause as 
helping the Slavs simply because they are supposed to be brothers 
of ours." No, I am not talking about these rationally liberal old 
men who chew over old phrases, but about the real reaction to the 
Popular movement, a reaction that, by all signs, will soon rear its 
head. It is this reaction which naturally and despite itself will ally 
with those gentlemen who, having long ago simplified their view 
of Russia to the ultimate degree of clarity, are prepared to say, "We 
really ought to stop this whole movement so that everything can 
rest in the state of inertia it did before." And just imagine: it is 
not at all the fantastical nature of this "phenomenon" that causes 
the simplifiers to dislike it; I mean, it is not because something 

A Writer's Diary 
they had considered inert, senseless, and utterly simple suddenly 
ventured to speak out as though it realy had consciousness and 
life. Such dislike we could understand: they simply felt offended 
and nothing more. But it's quite the contrary: they didn't like this 
whole phenomenon because from something fantastical it suddenly 
became comprehensible to everyone. "How did it dare become 
comprehensible to everyone so suddenly," they ask. "How did it 
dare take on such a simplified and sensible appearance?" It was 
this sort of indignation, as I said earlier, that met with support 
both among our intellectual old men, who strive with all their 
might to "simplify" and bring this "phenomenon" down from the 
rational level to something elemental and primitive, which, though 
it may be good-hearted, is still ignorant and potentially harmful. 
In short, the reaction is attempting with all its might and with all 
its means to simplify above all. . . .  Meanwhile, because of this 
excessive simplification of views on certain things, the cause itself 
is sometimes lost. In some instances simplicity harms the simplifiers 
themselves. Simplicity does not change; simplicity moves in a 
straight line and is arrogant above all. Simplicity is the enemy of 
analysis. The end result, very often, is that in your simplicity you 
begin to Jose your grasp of the subject and lose sight of it altogether, 
so that the reverse happens; that is, your own view involuntarily 
changes from something simple into something fantastic. This hap­
pens precisely because of the mutual, lengthy, and ever-growing 
alienation of one Russia from the other. Our alienation began pre­
cisely from one Russia's simpli[ted view of the other. It began a very 
long time ago, as we know, still in the time of Peter the Great, 
when there first developed the unusual simplification of views of 
"upper" Russia on the People's Russia. Since then, from generation 
unto generation, this view has done nothing more than grow ever 
more simple. 
3· Two Suicides 
Not long ago I happened to be speaking to one of our writers (a 
great artist) about the comical aspects of life and the difficulty of 
defining a thing and giving it its proper name. Just prior to that 
I had remarked to him that I, who have known Woe from Wit for 
almost forty years, had only this year properly understood one of 
the most vivid characters of this comedy, Molchalin, and had come 
to this sudden understanding of him only when he (the writer with 

October 
whom I was speaking) had portrayed him in one of his satirical 
sketches. (I shall have something to say about Molchalin some time 
in the future; he's an important topic.) 
"But do you know," the writer said to me suddenly, apparently 
deeply struck by his long-held idea, "do you know, whatever you 
write or portray, whatever you set down in a work of art, you can 
never match real life. It doesn't matter what you depict-it will 
always come out weaker than real life. You might think you've 
found the most comical aspect of some certain thing in life and 
captured its most grotesque aspect-but not at all! Real life will at 
once present you with something of this same sort that you never 
even suspected and that goes far beyond anything your own ob­
servation and imagination were able to create! . . .  
" 
I had known this ever since 1846, when I began writing, and 
perhaps even earlier, and this fact has struck me more than once 
and has caused me no small bewilderment: what is the use of art 
when we can see it so lacking in power? In truth, if you investigate 
some fact of real life-even one that at first glance is not so vivid­
you'll find in it, if you have the capacity and the vision, a depth 
that you won't find even in Shakespeare. But here, you see, is the 
whole point: whose vision and whose capacity? Not only to create 
and to write a work of literature, but merely even to pick out the 
fact requires something of the artist. For some observers all the 
facts of life pass by in the most touchingly simple manner and are 
so plain that it's not worthwhile to think about them or even to 
look at them. Those same facts of life will sometimes perplex 
another observer to the extent that he (and this happens not in­
frequently) is at last incapable of simplifying and making a general 
conclusion about them, of drawing them out into a straight line 
and so setting his mind at rest. He resorts to simplification of 
another sort and very simply plants a bullet in his head so as to 
quench at one stroke his tormented mind and all its questions. 
These are only the two extremes, but between them lies the entire 
range of the human intellect. But of course we can never exhaust 
a whole phenomenon and never reach its end, or its beginning. 
We know only the daily flow of the things we see, and this only 
on the surface; but the ends and the beginnings are things that, 
for human beings, still lie in the realm of the fantastic. 
By the way, one of my respected readers wrote last summer to 
tell me of a strange and unexplained suicide, and I have been 
wanting to talk about it. Everything about this suicide, both its 

A Writer's Diary 
extema1 and its internal aspects, is a ridle. I, of course, fOIJawing 
the dictates of human narure, have tried to come up with some 
solution to this ridle so as to be able "to pause and rest my mind." 
The victim is.a young girl of no more than twenty-thre or twenty­
four, the daughter of ooe very well-known Rusian emigre; she was 
born abroad, Rusian by origin but scarcely Rusian 31 al by 
education. The newspapers made some vague mention of her 31 
the time, but the details of the case are very curious: "She soaked 
a piece of coton wool in chloroform, bound this to her face and 
lay down on the bed . . .
. " And so she died. She wrote the fOllowing 
nore befOre her death: 
Je m'en vais entreprendre un long voyage. Si cela ne reusit pas 
qu'oo se rasemble pour fi!tl:r ma resum:ction avec du Cliquct. Si 
cela riwril, je prie qu'on ne me laise enterer que tout a fait mone, 
puisqu 'il est tres desagreable de se rtveiler dans un cen:ueil sous 
tere. Ce 11' est pas chic! 
Which, translated, is: 
I am seting off on a long journey. If the suicide should DOt suced, 
then let everyone gather to celebrate my n:sum:ction with glases of 
Cliquct. If I do rucud, I ask only that you oot bury me until you 
have determined that I am completely dead, because it is most un­
pleasant to awaken in a coffin underground. T1raz would not be chic 
il al! 
In this nasty, vulgar chic I think I hear a chalenge indignation, 
perhaps, or anger-but about what? Persons who are simply vulgar 
end their lives by suicide only for material, obvious, external rea­
sons; but it is apparent from the tooe of this nore that she could 
not have such reasons. What could she be angry about? About the 
simplicity of the things she saw around her? About the lack of any 
meaningful content in life? Was she ooe of those very well-known 
judges and negators of life who are angry 31 the "stupidity" of 
man's presence on earth, 31 the senseles unintentionality of his 
appearance here, 31 the tyrany of brute causality with which they 
canot reconcile themselves? Here we have a soul of ooe who has 
rebelled against the "linearity" of things, of ooe who could not 
tolerate this linearity, which was pased on to her from childhod 
in her father's house. The most hideous thing of al is that she 
died, of course, without any apparent doubt. Most probably, there 
was no conscious doubt in her soul, no "questions." It is most 

October 
likely of al that she believed everything she had been taught since 
childhood, without question. And so she simply died from "chilly 
gloom and tedium," in animal, so to say, and unaccountable suf­
fering; it was as if she could not get enough air and she began to 
sufocate. Her soul instinctively could not tolerate linearity and 
instinctively demanded something more complex . . . .  
About a month ago all the Petersburg newspapers carried several 
short lines in fine print concerning a suicide in the city. A poor 
young girl, a seamstress, threw herself out of a fourth-floor window 
"because she was absolutely unable to find enough work to make 
a living." These accounts added that she leapt and fell to the ground 
holding an icon in her hands. This icon in the hands is a strange 
and unprecedented feature in suicides! This, now, is a meek and 
a humble suicide. Here, apparently, there was no grumbling or 
reproach: it was simply a matter of being unable to live any longer­
"God did not wish it"-and so she died having said her prayers. 
There are some things which, no matter how simple they seem on 
the surface, one still goes on thinking about for a long time; they 
recur in one's dreams, and it even seems as if one is somehow to 
blame for them. This meek soul who destroyed herself torments 
one's mind despite oneself. It was this latter death that reminded 
me of the suicide of the emigre's daughter I had heard about last 
sumer. But how different these two creatures are-just as if they 
had come from two different planets! And how different the two 
deaths are! And which, I ask, of these two souls bore more torment 
on this earth-if such an idle question is proper and permissible? 
4· The Sentence 
By the way, here are the thoughts of one person-a materialist, of 
course-who committed suicide out of boredom . 
. . . In fact, what right did this Nature have to bring me into the 
world as a result of some eternal law of hers? I was created with 
consciousness, and I was conscious of this Nature: what right did she 
have to produce me, a conscious being, without my willing it? A 
conscious being, and thus a suffering one; but I do not want to suffer, 
for why would I have agreed to that? Nature, through my conscious­
ness, proclaims to me some son of hannony of the whole. From this 
message human consciousness has created religions. Nature tells me­
even though I know ful well that I cannot participate in the "harmony 
of the whole" and never will be able to and haven't the least idea 

A Writer's Diary 
what this means in any case-that I still ought to submit to this 
message, to humble myself, to accept suffering in view ofthe harmony 
of the whole and agree to live. However, if I am to make a conscious 
choice, then naturally I would prefer to be happy only during the 
moment while I exist; but as regards the whole and its harmony, once 
I have been annihilated, I haven't the least concern if this whole with 
its harmony remains after I am gone or is annihilated at the same 
instant as I am. And why should I have to worry so whether it is 
preserved after I am gone? That is the question. It would have been 
better had I been created like all animals, that is, as a living being, 
but without a rational conception of myself. My consciousness is 
certainly not a harmony but just the opposite, a disharmony, because 
I am unhappy with it. Just look at those who are happy on earth, 
look at the sort of people who consent to go on living. It is precisely 
those people who are like animals and who are most closely akin to 
those species because of the limited development of their conscious­
ness. They willingly consent to live, but on condition that they live 
like animals; that is, they eat, drink, sleep, build their nests, and 
raise their offspring. To eat, drink, and sleep in human fashion means 
to grow rich and to steal; building a nest above all means to steal. 
You may object, perhaps, that one can arrange one's life and build 
one's nest on a rational foundation, on scientifically proven social 
principles and not by stealing, as was the case heretofore. Granted; 
but I ask you: what for? What is the point of arranging one's life and 
expending so much effort to arrange social life correctly, rationally, 
and in a morally righteous manner? No one, of course, can give me 
an answer to that. All that anyone could reply is: "In order to derive 
pleasure." Indeed, if I were a flower or a cow I would derive some 
pleasure. But continually posing questions to myself, as I do now, I 
cannot be happy, even with the supreme and direct happiness of love 
for my neighbor and the love of humanity for me, since I know that 
tomorrow it will all be annihilated. I, and all this happiness, and all 
the love, and all of humanity will be transformed into nothing, into 
the original chaos. And under such a condition I simply cannot accept 
any happiness-not from my refusal to agree to accept it, not from 
stubbornness based on some principle, but simply because I will not 
and cannot be happy under the condition of the nothingness that 
threatens tomorrow. This is a feeling, a direct feeling, and I cannot 
overcome it. Well, suppose I were to die but humanity were to remain 
eternal in my place; then, perhaps, I might still find some comfort 
in it. But our planet, after all, is not eternal, and humanity's allotted 
span is just such a moment as has been allotted to me. And no matter 
how rationally, joyously, righteously, and blessedly humanity might 

October 
6s s  
organize itself on earth, it will all be equated tomorrow to that same 
empty zero. Though there may be some reason why this is essential, 
in accordance with some almighty, eternal, and dead Jaws of Nature, 
believe me, this idea shows the most profound disrespect to humanity; 
it is profoundly insulting to me, and all the more unbearable because 
there is no one here who is to blame. 
And finally, even if one were to admit the possibility of this fairy 
tale of a human society at long last organized on eanh on rational 
and scientific bases; if one were to believe in this, to believe in the 
future happiness of people at long last, then the mere thought that 
some implacable Jaws of Nature made it essential to torment the human 
race for a thousand years before allowing it to attain that happiness­
that thought alone is unbearably loathsome. Now add the fact that 
this very same Nature, which has permitted humanity at last to attain 
happiness, tomorrow will find it necessary for some reason to reduce 
it all to zero, despite the suffering with which humanity has paid for 
this happiness; and, more imponant, that Nature does all this without 
concealing anything from me and my consciousness as she hid things 
from the cow. In such a case one canot help but come to the very 
amusing yet unbearably sad thought: "What if the human race has 
been placed on the earth as some son of brazen experiment, simply 
in order to find out whether such creatures are going to survive here 
or not?" The sad pan of this thought lies mainly in the fact that once 
again no one is to blame; no one conducted the experiment; there is 
no one we can curse; it all happened simply due to the dead Jaws of 
Nature, which I absolutely cannot comprehend and with which my 
consciousness is utterly unable to agree. Ergo: 
Whereas Nature replies through my consciousness to my questions 
about happiness only by telling me that I can be happy in no other 
way than through harmony with the whole, which I do not understand 
and, evidently, never will be capable of understanding; 
And whereas Nature not only refuses to recognize my right to receive 
an account from her and indeed refuses to answer me at all, and not 
because she does not want to answer, but because she cannot answer; 
And whereas I have become convinced that Nature, in order to · 
answer my questions, has assigned to me (unconsciously) my own self 
and she answers me through my own consciousness (because I am 
saying all this to myself); 
And whereas, finally, under such circumstances I must assume si­
multaneously the roles of plaintiff and defendant, accused and judge, 
and find this comedy utterly absurd on Nature's pan and even hu­
miliating on my pan; 

A Writer's Diary 
Therefore, in my incontrovertible capacͳty as plaintif and defen­
dant, judge and accused, I condemn this Nature, which has so bra­
zenly and unceremoniously inflicted this suffering, to anihilation 
along with me . . . .  Since I am unable to destroy Nature, I am de­
stroying only myself, solely out of the weariness of enduring a tyrany 
in which there is no guilty pany. 
N.N. 

2 
1. A New Phase in the Eastern Question 
The Eastern Question has entered its second period, while its first 
has come to an end, but not because of the supposed defeat of 
Cherniaev. Suvorov suffered the same son of defeat in Switzerland 
in that he had to retreat; but can we say that Suvorov was defeated? 
It was not his fault that he led the Russian People into France under 
impossible conditions. We are not comparing Cherniaev with 
Suvorov, but wish only to say that there are such circumstances under 
which even the Suvorovs must retreat. It's true that in St. Petersburg 
at present cenain of our future military leaders are loudly criticizing 
Cherniaev's maneuvers, while politicians have taken up the cry that 
he has led the Slavs and the Russians into battle "under impossible 
conditions." But none of these future military leaders of ours have 
ever found themselves in the tight spots in which Cherniaev has 
been. Al these soldiers are really still civilians trying to invent gun­
powder without ever having smelled it themselves. As far as the pol­
iticians are concerned, they ought to recall the legend of Suvorov's 
pit in Switzerland: he ordered a pit to be dug, then jumped into it, 
ordering the soldiers to fil it in with earth if they did not want to 
obey and follow him . The soldiers burst into tears, pulled him out 
of the pit, and followed him . Well, it looks as if the entire Russian 
People will pull Cherniaev out of the pit that all the plotters and 
schemers have dug for him in Serbia. You have forgotten, gentlemen, 
that Cherniaev is a national hero, and it is not for you to bury him 
in a pit. 
The Eastern Question has entered its second period because the 
resounding words of the tsar have produced echoes of endorsement 
in the beans of all Russian people and echoes of trepidation in the 
beans of all Russia's enemies. The Pone kept silent and accepted 

A Writer's Diary 
the ultimatum; but what will happen now is more than ever a 
mystery. There is talk of a conference in Constantinople (or in 
some other place-does it really matter where?) or of a congress 
of diplomats. So it is to be diplomacy again, to the joy of those 
who worship diplomacy! 
And now, after Russia's word has been ringingly pronounced, 
the European press once more presumes to give us lessons. Why 
even the Hungarians, almost on the very eve of the ultimatum, 
wrote that we are afraid of them and therefore were equivocating 
and would not dare to declare our intentions. Once more the English 
will be intriguing and giving us advice, imagining once more that 
we are so afraid of them. Even the French, of all people, will 
pronounce their word at the conference with a scornful and pom­
pous air, telling us what they want and what they don't want; but 
what do we care about France, and why should we be interested 
in what she wants or doesn't want? It's no longer 1853, and never, 
perhaps, has there been a moment for Russia in which her enemies 
were less able to harm her. But still, let diplomacy reign, to the 
consolation of its Petersburg admirers. But what of Bulgaria and 
the Slavs? What will happen to them in these two months? This 
is the question. This is an urgent matter, after all, and one that 
cannot be put off for a moment. What will happen to them in 
these two months? Bulgarian blood will flow once more, perhaps! 
The Porte, after all, has to show its zealots that it did not accept 
the ultimatum out of cowardice; and so Bulgaria will pay: "You 
see; we're not afraid of the Russians when we can slaughter Bul­
garians during the very conference." Well, and what shall we do 
if that happens (and it well may happen)? Shall we express our 
indignation right there at the conference? But the Porte will at once 
deny any massacre and blame everything on the Bulgarians them­
selves; she might even assume a nobly offended air and quickly 
set up a commission of inquiry: "Now, gentlemen, representatives 
of Europe, you can see for yourselves how Russia offends me and 
how she won't leave me alone!" Meanwhile, more and more Bul­
garians will be slaughtered, while the press of Europe will, perhaps, 
again support the bashibuzouks and say that Russia is pressing the 
issue because of her own conceit, that she is deliberately laying 
plots against the conference and wants war and . . . .  And it is very 
possible that Europe will again propose a peace that is even worse 
than war-a peace that is heavily armed; a peace in which nations 
are agitated and restless, with gloomy expectations. And this may 

October 
well last for a whole year! Another whole year of uncertainty! . . .  
And after that year, of course, and after such a peace, the war will 
begin once more. The Slavs need peace, but not that kind of peace. 
It's not peace at all that's needed now, but simply an end. 
Yet people have been speaking out against Cherniaev, and these 
are only the first to take potshots at him. Just wait a bit-the chorus 
will grow larger and stronger. The main thing here is not Cherniaev: 
what we have is a reaction against the whole movement of this year. 
The Petersburg Gazette, in its excellent article replying to the attacks 
on Cherniaev, warned the Srock Exchange News that it would lose 
subscribers and that readers would turn away from it; but this is 
scarcely to happen now: there are many, many people now who 
find the Srock Exchange News entirely in tune with their views. 
These are the same people who stored up so much spleen over the 
past year; they are angry and exasperated people who see them­
selves as lovers of order above al. For them the entire movement 
of this past year was nothing but disorder, while Cherniaev is only 
a shameless rogue. "A Lieutenant-General," they say, "yet he flew 
off to look for adventure like some condoniere." But these are 
people who love bureaucratic order, so to say. There is yet another 
type of lover of order, however: these are the upper intelligentsia 
who look on with bleeding hearts at "the waste of so much force 
on such a medieval, so to say, cause when the schools, for exam­
ple . . .  " etc., etc. Those who attack Cherniaev shout that Russian 
blood was shed in vain with no advantage for Russia. New Times 
gave a fine reply about advantage and about what advantage means; 
it answered directly in frank words, unashamed at the idealism of 
its words-something of which everyone else is so ashamed. As 
early as June, at the very beginning of the movement, I happened 
to write in my Diary of where Russia's advantage lay in this sit­
uation. Such a lofty organism as Russia ought also to project a 
powerful spiritual significance. Russia's advantage lies not in seizing 
the Slavic provinces but in a sincere and deep concern for them, 
in protecting them, in fraternal union with them, in conveying to 
them our spirit and our view on the union of the entire Slavic 
world. An organism as exalted as Russia cannot be satisfied with 
material advantage alone, cannot be satisfied with "bread" alone. 
This is neither an ideal nor a set of empty phrases: as proof, we 
have the whole Russian People and the whole movement of this 
past year. This is a movement which, in its self-sacrificing nature 
and disinterestedness, in its pious religious thirst ro suffer for a 

66o 
A Writer's Diary 
righteous cause, is almost without precedent among other nations. 
Such a People can cause no concern for order; this is not a People 
of disorder, but a People of fin views and unshakeable principles, 
a People devoted to sacrifice, seeking truth and knowing where 
truth can be found, a humble but strong People, as honest and 
pure in heart as one of their high ideals, the epic hero Ilya Mu­
romets, whom they cherish as a saint. The heart of the One who 
preserves this People must rejoice over them; and it does rejoice, 
and the People know it! No, this was not a matter of disorder . . . .  
2. Chemiaev 
Even those who defend Cherniaev now no longer consider him a 
genius, but only a valiant and brave general. But the mere fact that 
he headed the whole movement in the Slavic cause already showed 
the foresight of genius; such tasks are undertaken only by those 
having the power of genius. The Slavic cause, of necessity, had at 
last ro begin, that is, to move into its active phase; and without 
Cherniaev it would not have done this. People will say that this 
was the whole problem: that Cherniaev gave it its initial nudge and 
inflated it to the dimensions it has; that this was his fault and that 
he began it prematurely. But the great Slavic question could not 
but be raised, and, in truth, I don't know if we can still argue 
about its timeliness. But once the Slavic cause has been taken up, 
then who but Russia should stand at its head? This is Russia's 
mission, and Cherniaev understood that and raised Russia's banner. 
To resolve to do this, to take this step-no, this could not be done 
by a man without some special power. 
People will say that this was al done out of vanity and that he 
is an adventurer who only wanted to make a name for himself. 
But vain, ambitious people in such instances seek first to stake 
their bet on a sure thing, and if they do take a risk, then it is only 
up to a certain limit: when conditions threaten certain failure they 
quickly abandon the cause. Cherniaev, of course, had long foreseen 
the impossibility of immediate military victory with only the Serbs 
and without Russian help: we now know too much and have too 
many details about this affair to have any doubts about that. But 
he could not abandon the cause, for the cause is not limited to 
immediate military victory alone: it involves the future of both Russia 
and the Slavic lands. In any case, his hope for immediate Russian 

October 
661 
military assistance was not a vain one, for Russia has at last pro­
nounced her great and decisive word. Had this word been uttered 
even a little earlier, Cherniaev would not have erred in anything. 
Oh, there are many who, in Cherniaev's place, would have refused 
to wait so long: these are the vain ones and the careerists. I am 
certain that many of his critics would not have held up under half 
of what he has borne. But Cherniaev was serving this mighty cause 
and not merely his vanity, and he preferred rather to sacrifice all­
his fate, his fame, his career, and perhaps even his life-than to 
abandon the cause. This was precisely because he was working for 
Russia's honor and advantage and he knew it. For the Slavic cause 
is a Russian cause and should be resolved ultimately only by Russia 
alone and through the Russian idea. Cherniaev persisted also for 
the sake of the Russian volunteers who all rallied around his banner, 
rallied both for an idea as well as for the one who represented that 
idea. He simply could not abandon them, and here again, of course, 
we see an example of his magnanimity. How many of his critics 
in his place would have abandoned all and everything-the idea, 
Russia, the volunteers, no matter how many of them there were! 
One has to speak the truth, after all. . . .  
Cherniaev is criticized from the military side as well. But in the 
first place, and once again, these military men were not in the tight 
spots in which Cherniaev found himself; and in the second place, 
everything that Cherniaev has already done "under impossible con­
ditions" could not have been done by any of his critics. These 
"impossible conditions," which had so much influence on military 
developments, also belong to history; but their main features are 
already known even now and are so characteristic that one cannot 
overlook them even from a strategic viewpoint. If it is true that 
the intrigues against Cherniaev reached the point that at the most 
critical moments the highest bureaucrats of the country, in their 
suspicious hatred of a Russian general, left his most important 
requests and demands for the army unanswered and even on the 
eve of the final and decisive battles left him without artillery shells, 
then can we make a just criticism of military actions without clar­
ification of this point? All these intrigues and all this aggravation 
are unprecedented: this "untrustworthy" general was still the com­
mander of their armies and was defending the approach to Serbia; 
and they, out of vexation and malice, sacrificed everything-the 
army, even their fatherland-simply in order to destroy a man they 
disliked. At least that is how it was according to very reliable 

662 
A Writer's Diary 
sources. Al the correspondents and al the newspapers in Europe 
testify that these intrigues certainly went ·on; they began and con­
tinued in Belgrade the whole time, from the moment ofChemiaev's 
arrival in Serbia. The English, as a maner of policy, had a strong 
hand in these intrigues, as did certain Russians as well-for what 
reason we do not know. It is very likely that Cherniaev somehow 
offended the vanity of Serbian officials when he began his work. 
Nonetheles, the main reason for their suspicious and perpetual 
anger at him was doubtles the one I spoke of earlier, that is, the 
preconceived notion of a great many Serbs that if the Slavs are to 
be liberated by the Russians, then it would be for Russia's benefit 
alone; Russia would anex them and deprive them of their "so 
glorious and certain political future." As we know, they decided 
to declare war on Turkey even before Cherniaev's arrival, hoping 
precisely that after they asumed leadership of the Slavic movement 
and vanquished the Sultan, they could form a united Slavic Serbian 
kingdom of several million people "with so glorious a future." The 
large Serbian party, which is influential in its own lands, dreamed 
only of this. In shon, they were dreamers, very like smal seven­
year-old children who put on toy epaulets and imagine themselves 
generals. Cherniaev and the volunteers, of course, must naturaly 
have alarmed the party "by the future anexation by Russia which 
was to come in their wake." And now, no doubt, after the recent 
military misfonunes, there will begin (and already has begun) even 
more biner wrangling. Al of these dreamers will begin privately, 
and perhaps publicly as well, to disparage the Rusians and to 
afirm that the whole misfonune arose because of the Rusians . . . .  
But a linle time wil pass and a reaction wil ensue to set things 
right; for al these Serbs who are now so suspicious are ardent 
patriots just the same. They wil recal the Rusian dead who gave 
their lives for Serbia. The Russians wil leave, but the great idea 
will remain. The great Russian spirit wil leave its traces in their 
souls, and their own Serbian valor will spring up from the Rusian 
blood that was shed for them. Someday, after al, they wil satisfy 
themselves that the Russian help was selfles and that none of the 
Russians who died for them was thinking of anexation! 
But stil, this should not cause a rift between us and the Slavs. 
There are two Serbias: the upper Serbia, proud and inexperienced, 
which stil has not lived and acted, but which has passionate dreams 
about the future, beset with parties and intrigues which (again, as 
a result of rash inexperience) can go to lengths one wil not find 

October 
among long-lived, far larger, and more independent nations than 
Serbia. But along with this upper Serbia, which is so eager to live 
politically, there is the Serbia of the people, which considers the 
Russians alone as their saviors and brethren and the Russian tsar 
as their sun; this is the Serbia that loves and trusts the Russians. 
It is impossible to express a view on this subject better than did 
the Moscow News, which is unquestionably our finest political news­
paper. Its words are as follows: 
We are certain that the feelings of the Russian People toward Serbia 
will not be altered by the success of the intrigues which were harmful 
to both sides . . . .  The Serbs of the Duchy are a peaceful, agricultural 
people who, in the course of a long peace, have managed to forget 
their military traditions and have not managed to elaborate in their 
place the firm national consciousness that binds every historical nation. 
Finally, the Serbs of the Duchy cannot be called a nation: they are 
only the fragment of a nation that has no organic significance. But 
we cannot forget that the Serbs rose up with enthusiasm and unanimity 
to help their blood brethren who were being villainously tortured . . . .  
The Russian People will not abandon the Serbs at this terrible mo­
ment; the blood of Russian People has shown how pure was their 
sympathy, how heroically selfless was their sacrifice, and how senseless 
were the hostile calumnies of Russia's supposed desire to derive some 
benefit for herself out of Serbia's dilemma. May the memory of the 
valorous Russians who fell for Serbia serve as a link of brotherly love 
between two nations, so similar in blood and in faith. 
I will say in conclusion: granted that this swnmer we Russians 
have sufered, apart from all the disorders (?), even material losses 
and have already expended, perhaps, some tens of millions (which, 
however, went to organize and improve our army-also a good thing, 
of course), still, the fact alone that this year's movement has shown 
us who our best people are-that alone is an achievement beyond 
compare. Oh, if only all nations, even the most advanced and 
intelligent in Europe, could know certainly and agree unanimously 
on whom to consider their truly best people-would Europe and 
European humanity appear as they do today? 
3. The Best People 
The best people-this is a topic that merits a few words of comment. 
These are people without whom no society and no nation can live 

A Writer's Diary 
or endure, even given the broadest equality of rights. The best people 
are, naturally, of two kinds: ( 1) those to· whom the people them­
selves and the nation itself pay reverence voluntarily, recognizing 
their genuine valor; and (2) those to whom all or very many of the 
people or the nation pay reverence through a certain compulsion, 
one might say, and even if they do consider them their "best 
people," they do so rather as a maner of convention and not com­
pletely and genuinely. One can't complain about the existence of 
this "conventional" category of best people who are, so to say, 
"officially" recognized as the best because of the higher consid­
erations of order and administrative stability: the "best people" of 
this sort arise through a historical law, and they have always existed, 
in all nations and states, from the beginning of the world, so that 
no society could organize and bind itself into a whole without a 
certain amount of such voluntary compulsion. In order to maintain 
itself and live, every society must necessarily respect someone and 
something and-most important-this must be done by society as 
a whole, not by each individual choosing for himself. The best 
people of the first category-the truly valorous, to whom everyone 
or the vast majority of the nation pays sincere and genuine rev­
erence-are sometimes rather elusive, because even the ideal people 
are often difficult to define and have peculiarities and odd habits, 
while outwardly they very often have even a somewhat disreputable 
air. Because of that, a group of "best people" are conventionally 
set up in their place, forming, so to say, a caste of best people 
having official support: "These," the nation is told, "are the people 
you must respect." And if, when this occurs, these "conventional" 
ones actually coincide with the best people of the first category 
(because not all of those in the first category have a disreputable 
air) and are also truly valorous, then the aim is not only fully but 
doubly achieved. In Russia in the earliest times such best people 
were the prince's bodyguard; later there were the boyars, the clergy 
(but only the highest of them), and even certain well-known mer­
chants; although there were very few of the latter. I should note 
that these best people, in Russia and elsewhere (I mean in Europe) 
eventually always elaborated a rather formalized code of valor and 
honor; and although this code as a whole was, of course, always 
rather arbitrary and sometimes differed sharply from popular ideals, 
some aspects of it were quite high-minded. The "best" person was 
always obliged to die for his country, for example, if such a sacrifice 

October 
66s 
were demanded of him; and he indeed would die as bound by 
honor, "lest great injury be done to the good name of my family." 
And of course this was far better than the right to dishonor, by 
which a person abandons everything and everyone in a moment of 
danger and runs off and hides, saying "let the whole world perish 
so long as my life is secure." This was how it was in Russia for a 
very long time; and I should point out once more that in Russia 
these "official" best people very, very often shared very many of 
the ideals of the unofficial or popular best people. Of course, this 
was certainly not true in all respects, but at least one can confidently 
say that at that time the Russian boyars and the Russian People 
had much more in common morally than the conqueror tyrants in 
most of Europe-the knights-had with their conquered slaves­
the people. 
But suddenly there appeared a radical change in the organization 
of our best people as well: by decree of the state, all the best people 
were sorted out into fourteen categories called classes, one higher 
than the other in a kind of staircase, so that we had precisely 
fourteen categories of human valor, each with a German name. This 
change, as it developed further, did not fully manage to achieve 
the purpose for which it was originally set up, for the former "best 
people" themselves at once filled all these fourteen new categories; 
they simply began to be called aristocracy instead of boyars. But 
this change did achieve its aim in part because it considerably 
expanded the limits of the old barriers. There came an influx of 
fresh forces from the depths of society-democratic forces, by our 
terminology-and from the ranks of the seminarians in particular. 
This influx brought much that was vivifying and productive into 
the group of best people, for there appeared people with talents, 
with new outlooks, and with education that was unprecedented at 
the time; but at the same time they had tremendous scorn for their 
own origins and avidly hastened to transform themselves, by means 
of the table of ranks, as quickly as possible into pure-blooded 
aristocrats. I should point out that, aside from the seminarians, 
only a very few from the People and the merchants, for instance, 
managed to make their way into the category of "the best people"; 
the aristocracy continued to stand at the head of the nation. This 
category was always strongly organized; and whereas money, prop­
erty, the sack of gold already held sway all over Europe and were 
considered quite sincerely as all that was valorous and all that was 

666 
A Writer's Diary 
best in people and among people, in Russia-and this is still in 
living memory-a general, for instance, was so highly regarded 
that even the richest merchant considered it a great honor to lure 
one into his home for dinner. Only recently I read an anecdote­
which I would not have believed had I not known that it was 
absolutely true-about a certain Petersburg lady from a circle of 
the very highest class who publicly forced a merchant-lady worth 
ten milion to give up her seat at a concert, took her place, and 
gave her a proper scolding in the bargain; and this was only some 
thirty years ago! One must also point out, however, that these 
"best" people who settled themselves in place so solidly also set 
up some very fine rules to live by-the virtual obligation to acquire 
some education, for example-so that this whole caste of best people 
at the same time made up the bi.i.lk of Russia's educated class, the 
guardian and the bearer of Russian enlightenment, such as it was 
then. It goes without saying that this class was also the only guard­
ian and bearer of the code of honor, but entirely on the European 
model, so that the letter and the form of the code at last entirely 
overcame any genuine feeling in its content: there was a lot of 
honor, but ultimately there were not such a lot of honorable people. 
During this period, and particularly at its end, the class of "best 
people" had already grown far away from the People and their 
ideals of what was "best"; in fact, there was open mockery of 
almost everything the People considered "best." But suddenly there 
occurred one of the most colossal revolutions Russia had ever ex­
perienced: serfdom was abolished and everything changed pro­
foundly. It is true that all fourteen classes remained as they were, 
but the "best people" seemed to falter. Their former influence over 
the mass of society seemed to disappear; the views on what was 
"best" semed somehow to change. It's true that they did not 
change for the better in entirety; moreover, something extremely 
confusing and ambiguous began to happen to the conception of 
"best." Nevertheless, the old view was no longer satisfactory, giving 
rise to most serious questions in the minds of very many: "Whom 
can we now consider our best people? Most important, where shall 
we find them? Who will take the responsibility for proclaiming 
them the best, and on what basis? Does someone need to take this 
responsibility? And finaly, do we know what this new basis is? 
Will anyone accept that this is the proper basis on which we must 
build so much anew?" Truly, these questions arose in the minds 
of very many people . . . .  

October 
4· On the Same Topic 
The whole point was that the shield of authority, as it were, was 
removed from the former "best people"; their official status was 
somehow canceled. And so, in the first instance, there was some 
comfort in the fact that the former caste pattern of "best people," 
although not utterly destroyed, at least was forced to yield consid­
erably and broaden itself so that each one of them, if he wished 
to maintain his former significance, was forced willy-nilly to move 
from the category of "conventionally best people" into the category 
of "naturally best people." There dawned the beautiful hope that, 
little by little, the latter would occupy all the places of the former 
"best people." How all this was to take place remained a mystery, 
of course. But for many people-very honorable, but hot-blooded 
and liberal-there was no mystery at all. For them everything was 
already resolved as though by decree; some among them even 
thought that everything had already been achieved and that if the 
"natural" man had still not taken first place today, then tomorrow, 
just as son as it brightened a bit, he certainly would take his 
place . . . .  Meanwhile, more thoughtful people had not stopped rais­
ing questions on the old topic: "just who are they, these natural 
people? Does anyone know what they're called these days? Haven't 
they, perhaps, lost their ideals altogether? Where do we find this 
commonly acknowledged 'best person?' To what and whom should 
our whole society pay honor and whom should we choose as a 
model?" 
Al these things, perhaps, were not repeated literally in these 
terms, nor exactly in the form of these questions; however, there 
is no doubt that our society experienced all this tumult in one form 
or another. Fiery people, full of rapture, cried out to the skeptics 
that the "new man" exists, has been discovered, defined, and given. 
They decided, at last, that this new, "best" man is simply the 
enlightened man, the man of science without the old prejudices. There 
were many, though, who could not accept this view for one very 
simple reason: the educated man is not always the honest man, 
and knowledge still does not ensure valor in a man. At that moment 
of general indecision and uncertainty, some were ready to suggest 
that perhaps it was time to turn to the People and their principles. 
But there were so many who had long found the expression "the 
People's principles" repellent and hateful; besides, the People 
themselves, after their liberation, seemed in no particular hury to 

668 
A Writer's Diary 
display their valor, so that it seemed a dubious proposition to go 
off seeking answers to such questions among them. The contrary 
seemed to be the case: there were reports of disorder, depravity, 
rotgut vodka, unsuccessful attempts at self-government; about ku­
laks and exploiters who had taken the place of the former land­
owners; finally, there were reports of the Yids. Even the most artful 
writers proclaimed that the kulak and the exploiter held sway over 
the People, and the People, in the bargain, were accepting them 
as their genuine "best" people. There appeared, finally, even one 
view, absolutely liberal in the highest sense, that our People now 
cannot be competent to create the ideal of the best person; in fact, 
they are not only incompetent, they are even incapable of taking 
part in this glorious afair; they must first be taught to read and 
write, to be educated and developed; schools must be built, etc., 
etc. We have to admit that very many of the skeptics found them­
selves at a loss and had no answer to this . . . .  
And meanwhile a new storm was brewing and a new disaster 
was looming-"the money bag!" In the place of the former "con­
ventional" best people there appeared a new convention that almost 
immediately assumed a most terrible significance among us. Oh, 
of course we had had the money bag earlier as well; it always 
existed in the person of the former merchant-milionaire; but never 
was it elevated to such a status and given such significance as in 
our recent history. Our old-style merchant, despite the role that a 
milion in capital played everywhere in Europe, had a relatively 
modest place in the social hierarchy. Truth to tell, he did not deserve 
any better. Let me stipulate beforehand: I am speaking only of the 
truly wealthy merchants; most of them, who had not yet been 
corrupted by wealth, lived in the same fashion as Ostrovsky's char­
acters. These, perhaps, were no worse than many others, at least 
if one speaks in relative terms, while the lowest and most numerous 
merchants were almost on the same level as the People. But the 
more wealth our old-style merchant acquired, the worse he became. 
In essence, he was just as much a peasant as before, only a depraved 
peasant. The old-style millionaire merchants were divided into two 
categories: those who continued to wear beards, despite their mil­
lions, and who, despite the mirors and parquet floors in their 
enormous houses, lived rather swinishly, in both a moral and a 
physical sense. The best thing about them was their love for church 
bells and powerfully voiced deacons. Despite this love, they had 
already split away entirely from the People in a moral sense. It is 

October 
difficult to imagine anything less compatible morally than the Peo­
ple and some millionaire factory owner. I have heard that when 
Ovsiannikov was recently transported to Siberia by way of Kazan, 
he kicked aside the kopecks which the People naively tossed into 
his carriage: that in itself is the ultimate degree of moral alienation 
from the People, the loss of even the slightest comprehension of 
the People's thought and spirit. And the People have never endured 
such servitude as they do in the factories of some of these gentle­
men! The other category of millionaire merchants was marked by 
their dress coats and shaven chins, by the splendid European fur­
nishings of their houses, by the education of their daughters in 
French and English and music, often by the orders they were 
awarded for large donations, by their insuferable scorn for everyone 
a bit lower than themselves, by their contempt for the ordinary 
"dinnertime" general and at the same time by the most abjectly 
servile attitude toward any important dignitary, especially if the 
merchant managed-through God knows what sort of scheming 
and striving-to entice such a dignitary to his house for a ball or 
a dinner arranged, of course, especially for that dignitary. These 
attempts to give a dinner for some personage became a whole 
program of life. This was something avidly sought after; the mil­
lionaire spent his time on earth almost for that alone. It goes without 
saying that this old-style wealthy merchant prayed to his million 
as to a god: the million was everything in his eyes; the million 
pulled him up from insignificance and gave him his entire meaning. 
In the coarse soul of this "corrupted peasant" (since that was what 
he continued to be, despite all his dress coats), there could never 
arise a single thought or a single feeling which even for a moment 
could raise his consciousness above that million of his. It goes 
without saying that, despite their superficial polish, the whole fam­
ily of such a merchant was raised without any education. The 
million not only did not promote education, it had the contrary 
effect and served as the principal cause of ignorance: what point 
was there for the son of a millionaire to go to university when he· 
could get everything without studying at all, the more so that when 
al these millionairelings got their million they very often acquired 
the rights of noblemen. Wealth brought nothing into the soul of 
such a carnivorous and arrogant youth except for a life of dissipation 
from his tenderest youth and the most distorted notions of his 
world, his native land, his honor, and his duty. And the distortion 
of his notion of the world was monstrous, for over everything 

A Writer's Diary 
loomed the conviction, which had been traiJiformed into an axiom, 
that "I can get anything for money-any distinction, any valor; I 
can buy anyone and buy my way out of anything." It is dificult 
to imagine the barenness of the heart of a youth brought up in 
such a wealthy home. From conceit, and so as to be no worse than 
others, such a millionaire might, perhaps, sometimes donate im­
mense sums for the good of his country-in times when it was in 
danger, for example (although the only time this happened was in 
1812); but he made his donation with some reward in mind and 
was prepared at every moment of his existence to join forces with 
the first Yid who came along in order to betray everyone and 
everything so long as he could make a profit from doing so; pa­
triotism and civic feeling are all but absent from these hearts. 
Oh, of course I'm speaking about our Russian commercial mil­
lionaire only as a caste. There are exceptions everywhere and al­
ways. One can also point out merchants here in Russia who were 
noted for their European education and valiant public accomplish­
ments; still, there were very few of them among our millionaires, 
and they are well known; the caste doesn't lose its character because 
of a few exceptions. 
And now the former limits of the old-style merchant have 
suddenly expanded enormously. He has been joined by the Euro­
pean-style speculator, previously unknown in Russia, and the stock­
exchange gambler. The contemporary merchant no longer needs 
to lure a "personage" to his house for dinner or give a ball for 
him; he already has become his kinsman and rubs elbows with 
him at the stock exchange or a shareholders' meeting or at a bank 
which he and the personage establish; he himself is now a some­
body, a personage. The main thing is that he has suddenly found 
himself in one of the highest places in society, the very place which 
the whole of Europe-officially and quite genuinely-has assigned 
to the millionaire. He, of course, never doubted for a moment that 
he was truly worthy of such a place. In shon, he is now becoming 
more and more convinced, from the bottom of his heart, that it is 
now he who is the "best" person on earth and that he has taken 
the place of all who preceded him. The calamity that threatens lies 
not in the fact that he believes such nonsense but that others as 
well (and many of them), it seems, are beginning to believe just 
the same thing. The money bag is seen now by a terrible majority 
to be the best thing of all. Of course, there will be those who try 
to dismiss such fears. Yet the actual worship of the money bag 

October 
today is not merely indisputable; the sudden expansion of that 
worship is unprecedented. I repeat: we understood the power of 
the money bag before as well, but never in Russia until now was 
the money bag regarded as the wonhiest thing on earth. In the 
official classification of Russians the old-style merchant's money 
bag could not displace even a bureaucrat in the social hierarchy. 
But now, even the former hierarchy seems ready, without even any 
outside compulsion, to take second place to such a gracious and 
fine new "conventional" best person who "so long and so unjustly 
did not assume his proper rights." Today's stock-exchange gambler 
hires literary men to serve him; lawyers hover around him: "this 
young school of agile minds and arid heans; a school in which 
every healthy feeling is distorted when the occasion demands dis­
tortion; a school that teaches every possible method of personal 
attack, done without fear of punishment, continually and unre­
lentingly, based on need and demand" -this young school has fallen 
into complete harmony with today's stock-exchange gambler and 
has begun to sing his praises. Oh, please don't think that I'm 
hinting at the Strusberg affair. The lawyers who proclaimed their 
clients who "happened" to get involved in the case to be ideal 
people, and who sang them a hymn as "the best people in Moscow" 
(exactly in this line), have only missed their mark. They have 
demonstrated that it is they who lack not only the slightest serious 
conviction but are even lacking restraint or sense of measure; and 
if it is they who are playing the role of the "European talents" in 
our midst, then it is only because we have nothing better. In actual 
fact they, like diplomats, have demanded as high a price as possible 
so as to obtain the best possible minimum: "Not only are they 
innocent, they are holy!" Word has it that on one occasion the 
spectators in court even hissed them. But a lawyer is certainly not 
a diplomat; this comparison is false in its very essence. It would 
be more correct, far more correct, to point to the client and ask 
the question of the Gospel: "Gentlemen of the jury, which of you 
is without sin?" Oh, I am not speaking out against the verdict: 
the verdict is just, and I accept it fully; it should have been pro­
nounced, if only on the bank. The case was of just such a nature 
that to convict by "the public conscience" this unfonunate Moscow 
Loan Bank, which just "happened" to become involved, meant at 
the same time to convict all our banks, and the whole stock ex­
change, and all the gamblers on the exchange, even though they 
have not yet been caught-does it really make any difference? Which 

A Writer's Diary 
one of them is without sin, without that very same sin-tell me 
truly, which one? Someone has already written that the punishment 
was mild. I must make it plain that I am not referring to Landau; 
he is truly guilty of an unusual crime, and I don't wish to go into 
that. But Danila Shumakher, convicted of petty swindling, received 
a terrible punishment. Let us look into our own hearts: are there 
many among us who would not have done the same as he did? You 
needn't confess out loud, but simply think about it privately. But 
long live Justice! Didn't we pack them off to jail, though! "Take 
that," we say, "for our depraved and plutocratic age; take that for 
our own egotism; take that for our base, materialistic views of the 
joys and delights of life, for our barren and treacherous feeling of 
self-preservation!" Say what you will, it's useful to convict even 
one bank for our own sins . . . .  
My Lord, haven't I wandered off the topic! Can I, too, be writing 
about the Strusberg case? Enough! I'll hurry and finish. I was 
speaking about "the best person" and wanted only to make the 
point that the ideal of the genuine best person, even one of the 
"natural" type, stands in real danger of being obscured in our 
society. The old has been shattered or has worn out, the new is 
stil soaring in the heights of fantasy, while in acruality and before 
our very eyes there has appeared something repulsive, an unprec­
edented development in Holy Russia. The fascination that people 
have ascribed to this new force-the bag of gold-begins to inspire 
in some hearts (hearts that are all too suspicious) even fear for the 
People, for instance. We, the upper levels of society, let's say, 
though we might be seduced by this new idol, still have not been 
utterly lost: it was not in vain that the torch of education shone 
over us for rwo hundred years. We have the mighty weapon of 
enlightenment; we can repel this monster. At a moment of the 
filthiest financial debauchery did we not send the Moscow Loan 
Bank off to jail? But the People, all hundred million of our People, 
this "sluggish, depraved, insensate mass" into which the Yid has 
already penetrated-what will they use to withstand the monster 
of materialism, in the form of the bag of gold, that is moving upon 
them? Will they use their poverty? Their rags? Their taxes and 
their failed harvests? Their vices, their rotgut vodka, their flogging? 
We feared that the People would at once collapse before the growing 
power of the bag of gold and that a generation would not pass 
before they would become enslaved to it far worse than they were 
enslaved before. We feared that their submission would not only 

October 
be from compulsion but would be moral as well, with their entire 
will. We feared that it would be precisely the People, before anyone 
else, who would say: "This is the most important thing; this is 
where power, peace, and happiness are to be found! This is what 
we shall worship and follow." That's what was to be truly dreaded, 
at least for a long time. Many of us fell to thinking, and 
suddenly . . . .  
But what it was that sudenly happened last summer I shall talk 
about in the next issue of my Diary. I'd like to talk about it with 
no "humor," straight from my heart and in plain fashion. What 
happened this past sumer was so touching and heartening that 
it is even dificult to believe. It is difficult to believe because we 
had already lost faith in these People of ours and considered them 
grossly incompetent to express their own opinion on the question 
of who ought to be the Russian "best man." We had thought that 
the entire organism of this People was already infected by material 
and spiritual corruption; we had thought that the People had already 
forgotten their spiritual principles and were no longer preserving 
them in their hearts; that in their destitution and depravity they 
had lost or distorted their ideals. And suddenly, this entire "ho­
mogeneous and torpid mass" (this, of course, being the view of 
some of our clever thinkers), whose hundred million members 
sprawled, silent and unbreathing, over thousands of miles of our 
land in a state of eternal genesis and apparently eternal impotence 
to say or do anything, appearing as something eternally elemental 
and submissive-suddenly this entire Russia awakens, arises, and 
humbly but firmly expresses its splendid opinion to the whole 
nation . . . .  Moreover, Russian people take up their staffs and set 
off in crowds a hundred strong, accompanied by thousands of 
people, on some sort of new crusade (and that is precisely what 
this movement is being called; it was the English who first com­
pared this Russian movement of ours to a crusade) to Serbia, for 
the sake of some of their brethren, because they have heard that 
their brethren were being tortured and oppressed. A father-an old 
soldier-instead of living at his ease, suddenly takes up arms and 
sets off on foot for thousands of miles, asking directions along the 
way, to go fight the Turks and support his brethren, and he takes 
his nine-year-old daughter along with him (this is a fact): "There'll 
be good Christians to be found who'll look after my daughter while 
I'm off wandering." And off he goes . . . .  And there are thousands 

A Writer's Diary 
of cases like his! Well, had anyone told us before-in the winter, 
for example-that such a thing would happen here, we would never 
have believed him; we would never have believed in this "crusade," 
whose beginning is plain to see (but whose end is far from visible). 
Even now, though we can plainly see what is happening, we cannot 
help but ask ourselves at times: "How on earth could this happen? 
How could such an unforeseen thing as this occur?" The Russian 
land has proclaimed for all to hear everything that it reveres and 
in which it believes; it has shown what it considers "best" and 
which people it regards as "the best." And it is the question of 
the kind of people these are and the kind of ideals that have been 
revealed which I am postponing until my next Diary. In essence, 
these ideals and these "best people" are clear and evident from 
the first glance: "the best person" in the conception of the People 
is the one who does not give in to material temptation; he is the 
one who continually seeks to work for God's cause, who loves the 
truth, and who, when it is necessary, rises up to serve that truth, 
leaving his home and his family and sacrificing his life. I wanted 
to state specifically why we, the educated classes, may trust boldly 
and firmly that not only is the image of the "best man" not lost 
in our Russia but, on the contrary, this image has shone forth more 
brightly than ever before; that those who provide it, guard it, and 
bear it are now those same simple Russian People whom we, in 
our enlightened pride and, at the same time, our naive ignorance, 
were wont to consider "incompetent." I particularly wanted to take 
up the question of how the requirements and demands of our 
enlightenment could even now be brought fully into accord with 
the People's notion of "the best person," despite the obviously 
simple and naive forms in which that notion is expressed. It is not 
the form that is important, but its content (even though the form 
is beautiful). The content, though, is beyond dispute. And that is 
why we can joyously allow ourselves to hope anew: our horizon 
has cleared, and our new sun rises with dazzling brilliance . . . .  
And if it were only possible that we could all agree and join the 
People in their understanding of whom we henceforth must consider 
our "best" person, then, perhaps, this past summer could mark 
the beginning of a new era in Russian history. 

November 


1 
The Meek One: A Fantastic Story 
Author's Foreword 
I apologize to my readers for providing, in place of my Diary in 
its usual form, merely a story this time. However, I truly have been 
working on this story for the bener part of a month. In any case, 
I beg the indulgence of my readers. 
Now, a few words about the story itself. I called it "fantastic," 
even though I consider it to be realistic to the highest degree. But 
it truly does contain something fantastic, which is the form of the 
story itself, and it is this which I find necessary to explain 
beforehand. 
The fact is, this is neither a story nor a memoir. Imagine a 
husband whose wife only a few hours earlier has killed herself by 
jumping out a window; her body now lies on the table before him. 
He is in a state of bewilderment and still has not managed to collect 
his thoughts. He paces through the apartment, trying to make 
sense of what has happened, to "focus his thoughts." He is, as 
well, an out-an-out hypochondriac, the sort who talks to himself. 
And so he is talking to himself, telling the story, and trying to 
milke it clear to himself. Despite the apparent coherence of his 
speech, he contradicts himself several times, both logically and 
emotionally. At times he justifies himself and blames her, then he 
launches into explanations of things which have little to do with 
the case: we see here the crudity of his thoughts and spirit, and 
we see deep feeling as well. Little by little he really does milke it 
clear and "focus his thoughts." The series of memories he has 
evoked irresistibly leads him at last to truth; and truth irresistibly 

A Writer's Diary 
elevates his mind and his spirit. By the end, even the tone of the 
story changes as compared with its confused. beginning. The truth 
is revealed quite clearly and distinctly to the wthappy man-at least 
as far as he is concerned. 
That is the subject. Of course, the process of the narative goes 
on for a few hours, with breaks and interludes and in a confused 
and inconsistent form: at one point he talks to himself; then he 
seems to be addressing an invisible listener, a judge of some sort. 
But so it always happens in real life. If a stenographer had been 
able to eavesdrop and write down everything he said, it would be 
somewhat rougher and less finished than I have it here; still, it 
seems to me that the psychological structure would perhaps be just 
the same. And so it is this assumption of a stenographer recording 
everything (and whose account I simply polished) that I call the 
fantastic element of my story. Yet something quite similar to this 
has already been employed more than once in art: Victor Hugo, 
for example, in his masterpiece The Last Day of a Man Condemmd 
to Death, employed virtually this same device, and even though he 
did not depict any stenographer, he allowed an even greater breach 
of verisimilitude when he presumed that a man condemned to 
execution could (and would have time to) keep a diary, not only 
on his last day, but even in his last hour and literally in his last 
moment of life. But had he not allowed this fantastical element, 
the work itself-among the most real and most truthful of all his 
writings-would not have existed. 
1 .  Who Was I and Who Was She? 
. . .  So as long as she's still here everything's all right: every minute 
I go up to have a look at her; but they'll take her away tomorrow, 
and how will I ever stay here by myself? She's on the table in the 
anterom now, they put two card tables together, but tomorrow 
there'll be a coffin, a white one-white gros de Naples. That's not 
the point, though . . . .  I just keep walking, trying to find some 
explanation for this. It's been six hours now, and I still can't focus 
my thoughts. The fact is that I just keep on walking, back and 
forth, back and forth . . . .  This is how it happened. I'll just tell it 
in order. (Order!) Gentlemen, I'm certainly not a literary man, 
and you'll see that for yourselves; but never mind: I'll tell you what 
happened as I understand it myself. That's what I find so horrible: 
I understand it all! 

November 
If you really want to know-1 mean, if I'm going to start from 
the very beginning-then it was she who just started coming to 
me then to pawn some things in order to pay for an advertisement 
in The Voice: "So-and-so, a governess, willing to travel, give lessons 
in private homes, etc., etc." That was at the very beginning, and 
I, of course, didn't see her as any different from the others. She 
came like all the rest, and so on. And then I did begin to see 
something different about her. She was so delicate and blonde, a 
little taller than average; she was always a little awkward with me, 
as if she were embarrassed (I suppose she was the same with all 
strangers, and of course to her I was no different from anyone else, 
I mean if you take me as a man and not as a pawnbroker). As 
soon as she got her money she would turn. around and leave at 
once. And never a word. The others would argue, plead, try to 
haggle. Not this one, she'd just take what I offered . . . .  Wait now, 
I think I'm getting confused . . . .  Yes. What struck me first were 
the things she brought: cheap silver-plated earrings, a trashy little 
locket-twenty kopecks was all she'd get. And she herself knew 
they were worth next to nothing, but I could tell by her face that 
to her they were treasures. And sure enough, as I learned later, 
these were the only things she had left from mommy and daddy. 
Only once I allowed myself a little smirk at her things. You see, 
I never allow myself to do anything like that. I maintain a gentle­
manly tone with my clients: keep it short, keep it polite, and be 
strict. "Strict, strict, strict." But one day, to my surprise, she 
actually brought in the remnants (I mean, literally) of an old hare­
skin jacket. I couldn't help myself and made a joke of sorts about 
it. Heavens, how she flushed! She had big, blue, wistful eyes, but 
there was fire in them then! She didn't say a word, though. Just 
took up her "remnants" and left. It was then that I particularly 
noticed her for the first time and thought something of this sort 
about her-1 mean something quite particular. Oh yes, and I also 
recall an impression. What I mean is the main impression, the 
synthesis of everything: she seemed terribly young, so young she 
might have been fourteen. Whereas in actual fact she was only a 
few months short of sixteen. But that's not what I meant; that 
certainly wasn't the synthesis. She came back again the next day. 
I found out later that she had gone to gone to Dobronravov's and 
to Moser's with this jacket, but neither of them takes anything but 
gold, so they wouldn't even talk to her. I, on the other hand, had 
once taken a cameo from her (a cheap little thing), but later, when 

68o 
A Writer's Diary 
I had thought about it for a while, I was surprised. You see, 
don't accept anything but gold and silver either, yet I allowed her 
to pawn a cameo. And that was my second thought about her at 
the time; that I remember. 
This time-I mean after she had come from Moser-she brought 
an amber cigar-holder. It wasn't much of a thing, amateurish work­
manship, and again, worthless to me because I only accept gold. 
Since this was right after her little rebellion of the previous day, I 
was strict with her. With me, being strict means being curt. How­
ever, as I was handing her the two rubles, I couldn't resist and 
said, as if somewhat irritated: "You know I'm only doing this for 
you; Moser wouldn't take a thing like this." I particularly stressed 
the words "for you," and did so deliberately, to give them a certain 
implication. I was angry. She flushed again when she heard the "for 
you," but she didn't say a word, didn't throw down the money; 
she took it. Well, that's what poverty is! How she flushed, though! 
I realized that I had stung her. And when she had gone I suddenly 
asked myself: "Is this victory over her really worth two rubles? 
Hee-hee-hee!" I recall that I asked myself that very question twice: 
"Is it worth it? Is it worth it?" And with a laugh I answered the 
question in the affirmative. I had tremendous fun at the time. But 
it wasn't a bad feeling on my part: I had something in mind; there 
was a purpose to what I was doing. I wanted to test her, because 
certain ideas about her suddenly began floating around in my mind. 
This was my third particular thought about her . 
. . . Well, it all began from that time. Of course, I immediately 
tried to find out everything about her indirectly, and I waited with 
particular impatience for her to come again. You see, I had a feeling 
she would come soon. When she did come, I began a friendly 
conversation, was as polite as could be. I've not been badly brought 
up, after all, and have good manners. Hmm. It was just then that 
I realized she was kind and meek. Kind, meek people don't resist 
for long, and though they don't open themselves very easily, they 
still just don't know how to duck out of a conversation: they may 
not give you much of an answer, but they do answer, and the 
further you go, the more you get out of them. Only you mustn't 
let up if there's something you want. Of course, she didn't explain 
anything at that time. It was only later that I found out about The 
Voice and all the rest. At that time she was using her last resources 
on advertisements, and of course these were a bit presumptuous, 
at least at first: "Governess, willing to travel. Submit offers by 

November 
68 1 
rerurn mail." But later: "Willing to accept any work: teach, serve 
as companion, manage household, nurse an invalid lady; have sew­
ing skills" and so on-you know what it is! Of course, all these 
laner things were added to the advertisements bit by bit, while at 
last, when she had reached the point of despair, they would read: 
"Willing to work without salary, for board alone." No, she couldn't 
find a position! I decided then to give her a final test: I suddenly 
picked up the latest issue of The Voice and showed her an ad: 
"Young lady, orphaned, seeks position as governess to young chil­
dren, preferably with elderly widower. Can provide comforts in the 
home." 
"There, you see, this girl's placed her ad this morning, and by 
evening she'll surely have found a position. That's how to write 
an ad!" 
She flushed again, and again her eyes flashed; she turned and 
walked out at once. I was very pleased. However, at that time I 
was already certain of everything and wasn't the least bit concerned: 
no one else was going to take her cigar-holders. But she had used 
up even her cigar-holders. And so it was that she came in two days 
later, so pale and upset-I realized that something must have hap­
pened at home, and something really had happened. I'll explain 
in a minute what it was, but now I only want to recall how I 
managed to show her a bit of style and raise myself in her esteem. 
Suddenly this plan popped into my head. The fact was that she 
had brought this icon (she had at last made up her mind to bring 
it) . . . .  Oh, but listen to me! It had already begun then, and I'm 
gening things mixed up . . . .  The point is that now I want to bring 
it all back in my mind, every linle thing about it, every tiny detail. 
I just want to focus my thoughts and I can't, and all these tiny 
details . . . .  
It was an image of the Virgin Mary. The Virgin with the Infant 
Jesus-an ancient, family household icon in a silver, gilded frame, 
worth, maybe, six rubles. I could see that the icon meant a lot to 
her, and she was pawning it all, frame included. 
"Wouldn't it be bener to remove the frame and take back the 
icon?" I said. "It's an icon, after all, and somehow it seems not 
quite the thing to do . . . .  " 
"Is it against the rules to take an icon?" 
"No, it's not against the rules, but still, you yourself, 
perhaps . . . .  " 
"Well, take off the frame." 

682 
A Writer's Diary 
"I'll tell you what," I said, after a little thought, "We'll keep it 
in the frame; I'll put it over there in the icon Case with my others, 
under the lamp" (ever since I opened my pawnshop I've kept an 
icon lamp burning), "and I'll just give you ten rubles for it." 
"I don't need ten. Just give me five, and I'll certainly redeem 
it." 
"You don't want ten? The icon's worth that much," I added, 
noticing that her eyes again were flashing. She said nothing. I 
brought her the five rubles. 
"Don't despise me," I said. "I've been in a similar bind myself, 
and even worse. And if you se me now, working at a profession 
like this . . .  it's just the result of all that I've been through . . . .  " 
"You're taking revenge on society? Is that it?" she interrupted 
suddenly, with a rather sarcastic smile which, however, contained 
a good deal of innocence (I mean her sarcasm was general and not 
directed at me personally, because at that time she did not se me 
as any different from the others, so she said it almost without 
malice). "Aha!" -1 thought to myself. "That tells me something 
about you! You're showing your character. One of the new 
generation." 
"You see," I remarked, half in jest, half mysteriously, '"I am a 
part of that whole that wills forever evil but does forever good . . . .  "' 
She cast a quick glance at me, showing great interest (and also 
a good deal of childish curiosity). 
"Wait . . . .  What does that mean? Where does it come from? I've 
heard it somewhere . . . .  " 
"You needn't rack your brain; Mephistopheles introduces himself 
to Faust with those words. Have you read Faust?" 
"Not . . .  not very carefully." 
"In other words, you haven't read it at all. You must read it. 
But I can see that sarcastic smile again. Please, don't assume I 
have so little taste as to embellish my role as a pawnbroker by 
passing myself off as Mephistopheles. A pawnbroker is a pawn­
broker, and so he shal remain. We all know that." 
"You are a strange sort of person . . . .  I didn't mean to imply 
anything of the kind . . . .  " 
She meant to say, "I never expected you to be a man of edu­
cation," but she didn't say it, although I knew that she thought it. 
I had pleased her immensely. 
"You see," I remarked, "one can do good in any field of endeavor. 

November 
I'm not speaking of myself, of course. Quite possibly I do nothing 
but evil, but . . . .  " 
"Of course one can do good in any place in life," she said, 
casting a swift and penetrating glance at me. "In any place, to be 
sure," she added suddenly. 
Oh, I recall it; I recall all those moments! And I want also to 
add that when yowtg people, those dear yowtg people, want to say 
something very clever and profowtd they suddenly, with excessive 
sincerity and naivete, put on a face that says: "There! Now I'm 
telling you something very clever and profowtd." And they do it 
not from vanity, as people like myself might. But you can see that 
they themselves put great store in all that; they believe in it and 
respect it, and think that you have the same respect as they do. 
Oh, the candor of youth! That is how they conquer. And in her 
it was so charming! 
I remember it, I've forgotten nothing! When she left I at once 
made my decision. That same day I went off on my final inves­
tigation and learned the remaining facts about her, right down 
to the most intimate details of her current life. I had learned her 
earlier history from Lukeria, who was then their servant and 
whom I had bribed several days before. These details were so 
terrible that I simply cannot wtderstand how she was able to laugh, 
as she had just now, and to take any interest in the words of 
Mephistopheles when she herself had to face such horrors. But 
such is youth! That was just how I thought of her then, proudly 
and joyfully, because here I could also see the signs of a great soul. 
It was as if she were saying: "Even on the very edge of perdition, 
the great words of Goethe shine out for me." Yowtg people always 
have some greatness of soul-to a tiny degree, at least and perhaps 
in the wrong direction. I am speaking of her, I mean, of her alone. 
And the main thing was that I regarded her then as my own and 
had no doubt about my power over her. Do you know, that is a 
terribly voluptuous thought-when one no longer has any doubts. 
But what's wrong with me? If I go on this way, when will I ever 
focus my thoughts? I must get on with it! Lord, this isn't the point 
at all! 
2. ,A Proposal of Marriage 
"The intimate details" I discovered about her I can explain in a 
few words: her father and mother had died some time ago, three 

A Writer's Diary 
years before I met her, and she had ben left in the ch.a!Be of some 
aunts whose way of life was rather improper; in fact, "improper" 
is not a strong enough word to describe them. One aunt was a 
widow with a large family-six little children, all close in age; the 
other aunt, a spinster, was a nasty old piece of work. They were 
both nasty, in fact. Her father had ben a minor civil servant, a 
copying clerk who had only personal, but not hereditary, nobility. 
In short, the whole situation suited me to & tee. I appeared as if 
from another, higher world: I was still a retired junior captain from 
a renowned regiment, a nobleman by birth, of independent means, 
and so on, and as far as the pawnshop was concerned, the aunts 
could only look upon that with respect. She had ben enslaved to 
the aunts for thre years, but stil had managed to qualify at some 
sort of examination; she had managed to qualify, snatching mo­
ments from her merciless daily labor, and that signified something 
of her striving for what was sublime and noble! And why did I 
want to mary her? However, let's forget about me for the moment; 
that will come later. . . .  As if that mattered, in any case! She gave 
lesons to her aunt's children, sewed their underclothes, and, in 
the end, not only washed clothes but, with her weak chest, scrubbed 
floors as well. To put it plainly, they even beat her and reproached 
her for every crust of bread. It ended by their planning to sell her. 
Foo! I'm omitting the sordid details. Later she told me the whole 
story. A fat shopkeeper in the neighborhood had watched the whole 
thing for a year (he was not simply a shopkeeper, in fact, but owned 
two grocery stores). He had already driven two wives to their graves 
with his beatings, and now he was looking for a third. His eye fell 
on her. "She's a quiet one," he thinks, "raised in poverty, and I'll 
mary her for the sake of my motherless children." He had children, 
to be sure. He started courting her and negotiating with the aunts. 
On top of everything else, he was a man of fifty; she was horrified. 
It was at this point that she started coming to me to get money 
for the advertisements in The Voice. At last she began pleading 
with the aunts to give her just a tiny bit of time to think the matter 
over. They allowed her a little time, but only a little, and kept 
naging at her: "We don't know where our next meal is coming 
from ourselves, never mind having an extra mouth to feed." I 
already knew all about this, and during the day that followed our 
morning encounter I made my decision. The shopkeeper called on 
her in the evening, bringing a pound of sweets worth half a ruble 
from his store. She was sitting with him, while I called Lukeria 

November 
6ss 
from the kitchen and told her to go back and whisper that I was 
at the gate with something urgent to tell her. I was pleased with 
myself. On the whole, I was terribly pleased that whole day. 
Right there at the gate, with Lukeria standing by, I explained 
to her (and she was still amazed at my sending for her) that I 
would be happy and honored if . . . .  In the second place, so that 
she shouldn't be surprised at the way I proposed to her right on 
the street, I told her, "I'm a straightforward man, and I know the 
circwnstances of your case." And I wasn't lying when I said I was 
straightforward. Well, to hell with it; it doesn't matter. I spoke not 
only politely, that is, showing myself as a man with good manners, 
but also with originality, and that was the most imponant thing. 
Well, and what of it? Is it a sin to admit that? I want to judge 
myself and I am judging myself. I'm supposed to speak both pro 
and contra, and that's what I'm doing. Even afterward I would 
recall those moments with pleasure, as silly as it might have been. 
I told her plainly then, without any embarrassment, that in the 
first place I was not panicularly talented or panicularly clever, 
and, perhaps, not even panicularly kind. I said I was a rather 
cheap egotist (I remember that expression; I made it up on the 
way to her house and was pleased with it) and that it was very 
likely that I had many other disagreeable qualities as well. All this 
was spoken with a panicular kind of pride-you know how it is 
done. I had enough taste, of course, not to launch into listing all 
my vinues after having so nobly declared my shoncomings to her. 
I didn't say, "On the other hand, I am such-and-such." I could 
see that she was still terribly frightened, but I didn't tone down 
anything; in fact, seeing that she was frightened, I deliberately laid 
it on: I told her plainly that she would have enough food to eat, 
but there would be no fine dresses, theater, or balls. These might 
come at some future time when my goal had been achieved. I was 
quite carried away with this severe tone of mine. I added-doing 
my best to make it seem like a passing thought-that if I had taken 
up such an occupation (meaning the pawnshop), it was only because 
I had a cenain goal, that there was one panicular circwnstance . . . .  
But I had the right to speak that way, after all: I really did have 
such a goal, and there really was such a circwnstance. Wait a 
moment, ladies and gentlemen: I was the first to hate that pawn­
shop, and I hated it all my life. But you see, in essence (and even 
though it's ridiculous to talk to oneself in mysterious phrases), I 
was "taking my revenge on society," I really and truly was! So 

686 
A Writer's Diary 
her linle joke that morning about my "taking revenge" was unfair. 
You se, if I had told her directly: "Yes, I'm taking my revenge 
on society," she would have laughed as she 
·
did in the morning and 
it really would have twned out to seem amusing. But by making 
an indirect hint and slipping in a mysterious phrase, I was able 
to capture her imagination. Besides, at that time I wasn't afraid of 
anything: I knew that the fat shopkeeper was more repulsive to 
her than I in any case, and that I, standing by her gate, would 
appear as her liberator. That I certainly did understand. Oh, human 
beings understand nasty tricks very well! But was that a nasty 
trick? How can one pass judgment on a man in a case like this? 
Did I not love her already, even then? 
Wait a moment: of course, I didn't say a single word to her then 
about my doing her a good deed. On the contrary, quite on the 
contrary: "It is I, " I said, "who is the beneficiary here, and not 
you." So I even expressed this in words, unable to restrain myself, 
and perhaps it came out stupidly, because I noticed a wrinkle pass 
over her brow. But on the whole I won a decisive victory. Wait 
now, if I'm going to recall this whole sordid thing, then I'll recall 
it down to the last bit of nastiness: I stood there and a thought 
stirred in my mind: "You are tall, well-built, well-manered, and 
finally-speaking without any boasting-you're not bad-looking ei­
ther." That was what was runing through my mind. I scarcely 
need to tell you that she said yes right there by the gate. But . . .  
but I ought to tell you as well that she stood there by the gate and 
thought for a long time before she said, "Yes." She thought so 
long and hard that I was about to ask her, "Well, what is your 
answer?" And indeed, I couldn't restrain myself and asked, with 
a linle flourish but very politely, "Well, what is your answer, Miss?" 
"Wait a moment, let me think." 
And her linle face was so serious, so serious that even then I 
might have read it! But I was mortified. "Can she really be choosing 
between me and the shopkeeper?" I thought. Oh, but I still didn't 
understand it then. I didn't understand anything then, not a thing. 
I didn't understand until today! I remember Lukeria running out 
after me as I was leaving, stopping me on the road and saying, all 
in a rush: "God will reward you, sir, for taking our dear miss! 
Only don't tell her that; she's such a proud one." 
A proud one, indeed! "I like those proud ones," I thought. Proud 
women are especially beautiful when . . .  well, when you have no 
more doubts about your power over them, isn't it so? Oh, you 

November 
mean, clumsy man! Oh, how pleased I was! You know, when she 
was standing there by the gate, deep in thought about whether to 
answer yes, I was amazed, you know, that she could even be 
thinking such a thing as this: "If there's misery in store both here 
and there, then wouldn't it be bener just to choose the worse-the 
fat shopkeeper-straightaway? Then he can beat me to death in a 
dnmken fit." Eh! So what do you think, could she have had such 
a thought? 
But even now I don't understand; I don't understand a thing! I 
just said that she might have had such a thought: to choose the 
worse of two evils, meaning the shopkeeper. But who was the worse 
for her then: the shopkeeper or I? A shopkeeper or a pawnbroker 
who quotes Goethe? That's still a question! What question? And 
you don't understand even that: the answer is lying on the table, 
and you're talking about a "question"! Well, to hell with me! I'm 
not the issue here at all . . . .  And what do I care now, anyway, 
whether I'm the issue or not? That's something I cenainly can't 
solve. I'd bener go to bed. My head aches . . . .  
3· The Noblest of Men, but I Don't Believe It Myself 
I couldn't get to sleep. Anyhow, how could I sleep with this throb­
bing in my head? I want to come to terms with all this, all this 
filth. Oh, the filth! Oh, the filth I rescued her from then! Why, 
she must have understood that and appreciated what I did! There 
were other ideas I savored as well. For example: I'm fony-one, 
and she's only sixteen. That was alluring, that feeling of inequality; 
a thing like that is delectable, very delectable. 
I wanted to arange our wedding a l'anglaise, meaning just the 
two of us with only two witnesses, one of whom would be Lukeria, 
and then straight off to the train, to Moscow, say (it happened that 
I had some business to do there), to a hotel for a couple of weeks. 
She was very much against that and wouldn't hear of it, and I had 
to go pay my respects to the aunts as her nearest relatives from 
whom I was taking her. I gave in, and the aunts were paid ap­
propriate respect. I even presented the creatures with a hundred 
rubles each and promised them still more-not saying anything to 
her, of course, so as not to grieve her with sordid dealings like 
this. The aunts at once became as cordial as could be. There was 
also an argument about her trousseau: she had-almost literally­
nothing, but she didn't want anything. However, I managed to 

688 
A Writer's Diary 
show her that it simply wouldn't do to have nothing at al, and so 
it was I who collected her trouseau, foſ if I hadn't, then who 
would have? But never mind about me; that's not important. I did 
manage to pass on some of my ideas to her then, so that at least 
she knew. Perhaps I was even hasty. What mattered was that, right 
from the very stan, despite some attempt at restraint, she rushed 
to met me with love, she would gret me with delight when I 
visited her in the evening, she would babble on (that charming, 
innocent babble of hers) about her childhood, her earliest years, 
her parents' home, her father and mother. But I at once threw cold 
water on al this rapture of hers. That was just my plan, you se. 
When she was elated, I would respond with silence-a benevolent 
silence, of course . . .  but still she would quickly se that we were 
two very different people and that I was an enigma. And my main 
point was to keep working at that enigma! Maybe it was just for 
the sake of solving an enigma that I did this whole stupid thing! 
Strictnes, in the first place. It was strictnes when I brought her 
into my house. In short, while I went on with my daily round, 
quite satisfied, I created a whole system. Oh, it happened without 
any effort and just sprang up on its own. And it couldn't have 
happened any other way: the course of events compelled me to 
create this system-why on earth should I slander myself! It was 
a genuine system. Wait a moment, now, and listen: if you are going 
to judge a man, then you have to know the facts of his case . . . .  
So listen. 
I'm not sure how to begin this, because it's very difficult. When 
you begin to justify yourself-that's when it becomes dificult. You 
se, young people generally are scornful of money, for instance. 
So I at once set to work on the issue of money. I stresed the 
money question. And I stresed it so much that she began more 
and more to keep silent. She would open her big eyes, listen to 
me, look and me, and not say a word. Young people are noble, 
you se-the best young people, I mean; they are noble and im­
pulsive, but have little tolerance; just as son as something doesn't 
go quite their way, they show their contempt. But I wanted her to 
have a broad, tolerant outlook; I wanted to instil this breadth right 
into her heart, to make it a part of her. Don't you se what I had 
in mind? Let me take a trivial example: how could I explain my 
pawnshop to a person like her, for instance? Of course, I didn't 
start to talk of it imediately, or else it would have semed as if 
I were apologizing for keeping a pawnshop; but I acted with pride, 

November 
and barely said a word of it. I am an expert at speaking while 
barely saying a word; I've been speaking without saying a word 
all my life, and have endured whole inner tragedies without saying 
a word. Oh, of course I myself was unhappy! Everyone had cast 
me off, cast me off and forgotten me, and not a single soul knows 
it! And suddenly this sixteen-year-old got hold of a few details 
about me from some contemptible people and thought she knew 
everything; but the real secret still lay in the bosom of this man 
almƄ! I just kept silent, and especially with her I kept silent, right 
until yesterday. Why did I do that? Because I'm a proud man. I 
wanted her to find out herself, with no help from me, and this 
time not from tales told by scoundrels. No, she should come to a 
conclusion herself about this man and discover what he is! When 
I took her into my home I wanted complete respect. I wanted her 
to stand before me in ardent homage because of my sufferings, and 
I deserved that. Oh, I was always proud; I always wanted all or 
nothing! And that's just why I'm not content with halfway measures 
where happiness is concerned; I wanted it all. That's just why I 
had to act as I did then, as if to say to her: "You draw your own 
conclusion and appreciate my worth! "  Because you have to agree 
that if I began explaining things to her myself and dropping hints, 
ingratiating myself and asking her to respect me, it would be no 
better than begging for charity . . . .  But yet . . .  yet why am I talking 
about this! 
Stupid, stupid, stupid, and stupid again! Frankly and mercilessly 
(and I stress the fact that it was merciless), I explained to her then, 
in a few words, that "the nobility of youth is very charming but 
isn't worth a penny. And why not? Because it is acquired cheaply 
and is not obtained through experience. It's all 'the first impressions 
of existence.' But let's have a look at you when you have to earn 
your daily bread! Cheap nobility is always easy; even sacrificing 
your life-even that is cheap, because it's just a matter of a stirring 
ofthe blood and an excess of energy, a passionate longing for beauty! 
No, take on some noble deed that is difficult, unobtrusive, unsung, 
one with no glamour, but which involves criticism, a great deal of 
sacrifice, and not a drop of glory, one where you, the radiant youth, 
are held up as a scoundrel by everyone when you are more honorable 
than any of them. Well, now, try taking on a deed like that! No, 
ma'am, you'll turn it down! And 1-1 have done nothing but bear 
the weight of such a deed my whole life long." At first she would 
argue. And how she argued! But then she began to keep quiet, 

A Writer's Diary 
and at last she wouldn't say a word; only she would open her eyes 
as wide as could be while she listened, such big, big eyes, full of 
attention. And . . .  and apart from that I suddenly noticed a smile, 
a skeptical, silent, unpleasant smile. And so it was with this smile 
that I brought her into my house. It's true, of course, that she had 
nowhere else to go . . . .  
4· Plans and More Plans 
Which one of us first began it? 
Neither of us. It began by itself 
right from the very start. I said that I was going to be strict when 
I brought her into the house, but from the first step I softened. 
Even before we maried I explained to her that she would take 
charge of accepting the articles for pawn and paying out the money, 
and she didn't say a word at the time (I draw your attention to 
that). Moreover, she set about the job even with some enthusiasm. 
Of course, the aparunent and the furnirure all remained as they 
had been. It's a two-room apartment: the large anteroom has the 
pawnshop and is divided by a counter; the other room, also large, 
is our parlor and serves as a bedroom as well. I only have a little 
furniture; even her aunts had better. The icon case and lamp are 
in the anteroom with the pawnshop; the other room has my book­
case, with a few books in it, and a chest the key for which I keep; 
and then there's the bed, a couple of tables, and some chairs. 
Before we married I told her that I set aside a ruble a day and no 
more for our subsistence-I mean for food for me, her, and Lukeria 
(whom I'd managed to lure away). "I need thirty thousand in three 
years," I told her, "and there's no other way to raise it." She didn't 
object, but I raised our subsistence allowance by thirty kopecks. 
The same with the theater. I had told my fiancee that there wouldn't 
be any theater, but all the same I decided that once a month I 
would take her to a play, and do it in proper fashion, too, with 
orchestra seats. We went together, three times, and saw The Pursuit 
of Happiness and The Singing Birds, I think. (Oh, to hell with it; 
what difference does it make!) We went in silence, and we came 
back in silence. Why was it that we started by keeping silent right 
from the very beginning? Why? We didn't quarrel at first, you see, 
but still we kept silent. I remember how she would always steal 
furtive glances at me; as soon as I noticed that, I kept an even 
more determined silence. True enough, it was I who insisted on 
the silence, not she. Once or twice she had fits of affection when 

November 
she rushed to embrace me; but since these outbursts of hers were 
unhealthy and hysterical, while I needed happiness that was solid, 
with respect from her, I reacted coldly. And I was right: the day 
after every outburst we would have a quarrel. 
They weren't really quarrels, I mean, but there was silence, and 
it took on a more and more insolent manner on her part. "Rebellion 
and independence"-that's what she had in mind, only she didn't 
know how to manage it. Yes, that gentle face of hers grew more 
and more insolent. Believe it or not, she began to find me obnox­
ious; I could tell that. And it was obvious enough that she was 
having fits of temper. Now tell me, how could she, coming from 
such squalor and poverty-after scrubbing floors, in fact-how 
could she suddenly start fuming because we lived poorly! But you 
see, ladies and gentlemen, it was not poverty, it was frugality, and 
in the things that mattered-even luxury: in our linen, for instance, 
or in cleanliness. I had always imagined before that a wife finds 
cleanliness attractive in her husband. However, it wasn't poverty 
that bothered her, it was my supposed stinginess in housekeeping: 
"He has a goal," she would probably say to herself, "and is showing 
off his strong character." She herself suddenly refused to go to the 
theater. And that mocking look of hers became more and more 
obvious . . .  while I made my silence more and more intense. 
Should I have tried to justify myself? The pawnshop caused the 
most trouble. Let me explain: I knew that a female, and especially 
a girl of sixteen, could do nothing other than submit completely 
to her husband. Women have no originality: why, that's an axiom, 
and even now, even now I consider that an axiom! What does it 
prove that she's lying out there in the anteroom: truth is truth, 
and even John Stuart Mill himself can do nothing about it! But a 
loving woman-oh, a loving woman will worship even the flaws, 
even the vices of her beloved. He himself can't find such ways to 
excuse his vices as she can. This is noble, but it's not original. It 
is lack of originality, and only that, that has been the ruin of women. 
And so, I repeat: what if you do point to that table out there? Is 
it something original that's lying on the table? Oh-h-h! 
Listen to me: I was confident she loved me then. Why, she used 
to rush over to embrace me. So she loved me, or rather she wanted 
to love me. Yes, that's how it was: she wanted to love me; she was 
trying to love me. And the main thing was that I didn't have any 
vices that she'd have to try to excuse. "Pawnbroker," you say; 
everybody says it. And what if I am a pawnbroker? It means there 

A Writer's Diary 
DD1Sl be reaMJDS ix the DObleR of men to become pawnbroken. 
You se, ladies and geodemen, there an: certain ideas . .
. I mean, 
there are some ideas which, when ъ try to pm them into words, 
sound æ- sily. They simply make ooe ashamed. Why is that? 
No reaso a1 alL Because 'i1i'e an: al worthles, and noe of us can 
bear the tnh. That's the ouJy reason I can think of. I said "the 
noblest of men" just oow. That may sound ridiculous, yet thal's 
just bow it was. It's the tnh; it's the O'UeSl tnb of al! Yes, a1 
the time I lwd du riglu to try to 5eCUre my futun: and to open this 
pawnshop: "You bare rejected me 'you people, I mean); you have 
cast me om with your scornful silence. You answered my pasio.ate 
loging to lore you with an insult I w:il.l fel al my we. So 1XM' 
I am quite justified in waling myself of from you, coUecting my 
thirty thousand rubles, and living the rest of my we somewhere 
in the Crimea, OU the Souibem Shore, amid ITIWmtaim and vine­
yards, ou my aurn estaie, pun:based with that thirty do!S3nd. 
Whar ID3I1en most is to lire faraway from al of you, bearing DO 
malice, bm with an ideal in my MJUI, with the woman I lme nat 
to me, with a family, if God bleses me with ooe, spending my 
days helping the oeighboring senJen.'' It'!> al \'efY 'i1i'el, of course, 
to say this to myself _., bm what could bare ben stupider than 
to try painting ber a picture of al thal back then? Tba1 aplains 
my proud silence; thai explains why 'i1i'e Sal without exchanging a 
word. Because what could sbe bare understodr Sixten years old, 
barely into ber s"OUlbt Could 5obe bare acepted my justificninusr 
Could 5obe bare understod my S1lfleringsr Sbe bas a simple, 
"suaight-line" wэ· of thinking; sbe knolrs litle of we, is ful of 
ьuung, cheap corictio:s, sufen from the blindnes of "the beau­
tiful 5oOUl ' '; and abore al, there's the pawosbop--thai was enough! 
Bw wa5o I some criminal in the pawrnsbopr Didn't she se bow I 
acted;. Did I erer charge more than my duer, Oh, what a dreadful 
thing is tnh in the worldŹ This charming girl, this mek ooe, 
this uv- cnarure-5obe was a ÝT3Dl, an insuferable ÝTanl orer 
my 5o0Ul, a tormenterы I am defaming myself unles I say thai! You 
think I didn't loYe berr Who can say thal I didn't loYe berr Don't 
suu se the irony bere, the wicked irony of fate and nature? We 
an: damned; human we in general 
and mine, in panicular/ is 
damned: Of course, I UDdenund now thai I made some mistake! 
Something 'i1i'e0t wrong back then. Ererything was clear; my plan 
wa5o a5o clear a5o the air: "Sa-ere, proud, neding DO ooe's moral 
comobtiou, sufering in 5ow." Thai is haw it was; I didn't lie, 

November 
really I didn't! "One day she will see for herself that it was a 
matter of my nobility"-only she wasn't able to see it then-"and 
when she eventually realizes it, she will have ten times more esteem 
for me and will fall to her knees, her hands folded in ardent prayer." 
That was the plan. But at this point I forgot something; or there 
was something I didn't take into consideration. There was some­
thing I couldn't manage to do properly. But, never mind, that's 
enough. Whose forgiveness is there to ask now? What's done is 
done. Take courage, man, and be proud! It's not your fault! . . .  
And so, I'll tell the truth; I'm not afraid to face the truth head 
on: it was her fault, her fault! . . .  
5 . The Meek One Rebels 
The quarrels started because she suddenly took it into her head to 
loan money on her own terms and to appraise articles at higher 
than their real value. Twice she even presumed to quarrel with me 
on the topic. I wouldn't agree to what she was doing. It was at 
this point that the captain's widow turned up. 
An old widow came in with a locket, a gift of her late husband, 
the captain, and a keepsake, of course. I gave her thirty rubles for 
it. She started whining and pleading for us not to sell the thing, 
and of course I said we wouldn't. Well, to cut the story short, she 
suddenly turned up five days later to exchange the locket for a 
bracelet that wasn't worth even eight rubles; I refused her, of course. 
I suppose she must have been able to read something in my wife's 
eyes; anyway, she came again when I wasn't there, and my wife 
exchanged the bracelet for the locket. 
When I found out that same day what had happened, I spoke 
mildly but firmly and reasonably to her. She was sitting on the 
bed, looking at the floor, flicking her right toe against the carpet 
(a gesture of hers); a nasty smile played on her lips. Then, without 
raising my voice at all, I stated calmly that the money was mine, 
that I had the right to regard life through my eyes, and that when 
I brought her into my house I had hidden nothing from her. 
Suddenly she jumped to her feet, all a-tremble, and-can you 
believe it?-suddenly started stamping her feet at me. She was a 
wild beast; she was having a fit; she was a wild beast having a fit. 
I was numb with amazement: I had never expected antics like this. 
But I kept my head and didn't even make a move; once more, in 
the same calm voice as before, I told her plainly that henceforth 

A Writer's Diary 
I would let her have no more part in my business affairs. She 
laughed in my face and walked out of the apartment. 
The fact is, she did not have the right to walk out of the apart­
ment. Nowhere without me: such was the agreement made before 
we maried. She came back toward evening; I didn't say a word. 
The next day she went out in the morning, and did the same 
the day after that. I closed up the shop and went off to see her 
aunts. I had had no dealings with them since the wedding: I would 
not have them call on me or call on them. But it turned out that 
she had not been visiting them. They listened to my story with 
interest and then laughed in my face: "That's just what you de­
serve." Yet I had expected them to laugh. Right then I offered the 
younger aunt, the old maid, a hundred-ruble bribe, giving her 
twenty-five in advance. Two days later she came to see me, saying: 
"There's an officer, a Lieutenant Efimovich, one of your army 
friends, who's involved in the affair." I was astonished. This Efi­
movich had done me more harm than anyone in the regiment, and 
about a month before, being the shameless creature he is, he had 
come into the pawnshop twice, pretending he wanted to pawn 
something, and I recall he began laughing with my wife. I ap­
proached him right then and told him that in view of our former 
relations he should not dare to call on me again, but I hadn't the 
least notion of anything like this; I simply thought he was being 
impudent. And now, suddenly, the aunt tells me that she already 
has a rendezvous aranged with him and the whole affair is being 
managed by a former acquaintance of the aunts, a certain Julia 
Samsonovna, and a colonel's wife to boot. "She's the one your wife 
visits now," the aunt tells me. 
Let me sumarize this episode. The whole affair cost me nearly 
three hundred rubles, but within two days I had aranged things 
so that I could stand in an adjoining rom behind a door and listen 
to my wife's first rendezvous alone with Efimovich. In anticipation 
of this, I had a brief but-for me-very significant encounter with 
her on the eve of the event. 
She had returned home toward evening and sat on the bed looking 
mockingly at me, tapping her little foot against the rug. Looking 
at her, the thought suddenly flew into my head that for this whole 
past month or, rather, for the previous two weeks, she had absolutely 
not been herself; one could even say that she had become the 
antithesis of herself: here was a violent, aggressive creature-! 
couldn't call her shameless, but she was agitated and looking to 

November 
cause a commotion. She was deliberately seeking out ways to cause 
a commotion. Her gentle spirit held her back, however. When a 
woman like that begins to revolt, even if she may have stepped 
over the limit, you can still always tell that she is only forcing 
herself, pushing herself further, and that she herself cannot over­
come her own sense of morality and shame. And that is the reason 
such women sometimes go to such lengths that you can scarcely 
believe your eyes. The woman used to debauchery will, on the 
contrary, always tone things down; such a one will do something 
far worse, but will do it with an air of decorum and respectability 
that attempts to claim superiority over you. 
"Tell me, is it true they kicked you out of the regiment because 
you were afraid to fight a duel?" she asked me suddenly, right out 
of the blue, her eyes flashing. 
"It's true. By decision of the officers I was asked to leave the 
regiment, though I had sent in my resignation even before that." 
"They kicked you out as a coward?" 
"Yes, the verdict was that I was a coward. But I refused the 
duel not as a coward but because I didn't want to submit to their 
tyrannical decree and challenge a man who, in my view, had caused 
me no offense. You must realize," I couldn't resist adding, "that 
standing up to that sort of tyranny and accepting all the conse­
quences meant showing far more courage than fighting in any duel." 
I couldn't resist; I said it as if to justify myself. But this was all 
she needed, this new hwniliation for me. She laughed spitefully. 
"And is it true that for three years afterward you wandered the 
streets of Petersburg like a tramp, begging for small change and 
spending the nights under billiard tables?" 
"I even used to sleep in the Haymarket, at the Viazemsky house. 
Yes, that's true. After leaving the regiment there were a good many 
shameful things in my life, and much degradation. But it wasn't 
moral degradation, because I was the first to despise my own actions 
even then. It was only a degradation of my will and my mind, and 
it was caused only by despair at my situation. But that's all 
past . . . .  " 
"Oh, and now you are an important figure-a financier! "  
That was a dig at the pawnshop. But by then I had managed to 
gain my self-restraint. I could see that she was eager to hear some 
humiliating explanations and-I didn't provide any. At that point 
a customer rang and I went to the anteroom to look after him. An 
hour later, when she had suddenly dressed to go out, she stopped 

A Writer's Diary 
in front of me and said, "Still, you didn't tell me anything about 
that before the wedding?" 
· 
I did not reply, and she left. 
And so, on the next day, I stood behind the door in this rom 
listening to my fate being decided. I had a revolver in my pocket. 
She was sitting at the table, nicely dressed, and Efimovich was 
preening himself in front of her. And what do you think? What 
happened (and it's to my credit that I say this) was exactly the 
thing I had supposed and anticipated would happen, although I 
was not conscious of supposing and anticipating it. I don't know 
if that makes sense to you. 
This is what happened. I listened for a whole hour, and for a 
whole hour I was present at a duel between the noblest and most 
elevated of women and a depraved, dull creature of society with a 
groveling soul. And how, I thought in utter amazement, how could 
this naive, this meek, this reticent girl possibly know all this? The 
wittiest author of a high-society comedy could not have created this 
scene of ridicule, naive laughter, and the saintly scorn of virtue for 
vice. And what brilliance there was in her words and little rurns 
of phrase; how winy were her quick replies; what truth there was 
in her condemnations! And, at the same time, how much almost 
girlish naivete. She laughed in his face at his declarations of love, 
at his gesrures, at his propositions. Having arrived with the notion 
of storming the fortress head on and not anticipating any resistance, 
he suddenly was disarmed. At first I was prepared to believe that 
she was simply playing the flirt: "the coquetry of a creature who, 
though depraved, is winy, and so works to increase her own value." 
But no: truth radiated like the sun, and there was no possibility 
of doubt. She, with her lack of experience, might have decided to 
arrange this rendezvous out of hatred for me, a hatred that was 
both insincere and impetuous, but when it came to the crux of the 
matter her eyes were opened at once. It was simply a matter of a 
woman who was trying desperately to injure me in any way she 
could but who, once she had resolved to do such a dirty deed, was 
unable to bear the messy consequences. And could Efimovich, or 
any of those other society creatures, seduce a woman like her­
she, pure and sinless, with her ideals? On the contrary: he only 
made her laugh. The whole truth rose up from her soul, and her 
anger brought the sarcasm from her heart. I repeat: this buffoon 
at last fell into a complete daze and sat frowning, scarcely answering 
her, so that I even began to fear that he might go so far as to insult 

November 
her out of a mean wish for revenge. Again I repeat: it is to my 
credit that I listened to this whole scene with scarcely any surprise. 
It was as if I were encowltering only things I already knew. It was 
as if I had gone there to have that encounter. I had come believing 
nothing, with no accusation against her-although I had taken a 
revolver in my pocket: that's the truth! And could I have imagined 
her in any other way? Why was it I loved her? Why was it I 
cherished her? Why was it I had married her? Oh, of course I was 
all too convinced of how much she hated me then, but I was also 
convinced of how pure she was. I put a sudden end to the scene 
when I opened the door. Efimovich leapt up; I took her hand and 
invited her to leave with me. Efimovich recovered and suddenly 
burst into a loud peal of laughter. 
"Oh, there's nothing .I can say against sacred conjugal rights! 
Take her away! And do you know," he shouted as I left, "even 
though a real gentleman wouldn't stoop to fight a duel with you, 
out of respect for your lady, I'm at your service . . .  that's if you 
dare, of course . . . .  
" 
"Do you hear that!" said I, stopping her for a moment on the 
threshold. 
And then not a single word all the way home. I led her by the 
hand, and she offered no resistance. On the contrary: she seemed 
terribly shocked. But that lasted only until we reached the apart­
ment. When we arrived she sat down on a chair and fixed her gaze 
on me. She was extraordinarily pale; even though her lips at once 
assumed their mocking expression, she looked at me with a solemn 
and stern challenge, and I think for the first few moments she 
seriously believed that I was going to shoot her. But I silently drew 
the revolver from my pocket and laid it on the table. She looked 
at me and at the revolver. (Note this: she was already familiar with 
this revolver. I had acquired it when I opened the pawnshop and 
had kept it loaded ever since. When I opened the shop, I decided 
not to keep huge dogs or a muscular manservant as Moser does, 
for example. The cook lets in my customers. But those who practice 
our trade cannot deprive themselves of the means of self-defense­
one never knows what might happen. And so I kept a loaded 
revolver. During her first days in my house, she took a great interest 
in this revolver and had a lot of questions about it. I explained its 
mechanism and how it works and once even persuaded her to fire 
at a target. Keep all that in mind.) Paying no heed to her frightened 
glance, I lay down on the bed, half undressed. I felt quite exhausted; 

A Writer's Diary 
it was around eleven o'clock. She went on sitting in the same spot, 
not stirring, for nearly an hour more and then put out the light 
and lay down, also dressed, on the sofa by the wall. This was the 
first time she did not lie down beside me. Bear that in mind as 
well . . . .  
6. A Dreadful Recollection 
Now, this dreadful recollection . . . .  
I woke up the next morning about eight o'clock, I think, and 
the rom was already quite light. I awakened at once, my mind 
fully clear, and opened my eyes. She was standing by the table, 
holding the revolver. She didn't notice that I was awake and was 
looking at her. And suddenly I saw her begin to move toward me, 
still holding the revolver. I quickly closed my eyes and pretended 
to be sound asleep. 
She carne up to the bed and stood over me. I could hear every­
thing; even though a deathly silence had fallen on the rom, I 
could hear that silence. Then a shudder passed through me and, 
unable to resist, I suddenly-! couldn't help it-1 had to open my 
eyes. She was staring right into my face, holding the pistol to my 
temple. Our eyes met. But we looked at each other for no more 
than a moment. With an effort I closed my eyes again and at the 
same time resolved with all the strength I could muster that I would 
not move another muscle and would not open my eyes no matter 
what fate awaited me. 
In actual fact it happens that a soundly sleeping person can 
suddenly open his eyes, and even raise his head for a second and 
look around the rom; then, a moment later, he can lay his head 
on the pillow once more and fall asleep without remembering a 
thing. When I, having met her gaze and having felt the pistol at 
my temple, suddenly closed my eyes again and did not stir, as if 
I were sound asleep, she certainly might have assumed that I really 
was sleeping and had seen nothing, the more so that it would be 
quite improbable for one who had seen what I had to close his eyes 
again at such a moment. 
Yes, quite improbable. But still, she might have guessed the truth 
as well: that thought also flashed in my mind at that same moment. 
Oh, what a whirlwind of thoughts and sensations rushed through 
my mind in less than an instant. Hurrah for the electricity of human 
thought! If that were the case (I felt)-if she had guessed the truth 

November 
and knew I was not sleeping-then I had already crushed her by 
my readiness to accept death, and her hand might be trembling 
in hesitation at this moment. The resolve she had shown earlier 
might have been shanered by this amazing new realization. I've 
heard that people standing on a great height seem to be drawn 
downward, into the abyss, by their own accord. I think that many 
suicides and murders have been commined simply because the 
person had already taken the pistol into his hand. There's an abyss 
here as well, a forty-five-degree slope that you cannot help but slip 
down; there is an irresistible call for you to pull the trigger. But 
the awareness that I had seen it all, that I knew it all, and was 
silently awaiting death at her hand-that might keep her from 
sliding down the slope. 
The silence continued, and suddenly I felt the cold touch of iron 
at the hair on my temple. You might ask: was I firmly convinced 
I would survive? I will answer, as before God: I counted on nothing, 
except perhaps one chance in a hundred. Why, then, could I accept 
death? But let me ask you: what was my life worth now, after the 
creature I loved had pointed a revolver at me? Besides, I knew 
with all the strength of my being that a struggle was going on 
between us at that very moment, a terrible duel of life and death, 
a duel fought by that very same coward of yesterday, the man whose 
comrades had thrown him out of his regiment for cowardice. I 
knew it, and she knew it-as long as she had guessed the truth 
that I was not asleep. 
Perhaps this didn't happen, perhaps I didn't think anything of 
the sort at the time; yet it all must have happened-without my 
thinking anything, perhaps-because I have done nothing but think 
of it every hour of my life ever since. 
But now you ask: why didn't I save her from this criminal act? 
Oh, I have asked myself that same question a thousand times since, 
every time when, a chill gripping my spine, I recall that second. 
But I was in such a state of black despair at the time: I myself 
was perishing, truly perishing, so how could I save anyone else? 
And what makes you think I even wanted to save anyone? Who 
knows what I was feeling at the time? 
Stil, my mind was seething with activity; seconds passed; the 
silence was deadly; she continued to stand over me, and suddenly 
I shuddered with hope! I opened my eyes at once. She was no 
longer in the rom. I rose from the bed: I had conquered, and she 
had been vanquished forever! 

700 
A Writer's Diary 
I went out to get myself some tea. The samovar was always set 
up in our other rom, and she was always the one to pour the tea. 
I took a seat at the table without saying a word and accepted a 
glass of tea from her. Five minutes later I glanced at her. She was 
dreadfully pale, even paler than yesterday, and she was looking at 
me. And suddenly-suddenly, noticing that I was looking at her, 
her pale lips broke into a pale smile; her eyes posed a timid 
question. "So, she still doesn't know for sure and is asking herself: 
does he know, or doesn't he? Did he see, or didn't he?" Indiffer­
ently, I looked away. After I had tea I closed the shop, went to 
the market, and bought an iron bedstead and a screen. On returning 
home, I had the bed set up in the anteroom with the screen around 
it. This was a bed for her, but I said not a word to her about it. 
She needed no words to understand. This bed told her that I "had 
seen it all and knew it al," and that there could be no more doubts. 
I left the revolver on the table for the night, as always. That night 
she lay down in silence on this new bed: the marriage was dissolved, 
she was "vanquished, but not forgiven." During the night she 
became delirious, and by morning had developed a high fever. She 
was in bed for six weeks. 

2 
1 .  A Dream of Pride 
Lukeria has just announced that she will not go on living here and 
will leave as soon as the mistress has been buried. I spent five 
minutes on my knees in prayer. I wanted to pray for an hour, but 
I kept thinking and thinking, and all my thoughts were painful. 
My head aches-so how can I pray? It would only be a sin! It's 
strange as well that I don't feel sleepy: when there is an immense 
grief-one that can scarcely be borne-one always wants to sleep, 
at least after the first paroxysms. I've heard that those condemned 
to death sleep exceptionally soundly on the last night. And so it 
should be; this is nature's way; otherwise they wouldn't have the 
strength . . . .  I lay down on the sofa, but I couldn't fall asleep . . . .  
. . . We looked after her day and night for the six weeks of her 
illness-I, Lukeria, and a trained nurse whom I hired from the 
hospital. I didn't begrudge the money and even wanted to spend 
it on her. I called in Dr. Schroeder and paid him ten rubles per 
visit. When she regained consciousness I spent less time around 
her. Still, why bother to describe all this? When she was completely 
on her feet again, she quietly and without a word sat herself down 
in my room at a special table which I had also bought for her at 
that time . . . .  Yes, it's true: we said not a word to one another, 
Well, actually, we did begin speaking later on, but only about quite 
ordinary things. I made a point, of course, of not lening myself 
talk too much, but I could see very well that she, too, was happy 
not to say more than she had to. It seemed to me that this was 
absolutely natural on her part: "She's too distraught, and feels too 
crushed," I thought, "and naturally I have to give her time to 
forget and to come to terms." And so it was that we went on in 
701 

702 
A Writer's Diary 
silence, although privately I was constantly_ preparing myself for 
the future. I assumed that she was doing the same thing, and I 
found it awfuly intriguing to speculate on just what was going on 
in her mind. 
One more thing: no one knows, of course, how much I sufered 
while grieving over her during her illness. But I sufered in silence 
and stifled my groans even from Lukeria. I couldn't imagine, I 
couldn't even suppose, that she might die before learning every­
thing. But when she was out of danger and her health began to 
return, I recall that I quickly recovered my composure. Besides, I 
had decided to put off our future as far as possible and keep things 
in their present form for the time being. Yes, something very odd 
and peculiar happened to me then-1 don't know how else to 
describe it. I was triumphant, and the very awareness of that turned 
out to be quite sufficient for me. And so the whole winter passed 
this way. Oh, I was satisfied as I had never been before, and for 
the whole winter. 
You see, there had been one terrible external event in my life 
which up to this point-that is, until the catastrophe with my wife­
had oppressed me every day and every hour: this was my loss of 
reputation and my leaving the regiment. To put it briefly, there 
had been a tyrannical injustice committed against me. It is true 
that my fellow officers did not like me because I was not an easy 
person to get along with and, perhaps, because there was an element 
of the ridiculous about me, although it often happens that something 
which you revere and regard as sublime and sacred will at the same 
time be cause for the amusement of your whole crowd of friends. 
Oh, even in school people never liked me. No one anywhere ever 
liked me. Even Lukeria isn't able to like me. That same incident 
in the regiment, while a consequence of the general dislike for me, 
still was largely a matter of chance. I mention this because there 
is nothing more offensive and painful than to be ruined by a matter 
of chance, by something that might or might not have happened, 
by an unlucky conglomeration of circumstances that might have 
simply passed over like a cloud. For an intelligent creature this is 
humiliating. The incident happened as follows. 
Once, in the theater, I went to the bar during the intermission. 
The hussar A--v came in suddenly and, in the presence of all 
the officers and general public who were standing there, began 
loudly telling two of his fellow hussars that Captain Bezumtsev of 
our regiment had only just.caused a disgraceful row in the corridor 

November 
and that "he was drunk, by the look of it." This conversation did 
not go any further, and it was a mistake in any case, since Captain 
Bezumtsev was not drunk and, strictly speaking, the row wasn't 
really a row. The hussars began speaking of something else, and 
there the maner ended. But the next day the story had reached our 
regiment and talk at once began to the effect that I had been the 
only officer of our regiment present in the bar, and that when the 
hussar A--v had made such an impertinent remark about Captain 
Bezumtsev, I had not gone up and rebuked him. But what would 
have been the point of that? If he had a grudge against Bezumtsev, 
then it was their personal affair; why should I get involved? Mean­
while, our officers began insisting that it was not a personal affair 
but concerned the regiment as a whole; and since I was the only 
officer of our regiment present, in failing to act I had proved to 
all the other officers and civilians in the bar that our regiment could 
have officers who were not particularly fussy about their own honor 
and the honor of their regiment. I could not agree with such a 
view. They let me know that I could correct the matter even now­
although belatedly-by asking for a formal explanation from 
A--v. I did not want to do this, and in my exasperation I gave 
them a haughty refusal. Then I resigned at once. That's the whole 
story. I left the regiment proudly, yet crushed in spirit. My will 
and my mind had suffered a very severe blow. At the same time, 
as it happened, my sister's husband in Moscow had squandered 
our modest legacy, including my own tiny share in it, so I was left 
on the street without a penny. I could have taken some civilian 
job, but I didn't: after wearing a brilliant uniform I couldn't accept 
work for some railway. And so: if it's to be shame, let it be shame; 
if disgrace, then disgrace; if degradation, then degradation-the 
worse, the bener. That is what I chose. Thereafter, three years of 
gloomy memories, and even the Viazemsky house. A year and a 
half ago a wealthy old woman, my godmother, died in Moscow, 
and to my surprise she left me (among her other bequests) three 
thousand rubles. I thought things over for a time and then chose 
my fate. I decided on a pawnshop, offering apologies to no one: 
money, then a cozy home and, at last, a new life far removed from 
my old memories-that was my plan. Nevertheless, my gloomy 
past and my once honorable reputation, now destroyed forever, 
haunted me every hour and every minute. But then I married. 
Whether that was chance or not I don't know. But when I brought 
her into my house I thought that I was bringing in a friend, and 

A Writer's Diary 
I was so much in need of a friend. But I saw clearly that I had 
to train my friend, that I had to add the final touches to her, even 
conquer her. And could I have explained it all at once to this 
sixteen-year-old with her prejudices? For example, how could I, 
without the chance assistance of the terrible catastrophe with the 
revolver, have convinced her that I was not a coward and that my 
regiment had unjustly accused me of cowardice? But the catastrophe 
came along at the right moment. When I held up against the 
revolver, I avenged myself on all my gloomy past. And even though 
no one knew about it, she knew, and that meant everything to me, 
because she herself meant everything to me-all my hope for the 
future of my dreams! She was the only human being whom I was 
developing for myself, and I had no need of any other. And now 
she had discovered it all; she had discovered, at least, that she had 
been unjust in rushing off to ally herself with my enemies. I was 
delighted by this thought. I could no longer be a scoundrel in her 
eyes, merely an odd sort of fellow. But after everything that had 
happened, even this thought was not entirely displeasing to me. 
Oddness is not a vice; on the contrary, women sometimes find it 
attractive. In short, then, I was deliberately putting off the de­
nouement: what had already happened was, for the moment, more 
than enough to ensure my peace of mind and contained abundant 
images and material for me to dream about. That's the trouble, 
you see: I am a dreamer. I had enough raw material for myself, 
and as for her, I thought that she could wait. 
And so the whole winter passed in a kind of expectation of 
something. I loved to steal glances at her as she sat at her little 
table. She would work at her sewing, and sometimes in the evening 
would read books she took from my shelf. The selection of books 
on my shelf also should have testified on my behalf. She scarcely 
went out at all. Just before dusk every day, after dinner, I would 
take her out for a walk for the sake of some exercise, but not in 
complete silence as before. I tried to keep up the appearance that 
we were not keeping silent but talking cordially; but as I said, 
neither of us spoke too much. I did this deliberately; as for her, 
I thought it was essential to "give her some time." It's odd, of 
course, that it was almost the end of winter before it occurred to 
me that while I loved to steal glances at her, never once through 
the winter did I catch her looking at me! I thought this was simply 
a matter of her shyness. Besides, she had a look of such submissive 

November 
timidity, such weakness after her illness. No, bener wait and "sud­
denly she will approach you herself . . . .  
" 
I was absolutely delighted by this thought. I'll add one thing 
more: sometimes, as if deliberately, I would work myself up and 
in fact push my emotions and my mind to the point where I actually 
seemed to feel as if she had offended me. And so it continued for 
some time. But my hatred never managed to ripen and take root 
in my inner being. And I myself felt that this was really only a 
game of some sort. And even then, although I had dissolved the 
marriage when I bought the cot and the screen, I never ever re­
garded her as a guilty party. That was not because I judged her 
offense lightly, but because I had the sense to forgive her completely, 
from the very first day, even before I bought the cot. In short, it 
was an oddity on my part, for I am a morally strict person. To 
the contrary: I could see that she was so vanquished, so humbled, 
so crushed, that there were times when I was in an agony of pity 
for her, even while sometimes being absolutely pleased with the 
notion of her humiliation. The idea of this inequality between us 
appealed to me . . . .  
That winter I deliberately did several good deeds. I forgave two 
loans; I loaned money to one poor woman without a pawn. And 
I said nothing to my wife about it, and did not do it in order for 
her to find out; but the old woman herself came to thank me, 
almost on her knees. And so the deed became known. I think that 
my wife truly was pleased to learn about the old woman. 
But spring was coming on. It was already the middle of April, 
the storm windows had been taken down and the sun began to 
bring bright patches of light into our silent rooms. But a shroud 
hung before me and blinded my reason. That terrible, fateful 
shroud! How did it happen that it all suddenly fell away from my 
eyes and that suddenly my sight was restored and I understood it 
all! Was it a maner of chance, or had the appointed day simply 
arrived, or was it a ray of sunlight that kindled the thought and 
the surmise in my benumbed mind? No, it was not a thought and 
not a surmise; it was a little vein that suddenly began to throb, a 
little vein that had all but atrophied but which twitched and came 
to life, bringing new feeling to my benumbed soul and exposing 
my diabolical pride. At the time it seemed as though I leapt from 
my chair. And it happened suddenly, when I least expected it. It 
happened before evening, about five o'clock, after dinner. . . .  

706 
A Writer's Diary 
2. Suddenly the Shroud Fell Away 
A word or two first. As long as a month before I had noticed a 
peculiar sort of melancholy in her. It wasn't just her silence, it was 
real melancholy. That also I noticed suddenly. She was sining at 
her work, her head bent over her sewing, and she didn't notice 
that I was looking at her. And it suddenly struck me right then 
how thin and gaunt she had become; her face was pale, her lips 
white. Al this, together with her melancholy, gave me a great 
shock. Even before this I had heard her little dry cough, especially 
at nights. I got up at once to call Doctor Schroeder, saying nothing 
to her. 
Schroeder came the next day. She was quite surprised and looked 
first at Schroeder, then at me. 
"But I'm quite well," she said, smiling uncertainly. 
Schroeder did not give her a very careful examination (the haugh­
ty maner of these medical men sometimes doesn't permit them 
to be careful) and told me only, in the next rom, that this was a 
result of her illness and that when spring came it would not be a 
bad idea to go to the seaside or, if that were impossible, simply to 
move to a country place. In short, he didn't tell me anything except 
that she was sickly or something of the sort. When Schroeder left 
she said once more, looking at me with terrible seriousness, "I am 
quite, quite well." 
But having said that she blushed at once, evidently from shame. 
Evidently it was shame. Oh, now I understand: she felt ashamed 
that I, who was still her husband, was looking after her just as if 
I still were her real husband. But at that time I did not understand 
and assumed she blushed out of modesty. (The shroud!) 
And so it was, a month after this, some time after four o'clock 
on a bright, sunny day in April, I was sining in the shop checking 
my accounts. Suddenly I heard her, sining in our rom and working 
at her table, begin ever so softly . . .  to sing. This new event sur­
prised me enormously, and even now I do not understand it. Pre­
viously I had scarcely ever heard her sing-oh, perhaps in the very 
first days after I brought her home, when we stil could rollick 
about, target shooting with the pistol. Then her voice was still 
quite strong and clear, although not always true, but very pleasant 
and sound. But now her little song was so weak. I don't mean to 
say it was mournful (it was an old love song of some sort); but it 
was as if something in her voice had cracked and broken, as if her 

November 
little voice could not cope any more, as if the song itself were ill. 
She was singing in a low voice which rose and then suddenly broke 
off-such a poor little voice, and it broke off so pitifully. She cleared 
her throat and once more began to sing ever so quietly . . . .  
You may laugh at my getting upset, but no one will ever un­
derstand why I was so moved! No, I still wasn't sorry for her; this 
was something quite different. At first, at least in the first moments, 
I felt suddenly perplexed and greatly surprised, strangely and ter­
ribly, painfully and almost spitefully surprised: "She's singing, and 
in my presence! Has she forgotten about me or what?" 
Completely shocked, I remained at my place for a time; then I 
suddenly rose, took my hat, and went out, scarcely knowing what 
I was doing. At least I didn't know where I was going and why. 
Lukeria came to help me with my overcoat. 
"She's singing?" I couldn't help but ask Lukeria. She did not 
understand and looked at me, still uncomprehending; however, it's 
no surprise that she failed to understand me. 
"Is that the first time she's been singing?" 
"No, she sometimes sings when you're not home," Lukeria 
answered. 
I recall it all. I went down the stairs, onto the street, and set off 
with no notion of where I was going. I reached the corner and 
stared off into the distance. People passed and jostled me, but I 
didn't feel anything. I hailed a cab and told the driver to take me 
to the Police Bridge-Lord knows why. Then, suddenly, I gave 
him twenty kopecks and dismissed him. 
"That's for your trouble," I said, laughing senselessly; in my 
hean, however, a son of ecstasy suddenly welled up. 
I turned toward home, increasing my pace. The poor, cracked, 
broken note began to ring in my soul once more. I could scarcely 
catch my breath. The shroud was falling from my eyes! If she could 
stan singing in my presence, it meant she had forgotten about me­
that was clear and that was dreadful. My hean could sense that. 
But rapture radiated in my soul and overcame the dread. 
Oh, the irony of fate! You see, there had been nothing and could 
not have been anything in my soul that whole winter apan from 
this rapturous feeling. But where had I been all winter? Was I 
aware of what was happening in my soul? I ran up the stairs in a 
great rush; I don't recall if I had any apprehension when I entered 
the room. I remember only that the whole floor seemed to undulate 
beneath my feet and I moved as if floating down a river. I came 

708 
A Writer's Diary 
into the rom; she was sitting in her usual place sewing, her head 
bent over her work, but wasn't singing any more. She cast a passing, 
uncurious glance at me; in fact, it was not a glance but merely an 
instinctive and indifferent gesture, the kind directed at anyone who 
enters a room. 
I made straight for her and took a chair close beside her, like 
one scarcely in his right mind. She glanced quickly at me, as if 
taking fright; I took her hand and don't recal what I said to her­
or rather, what I tried to say to her, because I couldn't even speak 
properly. My voice had broken and would not obey me. And in 
any case, I didn't know what to say; I was gasping for breath. 
"Let's talk . . .  you know . . .  say something to me! "  I babbled 
something stupid. How could I collect my thoughts? She shuddered 
and drew back in great fear, staring at my face. But suddenly I 
could see stem amazement in her eyes. Amazement, yes, aJJ.d it was 
stem. She looked at me wide-eyed. This sternness, this stern amaze­
ment was like a blow that shattered my skull. "So is it still love 
you want? Is it love?" This was what her amazed expression seemed 
to be asking me, although she still didn't say a word. But I could 
read everything, absolutely everything. I felt a tremor pass through 
my whole being and I simply collapsed at her feet. Yes, I fell down 
at her feet. She leapt up quickly, but with extraordinary strength 
I grasped both her hands to hold her back. 
And I understood the full depth of my despair, I understood it 
completely! But-can you believe it?-my soul was so overflowing 
with rapture that I thought I would die. I kissed her feet in happi­
ness, in ecstasy. Yes, in immeasurable, boundless happiness-and 
this with complete awareness of the hopelessness of my despair! I 
wept, I tried to say something but could not. Her frightened and 
amazed expression suddenly changed to one of concern, to a look of 
profound questioning, and she gazed at me strangely, even wildly; 
there was something she wanted to understand at once and she 
smiled. She felt terribly ashamed that I was kissing her feet and 
pulled them away, but I at once began kissing the spot on the floor 
where her feet had been. She noticed that and laughed with embar­
rassment (you know how people laugh with embarrassment). She 
was about to go into hysterics, I could see; her hands were trembling. 
But I wasn't thinking about that and kept mumbling that I loved 
her, that I would not get up: "Let me kiss the hem of your dress . . .  
let me worship you this way for the rest of my life . . . .  " I don't 
know-I don't remember, but suddenly she broke into shudders and 
sobs; a terrible fit of hysterics began. I had frightened her. 

November 
I caried her over to the bed. When her fit had passed, she sat 
up on the edge of the bed, and with a terribly distraught air she 
seized my hands and begged me to calm down: "Enough! Don't 
torment yourself, calm down! "  And she began to cry again. I didn't 
leave her the whole evening. I kept telling her that I would take 
her to Boulogne to bathe in the sea-right away, this moment, in 
two weeks; that her poor voice was so weak, as I had heard the 
other day; that I would close the shop, sell it to Dobronravov; that 
everything would begin anew. Above al, Boulogne, Boulogne! She 
listened, growing more frightened all the while. But the most im­
portant thing for me was not that, it was my urge-which grew 
ever stronger-to lie down again at her feet, to kiss them, to kiss 
the ground on which her feet stood, to worship her. "There is 
nothing, nothing more that I ask of you," I kept repeating. "Don't 
say anything, don't pay any attention to me, just let me sit in the 
corner and look at you. Turn me into your thing, your lapdog . . . .  " 
She wept. 
"And I thought щ would just let me go on like that. " This burst 
forth from her involuntarily, so much so that perhaps she wasn't 
even aware of saying it. And meanwhile-oh, this was the most 
important thing, the most fateful thing she said, the thing I un­
derstood best during that whole evening, and it was like a knife 
slashing my heart! It made everything clear to me, everything! But 
as long as she was by my side, as long as I could look at her, hope 
was overpowering and I was terribly happy. Oh, I exhausted her 
terribly that evening and I knew it, but I kept thinking that I 
would at once be able to remake everything anew. At last, much 
later in the evening, she became completely exhausted; I persuaded 
her to go to sleep, and she at once fell into a sound sleep. I expected 
that she might become delirious, and she was delirious, but only 
very slightly. I kept getting up during the night and tiptoeing 
quietly in my slippers to have a look at her. I wrung my hands 
over her, looking at that frail creature on that poor little bed, that 
iron cot I had bought her for three rubles. I got down on my knees 
but did not dare kiss her feet while she slept (without her per­
mission!). I knelt to pray to God, but jumped up again. Lukeria 
kept coming out of the kitchen to keep an eye on me. I went out 
and told her to go to bed and that tomorrow "something altogether 
different" would begin. 
And I believed that, blindly, madly, terribly. Oh, I was drowning 
in ecstasy! I could barely wait for the next day. The main thing 
was that I couldn't believe any disaster would happen, despite all 

7 1 0  
A Writer's Diary 
the symptoms. My good sense had still not entirely returned to 
me, despite the shroud that had fallen; it did not return for a very 
long time-oh, not until today, not until this very day!! But then 
how could my good sense have returned to me then: she was still 
alive, after all; she was right before me, and I before her. "She'll 
wake up tomorrow and I'll tell her all this, and she will se every­
thing." That was how I thought at the time-simply and clearly­
and that was why I was in ecstasy! The main thing was this trip 
to Boulogne. For some reason I kept thinking that Boulogne was 
everything, that something conclusive would happen in Boulogne. 
"To Boulogne, to Boulogne! . . .  " And with that insane thought I 
awaited the morning. 
3· I Understand Al Too Well 
Why this was only a few days ago, five days, just five days ago, 
last Tuesday! No, no, if there had been only a little more time, if 
only she had waited just a little and-and I would have cleared 
away all the fog that surounded us! But she did calm down, didn't 
she? The next day she listened to me with a smile, despite her 
confused state of mind . . . .  The main thing was that this whole 
time, all five days, she was in a state of confusion or shame. And 
she was afraid, too, very much afraid. I won't dispute it; I won't 
contradict you like some madman: she was frightened, but why 
shouldn't she be, after all? We had been like strangers to one 
another for such a long time, you see; we had grown so far apart 
from one another, and then suddenly all this . . . .  But I paid no 
attention to her fear; our new life was shining before my eyes! . . .  
It's true, absolutely true, that I made a mistake. And perhaps there 
were even many mistakes. Just as soon as we woke the next day 
I made a mistake, right that same morning (this was on Wednesday): 
I suddenly made her my friend. I was in far too great a rush, of 
course, but I absolutely needed to confess-much more than con­
fess, in fact! I didn't even hide the things that I had been hiding 
from myself my whole life. I declared frankly that all winter long 
I had thought of nothing but the certainty of her love for me. I 
explained to her that my pawnshop had only been the perversion 
of my mind and my will, my personal idea of both punishing and 
exalting myself. I explained that in the theater bar I truly had been 
a coward-it was a matter of my character and my overly self­
conscious nature: I had been taken aback by the circumstances, 

November 
7 1 1  
by the bar itself; taken aback by the thought that if I did step 
forward I might make a fool of myself. It wasn't the duel that made 
me fearful, it was the possibility of making a fool of myself . . . .  
And later I didn't want to admit it and tormented everyone, and 
tormented her because of it; in fact, that was the reason I married 
her-to torment her for my past. I spoke for the most part as if 
in a delirious fever. She took my hands and begged me to stop: 
"You are exaggerating . . .  you're tormenting yourself." And the 
tears began again, and again she was on the verge of hysterics! 
She kept pleading with me to say no more about it and to stop 
dredging up my past. 
I paid no heed to her pleas, or scarcely any heed: Spring! Bou­
logne! The sun over there, our new sun-that was all I could talk 
about! I closed the pawnshop and transferred my business to Dob­
ronravov. I suddenly suggested to her that we should give it all 
away to the poor, apart from the original three thousand which I 
had inherited from my godmother. That we would use to go to 
Boulogne, and then return and begin a new life of honest labor. 
And so it was decided, because she didn't say a word . . .  she only 
smiled. And I think that she smiled more as a matter of tact, so 
as not to hurt my feelings. I could see, after all, that I was purring 
a great burden on her, don't think that I was so stupid and such 
an egotist that I didn't see that. I could see it all, right down to 
the last detail; I saw it and knew it better than anyone: all my 
despair stood out for all to see! 
I told her everything about me and about her. And about Lukeria. 
I told her that I had wept. . . .  Oh, of course I would talk on other 
subjects. I was also trying hard not to remind her of certain things. 
And she even showed some enthusiasm once or twice, I remember 
that! Why do you say that I looked and saw nothing? And if only 
this had not happened, then everything would have been restored 
to life again. Why, she was telling me just the other day, when we 
began talking about reading and what she had read that winter; 
she laughed when she recalled that scene between Gil Bias and the 
archbishop of Granada. And how she laughed: sweet, childish 
laughter, just as she used to, before we were married. (A moment! 
A moment!) How delighted I was! I was much struck, however, 
by her mention of the archbishop: so she had found enough hap­
piness and peace of mind to be able to laugh at this masterpiece 
as she sat there in the winter. That meant she must have begun to 
recover her stability; she must have begun to believe that I would 

7 1 2  
A Writer's Diary 
not leave her like that. "I thought you would just let me go on like 
that. " That's what she told me that Tuesday! Oh, this was how a 
ten-year-old girl would think! And yet she believed, she truly did, 
that everything in fact would remain like that: she sitting at her 
table and I at mine, and so we would both go on until we were 
sixty. And suddenly I come up to her, the husband; and the husband 
needs love! Oh, what misunderstanding, what blindness on my 
part! 
It was also a mistake for me to look at her with such rapture on 
my face: I should have kept a grip on myself so my rapture wouldn't 
frighten her. And in fact I did keep a grip on myself. I didn't kiss 
her feet any more. Never once did I let it show that . . .  well, that 
I was her husband. Oh, that never entered my mind; I only wanted 
to worship her! But, you see, I couldn't keep altogether silent; I 
had to say something! I suddenly told her how much I enjoyed her 
conversation and that I considered her vastly, incomparably more 
educated than I, and better developed mentally. She blushed ter­
ribly and said, embarassed, that I was exaggerating. And here, 
like a fool, I couldn't restrain myself and told her of the ecstasy 
I had felt that time when I stood outside the door listening to her 
duel-a duel of innocence with that creature-and how I delighted 
in her intelligence, her brilliant wit, both coupled with her childish 
naivete. Her whole body semed to shudder and she mumbled 
something about my exaggeration; but suddenly her whole face 
clouded over and she covered it with her hands and burst into 
sobs . . . .  And here again I couldn't restrain myself: once more I 
knelt before her; once more I began kissing her feet; and once 
more it ended in her having a fit, as she had on Tuesday. That 
was yesterday evening, and the next morning . . . .  
The next morning?! Madman, why that was this morning, just 
a little while ago! 
Listen and try to comprehend: when we sat together by the 
samovar a few hours ago (this was after her fit of yesterday), she 
surprised me by her air of calm. That's how she was! But I spent 
the whole night trembling with terror over what had happened that 
day. But suddenly she came up to me, stood before me, folding 
her hands (only hours ago!), and began to tell me that she was the 
guilty party and she knew it, that her crime had tormented her all 
winter and was tormenting her even now . . .  that she cherished my 
magnanimity . . . .  "I will be your faithful wife; I will respect 

November 
7 1 3 
you . . . .  "At this point I jumped up and, like a madman, I em­
braced her! I kissed her; I kissed her face and her lips, and I 
kissed her like a husband for the first time after a long separation. 
And why did I ever leave her? Only for two hours . . .  our passports 
for abroad . . . .  Oh, God! Just five minutes, if only I had come back 
just five minutes earlier! . . .  And here was this crowd of people at 
our gate, people staring at me . . . .  Oh, Lord! 
Lukeria says-(oh, now I'll never let Lukeria go; she knows 
everything. She was here all winter; she'll be able to tell me)-she 
says that after I left the house, and only some twenty minutes 
before I came back, she suddenly went to the mistress in our room 
to ask something-! don't remember what-and noticed that her 
icon (that same icon of the Virgin Mary) had been removed from 
the icon case and was standing before her on the table; the mistress, 
it seemed, had just been praying before it. 
"What is it, ma'am?" 
"It's nothing, Lukeria, you may go . . . .  Wait, Lukeria." 
She came up to Lukeria and kissed her. 
"Are you happy, ma'am?" Lukeria asked. 
"Yes, Lukeria." 
"The master should have come to ask your forgiveness a long 
time ago, ma'am. Thanks be to God you've made it up." 
"That's fine, Lukeria," she said. "You may go now." 
And she smiled, but oddly somehow. It was such an odd smile 
that ten minutes later Lukeria came in again to have a look at her: 
"She was standing by the wall, right near the window, her arm 
against the wall and her head against her arm, just standing there, 
thinking. And she was so deep in thought that she didn't even 
notice me standing there watching her from the other room. I could 
see she had a kind of smile on her face, standing there, thinking 
and smiling. I looked at her, turned and went out on tiptoe, won­
dering about her. But suddenly I heard the window open. Right 
away I went in to tell her that it was still cool outside and she 
might catch a cold if she wasn't careful. And I saw that she'd 
climbed up on the windowsill and was standing upright in the 
open window, her back to me, holding the icon. My heart just 
sank inside me, and I shouted 'Ma'am, ma'am!' She heard me 
and made a move as if to turn toward me, but didn't. She took a 
step, pressed the icon to her bosom, and leapt out the window! "  
I remember only that when I came through the gate she was still 

7 1 4 
A Writer's Diary 
warm. The worst thing was that they were all.staring at me. They 
shouted at first, and then suddenly they all fell silent and made 
way before me, and . . .  and she was lying there with the icon. I 
have a vague memory of coming up to her, silently, and looking 
for a long time. They all surrounded me and were saying something 
to me. Lukeria was there, but I didn't see her. She tells me she 
spoke to me. I only remember some fellow shouting to me that 
"there wasn't but a cupful of blood came out of her mouth, you 
could hold it in your hand! "  And he showed me the blood there 
on the paving stone. I think I touched the blood and smeared the 
end of my finger with it; I recall looking at my finger while he 
kept on: "You could hold it in your hand! "  
"What do you mean, in your hand?" I yelled at the top of my 
voice (so people say) and raised my arms to attack him . . . .  
Oh, savage, how savage! A misunderstanding! It's unbelievable! 
Impossible! 
4· I Was Only Five Minutes Late 
And isn't it so? Can you believe this? Can you really say it was 
possible? For what, why did this woman die? 
Oh, believe me, I understand; but why she died is still a question. 
She was frightened by my love, asked herself the solemn question 
whether to accept it or not, found the question too much for her 
to bear, and thought it better to die. I know-there's no point 
racking my brain about it: she had made too many promises and 
got frightened that she wouldn't be able to keep them; that much 
is clear. There are some facts about the case that are absolutely 
terrible. 
Because why did she die? The question remains. The question 
keeps pounding in my brain. I would have left her like that if she 
had wanted to be left like that. She didn't believe it, that was the 
thing! But no, wait, I'm not telling the truth; it wasn't that way 
at all. It was simply because with me there had to be honesty: if 
she was going to love me, then she had to love me completely, not 
as she would have loved that shopkeeper. And since she was too 
chaste and too pure to compromise on the kind of love that would 
have satisfied the shopkeeper, she didn't want to deceive me. She 
didn't want to deceive me with a half-love or a quarter-love that 
masked itself as complete love. People like her are just too honest, 

November 
7 1 5 
that's the thing! And I wanted to instill some breadth of feeling 
into her then, you remember? A strange idea. 
I'm awfuly curious: did she respect me? I wonder, did she 
despise me or not? I don't think she did despise me. It's awfully 
queer: why didn't it even once, all winter long, enter my head that 
she despised me? I was as convinced as could be of the contrary, 
right until that moment when she looked at me with stern amaze­
ment. And it was specifically stern. At that point I realized at once 
that she ƶespised me. I realized it unalterably and forever! Ah, let 
her despise me, even for the rest of her life, but let her go on 
living! Only hours ago she was still walking about, talking. I simply 
can't understand how she could have jumped out of the window! 
And how was I to have suspected it even five minutes before? I've 
called Lukeria in. I will never let Lukeria go now. Never! 
Oh, we still could have come to terms. It was just that we had 
grown so terribly alienated from one another over the winter. But 
couldn't we have made that up? Why, oh why couldn't we have 
come together and begun a new life? I'm a noble, generous person, 
and so is she: and there's a point in common! Just a few more 
words, no more than a couple of days, and she would have un­
derstood everything. 
What hurts me most is that the whole thing was a matter of 
chance-simple, barbaric, blind chance! That's what hurts! Five 
minutes, just five short minutes late! Had I arrived five minutes 
earlier, the moment would have passed over like a cloud and the 
notion would never have entered her head again. And the result 
would have been her understanding everything. And now the empty 
roms again, and I'm alone again. There's the pendulum ticking; 
what does it care? It has pity for no one. I have no one now­
that's the calamity. 
I just keep pacing and pacing the floor. I know, I know-don't 
tell me: you think it's ridiculous for me to be complaining about 
a matter of chance and "five minutes." But it's obvious, surely. 
Just think of this one thing: she didn't even leave a note saying, 
"Don't blame anyone for my death," as all the others do. Couldn't 
she have realized that even Lukeria might get into some trouble: 
"You were alone with her," they could say, "and you pushed her 
out." They might have dragged Lukeria off to jail if it hadn't been 
for the four people looking out of the windows of the building in 
the courtyard. They saw her standing with the icon in her hands 
and saw her throw herself out. But the fact that there were people 

7 1 6  
A Writer's Diary 
standing there looking on is also a matter of chance, you se. No, 
the whole thing was just a moment, only one unaccountable mo­
ment. An impulse, a passing fancy! And what of the fact that she 
prayed before the icon? That doesn't mean she was saying her 
prayers just before dying. The moment lasted no more than ten 
minutes, perhaps; the decision was made just while she was stand­
ing by the wall, her head resting against her arm, and smiling. 
The thought flew into her head, made her dizzy and-and she 
couldn't resist it. 
Say what you like, but this is a clear case of misunderstanding. 
She could have gone on living with me. And what if anemia were 
the cause? Simply a case of anemia, of exhaustion of her vital 
energy? She was worn out from that winter, that's al . . . .  
I was too late ! ! !  
How slender she looks in her coffin, and how sharp her little 
nose has become! Her eyelashes lie straight as arrows. And when 
she fell she didn't break anything, she wasn't disfigured! There 
was only this little bit of blood, "you could hold it in your hand." 
Not more than a spoonful. It was internal concussion. Here's a 
queer idea: what if I didn't have to bury her? Because if they take 
her away, then . . .  oh, no, it's hardly possible that they can take 
her away! Oh, of course I know that they should take her away; 
I'm not a madman and I'm not raving. On the contrary, my mind 
was never so clear. But how can it be? No one in the house again, 
these two roms again, alone with my pawned goods again. I'm 
raving! Now I'm raving! I tormented her til she couldn't take it 
any more. That's it! 
What do I care for your laws now? What do I care for your 
customs and your maners, your life, your state, your religion? Let 
your judge judge me, let them bring me to court, to your public 
court, and I will say that I don't acknowledge any of it. The judge 
will shout, "Be silent, sir!" And I will shout in reply: "What force 
do you have that can compel me now to obey? Why did this blind, 
immutable force destroy what was dearest to me? Why do I need 
your laws now? I will withdraw from your world." Oh, what do 
I care! 
She canot see! She's dead; she canot hear! You don't know 
what a paradise I would have created for you. I had a paradise in 
my soul and I would have planted it al around you! So what if 
you wouldn't have loved me-what would that matter? Everything 
would have been like that, everything would have remained like 

November 
71 7 
that. You would only have talked to me as to a friend, and we 
would have been happy and laughed joyously as we looked into 
each other's eyes. And so we would have lived. And if you had 
come to love another, well so be it! You would have walked with 
him, laughing, and I would have watched you from the other side 
of the street . . . .  I don't care what would have happened, if only 
she would open her eyes just once! Just for a moment, only one 
moment, if she would look at me just as she did a little while ago 
when she stood before me and vowed to be my faithful wife! Oh, 
in one glance she would understand everything! 
Immutability! Oh, nature! People are alone on earth, that's the 
calamity! "Is there a man alive on the field?" cries the hero of the 
Russian epic. I cry the same, though not a hero, and no one 
responds. They say the sun gives life to the universe. The sun will 
rise and-look at it, is it not a corpse? Everything is dead, and 
everywhere there are corpses. There are only people alone, and 
around them is silence-that is the earth! "Love one another." Who 
said that? Whose commandment is that? The pendulum ticks, 
unfeelingly, disgustingly. It's two o'clock in the morning. Her little 
shoes stand by her cot, just as if they were waiting for her . . . .  
No, in al seriousness, when they take her away tomorrow, what 
will become of me? 


December 


1 
1. More about a Case That Is Not as Simple as It Seems 
Just two months ago, in my October Diary, I made some remarks 
about an unfortunate woman, Katerina Prokofievna Kornilova, who 
had run afoul of the law. This is that same stepmother who in May, 
during a fit of anger at her husband, had thrown her six-year-old 
stepdaughter out of a window. The case is particularly well known 
because of the fact that the little girl who was thrown from the 
fourth-story window suffered no injuries or harm and is now alive 
and well. I am not going to recall all the details of my October 
article; my readers have perhaps not forgotten it. I shall remind 
them only of the purpose of my article: this whole case at once 
seemed to me to be absolutely extraordinary, and I was immediately 
convinced that it must not be treated too simply. The unfortunate 
woman was pregnant; she was angry at her husband's reproaches; 
she was depressed. But it was not that-i.e. , not the desire to take 
revenge on a husband who reproached and pained her-that was 
the cause of her crime; it was the "affect of pregnancy." In my 
view, she had at the time been suffering several days or weeks from 
that particular, uninvestigated but undeniably existing condition of 
certain pregnant women in which their personalities undergo 
strange and sudden changes and in which they are subject to strange 
influences; it is a kind of madness without madness that may some­
times reach the point of truly abnormal behavior. I gave the ex­
ample, known to me since childhood, of a certain Moscow lady 
who, during a specific period of her pregnancy, would fall victim 
to a strange compulsion to steal things. Yet this lady owned a 
carriage and was in absolutely no need of the things she would 
steal; still, she stole quite consciously and knew full well what she 
was doing. She was fully conscious all the while but was simply 
7 2 1  

722 
A Writer's Diary 
unable to resist this strange compulsion. That is what I wrote two 
months ago, and I confess that I wrote it with a very remote and 
hopeless purpose of somehow helping and easing the lot of this 
unfonunate woman, despite the terrible sentence that had already 
ben pronounced upon her. In my article I could not refrain from 
saying that if, so many times already, our jurors have brought in 
acquittals, mostly of women, despite a ful confession to a crime 
and obvious evidence determined by the court that that crime had 
ben committed, then it semed to me that Kornilova could have 
ben acquitted as well. Gust a few days after the sentence on the 
unfonunate, pregnant Kornilova, a most bizare criminal and mur­
derer, the woman Kirilova, was completely acquitted.) However, 
let me quote what I wrote at the time: 
At least if the jury had acquitted the defendant they would have 
had something on which to base their ven:tict: "Although such path­
ological afects occur but rarely, they do occur. What if there was an 
affect of pregnancy in this case as well?" That is something to consider. 
At least in this case everyone would have understood the grounds for 
mercy and no doubts would have ben aroused. And what of the 
possibility of an error? Surely an error on the side of mercy is better 
than an error on the side of punishment, the more so as there is no 
way of verifying anything in this case . The woman is the first to 
consider herself guilty; she confessed imediately after committing 
the crime, and she confessed again in coun six months later. So she 
wil go to Siberia, perhaps, in conscience and in the depths of her 
soul considering herself guilty; so she will die, perhaps, repenting in 
her final hour and considering herself a murderer. And never wil it 
occur to her, nor to anyone else on earth, that there is a pathological 
afect that can arise during pregnancy and that it, perhaps, was the 
cause of it al, and that, had she not been pregnant, nothing would 
have happened . . . .  No, of rwo errors here, it is better to chose the 
error of mercy. 
When I had written al that, caught up with my idea, I fell into 
speculation and added that this por twenty-year-old wrongdoer 
who was about to give birth in prison had perhaps already made 
up with her husband. Perhaps her husband (now fre and having 
the right to remary) visits her in prison, waiting for her to be 
sent off to forced labor, and they both weep and grieve. Her linle 
daughter, the victim, also visits her "mumy," having forgotten 
everything, and cuddles her with al sincerity. I even sketched in 

December 
723 
the scene of their farewell at the railway station. All these "spec­
ulations" of mine flowed from my pen at the time not merely to 
create some strong effect or to paint a picture; I simply had a feeling 
of the truth of life which then consisted in the fact that, even 
though each of them-the husband and the wife-might well have 
considered the other the guilty party, in fact they could not help 
but forgive one another and be reconciled once more. I felt that 
this was not only because of Christian feeling but precisely due to 
an involuntary, instinctive sense that the crime that had been com­
mined (which in their simple view was so obvious and indisputable) 
in essence was perhaps not a crime at all but rather some sort of 
odd happening, commined in an odd way, as if not by their will 
but as a result of God's judgment for the sins of both of them . . . .  
When I had finished that article and put out the issue of my 
Diary, still in the grip of my own speculations, I decided to try 
my very best to have a meeting with Kornilova while she was still 
in prison. I confess that I was very curious to test whether there 
was any truth in what I had wrinen about Kornilova and speculated 
about her later. And, indeed, one very forrunate circumstance arose 
that soon allowed me to visit her and get to know her. And I myself 
was amazed: imagine, at least three-quarters of my speculations 
proved to be true. I had discerned what had happened nearly as 
well as if I had been present myself. Her husband really had visited 
her, and was continuing to do so; they both really do weep and 
grieve over one another; they say their farewells and forgive one 
another. "My little girl would have come," Mrs. Kornilova told 
me, "but she is in a kind of school now where the children are 
not allowed out." I regret that I cannot pass on everything that I 
learned about the life of this devastated family; there are some 
features of the case that are most curious, in their own way, of 
course. Oh, naturally I was mistaken in some things; but not in 
the essentials. For example, although the husband is a peasant, he 
wears German clothes; he is a good deal younger than I had sup­
posed. He works as a "!adler," dealing with the dyes used for bank 
notes in the Government Printing Office, and he earns a rather 
substantial monthly salary for a peasant; thus he is considerably 
bener off than I had supposed. She is a seamstress and works at 
sewing even now, in prison, where she gets orders and also earns 
good money. In short, it's not at all a maner of "coarse cloth and 
felt boots for her journey, tea, and sugar"; the tone of their con­
versations is rather higher than that. She had given birth a few 

A Writer's Diary 
days before my first visit, not to a son but a daughter, and so on. 
These are minor diferences from my imaginings, but in the main 
and in the essence there was no mistake at all. 
At that time, after giving binh, she was in a special area of the 
prison and was alone; she was sitting in a comer, and next to her 
on the bed lay her newborn daughter, who had just been christened 
the day before. When I came in the infant gave a weak cry with 
that particular little cracked voice all newborn infants have. This 
prison, by the way, is for some reason not even called a prison but 
rather "a house of preliminary detention of criminals." A good 
many criminals are held in it, however, especialy ones charged 
with some very curious crimes, about which, perhaps, I will speak 
in due course. But I will add in passing that I came away much 
gladdened, at least by the women's section of the prison, where I 
saw the obviously humane attitude of the prison staf toward the 
inmates. Later I visited some other wards, such as the one holding 
inmates who were nursing infants. I saw the concern, attention, 
and care accorded these women by the prison staff imediately 
responsible for them. And even though I did not have a long time 
to observe conditions there, there are certain features, certain words, 
and certain actions and movements that at once indicate a great 
deal. I spent about twenty minutes with Mrs. Kornilova on the 
first occasion. She is a very young, attractive woman with an in­
telligent expression, but very naive indeed. For the first minute or 
two she was somewhat surprised by my visit, but she quickly 
realized that she was seing next to her a friendly penon who sym­
pathized with her, which was how I had introduced myself when 
I came in. She became quite frank with me. She is not a particularly 
talkative person, nor is she very quick in conversation; but what 
she does say she states firmly and clearly, with evident honesty, 
and always in a kindly way but without being at all fulsome or 
ingratiating. She spoke to me not really as an equal but almost as 
a friend. At the time, probably under the influence of the very 
recent verdict in her case (which was pronounced in the very final 
days of her pregnancy), she was somewhat agitated and even began 
to weep when recalling one witness's testimony against her con­
cerning certain things she is alleged to have said on the day of the 
crime and which she claims she never said. She was very much 
grieved by the injustice of this testimony; but what struck me was 
that she spoke with no bitterness at all and only exclaimed, "So 
it sems that was my fate!" When I turned the conversation to her 

December 
newborn daughter, her face at once broke out in a smile: "Just 
yesterday," she said, "we christened her." "And what's her name?" 
"The same as mine, Katerina." That smile of a mother condemned 
to hard labor for her child born in prison right after the sentence, 
and condemned with her mother even before her birth-that smile 
produced a strange and painful impression on me. When I began 
to question her carefully about her crime, the tone of her answers 
at once made a very favorable impression on me. She answered all 
my questions directly and clearly, with no evasion at all, so that I 
saw at once that I need take no special precautions. She admitted 
frankly that she was guilty of everything she had been charged 
with. I was also at once struck by the fact that when she spoke of 
her husband (in a fit of anger at whom she had thrown her child 
out of the window) she not only had nothing malicious or even in 
the least way accusatory to say, but in fact it was quite the contrary. 
"So how did it all happen?" I asked. And she told me frankly 
how it happened. "I wanted to do something wicked, but it was 
as if it wasn't my own will but someone else's." I recall that she 
added (in answer to my question) that even though she at once 
went off to the police station to report what had happened, she 
"didn't want to go to the station at all, but somehow got there­
not knowing how-and confessed the whole thing." 
The day before my visit I learned that her attorney, Mr. L., had 
filed a motion to quash the verdict; thus there still remained some 
hope, faint though it might be. But aside from that, I had another 
possibility in mind. I will say nothing about it now, but I did pass 
it on to her at the end of my visit. She heard me out with no great 
faith in the success of my plans; she did believe fully in my sym­
pathy for her, however, and thanked me for it. When I asked 
whether I might assist her in some other way, she at once realized 
what I meant and answered that she was not in any need and had 
both money and paid work. There was not the slightest bit of 
touchiness in what she said, so that had she been without money 
she perhaps would not have refused to accept a small contribution 
from me. 
I visited her once or twice after that. As we spoke on one occasion, 
I made a point of bringing up the acquittal of the murderer Kirilova, 
which had occurred only a few days after the guilty verdict was 
pronounced on her, Kornilova. I did not notice the slightest trace 
of envy or protest in her, however. She is inclined to regard herself 

A Writer's Diary 
as a having committed a serious crime, in the full sense of the 
word. As I observed her more closely, f couldn't help but notice 
that this rather curious feminine character is grounded in a good 
deal of steadiness, orderliness, and (something that particularly 
caught my interest) cheerfulness. Nevertheless, she is obviously 
tormented by her reminiscences. She has deep and sincere grief 
over her past strictness toward the child. "I didn't take to her at 
all," she says. Her response to her husband's continual criticisms 
of her, in comparison to his first wife, was to beat the child; as I 
had surmised, she was jealous of this first wife. It is obvious that 
she is troubled by the thought that her husband is now free and 
even can marry. She was very pleased to tell me once, just as soon 
as I arrived, that her husband had visited not long before and had 
told her, "How can I think of marrying at a time like this!" And 
so, I thought, she must have been the one to raise the question 
with him. I repeat: she is fully aware that after her conviction her 
husband is no longer her husband and the marriage has been 
dissolved. It occurred to me then that their meetings and their 
conversations must thus be truly odd. 
In the course of my visits I had occasion to discuss Kornilova 
with some of the prison staff and with Mrs. A. P. B, the assistant 
warden. I was surprised at the obvious sympathy that Kornilova 
had evoked in all of them. Among other things, Mrs. A. P. B. told 
me one curious thing she had noticed: when Kornilova had entered 
the prison (this was right after the crime), she seemed a different 
person altogether-coarse, rude, malicious, and quick to answer 
back. But no sooner had a few weeks passed than she suddenly 
and radically changed: there appeared a kind, meek, and simple­
hearted creature-"and so she remains to this day." This piece of 
information seemed to me to be highly relevant to her case. But 
the trouble was that this case had already been heard and decided 
upon and the sentence pronounced. And then, just the other day, 
I learned that the court's verdict, which had been appealed, had 
been quashed (as a result of violation of Article 693 of the Criminal 
Code) and that the case will be reexamined by a jury in another 
division of the court. Thus, at the present moment, Kornilova is 
again a defendant and not a convict sentenced to hard labor, and 
is again the legal wife of her legal husband! And so hope shines 
before her once more. God grant that this young soul, which has 
already borne so much, not be crushed forever by a new verdict 
of guilty. Such shocks are hard for the human soul to bear. Her 

December 
727 
experience is like that of a man about to be executed by a firing 
squad; suddenly, he is untied from the post; his hopes are restored, 
the blindfold is removed from his eyes, he sees the sun once more. 
Then, five minutes later, he is taken and tied to the post again. 
In fact, can it be that no consideration at all will be given to the 
accused's pregnant condition at the time the crime was committed? 
The most important element of the prosecution's case, of course, 
is that she committed the crime consciously. But once more I ask: 
what role does consciousness play in a case like this? She might 
well have been fully conscious, but could she have resisted the wild 
and perverted fit of temporary insanity even with the clearest con­
sciousness in the world? Does this really seem so impossible? Had 
she not been pregnant, at the moment of her outburst of anger 
she might have thought: "That wretched little brat ought to be 
thrown out of the window; at least that would stop him from nagging 
me about her mother all the time." She might have thought it, but 
she would not have done it. But in her pregnant condition she could 
not resist and she did it. Could it not have happened just this way? 
And what does it matter that she herself testified that even on the 
day before she had wanted to throw the girl out of the window but 
her husband had prevented her. This whole criminal intent, so 
logically and resolutely thought out (including moving the flow­
erpots from the windowsill, and so on) and carried out the following 
morning, cannot in any way be regarded as an ordinary crime with 
intent: something unnatural and abnormal occurred here. Consider 
one thing: after throwing the girl out of the window and looking 
out to see where she had fallen (the child was unconscious for the 
first minute and Kornilova, looking from the window, might have 
thought her dead), the murderer closes the window, gets dressed, 
and goes off to the police station where she confesses the whole 
thing. But why would she confess if she had planned the criminal 
deed calmly and resolutely, with cold-blooded deliberation? Who 
and where are the witnesses to testify that she did in fact throw 
the child out? Or did the girl simply fall out through carelessness? 
Indeed, she could have convinced her husband, when he returned, 
that the child had fallen out herself and that she, Kornilova, was 
not to blame for anything (thus getting her revenge on her husband 
and exonerating herself). Even if, when she looked out the window, 
she had determined that the child had not been hurt and was alive 
and so could later testify against her-even so, she would have had 
nothing to fear: for a judicial investigation, what significance could 

728 
A Writer's Diary 
there be in a six-year-old child's testimony that she had been lifted 
up from behind and pushed from a window? Any medical expert 
could have confirmed that at the moment she lost her balance and 
fell (that is, even if she had fallen out by herself), the child might 
well have believed someone had seized her legs from behind and 
pushed her out. If that were so, then why did the guilty woman 
at once go off to the police station to confess? People of course will 
reply: "She was in despair and wanted to end her life in one way 
or another." In fact, no other explanation can be found. Yet this 
explanation itself shows the sort of emotional strain and upset this 
pregnant woman suffered from. Her own words are interesting: "I 
didn't want to go to the police station, and yet somehow I did." 
That means she was acting as if in a state of delirium, "as if it 
wasn't my own will, " despite being completely conscious of what 
she was doing. 
On the other hand, the things that Mrs. A. P. B. says also explain 
a great deal: "She was a different person altogether-coarse, ma­
licious-and suddenly, two or three weeks later, she changed en­
tirely: she became meek, placid, and kind." Why was that? It was 
because the well-known pathological period of pregnancy had end­
ed, the period of malignancy of will and "madness without mad­
ness." With it the period of temporary insanity came to an end 
and a new person appeared. 
And now this is the situation: she will once more be sentenced 
to hard labor; once more she, who has already suffered such shocks 
and who has undergone so much, will be shocked and crushed by 
a second sentence. She, twenty years old and scarcely beginning to 
live, with a nursing infant in her arms, will be cast into a hard­
labor prison. And what will be the result? Will she derive much 
from her hard labor? Will her soul not harden? Will she not sink 
into depravity? Will she not become embittered for the rest of her 
days? When did hard labor ever reform anyone? And what is most 
important, this al takes place against the background of this mys­
terious yet quite genuine state of temporary insanity resulting from 
her pregnancy at the time of the crime. I said two months ago, 
and I repeat: "It is better to err on the side of mercy than on the 
side of punishment." Acquit the unfortunate woman lest a young 
soul perish, a young soul that, perhaps, has so much life ahead of 
her and so much potential for good. All this will certainly perish 
in hard labor, for her soul will become depraved. Now, however, 
the terrible lesson she has endured may well keep her from evil 

December 
for the rest of her life. Above all, it may be a powerful aid in 
developing and maturing that embryo and that potential for good 
which are obviously and certainly now present in that young soul. 
And even if her heart really were hardened and malicious, mercy 
would certainly soften it. But I assure you that her heart is far 
from being hardened and malicious, and I am not the only one to 
bear witness to that. Can we really not acquit her? Can we not risk 
acquitting her? 
2. A Belated Moral 
That October issue of my Diary caused me problems of a sort in 
other ways as well. It contains a short article, "The Sentence," 
which left me in a certain amount of doubt. This " Sentence" is 
the confession of a suicide, his last words written to justify himself 
and, perhaps, to provide a moral lesson before he put the gun to 
his head. Several of my friends, whose opinions I most value, 
praised my little article but also confirmed my doubts. They praised 
it for truly discovering what might be called the formula for suicides 
of this sort, a formula that clearly expresses their essence. But they 
too were skeptical: would the intent of the article be understood 
by each and every reader? Might it not, on the contrary, produce 
just the opposite impression on some? Moreover, might not some 
of them-those very ones who had already begun to have visions 
of a revolver or a noose-even be seduced on reading it and have 
their unfortunate intentions confirmed even more deeply? In short, 
my friends expressed those very same doubts which had begun to 
creep into my own mind. As a result, they concluded that the 
article should have been followed by a clear and simple explanation 
from the author of his intent in writing it, and even that a clear 
moral should be added. 
I agreed with that. Indeed, I myself, even while writing the 
article, felt that a moral was essential, yet somehow I felt embar­
rassed to add one. I felt ashamed to assume that even the most 
naive of readers would be so simple-minded as to miss the inner 
sense of the article, its intent and its moral. Its intent was so clear 
to me that I could not help but assume that it was equally clear 
to everyone. It seems that I was mistaken. 
Some years ago one writer observed, quite justly, that it used to 
be considered shameful for a person to admit he did not understand 
certain things because it gave direct evidence of his dullness and 

730 
A Writer's Diary 
ignorance, of the stunted development o( his mind and heart and 
the weakness of his mental faculties. But now, by contrast, the 
phrase "I don't understand it" is very often unered almost proudly 
or at least with an air of importance. As far as his listeners are 
concerned, this phrase at once seems to place the man on a pedestal; 
what is even more absurd is that he shares his listeners' feelings 
and isn't the least bit ashamed at the cheapness of the pedestal he 
has mounted. Nowadays the words "I don't understand a thing 
about Raphael" or "I made a point of reading the whole of Shake­
speare and I confess that I found absolutely nothing special in 
him"-these words nowadays might be taken not only as a sign 
of profound intellect but even as something valorous, almost a great 
moral accomplishment. And is it only Shakespeare or Raphael who 
is subjected to such judgment and skepticism these days? 
That comment which I paraphrased here regarding people who 
take pride in their ignorance is quite true. Indeed, the pride of 
the ignorant has become excessive. Dull or poorly educated people 
aren't the least bit ashamed of their unfortunate qualities; on the 
contrary, things seem to have reached the stage where these same 
qualities even add some life to their characters. I have also often 
noticed that a strong tendency toward specialization and dissociation 
has developed in literature and in personal life, and that the poly­
math is becoming extinct. People who argue with their opponents 
to the point of frothing at the mouth haven't read a line their 
opponents have wrinen for decades: "My convictions are different," 
they say, "and I do not intend to read nonsense like that." It's 
truly a case of a kopeck's-worth of ammunition and a ruble's-worth 
of ambition. Such extremes of one-sidedness and seclusion, dis­
sociation and intolerance, have appeared only in our own time, 
meaning the last twenty years in particular. Along with these things 
many people display a bold audacity: those having scarcely any 
learning laugh at those who know and understand ten times as 
much, and even laugh in their faces. But worst of all is the fact 
that the more time passes, the more firmly entrenched this 
"straight-line" approach to things becomes. One can see, for ex­
ample, a noticeable weakening of the feeling for language, for 
metaphor and allegory. One can also see that people (generally 
speaking) have begun to lose their sense of humor, and this itself, 
according to one German thinker, is one of the surest signs of the 
intellectual and moral decline of an epoch. What we have, rather, 
are gloomy dullards with wrinkled brows and narrow minds who 

December 
73 1 
can only move in one way, in a single direction along a single 
straight line. Do you imagine that I'm talking only about our young 
generation and about our liberals? I assure you that I have our 
elders and our conservatives in mind as well. As if in imitation of 
the young generation (who are now gray-haired, however), some 
twenty years ago there had already appeared strange, straight-line 
conservatives, irritated little old men, who understood absolutely 
nothing about current affairs or about the "new people" or the 
younger generation. Their "straight-linedness," if you can call it 
that, was sometimes even more severe, harsh, and obtuse than the 
straight-linedness of the new people. Oh, it's quite possible that 
all this came from an excess of good intentions and from noble 
feelings that had been offended by the follies of the time. But still, 
these people are sometimes more blind than even the latest straight­
line individuals. However, I think that in denouncing straight­
Iinedness I have strayed too far from my topic. 
As soon as my article appeared I was overwhelmed by inquiries­
by letter and in person-about what I meant in my "Sentence." 
"What are you trying to say here?" people asked; "Aren't you 
justifying suicide?" Others, so it seemed to me, had found some­
thing to be happy about. And so the other day a certain author, 
a Mr. N. P. ,  sent me his little article, written in a politely abusive 
style, which he published in Moscow in the weekly Recreation. I 
don't subscribe to Recreation and don't believe that it was the editor 
who sent me this particular issue, so I attribute its receipt to the 
kindness of the author himself. He condemns and ridicules my 
article: 
I received the October issue of A Writer's Diary, read it, and fell 
to thinking. There are many good things in this issue, but many 
strange things as well. I will set forth my perplexity in the most 
concise manner I can. What was the point, for instance, of printing 
in this issue the "reflections" of one who killed himself out of bore­
dom? I truly do not understand the point of this. These "reflections"­
if one can so call the ravings of this semilunatic-have been known 
for a long time, in somewhat paraphrased form of course, by all those 
whose business it is to know such things, and thus their appearance in 
our time, in the diary of a writer such as F. M. Dostoevsky, serves 
only as an absurd and pitiful anachronism. Our age is one of cast­
iron conceptions, an age of positive opinions, an age whose banner 
bears the motto: "To live by all means! . . .  " In everything and every­
where, of course, there are exceptions; there are suicides with and 

732 
A Writer's Diary 
without deliberation, but no one nowadays pays any anention to such 
cheap heroics. Heroism of that son is only too ridiculous! There was 
a time when suicide, especially suicide with deliberation, was elevated 
to the level of the greatest "awareness" (but awareness of what?) and 
heroism (again, heroism of what kind?), but that rouen time has passed 
and has passed irretrievably. Thank heaven for that; there is nothing 
to be regrened in its loss. 
Any suicide who dies with deliberation of the son that was printed 
in Mr. Dostoevsky's diary deserves no sympathy at al. Such a person 
is no more than a coarse egotist and anention-seeker and a most 
harmful member of human society. He is even unable to complete 
his ridiculous deed without having people talk about it. Even here 
he is unable to sustain his role and his affectations; he has to write 
his "reflections," though he could die very well with no reflection at 
al . . . .  Oh, the Falstaffs of life! These knights mounted on stilts! . . .  
I felt very depressed after reading this. God Lord, do I have 
many readers like this? Did Mr. N.P., who states that my suicide 
doesn't deserve any compassion, seriously believe that I described 
his case in order to win him sympathy? Naturaly, the single opinion 
of Mr. N.P. would not have been so irnponant. But the fact is that 
in the present instance Mr. N.P. surely represents a type, a whole 
collection of people like himself, a type which is even somewhat 
similar to that brazen type I was speaking about just now, brazen 
and single-minded, a type holding those same "cast-iron concep­
tions" of which Mr. N.P. himself spoke in the excerpt I quoted 
from his article. The notion that there might be a whole collection 
of people like that truly scares me. Of course, I may be taking 
this too much to hean. Yet I'll tell you frankly: despite my sen­
sitivity, I still would not consider writing a reply to this "collection" 
of people. This is cenainly not because I am scornful of them­
why not have a little chat with people, after all?-but simply because 
there is little space in this issue. And so, if I am replying now and 
sacrificing space, then I am, so to say, answering my own doubts 
and replying to myself, as it were. I can see that I have to add a 
moral to my October article, and do so without delay; I must explain 
its purpose and spell it out in plain words. At least my conscience 
will be at rest, that's the point. 
3. Unsubstantiated Statements 
My article "The Sentence" concerns the fundamental and the loft­
iest idea of human existence: the necessity and the inevitability of 

December 
733 
the conviction that the human soul is immortal. Underlying this 
confession of a man who is going to die "by logical suicide" is the 
necessity of the immediate conclusion, here and now, that without 
faith in one's soul and its immortality, human existence is unnatural, 
unthinkable, and unbearable. And it certainly seemed to me that 
I had clearly expressed the formula of the logical suicide, that I 
had found the formula. Faith in immortality does not exist for him; 
he explains that at the very beginning. Little by little the thought 
of his own aimless existence and his hatred for the unresponsiveness 
of the stagnant life around him leads to the inevitable conviction 
of the uner absurdity of human existence on earth. It becomes as 
clear as day to him that only those people can consent to live who 
are akin to the lower animals and who most closely resemble them 
through their weakly developed consciousness and their strongly 
developed and purely carnal needs. They consent to live precisely 
as animals do, that is, in order to "eat, drink, sleep, build their 
nests, and raise their young." Oh, yes, eating, sleeping, despoiling 
the earth, sining on a soft chair-these things will long anract 
people to the earth, but cannot anract the higher types of people. 
Meanwhile, it is the higher types who rule over the earth and who 
have always ruled; and always the result has been that millions of 
people follow them when the times demand it. What is the most 
sublime of words and the most sublime of thoughts? This word, 
this thought (without which humanity cannot live) is very often 
first spoken by poor, unknown, and insignificant people who are 
very often oppressed and who die in oppression and obscurity. But 
the thought and the word they uner does not die and never dis­
appears without leaving a mark; it can never disappear once it has 
been unereci-and that is a remarkable thing in human history. In 
the next generation, or two or three decades later, the thought of 
a genius already envelops everything and everyone and captures 
their imaginations-and it turns out that it is not the millions of 
people who are triumphant, and not the material powers that seem 
to be so awesome and unshakeable; it is not money, not the sword; 
not physical might, but the thought that was imperceptible at first­
often the thought of one who seemed to be the least among men. 
Mr. N. P. writes that the appearance of such a confession in my 
Diary "serves" (serves whom and what?) "as an absurd and wretch­
ed anachronism," for now we have "an age of cast-iron convictions, 
an age of positive opinions, an age that holds up a banner with 
the slogan 'To live by all means!' . . .  " (Indeed! That's probably 

734 
A Writer's Diary 
just why suicide has become so prevalent among our educated class.) 
I can assure the respected Mr. N.P. and ·all those like him that 
when the time comes, all this "cast iron" will be swept away like 
down before some idea, no matter how insignificant that idea may 
at first seem to these gentlemen of "cast-iron convictions." For me 
personally, however, one of the most dreadful portents for our 
future, and even for our very near future, lies in the very fact that, 
in my view, in an all-too-large portion of educated Russians, by 
some particular, strange . . .  well, let me call it predestination-there 
has taken root more and more, and with remarkable progressive 
rapidity, an absolute lack of faith in one's soul and its immortality. 
And this lack of faith takes root not only through a conviction (we 
still have very few convictions about anything); it does so through 
some strange, universal indifference to this most sublime idea of 
human existence, an indifference at times even derisive. God only 
knows what laws caused it to become established among us. It is 
an indifference not only to this idea alone but toward everything 
that is vital and expresses the truth of life, toward everything that 
generates and nourishes life, gives it health, and does away with 
corruption and putrefaction. In our time this indifference is even 
almost a Russian peculiarity, at least in comparison with other 
European nations. It has long since permeated the educated Russian 
family and has all but destroyed it. Neither a person nor a nation 
can exist without some higher idea. And there is only one higher 
idea on earth, and it is the idea of the immortality of the human 
soul, for all other "higher" ideas of life by which humans might 
live derive from that idea alone. Others may dispute this point with 
me (about the unity of the source of all higher things on earth, I 
mean), but I am not going to get into an argument just yet and 
simply set forth my idea in unsubstantiated form. It cannot be 
explained all at once, and it will be better to do it little by little. 
There will be time to do this in the future. 
The man I told you about who committed suicide is indeed a 
passionate exponent of his idea-that is, the necessity of suicide­
and not an indifferent or "cast-iron" sort of person. He is truly 
tormented and suffering, and I think I conveyed that clearly 
enough. It is all too clear to him that he cannot go on living, and 
he is utterly convinced that he is correct and cannot be refuted. 
He cannot escape confronting the highest and most fundamental 
questions: "What is the point of living when he is already aware 
that it is disgusting, abnormal, and inadequate for a human to live 

December 
735 
like an animal ?  And what is there to keep him living on earth in 
such a case?" He can find no answers to these questions and he 
knows it, for although he has realized that there exists, as he 
expresses it, "a harmony of the whole," still, he says, "I don't 
understand it and I never will be able to understand it. That I will 
never be able to share in that harmony is the necessary and in­
evitable conclusion." And it was this sort of clear-cut conclusion 
that led him to his end. So what was the trouble here? Where did 
he make his mistake? The trouble was entirely in his loss of faith 
in immortality. 
But he himself is avidly seeking (at least he was seeking, while 
he lived, and his quest caused him real pain) some reconciliation; 
he tried to find it in "love for humanity." "If not I, then at least 
humanity as a whole may be happy and someday anain harmony. 
This notion might have kept me living on earth," he says. And of 
course this is a noble thought, the noble thought of a martyr. But 
the inescapable conviction that the life of humanity as a whole is 
essentially only such a moment as his own life, and that on the 
day after this "harmony" is achieved (if one can believe that this 
dream can be achieved), humanity will be transformed into just 
such a nonentity as he through the force of the immutable laws of 
nature, and this after all the suferings borne in realizing this 
dream-this thought fills him with utter indignation precisely be­
cause of his love for humanity. He feels insulted on behalf of all 
of humanity and, by virtue of the law of reflection of ideas, even 
his original love for humanity is destroyed. In just the same fashion, 
it more than once has been noted how, in a family dying of star­
vation the father or mother, toward the end when the sufferings of 
the children have become unbearable, will begin to hate those same 
children whom they had previously loved so much, precisely be­
cause their suffering has become unbearable. Moreover, I maintain 
that the awareness of one's own utter inability to assist or bring 
any aid or relief at al to sufering humanity, coupled with one's 
complete conviction of the existence of that suffering, can even 
transform the luve for humanity in your heart to hatred for humanity. 
Those gentlemen of cast-iron convictions will not believe this, of 
course, and won't even understand it: for them, love for humanity 
and its happiness are such cheap things; everything has been so 
conveniently arranged, and has been given and set down for so 
long, that it is not worth even thinking about. But I intend to give 
them a good laugh: I declare (again, without substantiation, at least 

A Writer's Diary 
fur the moment) that love for humanity is ev:n entirely unthinkable, 
incomprehensible, and uuerly impossible wiJrow faill in the imor­
tality of the human soul to go along wilJr il. Those who deprived 
humanity of its faith in its own imonality want to replace that 
faith, in the sense of the highest purpose of existence, by "love 
for humanity." Those people, I say, are raising their hands against 
themselves; for in place of love for humanity they plant in the bean 
of one who has lost his faith the sed of hatred for humanity. Let 
al those wise men of cast-iron convictions shrug their shoulders 
at this statement of mine. But this thought is wiser than their 
wisdom, and I believe without a doubt that it wil someday become 
an axiom for humanity. Once more, though, I am setting forth this 
idea as wel without substantiation-for the moment, at least. 
I even afirm and venture to declare that love for humanity in 
general is, as an idea, one of the most dificult ideas for the human 
mind to comprehend. Precisely as an idea. Feeling alone can justify 
it. But such a feling is possible only with the conviction of the 
immonality of the human soul to accompany it. (Again, an un­
substantiated assertion.) 
The result, clearly, is that when the idea of imonality is lost, 
suicide becomes an absolute and inescapable necessity for any per­
son who has even developed slightly above the animal level. On 
the other hand, imonality, promising eternal life, binds people 
al the more firmly to earth. This, it would sem, is a contradiction: 
if there is so much life-that is, if there is an eternal one apan 
from the earthly-then why place such a value on this earthly life? 
But it turns out to be just the contrary: for only with faith in his 
imonality does a person comprehend his whole wise purpose on 
earth . Without the conviction of his immonality, the links between 
the person and the earth are broken; they grow more fragile, they 
decay, and the loss of a higher meaning in life (experienced at least 
in the form of unconscious anguish) surely brings suicide in its 
wake. Working back from this point, I derive the moral to my 
October anicle: "If the conviction of immonality is so esential 
for human existence, then it follows that it is the normal state of 
humanity; and if that is the case, then the very imonality of the 
human soul e:cisrs wilJr cmainty. " In shon, the idea of imonality 
is life itself, life in the ful sense; it is its final formula and hu­
manity's principal source of truth and understanding. That was 
the purpose of my anicle, and I supposed that it could not help 
but be clear to everyone who read it. 

December 
737 
4· A Few Words about Young People 
Now this is also relevant. Someone may point out to me that in 
our age people who have never concerned themselves with any 
higher questions also kill themselves. They still kill themselves, 
mysteriously, for no apparent reason. We do indeed see many (and 
their large number is again a mystery of a kind) suicides, strange 
and puzzling ones committed not by reason of poverty, nor of some 
insult; they occur with no evident reason, and certainly not from 
material want, unrequited love, jealousy, illness, hypochondria, or 
insanity; they just happen-God knows why. Such cases in our age 
are a great temptation, and since it is absolutely undeniable that 
they have become a virtual epidemic, they are becoming a most 
disrurbing problem for many people. Of course, I am not going 
to undertake to explain all these suicides, and indeed I cannot 
explain them,* yet I am completely convinced that the majority of 
these suicides, on the whole, directly or indirectly, arose from one 
and the same spiritual illness: from the absence of any higher ideal 
of existence in the souls of these people. In that sense, our indif­
ference, as the contemporary Russian malady, has corroded all 
souls. True enough, there are some in Russia who pray and go to 
church but who do not believe in the immortality of their souls; 
or rather, it's not that they do not believe, but simply that they 
never think of it. And yet these are often by no means the cast­
iron or bestial types of lower humanity. However, it is out of this 
faith alone, as I said above, that the whole higher meaning and 
significance of life emerges; from it emerges the longing and the 
urge to live. Oh, I repeat: there are many who long to live without 
any ideas at all and without any higher meaning in their lives, 
simply to live an animal life, like some member of a lower order; 
but there are also very many who, curiously enough, seem on the 
surface to be extremely crude and vicious yet whose nature, perhaps 
even without their knowing it, has long yearned for some higher 
purpose and significance to their lives. Such people are not satisfied 
with gluttony or love for fancy fish pies, beautiful trotting horses, 
debauchery, exalted rank and power, the adoration of their sub­
ordinates and the porters at the doors of their homes. A person 
like that will shoot himself precisely for what appears to be no 
reason at all, and yet it was certainly on account of a longing, which 
*I receive many letters setting forth the facts of suicides and asking me what I 
think about these suicides and how I explain them. [Dostoevsky's note] 

A Writer's Diary 
may well have been unconscious, for some higher sense of life that 
he could find nowhere. And there are some among them who, on 
top of everything else, will shoot themselves after having played 
some outrageous and nasty trick or done some monstrous deed. 
Oh, and when one looks at many of these cases it's indeed difficult 
to believe that they committed suicide out of "longing for the higher 
aims of life." "Why, they hadn't the least thought of any aims; 
they never spoke of such things; they only performed some dirty 
deeds"-such is the common opinion! But suppose they did not 
have any higher concerns and only did perform dirty deeds: do 
you know for certain the complex routes in the life of our society 
by which this lofty anguish is conveyed to a certain soul and infects 
it? Ideas fly about through the air, but they cenainly follow some 
laws; ideas live and are spread in accordance with laws too difficult 
for us to grasp; ideas are infectious, and do you know that within 
the general mood of life a certain idea, a certain concern or longing 
accessible only to a highly educated and developed mind, may 
suddenly be passed on to a creature who is semiliterate, coarse, 
and who has never been concerned about anything; and that such 
an idea may suddenly infect that person's soul with its influence? 
Some may point out to me again that in our age even children or 
young people who have not yet experienced life are doing away 
with themselves. But I have a secret conviction that our young 
people are sufering and longing because of the absence of higher 
aims in the life of our society. The higher aims of life are scarcely 
mentioned at all within our families, and as far as the notion of 
immortality is concerned, not only do people not think about it, 
they all too often even make fun of it, and do so in front of the 
children from their tenderest years, perhaps even with a deliberately 
didactic purpose. 
"But the family doesn't even exist among us," one of our most 
talented writers remarked to me not long ago when disputing my 
views. Well, indeed, this is not far from the truth: given our 
universal indifference to the higher aims of life, of course, the 
family in certain strata of our nation perhaps already has falen 
apart. At least it is perfectly clear that our young generation is 
destined to seek out its ideals and the higher meaning of life for 
itself. But this isolation of our younger generation, this abandon­
ment of them to their own devices is something dreadful. This is 
all too significant a question at the present moment, the present 
instant of our life. Our young people have been so placed that they 

December 
739 
have absolutely nowhere to get advice about the higher meaning 
of life. From our clever people, and generally from those who are 
to guide our youth, they can borrow at present, I repeat, little more 
than a satirical view; but there is nothing positive, in the sense of 
what to believe, what to respect and worship, what to strive for­
and these things are so necessary, so essential to young people; 
young people everywhere and in every age have craved and sought 
after these things! And even if there were the capacity-within the 
family and in the schools-to pass on some sound advice, then 
again the family and the schools (not without some exceptions, of 
course) have lost all interest in doing so because of the multitude 
of other tasks and aims that are more practical and of more con­
temporary concern. The young people of December 6 on Kazan 
Square were doubtless nothing more than a "herd" driven on by 
the hands of some crafty scoundrels, at least judging by the facts 
set forth in The Mosc(fiJ) News. What will emerge from this affair 
and what will develop I cannot tell. Without a doubt there was a 
good deal of malicious and immoral tomfoolery here, a monkey like 
aping of someone else's doings; nevertheless, it would have been 
possible to bring them together simply by assuring them that they 
were to gather in the name of something sublime and beautiful, in 
the name of some remarkable self-sacrifice for the greatest of pur­
poses. Only a very few of them may have been concerned with 
this "quest for an ideal," but these few rule over the others and 
lead them-that much is already clear. And so now who is to blame 
that their ideal is such a grotesque one? Of course, they themselves 
are to blame, but not only themselves. Oh, doubtless even the 
reality that now surrounds them could have saved them from their 
grotesque alienation from all that is vital and real, from their crude 
incomprehension of the simplest things; but the point is that the 
times are such that our young generation's alienation from the soil 
and from the truth of the People must amaze and horrify even their 
own "fathers," who so long ago alienated themselves from every­
thing Russian and who are living out their lives in the blissful 
tranquillity of higher critics of the Russian land. And so here is a 
lesson, a lesson to the family and to the school and to the blissfully 
convinced critics: they themselves cannot recognize their (fiJ)n prod­
ucts and they renounce them; but . . .  but can they, these "fathers," 
be charged with all the blame? Are they themselves not the products 
and the consequences of some particular fateful laws and prede­
terminations that have stood over the whole educated stratum of 

740 
A Writer's Diary 
Russian society for nearly two centuries now, almost right up until 
the great reforms of the present reign? No, it is clear that two 
hundred years of alienation from the soil and from any kind of 
activity cannot simply be shrugged off without paying a price. It 
is not enough to accuse, one must seek remedies as well. I think 
that there are remedies: they are to be found among the People, 
in the things the People hold sacred, and in our joining with the 
People. But . . .  but more about that later. I undertook my Diary 
in part for the purpose of speaking about these remedies, insofar 
as my abilities permit me. 
5· On Suicide and Arrogance 
But I have to finish with Mr. N .P. What happened to him happens 
to many people of his "type": for them, what is clear and too 
easily comprehended must be stupid. They are much more inclined 
to scorn clarity than to praise it. It is another matter with something 
covered with flourishes and fog: "Ah, this we don't understand; 
therefore it must be profound." 
He says that the "discourse" of my suicide is only the "ravings 
of a semilunatic" and that it has "long been well known." I am very 
much inclined to think that the "discourse" became "known" to 
him only after his reading of my article. As far as the "ravings of 
a semilunatic" are concerned, these ravings (does Mr. N.P. and 
all those like him know this?), i.e. , the conclusion of the necessity 
of suicide, are for many-and for far too many in Europe-some­
thing like the very latest word of science. I expressed this "latest 
word of science" very briefly, clearly, and in popular fashion, but 
with the single intention of refuting it-not by reasoning or logic, 
for it is logically irrefutable (and I challenge not only Mr. N .P. but 
anyone you please to refute logically these "ravings of a semilun­
atic")-but by faith, by deducing the necessity of faith in the 
immortality of the human soul, by deducing the conviction that 
this faith is the single source of a genuine life on earth-of life, 
health, healthy ideas, and healthy deductions and conclusions . . . .  
And, in conclusion, something quite comical. In that same Oc­
tober issue I informed my readers about the suicide of the daughter 
of an emigrant: "She soaked a piece of cotton wool in chloroform, 
bound this to her face, and lay down on the bed. And so she died. 
Before her death she wrote a note: 'I am setting off on a long 
journey. If the suicide should not succeed, then let everyone gather 

December 
741 
to celebrate my resurrection with glasses of Cliquot. I f  I do succeed, 
I ask that you not bury me until you have determined that I am 
completely dead, because it is most unpleasant to awaken in a 
coffin underground. That would not be chic at all!"' 
Mr. N.P. mounted his high horse after reading ofthis "frivolous" 
suicide and decided that her act "merits no attention at all." He 
was angry at me for my "exceedingly naive" question about which 
of the two suicides suffered more on earth. But then there was an 
absurd note. He unexpectedly added: "I daresay that a person who 
wants to greet her rerurn to life with a glass of champagne in her 
hand" (where else?) "could not have suffered very much in this life 
if she chooses to enter it again with such ceremony and without 
altering her way of life one bit, in fact, not even considering any 
alterations . . . .  " 
What a funy thing to say! What beguiled him most of all was 
the champagne: "Anyone who drinks champagne cannot possibly 
sufer." But you see, if she had loved champagne so much, then 
she would have gone on living in order to drink it; but as it was, 
she wrote about the champagne just before her death-before the 
serious fact of death-knowing ful well that she would cenainly 
die. She could not have had much faith in her chances of recovery, 
and recovery, in any case, did not hold any attraction for her since 
it only meant a recovery for another anempt at suicide. So the 
champagne is of no real consequence here; she had no intention 
of drinking it. Does that really require explanation? She mentioned 
the champagne simply out of the desire to make an outlandish and 
cynical statement when dying. She senled on champagne because 
she could find no picrure more vile and obscene than sipping 
champagne at her "resurrection from the dead." She had to write 
this obscenity as an insult to everything she was leaving on earth, 
to curse the eanh and her eanhly life, to spit on it and so make 
that spitting her final statement to those friends she was leaving 
behind. What was the cause of such malice in this seventeen-year­
old girl? (N.B.: She was seventeen, and not twenty, as I wrote in 
my article. Several people who knew more about the case corrected 
me afterward.) And at whom was the malice directed? No one had 
offended her; she was not wanting for anything; she died, appar­
ently, also for no reason whatsoever. But it was precisely that note, 
precisely the fact that at such a moment she was so concerned to 
make such an obscene and outlandish statement that (obviously) 
leads one to the thought that her life had been immeasurably purer 

742 
A Writer's Diary 
than this grotesque obscenity would suggest, and that the malice, 
the boundless bitterness of this gesture testifies, rather, to the great 
sufering and pain she had borne and her despair at the final 
moment of her life. Had her death been caused by some apathetic 
boredom that she herself could not recognize, she would not have 
made this grotesque statement. One must take a more compassionate 
attitude toward such a spiritual condition as hers. Obviously she 
was sufering, and certainly she died from spiritual yearning, hav­
ing undergone great inner torment. What was it that caused her 
so much torment in her seventeen years? But here we raise the 
terrible question of our age. I have suggested that she died from 
heartache (much too precocious a heartache) and from a sense of 
the pointlessness of life, solely the result of the warped theory of 
child-rearing in her parents' home, a theory with a mistaken con­
cept of the higher meaning and purposes of life, a theory that 
deliberately destroyed in her soul any faith in its immortality. Let 
this be only my suggestion; but surely she did not die only in order 
to leave this mean little note behind her so as to astonish people, 
1s Mr. N.P. supposes. "No man shall hate his flesh." Destroying 
one's self is a serious thing, despite any chic that may be involved, 
and an epidemic of self-destruction spreading among the educated 
classes is an extremely serious thing which warants constant ob­
servation and examination. A year and a half ago one highly talented 
and competent member of our judicial system showed me a bundle 
of letters and notes he had collected that were written by suicides, 
in their own hand, immediately before they had taken their lives, 
i.e. , five minutes before death. I can recal two lines written by a 
fifteen-year-old girl; I also recall a note scribbled in pencil, written 
in a moving carriage in which the man shot himself before reaching 
his destination. I think that if Mr. N.P. had even glanced through 
this most interesting bundle of letters, then even in his soul, per­
haps, there might have been a certain change and his peaceful 
heart would have become troubled. But I don't know for certain. 
In any case, one must look at these facts with greater compassion, 
and certainly not with such arrogance. We ourselves, perhaps, are 
to blame for these facts, and there is no cast iron that will later 
save us from the disastrous consequences of our complacency and 
arrogance when, in the fullness of time, we sufer the consequences. 
But that's enough. My reply has been made, not to Mr. N.P. 
alone, but to many Messrs. N.P. 

2 
1 .  A Story from the Lives of Children 
Let me tell you about this so that I won't forget it. 
On the outskirts of Petersburg-in fact, even beyond the out­
skirts-there live a mother and her twelve-year-old daughter. The 
family is not well-off, but the mother has a job and earns her own 
living. The daughter attends school in Petersburg and always travels 
by public coach, which makes several scheduled trips a day between 
the Gostiny Dvor and the place where they live. 
And so, recently, a couple of months ago, just at the time when 
winter so quickly and unexpectedly set in with a week of calm, 
bright days and a few degrees of frost and it first became possible 
to travel by sled, the mother looked at her daughter one evening 
and said: "Sasha, I don't see you studying your lessons. I haven't 
seen you do anything for some days now. Do you know your 
lessons?" 
"Oh, Mama, don't worry; everything's done. I've even prepared 
a whole week ahead." 
"Well, then, I suppose it's all right." 
Sasha went off to school the next day; sometime after five o'clock 
the conductor of the coach on which Sasha was to return home 
jumped off as he was passing their house and handed Mama a note 
from her which read as follows: "Dear Mama, I have been a very 
bad girl all week. I got three zeros and I've been lying to you all 
the time. I'm ashamed to come home, and I'm never coming back 
again. Good-bye, dear Mama, forgive me. Your Sasha." 
You can well imagine how the mother felt. She naturally wanted 
to drop everything at once, rush off to the city, and somehow try 
to find her Sasha. But where should she look? How could she ever 
find her? A close friend of the family happened to be there; he 
743 

744 
A Writer's Diary 
was deeply concerned about the matter and volunteered to go at 
once to Petersburg to make inquiries at the school and then to 
check at all the homes of her acquaintances; if need be, he would 
search all night long. The main consideration that led the mother 
to put her trust in the deep concern of this kind man and stay at 
home herself was that, should Sasha think better of her decision 
and come back, she might leave again if she did not find her mother 
there. They decided that if Sasha were not found by morning, they 
would notify the police at dawn. The mother spent some very 
difficult hours at home, which you can well understand without 
my description. 
"And so," the mother relates, "about ten o'clock I suddenly 
heard the familiar, hurried little steps in the snow outside and then 
on the stairs. The door opened, and there was Sasha." 
"Mama, dear Mama, I'm so glad I came back to you! " 
She clasped her little hands together, then hid her face behind 
them and sat down on the bed. She was so tired and worn out. 
Well then, of course, came the first cries and the first questions. 
The mother proceeded very cautiously, still afraid to reproach her 
daughter. 
"Oh, Mama, after I told you those lies yesterday about my lessons 
I made up my mind: I wasn't going to go to school anymore and 
I wasn't going to come back home; because once I stopped going 
to school, how could I lie to you every day and tell you that I 
was?" 
"But what on eanh were you going to do? If you weren't at 
school and you weren't living here, then where would you go?" 
"I thought I'd live on the street. As soon as it was day, I'd just 
keep walking around the streets. I've got a warm coat, and if I 
got cold I could stop in at the Arcade. I could buy a roll for my 
dinner every day, and I'd manage to find something to drink­
there's snow on the ground now. One roll would be enough. I've 
got fifteen kopecks, and a roll costs three, so that's five days." 
"And then?" 
"And then I don't know what. I hadn't thought about it." 
"And at night? Where were you planning to spend your nights?" 
"Oh, I've thought about that. When it got dark and late I was 
going to go to the railway, way past the station where there aren't 
any people around, but there're an awful lot of railway cars. I'd 
crawl into one of those cars that looked like it wouldn't be moved 
anywhere and spend the night. And I did go there. I walked a 

December 
745 
long way, well past the station, and there wasn't a soul around. 
Off to one side I saw some cars, but not at all like the ones everyone 
rides in. There, I thought, I'll crawl into one of those and nobody 
will see me. I was just starting to get in, and suddenly a watchman 
shouted at me: 'Where do you think you're going? Those cars are 
for hauling dead people.' 
"As soon as I heard that I jumped down; but I could see he 
was already getting close.'' 
" 'What do you think you're doing here?"' 
"I just ran away from him as fast as I could go. He shouted 
something, but I just ran off. I went along, scared out of my wits. 
I came back to the street and I'm walking around when suddenly 
I see a building, a big stone house that's being built-it's only just 
bare bricks, no glass in the windows and no doors-they're boarded 
up-and there's a fence around it. Well, I think, if I can somehow 
get into that house, no one will see me there 'cause it's dark. I 
went down a little alleyway and found a spot where the boards 
were open enough for me to squeeze through. So I squeezed through 
and came right into a pit, still full of earth; I felt my way along 
the wall to a corner where there were some boards and bricks. 
Well, I thought, I can spend the night here on these boards. And 
so I lay down. But all of I sudden I hear voices speaking ever so 
quietly. I raised my head and right in the corner I hear people 
talking in low voices and I see someone's eyes that seem to be 
staring right at me. I was scared out of my wits and right away I 
ran out through that same door and onto the street again. I can 
hear them calling after me. I managed to slip away. And here I 
had thought that there was no one in the house! 
"When I got back on the street again I suddenly felt so tired. 
So very, very tired. I walk around the streets, there're people about; 
what time it is I don't know. I came out on Nevsky Prospect and 
I'm walking by the Gostiny Dvor, crying my eyes out. 'Now,' I 
think, 'if only some nice person would come along and take pity 
on a poor little girl who has nowhere to spend the night. I'd .tell 
him everything, and he'd say: "Come and stay with us for the 
night."' I keep thinking about that as I walk along, and suddenly 
I look up and see our coach standing there, ready to start off for 
its last trip here. And I thought it had surely left a long time ago. 
'Ah,' I think, 'I'll go back to Mama!' I got on the coach, and now 
I'm so glad that I came back, Mama. I'll never lie to you again, 
and I'll study hard! Oh, Mama, Mama!" 

A Writer's Diary 
"And so I asked her," the mother went on, "Sasha, did you 
really think up this whole plan yourself-about not going to school 
and living on the streets?" 
"Well, Mama, you see, quite a while ago I made friends with a 
girl my age, only she's at a different school. But can you believe 
she hardly ever goes to school-she just tells them at home every 
day that she goes. She told me that she's bored in school, but it's 
lots of fun on the street. 'Once I leave the house,' she says, 'I just 
keep walking around. I haven't showed up at school for two weeks 
now. I look in the windows of the shops; I go to the Arcade, I eat 
a roll. And when evening comes, I go home.' When I heard that 
I thought: 'That's what I'd like to do.' And school started to seem 
so dull. But I didn't have the least notion of actually doing it until 
yesterday. And yesterday, after I lied to you, I made up my 
mind . . . .  " 
This story is true. Now, of course, the mother has taken some 
precautions. When the story was told to me I thought that it might 
fit very well into my Diary. I was given permission to publish it, 
without revealing the real names of the participants, of course. 
Narurally I will at once hear objections: "This is only one isolated 
case, and it happened simply because the girl was very stupid." I 
know for certain that the girl is not at all stupid. I also know that 
in these young souls, already past early childhood but still far from 
attaining even the first stage of marurity, there sometimes arise 
amazing, fantastic notions, dreams, and intentions. This age (twelve 
or thirteen years) is an unusually interesting one, even more so in 
a girl than in a boy. Speaking of boys, by the way: do you recall 
an item that appeared in the newspapers some four years ago about 
three very young high-school students who decided to run off to 
America? They were caught quite a distance away from their city 
and had a pistol in their possession. On the whole, even formerly­
a generation or two ago-the heads of these young folks were just 
as full of dreams and fantastic plans as are the heads of today's 
youth. But today's young people are somehow more decisive and 
much less prone to doubt and reflection. Young people of past days 
might think up some project (running off to Venice, say, after 
reading all about the city in the tales of Hoffmann and George 
Sand-I knew one such person), but they never went on to carry 
it out. At most they might tell a friend about it after making him 
take an oath of secrecy; but today's young people think up plans 
and then carry them out. In the past, however, young people felt 

December 
747 
bound by a sense of duty and an awareness of their responsibility 
to their fathers and mothers and to certain beliefs and principles. 
But nowadays this sense of obligation has undoubtedly grown weak­
er. They have fewer restraints on them, both outer and inner. That, 
perhaps, is why their minds work in a more one-sided manner; 
and of course there are reasons for all this. 
The main thing is that these are not isolated instances caused by 
stupidity. I repeat: this remarkably interesting age of twelve or 
thirteen years truly needs special study by our educational experts, 
who are so much involved with pedagogy, and by parents, who are 
now so much involved with matters of "business" and nonbusiness. 
And how easily all this can happen-the most terrible thing, I 
mean-and to whom? To our very own children! Just think of the 
place in this mother's story when the girl "suddenly felt tired, was 
walking along and crying, dreaming of meeting some kind man 
who would feel sorry for a poor girl with nowhere to spend the 
night and invite her to come home with him." Just imagine how 
easily this wish of hers, which reveals her childish innocence and 
immaturity, might have been fulfilled, given the fact that every­
where on our streets and in our wealthiest homes there are swarms 
of "kind men" of just that sort! And what, then, the next morning? 
Either a hole in the ice, or the shame of confessing, and after the 
shame of confessing would develop the capacity to come to terms 
with this memory-keeping everything to oneself but now pondering 
over it from a different point of view, to keep thinking and thinking 
about it, but with all sorts of new imaginings. And all this would 
happen linle by linle and of its own accord; and then at last, 
perhaps, would come the desire to repeat the experience, and then 
all the rest. And this at the age of twelve! And everything kept 
well concealed. Concealed in the full meaning of the word! What 
about this other girl who spent her time looking in the shops and 
visiting the Arcade instead of going to school and who taught our 
Sasha to do the same? I have often heard things of this sort about 
boys who found school boring and vagrancy fun. (N.B.: Vagrancy 
is a habit, an unhealthy one, and, in part, our national one; it is 
one of the things that distinguishes us from Europe. It is a habit 
which then is transformed into an unhealthy obsession, and it very 
often originates in childhood. I will certainly say something later 
about this national obsession of ours.) And so now, it seems, it is 
possible to have vagrant girls as well. And such a girl, let's say, is 
still completely innocent; but even if she is as innocent as the very 

A Writer's Diary 
first creature in the Garden of Eden, she still can't avoid "the 
knowledge of Good and Evil," even if only a·bit of it, even if only 
in her imagination and in her dreams. The street, after al, is such 
a quick and ready school. And the main thing, which I repeat 
again and again: this is such a curious age, an age that, on the 
one hand, still completely preserves the most childish, touching 
innocence and immaturity but, on the other hand, has already 
acquired an avidly quick capacity for the perception of and rapid 
familiarization with such ideas and conceptions of which, in the 
view of so many parents and pedagogues, this age supposedly hasn't 
the haziest idea. It is this division, it is this joining together of 
these two so dissimilar halves of the young person, which presents 
such a danger and such a critical point in the lives of these young 
creatures. 
2. An Explanation Regarding My Participation in the 
Forthcoming Publication of the Magazine Light 
In A Writer's Diary (and once more in that same October issue) I 
placed an announcement of Professor N. P. Vagner's plans to pub­
lish a new magazine, Light, next year. No sooner had this an­
nouncement appeared than people began asking me about this new 
magazine and about my possible participation in it. I replied to 
everyone to whom I could reply that on N. P. Vagner's invitation 
I had promised to publish only a story in the magazine, and that 
that would be the entire extent of my participation in it. But now 
I can see that it is essential to make this clear in print as well, for 
the inquiries continue to come in. I receive leners from my readers 
every day which clearly show that, for some reason, they believe 
my participation in the magazine Light will be much more extensive 
than was indicated in Professor Vagner's announcement, i.e. , that 
I will al but transfer my activities to Light; that I will undertake 
some new activities and expand my former ones, and that, if I will 
not be a direct participant in the editorial or publishing aspects of 
the magazine, then I am certainly closely involved in the concept, 
the views, the plan of the magazine, etc. 
In reply to al this I now state that in the coming year I will be 
publishing only A Writer's Diary and that, as in the past year, my 
entire work as an author will be devoted to the Diary. As far as 
the new magazine Light is concerned, I am participating neither 
in its concept nor in its plan or its editorship. I do not even have 

December 
749 
any notion of the views of the fonhcoming magazine and await the 
appearance of its first issue so that I may acquaint myself with 
them for the first time. I suppose that people assumed my panicular 
close relationship with the magazine Light only from the fact that 
the first announcement about it appeared in A Writer's Diary, and 
that it somehow happened that the announcement appeared in no 
other newspaper for a rather long time thereafter. In any case, to 
promise a story to another publication does not mean abandoning 
one's own and switching to the new one. My most sincere wish 
for the success of the esteemed Professor Vagner's undenaking is 
based only on my personal hope, and even my conviction, that we 
shall find something new, original, and useful in his magazine. But 
I know no further details about the magazine Light. I have nothing 
to do with its publication and at the moment know nothing more 
than anyone who has read· the newspaper advertisement about it. 
3· Where Does the Matter Stand at the Moment? 
A year has passed, and with this twelfth issue the first year of 
publication of A Writer's Diary comes to an end. I have had a most 
gratifying response from my readers, and yet I have not managed 
to say a hundredth pan of what I intended to say; many of the 
things I did say, I now can see, I did not manage to express clearly 
the first time, and my views were even frequently misinterpreted, 
something which is, of course, mainly my fault. Although I didn't 
manage to say very much, I still hope that, even from what was 
expressed this year, my readers will understand the nature and the 
tendency the Diary will have in the coming year. The principal 
aim of the Diary thus far has been to elucidate as best I can the 
idea of the uniqueness of our national spirit and to point out as 
best I can its manifestations in the facts that present themselves 
day by day. In this sense, for example, the Diary has said quite a 
lot about this year's sudden national and Popular movement in the 
so-called "Slavic cause." Let me say in advance: the Diary does 
not make any claim to present monthly articles on politics; but it 
will always attempt as best it can to find and to point out our 
national and Popular point of view in current political events. For 
example, from my articles on the "Slavic movement" of this year 
the readers perhaps have already realized that the Diary wanted 
only to clarify the essence and the significance of this movement 
as it concerns us Russians, first and foremost; it wanted to show 

750 
A Writer's Diary 
that for us this cause is not only a matter of Slavism and is not 
limited to the political side of the question as it is posed today. 
Slavism-the unity of al the Slavic peoples with the Russian People 
and among themselves-and the political aspect of the question­
matters of borders and frontier regions, seas and straits, Constan­
tinople, etc.-are both questions which, though certainly of top 
priority for Russia and her future destiny, still do not exhaust the 
essence of the Eastern Question for us, i.e., in the sense that it 
can be solved in the spirit of our People. In that sense, these 
questions of top priority must take second place. For the essence 
of the whole matter, as the People understand it, consists entirely 
and without a doubt only in the fate of Eastern Christianity, i.e., 
Orthodoxy. Our People know neither the Serbs nor the Bulgarians; 
t'1ey send their humble donations and their volunteers not to help 
the Slavs and not to help Slavism. They do this only because they 
have heard how Orthodox Christians, our brethren, are suffering 
at the hands of the Turks, the "godless Agarians," for the faith of 
Christ. That is why-and that is the only reason-this whole move­
ment of the People began this year. The present and future destinies 
of Orthodox Christianity make up the entire idea of the Russian 
People; in this is their service to Christ, and in this their eagerness 
to accomplish some great deed for Christ. This eagerness is genuine 
and magnificent; it has been unstoppable since times of old; per­
haps it will never stop. And that is a most important fact about 
the character of our People and our state. The Old Believers of 
Moscow equipped and donated a whole field hospital (and an ex­
cellent one), which they sent to Serbia; yet they knew ful well 
that the Serbs were not Old Believers but people like ourselves 
with whom they are not in accord on matters of religion. An incident 
such as this showed clearly the notion of the future, ultimate fate 
of Orthodox Christianity, remote though it well may be, and the 
hope of a future union of al Eastern Christians. And in helping 
the Christians against the Turks, the oppressors of Christianity, 
the Old Believers indicated that they considered the Serbs just such 
genuine Christians as they themselves are-or Christians of the 
future, at least-despite some temporary differences. In that sense, 
this donation even has historic significance, inspiring comfoning 
thoughts and confirming in part my statement that in the fate of 
Christianity is also contained the whole aim of the Russian People, 
despite the fact that they are temporarily disunited by certain chi­
merical differences of religion. There can be no disputing the fact 

December 
75 1 
that among the People there has even been fixed and consolidated 
the belief that the whole of Russia exists only in order to serve 
Christ and to protect all of the Orthodox of the world from the 
unbeliever. If this thought is not directly expressed by every one 
of the People, then I assert that large numbers of the People will 
express it quite consciously, and these large numbers unquestion­
ably have an influence on the rest. Thus one may state plainly that 
this thought is almost a conscious one in the whole of our People 
and not merely something cloaked in Popular sentiment. And so, 
in this sense alone is the Eastern Question intelligible to the Russian 
People. That is the most important fact. 
But if such is the case, the view of the Eastern Question ought 
to become much more clearly defined for all of us. Russia's strength 
lies in her People and their spirit and not merely in her education, 
for example, or her wealth, enlightenment, and so on, as is the 
case in certain European states which have, through decrepitude 
and loss of their vital national idea, become entirely artificial and 
even somehow unnatural. I think that this will be true for a long 
time to come. But if the People understand the Slavic question, 
and the Eastern Question generally, only in terms of the fate of 
Orthodoxy, then it follows that the cause is not merely an accidental, 
passing one, nor merely a superficial political one, but touches on 
the very essence of the Russian People; this means that it is an 
eternal cause that will remain until its ultimate resolution. Russia, 
in this sense, can no longer renounce her movement to the East 
and cannot change her aims, for then she would be renouncing 
herself. And if, temporarily, following circumstances, this question 
did-and certainly had to-sometimes assume a different orienta­
tion; if there were times when we had to and even wanted to yield 
to circumstances and curb our aspirations-still, this question as a 
whole and as the essence of the very life of the Russian People 
must certainly sometime achieve its principal aim, that is, the union 
of all the Orthodox families in Christ and in brotherhood and with 
no more distinction between the Slavs and other Orthodox nation· 
alities. This union may not be a political one at all. The specific 
Slavic question, in its narrow sense, and the political question, in 
its narrow sense (i.e., the seas, straits, Constantinople, etc.) will 
resolve themselves in the course of this process in the way least in 
discord with the solution of the main and fundamental issue. Thus, 
I repeat, from this Popular standpoint the whole question takes on 
solidity and permanence. 

752 
A Writer's Diary 
In this respect, Europe, which has no comprehension whatever 
of our national ideals (measuring them by' her own standard, that 
is, and crediting us only with gred for new territory, violence, 
and conquest) at the same time understands the essence of the 
matter very clearly. 
But for Europe what matters is certainly not that we will now 
not seize territory and that we promise not to conquer anyone: 
what is much more important for her is the fact that, as before and 
as always, we are adamant in our determination to help the Slavs 
and have no intention of abandoning that help. And if this should 
happen even now, and we do come to the aid of the Slavs, then 
we, in the eyes of Europe, will be laying down another stone in 
that fortress which we supposedly are gradually erecting against 
her in the East; of this the whole of Europe is convinced. For in 
helping the Slavs we are at the same time continuing to instill and 
strengthen the Slavs' faith in Russia and her power, and more and 
more are making them accustomed to regard Russia as their sun, 
the center of the whole of the Slavic world and even of the whole 
of the East. And, in Europe's eyes, the strengthening of this notion 
is something that could lead us to conquests, despite al the con­
cessions that Russia is honorably and justly prepared to make in 
order to soothe Europe. Europe realizes only too well that this 
planting of an idea contains the whole essence of the cause at the 
moment, and that it is not merely a matter of material acquisitions 
in the Balkan peninsula. Europe also realizes that Russian policy 
as well regards al this most clearly as the essence of its aim. And 
if such is the case, then how can she, Europe, not be afraid? That 
is why Europe would like to take the Slavs under her protection 
by any means she can, to steal them away from us, as it were, and 
if possible to turn them against Russia and the Russians for ever. 
That is why she would have liked the Treaty of Paris to continue 
for as long as possible. That is also the source of all these projects 
about the Belgians, the European gendarmerie, and so on. Oh, 
anything, as long as it is not the Russians, as long as it somehow 
hides Russia from the eyes and the thoughts of the Slavs and even 
erases her from their memory! And that is where the matter stands 
at present. 

December 
753 
4· A Short Comment on "Pondering Peter" 
Recently there has been a good deal of talk of how the heated 
summer raptures of our educated classes were followed by a distinct 
chill, mistrust, cynicism, and even anger. Aside from certain very 
definite opponents of our Slavic movement, I think that all the 
others can be grouped into two general categories. The first category 
we may call the Judaizers. They ranle on about the damage that 
war can cause in an economic sense; they frighten us with bank 
failures, a drop in the exchange rate, a decline in trade, and even 
our military weakness-not only with respect to Europe but even 
with respect to the Turks, forgetting that the Turkish bashibazouk, 
who tortures the unarmed and the defenseless and who beheads 
dead bodies, is-in the words of the Russian proverb-"a brave 
lad against a sheep, but a sheep against a brave lad." The truth 
of this will certainly be borne out. What exactly do the Judaizers 
want? The answer is clear: in the first place, and principally, they 
found it difficult to keep sitting in their comfortable seats. But 
without entering into this moral aspect of the matter, let me note 
the second thing: the complete and utter lack of any historical and 
national understanding of the task that lies ahead. They regard the 
matter as if it were some passing linle whim that can be ended 
whenever we feel like it: "You've had a chance to kick up your 
heels," they seem to be saying, "but that's enough. Let's get back 
to business now." Stock-exchange business, of course. 
The second category are the Europeanizers, our same old Euro­
peanizing movement again. From this side we still hear the most 
"radical" questions: "What use are the Slavs to us, and why should 
we love them? Why should we go off to war for them? In pursuing 
some useless cause, will we not damage our own development, our 
schools? In pursuing the cause of nationality, will we not set back 
the cause of universality? Will we not, finally, arouse religious 
fanaticism in Russia?" And so on and so forth. In short, although 
these questions may be radical ones, they have long been worn out. 
The principal thing here is our old, outmoded, senile, and historical 
fear of the bold notion that Russia might possibly act independently. 
At one time this whole lot were liberals and progressives and were 
considered as such; but their historical moment has passed, and 
now it is difficult to imagine anything more retrograde. Meanwhile, 
in their blissful stagnation in the ideas of the 1 830s and 1840s they 
continue to regard themselves as being in the forefront of things. 

754 
A Writer's Diary 
Formerly they were regarded as democrats; now one simply can't 
conceive of anyone more squeamishly ariStocratic in their attitude 
to the People. Some may say that they have only condemned the 
dark side of our People; but the point is that in condemning the 
dark side they have also belittled al that is bright, and one can 
even say that it was precisely in the bright side that they saw 
darkness. They have not managed to make out what is bright and 
what is dark here! And in truth, if one looks closely into al the 
views of our Europeanizing intelligentsia, then one can conceive 
of nothing more harmful to the healthy, just, and independent 
development of the Russian People. 
And al this is done with complete, sincere innocence. Oh, of 
course they love the People, but . . .  in their own fashion. And what 
does it maner that someday everything in Russia will be consoli­
dated and made clear? Before that happens some great events may 
come to pass and catch our intelligentsia by surprise. Then might 
it not be too late? The proverb says, "Catch Peter in the morning; 
if he ponders an hour his thoughts will turn sour." It's a rough 
sort of proverb and not a very elegant expression, but there is truth 
in it. Wouldn't the same thing happen to the Russian Europeanizing 
individual as to Peter late in the day? Hasn't he perhaps been 
pondering things too long? The point is just that something of this 
sort has, it sems, already begun to happen . . . .  
And yet for me it is almost axiomatic that al our Russian dis­
unities and dissociations have been founded from the very begining 
only on misunderstandings, the crudest sort of misunderstandings, 
with nothing of real substance in them. The worst of it is that it 
will be a long time yet before each and every one of us realizes 
that. This, too, is one of our most interesting topics. 

Notes 
The following notes are intended to provide the English-speaking 
reader with at least minimal background information about refer­
ences in the text. Tho! most important source is provided by the 
volwninous and quite excellent annotations included in the USSR 
Academy of Sciences' thirty-volume edition of Dostoevsky's Com­
plete Works, F. M. Dostoevsky, Polnoe sobranie sochinenii v tridstati 
tomakh (Leningrad: Nauka, 1972-88), abbreviated hereafter as 
PSS. However, these notes are based on a set of assumptions that 
are not always applicable to nonspecialist readers in the West: Soviet 
readers do need not to be told about Belinsky or Nekrasov, for 
example, whereas the Western reader might. Thus, I have not 
provided a complete translation of the notes in P SS but have used 
them, rather, as a guide. I have anempted to check independently 
each reference derived from this source, but this has not always 
been possible: many of the nineteenth-century Russian newspapers 
Dostoevsky read so avidly are not available in North America and 
are difficult to access even in the Soviet Union. Additional material 
was derived from specific works cited in the notes themselves, and 
from the works of individual writers whom Dostoevsky mentions 
in the Diary. The sources listed below were repeatedly consulted. 
All dates mentioned in the notes are old style (o.s.), i.e. , twelve 
days behind the Gregorian calendar, unless otherwise indicated. 
Sources 
Baedeker, Karl. Russia, with Teheran, Port Arthur, and Peking: Handbook 
for Travellers. Leipzig: Karl Baedeker, 1914. 
Bol'shaia entsiklopediia [Great encyclopedia]. Ed. S. N. Iuzhakov. 22 vols. 
St. Petersburg: Prosveshchenie, 1 896. 
Bol'shaia suuetskaia entsiklopediia [Great Soviet encyclopedia). Ed. 0. Iu. 
Shmidt. 65 vols. Moscow: Sovetskaia entsiklopediia, 1926-47. 
7 5 5  

756 
Notes 
Bol'shaia sovetskaia entsiklopediia [Great Soviet .encyclopedia]. 3d ed. Ed. 
A. M. Prokorov. 30 vols. Moscow: Sovetskaia entsiklopediia, 197o-
78. 
Dostoevskaia, A. G. Vospominaniia [Memoirs). Moscow: Khudozhestven· 
naia literatura, 1 97 I . 
Encyclopaedia Britannica. 1 nh ed. 29 vols. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni· 
versity Press, 1910- 1 1 .  
Encyclopaedia Britannica. 14th ed. 24 vols. Chicago, London, and Toronto: 
William Benton, 1958. 
New Encyclopaedia Britannica. 1 5th ed. 32 vols. Chicago: Encyclopaedia 
Britannica, 1987. 
Entsiklopedicheskii sluvar' [Encyclopedic dictionary] . 82 vols. St. Peters­
burg: Brokgauz and Efron, I89Q-I904· 
Entsiklopedicheskii sluvar' [Encyclopedic dictionary]. 58 vols. St. Petersburg 
and Moscow: Granat, 191D-40. 
Frank, Joseph. Dostoevsky: The Seeds of Revolt, 1821- 1 849· Princeton, 
N.J. : Princeton University Press, 1 976. 
--. Dostoevsky: The Years of Ordeal, I 85o-1 859· Princeton, N.J.: 
Princeton University Press, 1983. 
--. Dostoevsky: The Stir of Liberation, I86o-1 865. Princeton, N.J.: 
Princeton University Press, 1986. 
Der Grosse Brockhaus. 1 5  vols. Wiesbaden: F. A. Brockhaus, 1977-81. 
Grossman, Leonid. Seminarii po Dostoevskomu: Materialy, bibliograjiia i 
kommentarii [Seminars on Dostoevsky: Source materials, bibliog­
raphy, commentaries]. Moscow and Petrograd: Gas. lzdatel'stvo, 
1922. 
--. Zhizn' i trudy F. M. Dostoevskogo: Biograjiia v datakh i dokumentakh 
[The life and works of F. M. Dostoevsky: A biography in dates and 
documents). Moscow and Leningrad: Academia, 1935. 
Guedalla, Philip. The Second Empire. London: Hodder and Stoughton, 
1932. 
Istoriia Mosk-zry [The history of Moscow). 6 vols. Moscow: AN SSSR, 
1952-59· 
/storiia russkoi literatury XIX veka [A history of Russian literature of the 
nineteenth century] . Ed. D. N. Ovsianiko-Kulikovsky. 5 vols. Mos­
cow: Mir, 1908-Io. 
Kratkaia literaturnaia entsiklopediia [Shan literary encyclopedia]. Ed. A. 
A. Surkov. 9 vols. Moscow: Sovetskaia entsiklopedia, 1962-78. 
Mochulsky, Konstantin. Dostoevsky: His Life and Work. Trans. and intro. 
by Michael Minihan. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 
1967. 
Modem Encyclopedia of Russian and Soviet History. Ed. Joseph L. Wie­
czynski. Gulf Breeze, Fla. :  Academic International Press, 1976-. 
Modem Encyclopedia of Russian and Soviet Literature. Ed. Harry B. Weber. 
Gulf Breeze, Fla.: Academic International Press, 1977-. 
Nechaeva, V. S. Zhurnal M. M. i F. M. Dostoevskikh "Vremia," 1861-

Notes to Page I 2 I 
757 
1863 [M. M .  and F. M .  Dostoevsky's journal "Time," 1861-1863]. 
Moscow: Nauka, 1972. 
--. Zhumal M. M. i F.  M. Dostoevskikh "Epokha," 1864-1865 (M. 
M. and F. M. Dostoevsky's journal "Epoch," 1864-1865] . Moscow: 
Nauka, 1975· 
Ocherki istorii Leningrada [Outlines of the history of Leningrad]. Ed. M. P. 
Viatkin et al. 7 vols. Moscow and Leningrad: AN SSSR, 1955-89. 
Petrovich, Michael Boro. A History of Modem Serbia, 1804-1918. 2 vols. 
New York: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich, 1976. 
Abbreviations 
BV 
Birzhevye vedomosti [The Stock Exchange News]-liberal daily 
D 
Dele [The Cause]-radical monthly 
DP 
Dnevnik pisatelia [A Writer's Diary] 
E 
Epokha [The Epoch]-St. Petersburg monthly edited by Dostoev-
sky (1864-65) 
G 
Golos [The Voice]-St. Petersburg daily, moderately liberal 
Gr 
Grazhdanin [The Citizen]-conservative weekly edited by Dos-
toevsky (1873) 
MV 
Moskuvskie vedomosti [Moscow News]-conservative daily 
NV 
Nuvoe vremia [New Times]-leading St. Petersburg daily 
OZ 
Orechesrvennye zapiski [Notes of the Fatherland]-monthly, edited 
by N. N. Nekrasov and M. Saltykov-Shchedrin ( 1868-84) 
PG 
Pererburgskaia gazeta [The Petersburg Ga2ene]-popular daily 
RM 
Russkii mir [The Russian World]-conservative daily 
RV 
Russkii vesrnik [The Russian Messenger]-conservative monthly; a 
leading literary journal of the nineteenth century 
S 
Suvremennik [The Contemporary]-radical monthly, edited by N. 
Chernyshevsky and N. Dobroliubov (1856-62) 
SV 
Sankt-Peterburgskie vedomosti [St. Petersburg News]-conservative 
daily 
V 
Vremia [Time]-monthly, edited by F. M. and M. M. Dostoevsky 
( 1861-63) 
VE 
Vesrnik Evropy [The European Messenger]-liberal monthly 
Z 
Zaria [Dawn] - neo-Slavophile monthly 
I873. I :  Introduction 
The Citizen: Dostoevsky's appointment as editor of Gr was confirmed by 
the Main Administration of Press Affairs on December 20, 1 872. His 
tenure as editor began on January 1, 1873. 
Chinese emperor: MV, no. 315, December 13, 1872, carried an account 
of the elaborate ceremonies accompanying the wedding of the emperor 
of China, T'ung-Chi, which took place on October 16, 1 872. 
Meshchersky, Vladimir Petrovich, prince (1839-1914), publisher, political 
figure, and extreme conservative. 

758 
Notes to Pages 122-29 
Bismarck: Meshchersky's novel Odin iz nashikh Bismark(IV [One of our 
Bismarcks) was appearing in Gr in I 872--?3. 
Moscuw News: MVwas published by the conservative M. N. Katkov (I8I8-
87), who frequently wrote its editorials. 
I'M Voice: G was published by A. A. Kraevsky (I8ID-99) and frequently 
exchanged barbs with Gr. 
From the Other Shore: Dostoevsky met Alexander Herzen (I8I2-70), writer, 
journalist, political thinker, and nineteenth-century Russia's most famous 
political emigre, in London in July I862. Herzen's S togo berega [From 
the other shore] (I 850) conveys his disillusionment after the failure of 
the European revolutions of I848. 
Pogodin, Mikhail Petrovich (I800-75), Russian historian, journalist, and 
panslavist. His anicle on Herzen appeared in Z, no. 2, I 87o. 
Belinsky, Vissarion (I81 1-48), nineteenth-century Russia's most famous 
literary critic. Herzen relates this story in Byloe i dumy [My past and 
thoughts], pt. 2, chap. I6. Belinsky's anicle, "Russkaia literatura v I84I 
godu" [Russian literature in I 84I] appeared in OZ, no. I, I842. 
1873.2: Old People 
That story: Dostoevsky first met Belinsky in early June I 845· Belinsky 
had heaped lavish praise on Dostoevsky's first work, Bednye liudi [Poor 
folk) . (See also notes to January I 877, 2.3.) 
Proudhon, Pierre Joseph (I809-65), French socialist and political writer. 
Herzen contributed to Proudhon's newspaper La Voix du peuple, I 849-
50. He describes his visit to the Paris barricades during the I 848 rev­
olution in My Past and Thoughts, pt. 5, chap. 35· 
appeal to Russian revolutionaries: Herzen's appeal, "Russkim ofitseram v 
Pol'she" (To Russian officers in Poland) (I862) urged liberal-minded 
Russian officers to ally themselves with Polish rebels, in the hope that 
this would both help the Poles and extend the uprising to Russia. He 
later admined that this had been an error. 
Belinsky's father was a naval doctor. 
The Internationale: The International Working Men's Association was 
founded in I 864 by Marx and Engels. The proclamation Dostoevsky 
quotes here, however, came from M. A. Bakunin's organization, L' Alli­
ance de Ia Democratie Socialiste, and dates from I869. 
Renan, Ernest (I823-92), French philosopher and orientalist. His Vie de 
Jesus (I863) depicts Jesus as a purely human preacher of noble moral 
teachings. 
one of Belinsky's friends: Belinsky's friend, apparently, was Vasily Pe­
trovich Botkin ( I 8 1 1-69), writer, critic, and translator. The novice writer 
was likely Ivan Turgenev. 
Sand, George (I804-76), pseudonym of Amandine Lucile Aurore Dude­
van!, French novelist. Her novels propounded utopian and Christian 
socialism and enjoyed great popularity in Russia. Etienne Cabet (I788-
I856), French utopian socialist, founder of a utopian colony in Nauvoo, 

Notes to Pages 129-46 
759 
Illinois. Pierre Leroux (I798- I871), French philosopher and utopian 
socialist whose notions of Christian socialism had a strong influence on 
George Sand. (See also notes to June 1876, 1 .2.) 
Feuerbach, Ludwig Andreas (1804-72), German philosopher. His Das 
Wesen des Chrisrenrums (184I) attempts to humanize theology and views 
God as a projection of mar.'s nature. 
Strauss, David Friedrich (I8o8-74), German theologian-philosopher. His 
Leben Jesu (1835) criticized Christian dogma and denied the historical 
basis of the supernatural events related in the Gospels; it was a popular 
"forbidden book" in Russia. 
Mme. Hogg kept a pension for women in Geneva and was active in the 
women's movemtnt. 
The Nikolaevsky railway, built 1 843-5I, linked Moscow and St. 
Petersburg. 
The wives of the Decembrists: The women, Mme. Muravieva, Mme. 
Annenkova, and Mme. Fcnvizina, arranged the meeting with Dostoev­
sky and later interceded with the prison authorities on behalf of him 
and other convicted members of the Petrashevsky Circle. (See also notes 
to January 1 876, 3.2, and July-August I876, 4.2.) 
1873.3: Environment 
new (just) courts: In 1 864 occurred a major reform of the Russian judicial 
system, one of the main features of which was the institution of trial by 
jury. 
I was in prison: Dostoevsky was sentenced to four years of hard labor, 
followed by a term of Siberian exile, on December 22, 1849; his period 
of hard labor ended on February IS, 1 854. 
Not long ago: Dostoevsky lived in Europe from April I 867 to July 1 87 1 .  
The woman's story: The trial of the peasant N .  A .  Saiapin, accused of 
abusing his wife, occurred in the Tambov circuit coun on September 
30, I872. 
hang by the heels: The daughter's plight, as described by Dostoevsky, 
roused a group of Moscow ladies to take steps to have her sent to a 
trade school in Moscow. 
1873.4: Something Personal 
Kovalevsky, Egor Petrovich (I81 I-68), explorer, writer, and statesman. 
Dostoevsky knew him during the former's tenure as president of the 
Literary Fund, an organization to assist writers in need. Dostoevsky 
served as secretary of the fund from I 863 to I 865. 
Crime and Punishment was serialized in RV, beginning in January I 866. 
One of these magazines: The publishers were M. M. Stasiulevich (I 826-
I9I I), who edited RV beginning in I866, and the poet N. N. Nekrasov 
(I82I-77), coeditor of S, which was closed by the government in April 
I 866. Nekrasov was one of the first readers of Dostoevsky's Poor Folk 
in I 845; he had high praise for the work, but their later relationship, 

Notes to Pages 147-52 
which Dostoevsky describes in detail in DP, December 1 877. 2. 1-2.4, 
was often difficult. (See also notes to chapter 5.) 
" . . .  a dressing-down": The author of the review of the first pan of Crime 
and Punishment, which appeared in S, nos. 2 and 3, 1 866, was G. Z. 
Eliseev. He sharply criticized Dostoevsky for attacking students in the 
novel. 
Chernyshevsky, Nikolai Gavrilovich (1828-89), journalist, social thinker, 
and a major figure in the revolutionary movement of the 1 86os. In 1 862 
he was arrested for revolutionary activities. After a rigged trial, he was 
sentenced to a prison term followed by exile for life. He was considered 
a manyr by many. 
'The Crocodile': Dostoevsky's story "Krokodil" [The crocodile] appeared 
in E, no. 2, 1 865. 
Bulgarin, Faddei Venediktovich ( 1789-1 859), Russian writer, journalist, 
and publisher of Severnaia pchela [The Northern Bee], a conservative 
newspaper. Bulgarin was notorious for his denunciations of writers to 
the secret police of Nicholas I. 
my return from Siberia: Dostoevsky seems to have erred here, since he 
returned to St. Petersburg from his exile in December 1859. Cherny­
shevksy's account of the meeting, which differs in some details from 
Dostoevsky's, places it in late May 1 862 (see N. G. Chernyshevsky, 
Polnoe sobranie sochinenii [Complete collected works], Moscow: Khu­
dozhestvennaia literatura, 1939-50, vol. 1 ,  p. 777). N. G. Rozenblium 
maintains that the meeting took place shortly after the series of major 
fires in St. Petersburg in May 1862, most probably on May 30 or 3 1  
(Literaturnoe nasledstvo 86: F. M. Dostoevsky: novye materialy i issledov­
aniia [Literary legacy, 86: F. M. Dostoevsky: New material and re­
search], Moscow: Nauka, 1973, pp. 39-40.) 
"To the Young Generation": The proclamation " K  molodomu pokoleniiu" 
(To the young generation) appeared in September 1 861 . It was the 
product of Chernyshevsky, N. V. Shelgunov, and M. L. Mikhailov. 
Dotoevsky may have had in mind the proclamation "Molodaia Rossiia" 
[Young Russia], which appeared in May 1 862. "Young Russia" was 
written by P. G. Zaichnevsky and was much more revolutionary in tone 
than the other proclamations of the time. 
Chernyshevsky's arrest: Arrested on July 7, 1 862, Chernyshevsky spent 
nearly two years in prison in St. Pet̾rsburg before being exiled to Siberia, 
where he remained until 1 883. 
The Arcade (passazh): A popular shopping area off Nevsky Prospect. 
The Voice: G, no. 93, April 3, 1 865, noted: "Although Mr. F. Dostoevsky 
will not take our advice, of course, we still would suggest that he break 
off this most tactless story at Chapter Four. Rumors which are extremely 
detrimental to the reputation of The Epoch and to Mr. Dostoevsky himself 
are already circulating about the story." 
Strakhov, Nikolai Nikolaevich (1828-96), Russian philosopher and literary 
critic, coeditor of Dostoevsky's V and, to some extent, his philosophical 
mentor. 

Notes to Pages 1 52-70 
Andrei Aleksandrovich Kraevsky: See notes to 1 873. 1 .  
"Notes of a Madman" [Zapiski sumasshedshego] (1835), story by Nikolai 
Gogo!; "God" [Bog] (1784), ode by G. R. Derzhavin; Yury Miloslavsky, 
or the Russians in 1612 [lurii Miloslavskii, iii Russkie v 1612 godu] 
(1829), novel by M. N. Zagoskin; Afanasy Afanasievich Fet (1820-92), 
Russian lyric poet; Ivan Fedorovich Gorbunov (1831-95), Russian actor, 
writer, and storyteller. 
critical article on . . .  What Is To Be Dun2?: V. S. Nechaeva (in Zhumal 
M. M. i F. M. Doswevskikh "Epokha," 1864-1865 [Moscow: Nauka, 
1975], pp. 209-10) points out that no such review appeared in E, 
although S!Iakhov had wrinen one. Dostoevsky decided against pub­
lishing it; after E ceased publication, Strakhov's review appeared m 
Biblioreka dlia chreniia [Library for Reading], nos. 7-8, 1 865. 
1 873· 5: VIas 
"VIas," by N. N. Nekrasov, appeared in S, no. 6, 1855. Dostoevsky's 
relationship to Nekrasov underwent many changes. Nekrasov was one 
of the first readers to heap high praise on Dostoevsky's first work, Poor 
People. In the 1 86os and 187os, however, Nekrasov was solidly in the 
radical camp. Dostoevsky continued to admire Nekrasov as a poet but 
had strong ideological disagreements with him. (See also December 1 877, 
2.1-2.4.) 
verses about the barge-haulers' songs: Nekrasov's "On the Volga" [Na 
Volge) appeared in S, no. 1 ,  1861. The poem describes the hard lot of 
the barge-haulers and suggests that they should not simply accept it 
passively. 
this remarkable tale: The exact source of Dostoevsky's story is unknown, 
but the motif of the desecration of the Eucharist is not uncommon in 
Russian folklore. 
"new people": A phrase used most notably by N. G. Chernyshevsky to 
describe the young generation of radicals he depicts in his novel What 
Is lo Be Dun£? [Chto delat'?) (1863). 
Mr. Ostrovsky's tempter: Ostrovsky, Aleksandr Nikolaevich (1823-86), 
Russian dramatist. His comedy Don't Live as You Choose [Ne tak zhivi 
kak khochetsia] (1855) has a character, Eremka, who leads the play's 
hero astray. 
On February 19, 1862, the Edict of Emancipation of the serfs was signed. 
"fledglings from Peter's nest": This metaphor appears in Pushkin's poem 
"Poltava" ( 1828). Dostoevsky has in mind the educated classes that 
originated after the reforms of Peter the Great. 
1 873.6: Bobok 
my portrait: A portrait of Dostoevsky, by V. G. Perov, was exhibited in 
the Academy of Arts in early 1 873. A commentator in G, no. 14, 1 873, 
noted: "This is a portrait of a man exhausted by a serious ailment." 

Notes to Pages 17o-83 
Collegiate Councilor: Rank of the 6th class, equivalent to the rank of 
colonel in the army. (See also notes to October 1876, 2.3.) 
the smell, the smell! :  Dostoevsky's narrator makes an untranslatable pun 
here: dukh (spirit), which colloquially can mean "smell," and dukhovnyi, 
"ecclesiastic." 
people trained as engineers: As in Dostoevsky's novel The Devils (Besy] 
(1871), where Kirillov, an engineer, is involved in a political conspiracy 
and has developed philosophical ideas. 
Moscow Exhibition: In the summer of 1872 a polytechnical exhibition 
commemorating the 2ooth anniversary of binh of Peter I was held in 
Moscow. 
bread crumbs on the ground: M. M. Bakhtin's explanation: "bread may 
be crumbled and left on the eanh: this is a planting of the seed, an act 
of fecundation. It must not be left on the floor, since that is infenile." 
(M. M. Bakhtin, Problemy poeriki Dosroevskogo, 3d ed. (Moscow: Khu­
dozhestvennaia literatura, 1972), p. 238. 
Suvorin's Almanac: A. S. Suvorin, Russkii kalendar' na 1872 god (St. 
Petersburg, 1872). A reference book and compilation of facts about 
Russia; the founh section dealt with popular customs and beliefs. 
Your Excellency: An official in the civil service of the third and fourth 
ranks, equivalent to a lieutenant- or major-general in the army, would 
be addressed as "Your Excellency" [vashe prevoskhodirel'srvo] and, al­
though not a military man, would be called a general nonetheless, par­
ticularly by those attempting to flatter him. 
"Rest, beloved ashes . . .  ": Pokoisia, milyi priakh, do radoslnogo urra! was 
the epitaph on the grave of the Russian writer and historian N. M. 
Karamzin (1766-1826), and was frequently reused. 
Coun Councilor: 7th rank, equivalent to lieutenant-colonel in the army. 
fony-day memorial: Memorial prayers (sorokoviny, sorochiny, sorokousr] were 
said fony days after a death. It was popularly believed that during these 
fony days the soul of the deceased was in torment. 
rice porridge: A porridge of rice or wheat with honey [kut'ia], a symbol 
of resurrection, was customarily eaten after the funeral. 
Actual Privy Councilor: 2d rank, equivalent to general in the army. 
The Vale of Jehoshaphat was considered the site at which the Last Judgment 
would take place (Joel 3: 12). 
Ekk, Vladimir Egorovich (1818-75), professor and well-known physician. 
Botkin, Sergei Petrovich (1832-89), eminent physician and scholar, one 
of the finest diagnosticians of his day. 
State Councilor: A rank of the 5th class, equivalent to the rank between 
that of colonel and major-general in the army. 
Lebeziatnikov is also the name of an obsequious character in Crime and 
Punishment. The name suggests the verb lebezir', "to fawn upon some­
one, ingratiate oneself." 
Bobok means "bean." 

Notes to Pages I 86-95 
I 873.7: A Troubled Countenance 
"The Sealed Angel": Leskov, Nikolai Semenovich (I828-95), Russian 
writer. His story "Zapechatlennyi angel" [The sealed angel] appeared 
in RV, no. I ,  1 873. Nekrasov's "Kniaginia M. N. Volkonskaia" [Prin­
cess M. N. Volkonskaia] appeared in OZ, no. 1 ,  1873. Mikhail Ev­
grafovich Saltykov-Shchedrin (I826-89), Russian satirist. The second 
sketch of his "Blagonamerennye rechi" [Loyal speeches] likewise ap­
peared in OZ, no. I ,  1873. 
Skabichevsky, Aleksandr Mikhailovich (1838- I9IO), Russian critic. His 
"Drama v Evrope i u nas" [Drama in Europe and Russia] appeared in 
OZ, no. I ,  1873. N.M.: Nikolai Konstantinovich Mikhailovsky (1842-
1904), journalist, literary critic, sociologist, and theoretician of the Pop­
ulist movement. 
Patriarch Nikon: Nikita Minin (I6oS-8I), Patriarch of Moscow and All 
Russia. His liturgical reforms provoked the "great schism" in the Or­
thodox church. The icons in question thus would have been revered by 
the Dissenters because they had been consecrated before the schism. 
Deacon Akhilla, in Leskov's novel Soboriane [Cathedral folk] (1872) spends 
much of his time "doing battle with evil," which he personifies as the 
Devil. Akhilla dies after he attacks what he assumes is the Devil himself, 
falls into an icy canal, and eventually dies of exposure. 
new sect of Stundists: The Stundists were a Protestant religious sect that 
appeared in southern Russia in the late 1 86os; their origins were linked 
to German settlers in that area. 
costs us so dearly: The relatively large portion of the Russian budget that 
derived from the tax on alcohol was a topic in the Russian press; Dostoev­
sky comments on this problem in ! 873. 1 1 .  
I873.8: A Half-Letter from " A  Certain Person" 
"a certain person": The author here is therefore the same fictional character 
who narrated "Bobok" (!873.6). Later in the Diary another character, 
"the paradoxicalist," makes more than one appearance. 
my supposed literary enemies: Prominent among Dostoevsky's literary 
"enemies" here are N. K. Mikhailovsky, who in OZ, no. 1 ,  1 873, had 
taken issue with Dostoevsky's suggestion, made in 1 873.2, that socialism 
was necessarily atheistic and revolutionary. Socialists, Mikhailovsky ar­
gues, have no uniform views on religious matters; "Socialism in Russia," 
he stated, "is conservative." Another "enemy," V. P. Burenin, had writ­
ten a critical review of The Devils (SV, nos. 6 and 1 3, 1 873). Throughout 
much of 1 872, OZ and SV had also carried on a public quarrel between 
Mikhailovsky and Burenin. Burenin is one of the prime targets of "A 
Certain Person's" abuse, but his letter is also directed generally at the 
rancorous polemics and personal attacks that had been common among 
journals and journalists since the 186os. A few excerpts from om. of 

Notes to Pages 197-208 
Burenin's attacks on Mikhailovsky show that "A Certain Person's" por­
trayal of this literary squabble is not undul)C exaggerated: "Tell me, Mr. 
Mikhailovsky, are you feeling al right? Do you now think that you have 
crushed me like a bedbug? What's now being spattered, after your 
reading of this column-is it my 'bedbuggish blood' or tears of impotent 
fury squeezed from your tender soul . . .  ? . . .  From here I can see Mr. 
Mikhailovsky, his face now red, now pale, struck with fear and heartache 
as he casts his eye over these opening remarks . . . .  In despair he puils 
his hair, and a horrible thought runs through his mind: 'My God, this 
Z. [Burenin] wants to make me out a madman in front of my read­
ers . . .  '" (SV, no. 205, 1872). 
Dear old Krylov: Krylov, Ivan Andreevich (1769?-1844), Russian fabulist; 
many of his fables are frequently quoted. 
Palkin's: A tavern on the comer of Nevsky and Liteiny Prospects. 
"I fear amidst war's strident clamor": The verse comes from Pushkin's 
"Iz Gafiza" [From Hafiz] (1829). 
Berg's Theater in St. Petersburg staged mainly light entertainment. 
Antropka appears at the end ofTurgenev's story "Pevtsy" [Singers) (1850). 
Dussault's: A fashionable restaurant on St. Petersburg's Bolshaia Morskaia 
Stret. 
the last day of Carnival: The last Sunday before Lent was traditionally 
the day upon which one sought forgiveness of one's acquaintances. 
1 873.9: Apropos of the Exhibition 
the exhibition: Some hundred paintings and sculptures were exhibited in 
March 1873 at the Academy of Arts in St. Petersburg. 
Our Own Folk: Ostrovsky's comedy Svoi liudi sochremsia [Our own folk, 
we'll settle it] was published in 1850 and first performed in 1861. 
a Frenchinan who knew not a word of Russian: Louis Viardot's translations 
of five stories by Gogo!, Nouvelks n.tsSes, appeared in Paris in 1845. 
Viardot's translation of Don Quixou appeared in 1836. 
"Three Portraits": Turgenev's story "Tri portreta" [Three portraits] was 
published in 1846. 
Pushkin's "Pikovaia dama" [Queen of spades) (1834) was translated by 
Paul de Julvecourt and published in Paris in 1843; a translation by 
Prosper Merimee appeared in 1849. Kapitanskaia dochka [The captain's 
daughter) (1836) was translated by Turgenev and Viardot and appeared 
in 1 853· 
"This barren landscape . . .  ": line from the poem by F. I. Tiutchev, "Eti 
bednye seleniia" [These por vilages] (1855). 
Kuindzhi, Arkhip lvanovich (1842-1910). His painting Na ostrove Valaame 
[On the Island of Valaam] (1873) was the first work to bring him some 
fame as a painter. See V. S. Manin, Arkhip lvanuvich Kuindzhi i ego 
shkola (Arkhip lvanovich Kuindzhi and his school) (Leningrad: Khu­
dozhnik RFSFR, 1987), plate 14. 
resettlement of Circassians: Dostoevsky probably has in mind Petr Ni­
kolaevich Gruzinsky 's Ostavlenie gonsami aulov pri priblizhenii russkikh 

Notes to Pages 208- 1 5  
voisk [The mountaineers abandon their villages at the approach of Rus­
sian forces] (1872). 
Makovsky, Vladimir Egorovich (1846-1920), Liubiteli soluv'ev [Nightingale 
fanciers] (1872-73). See Russia: The Lond, The People. Russian Painting 
185o-1910 (Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution, 1986), p. 59· 
Then we se a game of cards: The painting Dostoevsky probably has in 
mind is Kosinra Ahvenanmaal/a [In a Cabin on Aland], by the Finnish 
painter Karl Emanuel Jansson (1846-74). 
Perov, Vasilii Grigorevich (1 832-82) Okhomiki na privale (1871). See Vla­
dimir Leniashin, Varilii Grigorevich Perov (Leningrad: Khudozhnik 
RFSFR, 1987), plate 79. 
Makovsky's Pridvomye psa/omshchiki na klirose [Coun singers in the choir 
stalls] (1870). See E. V. Zhuravleva, Vladimir Egorovich Malwvskii, 1846-
1920 (Moscow: Iskusstvo, 1972), pp. 26-27. 
Patriarchs: i.e., prior to Peter the Great's reform of 1720, which ended 
the patriarchate and brought the church effectively under government 
control. 
"Affii-i-cted!": In chapter 1 of Leskov's novel Cathedral Folk (see note 
to 1873. 7), Deacon Akhilla is so carried away by his solo pan in the 
anthem "And by sorrows a1JI.icted" that he goes on repeating "afflicted, 
afflicted" long after the rest of the choir have finished. 
Hood, Thomas (1799-1845), English poet. His "Song of the Shin" (1843) 
is a poem of social protest against the exploitation of women's work. 
two latest poems by Nekrasov: The poems are "Kniaginia Trubetskaia" 
[Princess Trubetskaia], OZ, no. 4, 1872, and "Kniaginia M. N. Vol­
konskaia" [Princess M. N. Volkonskaia], OZ, no. 1 ,  1 873, published 
under the common title Russkie zhenshchiny [Russian women] . They deal 
with the Decembrists' wives (see notes to July-August 1876, 4.2). 
Repin, Ilia Efimovich (1844-1930). His Bur/aki na Volge [Barge-haulers 
on the Volga] (187o-73) was the most discussed painting at the Exhi­
bition. Se 0. A. Liaskovskaia, /I 'ia Efirnuvich Repin: zhizn i rvorchesrvo 
[Ilia Efimovich Repin: Life and work] (Moscow: Iskusstvo, 1982), p. 
59· 
stuffed with porridge: Dostoevsky may have taken this detail from Leskov's 
Cathedral Folk, which had appeared in RV, nos. 4-7, 1 872. 
Bronnikov, Fedor Andreevich (1827-1902). His painting Gimn pifagoreitsev 
ooskhodiashchemu solmsu [The hymn of the Pythagoreans to the rising 
sun] (1869) was in the pseudoclassical academic style. 
Ge, Nikolai Nikolaevich ( 1 831-94). His painting Petr I doprashivaet tsar­
evicha Alekseia Petrovicha v Petergofe [Peter I interrogates the tsarevich 
Aleksei Petrovich at Peterhof] ( 1 871) was among those exhibited (see 
Nikolai lva'fiUIJich Ge [Moscow: Iskusstvo, 1978], plate 31). His earlier 
Tainaia vecheria [The Last Supper] (1863) was extremely controversial 
because of what many considered a mundane treaunent of an event having 
profound religious significance. See V. Porudominskii, Nikolai Ge (Mos­
cow: Iskusstvo, 1970) p. 32, plate 1 .  

Notes to Pages 217-35 
1 873. 10: An ImpersoȎtor 
Kastorsky is the alias used here by N. S. Leskov, whose major navel, 
Catlwlral Folk, ponrayed Rusian clergymen. Dostoevsky pretends to 
be unaware of the real identity of the writer. 
Nedolin, M. A.: Minor writer who published a number of stories in 1872-
77-
The navel Zapiski prichemika [Notes of a psai.m·reader], by Marko Vavchok 
[M. A. Markovich), appeared in OZ, nos. 9-1 2, 1869, and nos. 1ǋ 
II, 1870. 
The choristers in Makovsky's painting are wearing dark soutanes and 
pelerines, as had been the practice since Peter the Great, who borrowed 
the costume from the Poles. 
Dmitry Donskoi (135ǋ89), Grand Duke of Muscovy; Yaroslav the Wise 
(978-1054), Grand Duke of Kiev. 
The verse is from N. M. Yazykov, "Komu, o Gospodi! dostupny tvoi 
Sionski vysocy?" (Who, 0 Lord, may lodge in Thy heights of Zion?] 
(1830), which is based on Psalm 15. 
Mount Athos: A peninsula in northeastern Grece, a center of Orthodox 
monasticism and frequent place of pilgrimage for Rusians. 
bewilderment: At the end of pan 5 of Leskov's navel Na rwzhokh [At 
dagers drawn] (18̬71) the scene suddenly and inexplicably shifts to 
Moldavia. 
"Bring him back!": Inaccurare quotation from the end of act 2 of Gogol's 
play Zhenil'ba [The Mariage] (1842). 
Pushkin's epigram "Sapozhnik. Pritcha" [The shoemaker: A fable] (1829) 
17le Russia11 World: Leskov was a regular contributor to RM in the early 
187os; the newspaper published a number of flanering references to his 
work. 
1 873. 1 1 :  Dreams and Musings 
drunkennes: Gr, like many other Rusian newspapers in 1 872-73, carried 
a number of articles on the problem of widespread drunkennes among 
the peasantry and on means to combat the abuse of alcohol. 
In Gogol's "Notes of a Madman" the main character, Poprishchin, com· 
ments on curent Spanish politics and ends by imagining himself king 
of Spain. 
Pypin, Aleksandr Nikolaevich (1833-1904), Russian critic, literary his­
torian, and fol.klorist. In parts 5 and 6 of his "Kharakteristiki litera­
turynykh mneni ot dvadtsatykh do piatidesiatykh godav. lstoricheskie 
ocherki" [Characteristics of Rusian literary opinions from the 182os to 
the 185os: a historical sketch] (VE, nos. 1 1  and 12, 1872), Pypin took 
the Slavophiles to task for their "romantic patriotism" and idealization 
of traditional Rusian life. He argued that "to become independent of 
Western civilization and to rise above it, to 'make Western enlightenment 
conform to our principles,' as Kirevsky demanded, we must first acquire 
the strength to do so; we must absorb and transform the content of 

Notes to Pages 237-64 
Western enlightenment and make our own contribution to it" (no. I2, 
p. 664). 
grand budget: In I873 Russia's budget was SI7 million rubles; income 
from the spirit monopoly amounted to I66.5 million rubles. 
Susanin, Ivan (?-I6I3). Susanin helped rally Russians against the Polish 
invaders during the "Time of Troubles" in the early seventeenth century 
and became a national hero. Gr, no. 3, January IS, I873, carried a note 
regarding the mutilation of Susanin's statue in Kostroma. 
Spasovich, Vladimir Danilovich (I829-I9Q6), Russian lawyer and legal 
scholar; professor at St. Petersburg University. Spasovich once argued 
that his client, accused of embezzlement, was simply an impractical 
person. (See also notes to February I876, 2.2.) 
plot for a shon novel: The motif of the schoolteacher figures in the plans 
for A Raw You1h. 
1 873. 12: Apropos of a New Play 
Kishensky's play Pi1' do dno-ne vidat' dobra [Strong drink every day 
keeps fonune away) appeared in Gr, nos. 23-25, June 4, 1 1 ,  and I8, 
I873-
for vodka and for money: As the only worker in his family, the hero of 
the play would be exempted from military service under the regulations 
on recruitment of I 862. 
"mediocor": Stepanida means "mediator" [mirovoi posrednik], an official 
appointed to oversee relations between landowners and former serfs in 
the period following the abolition of serfdom; the word she uses, pos­
redsrvennik, suggests a mediocrity. 
Rachel, Elise (Elisabeth Rachel Felix) (I82I-S8), French tragic actress 
who toured Russia in the I8sos. 
1 873. 13: Little Pictures 
The Police Bridge spanned the Moika River on Nevsky Prospect. 
The Anichkov Bridge spanned the Fontanka Canal on Nevsky Prospect. 
sazhen: A Russian measure, approximately seven feet. 
Ton, Konstantin Andreevich (I794-I88I), Russian architect noted for the 
stylized Byzantine manner of his buildings. 
Rastrelli, Banolomeo Francesco (I700-7I), Italian architect who spent 
most of his life in Russia, creating the country's best examples of baroque 
architecture. 
Vyborg side: That area of St. Petersburg that lay on the right bank of the. 
River Neva. 
Liteiny: Here, the left bank of the Neva where the center of the city was 
located. 
girl of the same age: Dostoevsky's daughter, Liubov, was born in I869. 
1 873. 14: To a Teacher 
a cenain book of an official nature: A. S. Suvorir. (pseud. Neznakomets), 
writing in SV, no. I92, July I 5, I 873, commented on Doklad vysochaishe 

Notes to Pages 264-79 
uchrezhdemwi komissii dlia issleduvaniia nyneshnego polczheniia sel 'skogo 
khoziasrva i sel 'skoi proizvoditel 'nosti (Report of the Imperial Commission 
to investigate the present state of agriculture and agricultural produc­
tivity] (St. Petersburg, 1873). The report provided data indicating wide­
spread demoralization of the peasantry and questioned the wisdom of 
the 1862 peasant reform. 
Suvorin's view of the peasantry was much the same as Pypin's (see notes 
to 1873. 1 1). Marko Vovchok (pseudonym of Maria Aleksandrovna Mar­
kovich) (1833-1907), Ukrainian writer, author of stories of Russian and 
Ukrainian peasant life. Dmitri Vasilevich Grigorovich (1822-99), Russian 
novelist who frequently wrote on peasant themes. (See also notes to April 
1876, 1 .4, and July-August 1 876. 3.2.) 
Janin, Jules Gabriel (1804-74), French novelist, critic, and journalist. For 
forty-two years he published a weekly theatrical feuilleton in the Paris 
newspaper Journal des dibats. 
Zariade: An area in Moscow, immediately south and east of Red Square, 
in which were concentrated tailors, hatrnakers, glovers, and other such 
craftsmen. 
The Voice: Kraevsky, Andrei Aleksandrovich (181o-99), journalist, editor, 
and publisher of the newspaper Gales [The Voice]. He and Dostoevsky 
had a longstanding feud. Dostoevsky here apparently has in mind Kraev­
sky's criticisms of "Vias" (DP, 1873.5). 
1873. 15: Something about Lying 
Botkin: See notes to 1873.6. 
In My Past and Thoughts, pt. 8, chap. 72, Herzen comments on the 
maners of Russians traveling abroad: "Russians speak in a loud voice 
where others speak in a low voice, and do not speak at al where others 
speak loud. They laugh aloud and tell funny stories in a whisper, they 
quickly make friends with the waiters and slowly with their neighbours. 
They eat with their knives. The military people look like Germans, but 
they are distinguised from them by the peculiar insolence of the back 
of their heads and their original bristling hair; the ladies attract attention 
by their dress in railway trains and steamers, just as Englishwomen do 
at table d'hote, and so on" (My Past and Thoughts, trans. Constance 
Garnett (London: Chatto & Windus, 1926], 5: 1 87-88). 
Liebig, Justus von (1803-73), German chemist. His work on the chemistry 
of life processes was particularly influential in Russia. 
Lieutenant Pirogov is the main character in Gogol's story "Nevskii pro­
spekt" [Nevsky Prospect] (1835). He makes advances to the pretty wife 
of a German tradesman, Schiller, who beats him; Pirogov quickly recovers 
and spends the evening dancing. 
1873. 16: One of Today's Falsehoods 
Nechaev, Sergei (1847-82), Russian revolutionary and conspirator. On 
November 26, 1869, Nechaev and four members of his group murdered 

Notes to Pages 279-95 
a student of the Moscow Agricultural College and former member of 
the group, Ivanov. Nechaev himself escaped abroad, but many of his 
followers were arrested. Dostoevsky attended their trial in July I871. In 
The Devils, the ruthless and cynical methods of Peter Verkhovensky are 
modeled on those of Nechaev. 
The anicle appeared in RM, no. 30I , November I3, I873· 
one Nechaev: In pan 2, chap. 8 of The Devils Dostoevsky's manipulative 
schemer, Peter Verkhovensky, says this to Stavrogin as he explains the 
tactics he plans to use to seize political power. 
Blanc (Jean Joseph Charles) Louis ( I 8 I I-82), French politician and his­
torian. His study L'Organisaticm du travail (I839) had argued for the 
equalization of wages. He became a member of the Provisional Govern­
ment in I 848 and was instrumental in having the government guarantee 
that all workers could earn their livelihood. Such proposals held great 
appeal for workers but alarmed the middle classes. On May I S, I 848, 
a large crowd of workers invaded the National Assembly and disrupted 
its functioning; Blanc was accused of instigating the affair. His parlia­
mentary immunity was lifted and he had to flee to England. His friend 
and colleague Fran(fois Arago helped save him. Dominique Fran(fois 
Jean Arago (I786-I853), French physicist and politician, director of the 
French Royal Observatory, minister of war and marine in the Provisional 
Government. 
Considerant, Victor Prosper (I8o8-93), French utopian socialist. His jour­
nals Le Phalanstere (I832-34) and La Phalange (I836-49) popularized 
the ideas of Fourier. Pierre Joseph Proudhon (I809-65), French socialist 
and political writer. His treatise Qu 'est-ce que Ia propriete? concluded that 
"La propriete, c'est le vol [propeny is theft)." 
Belinsky: See notes to I873. I ,  I873.2. 
Strauss: See notes to I 873.2. 
Karamzin: See notes to I 873.6. 
Kel'siev, Vasilii lvanovich (I835-72), Russian journalist and revolutionary. 
Writing in the journal Zaria [Dawn], no. 3, I86I, he tells the story of 
the former cavalry officer Burovin, who made his way on foot, penniless 
and without documents, from St. Petersburg to London. 
In My Past and Thoughts, pt. 7, chap. 3, Herzen tells of a young Russian 
landowner, P. A. Bakhmetev, who in I 857 went to New Zealand to found 
a socialist colony. 
inspection: In I 87I-72 an educational reform, carried out by the very 
conservative minister of education D. A. Tolstoi (I823-89), limited access 
to universities and emphasized the teaching of Latin, Greek, and math­
ematics in secondary schools. Study of the natural sciences, which were 
seen as a source of inspiration for revolutionary ideas among students, 
was minimized. 
[Announcement] 
This announcement appeared in G, no. 352, December 2I, I 875, and at 
the end of the January I 876 issue of DP. 

770 
Notes to Pages 299-302 
January 1876, 1 . 1: In Place of a Foreword. On the Great 
and Small Bears, on Great Goetfie's Prayer, and, 
Generally, on Bad Habits 
Khlestakov: Gogol's inspired liar in his play Revizor [The Inspector­
General]. 
In Goethe's The Sorrows of Young Werther, a passage from the last letter 
Werther wrote before his suicide reads: "I walk over to the window, my 
dearest one, and look out. Through the storm clouds flying by, I can 
still see a few stars in the eternal sky. No, you will not fall. The Eternal 
One carries you in his hean, as he carries me. I can see the handle of 
the Big Dipper, my favorite of al the constellations. When I left you 
that night, as I walked out the gate, it stood in the sky facing me. In 
what a state of intoxication have I been often when I looked at it. Then 
I would lift my hand and make a sign of it, a sacred marker for my 
present bliss" (Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, The Sor(f{J)s of Young 
Werther and Selected Writings, trans. Catherine Hutter [New York: The 
New American Library/Signet Classic, 1962], p. 125). 
"Mr. X" (Neznakomets) was the pseudonym of A. S. Suvorin (1834-1912), 
journalist and publisher. His column of January 4, 1876 (NV, no. 3), 
commented on the uniformly liberal tendency of Russian newspapers of 
the day, noting that Dostoevsky's Diary would provide a refreshing 
change. 
"Je suis un homme heureux . . .  ": Dostoevsky's paraphrase of the towns­
people's opinion of Jean Valjean as mayor of Montreuil-sur-Mer, in Les 
Miserables (pt. 1 ,  bk. 5, chap. 3). 
January 1 876, 1 . 2: A Future Novel. Another 
"Accidental Family" 
The Artists' Club: A favorite gathering spot for Petersburg artists and 
writers. G, no. 356, December 25, 1 875, noted: "On Friday, December 
26, a large children's festival-a Christmas tree-will take place in the 
Petersburg Assembly of Artists, with free gifts for all children, acrobats, 
magicians, two musical orchestras, toboggan slides, electrical illumina­
tion, and much more. The Christmas parties of the Petersburg Assembly 
of Artists have long been renowned for the beauty of their appointments." 
Fathers and Sons: Dostoevsky had been thinking of a novel about fathers 
and children since the early 1 87os. His Raw Youth realized at least pan 
of his plan; relations between father and sons are also central to The 
Brothers Karamazuv. 
Nekrasov: See notes to 1873·4• 1873·5• and December 1877, 2.1-2.4. 
Dostoevsky published his Raw Youth in Nekrasov's OZ in 1875; his 
thre previous novels had appeared in Katkov's RV. 
Perova, Avdotia Ivanovna, was murdered by her common-law husband on 
January 14, 1876. 

Notes to Pages 303-I 4 
77I 
"all the impressions of existence . . .  ": A paraphrase of lines from Pushkin's 
poem "Demon" [The demon] (1823). 
January I876. 1 .3: The Christmas Party at the Artists' 
Club. Children Who Think and Children Who Are 
Helped Along. A "Gluttonous Boy." "Oui" Girls. 
Jostling Raw Youths. A Moscow Captain in a Hurry 
"gluttonous boy": Pushkin, Eugene Onegin (1825-33), "The Travels of 
Onegin." 
Noblemen's Club: PG of January 3, 1876, carried an item describing a 
fistfight between two merchants in the Noblemen's Club and a distur­
bance caused by a drunken army officer at a ball. 
Skvoznik-Dmukhanovskys: Characters from Gogol's The Inspector-General. 
Skvoznik-Dmukhanovsky is mayor of the town, Derzhirnorda is a po­
liceman; both are ponrayed as crude Russian types. 
high-society balls: In act 3 of Gogol's Dead Souls, Khlestakov boasts that 
he has attended a society ball in Petersburg where a watermelon costing 
700 rubles was served. 
Hypocrisy: A maxim from Fraṋois de Ia Rochefoucauld, Ri/lexions ou 
sentences er maximes morales (1665): "L'hypocrisie est un hommage que 
le vice rend a Ia venu." 
January I876, 1 .4: The Golden Age in Your Pocket 
Piron, Alexis (1689-1773). French poet, renowned for his epigrams and 
witty ripostes. 
January I 876, 2. I: The Boy with His Hand Out 
" . . .  and pitilessly": A paraphrase of lines from N. A. Nekrasov's poem 
"Detstvo" [Childhood] (1844), one ponion of which describes a peasant 
boy being forced to drink vodka by his elders. 
January I876, 2.2: The Boy at Christ's Christmas Party 
As noted by G. M. Fridlender ("Sviatochnyi rasskaz Dostoevskogo i bal­
lada Riukkena" [Dostoevsky's Christmas Story and F. Rilcken's Ballad], 
in Mezhdunarodnye sviazi russkoi lirerarury [Russian literature's interna­
tional links] [Moscow-Leningrad: AN SSSR, 1963], pp. 370-90), Dos­
toevsky borrowed the basis for this story from the ballad of the German 
poet Friedrich Rilcken (1788-1866), "Des fremden Kindes heiliger 
Christs" (1816). 
famine: A series of poor harvests in Samara Province between 1871 and 
1873 led to a disastrous famine. 
All the more: i.e., as Dostoevsky promised in his "Announcement," above. 

772 
Notes to Pages 314-27 
January 1876, 2.3: A Colony of Young Offenders. Dark 
Individuals. The Transfonnation of Blemished Souls into 
Immaculate Ones. Measures Acknowledged as Most 
Expedient Thereto. Little and Bold Friends 
of Mankind. 
Powder Works: Dostoevsky, accompanied by the lawyer and 'Yriter 
A. F. Koni, visited the colony on December 27, 1875. 
P. A. R--sky: Rovinsky, Pavel Apollonovich (183I-I916), ethnographer, 
traveler, and journalist. His accounts of his travels in Mongolia and 
Serbia appeared in VE in the early I 87os. 
The "Lithuanian Castle," located at the comer of the Moika and Nikolsky 
canals in St. Petersburg, housed a prison that held both adults and (until 
1 875) juveniles. 
all our schools: The educational reforms of 1 864 virtually abolished cor­
poral punishment in schools. 
Sevaswpol Tales: L. N. Tolstoy, "Sevastopol v dekabre 1 854"; "Sevastopol 
v mae 1855"; "Sevastopol v avguste 1855" [Sevastopol in December 
1 854; Sevastopol in May 1 855; Sevastopol in August 1855) (1855-56); 
lkchera na khuwre bliz Dikanki [Evenings on a farm near Dikanka) 
(1831), Nikolai Gogol's first collection of stories; M. Iu. Lermontov, 
Pesnia pro tsaria Ivana Vasil' evicha, molodogo aprichnika i udalogo kuptsa 
Kalashnikova [The tale of Kalashnikov) (1838). Aleksei Vasilevich Kol­
stov (1808-42), Russian poet who wrote verse in a folk style. 
the duck: Dostoevsky refers to the visual method of education favored by 
some "progressive" teachers. The pupils were asked, for example, why 
a duck had feathers and were gradually led to deduce the reason. 
"he who labors": A paraphrase of Marthew IO: Io: "For the workman is 
worthy of his meat . . . .  " 
Potugin, a character from Turgenev's novel Dym [Smoke] (1867). In chapter 
14, he argues forcefully that Russia has made no real contribution to 
world civilization and expresses views that are strongly Westernizing. 
January 1876, 3. 1 :  The Russian Society for the Protection 
of Animals. The Government Courier. Demon-Vodka. 
The Itch for Debauch and Vorobev. From the End or 
from the Beginning? 
The Russian Society for the Protection of Animals was founded on October 
4, 1 865, in St. Petersburg; branches were later established in other 
centers. Its president through the first decade of its existence was Prince 
A. A. Suvorov-Ryminsky (1804-82). In 1 871 the society's efforts helped 
pass a law levying a fine of up to ten rubles for cruel treatment of 
domestic animals. 
Pushkin had died: Dostoevsky errs here: Pushkin died on January 29, 
1 837· 

Notes to Pages 329-33 
773 
flogging: After 1861, specified civil and criminal offenses committed by 
peasants had been tried in rural district (volostnm) courts, whose mem­
bers were chosen from among the peasants themselves. Flogging was 
frequently chosen as a punishment in such courts. 
railway disaster: On December 24, 1875, a train carrying army recruits 
on the line between Elisavetgrad (now Kirovgrad) and Odessa derailed, 
killing sixty-six and injuring fifty-four. The subsequent inquiry revealed 
widespread shortcomings in the administration of the railway line. 
In July of 1873, A. S. Suvorin (see note to January 1876, 1 . 1), writing 
in SV, no. 199, reported that Golubev, manager of the Orel-Vitebsk 
railway, had expelled the passengers from a first -class compartment that 
he wanted for his own use. Golubev denied this accusation and evenrually 
sued Suvorin for slander. The case was not heard until September 1874. 
penknife: The incident, which took place on January 5, 1876, was widely 
reported in the press. 
January 1876, 3.2: Spiritualism. Something about Devils. 
The Extraordinary Cleverness of Devils, If Only These 
Are Devils 
The Decembrists were the group of young men, mostly army officers, who 
attempted a coup on December 14, 1825. Five were executed, many 
others exiled to Siberia for long terms. 
Annenkov, Ivan Aleksandrovich (1802-78), Russian army officer, Decem­
brist, and memoirist. Les Mimoires d'un maitre d'armes (1840), by Al­
exandre Dumas-pere, was based very loosely on the experiences of a 
French fencing master, Grisier, who had given fencing lessons to An­
nenkov in the 1820s. 
Muravev-Apostol, Matvei lvanovich ( 1793- 1886), brother of S. I. Muravev­
Apostol, one of the five Decembrists who were executed. Petr Niko­
laevich Svisrunov (1803-89). Mikhail Aleksandrovich Nazimov (1800-
88), exiled 1825-56. 
devils and spirirualism: Spirirualism was frequently discussed in the Rus­
sian press in the 1 870s. Seances, with table-rurning and attempts to 
communicate with spirits, were not an uncommon form of entertainment 
in some social circles; the emperor Alexander II himself had seances 
conducted in the Winter Palace. Among the leading proponents of spir­
irualism were A. N. Aksakov (1832-1903) and N. P. Vagner (1829-
1907). (For Vagner, see also notes to December 1 876, 2.2). The noted 
chemist D. I. Mendeleev was instrumental in organizing a Scholarly 
Commission, in which he participated, to srudy spirirualism. The com­
mission attended a number of seances and exposed fraudulent practices 
by several mediums. 
Eddy, Horatio, and Eddy, William, brothers who owned a small farm in 
the township of Chittenden, Vermont. Various psychic phenomena oc­
curring at their homestead aroused considerable interest in the 1 870s. 
Dostoevsky combines their name with Harriet Beecher Stowe's Uncle 

774 
Notes to Pages 333-39 
Tom's Cabin, a novel widely known in Russia. See Sir Arthur Conan 
Doyle, Th2 History of Spiritualism (London: Cassell, 1926), 1 :  259ff. 
Gogo!: G, no. 6, January 6, 1876, reponed that a respected Moscow 
intellectual (whom the newspaper did not identify) had become a medium 
and had claimed that Gogo! had dictated to him ponions of volume 2 
of Dead Souls from the manuscript Gogo! had burned. A number of 
people in Moscow had seen ponions of the manuscript, and some of 
them agreed that its style did indeed resemble Gogol's. 
"Who can be likened . . .  ?": Dostoevsky here combines two verses from 
the Book of Revelations, chapter 13, verse 4: " . . .  Who is like unto this 
beast?" and chapter 13, verse 13: " . . .  and he doeth great wonders, so 
that he maketh fire to come down from heaven on the earth in the sight 
of man." The same verses are quoted by his Grand Inquisitor in Th2 
Brothers Karamazuv, bk. 2, pt. 5, chap. 5· 
the pope himself: Dostoevsky has in mind Bismarck's conflict with the 
Catholic church during the 1 87os, which was panly prompted by the 
declaration of papal infallibility of 1870 (see also notes to March 1 876, 
1 . 5). His Kulturkampfaimed at limiting the power of the Catholic church 
and making it subservient to the state. The Jesuits were expelled from 
Gennany, and a number of priests and bishops were imprisoned. In his 
encyclical of February 5 (n.s.), 1875, Pope Pius IX excommunicated 
Gennan Catholics who opposed the notion of papal infallibility and 
accepted teaching positions from the state. 
Crokes and Olcott: Crokes, William (1832-1919), noted English chemist. 
He became interested in making a scientific study of spiritualism and, 
after seances with a medium, concluded that a cenain "psychic force" 
actually did exist. Henry Steel Olcott (1832-1907), American lawyer 
and journalist, cofounder (with Mme. Blavatsky) of the Theosophical 
Society. In 1874 he was sent by the New York Daily Graphic to write 
a series of anicles about the psychic powers of the brothers Eddy. 
Ivan Filippovich: Dostoevsky here apparently combines the names of two 
figures from the Flagellant sect, Ivan Timofeevich Suslov and Danila 
Fillipovich. The name may also reflect the Moscow "prophet" Ivan 
Iakovlevich Koreisha (178o-t86t), whom Dostoevsky ponrays as Semen 
Iakovlevich in his novel The Devils. 
The Tuileries Palace was burned on orders of the Paris Commune during 
fighting in the Paris revolution of 1871. 
Polonsky, Iakov Petrovich (1819-98), Russian poet. His poem "Starye i 
novye dukhi" [Old spirits and new] appeared in December 1875 and 
contrasted the "new spirits" that caused tables to turn with the old ones 
that had inspired humanity for centuries. 
January 1876, 3.3: A Word Apropos of My Biography 
Mr. V. Z.: The author of the articles on Dostoevsky and his brother, 
Mikhail, was Vladimir Rafailovich Zotov (1821-78), writer, journalist, 

Notes to Pages 339-47 
775 
and historian of literature. Zotov's anicle is often very critical of Dos­
toevsky's writings. 
I 822: Dostoevsky himself errs here. He was born on October 30, I 82 I .  
February 1 876, 1 . 1 :  On the Fact That We Are All Good 
People. How Russian Society Resembles 
Marshal MacMahon 
I don't hate children: PG, no. 24, February 4, I 876, commented that 
Dostoevsky's remarks about suicides among young people (see January 
I 876, I .  I) revealed his lack of understanding of the younger generation 
and that his description of the Christmas pany in the Artists' Club 
(January I 876, 1 .3) abused young and old alike. The same issue of PG 
reprinted "The Boy at Christ's Christmas Pany" (January I 876, 2.2), 
however. Other press reactions to the January Diary were generally 
positive. 
Pechorin is the cynical, manipulative hero of Mikhail Lermontov's A Hero 
of Our Time [Geroi nashego vremeni], I 840-41 .  In a climactic duel scene 
in the novel, he shoots Grushnitsky, a rival for a woman. 
Silvio, hero of Alexander Pushkin's shon story "The Shot" [Vystrel], 
I83I. 
MacMahon, Marie Edme Patrice Maurice de, Duke of Magenta (I8o8-
93), French marshal and president of the French republic, I873-79. 
"J'y suis et j'y reste!": "I am here and here I will remain." Phrase uttered 
by Marshal (then General) MacMahon when his troops captured the 
Malakoff redoubt in Sevastopol during the Crimean War. The seizure 
of this strongpoint, on September 8, I855 (n.s.), marked the fall of the 
city and the effective end of the war. 
February 1876, 1 .2: On Love of the People. An Essential 
Contract with the People 
Slavic Committees were founded in St. Petersburg in I 856 and in Moscow 
in I 858 with the aim of promoting education, culture, and religion in 
non-Russian Slavic countries. The committees subsequently took on a 
more political and panslavist role and helped to rally Russian support 
for the Serbs in their uprising against Turkish rule. K. S. Aksakov 
(I8I7-6o), writer, memoirist, and one of the founders of the Slavophile 
school; he was an active member of the Moscow Slavic Committee during 
the first years of its existence. Fraternal Aid [Bratskaia pomoch' pos­
tradavshim semeistvam Bosnii i Gensogoviny], an anthology published 
to raise funds to aid families displaced by the Slavic uprising against 
the Turks in Bosnia and Herzegovina, was put out by the St. Petersburg 
section of the committee in I 876. Aksakov's anicle, "0 sovremennom 
cheloveke" [On contemporary man), argued that successful communal 
living demanded a high degree of education or development (obraziJ'Vanie] 

Notes to Pages 348-59 
and that the Russian peasants had achieved this through years of par­
ticipation in their peasant commune, the mir. -
Sergei of Radonezh, Saint (c. 1 32.1-92.), founder of the Trinity Monastery 
(located near present-day Zagorsk). St. Sergei was also noted for his 
efforts in consolidating the power of the Duchy of Moscow and for 
promoting the unity of Russian duchies before the Tatar threat. Saint 
Theodosius of Pechersk (d. 1074), founder of the Kiev Crypt Monastery. 
Saint Tikhon of Zadonsk ( 172.4-83), Bishop of Voronezh and Elets, and 
one of the prototypes for Zosima in The Brothers Karamazov. 
Belkin: Pushkin's collection of five short stories, Puvesti Belkioo [The tales 
of Belkin) (183 1) is narated by Ivan Petrovich Belkin, an artless, good­
natured character who had been held up by the critic Apollon Grigorev 
as a typically humble Russian type. 
Oblomuv ( 1859), novel by Ivan Goncharov. A Nest of Gentlefolk [Dvorian­
skoe gnezdo) (1859), novel by Ivan Turgenev. 
February 1 876, 1 .3: The Peasant Marey 
I'll tell you a story: According to the memoirs of Dostoevsky's younger 
brother, Andrei, Marey was an actual personage. 
The Pole M--cki: The Polish revolutionary Aleksandr Mirecki was an 
exile in Omsk while Dostoevsky was serving his term of hard labor 
there. The conversation he describes probably took place in April 1 85 1 .  
He also figures in Dostoevsky's Notes from the House of the Dead. 
Gazin likewise appears in Notes from the House of the Dead. 
February 1 876, 2. 1 :  Apropos of the Kroneberg Case 
Kroneberg case: Stanislav Leonidovich Kronenberg (the name appeared 
in newspaper accounts as Kroneberg, the form Dostoevsky uses) was 
tried on January 2.3 and 2.4, 1 876, for physically abusing his daughter, 
Maria. 
V. D. Spasovich: See notes to 1 873. 1 1 .  He was appointed by the court 
to defend Kronenberg. Spasovich was a well-known liberal who took 
part in a number of important trials; he is also one of the prototypes 
for the lawyer Fetiukovich in The Brothers Karamazov. 
February 1876, 2.2: Something on Lawyers in General. 
My Naive and Hasty Assumptions. Something on 
Talented People in General and in Particular 
Minister of the Imperial Court: In June 1 873, Dostoevsky, as editor of 
Gr, was brought to trial for having published an article that included 
remarks made by the emperor, Alexander II, but that had not been 
cleared by the palace censor. Dostoevsky's lawyer, V. P. Gaevsky, argued 
that, by law, pennission from the Minister of the Imperial Court was 
required only for quotations that contained expressions of the emperor's 
will. 

Notes to Pages 361-96 
777 
Somewhere in Gogol: In chapter 10 of Dead Souls, Nozdrev, questioned 
by the townspeople about Chichikov, tells them spectacular lies, which 
even they have difficulty believing. 
Thackeray: In Pendennis (1850), chapter 34, the narrator says about the 
writer Mr. Wagg: "He liked to make his entree into a drawing-room 
with a laugh, and, when he went away at night, to leave a joke exploding 
behind him." 
"one spares . . .  ": For the sake of a winy word one spares not even one's 
father." Russian proverb. 
" . . .  beast that roars . . .  ": Aleksandr Pushkin, "Ekho" [Echo] (1831). 
Lamartine, Alphonse Marie Louis de (1790-1869), French poet, states­
man, and man of leners. During the February revolution of 1848 he 
was chosen as one of the five members of the executive comminee. 
Although his political career was brief and without lasting influence, his 
eloquent speeches often pacified Parisians. His Harmonies poitiques et 
religieuses appeared in 18 30, his Histoire des Girondistes in 184 7. 
February 1876, 2. 5: The Pillars of Hercules 
"for they bind . . .  ": Manhew 23:4. 
February 1876, 2.6: The Family and Our Sacred Ideals. A 
Concluding Note about a Certain Modern School 
legal profession: The Russian legal profession, in the same sense that it 
existed in Europe, only came into being with the legal reform of 1 864. 
March 1876, 1 . 1 :  How True Is the Notion That "The 
Ideals May Be Base so Long as the Reality Is Good"? 
Gamma: Pseudonym of G. K. Gradovsky. His column was entitled "The 
Leaflet" [Listok]. 
"they may take the odd bribe . . .  ": A quotation from I. A. Krylov's fable 
"Muzykanty" [The Musicians] (1808). 
March 1876, 1 .2: A Hundred-Year-Old Woman 
a lady told me: The lady was Dostoevsky's wife, Anna, as noted in 
Grossman, Seminarii po Dostoel!skomu, p. 64. 
One of the buildings on Nikolaevsky Street (now Marat Street) housed 
the facility where DP was printed. 
· 
March 1876, 1 .3: Dissociation 
"things I have seen . . .  ": Again, as promised in his "Announcement," 
which precedes January 1 876. 
Dobroliubov, Nikolai Aleksandrovich (1836-61), literary critic and, during 
his brief life, one of the leading figures among the radicals of the 186os. 
a certain manuscript: The manuscript was the work of Nikolai Pavlovich 

Notes to Pages 40<>-408 
Peterson (1844-1919), a one-time revolutionary who became a disciple 
of the Rusian philosopher Nikolai Fedorov. Peterson introduced Fe­
dorov's ideas to Dostoevsky (and to Tolstoy). He had spent six months 
in prison fur his revolutionary activities. 
Man:h 1876, 1.4: Musings about Europe 
everyone . . .  is talking about peace now: Many Russian newspapers saw 
the decline in tension betwen Great Britain and Rusia (relations had 
grown strained due to British fears of Russian incursion into India), the 
improvement in relations between France and Germany, and the estab­
lishment of a conservative republic in France as symptoms of new sta­
bility in Europe. In January 1876, Austria, Great Britain, Germany, 
France, Italy, and Rusia jointly urged Turkey to institute reforms to 
ease the lot of Christians in Herzegovinia and Bosnia (the "Andrassy 
Note": se notes to Apri1 1 876, 2. 1); Turkey agred, provided the rebels 
put down their arms. 
five-billion contribution: Under the terms of the Treaty of Frankfun, which 
ended the Franco-Prusian War (March 1, 1871), France was compelled 
to pay Germany an indemnity of five billion francs. 
1be "senior line" (the Bourbons) were deposed by the Revolution of 1830. 
lbeir hopes to a return to power were partialy based on suppon from 
the Catholic church. 
The "junior line" (the Orleans Dynasty) held power in France from 1830 
to 1 848. 
Man:h 1876, 1. 5: An Expired Force and the Forces of the 
Future 
Pope Pius IX was eighty-thre years old a1 the time of writing; he died 
in 1 878. 
this enormous decision: Dostoevsky refers to the dogma of papal infali­
bility, accepted by the Vatican Council of July 18, 1870. 
the gates of Rome: Italian trops entered Rome in September 1870; the 
city and the Papal States subsequently became a pan of Italy. Pius IX 
refused to accept the situation and withdrew into the Vatican. 
Julian (Flavius Claudius Julianus) (c. 331-63), caled Julian the Apostate, 
emperor of Rome, A.D. 361-63. He attempted to restore paganism as 
the official religion. 
in a novel: In pan 2, chapter 8 ("Ivan Tsarevich") of 1M Devils (1871), 
Dostoevsky's archconspirator Peter Verkhovensky says: "Do you know, 
I have ben thinking of delivering up the world to the Pope. Let him 
come funh, barefoot, and show himself to the mob, saying: 'Se what 
they have brought me to!' and they wil al rush to follow him, even the 
army. 1be Pope on top, with us al around him, and beneath us­
Shigalyov's system. Al we ned is fur the /nzmuionale to come to an 
agrement with the Pope; and so it wil." 
For Bismarck and Catholicism, se notes to January 1 876, 3.2. 

Notes to Pages 41o-13 
779 
March 1876, 2. 1 :  Don Carlos and Sir Watkin. More Signs 
of "The Beginning of the End" 
Carlos, Don (Carlos Maria de los Dolores) (I848-I909), Prince of Bourbon, 
claimant, as Don Carlos VII, to the Spanish throne. After the defeat 
that ended the Second Carlist War, he fled to France. The French 
republican government refused to give him refuge, and, on March 4, 
I 876, he was received in England. 
Kupemik, Lev Abrarnovich (J845-I905), lawyer and journalist. On Feb­
ruary 5, I 876, he created an incident by threatening the manager of a 
coaching station and then firing several shots at a coachman to urge him 
to drive faster. 
Charnbord, Henri Charles Ferdinand Marie Dieudonne, Comte de (I82o-
83), claimant, as Henry V, to the French throne. One of his conditions 
for accepting the throne was the abandonment of the republican tricolor 
and the rerum of the white banner of the Bourbons as flag of France. 
Heinrich Heine, in chapter I 6 of his Reisebilder, describes this reaction to 
the passage. Near the end of Don Quixote (pt. 2, chap. 64), Don Quixote 
encounters the Knight of the White Moon (who in fact is the bachelor 
Sanson Carrasco); Carrasco defeats Quixote in a duel and forces him to 
rerum to his [Quixote's) native village for a year. Heine (and Dostoevsky) 
apparently confuses this episode with an earlier one (pt. I ,  chap. 46), 
in which the Don is bound while asleep and imprisoned in a cage after 
a brawl over the "helmet of Marnbrino," a brass basin the Don had 
taken from an itinerant barber. 
The Carlists' siege of Bilbao was broken by the republicans in May I874, 
and they were forced to retreat. However, on June 27 the general com­
manding the republican forces, Manuel de Ia Concha, was killed in battle; 
the demoralized republican army was subsequently pushed back toward 
Madrid by the Carlists who, however, missed their opporrunity to take 
the city. The republicans rallied, and on December 30, I 875, Carlos's 
cousin, Alphonso XII, was proclaimed king. 
Watkin, Sir Edward William (I8I9-I90I), British statesman and railway 
manager. 
"guest's" rude reception: Sir Edward's letter appeared in the London Times 
of March 7, I 876. Dostoevsky's translated text is incomplete and differs 
somewhat from the original English text that appeared in the Times; it 
is included, as it provides the basis for Dostoevsky's remarks. The 
complete portion of the letter reads as follows: "At the moment we 
touched the platform some gentlemen cheered, and Don Carlos raised 
his cap, while a flag, belonging to the Independent Order of Odd fellows, 
flapped round in the wind, showing a device of Charity protecting chil­
dren, with the motto-"Remember the widows and orphans! "  The effect 
was electrical, and certainly the crowd groaned; but it was rather a groan 
of pain than one of anger-a groan which did credit to the human 
emotions of the people, and did not discredit their manners. As Don 
Carlos had, I found, suffered from sea-sickness, I offered him an invalid 

Notes to Pages 414-20 
carriage in place of the saloon in which he was first seated, which he 
accepted, and during the moment of transfer I sent across the rails to 
beg that no further manifestation should be made, and I am thankful 
to say that from that moment no sound which could be fairly interpreted 
as insulting was uttered, though as the train rapidly left the station, 
some marks of displeasure witnessed the regret of all present that the 
blinds of the carriage had been, as I thought needlessly, drawn down. 
While regretting that anything should have occurred to give, even to the 
most ungenerous, an excuse for complaint, I feel bound to say that no 
other people in the world, assembled for a joyful day and suddenly 
confronted by the chief actor in a bloody patricidal war, would have 
shown so much courtesy and forebearance as was exhibited by the vast 
majority on Sarurday at Folkestone." Sir Edward was writing in reply 
to a Times report of March 6 indicating that Don Carlos had been 
"insulted by an unmannerly crowd" when he arrived at Folkestone. 
Sebastiani, Horace Fran̿;ois Bastien, Count (1771- 185 1), French marshal 
and diplomat, Minister of Foreign Affairs of France, 1 83o-32. 
Dobell, Sydney Thompson (1824-74), English poet and critic. The passage 
quoted appears in his book, Tlwughts on Art, Philosophy and Religion: 
Selected from the Unpublished Papers of Sydney Dobell (London: Smith, 
Elder & Co., 1876), pp. 1 54-55. The italics are Dostoevsky's. 
"There is no God . . .  ": Dostoevsky probably has in mind Voltaire's famous 
saying: "If God did not exist, He would have to be invented." 
" . . .  amid the waves": Saltykov-Shchedrin, "Diia sleduiushchikh nomerov 
'Svistka' . . .  " 
[For 
subsequent 
issues 
of 
"The 
Whistle . . .  "], 
Svistok [The Whistle], no. 9, 1 863. This same piece also contains a 
sarcastic reference to the incident between Shchapov and Mikhail Dos­
toevsky (see April 1876, 2.4). 
one observer: The observer, as indicated in Dostoevsky's notebooks, was 
K. P. Pobedonostsev. 
"love and sorrow": The passage quoted can be found in A Raw Youth, 
pt. 3, chap. 7, sec. ii. 
March 1876, 2.2: Lord Radstock 
Radstock, Baron Granville Augusrus William Waldegrave (183 1 - 1 913), 
English preacher and evangelist. Radstock visited Russia several times 
between 1874 and 1 876. His evangelistic efforts had considerable success 
among the upper levels of St. Petersburg society. A group called the 
Pashkovists, after one of the group's leaders, V. A. Pashkov, continued 
to propagate Radstock 's evangelical Christianity. 
Tatarinova, Ekaterina Filippovna (1783-1856). In the second decade of 
the nineteenth cenrury she founded a "spirirual union" of members of 
the Flagellant and Castrate sects that met in the Mikhailov ("Engi­
neers"') Castle in Petersburg. Rumors circulated of their ecstatic rites. 
Templars, The Knights Templars, or Poor Knights of Christ and of the 
Temple of Solomon, a medieval military order. The Masons of the En­
lightenment considered the Templars their predecessors. 

Notes to Pages 420-30 
inspiration from on high: A repon in Gr, no. 12, March 21, 1876, described 
prayer meetings among society ladies in which "some began throwing 
themselves down on divan cushions, gasping for breath, seeking there 
the inspiration of Christ's spirit. . . .  " 
March 1876, 2.3: A Word or Two about the Report of the 
Scholarly Commission on Spiritualistic Phenomena 
home of Mr. Aksakov: The repon appeared in G, no. 85, March 25, 
1876. For Aksakov see notes to January 1876, 3.2. 
March 1876, 2. 5: On Yury Samarin 
Samarin, Iurii Fedorovich (1819-76), Slavophile writer and historian who 
played an active role in the planning and implementation of the eman­
cipation of the serfs. 
Vasilchikov, Victor Illarionovich, Prince ( 1820-78), general and minister 
of war, 1858-6o. 
April 1876, 1 .  1 :  The Ideals of a Stagnant, Vegetative Life. 
Kulaks and Bloodsuckers. Superior People Who Drive 
Russia Forward 
Avseenko, Vasilii Grigorevich (1842-1913), writer and critic. Avseenko's 
anicle takes issue with Dostoevsky's assenion (in DP, February 1876, 
1 .2) that Russian writers took their ideals from the peasants: "despite 
Mr. Dostoevsky's opinion, the main task of our literature, panicularly 
in the period from 1830 to 1 86o, was to assimilate West-European ideals, 
common ideals, the ideas of civilization, law, justice, and humaneness­
all the things that were lacking in our Russian life and our Russian 
People" (p. 366). One could not expect salvation from the peasants, as 
Dostoevsky suggests: "We believe, to the contrary, that the Russian 
minority with European education has absorbed all that is vital and 
moral from the stagnant culture of the People; that educated minority 
must now refine these principles in the crucible of its own culture" 
(p. 376). 
Fadeev, Rostislav Andreevich ( 1824-83), general, military publicist. In the 
1870s Fadeev was a leading figure in the "party" of the conservative 
gentry. His book, Russkoe obshchestvo v nastoiashchem i budushchem (Chem 
nam byt'?) [Russian society in the present and in the future (What are 
we to be?)) (St. Petersburg, 1874), argued that the Russian gentry were 
a valuable national resource, created at the cost of the development of 
other social classes, and that the gentry's position should be strengthened 
in order to bring stability to Russian life. 
April 1876, 1.2: Minor Cultural Types. Damaged People 
Pisemsky, Aleksei Feofi.laktovich (1821-81), novelist and dramatist, who 
- frequently wrote on peasant themes. Avseenko's review of Pisemsky's 

Notes to Pages 43o-4o 
dramas (in RV, no. 10, 1 874) complained that Russian drama since 
Gogo) had largely ignored the life of the educated classes. He called for 
less of the "artistic element," by which he meant the vivid depiction of 
distinctive, usually comic types, and for more intellectual content. 
Ostrovsky: See note to 1 873·5· Most of his plays are set in a distinctly 
Russian merchant milieu. 
The Mihailovsky Theater (now the Leningrad Maly Theater of Opera and 
Ballet) was favored by members of Petersburg high society and by foreign 
residents of the city. It presented performances by touring foreign theater 
companies. 
Liubim Tortsov is a character from Ostrovsky's comedy Bednost' ne porok 
[Poverty is no vice] ( 1853). 
Woe frum Wit: Gore ot uma (1824), play by Aleksandr Griboedov. Avseenko 
regards it as the only Russian play having a hero, Chatsky, who expresses 
the concerns of the educated classes. 
P.vseenko's Mlechnyi put' [The Milky Way] appeared in RV from October 
to December 1 875; after a three-month interruption, it continued from 
April to June 1 876. 
Juvenals: A quotation from N. F. Shcherbina's poem "Fiziologiia 'Novogo 
Poeta.' Fel'eton v stikhakh" [The physiology of 'The New Poet': A 
feuilleton in verse] (1853). 
Bolshoi Morskoi Street (now Herzen Street) was in a very fashionable area 
of St. Petersburg. 
"perish separately": Dostoevsky paraphrases his remarks from February 
1 876, 1 .2. 
nothing at all worth preserving: One of the gentlemen is probably N. K. 
Mikhailovsky, writing in OZ, no. 12, 1 875: "In Nous of the Fatherland 
we have shown many times that . . .  European conservatism is utterly 
unthinkable in Russia because our conservatives have nothing to con­
serve . . . .  " 
April 1876, 1 .3: Confusion and Inaccuracy in the Points at 
Issue 
Ivan IV (Ivan the Terrible) ( 1 530-84) was unable to seize a permanent 
Russian outlet on the Baltic during the Livonian War. 
Potugin: See note to January 1 876, 2. 3· 
Family Chronicle: Aksakov, Sergei Timofeevich ( 1791- 1859), writer and 
memoirist. The episode mentioned occurs not in his Family Chronicle 
[Semeinaia khronika] but in his Memoirs [Vospominaniia] ( 1856), in the 
chapter entitled "High School: The First Period" [Gimnaziia. Period 
pervyy]. 
wooden plank: An icon. There were a number of superstitions and taboos 
associated with Friday, the day of Christ's crucifixion. Saints Florus and 
Laurus were much revered by Russian peasants. 

Notes to Pages 442-49 
April 1876, 1 .4: The Beneficent Swiss Who Liberates a 
Russian Peasant 
"count's lackeys": One could acquire the status of a nobleman (and with 
it, at least before 1861, the right to own serfs) by advancing through 
the civil or military hierarchy to a specific rank. During the nineteenth 
century this rank was raised from the eighth to the fourth. 
Turgenev: Ivan Petrovich Lavretsky's biography is related in chapters 8 
through 1 1  of A Nesl of Genllefolk [Dvorianskoe gnezdo] (1859). 
AniOn Goremyka (1847), short novel by D. V. Grigorovich that concerns 
the difficult life of a peasant serf. 
Baltic Provinces: Serfs in the three Baltic Provinces (Estland, Liftand, and 
Kurland) were liberated between 1816 and 1819 but were not given land. 
They rented it from the landowners or worked it for wages. 
Guizot, Fran<;ois Pierre Guillaume (1787-1874), French historian and 
statesman. 
April 1 876, 2. 1 :  Something on Political Questions 
Everyone is talking: The prime political topic of the day was the "Eastern 
Question," the term used to describe the whole range of problems con­
nected with the disintegration of the Turkish empire in the nineteenth 
century. The treaty of Kuchuk Kainardji (1774) contained a clause in 
which Turkey promised to protect the Christian religion within its empire 
and permitted Russia to make representations "in favor ofthe new church 
in Constantinople, and of those who carry on its services." A pan from 
her interest in the Orthodox Slavs of the Balkans, Russia had a long­
standing political interest in the straits that provided her access to the 
Mediterranean. Austria saw Turkish power declining only to be replaced 
by Russian influence; Great Britain, likewise, saw her communications 
with India threatened by the advance of Russia. Both states saw the 
advantage of maintaining the Ottoman Empire. Russia's defeat in the 
Crimean War and the peace terms set out in the Treaty of Paris (1856) 
seemed to resolve the Eastern Question in favor of Austria, Great Britain, 
France, and Turkey: Russia lost territorial gains in Bessarabia; she was 
not permitted to maintain naval forces in the Black Sea, which was made 
neutral. With the collapse of France in 1 870, however, Russia denounced 
the Black Sea clauses of the Treaty of Paris. In July 1875, the Christian 
Slavs of Herzegovina rose up against Turkish rule. On December 30, 
1875, Russia, Germany, and Austro-Hungary, fearful of a wider war in 
the Balkans, agreed on a joint note, which they presented to Turkey. 
This "Andrassy Note" urged Turkey to give equal status before the law 
to the Christian and Muslim subjects and to institute various adminis­
trative reforms in Bosnia-Herzegovina. The revolt in the Balkans con­
tinued to spread, however. Serbia armed and gave command of its forces 
to the Russian general Chemiaev. On May 13 the emperors of Russia, 
Germany, and Austro-Hungary signed the Berlin Memorandum, which 

Notes to Pages 449-63 
proposed the enforcement of a two months' armistice. Great Britain 
refused to support the memorandum. (See also notes to June 1876, 2.3.) 
The "three chancellors," A. M. Gorchakov, Russia's foreign minister, Bis­
marck, and Andrassy of Austria, planned a meeting in Berlin (which 
took place on May I I-13 n.s.) to discuss the Balkan question. 
Rodich, Gavro (181 3-90), baron, viceregent of Dalmatia. Baron Rodich 
had been sent by the European powers to negotiate a truce with the 
Herzegovinian insurgents. Russian newspapers reported that Rodich, in 
his talks with the insurgents in April 1876, had stated that Russia was 
too weak to offer them any aid. The insurgents agreed to lay down their 
arms provided Turkey would institute a number of reforms in Herze­
govina; Turkey refused to agree to a truce, however. Russian newspapers 
subsequently wrote of the increasing possibility of war in the Balkans. 
general crusade against Russia: During the Polish rebellion of 1863, the 
governments of England and France sent diplomatic notes to Russia 
demanding that the Polish question be brought to a European congress 
and insisting that Russia institute reforms in her Polish territories; Russia 
rejected these demands. 
explosion all over Europe: Russia was at war with Turkey in 1828-29. 
Russia's suppression of the Polish uprising of 183o-31 aroused consid­
erable sympathy for the Poles in Europe but brought them no real 
material help. Russia's acquistions in Central Asia (the Khanate of Ko­
kanda was annexed in February 1876) caused some alarm in England, 
as Russian expansion was seen to threaten British interests in India. 
April 1 876, 2.2: A Paradoxicalist 
of the sort that Europe made of us in 1863: See notes to April 1876, 2. 1 .  
April 1876, 2.3: Just a Bit More about Spiritualism 
back in February: On February 13, 1876, Dostoevsky attended a seance 
at the home of A. N. Aksakov, where the English medium, Mrs. Claire, 
demonstrated her capacities. 
Mendeleev's first lecture took place on April 24, 1876. (See also the notes 
to January 1876, 3.2.) 
"crinoline springs": In G, no. 101, April 12, 1876, Vagner (see notes to 
January 1876, 3.2) noted that during the seance his foot touched "some­
thing long and springy" under the table; he described this as a "crinoline 
spring." When he looked under the table he saw "something white, like 
the end of a spring, flashing under the skirt of Mrs. Claire." 
Solianoi Gorodok: The account appeared in NV, no. 56, April 26, 1876. 
Rachinsky, Sergei Aleksandrovich (1833-1902), botanist and educator. In 
an article published in RV (no. s, 1875), he proposed a purely mechanical 
explanation for phenomena observed at seances. 
Mendeleev's second lecture took place on April 25, 1876. For Suvorin, 
see notes to January 1876, r . r . Petr Dmitrievich Boborykin (1836-1921), 

Notes to Pages 464-7I 
Russian novelist. Both Suvorin and Boborykin had wrinen newspaper 
articles on spiritualism. 
April I876, 2.4: On Behalf of One Deceased 
Mikhail Mikhailovich: Dostoevsky's wife, Anna, notes: "I recall how in­
dignant Fedor Mikhailovich was as he read to me the excerpt from New 
Times and how passionately he spoke of his brother and refuted the 
allegations that had been raised against him. Fedor Mikhailovich always 
recalled Mikhail Mikhailovich with the most tender feeling. He loved 
, ,\him more than any other of his blood relatives, perhaps because he had 
\grown up with him and shared his ideas as a youth" (quoted in Grossman, 
''Seminarii po Dosroevskomu, pp. 64-65). The article is an obituary of 
Afanasii Prokof'evich Shchapov (1830-76), historian and journalist, ex­
iled in 1864 for his activities in support of the revolutionary movement. 
The obituary appeared first in D, no. 4, 1876. Dostoevsky's brother, 
Mikhail Mikhailovich, provided the financing for the brothers' journal­
istic activities, acted as business manager, and also contributed articles. 
(See also notes to March 1876, 2. l .) 
"The Runners": Shchapov's article, "Zemstvo i raskol. Beguny" [The 
Zemstvo and the sectarians: The runners) appeared in V, October-No­
vember 1862. 
Time had a brilliant success: V was quite successful; its maximum cir­
culation was over four thousand. 
money in advance: V. S. Nechaeva (Zhurnal M. M. i F. M. Dostoevskikh 
"Vremia " [Moscow: Nauka, 1972], p. 47) notes that Shchapov did in 
fact receive an advance from Mikhail Dostoevsky. 
In 1849: Mikhail Dostoevsky was arrested on May 6, 1849, and released 
on June 25. 
secret society: Fedor Dostoevsky became involved with two of the more 
extreme members of the Petrashevsky Circle, N. A. Speshnev (1821-
82) and S. F. Durov (1816-69). Mikhail disapproved of some of the 
radical proposals discussed in Durov's group, notably a proposal to 
obtain a lithograph and use it to reproduce articles exposing the short­
comings of the government. 
Gagarin, Pavel Pavlovich (1789-1 872), senator; member and factual head 
of the conunission investigating the Petrashevsky case. 
May I 876, 1 .  I: From a Private Letter 
The Kairova case: Vasilii Aleksandrovich Velikanov, manager of a theatrical 
company in Orenburg, had gone bankrupt in the spring of 1875. Leaving 
his wife, an actress in his company, in Orenburg, Velikanov traveled to 
St. Petersburg with his mistress, Anastasia Kairova, who was also an 
actress in his company; they hoped to find work in the theaters of the 
capital. Velikanov's wife arrived in St. Petersburg at the end of June 
and found her husband and his mistress at a suburban summer conage. 
She announced that she intended to remain with her husband, and 

Notes to Pages 4 72-93 
Kairova at first gave way and moved to the city. On the night of July 
7/8, however, Kairova returned to the cottag̮ and inflicted several razor 
cuts, which did not prove fatal, on Mrs. Velikanova's throat. The case 
came to trial on April 2, 1876; Kairova was acquined. Russian news­
papers commented extensively on the case; many of them regarded it 
as a test of the relatively new system of trial by jury. 
May 1 876, 1 .2: A New Regional Voice 
The First Step: Pervyi shag: Pruimsial'nyi literaturnyi sbomik (Kazan', 
1876). The anthology contains fiction, ethnographical and historical srud­
ies, and literary criticism by writers from the Kazan-Volga region. 
" . . .  no fourth Rome": The notion that Moscow was the Third Rome 
stems from the fiftenth century and was particularly fostered by the 
fal of Constantinople in 1453, which marked the end of the "second" 
(Byzantine) Roman empire. The idea that Moscow had inherited the 
political and spirirual authority of Byzantium also strengthened Moscow's 
claim to dominance over its city-state rivals. 
May 1876, 1 .3: The Court and Mrs. Kairova 
Jack of Hearts: The name of a band of Moscow hooligans, many of whom 
were from gentry families. An investigation into crimes commined by 
the band was being conducted in 1876. 
Utin, Evgenii Isakovich (1843-94), liberal lawyer and frequent contributor 
to VE. 
May 1876, 1 . 5: The Defense Attorney and Velikanova 
Arbenin, Byronic hero of Mikhail Lermontov's play, Maskarad [Mas­
querade] (1835/1842). Convinced, wrongly, of his wife Nina's infidelity, 
he abuses her verbally and evenrually poisons her. 
six-year-old stepdaughter: Dostoevsky writes of this case in detail in DP, 
October 1 876, r . l .  
"She loved much . . .  " :  Luke 7:47: "Her sins, which are many, are for· 
given; for she loved much . . . .  " 
May 1876, 2. 1 :  Something about a Certain Building. 
Some Appropriate Thoughts 
Dostoevsky visited the Foundling Home on April 28, 1876; his wife's 
cousin, Mikhail Nikolaevich 
Snitkin, was employed there as a 
pediatrician. 
Betskoi, Ivan Ivanovich (1704-95), educational reformer, who, in the eight­
eenth century, established the first foundling homes in Moscow and St. 
Petersbwg. 
gets into the water and chokes: A sixten-year-old girl, Bogomolova, was 
accused of having murdered her newborn infant on November 1 ,  1875. 

Notes to Pages 493-508 
She was acquitted after a trial in March I876. Dostoevsky parodies 
ponions of her testimony here. 
"Why does the duck have feathers?": See note to January I876, 2.3. 
May 1 876, 2.2: One Inappropriate Thought 
New Times: The letter was published in NV, no. 85 (May 26, I876). 
paid her dues to progress: Midwifery was one of the few professions open 
to women at the time; radical young women in panicular chose it as a 
career. 
May 1 876, 2.3: A Democratic Spirit, for Certain. Women 
Shchapov's wife: Olga Ivanovna Shchapova (nee Zhemchuzhnikova) met 
Shchapov (see note to April I 876, 2.4) when he was gravely il and 
about to be exiled. Against the wishes of her family, she married him 
and shared the hardships of his exile for ten years. 
June 1876, 1 . 1 :  The Death of George Sand 
Sand, George (I804-76), pseudonym of Amandine Lucile Aurore Dude­
vant, French novelist. 
Potugins: See note to January I876, 2.3. 
au poeu allemand: Schiller was made an honorary citizen of the French 
republic on August 26, I 792. 
Zhukovsky, Vasily Andreevich (I873-52), Russian early romantic poet and 
translator. 
June 1 876, 1 .2: A Few Words about George Sand 
all the rest . . .  was strictly suppressed: In the years following the European 
revolutions of I 848 a very strict censorship was imposed upon Russia 
in the hope of keeping out new Western ideas that might threaten the 
social order. 
Metternich-Winneburg, Clemens Wenzel Lothar, Prince (I773-I859), Aus­
trian statesman, diplomatist, and chancellor, I82I-48. He followed a 
largely reactionary policy in order to combat the forces of revolution. 
The verse is from "Sovremennaia pesnia" [Contemporary song] (I836) of 
Denis Davydov (I784- I839), Russian poet and soldier, hero of the War 
of I812: Thiers, Louis Adolf (I797-I877), French statesman and his­
torian; Rabaut Saint-Etienne, Jean-Paul (I743-93), French revolutionary, 
executed in December I793; Mirabeau, Honore Gabriel Riqueti, Comte 
de (I749-9I), French statesman and orator. 
Magnitsky, Mikhail Leontevich (I778- I855), curator of the Kazan edu­
cational district, notorious careerist and reactionary. In I 8 I 9 he rec­
ommended that Kazan University be closed and its building destroyed 
because of the institution's "godlessness." 
Liprandi, Ivan Petrovich (I790-I88o), official in the Ministry of Internal 
Affairs who managed the police observation of the Petrashevsky Circle 
and was active in the investigation of the affair. 

Notes to Pages 508-22 
Senkovsky, Osip Ivanovich (18oo-58), journalist, critic, and humorist. His 
reviews of contemporary writers display cynicism and contempt. 
Bulgarin, Faddei: Se notes to 1873·4· 
Yegor is a Russian form of George. 
Leroux, Pierre (1798-1 871), French philosopher and utopian socialist 
whose notions of Christian socialism had a strong influence on George 
Sand. Alexandre Auguste Ledru-Rollin (18o7-74), French lawyer and 
politician, minister of the interior in the provisional government following 
the 1 848 revolution. Sevemaia pchew [The Northern Bee), no. 109, May 
1 7, 1848, carried an account of orgies involving, among others, George 
Sand and Ledru-Rollin, which supposedly took place at the French 
Ministry of the Interior. Standard biographies of George Sand make no 
mention of these, however. 
middle of the thirties: George Sand's first work to be translated was her 
novel Indiana ( 1832), which appeared in Russian in 1833. 
L'Uscoqw (1838), novel. 
Balzac's significance: Grigorovich notes in his memoin that on one occasion 
Belinsky furiously attacked Balzac as a "petty-bourgeois" writer and 
that the critic reserved particular scorn for Balzac's Euginie Grandet 
(which Dostoevsky had translated into Russian in 1843) (D. V. Grigo­
rovich, Literatumye vospominaniia [Moscow: Goslitizdat, 1961], pp. 87-
88). 
Venetian tales: La Demiere Aldini (1837-38), novel. Dostoevsky translated 
the novel into Russian in 1 844, only to learn that a Russian translation 
already existed. 
Jeanne (1844), novel. 
"La Marquise" (1832), shon tale. 
"no name other than His": paraphrase of Acts 4: 1 2: "Neither is there 
salvation in any other; for there is no other name under heaven given 
among men, whereby we must be saved." 
June 1 876, 2. 1 :  My Paradox 
tusle with Europe: Russian newspapers wrote of the growing possibility 
of war between Turkey and her restive posesions, Serbia and Mon­
tenegro. Serbia in fact declared war on Turkey on June 30 (n.s.). Russian 
involvement in the Balkans, which in turn could lead to conflict with 
the other European powers, was raised as a possibility. (Se also notes 
to April 1876, 2. 1 .) 
"kvasnik" and "zipunnik": The words derive from "kvas," a traditional 
Russian fermented drink, and "zipun," a peasant coat of rough home­
spun material; they imply crude and specifically Russian qualities. 
Grigorev, Apollon Aleksandrovich (1822-64), Russian critic, philosopher, 
and poet, one of Dostoevsky's ideological mentors. His remarks about 
Belinsky appeared in V, DO. 2, 1861 , p. 89. 
June 1876, 2.2: Deduction from My Paradox 
Gagarin, Ivan Sergeevich, Prince (1814-82), Russian diplomat. Gagarin 
convened to Roman Catholicism in 1 842 and entered the Jesuit order 

Notes to Pages 523-24 
the following year; this made him ineligible to return to Russia. He 
spent the remainder of his life mainly in France, where he taught and 
published scholarly works. 
June 1876. 2.3: The Eastern Question 
they will have no success: While conservative newspapers such as NV 
raised the possibility of war, more liberal papers such as G, BV, and 
SV advised prudence and wrote of the necessity of preserving the peace. 
They argued that Serbia should seek a diplomatic solution to the dispute. 
After Serbia's declaration of war on Turkey on June 30, I876 (n.s.), 
some liberal newspapers adopted a more militant policy. 
Batory, Stefan (Istvan Bathory) (I 533-86), king of Poland and prince of 
Transylvania. The episode of Ivan IV's embassy to Stefan Batory is 
related in Karamzin's /storiia gosudarstva Rossiiskogo, vol. 9, chap. 5· 
Milan of Serbia (Milan Obrenovic IV) (I854-I90I), Grand Duke of Serbia, 
I868-82; king of Serbia (as Milan I), I882-89). Nicholas of Montenegro 
(I84I- I92I), Grand Duke of Montenegro; king of Montenegro, I9IO­
I8. Serbia declared war on Turkey on June 30, I876 (n.s.); Montenegro, 
on July 2, (n.s.). 
bashibuouks and Circassians: The Berlin Congress of the three chancellors 
(see note to February I876, 2. I) produced the "Berlin Memorandum," 
which demanded that Turkey cease all military operations against the 
insurgent Slavs for a period of two months and that she, Turkey, institute 
reforms in Bosnia and Herzegovina. France and Italy supponed the 
memorandum; England, however, refused to sign it. The Russian press 
saw this as a hostile act on the part of England. Turkish nationalists 
demanded that Turkey refuse to comply with the conditions of the mem­
orandum. The Turkish Sultan Abd-ul-Aziz was deposed on May 30 
(n.s.); the new Sultan, Murad IV, was easily exploited by Moslem ex­
tremists. Because of the shift of power in Turkey, the European powers 
decided to delay delivery of the Berlin Memorandum. An uprising that 
broke out in Bulgaria in April was put down by Turkish forces (bash­
ibuouks, or irregulars, noted for their cruelty and lack of discipline, 
and Circassians who had emigrated to Turkey after the Russian conquest 
of the Caucasus), who commined a number of atrocities. 
three monarchs: Alexander II had meetings with Wilhelm I of Germany 
and Franz Josef I of Austria in June I876. 
"the sick man": i.e., Turkey. 
England's prime minister: On June 26 (n.s.) Prime Minister Benjamin 
Disraeli, replying to a question in Parliament about Turkish atrocities 
in Bulgaria, noted that "they appear to have been begun by strangers 
entering the country and burning the villages without reference to religion 
or race . . . .  The persons, who are called Bashi-Buouks and Circassians, 
are persons who had settled in the country and had a stake in it" 
(Hansard's ParliaTN!ntary Debates, Third Series [London: Cornelius Bond, 
I876], 230: 425). These remarks were widely reponed in the Russian 
press. 

790 
Notes to Pages 526-31 
June 1876, 2.4: The Utopian Conception of History 
Diary: See February 1876, 1 .2. 
document concocted by Poles: Charles-Louis Lesur (177ȇ1849), French 
writer, publicist, and an official in Napoleon's Foreign Ministry, de­
scribes a secret "document" outlining Russian plans for expansion in 
Europe, which included the expulsion of the Turks from Europe and 
the seizure of Constantinople. The document was his own invention and 
formed part of a campaign of anti-Russian propaganda. See his Des 
progres de la puissance russe depuis san origin jusqu 'au commencement du 
XIX siecle (Paris, 1812). The "testament" was subsequently republished 
a number of times. 
Tsargrad: Here Dostoevsky uses the traditional Russian name (which is 
also akin to the name used in several other Slavic languages) for Con­
stantinople-literally, "the tsar's city." He thereby suggests its signifi­
cance in Russian history and, perhaps, even Russia's claim to it (se 
notes on the notion of Moscow as the Third Rome, May 1876, 1.2). 
Constantinople/Tsargrad was a holy city for medieval Russians and a 
common place of pilgrimage. 
capital of Slavdom: The possibility of a Slavic federation whose capital 
would be Constantinople was raised a number of times in the nineteenth 
century but was set forth in detail by the Russian publicist and ideologist 
of panslavism, N. Ia. Danilevsky (1822-85), in his Rossiia i Evropa 
[Russia and Europe) (St. Petersburg, 1871). The Slavic peoples, Da­
nilevsky argued, should tum away from Europeanism and pursue na­
tional goals, the first of which was to resolve the Eastern Question through 
seizure of Constantinople. War with Europe would ensue, and Russia 
would unite the Slavs under her leadership. The capital of this panslavic 
union would be Constantinople (Tsargrad), which Danilevsky envisaged 
as becoming the common property of al the Slavic peoples, belonging 
to no one of them. Dostoevsky read Danilevsky with great interest, but 
later (see DP, November 1877, 3.1) expressed his disagrement with 
him, arguing that Constantinople must belong to the Russians. 
Ivan III (144ȇ1505), grand duke of Muscovy. His conquests consolidated 
Moscow's dominance over other Russian city-states and established a 
strong centralized power. After his marriage to Sofia Paleologa, niece of 
the last Byzantine emperor, he adopted the Byzantine double-headed 
eagle and many of the trappings of the Byzantine court. The notion of 
Russia as heir to Byzantium (see note to May 1876, 1.2) was strengthened 
during his reign. 
June 1876, 2. 5: About Women Again 
Piedmont: The reference is to its central role in the uniting of Italy. Serbia 
was sometimes called "the Piedmont of the Balkans" because of its 
effons to lead the movement to ovenhrow Turkish rule. 
Chemiaev, Mikhail Grigor'evich (1828-98), lieutenant-general, publisher, 
panslavist. His newspaper, RM, was the first Russian publication to 

Notes to Pages 531-46 
79 1 
support the insurgents in the Balkans. In April 1876 Cherniaev arrived 
in Serbia without official Russian approval; he was warmly welcomed 
in Belgrade and subsequently took command of the main Serbian army. 
Although Emperor Alexander II disapproved strongly of Cherniaev's 
actions, his failure to renounce the general publicly led the Serbs to 
believe that the Russian government secretly supported him. 
Slavic Committee: See note to February 1876, 1.2. 
church of the Serbian community: The service was held on June 28, 1876. 
a young girl: The girl was Sofia Efimovna Lure (1858-189?), identified 
by Anna Dostoevskaia as the daughter of a wealthy banker from Minsk 
(Grossman, Seminarii po Dostoevskomu, p. 65). Dostoevsky publishes a 
portion of a letter from her in DP, March 1877, 3. 1 .  She in fact conceded 
to the wishes of her family and did not go to Serbia. 
July-August 1876, 1 . 1 :  Going Abroad. Something about 
Russians in Railway Carriages 
Ems: Dostoevsky left St. Petersburg on July 5, 1876, to spend the summer 
in Bad-Ems, a fashionable German resort noted for its mineral springs. 
The verse is from K. F. Ryleev's "Peter the Great in Ostrogozhsk" [Petr 
Velikii v Ostrogozhske) (I i12 3). 
"desolation" of the region: MV, no. 174, July 10, 1876. 
July-August 1 876, 1 .2: Something on Petersburg 
Baden-Badenism 
article in the Stock-Exchange News: BV, no. 182, July 4, 1 876, in an article 
by "Bukva" (1. F. Vasilevsky), accused Dostoevsky of political naivete 
for his views on the Eastern Question (DP, June 1876, 2.3, 2.4). 
Ivan III: See note to June 1876, 2.4. Russian historical claims to Byzantium 
developed after the fall of that city to the Turks in 1453 and were 
strengthened by the doctrine of Moscow as the Third Rome (see note 
to May 1876, 1.2). 
July-August 1876, 1.3: On the Pugnacity of the Germans 
Saxon trops: Dostoevsky and his wife lived in Dresden from early August 
1869 to July 5, 1871, during which time the victorious German armies 
returned from France. 
The German Suburb: In the seventeenth century, foreigners (whom the 
Russians referred to as "Germans") were forbidden to live inside the 
walls of Moscow. In 1652 Tsar Alexis set aside an area some three miles 
northeast of the Kremlin, in which foreign residents created their own 
European town. See Robert K. Massie, Peter the Great: His Life and 
World (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1980), pp. 110- 1 1 .  
The Voice: G, no. 200, June 2 1 ,  1876, suggested that this anti-Russian 
campaign was the work of the German government. 

792 
Notes to Pages 547-58 
July-August I876, 1 .4: The Very Laȍt Word of Civilization 
Khlestakov and Skvoznik-Dmukhanovsky are characters from Gogol's play 
171£ Inspector-General; in act 4, Skvoznik-Dmukhanovsky tells Khle­
stakov that a woman who complained to him of being flogged by the 
police was lying: "She flogged herself." 
wipe France: In the spring of 1875 Bismarck hoped to attack France once 
more so as not to allow her to recover from the defeat Germany inflicted 
during the war of 187o-7I . A strident anti-French campaign was carried 
out by the German press. Alexander II visited Berlin in May 1875, and 
is credited by some historians for helping to improve German-French 
relations. 
July-August I 876, 2. I: Idealist-Cynics 
Granovsky, Timofei Nikolaevich (1813-55), Russian historian and social 
thinker. The article, "Vostochnyi vopros s russkoi tochki zreniia 1855 
goda" [The Eastern Question from the Russian point of view of 1855], 
was reprinted several times and was attributed to Granovsky; its author 
in fact was B. N. Chicherin (1828-1904), Russian philosopher and 
historian. Granovsky was the major prototype for Dostoevsky's Stepan 
Trofimovich Verkhovensky in The Devils. 
dispute with the Hungarians: In 1849, Nicholas I sent Russian troops to 
Hungary to help Austria put down the uprising of Hungarians fighting 
for their independence. 
July-August I876, 2.2: Should One Be Ashamed of Being 
an Idealist? 
holy war: One of the immediate causes of the Crimean War was the question 
of Christian rights in the Holy Land, then under Turkish rule, and of 
who was to be entrusted with the keys to the temple of Bethlehem. 
" . . .  idyllic way of life": Dostoevsky here quotes Avseenko's remarks, 
which were discussed in DP, April I 876, 1. 1 .  
Kireev, Nikolai Alekseevich (1841-76). A former soldier, Kireev was an 
active member of St. Petersburg's Slavic Committee. He traveled to the 
Balkans on behalf of the committee to assess the prospects for an uprising 
against the Turks. He took command of a detachment of Bulgarian 
volunteers in Serbia and, conspicuously dressed in a white uniform, led 
them into an attack on a Turkish position. He was killed by Turkish 
fire on July 6 and his body seized and mutilated by the Turks. Kireev 's 
death became a powerful symbol to rally support for the Serbian cause. 
"And though he fell": A verse from K. D. Ryleev's "Volynskii" (1822). 
Areopagus: In Acts 17:22-34, Paul's statement about the raising of the 
dead is met with disbelief by the members of the Court of Areopagus 
in Athens. "However, some men joined him and became believers, 
including Dionysius, a member of the Coun of Areopagus; also a woman 
named Damaris, and others besides" (verse 34). 

Notes to Pages 562-74 
793 
July-August I876, 2.3: The Germans and Labor. 
Inexplicable Tricks. On Wit 
"And if you give a poor man . . .  ": A paraphrase of Matthew 10:41: "And 
whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones a cup of cold 
water only in the name of a disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in 
no wise lose his reward." 
July-August I 876, 3· I :  Russian or French? 
"Wunderfrau": A Munich woman named Hohenester earned this nick­
name for her renown as a healer. 
Lahn: The river on which Bad-Ems is situated. 
Turgenev: The scene occurs in Turgenev's Smoke, chapter 5· 
July-August I876, 3.2: What Language Should a Future 
Person of Consequence Speak? 
novels of peasant life: Dostoevsky refers to D. V. Grigorovich (see note to 
April 1876, 1 .4). Grigorovich was educated in French by his mother and 
grandmother and subsequently studied in a boarding school where 
French was the working language; he learned Russian from family ser­
vants and peasants. Dostoevsky, a fellow student at the Engineering 
School in 1838, provided him with a list of Russian novels, the first he 
had read in that language. 
Arina Rodionovna: Pushkin, like Grigorovich, was educated largely in 
French and made his first acquaintance with Russian from servants. In 
later life, during a period of exile at his family estate, Mikhailovskoe, 
he absorbed the language and folktales of his childhood nurse, Arina 
Rodionovna. 
"three whales": In Russian folk belief, the world is supported on the 
backs of three whales. 
M. Viardot: See note to 1873·9· Viardot's collaborator in the translation 
was Ivan Turgenev. 
Archpriest Avvakum: Avvakum Petrovich (1620?-1682), archpriest and 
central figure in the great schism in the Orthodox Church. His Life 
[Zhitie] (1672-75) is noted for its direct and colorful language, which 
often reflects the spoken idiom of the day. 
classical reform: See notes to 1873. 16. 
teachers who are Czechs: The increased stress on classical languages in 
the reformed education system resulted in a shortage of native-born 
teachers of Latin and Greek; teachers from central Europe were hired 
to fill the gap. 
The letter "yat' ," the thirtieth in the Russian alphabet until a reform of 
orthography in 1917-18, had historically represented a distinct sound; 
subsequently, its pronunciation in the literary language changed to co­
incide with that of the letter "ye" (pronounced as in the English word 

794 
Notes to Pages 577-88 
"yet"), by which it was replaced. Until the reform of orthography, many 
spelling errors resulted from the confusion of ihese two letters. 
July-August 1876, 4. 1 :  What Effects the Cure When 
Taking the Waters: The Water or the Bon Ton? 
Doctor Hirschom's: A. Iu. Girshgom, Ems i tselebnye ego istochniki. Deisrvie 
ix na zdorovyi i bol 'noi organizm, primenenie v razlichnykh bolezniakh, 
pravila upotrebleniia vod, i t.d. [Ems and its healing springs. Their effect 
on the sound and on the unhealthy organism, their applicability to various 
illnesses, procedures for the use of the waters, etc.] (St. Petersburg, 
!874). 
Pechorin: See note to February 1876, 1. 1 .  "Kavkazskii plennik" [Captive 
of the Caucasus] (1822), poem by A. S. Pushkin. 
the verses: Matthew 6:28-30. 
July-August 1876, 4.2: One on Whom Modem Woman 
Has Shown Favor 
For Granovsky, see note to July-August, 2. 1 .  The pamphlet on women 
was by N. N. Strakhov, The Woman Question: John Stuan Mill "On the 
Subjection of Women" [Zhenskii vopros. Razbor sochineniia Dzhona 
Stiuarta Millia "0 poodchinenii zhenshchiny") (St. Petersburg, 1 871). 
Strakhov here argued against equal rights for women. 
The author must be a bachelor: Strakhov was in fact a bachelor. 
Tatiana: heroine of Pushkin's Eugene Onegin; she remains faithful to her 
husband despite her love for Onegin. 
A number of wives of Decembrists sentenced to a lifetime of Siberian 
exile decided to share their husbands' fate, thereby giving up their wealth, 
social position, and right to return to European Russia. (Nekrasov's 
"Russian Women" (see notes to !873·91 concerns two such wives.) 
Kreuznach: Bad Kreuznach, city on the River Nahe, now in Rheinland­
Westphalia; a popular spa. 
July-August 1876, 4.3: Children's Secrets 
"Whoever lacked the wit": A. S. Griboedov, Woe from Wit, act 3, scene 3. 
Sonechka: In his Gospoda Molchaliny [The Messrs. Molchalin) (1874), 
the satirist M. E. Saltykov-Shchedrin provided an ironic continuation 
of the life of Chatsky, hero of Woe from Wit. Here Chatsky marries the 
heroine, Sofia (Sonechka), but because of his poor knowledge of the 
law, he writes a will in which he unintentionally disinherits her. 
Anicles de Paris: Small articles, mainly those connected with the fashion 
industry, that were made in Paris and were valuable exports. They 
helped pay the war reparations imposed by Germany under the Treaty 
of Frankfurt of 1871. 
Dumas, Alexandre (Dumas-fils) (1824-95), French dramatist and novelist. 
His L'Homme-femme. Ripon;e a M. Henri d'ldeville (1872) advises 

Notes to Pages 589-605 
795 
married couples to have only one child, after which the wife should 
simply be a mistress to her husband. 
Gavroche: Urchin from Victor Hugo's Les Misirables. 
In Emile Zola's Le Ventre de Paris (1873), chapter 3, the teacher Charvet 
lives in a "free marriage" with Clemence: "Depuis plus de dix ans, 
Clemence et lui vivaient martialement, sur des bases debattues, selon 
un contrat strictement observe de pan et d 'autre." 
July-August I876, 4.4: The Land and Children 
Clovis (466-5u), king of the Franks and founder of the Frankish 
monarchy. 
Potugins: See note to January 1876, 2.3. 
memoirs of a certain Russian landowner: The book in question was 
Zapiski Ivana Dmitrieviclw /akushkina [Notes of Ivan Dmitrievich Ia­
kushkin] (London, 1862). Iakushkin, who was involved in the Decem­
brist movement, offered his peasants their freedom, but without land, 
in 1 819. He !aught serf children to read and write (not singing, as 
Dostoevsky slates) so as to allow them to be trained in trades. 
July-August I876, 4. 5: An Odd Sununer for Russia 
'Down with Chemiaev': Cherniaev: See note to June 1876, 2.5. After a 
few initial victories in late June, his Serbians suffered several defeats 
at the hands of the Turks and were compelled to retreat. On July 25, 
1876 (August 6 n.s.), however, he was appointed commander-in-chief 
of the Serbian army. Again, after a few initial successes, his armies 
were forced into retreat. Russian newspapers carried reports of Serbian 
hostility toward Cherniaev and of deep division in Belgrade as to 
whether the war should be continued or a peace negotiated with Turkey. 
Some Serbs viewed Cherniaev as a megalomaniac who was ready to 
sacrifice Serbian lives in order to further his ambitions. The Russian 
voluteers also included some adventurers and ne'er-do-wells; their rowdy 
behavior in the cafes of Belgrade also fueled Serbian resentment. 
"Emburdened . . .  ": From F. I. Tiutchev's poem "Eti bednye selen­
'ia . . .  " ["These poor villages . . .  
"] (1855). 
September I 876, 1 .  I: Piccola Bestia 
Dostoevsky and his wife lived in Florence from November 1 868 to August 
1869, during which time this incident occurred (Grossman, Seminarii 
po Dostoevskomu, p. 65). 
Semipalatinsk: After he completed his term of hard labor in 1 854, Dos­
toevsky spent five years serving in the army in Siberia, initially as a 
private soldier at Semipalatinsk. 
Kuzma Prutkov: Pseudonym of A. K. Tolstoy, Vladimir Aleksei, and 
Aleksandr Zhemchuzhnikov, who produced nonsense verses, ridiculous 
aphorisms, plays, and parodies. In the fable "Konduktor i tarantul" a 

Notes to Pages 6o8-I I 
tarantula that has crept into a coach is killed by the conductor because 
it has not paid its fare. 
Beaconsfield, Benjamin Disraeli, Earl of ( I 8o4-8I), British statesman and 
man of letters, prime minister of Great Britain, I 874-80. Disraeli at 
first appeared not to take seriously the reports of Turkish atrocities in 
Bulgaria, expressing skepticism about newspaper accounts of torrure and 
the imprisonment of ten thousand persons: "In fact, I doubt whether 
there is prison accommodation for so many, or that torrure has been 
practised on a great scale among an Oriental people who seldom, I 
believe, reson to torrure, but generally terminate their connection with 
culprits in a more expeditious manner" (George Earle Buckle, The Life 
of Benjamin Disraeli, Earl of Beaconsf΀eld [London: John Muray, I920], 
6:43). The fact that members of the House of Commons took this remark 
as a joke was used by Disraeli's opponents to prove the prime minister's 
cynicism. On July 3I (n.s.) Disraeli dismissed reports of Turkish atroc­
ities in Bulgaria as "coffee-house babble." He later claimed that the 
documents initially available to him had in fact justified his playing 
down the atrocities (Roben Blake, Disraeli [London: Eyre and Spottis­
woode, I'}6], p. 593). NV, September 14, carried a ponion of a dispatch 
from the Vienna correspondent of the London Times which claimed that 
many of the Russian volunteers in Serbia were Slavophile or social­
democratic extremists who, once organized into military units, might 
return home to present a real danger to the Russian stability. 
war . . .  is a dishonorable one: In a speech delivered on September 20 
(n.s.), Disraeli described the conflict in the Balkans as "this outrageous 
and wicked war, for of al the wars that were ever waged there never 
was a war less justifiable than the war made by Servia against the 
Pone . . . .  Not only every principle of international law, not only every 
principle of public morality, but every principle of honour was outraged" 
(The Times, September 2 I ,  I876). 
chef-d'oeuvre: Some Russian newspapers charged that Turkey would not 
have undenaken the massacre of Bulgarian civilians without the cenainty 
of British suppon. 
'magnanimity . . .  never disinterested': Dostoevsky quotes here some phras­
es from the pamphlet he discusses in DP, July-August, 2. 1 .  
Tuileries: Se notes to January I876, 3.2. 
Kirev: Se note to July-August I876, 2.2. Raevsky, Nikolai Nikolaevich 
(I 839-76), Russian colonel, kiled in battle in Serbia on August 20, 
I 876. 
September I876, 1 .2: Words, Words, Words! 
"Administrative autonomy": A cease-fire was in effect in the Balkans for 
the period September 17-24 (n.s), but Turkey refused Serbia's proposal 
to continue the truce. The European powers, anempting to resolve the 
conflict in the Balkans by diplomatic means, proposed a return to the 
siruation that had existed prior to hostilities as well as administrative 

Notes to Pages 613-29 
797 
autonomy for Bulgaria and the areas in which the uprising occurred. 
Some Russian newspapers supponed this move. 
September 1876, 1 .3: Schemes and More Schemes 
"unnatural thing": NV, no. 196, September 14, 1876, proposed such a 
solution. 
Tory party: Gladstone and the British Liberal party, opposing the Con­
servatives' suppon of Turkey, played on the horrors of Turkish atrocities 
and proposed supponing the Slavs in the Balkans. Gladstone's pamphlet, 
"The Bulgarian Horrors and the Question of the East" (September 
1876), helped to rouse anti-Turkish feeling in Britain. 
elsewhere: Dostoevsky commented briefly on anti-Russian feelings among 
the Serbs in DP, July-August 1876, 4-5· 
Ionian islands: In 1864 Britain abandoned her protectorate of the Ionian 
islands and ceded them to Greece, in accordance with the wishes of the 
inhabitants. 
September 1876, 1 .4: Dressing Gowns and Soap 
Turkey . . .  pushed back into Asia: Russian newspapers in 1876 carried 
various repons of proposals, originating mainly from Gladstone and the 
British Liberal party, of expelling the Turks from Europe. 
The siege and capture of Kazan by Ivan IV (Ivan the Terrible) in 1 552 
marked the defeat of the last remnant of the Tatar Horde and the end 
of Tatar (Mongol) power in European Russia. 
Karamzin (see notes to 1873.6) described the taking of Kazan in his History 
of the Russian State, vol. 8, chap. 4-
September 1876, 2. 1 :  Outmoded People 
The European Messenger: The article, by L. A. Polonsky, appeared in VE, 
no. 9, pp. 351-54. 
September 1876, 2.2: Kifomokievism 
Kifomokievism: in chapter 1 1  of Gogol's Dead Souls, his character Kifa 
Mokievich is described as one whose "existence was taken up more with 
cerebration . . . .  " The character has come to symbolize idle speculation 
on utterly trivial matters. 
shariah: the system of Islamic duties-legal, ethical, and religious-that 
governs both private life and criminal law. The tide "caliph" implied 
both temporal and spiritual rule. 
September 1876, 2.3: Continuation of the Preceding 
"questioning feelings": The word used, sysk, suggests not only "question­
ing" but "investigation" and "searching," and was commonly used in 
connection with the struggle of the authorities against the revolutionary 
movement. 

Notes to Pages 63o-36 
a factual event: In the sumer of 1 876 some Russian newspapers carried 
reports of disturbances among the Moslem population of the Caucasus 
and of the presence of Turkish agitators in the Crimea; other Russian 
newspapers discounted these reports. 
Stundists: See notes to 1 873·7· 
krestianstvo: The Russian word for Christianity is khristiansrvo, and for 
peasantry, krest'iansrvo. The two words have a common Greek origin. 
September 1876, 2.4: Fears and Apprehensions 
communiques in 1 863: See notes to April 1876, 2 . 1 .  
North American battleship: In July 1 866, an American diplomatic mission, 
headed by G. V. Fox, arrived in St. Petersburg on board the monitor 
Mianumomo. The purpose of the mission was to congratulate Emperor 
Alexander II on his escape from an assassination attempt in April and 
to express gratitude for Russian support during the civil war. The Amer­
ican visitors traveled widely in Russia and were lavishly entertained. 
Thomas A. Bailey, America Faces Russia: Russian-American Relations 
from Early Times to Our Day (Gloucester, Mass.: Peter Smith, 1964), 
pp. 96-99-
Candiots: In 1866 the Greek population of Crete (then Candia) rose up 
against Turkish rule; a widespread campaign took place in Russia to 
collect money to aid the insurgents (Candiots), who were of the Greek 
Orthodox faith. 
Petersburg and Moscow: The Slavic Committee (see notes to June 1876, 
2.5), in May 1867, organized a congress in Moscow that aroused wide­
spread interest in Russia toward the other Slavic nations. A number of 
leading writers from these nations participated. 
liberation of Italy: In July 1858, Count Cavour (181o-61), prime minister 
of Piedmont, concluded a secret agreement with Napoleon III whereby 
both states would declare war on Austria and expel her from Italy; 
subsequently, a North Italian state would be formed. In exchange for 
her help, France was to receive Savoy and the county of Nice. Napoleon 
was reluctant to see a united Italy, however, and he concluded a separate 
armistice with Austria. 
"Jamais!": In the autumn of 1 867, with Garibaldi's trops at the gates of 
Rome, the French intervened to defend the Holy See. France's foreign 
minister, Eugene Rouher, declared in the Chamber of Deputies on De­
cember 5 (n.s.): "Au nom du gouvernement frano;ais, l'ltalie ne s'em­
parera pas de Rome! Jamais, jamais Ia France ne supportera cette violence 
a son honneur et a Ia catholicite" ["In the name of the French govern­
ment, Italy will not take possession of Rome! Never, never will France 
tolerate this violence to her honor and her catholicity"] . Quoted in Philip 
Guedalla, The Second Empire (London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1 932), 
p. 297-
The Hungarians: The author of the article notes that a number of Hun­
garians joined the forces of Garibaldi to fight for the liberation of Italy, 

Notes to Pages 638-53 
799 
"despite the fact that they were not fellow countrymen of the people 
whom they went off to help" (VE 5 [September 1876] : 352). Hungary 
supponed maintaining the integrity of the Ottoman empire and opposed 
the possibility of independent Slavic states near her borders. 
September I876, 2. 5: Postscript 
Jack of Heans: See notes to May 1876, 1 .3. 
October I 876, 1. I: A Case That Is Not as Simple as It 
Seems 
survived in good health: See May 1 876, 1.5. Dostoevsky discusses this 
case again in December 1877, 1 . 1-1 .6. 
October I876, 1 .2: A Few Remarks about Simplicity and 
Simplification 
Meshchansky Street: According to Dostoevsky's wife, the incident he de­
scribes was an actual one (Grossman, Seminarii po Dostoevslwmu, p. 65). 
The period he refers to, 1862-63, marked a high point in the influence 
of radical and utilitarian doctrines. 
Pushkin: In the 186os, the radical critics V. A. Zaitsev (1842-82) and D. 
I. Pisarev ( 184o-68), basing their thesis on utilitarian principles, argued 
that a pair of boots were of more value to humanity than the entire 
works of Shakespeare or Pushkin. 
October I876, 1 .3: Two Suicides 
one of our writers: The writer is Mikhail Evgrafovich Saltykov-Shchedrin 
(1826-89), then an editor of OZ, which wanted to publish something 
by Dostoevsky. 
Molchalin, a character from Griboedov's play Woe from Wit. (See also the 
notes to April 1 876, 1 .2.) Saltykov-Shchedrin recast Molchalin in his 
satirical cycle The Messrs. Molchalin (1874). (See also notes to July­
August 1876, 4-3-) 
daughter of one very well-known Russian emigre: The girl was Eli2aveta 
Aleksandrovna Henen, daughter of Alexander Henen (see note to 
1873. 1), who committed suicide in Florence at the age of seventeen. 
The suicide note Dostoevsky quotes here is an abbreviated paraphrase 
of the original. The original also does not contain the phrase "Ce n'est 
pas chic!" This, apparently, was a comment made by Konstantin Po­
bedonostsev, who wrote to Dostoevsky about the suicide, and which the 
latter assumed to be pan of Miss Henen's note. 
a suicide in the city: One such repon was carried in NV, no. 215, October 
3, 1876. The girl served as a prototype of the heroine of "The Meek 
One" (DP, November 1876). 

8oo 
Notes to Pages 653-60 
October I 876, I .4: The Sentence 
suicide ouc of boredom: An acquaintance of Dostoevsky's, the writer 
L. Kh. K.hokhriakova (1838-190), stated that Dostoevsky admitted 
that this was not a genuine suicide note but his own creation (L. Simonova 
[L. Kh. Kokhriakova], "Iz vospominanii o Fedore Mikhailoviche Dos­
toevskom" [From my recollections of F. M. Dostoevsky), Tserkuvno­
obshchescvennyi vesmik [The Clerical and Social Messenger], no. 18, 
February 1881). 
October I876, 2. I: A New Phase in the Eastern Question 
defeat of Cherniaev: On October 17, 1876, at Djunis, the Turks inflicted 
a decisive defeat on Cherniaev's army, effectively crushing the Serbian 
and Montenegrin forces. 
Suvorov, Aleksandr Vasil'evich (1729-18oo), Russian field marshal. During 
a campaign against the French revolutionary armies in Italy in 1799, he 
led his army out of French encirclement on a retreat through the passes 
of the Alps. 
words of the tsar: After Cherniaev's defeat, Prince Milan of Serbia appealed 
to Alexander II for assistance. On October 19, Russia presented Turkey 
with an ultimatum, threatening to break off diplomatic relations if Turkey 
did not suspend hostilities against the Serbs for a period of up to two 
months. Turkey quickly yielded, and discussions on how to resolve the 
situation ensued; Russia suggested a conference of the major powers. 
Hungarians: NV, no. 234, October 22, 1876, quoted Hungarian sources 
that claimed Russia was hesitating to take action in the Balkans out of 
fear of Hungary. 
1853 marked the beginning of the Crimean War. 
Bulgaria and the Slavs: The truce arranged in late October was between 
the Turks and the Serbs but did not extend to the Bulgarians and other 
Slavs involved in the conflict. In October, Russian newspapers carried 
accounts of massacres of Bulgarian civilians. 
Srock Exchange News: BV, no. 291, October 21, 1876, carried a strong 
criticism of Cherniaev's activities in Serbia. Coming to Cherniaev's de­
fense, PG (no. 208, October 22, 1876) suggested that readers show their 
disagreement with the views of BV. 
"schools, for example . . .  ": G, no. 277, October 7, 1876, suggested that 
Russia's domestic development, not foreign war, ought to be her prime 
concern; the practice of making donations to a common cause was a 
good one, but funds raised thereby should be devoted to Russian schools, 
roads, and medical services rather than to the Slavs. 
New Times: NV, no. 236, October 24, 1876, carried a strong defense of 
Russian volunteers in Serbia, noting that they were motivated by noble 
feelings of brotherhood, not by personal gain or wish for glory. 
Ilya Muromets: One of the principal heroes of the traditional bylina or 
Russian epic song. 

Notes to Pages 662-78 
801 
October 1876, 2.2: Cherniaev 
The English, as a matter of policy: In later September and early October, 
several Russian newspapers reponed that some Russians in Belgrade 
were undermining Cherniaev's efforts and causing dissension between 
him and the Serbs; NV, no. 215, October 3, 1876, noted that the British 
and Greek consuls in Belgrade were actively working against Russian 
interests. 
The item appeared in MV, no. 270, October 22, 1876. 
October 1876, 2.3: The Best People 
a German name: In 1722 Peter the Great instiruted the "Table of Ranks," 
a hierarchy of founeen categories of civil servants and military officers. 
He thus abolished, in theory at least, the previous tradition of aristocratic 
privilege, since hencefonh all who served were expected to begin at the 
bottom of the hierarchy and advance by their own merit. Even one of 
humble binh could acquire the starus of gentry by attaining a cenain 
rank. 
October 1876, 2.4: On the Same Topic 
Ostrovsky's characters: See notes to 1873·5· 
Ovsiannikov: In 1876, Stepan Tarasovich Ovsiannikov, a wealthy St. Pe­
tersburg flour-mill owner, was convicted of arson and sentenced to exile 
in Siberia. Russian peasants traditionally gave alms to convicts being 
trans paned to prison or exile. 
"this young school . . .  ": Quoted from February 1 876, 2.6. 
Strusberg, B. Henry (1823-84), Gennan railway entrepreneur. Strusberg 
had contracted to build a railway line in Russia. By bribing two of the 
directors of the Moscow Commercial Loan Bank, he obtained a loan of 
seven million rubles, using wonhless papers as security. Strusberg went 
bankrupt and in rurn caused the failure of the Moscow Bank. His trial 
took place in Moscow in October 1876. 
Landau was one of the bank directors whom Strusberg bribed. 
Shumakher, Danila Danilovich, mayor of Moscow, 1874-76. He was a 
member of the Moscow Commercial Loan Bank's advisory board and 
was accused of using infonnation gained through his position to recover 
his own deposits when the bank was about to fail. His sentence, which 
was only proclaimed after this issue of the Diary appeared, was in fact 
one month's imprisonment. (See Istoriia Moskvy [Moscow: AN SSSR, 
1952-59], 4: 500-501 .) 
A father-an old soldier-: G, no. 285, October 1 5, 1876, carried an 
account of this retired soldier. 
November 1876: Author's Foreword 
his last moment of life: Victor Hugo's Last Day of a Condemned Man [Le 
Demiere Jour d'un condamnel is a first-person "confession" written by 

802 
Notes to Pages 682-71 1  
the hero. It ends with his description of the sound of the footsteps of 
those coming to take him to be executed. In his preface to the first 
edition of the story, Hugo also attempted to explain its origins: "There 
are two ways of accounting for the existence of the ensuing work. Either 
there really has been found a roll of papers on which were inscribed, 
exactly as they came, the last thoughts of a condemned prisoner; or else 
there has been an author, a dreamer, occupied in observing nature for 
the advantage of society, who, having been seized with those forcible 
ideas, could not rest until he had given them the tangible form of a 
volume." 
November 1876, 1 . 1 :  Who Was I and Who Was She? 
'"I am a part of that whole . . .  "': A paraphrase of Mephistopheles's 
remark in Goethe's Faust, part 1, scene 2: 
. .  ; Ein Teil von jener Kraft, 
Die stets das Bose will, und stets das Gute Schafft. 
November 1876, 1 .3: The Noblest of Men, but I Don't 
Believe It Myself 
"'The first impressions of existence"': An inaccurate quotation from Push­
kin's poem "The Demon" [Demon] (1823). 
November 1876, 1 .4: Plans and More Plans 
The Pursuit of Happiness (Pogonia za schast'em] (1876), a play by Petr 
Ilych Iurkevich; The Singing Birds [Ptitsy pevchie] (1868), an operetta 
by Jacques Offenbach, more commonly known as La Perichole. 
John Stuart Mill noted: "If we consider the works of women in modern 
times, and compare them with those of men, either in the literary or 
the artistic department, such inferiority as may be observed resolves 
itself essentially into one thing: but that is a most material one: deficiency 
of originality" (The Subjection of Women [Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 
1970], p. 69). 
November 1876, 1 .5: The Meek One Rebels 
the Viazemsky house: A notorious lodging in the slums of St. Petersburg 
whose horrors were thus described in G, no. 298, October 28, 1876: 
"One can say without exaggeration that this house is the breeding ground 
and receptacle of every form of vice of which a human, oppressed by 
poverty and ignorance, is capable." 
November 1876, 2.3: I Understand All Too Well 
Gil Bias: In book 7, chapter 4 of Alain Rene Le Sage's novel, L'Histoire 
de Gil Bias de Santillane (1715-35), the archbishop of Grenada asks Gil 

Notes to Pages 717-31 
Bias for his honest opinion on a sermon the archbishop has delivered; 
when Gil Bias offers some very tactful criticism, the archbishop dismisses 
him. 
November 1876, 2.4: I Was Only Five Minutes Late 
"hero of the Russian epic": The narrator uses here the word bogatyr', the 
exceptionally strong and courageous hero of the traditional Russian epic 
poems, the byliny. 
is it not a corpse?: The image of the dead sun may derive from Revelations 
6: I2: "and lo, there was a great Ͳarthquake, and the sun became black 
as sackcloth of hair, and the moon became as blood." P. V. Bekedin, in 
"Povest' 'Krotkaia' (K istolkovaniiu obraza mertvogo solntsa)" [The tale 
"The Meek One": Toward an interpretation of the image of the dead 
sun], Dosroevskii: maurialy i issledovaniia (Leningrad: Nauka, I987), 7: 
I02-24, suggests some other possible sources, including Shakespeare 
and Goethe. 
December 1 876, 1 . 1 :  More about a Case That Is Not as 
Simple as It Seems 
the woman Kirilova: G, no. 255, September I 5, I876, reponed that on 
August 2, I873, Anna Kirilova, a twenty-seven-year-old St. Petersburg 
woman, had killed her lover, Semen Malevsky, when she found another 
woman in his bedrom. On November 2 she was acquitted; spectators 
in the coun applauded the verdict. 
one very fortunate circumstance: An official in the Ministry of Justice who 
had read Dostoevsky's October Diary urged Dostoevsky to convince 
Kornilova to submit an appeal for clemency and helped him arrange a 
meeting with her. 
Article 693 stipulated that witnesses to a crime, participants in it, jurors, 
and judges could not be sumoned as expen witnesses. Kornilova's 
sentence was quashed because one person was examined both as a witness 
and as an expen. 
looking out to see: Because of a typographical error in the newspaper 
repon of the incident, Dostoevsky mistakenly states that Kornilova 
looked out at the girl after pushing her; in fact, she did not look out 
the window but went directly to the police station. Dostoevsky describes 
the scene correctly in DP, December I877, 1 .4. 
December 1876, 1 .2: A Belated Moral 
Several of my friends: Khokhriakova (see note to October I 876, I .4) states 
that when she suggested that this note itself might prompt someone to 
suicide, Dostoevsky became quite alarmed and was anxious to correct 
any misunderstanding the note may have caused. 
weekly Recreation: The anicle appeared in the humor magazine Razvle­
chenie [Recreation], no. 5I, December 14, I876. 

Notes to Pages 739-52 
December 1876, 1 .4: A Few Words about Young People 
facts set forth in The Moscuw News: On Deeember 6, 1876, a group 
composed mainly of srudents demonstrated in Kazan Square in St. 
Petersburg. This was the first demonstration inspired by the newly 
organized revolutionary group Zernlia i Volia [Land and Freedom]. "On 
6th December the red banner of Zemlya i Volya appeared for a moment 
on the Square of Our Lady of Kazan in St. Petersburg, during the 
workers' and srudents' demonstration, as if to announce the quick pro­
gress they had made during the previous months" (Franco Venturi, RDots 
of Revolution [New York: Grosset and Dunlap, 1966], p. 569). Several 
newspapers, including G, no. 343, December 12, 1876, suggested that 
the demonstration was a product of Western, or even Turkish, intrigues. 
December 1876, 1 . 5: On Suicide and Arrogance 
"No man shall hate his flesh": Quotation from Ephesians 5:29: "For no 
man ever yet hated his own flesh . . . .  
" 
competent member: The lawyer and writer A. F. Koni (1844-1927) pro­
vided Dostoevsky with these suicide notes. 
December 1876, 2. 1 :  A Story from the Lives of Children 
mother and her rwelve-year-old daughter: As Dostoevsky's wife notes (in 
Grossman, Serninarii po Dostoevslwrnu, p. 66), the mother was L. Kh. 
Khokhriakova. (See also notes to October 1876, 1 .4.) 
Gostiny Dvor: A large block of shops in central St. Petersburg. 
The Arcade: See notes to 1873·4· 
December 1876, 2.2: An Explanation Regarding My 
Participation in the Forthcoming Publication of the 
Magazine Light 
Vagner, Nikolai Pe1rovich (1829-1907), Russian zoologist, writer, and pub­
lisher. The announcement of his magazine that appeared in DP listed 
Dostoevsky as one of its contributors. He did not have any links with 
· the magazine, however. (See also note to January 1876, 3.2.) 
December 1876, 2.3: Where Does the Matter Stand at the 
Moment? 
"godless Agarians": In Russian folklore, this was the name given to Arabs 
or Saracens, who were seen as mortal foes of Christendom. The name 
derives from Hagar, whose son, Ishmael, is the biblical ancestor of the 
rwelve nomadic tribes (Genesis 25: 12-18). 
The Treaty of Paris (1856) ended the Crimean War. Its terms guaranteed 
the territorial integrity of Turkey and deprived Russia of her acquisitions 
around the mouth of the Danube and in southern Bessarabia. The Black 
Sea was made neutral, and neither Russia nor Turkey was allowed a 

Notes to Page 752 
sos 
naval presence there. Russian diplomacy subsequently attempted to have 
these harsh terms lifted. In 1871 Russian warships were again allowed 
in the Black Sea. (See also notes to February 1876, 2. 1.) 
European gendarmerie: The Constantinople Conference-held from De­
cember 23, 1876, to January 20, 1877 (n.s.), in an attempt to find a 
peaceful solution to the Eastern Question-discussed, among other pro­
posals, the possible provision of a detachment of Belgian or Italian troops 
to supervise the truce, and the implementation of proposed reforms 
among the Christian population in Turkey's Balkan possessions. 


