
T H E  
D O U B L E 


THE DOUBLE 
A 
POEM O F  ST. 
PETERSBURG 
F. M. DOSTOYEVSKY 
Translated by George Bird 
INDIANA UNIVERSITY PRESS 
BLOOMINGTON & LONDON 

FIFTH PRINTING 1966 
COPYRIGHT @ 1958 BY INDIANA 
UNIVERSITY PRESS 
MANUFACTURED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOG CARD NUMBER: 
58-12204 

INTRODUCTION 
WITH his second novel, The Double, Dostoyevsky made 
one of those brilliant experiments which characterize 
the brash young artist. His first novel, Poor Folk, had won 
him immediate acclaim, and he wanted to follow it with a 
display of sheer genius. But for critics and readers of that 
day, the experiment fizzled out; they found it tedious, thin 
and overlong, and even the author had to admit its faults: 
"I wrote a lot of it too quickly, and in moments of fatigue. 
The first half is better than the second. Alongside many 
brilliant passages are others so disgustingly bad that I can't 
read them mysel£" Some fifteen years later, however, he 
revised and improved the book for a collected edition of 
his work; and three years before his death, he could still 
write that he had never expressed a more serious idea in 
literature: it was the form of the tale which had "failed 
I 
" 
utter y. 
As we know today, The Double contains the first open 
pronouncement of that "serious idea," the divided personal­
ity, which informs the whole of Dostoyevsky's achieve­
ment. Its technique is unresolved, but far from failing, it 
represents a bold advance beyond its sources, in Gogol and 
Hoffmann, toward the early tales of the modern symbolist, 
Franz Kaf ka. As an experiment, moreover, The Double 
almost works: its first half is a clever buildup toward 
psychological collapse; in the second half, which lags so 
badly, there are flashes of fine writing which move the 
story toward its strangely Kaf kan climax. For the modern 
reader, trained on careful symbolism and hyper-refined 
analysis, The Double retains all the freshness of a pioneer 

4 
INTRODUCTION 
effort, all the crude power, the unpretentious vigor, of a 
youthful stride toward psychological fiction. 
Because of its modernity, The Double had baffled early 
readers. They could only compare it with Gogol's light 
satires on the vanities and desires of petty clerks. But 
Dostoyevsky' s clerk, Mr. Golyadkin, is not a mere social 
type, like his models in "The Nose" and "The Diary of a 
Madman." He is instead the thin-skinned victim of social 
and bureaucratic pressures, and at the same time, his own 
executioner. Unable to cope with the anxieties of urban 
life, he responds either with defensive meekness and re­
tirement, or with aggressive tactics which inevitably fail. 
It is significant that the double first appears after the clerk's 
eviction from a lavish party. When Golyadkin tries to 
attend this party, he is turned away at the door by servants. 
He creeps to the back stairs of the flat, however, and in a 
scene foreshadowing Kaf ka, he stands there in a dark corner, 
in the midst of rubbish and litter, gathering courage to en­
ter. Finally he dashes into the midst of the ball and claims 
a dance with Klara Olsufyevna, the belle of the affair. 
Feeling strangely exhausted, he scrapes, stamps and stum­
bles when the dance begins. Klara utters a shriek, the crowd 
runs to her rescue, and Golyadkin is swept away by their 
forceful surge. After further confusion he is thrown out 
of the ball, and on his way home through the snow, he 
meets his double, his desire for aggressive social compe­
tence, released from within by the violent exclusion. 
Here, in embryo, is the new idea which Dostoyevsky 
brought to Russian fiction: the combination of inward 
and outward pressures to produce a split in being which is 
somehow real. It was an idea which went beyond the simple 
good-and-evil equations behind other doubles of the age, 
like Poe's William Wilson or Dickens' Sidney Carton and 
Charles Darnay. In Dostoyevsky's own work, it led directly 
to a host of doubles and divided selves: to Raskolnikov' s 
awareness, in Crime and Punishment, that Svidrigailov rep-

INTRODUCTION 
5 
resents his own perverse desires; to Versilov' s confession, 
in A Raw Youth, that a double stands beside him and 
prompts him to the most senseless actions; and finally, to 
Ivan Karamazov's vision of the devil as an actual presence, 
at the end of Dostoyevsky's career, when he was at last 
able to clarify the implicit premise of his early novel: 
namely, that dreams and hallucinations are real; that an 
unconscious self exists, opposing the conscious self; and 
that man is literally disunified in nature. 
As scholars have long recognized, The Double provides 
a useful key to Dostoyevsky's growth in moral and intel­
lectual power. It also points, in another direction, to his 
lesser-known role as formal innovator. In "The Nose," 
for instance, Gogol had spoofed the double theme in Hoff­
mann by dressing a nose in the costume of a state councillor, 
and sending its owner (a lowly clerk) in frantic search for 
it. He liked to parody Hoffmann, apparently, by placing 
his magical events in urban settings and exploiting their 
comic possibilities. But Dostoyevsky took this transfer 
seriously. He saw that Hoffmann's doubles belon<Ced in the 
urban world which had produced them; that they were 
more at home, as it were, in flats and offices than in romantic 
settings. This alone was an advance over his models in 
aesthetic conception; but the problem of execution, of 
combining realism and fantasy, proved beyond his im­
mediate powers. He seems to have worked here on three 
assumptions: first, that the double is produced by an acute 
state of hallucination in Golyadkin; second, that there is 
also an actual person, a new employee named Golyadkin, 
on whom the clerk projects his hallucination; and third, 
that the first two assumptions, properly handled, might 
create an illusion of the double's actuality, so as to suggest 
the reality of unconscious life. The first five chapters laid 
the groundwork for his realistic premise, the effect of hal­
lucination; but in later chapters, when the effect of fantasy 
was introduced, the two premises began to compete for 

6 
INTRODUCTION 
space and the writing became prolix and repetitious. George 
Bird, the translator of this edition, finds only praise for 
Dostoyevsky's technique, which certainly gains force and 
clarity from his deft translation. He fails to see, however, 
that a new idea calls for new means of expression, and that 
Dostoyevsky had merely improvised to meet this need. 
The form which The Double called for was not hallucina­
tion, but a bold stroke of fantasy conveyed in realistic de­
tail. It was not discovered until the fall of 1912, when the 
Czech genius, Franz Kaf ka, composed his first successful 
stories, "The Judgment" and The Metamorphosis. "The 
Judgment" owes little to Dostoyevsky, beyond the use of 
doubles, the business theme, the exchange of letters with 
an imaginary friend in Petersburg, and the horrendous 
verdict at the end, where a father condemns his son to 
death by drowning. In The Metamorphosis, however, the 
signs of Dostoyevsky' s influence are extensive and detailed. 
One need only compare the opening paragraphs in each 
tale to catch them. As The Double opens, for instance, 
Golyadkin, a minor civil servant, awakens from a long 
night's rest "like a man as yet uncertain whether he is awake 
or still asleep, whether all at present going on about him is 
reality or a continuation of his disordered dreams." When 
he regains his senses, the walls of his little room look at 
him familiarly, and "the foul, murky, grey autumnal day" 
peers in at him through the window rather sourly. Golyad­
kin shuts his eyes again, "as though regretting his recently 
ended slumbers and wishing to recall them for a moment." 
Then he leaps from his bed, looks at himself in a mirror, 
and says: "A fme thing it would be if there was something 
wrong with me today . . . if something untoward had 
happened, and a strange pimple had come up, or something 
equally unpleasant." At the end of the day, five chapters 
later, the pimple docs erupt in the form of a double, who 
plainly figures forth his illness. 
In The Metamorphosis, Kafka telescopes this process, and 

INTRODUCTION 
, 
7 
with a single stroke conveys the reality of unconscious life. 
For when Gregor Samsa, a commercial traveler, awakens 
one morning "from uneasy dreams," he finds himself 
transformed into a giant insect. Like Golyadkin, he feels 
uncertain about reality: "What has happened to me? he 
thought. It was no dream. His room, a regular human bed­
room, only rather too small, lay quiet between the four 
familiar walls." Assured of his surroundings, his eyes turn 
next to the window, and the overcast sky and the rain 
make him melancholy. "What about sleeping a little longer 
and forgetting all this nonsense," he thinks, and tries to 
turn over; but he is unable to move his insect shape. The 
pimple, the unpleasant outgrowth from within, has breached 
the surface of his conscious life. 
Undoubtedly, the insect metaphor came from other 
works by Dostoyevsky, like Notes from the Underground, in 
which another disgruntled clerk has "tried many times to 
become an insect;" or like The Brothers Karamazov, in 
which Dmitri characterizes the whole family as insects, or 
as victims of insects which live within them and govem 
their shameful conduct. As Kaf ka must have seen, the insect 
is the double in a different guise. In imitating the early 
novel, he had simply switched to the more striking meta­
phor and fused it with the opening scene. Of course, the 
imitation extends beyond this point, to the anxieties of 
urban life. Both heroes fear their office superiors, for ex­
ample, and by turns assert and debase themselves before 
them; both frighten their superiors off through startling 
modes of illness; and both suffer from social or familial 
exclusion, and from their own hidden fears about sexual 
love. Such parallels show how Dostoyevsky set a precedent 
for Kaf ka's urban nightmares; but the most vital link is still 
the opening paragraph, where Kafka solves the formal 
problem of The Double with a fait accompli, and creates a 
bridge between two worlds. That it was his own formal 
problem, as well as Dostoyevsky' s, seems evident from his 

8 
INTRODUCTION 
frequent use of the device in later stories, and from its 
absence in his previous work. 
So The Double has lent itself, importantly, to the develop­
ment of modern psychological fantasy. But more relevant 
for the general reader, it remains a fine example of that 
genre even today. Consider a typical passage, in which 
Golyadkin admits that if anyone had wanted to turn him 
into a boot-rag, he might have done so with impunity; but 
still that rag would have been no ordinary one: it "would 
have had pride, would have been alive and had feelings; 
pride and feelings might have remained concealed deep in 
its filthy folds and been unable to speak for themselves, 
but all the same they would have been there." Like Gregor 
Samsa, Golyadkin is a vulnerable being, a boot-rag in the 
making, with pride and feeling submerged and inarticulate. 
Yet Dostoyevsky speaks for them, he reveals them to us, 
deep within the filthy folds of self-delusion, and by insisting 
on their presence, he creates an urban hero like ourselves. 
And curiously enough, in the absence of anything like the 
moral and religious leaven of the later novels, it is precisely 
this sense of humanity which gives the story its Kafkan 
quality, its blend of humor, horror, and compassion. As a 
last example, take the end of the novel, when Golyadkin 
is carted off to an asylum and the double runs along beside 
his carriage: "Hands thrust into the pockets of his green 
uniform trousers and with a satisfied look on his face, he 
kept pace with the carriage, jumping up first on one side, 
then on the other, and sometimes, seizing and hanging 
from the window frame, he would pop his head in and 
blow farewell kisses at Mr. Golyadkin." Meanwhile, inside 
the carriage, the clerk is faced with the burning eyes of his 
doctor, Krestyan lvanovitch Rutenspitz, whose first name 
means "Christian," but whose verdict on the hero-like 
the father's verdict in "The Judgment" -comes "stern and 
dreadful as a judge' s sentence." 
MARK SPILKA 

NOTE BY TRANSLATOR 
FROM Dostoyevsky's time until our own, The Double 
has been neglected by all save scholars and critics, and 
no translator has offered an English version in which the 
merits of the original are apparent. This new translation 
has been made in the hope that it may win for The Double 
the recognition that Dostoyevsky thought it to deserve. 
The present translation is from the generally published 
revised text of The Double, prepared by Dostoyevsky for a 
new edition of his works in 1866. This revision, which 
consisted mainly in pruning the work as first published, 
was executed in haste. As a result, an improved form has 
been achieved at the price of creating a few obscurities, 
particularly towards the end of the book, and notably in 
Klara Olsufyevna's letter, and in details connected with the 
elopement. The translator has rejected the idea of collating 
the text with the original. These faults, if such they can be 
called, do not arrest the reader in mid-sentence, and far 
from marring the author's intention, often reinforce it, 
by adding slightly to the already frightening inconsequence 
of Mr. Golyadkin's later arguments. The manner of Mr. 
Golyadkin's entry into Olsufy lvanovich's courtyard at the 
beginning of Chapter 13 is somewhat abrupt, though not 
unduly so. Several puns on the name Golyadkin are lost in 
English, but their loss seems preferable to renaming the 
hero 'Mr. Poorfellow.' 

PRINCIPA L CH ARACTERS IN THE ST ORY 
Y akov (Y asha) Petrovich 
Golyadkin 
Pyotr (Petrushka) 
Krestyan lvanovich 
Rutenspitz 
Andrey Filippovich 
Vladimir Semyonovich 
Karolina lvanovna 
Olsufy lvanovich 
Berendeyev 
Klara Olsufyevna 
His Excellency 
Anton Antonovich 
Setochkin 
Nestor Ignatyevich 
Vakhrameyev 
A miuor civil servant. 
His man. 
Medical adviser to Mr. Golyad­
kin. 
Mr. Golyadkin' s departmental 
head. 
Nephew of Andrey Filippovich. 
A German ,formerly Mr. Goly­
adkin's landlady. 
A Civil Cou11sellor. 
His daughter. 
A Civil General, Mr. Golyad­
kin's highest official superior, 
and over Andrey Filippovich. 
The chief clerk under whom 
Mr. Golyadkiu serves. 
A colleague ofMr. Golyadkiu's. 
NOTE 
Russians have three names : Christian name, father's 
Christian name (patronymic), and surname. 
The usual 
form of address is by the first two names. 
An intimate or familiar form of address is by a diminu­
tive of the Christian name, e.g. Yasha, Petrushka. 
Servants were commonly addressed by their patronymic. 
-Translator. 

I 
IT was a little before eight when Yakov Petrovich 
Golyadkin, a minor civil servant, came to, 
yawned, stretched, and finally opened his eyes wide 
after a long night's rest. For two minutes or so 
he lay n1otionless in bed, like a man as yet un­
certain whether he is awake or stil asleep, whether 
all at present going on about him is reality or a 
continuation of his disordered dreams. But in a 
short while Mr. Golyadkin' s senses began record­
ing their usual everyday itnpressions more clearly. 
Everything looked back at him familiarly : the 
messy green walls of his little romn, begrimed 
with soot and dust, his mahogany chest of drawers, 
his imitation tnahogany chairs, the red painted 
table, the reddish oilcloth-covered ottoman pat­
terned with sickly green flowers, and lastly the 
clothing he had hastily discarded the night before 
and thrown in a heap onto the ottoman. And 
then the foul, murky, grey autumnal day peered 
in at him through the dirty panes in such a sour, 
ill-humoured way, that Mr. Golyadkin had no 
longer any possible ground for doubting that he 
lay, not in some distant fairy realm, but in his 
own rooms on the fourth floor of a large tenetnent 
house in Shestilavochnaya Street, in the capital 

12 
T H E  DO UBLE 
city of St. Petersburg. Having made a discovery 
of such importance, Mr. Golyadkin twitched his 
eyes shut again, as though regretting his recently­
ended slmnbers and wishing to recall then1 for a 
nwment. But an instant later, having in all like­
lihood at last stun1bled upon the one idea about 
which his scattered and inconsequent thoughts had 
been revolving, he bounded out of bed, and ran 
to a small round mirror standing on the chest or 
drawers. Although the sleepy, weak-sighted and 
rather bald image reflected was of so insignificant 
a character as to be certain of commanding no great 
attention at a first glance, its possessor remained 
well pleased with all that he beheld in the mirror. 
'A fmc thing it would be if there was something 
wrong with me today,' said Mr. Golyadkin under 
his breath. 
'A fmc thing if something untoward had hap­
pened, and a strange pimple had come up, or 
something equally unpleasant. Still, I don't look 
too bad. So far all's well.' 
Taking a great pleasure in the fact·that all was 
well, Mr. Golyadkin replaced the mirror, and 
though barefoot and still dressed in the manner 
in which he was accustomed to retire to bed, 
ran to the window and began looking intently 
for something in the courtyard below. What he 
saw was evidently also to his satisfaction, for his 
face lit with a self-contented smile. Then, after 
first peeping behind the partition into the closet 

THE DOUBLE 
13 
occupied by his servant Petrushka, and assuring 
himself of his absence, he tiptoed to the table, 
unlocked one of the drawers, and rummaging in 
a far comer, fmally produced fron1 beneath some 
old yellow-stained papers and other rubbish a 
worn green note-case, carefully opened it, and 
looked cautiously and with manifest e1৓oy1nent 
into the most remote of its secret pockets. And 
probably the bundle of nice green, grey, blue, 
red and particoloured notes it contained looked 
up at Mr. Golyadkin with equal approval and 
affability, for, with face beaming, he placed the 
open note-case in front of him on the table, and 
rubbed his hands energetically in a manner be­
tokening extreme pleasure. At last he drew out 
his comforting bundle of banknotes, and for the 
hundredth time since the day before, began count­
ing them, rubbing each carefully between fmger 
and thumb. 
' Seven hundred and fifty roubles in notes ! ' 
he breathed fmally in a half-whisper. ' Seven 
hundred and fifty roubles. A good sum ! A 
pleasant sum,' he continued, his voice trembling 
and somewhat weakened by the emotion of his 
gratification, the wad of notes clenched in his 
hands, and his face wreathed in snllles. ' A  very 
pleasant sun1 indeed ! A pleasant enough sum for 
anyone ! I'd like to see the nnn now who'd think 
it wasn't. A man can go a long way on a smn 
like this !' 

14 
T H E  D O U B L E 
'But what's this, where' s Petrushka got to ? 
thought Mr. Golyadkin, and clad as he was, 
took another look behind the partition. Petrushka 
was still nowhere to be seen, but on the floor 
where it had been set, quite beside itself, fuming, 
working itself into a passion, and threatening the 
whole while to boil over, was the samovar ; and 
what it was probably saying as it burred and 
lisped away furiously at Mr. Golyadkin in its own 
strange tongue was : 
'Come along and fetch n1e, good people, I'm 
quite ready, you see.' 
'To hell with him !' thought Mr. Golyadkin. 
'That lazy lump is enough to drive a n1an out of 
his wits. Where' s he disappeared to ? ' 
Seething with righteous indignation, he went 
out into the hall, which consisted of a small cor­
ridor terminated by the door of the entrance, 
and caught sight of his servant surrounded by a 
whole crowd of menials and riff-raff. Petrushka 
was busy recounting something, the others were 
all attention. Clearly neither the subject of con­
versation nor the conversation itself were to Mr. 
Golyadkin' s liking, for he im1nediately called to 
Petrushka, and went back into the room looking 
thoroughly displeased, and even disturbed. 
'That wretch would betray anyone for a song, 
his master especially,' he thought. 'And he's be­
trayed me, I'n1 certain of that-for a miserable 
farthing, I wouldn't mind betting . . . Well ?' 

T H E  D O U B L E  
'They've brought the livery, sir.' 
'Put it on, and con1e here.' 
15 
Having done so, Petrushka came into his 
nuster's room grining foolishly. His costume 
was odd in the extreme. He was attired in green 
footman's livery, trin1n1ed with gold braid and 
very much worn, that had obviously been in­
tended for someone a good two feet taller. He 
held a hat decorated with green feathers and also 
trimmed with gold braid, and wore at his side a 
footman's sword in a leather scabbard. To conl­
plete the picture he had, following his favourite 
practice of going about in a homely state or 
undress, nothing on his feet. 
Mr. Golyadkin inspected Petrushka thoroughly 
and seemed well pleased. Evidently the livery had 
been hired for some special occasion. And it was 
noticeable that Petrushka throughout the inspec­
tion watched his master with a strange air or 
expectancy, and followed his every move with 
unusual curiosity, n1uch to Mr. Golyadkin's em­
barrassment. 
'What about the carriage ?' 
'That's come too.' 
' For the whole day ?' 
'Yes. Twenty-five roubles.' 
'Have they brought the boots ? ' 
'They've brought them as well.' 
'Blockhead ! Can't you say "Yes, they have, 
. 
, 
, 
SlY 
? 

16 
T H E  D O U B L E 
Having expressed his gratification at the n1anner 
in which the boots fitted, he ordered his tea and 
washing and shaving water to be brought. He 
shaved and washed with extreme care, hurriedly 
sipping his tea between whiles ; then, setting about 
his fmal and major toilet, donned an almust new 
pair of trousers, a shirt front with little bronze 
buttons, and a waistcoat brightly adorned with nice 
little flowers ; about his neck he tied a speckled 
silk cravat, and lastly pulled on a uniform jacket, 
carefully brushed and also nearly new. Several 
times while thus engaged he looked lovingly at 
his boots, raising first one foot then the other to 
admire the style, all the while muttering something 
to himself, and occasionally winking and making 
an expressive grimace as a thought occurred to 
him. On this particular n1oming however, Mr. 
Golyadkin was extremely preoccupied, for he 
scarcely noticed the grins and grimaces that Pet­
rushka directed at him while assisting in his toilet. 
Finally, when he had arranged everything as it 
should be and was completely dressed, Mr. 
Golyadkin put his note-case into his pocket, took 
a last admiring look at Petrushka-who, having 
put on his boots was also quite ready-remarked 
that everything was done and that there was 
nothing to wait for, and went bustling down the 
stairs, his heart throbbing slightly. 
A sky-blue hired carriage e1nbbzoned with 
some sort of coat of arms can1e thundering up to 

THE D O U B L E 
' 
17 
the door. Petrushka, exchanging winks with the 
driver and some lounging bystanders, saw his 
master seated, and in a strange voice, being scarcely 
able to contain his idiotic laughter, shouted 'Drive 
off! ' sprang onto the rear footboard, and the whole 
equipage thtmdered away with a crashing and 
jingling in the direction of the Nevsky Prospect. 
No sooner had the sky-blue carriage passed 
through the gateway, than Mr. Golyadkin rubbed 
his hands convulsively and shook with silent 
mirth, like a merry fellow who has n1anaged to 
pull off some splendid joke, and is as pleased as 
Punch about it. But immediately after this glee­
ful outburst, the laughter on Mr. Golyadkin' s 
face yielded to an expression that was curiously 
apprehensive. In spite of the damp dismal weather, 
he lowered both windows of the carriage and 
began looking anxiously to left and right at the 
people in the street, assuming a studied air of 
decorum and sobriety in1mediately he noticed 
anyone looking at hin1. At the junction of 
Liteynaya Street and the Nevsky Prospect he 
shuddered, having suddenly experienced a most 
unpleasant sensation, and screwing up his face like 
some unfortunate whose corn has been trodden 
on, pressed himself hastily, and fearfully even, 
into the darkest corner of his carriage. The reason 
for this was that he had encountered two of his 
colleagues, two young officials from the very de­
partment in which he himself was e1nployed. It 

18 
T H E  D O U B L E 
seemed to Mr. Golyadkin that they for their part 
were utterly confounded at encountering him 
thus, and that one of them even pointed at him. 
It seemed that the other called him loudly by 
name, which was, of course, very unbecoming 
in the street. Our hero concealed himself, and 
did not respond. 
'What uncouth young men ! '  he thought. 
'What's so unusual about being in a carriage ? If 
you need a carriage, you take one. Uncouth lot ! 
I know them, the young hooligans. A good 
drubbing is what they need ! Playing heads or 
tails with their salary and roanling the streets, 
that's all they're good for. I'd tell them all a 
thing or two . . 
. ' 
Suddenly petrified, Mr. Golyadkin left his sen­
tence unfinished. An elegant droshky, drawn by 
a pair of mettlesome Kazan horses well known 
to Mr. Golyadkin, was rapidly overhauling his 
carriage on the right. The gentleman seated in 
the droshky, chancing to catch sight of Mr. 
Golyadkin's face, which the latter had rather 
rashly thrust out of the carriage window, seemed 
quite amazed at such an unlooked-for encounter, 
and, leaning out as far as he could, peered most 
interestedly and inquisitively into the very comer 
of the carriage in which our hero was with all 
haste concealing himscl£ The gentleman in the 
droshky was Andrey Filippovich, the depart­
mental head under whom Mr. Golyadkin held 

T H E  D O U B L E 
19 
the position of assistant to the chief clerk. Seeing 
that conceahnent was quite out of the question 
since Audrey Filippovich, having recognised him, 
was now staring hard at hirn, his eyes nearly 
popping out of his head, Mr. Golyadkin coloured 
up to the cars. 
' Shall I bow ? Shall I rnake some response : 
Shall I admit it's n1e, or shan't I ? ' thought our 
hero in indescribable anguish. ' Or shall I pretend 
it's not me, but someone extraordinarily like me, 
and just look as if nothing had happened : It 
really isn't me, it isll't me, and that's all there is 
to it,' said Mr. Golyadkin, raising his hat to 
Andrey Filippovich and not taking his eyes off 
him. Soon, however, the droshky overtook the 
carriage, bringing to an end the magnetic influence 
exerted by the gaze of the departmental head, 
but leaving Mr. Golyadkin blushing, smiling and 
muttering to himself. 
'I was a fool not to respond,' he thought 
fmally. 'I ought simply to have spoken up boldly, 
been frank and open about it. "There it is, 
Andrey Filippovich, I've been asked to diner as 
Ill"' 
we . 
Then suddenly remembering that he had made 
a fool of himself, our hero flushed like fire, 
scowled and directed at the opposite comer of 
the carriage a look both terrible and defiant, 
that was intended to reduce all his enemies in­
stantaneously to ashes. Finally, impelled by some 

20 
THE DOUBLE 
sudden flash of inspiration, he tugged at the cord 
attached to the driver's elbow, stopped the 
carriage, and ordered the driver to turn back to 
Liteynaya Street. The truth was that Mr. Goly­
adkin had felt an immediate need, probably for 
his own peace of n1ind, to communicate some­
thing of the greatest importance to his doctor, 
Krestyan lvanovich Rutenspitz. His acquaintance 
with the latter was admittedly of short standing, 
for it had been only the week before that he had 
visited him for the first time, on account of certain 
ailments. But after all, a doctor was supposed to 
be like a confessor, and to hide away from him 
would be foolish, since it was his job to know 
his patient. 
'Will it be all right, I wonder ? ' pondered our 
hero, alighting at the entrance of a five-storeyed 
house in Liteynaya Street, before which he had 
ordered the carriage to stop. 
' Is it a right and proper time to call ? Well, 
what does it matter ? '  he continued, trying as he 
mounted the stairs to get his breath and stop his 
heart from throbbing, as it invariably did on 
other people's staircases. 
'Well, what docs it matter ? After all, I've come 
on n1y own account. There's nothing wrong in 
that. It would be stupid to go hiding away. I'll 
just Inake out I didn't con1e for anything special, 
but was just passing . . . He'll sec that's as it 
should be.' 

T H E  D O U B L E  
, 
21 
While busy with these thoughts, Mr. Golyadkin 
had reached the second floor, and stopped outside 
Flat No. 5, which had affixed to the door a fine 
copper plate with the inscription: 
KRESTYAN IVANOVICH RUTENSPITZ 
Physician and Surgeon 
Standing before the door, our hero lost no tin1e 
in assuming a countenance of due ease and affa­
bility, and prepared to pull the bell. Thus poised, 
he came to an imn1ediate and rather opportune 
decision that it might perhaps be better to leave 
his visit till next day, since there was no great 
necessity for it at the moment. But suddenly 
hearing footsteps on the stairs, Mr. Golyadkin 
pron1ptly reversed his new decision, and at the 
satne time rang resolutely at Dr. Rutenspitz' bell. 

2 
DR. RuTENSPITZ, Physician and Surgeon, was 
an exceptionally healthy, albeit elderly gentle­
man, with bushy, greying eyebrows and side­
whiskers, an expressive twinkling gaze that seemed 
by itself to scare away all maladies, and a high 
decoration upon his breast. On this particular 
morning, he was sitting in a comfortable arm­
chair in his consulting room, smoking a cigar, 
drinking coffee brought to him by his wife 
herself, and now and then writing prescriptions 
for his patients. The last draught prescribed by 
him had been for an old man with haemorrhoids, 
and now, having seen this worthy out of a side 
door, he was sitting awaiting the next patient. 
In walked Mr. Golyadkin. 
Evidently the doctor neither expected nor 
wished to see Mr. Golyadkin, for he was for the 
moment suddenly bewildered, and unwittingly 
allowed a strange look, one might almost say a 
look of annoyance, to cross his face. 
As, for his part, Mr. Golyadkin s01nehow 
almost invariably turned up at the wrong time, 
and lost his head the moment he had occasion 
to approach someone on a personal 1natter, so 
now, having failed to prepare the opening sentence 

T H E  D O U B L E 
' 
23 
which was the real stmnbling-block for him 
at such times, he grew dreadfully confused, 
muttered son1ething that might have been an 
apology, then, being at a loss what to do next, 
took a chair and sat down. Suddenly recol­
lecting that he had not been invited to do so, and 
sensing the in1propriety of his action, he made 
haste to rectify this breach of social etiquette and 
bon toll by rising from the seat he had so un­
ceremoniously taken. Gathering his wits and 
realising vaguely that he had committed two 
blunders at once, he then resolved without delay 
upon committing a third, that is, he attempted 
an apology, muttered something with a smile, 
grew flushed and confused, relapsed into an 
expressive silence, sat down again, this time for 
good, and protected himself against every eventu­
ality by means of that defiant look \vhich pos­
sessed the singular power of enabling him to 
reduce all his enemies to ashes and utter destruc­
tion. It \Vas, moreover, a look that gave full 
expression to Mr. Golyadkin' s independence, 
making it clear that he had nothing to worry 
about, that he went his own way like anyone 
else, and had in any case nothing to do with 
what concerned other people. 
Dr. Rutenspitz coughed and cleared his throat, 
evidently as a sign that all this tnet with his 
agreement and approval, and ftxed a searching 
inquisitorial gaze upon Mr. Golyadkin. 

24 
T H E  D O UDLE 
'Dr. Rutcnspitz,' began Mr. Golyadkin, stniling, 
'I have con1e to bother you a second time, and 
for a second time I venture to ask your indulgence.' 
Mr. Golyadkin was obviously finding difticulty 
in selecting the right words. 
'M-n1 yes,' said Dr. Rutenspitz, allowing a 
stream of sn1oke to escape fron1 his tnouth, and 
placing his cigar on the table. 
'But you nutst 
follow tny instructions, you know. I told you 
your treatnlent n1ust take the form of a change 
of habits. Anutse yourself, visit your friends and 
acquaintances, don't grudge yourself a 
bottle 
occasionally, and keep gay cmnpany.' 
Still stni.ling, Mr. Golyadkin \vas quick to 
renurk that as he sa\v it he \Vas just like anyone 
else; he \vas his own n1aster, had his an1usen1ents 
just like anyone else, and naturally could go to 
the theatre, for like other people he had the n1eans; 
he was at his post in the oflice during the day, 
but \Vas at home in the evening; he \Vas all right, 
and \Vas, as he saw fit to observe here in passing, 
as well oftÒ as the next Illa.J.l; he had his own place, 
a.11d finally he had his nun Petrushka. 
At this 
point Mr. Golyadkin faltered. 
'M-n1-n1 no, th::n' s not the sort of life at all, 
I "'asn' t meaning to ask you about that,' said the 
doctor. 
'\Vhat I \Vailt to know is \vhether you 
are fond of gay cmnpany, \Vhether you have a 
good tin1e. Now then, are you leading a tnelan­
choly sort of life, or a gay one:' 

THE D O U B LE 
, 
25 
'Dr. Rutenspitz, I . . .  ' 
'H-m, what I'm saying,' interrupted the doctor, 
'is that vou n1ust radicallv reform vour whole 
.I 
.I 
.I 
life, and in a sense change your character com-
pletely.' Dr. R.utenspitz strongly emphasised the 
word 'change', and paused for a moment with 
a highly significant look. 
'Don't fight shy of gay life,' he continued. 
'Go to theatres, go to a club, and in any case 
don't be afraid of an occasional glass. It's no usc 
staying at home. You simply musm't.' 
'I like peace and quiet,' said Mr. Golyadkin, 
throwing a meaning glance at the doctor, and 
obviously seeking the \Vords that \Vould best 
render his thoughts. 'There's no one at my place 
except myself and Petrushka-I mean my man, 
Doctor. What I mean is, Doctor, I go my own 
\vay, my own peculiar \vay, Doctor. I keep to 
myself, and so far as I .:an see am not dependent 
on anyone. Also I go for walks, Doctor. ' 
'\Vhat's that: . . .  Yes. But there's not much 
pleasure in that at the moment. The \Veather is 
terrible.' 
'Yes, Doctor. But as I believe I have alreadv had 
J 
the honour of explaining, although I am a quiet 
sort of person, my path is separate from other 
people's. The road of life is a broad one, Doctor . . .  
\Vhat I mean, what I mean to say is . . .  Forgive me, 
Doctor, I have no gift for fine phrases.' 
'M 
. 
, 
1 -m-m, you \vere sa ymg . . .  

26 
T HE D O U B L E 
'I say you must forgive me, Doctor, for having 
so far as I can see no gift for fine phrases,' said 
Mr. Golyadkin in a half-offended tone, now a 
little lost and perplexed. 'In this respect, Doctor, 
I am not as other people,' he added with a 
peculiar sort of sn1ile. 'I'm no great talker. I 
haven't learnt to embellish what I say. But to 
make up for it, I'm a man of action, a n1an of 
action, Doctor.' 
'M-n1-m . . . What's that ? . . . So you're a 
man of action,' responded the doctor. Then for 
a moment there was silence, while the doctor 
stared in a strange and incredulous way at Mr. 
Golyadkin, and the latter, in turn, looked incredu­
lously askance at the doctor. 
'Peace is what I like, Doctor, not the tumult of 
society,' continued Mr. Golyadkin, still in his 
former tone, a little exasperated and bewildered 
by the doctor's stubborn silence. 'With most 
people-in society, I mean-you have to know 
how to bow and scrape.' (Here Mr. Golyadkin 
did a bow.) 'That's expected of you in society. 
You're asked to make puns, too, if you please, 
pay scented compliments, that's what's expected 
of you. But I haven't learnt to do this, Doctor 
-I haven't learnt all these cunning ways, I've 
had no time for them. I'm a plain simple man. 
There's no outward show about n1e. On this 
point, Doctor, I lay down my arms-or to con­
tinue the metaphor, I surrender.' 

T H E  D O U B L E  
27 
All this, of course, was delivered in a manner 
that made it quite clear that our hero had no 
regrets about his metaphorical surrender and his 
inability to acquire cunning ways, but entirely 
the reverse. While listening to him, the doctor, 
his face unpleasantly grimaced, kept his eyes upon 
the floor, as if preoccupied with a presentiment of 
some sort. 
Mr. Golyadkin' s tirade was followed by a rather 
long and significant silence. At length, in a low 
voice, the doctor said : 
'You seem to have wandered a little off the 
subject. I confess I have not quite followed 
' 
you. 
'I'm not one for fine phrases, Doctor,' said Mr. 
Golyadkin, this time in an abrupt incisive tone. 
'I am not, as I have already had the honour of 
informing you, Doctor, one for fine phrases.' 
' H-m-m !' 
'Dr. Rutenspitz, when I came in, I began by 
apologizing. Now I repeat what I said before, and 
again ask your indulgence for a time.' Mr. 
Golyadkin began once n1ore in a low taut ex­
pressive voice, that dwelt upon every point, and 
had a solemn ring about it. 'Dr. Rutenspitz, I 
have nothing to conceal from you. I am a little 
man, you know that yourself. But fortunately I 
have no regrets about being a little man. Quite 
the contrary, Doctor, and to be cmnpletely frank, 
I'm even proud of being a little man and not a 

28 
T H E  D O U B L E 
big one. Not being an intriguer-that's something 
else I'tn proud of I don't do things on the quiet, 
but openly, \Vithout a lot of artifice, and though 
I could do my share of hann, and do it very well 
too, and though I even know whom to harm 
and how to do it, I don't sully myself with these 
things, I wash my hands of them, Doctor. I wash 
my hands of them, Doctor ! ' For a moment 
Mr. Golyadkin relapsed into an expressive silence. 
He had been speaking with mild enthusiasn1. 
'I go about straight and openly,' he continued 
suddenly. 
'I don't go beating about the bush, 
because that's a way of doing things I scorn, and 
leave to others. I don't go trying to hun1iliate 
those who maybe are better than you or I 
. . . 
That is, better than I, I didn't mean to say 
"better than you", Doctor. I don't like odd words 
here and there, miserable double-dealing I can't 
stand, slander and gossip I abominate. The only 
time I put on a mask is when I go to a masquerade, 
I don't go about in front of people in one every 
day. I wil merely ask, Doctor, how you would 
take revenge on your worst enemy, or him you 
regarded as such : '  concluded Mr. Golyadkin, 
glancing defiantly at Dr. Rutenspitz. 
But though Mr. Golyadkin had spoken through­
out with the utmost clarity, precision and assur­
ance, weighing his words and relying on those 
calculated to produce the best effect, he was now 
looking at the doctor with ever-growing uneasiness. 

THE DOUBLE 
29 
He was all attention, timidly awaiting the doctor's 
reply with a sick uneasy feeling of in1paticnce. 
But Dr. Rutenspitz, to Mr. Golyadkin' s surprise 
and utter consternation, tnuttered something 
under his breath, pulled his chair up to the 
table, observed dryly, but none the less politely, 
something to the effect that his time was of value 
to him, and that somehow he did not quite follow ; 
he was prepared to be of assistance so far as lay 
in his power, and to the extent of his abilities, 
but beyond that, into matters of no concern to 
him, he would not venture. At this point he took 
his pen, drew towards him_ a sheet of paper from 
which he cut a strip the size of a doctor's prescrip­
tion, and am1ounced that he would prescribe what 
was appropriate. 
'No, Dr. Rutenspitz, it's not appropriate ! It's 
not appropriate at all ! ' said Mr. Golyadkin rising 
from his seat and seizing the doctor's right hand. 
'There's no need for that at all in tlus case ! '  
While he was speaking, a peculiar change catne 
over Mr. Golyadkin. His grey eyes flashed with 
strange fire, his lips trembled, all Ius muscles and 
features twitched and disarranged themselves. His 
whole body shook violently. Having followed 
his first irnpulse in arresting the doctor's hand, 
Mr. Golyadkin now stood stock-stili as though 
lacking self-assurance, and awaiting inspiration 
for further action. 
A rather peculiar scene followed. 

30 
T H E  D O U B LE 
For the moment somewhat at a loss, Dr. 
Rutenspitz remained glued to his seat, and stared 
at Mr. Golyadkin in open-eyed amazement, while 
the latter stared back in the same fashion. At 
length the doctor rose, supporting himself to some 
extent by one of the lapels of Mr. Golyadkin's 
jacket. Thus for a few seconds they stood, motion­
less, not taking their eyes off one another. Then, 
however, followed in a most extraordinary man­
ner Mr. Golyadkin' s second impulsive action. 
His lips trembled, his chin quivered, and quite 
unexpectedly, he burst into tears. Sobbing, bob­
bing his head up and down, beating his breast 
with one hand and clutching at the lapel of Dr. 
Rutenspitz' coat with the other, he tried to speak, 
tried to offer son1e sort of explanation, but no 
words came. 
Dr. Rutenspitz recovered at last fron1 his amaze­
ment. 
'That's enough of this. Calm yoursel£ Sit 
down_,' he said, attempting to seat Mr. Golyadkin 
in the arm-chair. 
'I have enemies, Doctor, I have enemies. I 
have deadly enemies who have sworn to ruin 
me . . . ' replied Mr. Golyadkin in a fearful 
whisper. 
'Enough about your enemies ! No need to 
bring them in. No need at all. Sit down, sit 
down,' continued the doctor, fmally getting him 
into the chair. 

T H E  D O U B L E 
' 
31 
Mr. Golyadkin settled hin1self in the chair, not 
taking his eyes off the doctor, who began striding 
from one corner of his consulting room to the 
other, looking extremely displeased. 
A long silence ensued. 
'I'm grateful to you, Doctor, extremely grate­
ful, and am most sensible of all that you have 
done for n1e. I shall not forget your kindness till 
the day I die,' said Mr. Golyadkin at length, rising 
fron1 the chair with a hurt expression. 
'Enough, enough, I tell you ! ' retorted the 
doctor at this sally, again forcing Mr. Golyadkin 
into his seat. 'What's the matter ? Tell me what's 
upsetting you now, and who these enemies arc 
you speak of. What's it all about : '  he continued. 
'No, Doctor, let's leave it at this,' answered 
Mr. Golyadkin, looking at the floor. 'It's best left 
till another time, Doctor . . . Till a more con­
venient time when all will be made clear, when 
the masks will fall from certain faces, and this 
and that will come to light. But meanwhile, after 
what has passed between us . . . You yourself 
will agree, Doctor . . . Allow n1e to wish you 
good morning,' said Mr. Golyadkin, rising from 
his seat gravely and deliberately, and reaching for 
his hat. 
'Well, as you wish . . .  H-m-m . . . ' (A mo­
mentary silence.) ' For my part, you know . . .  
Anything I can do . . . And, er . . .  I sincerely 
wish you all the best.' 

32 
T H E  D O UllL E 
'I understand, I understand, Doctor. I take 
your n1eaning perfectly . . . At any rate, forgive 
tny bothering you, Doctor.' 
' M-m-m no, I didn't mean that. Still, as you 
wish. Carry on with the medicine as before.' 
'I'll carry on with the medicine as you say, 
Doctor. I'll carry on with it, and get it at the 
same chemist's . . . It's a grand thing being a 
chemist nowadays, Doctor . . . A grand thing.' 
'Eh Á In what sense :' 
'In the most usual sense, Doctor. I mean that's 
how the world is nowadays . . .  ' 
'H 
' 
-m-m. 
'And that every little whipper-snapper-and 
not only in chemists' shops-looks down his nose 
at a gentleman.' 
'H-m. How do you mean : '  
'I'm speaking of someone well known, Doc­
tor . . . A mutual friend of ours . . . Shall we 
say Vladi1nir Scmyonovich, for instance : '  
'Ah !' 
'Yes, Doctor. And some I could name aren't 
so bound by what people think that they can't 
occasionally come out with the truth.' 
'How do you mean : '  
'Well, like this. It's neither here nor there, but 
still . . . They know how to spring the odd 
. ' 
surpnse. 
'How to what : '  
' Spring a surprise, Doctor. It's a saying we've 

T H E  D O U B L E 
33 
got. They sometimes know how to pay someone 
a compliment that's very much to the point for 
instance. There are such people, Doctor.' 
'Pay someone a compliment?' 
'Yes, Doctor, as an intimate acquaintance of 
mine did the other day.' 
'An intimate acquaintance of yours, eh? How 
was that, then Ǌ' said Dr. Rutenspitz, regarding 
Mr. Golyadkin attentively. 
'Yes, a certain intimate acquaintance of mine 
was congratulating another very intimate ac­
quaintance, who was, moreover, a close friend 
of mine, "a bosom friend" as the saying is, on 
his promotion to the rank of Assessor. The way 
he chanced to put it was: "I'm heartily glad of this 
opportunity of offering you my congratulations, 
my sincere congratulations, Vladimir Semyono­
vich, on your promotion-the more so since 
nowadays, as all the world knows, those who 
push their favourites are no more."' Here Mr. 
Golyadkin wagged his head roguishly and squinted 
at Dr. Rutenspitz. 
'H-m. He said that, did he Ǌ' 
'That's what he said, Doctor, and he looked at 
Andrey Filippovich, the uncle of our dear Vladimir 
Semyonovich. But what does it matter to me 
his being made an assessor ? Is that any business 
of mine ? And there he is wanting to get married 
and his tnother' s milk still wet on his lips, if you'll 
pardon the expression. I said as much. "There 

34 
T H E  D OUB LE 
1t 1s Vladimir Semyonovich," I said. Now I've 
told you all there is, and with your permission 
I'll be getting along.' 
'H 
, 
-111-nl. 
'Yes, Doctor, you 111 ust allow n1e to be getting 
along, I say. But to kill two birds with one stone, 
after I'd given the young n1an a start with that 
bit about pushing favourites, I turned to Klara 
Olsufyevna, who'd just been singing a tender 
ballad-all this was the day before yesterday, at 
her father' s-and I said : "Your singing is full of 
tenderness, but those who listen haven't got pure 
hearts." I gave a clear hint there, you sec Doctor, 
a clear hint, so that they didn't take it as referring 
to her, but looked further afield.' 
'And what about him ?' 
'He looked as if he'd bitten a lemon, as the 
. 
. , 
saymg 1s. 
'H 
, 
-m-m . . .  
'Yes, Doctor, I spoke to the old man also, and 
I said : " Olsufy Ivanovich," I said, "I know I am 
indebted to you, and I deeply appreciate the 
benefits you have lavished upon me since I was 
almost a child. But open your eyes, Olsufy 
lvanovich," I said. "Take a good look around. 
I myself deal frankly and openly, Olsufy Ivano-
. h , , 
VIC 
. 
' Quite so.' 
'Yes, Doctor, there it is.' 
'And what did he say ? '  

T H E  DO UBLE 
35 
'What did he say Ǌ He hummed and ha-ed, 
said this and that, about knowing me and about 
his Excellency's beneficence-and went all round 
the mulberry bush . . . But what can you expect Ǌ 
He's shaky with age, as they say.' 
' So that's how it is now ! ' 
'Yes, Doctor. That's how it is with al of us ! 
Poor old chap ! Already one foot in the grave 
and smelling of incense, as the saying is, but the 
moment they start some old wives' gossip, he's 
there to listen ; they can't get on without him . . .  ' 
'Gossip, you say : '  
'Yes, Doctor, they've made up some gossip. 
Our friend the Bear and his dear little nephew 
had a hand in it. They got together with the old 
women, and cooked it up. And what do you 
think Ǌ They've thought up a plan to destroy 
, 
someone. 
'D 
, 
estray someone Ǌ 
'Yes, Doctor, to clestroy someone morally. 
They put out a rumour . . . I'm still speaking or 
my close friend . . .  ' 
Dr. Rutenspitz nodded. 
'They put out a rumour about hin1 . . . I must 
confess, Doctor, I feel ashamed to speak of it.' 
'H 
, 
-m-m . . .  
'They put out a rumour saying he'd made a 
written promise of marriage when he was married 
already. And who do you think it was to, Doctor Ǌ, 
'N "d ' 
o 1 ea. 

36 
T H E  D O U B L E  
'A cook, a disreputable German woman who 
used to give him his dinner. He offered her his 
hand instead of payment.' 
'Is that what they say ?' 
'Can you believe it, Doctor ? A German, a vile 
beastly brazen German woman, Karolina Ivan­
ovna, if you know . . .  
' 
' For my part, I confess . . . ' 
'I understand you, Doctor, I quite understand, 
and feel it myself . . .  
' 
'Tell me, please, where you're living now.' 
'Where I'm living now, Doctor ?' 
'Yes . . . I wanted . . . I seem to remember 
you used to live . . .  
' 
'I did, Doctor, I did, I did use to. How could 
I help doing so ?' replied Mr. Golyadkin, accom­
panying his words with a short laugh. 
The doctor was somewhat nonplussed by this 
reply. 
'No, you missed my meaning. I wanted 
to . . .  ' 
' So did I, Doctor, so did I . . . ' continued Mr. 
Golyadkin with a laugh. 'But I've sat taking up 
too much of your time, Doctor. Pray allow me 
to wish you good morning.' 
'H 
, 
-m-m . . .  
'Yes, Doctor, I understand you. I now under­
stand you perfectly,' said our hero, assuming a 
rather theatrical pose. 'And so allow me to wish 
you good mon1ing.' 

T H E  D O U B L E  
 
37 
With this our hero bowed, and walked from 
the room, leaving Dr. Rutenspitz utterly amazed. 
On his way down the doctor's staircase, he 
smiled and rubbed his hands with glee. Once 
on the front steps and breathing the fresh air, he 
felt free, and was even ready to admit himself 
the happiest of mortals and go straight to the 
office. Then suddenly his carriage came rumbling 
in at the gate. One look, and it all came back to 
him. Petrushka was already opening the carriage 
door. A strange, extremely unpleasant sensation 
seized Mr. Golyadkin' s whole body. His face 
seemed to flush for a moment. He had a stabbing 
pain in his side. Just as he was about to set foot 
on the step of the carriage, he turned to look at 
Dr. Rutenspitz' windows. It was as he thought ! 
The doctor was standing at one of them, smooth­
ing his side-whiskers with his right hand, and 
gazing rather curiously at our hero. 
'That doctor is stupid,' thought Mr. Golyadkin 
as he concealed himself in his carriage. 'Terribly 
stupid. He may be able to cure his patients, but 
he's as soft as they make them, all the same.' 
Mr. Golyadkin sat back, Petrushka cried 'Drive 
on ! ' and the carriage moved out again into the 
N evsky Prospect. 

3 
THIS whole morning was one of frightful 
activity for Mr. Golyadkin. Once in the 
Nevsky Prospect, our hero ordered the carriage 
to stop at the Arcade. Jumping down, he ran in 
accompanied by Petrushka, and made a bee-line 
for a shop displaying gold and silver ware. From 
his very appearance it was plain that Mr. Golyadkin 
was a man with his hands full and a terrible amount 
to get through. After settling for the purchase 
of a complete tea and diru1er service for one 
thousand five hundred roubles, together with a 
fantastically-shaped cigar-case and a complete 
shaving outfit in silver for a sinlllar sum, after 
finally inquiring the price of other trifles, pleasing 
and useful in their way, Mr. Golyadkin con­
cluded by promising to return on the morrow 
without fail, or even to send for his purchases that 
same day, noted the nun1ber of the shop, listened 
attentively while the shopkeeper solicited a small 
deposit, and prmnised that there should indeed 
be a small deposit in due course. Thereupon 
he bade the stupefied shopkeeper a hurried 
good-day, and pursued by a whole swarm of 
assistants, made his way along the row of shops 
carefully searching for somewhere new, and 

T H E  D O U B L E 
39 
turning every minute to look at Petrushka. On 
the way he darted into a money changer's, and 
changed his big notes into notes of smaller de­
nominations, losing on the transaction, but ac­
quiring nevertheless a great number of small 
notes to swell his pocket-book, which evidently 
afforded him the keenest satisfaction. At length 
he stopped at a shop dealing in various ladies' 
materials. Here again, after bargaining over the 
purchase of goods worth a considerable sum, Mr. 
Golyadkin promised the shopkeeper to return 
without fail, took the number of the shop, and 
the question of a small deposit being raised, re­
peated that there would in due course be a small 
deposit. He then visited several other shops, 
and in each bargained for goods and inquired 
prices, sometimes having long arguments with 
the shopkeepers and walking out only to come 
back three times afterwards-in short, he showed 
unusual activity. From the Arcade our hero 
betook himself to a well-known furnisher's, where 
he ordered furniture for six rooms, and admired 
an intricately designed ladies' dressing-table in the 
latest style. After assuring the shopkeeper that he 
would send for it all without fail, he left the shop 
with his customary promise of a small deposit, 
and drove off to order something else. To put 
it briefly, there seemed no end to his activity. 
At last Mr. Golyadkin seemed to grow sick and 
tired of it all, and even began, heaven knows why, 

40 
T H E  D O U B L E 
to be troubled by twinges of conscience. Nothing 
on earth would have induced hin1 to meet Andrey 
Filippovich or Dr. Rutenspitz for instance. 
Finally the city clocks struck three, and as Mr. 
Golyadkin got back into his carriage, a pair of 
gloves and a bottle of perfume for one and a half 
roubles represented all that he had actually 
purchased. 
As he was still rather early, Mr. Golyadkin 
ordered the driver to stop at a well-known 
restaurant in the N evsky Prospect which so far 
he had known only by repute. He jumped down 
and hurried in to have a bite to eat and take his 
ease till the appointed time. 
After eating as befits a man with the prospect 
of a sumptuous dinner-party before him-that is, 
having snatched the odd something to stay the 
pangs as the saying is, and swallowed a glass of 
vodka-Mr. Golyadkin settled himself in an arm­
chair, and after a discreet look round, quietly 
attached himself to a certain meagre national 
newspaper. After reading a few lines he rose, 
looked at himself in the nurror, righted his dress 
and smoothed his hair ; after which he went to 
the window to see if his carriage was there, then 
resumed his seat and took up the newspaper. 
Our hero was clearly in a state of extreme agita­
tion. Glancing at the clock, and seeing that as 
it was only a quarter past three there was still 
some time to wait, Mr. Golyadkin decided that 

T H E  D O U B L E  
41 
it was not proper just to sit there, and ordered a 
chocolate that he did not particularly want. After 
drinking the chocolate and noting that the time 
had got on a bit, Mr. Golyadkin went to pay his 
bill. Suddenly son1eone clapped him on the 
shoulder. 
He turned and saw before him his two office 
colleagues, the two fellows young in years and 
junior in rank, whom he had met that morning 
in Liteynaya Street. Our hero was on no par­
ticular footing with them, was neither friendly 
nor openly hostile towards them. Correctness, or 
course, was observed on both sides, but nothing 
further. Indeed, there could be nothing further. 
The present encounter was disagreeable to Mr. 
Golyadkin in the extreme. He frowned slightly 
and was for the moment embarrassed. 
'Y akov Petrovich, Y akov Petrovich ! ' twit­
tered the two clerks. 'You here : What brings 
' 
you . . .  : 
'Oh, it's you, gentlemen,' interposed Mr. Goly­
adkin hurriedly, somewhat disconcerted and scan­
dalized by the clerks' surprise at seeing him, and 
by their familiarity, but pretending despite him­
self to be a free and easy sort of fellow. ' So 
you've deserted the office, eh : Ha-ha-ha ! '  And 
here, to preserve his dignity and patronize the 
office juniors, from whom he always kept his 
proper distance, he tried to tap one of the young 
men on the shoulder. But on this occasion the 

42 
T H E  D O U B L E 
popular approach failed Mr. Golyadkin, and 
instead of his nuking a seemly, intiinate gesture, 
something quite different happened. 
'Well, is our old Bear still sitting there : '  he 
blurted out. 
'Who do you mean, Y akov Petrovich : '  
'Come, come. As if you didn't know !' 
Mr. Golyadkin gave a laugh, and turned to 
collect his change. 'I'm speaking of Andrey 
Filippovich, gentlemen,' he continued, when he 
had finished with the cashier, now addressing 
the clerks with a very earnest expression. The 
two clerks exchanged knowing winks. 
'He's still there, Y akov Petrovich, and he was 
asking for you.' 
'He is, eh : Well, let him stay there, gentlemen. 
And so he was asking for me, was he?' 
'Yes, he was, Y akov Petrovich. But what's 
all this perfume and pomade ? You're the real 
dandy.' 
'Yes, that's how it is gentlemen. But enough 
--' replied Mr. Golyadkin looking away with 
a forced smile. Seeing him smiling, the clerks 
burst out laughing. Mr. Golyadkin pouted. 
'I'll tell you something as a friend, gentlemen,' 
he said after a short silence, as if he had made a 
momentous decision to conftde in the clerks. 
'You all know me, gentlemen, but up to now you 
have only known one side of me. No one can 
be reproached for this, and I confess I am partly 

T H E  D O U B L E  
43 
to blaine.' Mr. Golyadkin pursed his lips and 
looked at the clerks significantly. The clerks again 
winked at each other. 
'Up to the present you have not really known 
me, gentlemen. To explain here and now would 
not be at all appropriate. I'll merely give you a 
hint in passing. There are people, gentlemen, 
who don't like beating about the bush, and mask 
themselves only to go to a 1nasquerade. There are 
people who don't see that n1an' s one purpose in 
life is to be adept at bowing and scraping. There 
are people who don't say they're happy and en­
joying life to the full just because their trousers 
fit well, for instance. And finally there are people 
who don't like leaping and whirling around when 
there's no need, fawning, making eyes, and, what's 
most important of all, gentlemen, poking their 
noses in where they're not asked. I have said 
practically all there is, gentlemen. Now, if you will 
allow me, I must be off.' He paused, and the clerks, 
having had their money's worth, burst suddenly and 
in a most discourteous manner into a great roar 
of laughter. Mr. Golyadkin flushed red with anger. 
'Go on, laugh, gentlemen, laugh for the time 
being. You'll see when you're a bit older,' he 
said with injured pride, taking his hat and retiring 
towards the door. 'But I'll tell you something 
else, gentlemen,' he added, tun1ing to the clerks 
for the last time. 'I'll tell you something else now 
we're all here face to face. My rule gentlemen, 

44 
T H E  D O U B L E  
is, if at first I don't succeed, I take courage. If I 
do succeed, I hold on, and in any case I don't try 
llldermining anyone. I'm not one for intrigue, 
and I'm proud of it. As a diplomat I'd be no good 
at all. "The bird flies to the hllltsman," they say, 
gentlemen. That's true, I'm ready to admit. 
But who's the hllltsman here, and who the bird ? 
That's another question, gentlemen.' 
Mr. Golyadkin lapsed into an eloquent silence, 
and making a most expressive face, that is, raising 
his eyebrows and pursing his lips as tightly as 
possible, he raised his hat to the clerks and walked 
out, leaving them dumbfounded. 
'Where to ?' asked Petrushka rather grimly, 
having probably grown fed up with hanging 
about in the cold. 'Where to ? '  he asked Mr. 
Golyadkin, and met that fearful all-annihilating 
glare with which our hero had already protected 
himself on two occasions that morning, and to 
which he now had recourse a third time while 
descending the steps. 
'The Izmaylovsky Bridge.' 
'The Izmaylovsky Bridge ! ' ordered Petrushka. 
'They don't begin diner till after four, or 
perhaps not til five,' thought Mr. Golyadkin. 
'Isn't it a bit too early now ? Stil, I can arrive a 
bit eady. After all, it's a family dinner. I canjust 
go along sans fafon, as the saying is in the best 
circles. The Bear said it would all be sans Jacon, 
so that goes for me too.' 

T H E  D O U B L E 
, 
45 
Such were Mr. Golyadkin's thoughts, but mean­
while his agitation was increasing every minute. 
He was evidently preparing himself for some­
thing extremely troublesome, to say the least. 
He was whispering to himself, gesticulating with 
his right hand, and gazing incessantly out of the 
carriage window, so that no one seeing him then 
would have said that he was on his way to dine 
informally as one of the family, or sans Jaron as 
the saying is in the best circles. 
At last, just by the Izmaylovsky Bridge, Mr. 
Golyadkin indicated a house, and the carriage 
thundered in at a gate to stop by some steps on the 
right. Noticing the figure of a woman in one 
of the second-floor windows, Mr. Golyadkin 
blew her a kiss. But he had no idea what he was 
doing, for at that moment he was neither dead 
nor alive, but somewhere in between. He emerged 
from the carriage, pale and distracted, climbed the 
steps to the entrance, removed his hat, straightened 
his clothes mechanically, and with a slight trem­
bling at the knees made his way up the stairs. 
'Is Olsufy lvanovich at home ?' he inquired of 
the servant who opened to him. 
'Y cs sir-that is, no sir. He's not at home, sir.' 
'Eh ?  What do you mean, my dear chap ? I've 
come to dinner, my friend. You know me, don't 
' 
you ? 
'Of course, sir. But my orders arc not to admit 
' 
you. 

46 
T H E  D O U B L E  
'Y -y-you n1ust be making some mistake, my 
friend. It's me. I've been invited. I've come to 
dinner,' said Mr. Golyadkin, discarding his over­
coat, and showing every intention of going in. 
'I'm sorry, it's no good, sir. Orders are to refuse 
you adn1ittance. That's how it is.' 
Mr. Golyadkin turned pale. At that moment the 
door of one of the i.Imer rooms opened, and 
Gerasimych, Olsufy Ivanovich's old butler, ap­
peared. 
'There's a gentleman here trying to get in, and 
I . . .  ' said the servant. 
'You're a fool, Alexeich. Go along and fetch 
that scoundrel Semyonych here.' Then turning to 
Mr. Golyadkin he said politely but firmly : 'It's 
impossible, sir. Out of the question. The master 
begs you to excuse him. He cannot receive 
, 
you. 
'Did he say he couldn't receive me :' asked Mr. 
Gol yadkin with a note of uncertainty. 'Excuse 
my asking, Gerasimych, but why is it impossible :' 
' Quite impossible, sir. I announced you, and 
he said : "Ask him to excuse me. I cannot receive 
him," he said.' 
'But why :' 
'I'm sorry, sir.' 
'But what's the reason : It's impossible ! Go 
and announce me . . . How's it happened like 
this : I've come to dinner.' 
'I' 
. I' 
' 
1n sorry, str, m sorry . . .  

T H E  D O U B L E  
' 
47 
'Ah well, if he begs to be excused, it's a dif­
ferent matter. But tell n1e, Gerasitnych, why is 
. ' 
lU 
'Excuse 111e, excuse tne, sir ! ' exclaimed Gerasi­
nlych, firn1ly pushing Mr. Golyadkin to one side 
to make roon1 for two gentlemen who were at 
that moment entering the hall. It was Andrey 
Filippovich and his nephew Vladin1ir Semyono­
vich. Both looked in a puzzled way at Mr. 
Golyadkin. Audrey Filippovich was on the point 
of saying something, but Mr. Golyadkin's n1ind 
\Vas nude up, and with eyes lowered, scarlet­
faced, smiling, and looking thoroughly confused, 
he was already on his way out. 
' I'll come back later, Gerasimych. I'll explain. 
I hope all this won't cause any delay in clearing 
things up in good time,' he said, beginning in the 
doorway and finishing on the stairs. 
'Y akov Petrovich, Y akov Petrovich . . . ' came 
the voice of Andrey Filippovich hard behind him. 
Mr. Golyadkin was then already on the first 
landing. He turned quickly to face Andrey 
Fili ppovich. 
'What can I do for you, Andrey Filippovich ?' 
he said in a fairly resolute tone. 
'What's the matter with you, Yakov Petrovich : 
How is it that . . .  
' 
' Nothing, Andrey Filippovich. I'm here on 
tny own account. This is n1y private life, Andrey 
Filippovich.' 

48 
T H E  D O U B L E  
'What's all than' 
'I say that this is my private life, and that re­
garding my official relationships, nothing repre­
hensible is, so far as I can see, to be found in n1y 
presence here.' 
'How do you mean, "Regarding your offi­
cial . . . " What's the matter with you, sir ? ' 
'Nothing, Andrey Filippovich, nothing at all. 
A miserable cheeky girl, nothing else . . .  ' 
'What ! 
What ! ' 
Andrey Filippovich was 
utterly perplexed. 
Mr. Golyadkin, who so far had carried on the 
conversation from the foot of the stairs, looked 
as if he were about to fly at Andrey Filippovich' s 
face, and now, seeing the confusion of his depart­
mental head, he almost unconsciously took a step 
forward. Andrey Filippovich drew back. Mr. 
Golyadkin moved up one stair, then another . . .  
Andrey Filippovich looked round uneasily. Sud­
denly and with great rapidity Mr. Golyadkin 
bounded to the head of the stairs. With even 
greater rapidity Andrey Filippovich sprang back 
into the room, slam1ning the door after him. 
Mr. Golyadkin was alone. There was a mist 
before his eyes. He was completely bewildered, 
and stood vacant and hesitant, as though calling 
to mind some very stupid event that had recently 
occurred. 
' Ah  well,' he murmured, forcing a 
smile. In the meantime footsteps and voices had 
become audible on the stairs below, heralding in 

T H E  D O U B L E 
49 
all probability the arrival of other of Olsufy 
Ivanovich's invited guests. Mr. Golyadkin came 
partially to his senses, and quickly turning up the 
racoon collar of his overcoat and concealing as 
much of himself as possible behind it, stumbled 
awkwardly downstairs as fast as his legs would 
carry him. He felt weak and numb inside, and 
his confusion was such, that on emerging from 
the door, he made his way straight across the 
muddy courtyard to his carriage, instead of waiting 
for it to draw up. As he prepared to climb in, Mr. 
Golyadkin felt as if every living soul in Olsufy 
Ivanovich's house was staring at him from every 
window, and wished inwardly that he might sink 
through the ground or disappear into a mouse­
hole, carriage and all. If he turned round he knew 
he would fall dead on the spot. 
'What are you laughing at, blockhead ?' he 
fired at Petrushka. 
'I'm not. What have I got to laugh about ? 
Where to now ? ' 
'H 
, 
orne. 
'Home, driver ! ' yelled Petrushka, perching 
himself on the backboard. 
'He's got a voice like a crow,' thought Mr. 
Golyadkin. 
The carriage was already some way beyond the 
Izn1aylovsky Bridge, when suddenly our hero 
pulled the cord with all his might and shouted to 
the driver to tun1 back i1nn1ediatcly. The driver 

so 
T H E  D O U B L E 
turned the horses, and two minutes later they were 
again driving into Olsufy lvanovich's courtyard. 
'No, you fool, back again !' screamed Mr. 
Golyadkin, and it was as if the driver had been 
expecting such an order, for without either stop­
ping or offering a word of protest, he drove the 
whole way round the courtyard and out again 
into the street. 
But Mr. Golyadkin did not drive home. As 
soon as they had passed the Semyonovsky Bridge, 
he ordered the driver to tum into a side street 
and stop outside a rather unpretentious-looking 
restaurant. Once our hero had alighted he paid 
off the driver, and so was fmally rid of his carriage. 
Telling Petrushka to walk home and a·wait his 
return, he went into the restaurant, took a private 
room, and ordered dinner to be served. He felt 
extremely unwell, and his head seemed in a state 
of chaos. For a long while he paced the room in 
agitation. Then at last he sat down, propped his 
forehead on his hands, and began striving with all 
his might to think things out and get something 
settled with regard to his present position. 

4 
THE day-that festal day whereon occurred the 
anniversary of the birth of Klara Olsufyevna, 
only daughter of Civil Counsellor Berendeyev, 
sometime benefactor of Mr. Golyadkin, was 
marked by a dinner, splendid, magnificent, and 
such as has not been witnessed within the walls or 
any civil servant's apartment in or about the 
neighbourhood of the Izmaylovsky Bridge for 
many a day ; a dinner that was more like Bel­
shazzar's Feast, there being something Babylonian 
about its effulgence, sumptuosity and sense of the 
occasion ; a dinner with Veuve Clicquot, with 
oysters, with the fruits of Y eliseyev' s and Mal­
yutins' ,* with every kind of fatted calf, and an 
official programme setting forth the rank of each 
diner. The festal day signalized by so fme a diner 
ended with a brilliant bail-a small, intimate, 
family ball, but brilliant none the less for its good 
taste, polish and seemliness. Such balls do, I 
concede, take place, but they are a rare pheno­
menon. Resembling as they do more joyful 
family occasions than anything else, they can only 
be given in a house such as Civil Counsellor 
Berendeyev' s. I will go even further and say 
* Fashionable St. Petersburg stores.-Tra11slator. 

52 
T H E  D O U B L E  
that not every civil connsellor could give such 
balls. 
Would I were a poet ! A Homer or a Pushkin, 
of course, for with a lesser talent one would not 
attempt it-and then I would boldly and vividly 
depict for my readers the whole of that supremely 
festal day. Or rather, my poem would open with 
the dirmer, and I should lay particular emphasis 
on that striking and triumphant moment of the 
raising of the fust goblet to the health of the 
Queen of Festivities. I should depict the guests 
plnnged in reverentially expectant silence-a silence 
of almost Demosthenian eloquence. I should 
then describe Andrey Filippovich, as most senior 
among the guests, having with his venerable 
grey hairs and the orders appropriate to them 
upon his breast some claim to precedence, rising 
from his seat, and holding aloft a goblet of a 
sparkling vintage-no common wine, but nectar 
-conveyed hither from a distant realm expressly 
to be tasted at moments such as these. I should 
depict for you the happy parents of the Queen of 
Festivities, and the guests, raising their goblets 
after Andrey Filippovich, and gazing at him, filled 
with expectancy. Then I should depict for you 
that same Andrey Filippovich, of whom frequent 
mention is made, shedding a tear into his cham­
pagne glass, delivering a speech of felicitation, 
and proposing and drinking the health of Klara 
Olsufyevna. But I must confess, and confess 

T H E  D O U B L E 
11 
53 
freely, that it would be beyond my powers to 
depict the full pageantry of the n1oment in which 
the Queen of Festivities, flushed like a rose of 
spring with the bloom of blissful modesty, sinks 
for excess of joy into the arms of her loving 
mother ; how her loving mother lets fall a tear ; 
and how at this, that venerable old man, her father 
Olsufy Ivanovich, who has lost the use of his legs 
in long service, and has for his zeal been rewarded 
by fate with a little capital, a small house, some 
small estates and a beautiful daughter, begins 
sobbing like a child and proclaims through his 
tears the beneficence of his Excellency. I should 
be quite unable to depict for you the general 
heartfelt enthusiasm which promptly ensues, and 
which fmds eloquent expression in the behaviour 
of a junior clerk who in listening to Andrey 
Filippovich sheds a few tears of his own-looking 
for the moment more like a civil counsellor than 
a humble junior. Andrey Filippovich at this 
moment of triumph does not look at all like a 
collegiate counsellor and head of a section in a 
certain department. No, indeed 
. . . 
In some 
way he is different. I do not quite know in what 
way he is different, but certainly he is unlike a 
collegiate counsellor. He is more exalted ! And 
fmally . . . Oh, why do I not possess the secret of 
elevated, forceful style-of an exultant style, to 
depict all these beautiful and edifying moments of 
mortal existence, contrived as it were expressly 

54 
T H E  D O U B L E  
in evidence of the fact that virtue will sometimes 
trimnph over vice, envy, free-thinking and evil 
intent ! I will say nothing, but will point out to 
you in silence-for this will be better than elo­
quence-that fortunate young man entering upon 
his twenty-sixth year, Vladimir Semyonovich, 
nephew of Andrey Filippovich, who has in turn 
risen, and is in turn proposing a toast, while upon 
him rest the tearful eyes of the parents of the 
Queen of Festivities, the proud eyes of Andrey 
Filippovich, the modest eyes of the Queen herself, 
the rapturous eyes of the guests, and the decor­
ously envious eyes of certain colleagues of this 
brilliant young man. I will say nothing, although 
I cannot help observing that everything about 
this young man-who, let it be said in his favour, 
is more like an old man than a young one­
everything, from his rosy cheeks to the rank of 
Assessor with which he is invested, speaks at this 
triumphant moment of the lofty heights to which 
one may be elevated by good manners ! I shall 
not describe how fmally Anton Antonovich 
Setochkin, the chief clerk of a certain department, 
a colleague of Andrey Filippovich, and a former 
colleague of Olsufy Ivanovich, as well as being 
an old friend of the family and godfather to 
K.lara Olsufyevna, an old man as grey as a badger, 
while proposing a toast, crows like a cock and 
speaks some jolly verses ; and how by this decor­
ous breach of decorum, if one may use such a 

T H E  D O U B L E  
' 
55 
phrase, he sets the whole company laughing till 
the tears run, and Klara 0 lsufyevna, on instruc­
tions from her parents, rewards his mirth and 
amiability with a kiss. 
I shall merely state that the guests, feeling as 
guests naturally must after such a dinner, rose at 
last from the table, brothers and bosom friends. 
The older and more staid gentlemen, after a short 
while spent in friendly conversation and the ex­
change of eminently decorous and amiable con­
fidences, proceeded sedately to another room, 
where, breaking up into parties, they lost no time 
in seating themselves with proper dignity at the 
green baize-covered tables. The ladies, once 
seated in the drawing-room, suddenly became 
unusually amiable, and started chatting about 
various materials. The esteemed master of the 
house, who had lost the use of his legs in true and 
faithful service, and been recompensed for this by 
all that I have mentioned above, hobbled amongst 
his guests on crutches, supported by his daughter 
and Vladimir Semyonovich-when suddenly, also 
waxing rmusually amiable, he resolved upon im­
provisi'lg a modest little ball, regardless of expense. 
To this end a bright young man-the one who 
at dinner iooked more like a civil counsellor-was 
dispatched to summon musicians. The musicians 
arrived, eleven strong, and at last, at half past eight 
precisely, came the inviting strains of a French 
quadrille. Various other dances followed . . .  

56 
T H E  D O U B L E  
I need hardly mention that a fitting description 
of this ball improvised by the singular amiability 
of the grey-haired host is beyond the powers of 
my feeble pen. How can I, the humble chronicler 
of the adventures of Mr. Golyadkin, which are, 
however, very curious in their way, depict this 
singular and seemly medley of beauty, brilliance, 
decorum, gaiety, amiable sobriety and sober 
amiability, sprightliness and joy ; depict all the 
playfulness and laughter of the functionaries' 
daughters and wives, who, and I mean this as a 
compliment, are more like fairies than ladies, 
with their pink and lily-white shoulders and faces, 
their slender waists, their lively, twinkling, and 
-to use a grand word-homoeopathic feet ? How, 
fmally, can I depict for you the brilliant civil 
service cavaliers, both stolid and gay-level­
headed young men, both merry and decorously 
melancholy-some smoking pipes in intervals 
between dances in a remote small green room, 
others not smoking ; cavaliers of proper rank and 
good family to a man ; cavaliers deeply imbued 
with a sense of elegance and of their own worth ; 
who converse with the ladies for the most part 
in French, but who, when speaking Russian, 
employ only the very best expressions, pay com­
pliments, and voice profundities ; cavaliers who 
only in the smoking-room permit themselves an 
occasional amiable departure from language of the 
highest tone, in phrases of amicable, good-

T H E  D O U B L E  
57 
natured intimacy after the style of: 'You stepped 
a pretty fmc polka, Pctka 1ny boy ! ' or ' Vasya, 
you old so-and-so, you gave your little lady a 
jolly rough time of it ! ' 
All this, as I have informed the reader earlier, 
is beyond the power of my pen, and therefore I 
remain silent. Let us rather return to Mr. Goly­
adkin, the true hero of my veracious tale. 
His present position was curious to say the least. 
He also was there, ladies and gentlemen-not at 
the ball, that is, but very nearly. He was quite all 
right, and going his own way-although for the 
moment he had chosen anything but a direct 
route. He was standing-it's a funny thing to 
have to say-on a landing on the back stairs of 
Olsufy Ivanovich's apartment. But there was 
nothing wrong with his standing there. He was 
quite all right. He was pressed into a corner 
where, if it was not particularly warm, it was at 
least as dark as possible, and he was partially 
hidden, amidst all kinds of lumber and rubbish, 
by an enormous cupboard and some old screens. 
Here he was concealing himself until the ap­
pointed hour, and meanwhile merely following 
the general course of things as an outside observer. 
He was just watching . . . He could go in if he 
wanted . . .  After all, why shouldn't he ? A few 
steps, and in he'd go, with all the ease in the 
world. It was only after he had been standing 
between the cupboard and screens amidst all kinds 

58 
T H E  D O U B L E 
of lumber and rubbish for over two hours in the 
cold, that to justify himself he quoted a phrase 
of the late lamented French Minister Villele, to 
the effect that all comes in due season to him 
who wisely waits. It was a phrase he'd seen some 
time before in a book on some quite extraneous 
subject, but to have recalled it at that moment 
was particularly appropriate. In the first place it 
was a phrase well-suited to his position, and, 
secondly, why shouldn't it have occurred to 
someone who had spent nearly three hours on a 
cold dark landing, waiting for a happy ending to 
his troubles ? Immediately following this appro­
priate quotation, Mr. Golyadkin for some un­
known reason called to mind the late Turkish 
Vizier Martsimiris and the lovely Margravine 
Luise, both of whom he had read about at some 
time or other in a book. He then called to mind 
that the Jesuits had a maxim that all means were 
justified, provided the end was attained. A little 
encouraged by this historical fact, he asked him­
self what the Jesuits were. Numskulls, every one 
of them ! He'd outshine the lot. And if only the 
buffet-a door of which opened onto the back 
stairs and Mr. Golyadkin' s landing-were dear 
of people for a minute, Jesuits or no Jesuits, he'd 
march straight through-through the tea salo11, 
through the room where they were playing cards, 
and into the ball-room where at that 1noment 
they were dancing a polka. He'd march straight 

T H E  D O U B L E 
59 
through, in spite of everything . . .  Just slip past. 
No one would notice. And once there he would 
know what to do. 
Such, ladies and gentlemen, is the position in 
which we discover the hero of our very true story. 
Although to explain exactly what had been hap­
pening to hitn is difficult. 
He had been able to get as far as the stairs and 
landing, for the simple reason that everyone else 
had, and he didn't see why he shouldn't too. 
But go farther, he dare not-that was clear. 
Not because he wouldn't, but because he didn't 
want to, because he preferred to stay quiet. And 
there he was, staying quiet just as he had been for 
the past two and a half hours. But why shouldn't 
he ? Villele waited. 
'But what's Villele got to do with it ?' thought 
Mr. Golyadkin. 'Why drag him in ?  Suppos­
ing . . . Supposing I marched in now ? '  
'A walking-on part-that's all you've got ! '  
said Mr. Golyadkin, pinching his numbed cheek 
with his numbed fmgers. 'What a poor stupid 
fool you are ! ' 
These blandishments were merely by the way, 
and served no apparent purpose. Mr. Golyadkin 
was about to intrude, and had already started for­
ward. The time had con1e. The buffet was clear. 
He could see that through a tiny window. Two 
steps, and he ·was at the door and already opening 
It. 

60 
T H E  D O U B L E 
' Shall I, or shan't I : Shall I ? 
• 
• 
• Yes, I will­
why shouldn't I :  The brave go where they please ! '  
Thus reassuring himself, our hero suddenly and 
quite unexpectedly withdrew behind the screen. 
'No,' he thought. ' Suppose someone comes 
in ?  There you are-now someone has. Why did 
I stand gaping when no one was there ? Gone 
straight in-that's what I ought to have done ! 
But what's the good of saying that when you're 
made like me ? It's a vile tendency I've got ! 
I simply went into a blue ftmk. That's me all 
over ! Always making a hash of it-no question 
of that. And here I am standing round like a 
blinking idiot ! I could be at home now drinking 
a cup of tea . . . A cup of tea would be jolly nice. 
Petrushka will grumble if I'm late. Why not go 
home : To hell with all this ! Come on, I'm off! ' 
Having settled things thus, Mr. Golyadkin 
shot forward as if a spring had been touched off 
inside him. Two strides, and he was in the buffet. 
Flinging off his hat and coat and stuffmg them 
hurriedly into a corner, he straightened his jacket, 
smoothed his hair, and proceeded to the tea 
salon. From there he whisked on into the next 
room, slipped unobserved between the card­
players absorbed in the excitement of their game, 
and then . . .  At this point Mr. Golyadkin became 
oblivious of all that was going on around, and 
suddenly, like a bolt from the blue, he entered 
the ball-room. 

T H E  D O U B L E 
, 
61 
As if to spite him, no one was dancing. The 
ladies were promenading in picturesque groups. 
The men were gathering in little knots, or darting 
about engaging partners. Mr. Golyadkin noticed 
none of this. All he saw was Klara Olsufyevna, 
and standing near her, Andrey Filippovich, 
Vladimir Semyonovich, two or three officers, 
and two or three other very interesting young 
men who, as one could judge at first sight, were 
also the subject or the embodiment of great hopes. 
He saw one or two other people as well. Or 
rather-he didn't. He was no longer aware of 
anybody. Propelled by the same spring that had 
brought him bounding into a ball to which he 
had not been invited, he continued to advance 
steadily. He collided with a counsellor and trod 
heavily on his foot ; he stepped on the dress of a 
certain venerable old lady and tore it slightly ; he 
jostled a man with a tray ; he elbowed somebody 
else, but still forged on, noticing none of this, 
or, more accurately, noticing it, but not looking 
at anyone, until suddenly he found himself face 
to face with Klara Olsufyevna. At that moment 
there's not a shadow of doubt he would have 
dropped through the floor with the greatest 
pleasure in the world, and without so much as 
blinking. But what's done can't be undone-it's 
'Jtlite impossible. What could be done ? 
' If at first you don't succeed, hold on. If you 
do succeed, take courage,' thought Mr. Golyadkin. 

62 
T H E  D O U B L E  
He was, of course, not one for intrigue-no adept 
at bowing and scraping . . .  It had happened now. 
Added to which the Jesuits were mixed up in it 
son1ehow . . . But Mr. Golyadkin had no ti1ne 
for them ! Suddenly, as though at the wave of a 
hand, all noise, movement, conversation and 
laughter ceased, and gradually a crowd fanned 
around him. But he seemed to hear and see 
nothing. He couldn't look . . .  He merely stood 
there, keeping his eyes glued to the ground, but 
secretly vowing on his word of honour that 
somehow or other he'd blow his brains out that 
very night. 
'Here goes ! ' thought Mr. Golyadkin after this, 
and suddenly, to his own infinite astonishment, he 
began to speak. 
Mr. Golyadkin opened with felicitations and 
seemly good wishes. The former went well, but 
over the latter he stumbled. He had sensed that 
ifhe once stumbled everything would immediately 
go to the devil. And so it did. Having stumbled, 
he got stuck. Having got stuck, he blushed. 
Having blushed, he became confused. Becom­
ing confused he raised his eyes, looked about 
him-and froze with horror. They were all 
standing, speechless and expectant. A little way 
off someone began to whisper. Nearer at hand 
there was a sudden boisterous laugh. Mr. Goly­
adkin glanced, humbly embarrassed, at Andre y 
Filippovich. Andrey Filippovich retaliated with 

T H E D O U B L E  
63 
a look which would have crushed our hero cmn­
pletely, had he not been completely crushed already. 
'This concerns n1ore tny private life and n1y 
personal affairs, Audrey Filippovich,' said Mr. 
Golyadki.n, tnore dead than alive, in a voice that 
was barely audible. 'It's not an official matter.' 
'You ought to be ashatned, sir ! ' said Audrey 
Filippovich in a half-whisper, with a look of 
indescribable indignation on his face, taking Klara 
Olsufyevna by the arn1 and tun1ing away frmn 
Mr. Golyadkin. 
'I've nothing to be ashan1ed about, Audrey 
Filippovich,' replied Mr. Golyadkin, also in a half­
whisper, confused, and looking unhappily around 
in an attempt to fmd his tnilieu and proper sphere 
in that bewildered crowd. 
'It's nothing, nothing, gcntlen1en. Why, it 
could happen to anyone,' whispered Mr. Goly­
adkin, shifting his position slightly in an attempt 
to extricate himself from the encircling throng. 
Way was nude for him, and with dificulty our 
hero passed between the two rows of puzzled and 
curious spectators. Fate was drawing him on­
he could feel it. Certainly he'd have given a 
great deal if without any breach of decorun1, he 
could at that n1oment have found himself back 
on the landing. Since, however, this was quite 
impossible, he tried to slip into son1e corner where 
he could just stand, modest, decorous, and inde­
pendent, ৑umoying no one, calling no particular 

64 
T H E  D O U B L E  
attention to himself, but at the same time fmding 
favour with both host and guests. But Mr. 
Golyadkin felt as if the ground were being washed 
away beneath him-felt as though he were sway­
ing and falling. He reached a comer at last, and 
stood there in the manner of a rather indifferent 
outside observer, resting his hands on the backs 
of two chairs to assert full possession of them, 
and attempting as far as possible to give those of 
Olsufy Ivanovich's guests who had grouped them­
selves around him a jaunty look. Standing closest 
to him was an officer, a fine tall figure of a man 
beside whom Mr. Golyadkin felt like something 
out of a cheese. 
'Both these chairs are taken, Lieutenant. One 
is for Klara Olsufyevna, the other is for the 
Princess Chevchekhanova, who is dancing here. 
I'm keeping them for them,' said Mr. Golyadkin 
breathlessly, looking beseechingly at the lieutenant. 
The lieutenant gave him a withering smile and 
turned away without a word. Having suffered a 
rebuff in one quarter, our hero set about trying 
his luck elsewhere, and straightway addressed a 
certain pompous-looking counsellor wearing about 
his neck the cross of an important decoration. 
But the counsellor measured him with a stare 
that was like a sudden drenching tubful of icy 
water. Mr. Golyadkin fell silent. He decided it 
was better not to start up conversation, but to 
hold his peace and show that he was all right, 

T H E  D O U B LE 
65 
that he was like anyone else, and that his position, 
as far as he could sec, was at all events a proper 
one. To this end he glued his eyes to the cuffs 
of his jacket, then raised and fixed them upon a 
certain gentleman of extremely venerable appear­
ance. 
'This gentleman is wearing a wig,' thought 
Mr. Golyadkin. 'And if it's taken off, his head 
will be just like a billiard ball.' 
After 1naking this important discovery, Mr. 
Golyadkin thought of Arab emirs, and the green 
turbans they wear to symbolize their kinship with 
the prophet Mohan1med. Ren1ove the turbans 
and there'll also be nothing but bare, hairless 
heads. Then, probably by a peculiar association 
of ideas, Mr. Golyadkin got on to Turkish slip­
pers, apropos of which he at once reme1nbered 
that the boots Andrcy Filippovich was wearing 
were more like slippers than boots. Clearly he 
was to some extent fa1niliar with his situation. 
'That chandelier up there,' flashed through Mr. 
Golyadkin' s mind-' supposing it broke frmn its 
fittings and fell on the company-!' d rush and 
save Klara Olsufyevna at once. When I'd saved 
her I'd say : "Don't worry, young lady-it's 
nothing. I'm your rescuer." Then . . .  ' Here 
Mr. Golyadkin gave a sidelong glance to sec 
where Klara Olsufycvn::t was, and caught sight 
of Gcrasin1ych, Olsufy Ivanovich's old butler, 
tnaking straight for him, with an imposingly official 

66 
T H E  D O UB L E  
look of conccn1 on his face. An unaccountable 
and at the san1e time most unpleasant sensation 
made Mr. Golyadkin shudder and pucker up his 
face. Mechanically he looked around. He had 
thoughts of quietly edging himself out of harm's 
way, and merging in with the background, that 
is, of acting as if nothing whatever was the matter, 
and he wasn't concerned in it at all. Before he 
could reach any decision, however, there was 
Gerasimych, standing in front of him. 
'Can you sec that candle in the candelabra, 
Gcrasimyclu ' said our hero, smiling slightly. 'It's 
going to fall in a nlinute. Just go and tell someone 
to put it right. I'm sure it'll fall . . .  
' 
'The candle, sin Oh no, sir, that's all right. 
But there's someone asking for you, sir.' 
'Who's asking for me, Gerasimych ?' 
'I don't know exactly, sir. It's someone with a 
message. "Is Y akov Petrovich here ? "  he said. 
"Then call him," he said-"it's something very 
. 1 
d 
"' 
VIta an urgent . . .  
'No, Gerasimych, you're mistaken, quite nus­
taken.' 
'Hardly, sir.' 
'There's no "hardly" about it ! No one is 
asking for me, there's no one to ask. And I'm 
quite at home here-that is, I'm where I belong.' 
Mr. Golyadkin paused for breath, and looked 
around. It was as he thought ! Every living soul 
in the roon1 was watching, listening and solemnly 

T H E  D O U B L E 
67 
waltmg. The men were crowding closer, all ears. 
Further off, the ladies were exchanging alarmed 
whispers. The host himself was no great distance 
from Mr. Golyadkin, and· though he gave no 
indication of the direct and immediate interest 
he too was taking in the latter's affairs-for the 
whole thing was being conducted with delicacy 
-Mr. Golyadkin distinctly felt that the decisive 
moment had come. He clearly perceived that 
the hour for a bold stroke and the humiliation of 
his enenues was at hand. He was agitated. He 
felt a kind of sudden inspiration, and in a quavering 
but solemn voice he again addressed the waiting 
Gerasi1nych. 
'No, 1ny friend, no one is asking for n1e. You 
are nustaken. I will go further-you were nus­
taken this afternoon in giving 1ne to understand­
in daring to give me to understand, I say', (Mr. 
Golyadkin raised his voice) 'that Olsufy Ivanovich, 
who has been my benefactor for as long as I can 
ren1embcr, and 'vho, in a certain sense, has been a 
father to me, had forbidden me his house at a time 
when his paternal heart was f1lled with family 
exultation. '  (Well satisfied with himself, but 
deeply moved, Mr. Golyadkin looked about him. 
Tears started to his eyes.) 'I repeat, my friend,' 
concluded our hero, 'you were mistaken-cruelly 
and unpardonably mistaken.' 
It was a n1oment of triumph. Mr. Golyadkin 
felt he had produced exactly the right effect, and 

68 
T H E  D O U B LE 
stood. eyes modestly averted, awaiting Olsufy 
Ivanovich' s embrace. There were clear signs of 
excitement and bewilderment amongst the guests. 
Even the formidable and unshakable Gerasimych 
stuttered over his 'Hardly, sir . . . ' Then sud­
denly, for no apparent reason, the unpitying 
orchestra struck up a polka. All was lost-thrown 
to the winds. Mr. Golyadkin shuddered. Gerasi­
mych took a step back. The whole ball-room 
surged like the sea, and there was Vladimir 
Semyonovich sweeping off Klara Olsufyevna in 
the first couple, followed by the splendid lieutenant 
and the Princess Chevchekhanova in the second. 
Onlookers, filled with curiosity and delight, 
thronged to take a peep at the dancers-the polka 
being a fashionable new dance that was all the 
rage. Mr. Golyadkin was temporarily forgotten. 
But suddenly there was general alarm and per­
turbation. The music stopped . . . Something 
odd had happened. 
Fatigued by the dance and almost breathless, 
Klara Olsufyevna, her cheeks glowing and her 
breast heaving, had sunk exhausted into an arn1-
chair. All hearts had gone out to that delightful 
enchantress. Everyone was vying with everyone 
else to salute her and thank her for the pleasure 
she had afforded them, when suddenl y-thcre was 
Mr. Golyadkin. He was pale, extremely ill at 
case, and he too seen1ed to be in a state of exhaus­
tion, for he could hardly walk. For some reason 

T H E  D O U B L E  
69 
or other he was sm.iling and extending an inviting 
hand. Failing in her an1azcment to withdraw her 
hand in time, Klara Olsufyevna rose mechanic­
ally to Mr. Golyadkin's invitation. Mr. Golyadkin 
took one tottering step forward, then a second. 
He raised one foot, did a sort of bow, gave a sort 
of stamp, and stumbled. He too wanted to dance 
with Klara Olsufyevna. 
Klara Olsufyevna screamed. Everyone rushed 
to free her hand from Mr. Golyadkin' s, and in a 
flash our hero was pushed almost a dozen yards 
away by the crowd. A small group formed 
around him. There were cries and shrieks from 
two old ladies whom Mr. Golyadkin had nearly 
bowled over in his retreat. The confusion was 
appalling. Everyone was shouting, arguing and 
questioning his neighbour. The orchestra had 
fallen silent. Turning round inside the small 
circle of people, and half smiling, Mr. Golyadkin 
was mechanically muttering under his breath 
something about : why shouldn't he ŋ The polka 
was, as far as he could see, a novel and extremely 
interesting dance, contrived to delight the ladies . . .  
But if this was how it had turned out, he was pre­
pared to acquiesce. 
But Mr. Golyadkin' s acquiescence was, it 
seemed, not asked for. A hand fell on his arm, 
another descended lightly on his back, and he felt 
himself being steered with especial care in a certain 
direction. 

70 
T H E  D O U B L E 
He noticed at last that he was heading straight 
for the door. He thought of trying to do or say 
something . . . But no. He didn't want to any 
n1ore. He just laughed it off. He felt himselr 
being put into his overcoat, and his hat being 
rammed down over his eyes. He became aware 
of the cold dark landing and the stairs. Finally he 
tripped, and seemed to be falling into an abyss. 
He tried to cry out, and all of a sudden found he 
was in the courtyard. A chill blast of air struck 
him, and he stopped. Just at that moment he 
caught the sonnd of the orchestra striking up 
again. It all came back to him. His energy seemed 
suddenly restored. He had been standing rooted 
to the spot, but now he broke away, and rushed 
headlong out of the courtyard into the open, to 
freedom and wherever his legs might carry him. 

5 
EVERY tower in St. Petersburg that was wont 
to tell and strike the hour sounded midnight 
as Mr. Golyadkin rushed out, demented, onto 
the Fontanka Embankment near the lzmaylovsky 
Bridge, seeking safety from enemies and persecu­
tion, a shower of insults, the alarmed shrieks ot 
the old ladies, the sobbing and sighing of the 
other women, and the murderous glances ot 
Andrey Filippovich. He had no 1nore life in him. 
He was finished in the full sense of the word, and 
if at that moment he was still able to run, it was 
only by some incredible miracle. 
It was a dreadful night, a real November night, 
dank, misty, rainy and snowy, a night pregnant 
with colds, agues, quinsies, gumboils, and fevers 
of every conceivable shape and size-put in a 
nutshell, a night bestowing all the bounties of a 
St. Petersburg November. The wind howled 
through the streets, lashing the black waters of 
the Fontanka high above the mooring rings, and 
vigorously rattling the feeble lanterns along the 
embankment, which responded with those thin, 
ear-piercing squeaks, that cotnpose the unceas­
ing concert of jarring sound so fa1niliar to every 
inhabitant of St. Petersburg. It was raining and 

72 
T H E  D O U B L E  
snowing all in one. The sheeting rain was broken 
up by the wind and sprayed ahnost horizontally, 
as if from a firetnan' s hose, stabbing and stinging 
the face of the unhappy Mr. Golyadkin like so 
many pins and needles. In the night stillness, dis­
turbed only by the distant rumble of carriages, the 
howl of the wind and the squeak of the lanterns, 
was heard the dismal sound of water gushing and 
gurgling from every roof, porch, gutter and cor­
nice, onto the granite pavement. There was not 
a soul anywhere, nor could there be it seemed, 
at such an hour in such weather. And so, alone 
with his despair, Mr. Golyadkin jogged along the 
Fontanka, taking his usual short quick steps, and 
hastening to reach as soon as possible his Shesti­
lavochnaya Street, his fourth floor and his own 
rooms. 
Although snow, rain and all the nameless 
afflictions of a wet and windy St. Petersburg 
November night were suddenly and with one 
accord assailing Mr. Gol yadkin-weighed down 
as he was with enough misfortune already­
giving no quarter or respite, gumming up his 
eyes, cutting into him from all sides, chilling 
him to the bone, and driving him off his path 
and out of his mind ; although all this had fallen 
upon him at once as if by express agreement 
with his enemies to give him a day and a night 
he would not forget in a hurry, Mr. Golyadkin 
remained almost unaware of this final evidence of 

T H E  D O U B LE 
73 
a persecuting fate, so stmu1ed and shaken was he 
by all that had befallen hitn a few n1inutes earlier 
at Civil Counsellor Bercndeyev's. Any detached 
and impartial observer who at that moment merely 
glanced at Mr. Golyadkin and saw his anguished 
step, would immediately have been imbued with 
a sense of the appalling horror of his misfortunes, 
and would certainly have said he had the look or 
a man wishing to hide and escape from himsel£ 
And that is exactly how it was. We will say more : 
at that moment Mr. Golyadkin wanted not only 
to escape from himself, but to annihilate himselr 
completely, to return to dust and cease to be. He 
was oblivious of all around, and looked as if the 
vexations of that vile night-the long walk, the 
wind and the rain-no longer existed for him. 
A galosh parting company with Mr. Golyadkin's 
right boot, remained where it was in the slush 
and snow of the Fontanka pavement. Mr. Golyad­
kin had no thought of going back for it, for he 
had not noticed its loss. So great was his per­
plexity that every now and then, regardless of 
everything around, he would stop short and stand 
stock-stili in the middle of the pavement, cmn­
pletely absorbed by the awfulness of his downfall. 
At such moments he would depart tllis life and 
cease to exist. Then suddenly, off he would go 
like a madman, and run and run without looking 
back, as though being pursued and fleeing some 
still more dreadful calamity. His was indeed an 

74 
T H E  D O U B L E 
awful predicament. At last, his strength exhausted, 
Mr. Golyadkin stopped, and leaning over the 
railings like son1eone with a sudden nose-bleed, 
stared fixedly at the troubled black waters of the 
Fontanka. How long he spent thus engaged it is 
impossible to say. All one can say is that Mr. 
Golyadkin had then reached such depths of despair, 
had been so wearied, tormented and dispirited, 
that he had forgotten everything-the Izmay­
lovsky Bridge, Shestilavochnaya Street, and the 
position he was in. What did it matter ŋ He didn't 
care. The thing was over and done with-signed, 
sealed and delivered. Why should he worry ŋ . . .  
Suddenly he shuddered all over and instinctively 
leapt sideways a couple of yards. Filled with un­
speakable uneasiness, he peered about him. But 
there was no one. Nothing out of the ordinary 
had happened, and yet . . . And yet he thought 
someone had just been standing right there beside 
him, also with elbows on the railings, and, strange 
to relate, had even spoken to him-had spoken 
quickly, jerkily and not altogether intelligibly, but 
had said something of intimate concern to him. 
'Did I dream it ?' said Mr. Golyadkin, again 
peering around. 'But where am I ŋ  Ugh ! '  he 
concluded, shaking his head, and began uneasily 
and fearfully to stare into the wet murky distance, 
straining his short-sighted eyes to the uttermost 
in an effort to penetrate the sodden darkness that 
lay before him. But there was nothing new. 

T H E  D O U B L E 
75 
Nothing peculiar struck Mr. Golyadkin's eye. 
Everything seemed to be as it should-the snow 
falling harder and thicker, not a thing visible over 
twenty yards, the lanterns squeaking even more 
shrilly than before, and the wind taking up its 
mournful song on an even n1ore piteous and 
plaintive note, like an importunate beggar plead­
ing for a copper for food. 
'What's wrong with me ŋ' thought Mr. Golyad­
kin, setting off on his way again, and still looking 
round occasionally. He felt a strange new sensa­
tion coming over him-a mixture of fear and 
anguish. 
. . . A feverish shudder ran through 
every nerve. It was an unbearably dreadful 
moment. 
'Well, it doesn't matter,' he said to cheer him­
self up. 'Perhaps it's nothing, and not a disgrace 
to anyone's honour. Perhaps it had to be so,' he 
continued, not understanding himself what he 
was saying. 'Perhaps in due course this wil all 
tum out for the best. There won't be anything to 
complain of, and everyone will be vindicated.' 
So saying, and putting his mind at ease with 
words, Mr. Golyadkin shook himself off a bit and 
dislodged the snow with which his hat, collar, 
overcoat, scarf and boots were thickly encrusted. 
But he was still unable to shake off and rid him­
self of that strange vague feeling of anguish. 
Somewhere in the distance a cannon was fired. 
' Fine weather this is,' thought our hero. 'Hark ! 

76 
T H E  D O U B L E 
Won't that be for a flood À You can see the 
water's up too high.' 
No sooner had Mr. Golyadkin said or thougth 
this than he saw someone coming towards him­
someone who probably like himself had been 
delayed on some matter or other. A meaningless, 
quite fortuitous thing it seemed, but for some 
unknown reason Mr. Golyadkin was disturbed, 
scared even, and rather unsure of himself Not 
that he was afraid of it being anyone unpleasant, 
but . . .  
'Who knows who this belated fellow may be ? '  
flashed through Mr. Golyadkin's n1ind. 'Perhaps 
he's the san1e as the rest . . . Perhaps he's the most 
important part of it, and isn't just out for his 
health but with the express purpose of crossing 
my path and provoking me.' 
But Mr. Golyadkin may not exactly have 
thought this ; he may momentarily have sensed 
something very disagreeable that was much the 
same. Still, there was no time for thoughts or 
sensations. The man was a couple of yards away. 
Mr. Golyadkin lost no time in assuming as was his 
wont a very special expression that said clearly 
that he, Golyadkin, was going his own way and 
was all right, that the road was wide enough for 
everyone, and that· he, Golyadkin, -was obviously 
doing no harm to anybody. Suddenly, as though 
struck by a thunderbolt, he stopped dead in his 
tracks, and spun round like a weathercock in the 

T H E  D O U B L E 
' 
77 
wind to stare after the man who had passed and 
was disappearing rapidly into the whirl of snow. 
He also was in a hurry. He was dressed and 
muffled exactly like Mr. Golyadkin from head to 
foot, and was scuttling along the Fontanka at 
almost a run, with the same short rapid step. 
'What's this : '  whispered Mr. Golyadkin­
there was a smile of incredulity on his face, but 
his whole body was trembling. A cold shiver 
ran down his spine. The man had meanwhile 
disappeared completely, and the sow1d of his 
footsteps could no longer be heard. But Mr. 
Golyadkin stil stood gazing after him. Gradu­
ally he recovered his senses. 
'What is it ? '  he thought irritably. 'Have I 
gone mad or something ? ' 
He turned and went his way, walking steadily 
faster and doing his best not to think. With this 
object he even closed his eyes. Suddenly above 
the howling wind and the noise of the storm he 
again heard footsteps very close. He shuddered 
and opened his eyes. Twenty yards away was 
again the dark figure of a man drawing rapidly 
nearer. He was hustling along at a brisk trot, 
and the distance between them was diminishing 
rapidly. Mr. Golyadkin could now see his new 
late-night companion quite distinctly, and uttered 
a cry of horror and atnazement. His legs buckled 
beneath hin1. It was the san1e nun he had passed 
ten minutes before ! This and son1ething else so 

78 
T H E  D O U B L E  
astounded Mr. Golyadkin that he stopped, gave 
a cry, tried to say something, then rushed to over­
take the stranger, shouting in an attempt to halt 
him as quickly as possible. The stranger halted 
some ten yards from Mr. Golyadkin, where his 
whole figure was iluminated by a nearby 
lantern. He turned, and looking puzzled and 
in1patient, waited for what Mr. Golyadkin had 
to say. 
'Excuse me. Perhaps I'm mistaken,' quavered 
our hero. 
The stranger turned away with a gesture of 
annoyance, and walked quickly on without a 
word, as if in a hurry to make up the two seconds 
wasted over Mr. Golyadkin. As for the latter, he 
was trembling all over. His knees turned to jelly, 
and with a groan he sat down on a tall kerbstone. 
There was indeed cause for alarm, for he thought 
there was something familiar about the stranger. 
This by itself would have been nothing. But he 
was now almost sure it was someone he knew. 
He'd seen him often. He'd seen him somewhere 
quite recently even. But where ? Was it yester­
day ? But the fact that he'd seen him often wasn't 
of primary itnportance, there was nothing very 
special about him, nothing certainly that would 
have made anyone look twice at him. He was 
just like anyone else, of course, respectable, and 
perhaps even had certain quite good points ; he 
was, in short, a man going his own way. Mr. 

T H E  D O U B L E  
' 
79 
Golyadkin felt no hatred, cnnlity or even the 
slightest unfriendliness towards hitn-quite the 
reverse it would seen1. And yet-and this was 
the n1ain thing-he would not have wished to 
meet him for all the tea in China, and particular! y 
under circumstances such as the present. Mr. 
Golyadkin, we must add, knew this man per­
fectly well, knew his nan1e even. But again, not 
for all the tea in China would he have spoken his 
name, or been willing to admit that that over there 
was so-and-so whose father was so-and-so. How 
long Mr. Golyadk.in's n1ental confusion lasted, or 
how long he retnained seated on the kerbstone, 
we cannot say. But at last recovering somewhat, 
he took to his heels and ran as hard as he could 
without looking back. His lungs felt as if they 
would burst. Twice he tripped and nearly fell, 
and on one of these occasions his other boot 
parted company with its galosh. Finally he slack­
ened his pace a little to get breath. A rapid glance 
round showed that he had without noticing it 
run the whole of his usual route along the Fan­
tanka, crossed the Anichkov Bridge, and was now 
at the corner ofLiteynaya Street, some way along 
the Nevsky Prospect. He turned into Liteynaya 
Street. At that moment he was in the position of 
a man standing on the brink of a fearful precipice 
when the ground gives way beneath him . . . 
A tremor-the ground moves, a last shudder­
and it's falling with him into the abyss . . . The 

80 
T H E  D O U B L E 
hapless man has neither the strength nor the will­
power to leap back or to take his eyes from the 
yawning chasm . . . He is drawn towards it, 
and fmally jumps to hasten his end. Mr. Golyad­
kin knew, felt and was quite convinced, that some 
new evil would befall him on the way, and that 
some fresh unpleasantness would burst upon him ; 
that there would be, for instance, another meeting 
with the stranger. Oddly enough he even wanted 
this to happen, considering it inevitable and only 
asking that the whole thing might be got over as 
quickly as possible, and that he might know where 
he stood. Only let it be soon ! Meanwhile he ran 
on and on as though propelled by some external 
force, for he felt numb and weak all over. He 
was incapable of thought, but his mind clutched 
brier-like at everything. A miserable little stray 
dog, wet and shivering with cold, attached itself 
to Mr. Golyadkin and trotted along beside him, 
ears down and tail between its legs, every now and 
then looking up at him, timidly and intelligently. 
A long-forgotten idea, a recollection of something 
that had happened in the distant past now came 
into his head and hammered away there, irritating 
him and refusing to let him be. 
' Ugh ! Wretched little dog ! ' muttered Mr. 
Golyadkin, not understanding what he was saying. 
At last he caught sight of his stranger at the 
comer of Italyanskaya Street. But now instead 
of con1ing towards him, he was going in the same 

T H E  D O U B L E  
81 
direction. He was several yards in front, and also 
rurming. They turned into Shestilavoclmaya 
Street. Mr. Golyadkin caught his breath. The 
stranger had stopped right outside the house in 
which he lived. The bell rang, and the iron bolt 
grated back almost simultaneously. The wicket 
opened, the stranger stooped, remained visible 
for a second, then disappeared. Mr. Golyadkin 
got there at almost the same moment, and went 
through the wicket like a shot out of a gun. 
Ignoring the grumbling porter, he rushed breath­
lessly into the courtyard and for a moment regained 
sight of his interesting companion at the foot of 
the staircase leading to his rooms. He hurled 
himself in pursuit. The staircase was dark dank 
and dirty, and tnountains of junk belonging to 
tenants blocked every landing. Any stranger 
journeying up it after dark would run the risk 
of breaking a leg, and would be forced to spend 
about half an hour over it, cursing the staircase 
together with his friends for having settled in such 
a place. But Mr. Golyadkin's companion was 
darting lightly up the stairs, encountering no diffi­
culties, and showing perfect knowledge of the 
ground. Mr. Golyadkin nearly caught him up. 
Several times the hem of the stranger's coat 
brushed his nose. Suddenly his heart sank. The 
tnysterious man had stopped and knocked at the 
door of Mr. Golyadkin' s flat. Petrushka answered 
at once as if he had been waiting up (at any other 

82 
T H E  D O U B LE 
tin1e this would have surprised Mr. Golyadkin), 
and lighted the stranger in with a candle. Half 
out of his wits our hero followed, and without 
removing hat or overcoat, dashed down the short 
corridor. On the threshold of his room he stopped 
as though struck by a thunderbolt. His worst fears 
were realised . . . Everything he had dreaded and 
foreseen was now fact. Sitting on his bed, also 
wearing a hat and coat, smiling slightly, puckering 
up his eyes and tipping hi1n a friendly nod, was the 
stranger. Mr. Golyadkin wanted to scream, but 
could not-wanted to n1ake son1e form of pro­
test, but lacked the power. His hair stood on end, 
and he collapsed senseless with horror on the spot. 
And small wonder. He had fully recognized his 
friend of the night. It was none other than him­
self-Mr. Golyadkin . . .  Another Mr. Golyadki.n, 
but exactly the san1e as him . . . It was, in short, 
his double . . .  

6 
NEXT morning at eight precisely, Mr. Golyad­
kin came to, lying in bed. Immediately he 
remembered and saw in his mind's eye the full 
horror of all the extraordinary events of the pre­
ceding day, and the almost impossible adventures 
of the whole incredibly strange night. Such fierce 
diabolical malice on the part of his enemies, partic­
ularly as last demonstrated, made Mr. Golyadkin' s 
blood run cold. But at the same time it was all 
so peculiar, incomprehensible and absurd, it all 
seemed so impossible even, that really one could 
hardly credit it. Mr. Golyadkin would have been 
only too ready to regard the whole thing as a 
delirious fancy, a momentary derangement of the 
imagination or a clouding of the mind, had he not 
fortunately known from bitter experience of life 
the lengths to which a man may sometimes be 
driven by malice, and the furious extremes to 
which an enemy avenging pride and honour may 
sometimes go. The reality of last night's walk and 
to some extent of what had occurred during that 
walk, was, moreover, confirmed and supported 
by his weary limbs, his muzzy head, his breaking 
back and hacking cough. And fmally he had 
known for ages that they were cooking something 

84 
T H E  D OUB L E  
up, and that there was someone else in with the1n. 
But what of iu On mature consideration Mr. 
Golyadkin decided to keep quiet, to yield, and not 
protest until a certain time. 
'Perhaps their idea was just to give me a fright, 
and when they see n1e not minding or protesting, 
but submitting and humbly putting up with it, 
they'll give way first.' 
Such were the thoughts that ran through the 
mind of Mr. Golyadkin, as, stretching himself in 
bed and easing his aching limbs, he lay waiting 
for Petrushka to make his usual appearance. He 
had already been waiting for about a quarter of 
an hour, listening to the lazy fellow fussing about 
with the samovar behind the partition, but unable 
to make up his mind to call him. One might go 
further and say that Mr. Golyadkin was a little 
scared of facing Petrushka. 
'Heaven knows what he thinks about it all, the 
scoundrel,' he thought. 'Doesn't say a word, but 
he's crafty.' 
At last the door creaked and Petrushka appeared, 
bearing a tray. Mr. Golyadkin watched him 
timidly out of the corner of his eye, waiting im­
patiently for something to happen, waiting to see 
whether he'd say anything on a certain matter. 
Petrushka said not a word, and was somehow even 
more sullen and uncommunicative than usual. He 
squinted darkly around, and was quite clearly ex­
tremely displeased about something. He did not 

T H E  D O U B L E  
85 
so much as glance at his master, and this we may 
observe somewhat irritated the latter. He put 
everything he had brought on the table, turned, 
and disappeared behind his partition without a 
word. 
'He knows ! He knows all about it, the good­
for-nothing ! ' muttered Mr. Golyadkin as he set 
to to drink his tea. But although Petrushka came 
in several times for various things, he put no 
questions to him. 
Mr. Golyadkin was most agitated. The thought 
of going to the office terrified him. He had a strong 
presentiment of something being not quite right 
there. 
'If you go, you'll run slap into it,' he thought. 
'Isn't the best thing now to be patient for a bit : 
Wouldn't it be better to wait, and let them get 
on as they like ŋ I could wait here today, getting 
my strength back, recuperating and thinking it al 
out. Then I could pick a moment, and give them 
the surprise of their lives, and pretend nothing 
whatever was wrong.' 
Pondering thus, Mr. Golyadkin smoked one 
pipe after another. Time flew, and soon it was 
almost half past nine. 
'Well, it's half past nine,' thought Mr. Golyad­
kin. 'It's late to go now. Apart from that I'm 
ill. Of course I'm il. Who's to say I'm not ? 
And if they send anyone to see-let the adminis­
trative officer come if he likes-what do I care : 

86 
T H E  D O U B L E 
I've got backache. I've got a cough. I've got a 
cold in the head, and I can't go. I can't possibly 
in this weather. I might be taken il, and die. 
There's a heavy death-rate nowadays . . .  
' 
At last, by means of such arguments, Mr. 
Golyadkin salved his conscience completely, and 
justified himself in advance against the reprimand 
he might expect from Andrey Filippovich for 
neglecting his work. In all such situations our 
hero was very fond of justifying himself in his own 
eyes by various irrefutable arguments, and so 
salving his conscience completely. And so, his 
conscience salved, he picked up his pipe, filled it, 
and had no sooner got it drawing nicely, than he 
sprang up from the sofa, tossed it away, quickly 
washed, shaved and combed his hair, dragged on 
his uniform jacket and other things, and grabbing 
some papers, shot off to the office. 
Timidly Mr. Golyadkin entered his section, 
trembling in anticipation of something extremely 
nasty, trembling with an expectancy which, if 
unconscious and vague, was at the same time 
unpleasant. Timidly he seated himself at his 
usual place next to Anton Antonovich Setochkin, 
the chief clerk. Without looking round or allow­
ing himself to be distracted, he buried himself in 
the papers before him. He had decided and pro­
mised himself to keep as far aloof as possible 
from anything provocative, anything that could 
in any way compromise him, such as indelicate 

T H E  D O U B L E 
87 
questions, unseemly insinuations, and pleasantries 
about the events of the preceding night ; he had 
even made up his mind to forgo the usual cour­
tesies with his colleagues-inquiries as to their 
health etc. But to keep this up was obviously an 
impossibility. Uneasiness and uncertainty about 
something that touched him intimately always 
tormented him more than the thing itself. And 
that is why, despite his promise not to become 
involved whatever happened, and to keep aloof 
from everything, no matter what it was, Mr. 
Golyadkin kept raising his head, furtively and 
ever so slightly, to take a sly peep at the faces of 
his colleagues to left and right, in an attempt to 
decide whether anything new or special concern­
ing him was for some improper reason being con­
cealed. He supposed there to be a direct connexion 
between everything at that moment around him 
and what had happened the day before. At last 
he began to wish in his anguish that it might 
all end as speedily as possible, though heaven 
alone knew how-in some disaster if need be­
it didn't matter ! Fate took him at his word. No 
sooner had he made the wish, than his doubts 
were resolved, albeit in a most peculiar and un­
expected manner. 
The door of the next room opened with a timid 
little squeak as if to announce a person of no great 
consequence, and a figure, well known to Mr. 
Golyadkin, came and stood diffidently before the 

88 
T H E  D O U B L E 
desk at which he was sitting. Our hero did not 
raise his head. No. One fleeting glance at this 
figure, and he knew, he understood it all to the 
last detail. He flushed with shame, and just as 
the ostrich pursued by a hunter hides its head in 
the burning sand, so Mr. Golyadkin buried his 
wretched head in his papers. The newcomer 
bowed to Andrey Filippovich, and then could be 
heard those silkily formal tones in which the heads 
of all government departments are wont to 
address newly-arrived subordinates. 
' Sit here,' said Andrey Filippovich, indicating 
Anton Antonovich' s desk to the new recruit. ' Sit 
here opposite Mr. Golyadkin, and we'll give you 
some work right away.' He ended with a rapid 
and decorous admonitory wave of the hand, and 
was lost in the perusal of various documents from 
the great pile in front of him. 
At last Mr. Golyadkin raised his eyes, and if he 
did not faint away, it was solely because he had 
had from the first a presentiment of the whole 
thing, had been forewarned, and had already 
known in his heart who the newcomer was. His 
first move was to take a rapid glance around to 
see whether there was any whispering, whether 
any office witticisms were taking shape on the 
subject, whether anyone's face expressed surprise, 
and fmally whether anyone had collapsed beneath 
his desk with fright. But to his great astonishment 
he could detect nothing of the sort. He was 

T H E  D O U B L E  
89 
anuzed by his friends' and colleagues' behaviour. 
It seemed beyond the bounds of cmnmon sense. 
He was even frightened by such unusual silence. 
The reality of the thing spoke for itsel( It was 
strange, hideous, absurd. It was something to 
make a stir about. All this of course, merely 
flashed through Mr. Golyadkin' s mind. He felt as 
if he was being slowly roasted alive, and not 
without reason. Sitting opposite, was the terror 
of Mr. Golyadkin, the shame of Mr. Golyadkin, 
his nightmare of the day before, in short, Mr. 
Golyadkin hin1self; not the one who was now 
sitting on his chair with mouth agape and a dry 
pen in his hand ; not the one who was assistant 
to the chief clerk ; not the one who liked to efface 
and hide hin1self in the crowd ; not the one who 
said plainly by the way he walked, 'Don't touch 
me, and I won't touch you,' or 'Don't touch me, 
I'm not hurting you.' No. This was a different 
Mr. Golyadkin, quite different but at the same 
time identical with the first-the san1e height, 
same build, dressed the same, bald in the same 
place ; in short, the resemblance was perfect ; 
nothing, absolutely nothing had been omitted, so 
that had they been stood side by side, not a soul 
would have undertaken to say who was the real 
Mr. Golyadkin, and who the counterfeit, who the 
old, and who the ne\v, who the original and who 
the copy. 
Our hero, if comparison is possible, was like a 

90 
T H E  D O U B L E  
1nan on whon1 some wag has secretly focussed a 
burning-glass by way of a joke. 
'Is it a drean1, or isn't iu' wondered Mr. 
Golyadkin. 'Is it real, or is it yesterday's business 
continued ? But how can it ? What right has this 
to happen ? Who admitted this clerk ? Who 
authorized it ? Am I asleep ? Am I dreaming ? ' 
Mr. Golyadkin tried pinching himself, and even 
thought of pinching somebody else . . . No, it 
wasn't a dream, so that was that. He felt the 
sweat pouring from him. What was happening 
to him was, he sensed, unprecedented, unheard­
of, and therefore, to crown his misfortune, un­
seemly, for he perceived and understood the full 
disadvantage of being the first example of such 
lampoonery. He began fmally even to doubt 
his own existence, and although he had been 
prepared for everything in advance, and had 
himself wished for his doubts to be resolved in 
some way, what had happened was, of course, 
in the nature of a surprise. He was wrung with 
anguish. Now and then he would lose all power 
of reasoning and lapse into unconsciousness. After 
one such moment he recovered to fmd himself 
automatically and unconsciously guiding his pen 
over the paper. Not trusting himself, he began 
checking what he had written, but could make 
nothing of it. 
At last, the other Mr. Golyadkin, who all this 
while had been sitting quietly and decorously at 

T H E  D O U B L E  
91 
his place, got up, and disappeared into the other 
section on son1e tnatter. Mr. Golyadkin took a 
look around, but there was nothing. All was 
still. Nothing could be heard but the scratching 
of pens, the rustle of turning pages, and a murmur 
of conversation fron1 con1ers a little further re­
moved frmn the seat of Audrey Filippovich. Mr. 
Golyadkin glanced at Anton Antonovich, and 
seeing our hero's expression, which in all likeli­
hood reflected his tnood at that mmnent, and was 
in keeping with the whole drift of the affair, the 
good Anton Antonovich laid aside his pen, and 
with unusual concern inquired after Mr. Golyad­
kin' s health. 
'I-I-I'm all right, Anton Antonovich. I'm 
perfectly well, Anton Antonovich,' stammered 
Mr. Golyadkin. 'I've nothing at the moment to 
complain of, Anton Antonovich,' he added uncer­
tainly, not yet fully trusting tlus Anton Antonovich 
whose natne he was using so freely. 
'There. I thought you were poorly. It wouldn't 
have been surprising, I'm afraid. All sorts of 
epidenlics about, especially at present, you know.' 
'Y cs, Anton Antonovich, I know there are . . .  
But Anton Antonovich, that's not the reason for 
which I . . .  ' continued Mr. Golyadkin, staring 
hard at hitn. 'You sec, Anton Antonovich-I 
don't know how to put it to you-that is, I mean, 
from what angle to tackle this matter . . .  ' 
'What was that ? I confess I don't quite follow 

92 
T H E  D O U B L E  
you, you know. You . . .  urn . . .  You tell me a 
bit more fully what the trouble is,' said Anton 
Antonovich who, seeing the tears start to Mr. 
Golyadkin' s eyes, was becoming a little troubled 
himsel£ 
'I really . . . There's a clerk here, Anton 
Antonovich . . . ' 
'Well ? I still don't follow.' 
'What I mean, Anton Antonovich, is that there's 
a newly-arrived clerk here.' 
'Yes. A namesake of yours.' 
'Wh-a-t ?' cried Mr. Golyadkin. 
' A  namesake of yours. He's Golyadkin, too. 
Your brother, perhaps ? '  
'No, Anton Antonovich, I . . .  ' 
'Hm. You don't say. I thought he must be a 
near relation. There's a certain family resemblance, 
you know.' 
Mr. Golyadkin was stunned with amazement, 
and for a while, speechless. How could he treat 
so lightly a thing so unparalleled and monstrous 
-a thing so rare in its way as to astound the most 
uninterested observer ! How could anyone speak of 
a family resemblance, when here was a mirror 
image ! 
'Do you know what I advise you to do, Y akov 
Petrovich ?' continued Anton Antonovich-' go 
and see a doctor and ask his advice. Somehow 
you don't look at all well, you know. Your eyes 
have got a fmy look about them.' 

T H E  D O U B L E 
93 
'No, Anton Antonovich, naturally I feel . 
That is, what sort of a person is he, this clerk ? 
That's what I want to know.' 
'Y 
, 
cs ? 
'That is, haven't you noticed something peculiar 
about him, Anton Antonovich-something very 
significant ?' 
'What exactly ?' 
'I mean a striking resemblance to someone-to 
n1e for instance. Just now you said something, 
just a casual remark, about a family resemblance . . .  
Do you know twins are sometin1es as alike 
as two peas in a pod, so that you can't tell one 
from the other ? Well, that's what I'm talking 
about . . .  
' 
'Yes,' said Anton Antonovich, after pondering 
for a moment, as though this had never struck him 
betore. 'Yes. Quite right. Really, the resem­
blance is amazing, and you're perfectly correct 
-you could be taken for one another,' he con­
tinued, with a look of ever-increasing astonish­
ment. 'Do you know, it's a wonderful-it's a 
fantastic likeness, as they sometimes say. He's you 
exactly . . . Have you noticed, Yakov Petrovich ? 
I n1eant to ask you about it myself I 1nust confess, 
I wasn't paying proper attention at first. It's a 
wonder, it really is ! And tell me, Yakov Petro­
vich, you weren't born here, were you ? ' 
'N ' 
o. 
'Neither was he. Perhaps you're frmn the san1c 

94 
T H E  D O U B L E 
parts. Where did your n1other spend n1ost of her 
life, if you don't mind my asking ŋ '  
'Did you say . . . Did you say he wasn't born 
here, Anton Antonovich ? ' 
'No, he's not from these parts. It's an absolute 
marvel,' continued the loquacious Anton Antono­
vich, for whom it was a real treat to have smnething 
to prattle about. 
'It really does nuke you curious. The number 
of tin1es you pass him, brush up against hitn or 
knock into hin1, and don't notice. But don't you 
worry. It's a thing that does happen. Do you 
know, I n1ust tell you this, the very same thing 
occurred to an aunt of mine on tny mother's 
side. She saw her own spit and image before she 
died . . .  ' 
'No, I . . . Forgive my interrupting you, Anton 
Antonovich, but what I should like to know is 
how this clerk-that is, how does he stand here ?' 
'He's got the vacancy left by Setnyon Ivanovich 
who died. A place fell vacant, so they put hin1 
in. A good-hearted fellow, poor Semyon Ivano­
vich. Left three little kiddies, so they say. His 
widow came, and went down on her knees to his 
Excellency. But they say she hides it away. She's 
got a bit of money, but she hides it . . .  ' 
'No, I'm still on about the other thing, Anton 
Antonovich.' 
'What's than Ah, yes. But why are you so 
concerned about in Don't worry, that's what I 

T H E  D O U B L E 
95 
say. It'll all pass. What docs it n1attcn It's no 
affair of yours. It's God's doing, it's His will, and 
to grmnblc at that is a sin. His infmite wisdom is 
apparent in this, and you, Yakov Petrovich, so far 
as I can gather, are in no way to blame. The world 
is full of wonders ! Mother Nature is generous. 
And by way of example, while we' rc on the 
subject, you've heard, I take it, about-what 
d'you call 'em-the Siamese twins, being joined 
back to back, and living, eating and sleeping 
together like it. They earn good n1oney, people 
' 
say. 
'Anton Antonovich, allow n1e . . .  
' 
'I take your meaning. Well, what of it ? It 
doesn't tnatter. I tell you, to tny mind there's 
nothing to get upset about. He's a clerk just like 
anyone else-seems a capable chap. Says he's called 
Golyadkin. Isn't from hereabouts, he says, and 
he's a clerk. He's had a personal talk with his 
Excellency.' 
'What about =' 
' Oh, nothing. Gave an adequate account of 
himself, they say. Stated his case : " Such and 
such, and such and such, your Excellency. I've no 
fortune, I'd like to serve, and would be espcciall y 
proud to do so under you . . .  " Well, everything 
as it should be, you know. Put it all very nicely. 
Must be a clever fellow. Came with a rcconlmen­
dation, of course. Can't do much without one, 
you know.' 

96 
T H E  D O U ll L E  
'Who was it from : What I n1can is, who 
exactly is mixed up in this scandalous business :' 
' Oh, yes. It was a good recommendation, so 
they say. They say his Excellency had a laugh 
with Andrey Filippovich over it.' 
'Had a laugh with Andrey Filippovich ?' 
'Yes. He just smiled, and said it was all right, 
and he had no objections, provided he did his job 
properly . . .  
' 
'Well, what happened next ? You're cheering 
me up quite a bit, Anton Antonovich. Tell me 
what happened next, I beg you.' 
' Forgive me. Again I don't quite . . .  Ah well, 
it's no matter. It's quite simple. Don't you go 
worrying, that's what I say. There's nothing fishy 
b 
. 
' 
a out It . . .  
'No, what I want to ask you, Anton Antono­
vich, is, didn't his Excellency add anything to 
that, about me for instance ? ' 
'Oh, certainly ! Or rather, no, not a thing. 
You can be quite easy in your mind. Do you 
know-it's striking enough, of course, yet at 
first . . . Well, take n1c for instance. I almost 
missed it at first. Why I didn't notice till 
you mentioned it, I don't know, I'm sure. But 
still, you can be easy in your mind. He 
said nothing special, nothing whatever,' added 
the good Anton Antonovich, rising fron1 his 
scat. 
'Well, Anton Antonovich, I . . .  ' 

T H E  D O U D L E 
97 
'Er, look, excuse me, will you : Here I've been, 
babbling away, and I've got something urgent and 
important to do. I must get it finished.' 
' Anton Antonovich,' came a polite summons 
from Andrey Filippovich, 'his Excellency has been 
asking for you.' 
' Coming, Andrey Filippovich, conling at 
' 
once. 
And grabbing a pile of papers, Anton Antono­
vich sped first to Andrey Filippovich, and then 
into his Excellency's room. 
' So that's how we stand,' thought Mr. Golyad­
kin to himsel£ ' So that's the way things are. Not 
bad. Things have taken a much pleasanter turn,' 
he said to himself, rubbing his hands, and in his 
joy, oblivious of everything. 
' So it's quite ordinary, this business of ours. It's 
all come to nothing. It's all blowing over. No 
one's noticed in fact. Not a squeak out of them, 
the cut-throats-they're sitting and getting on 
with their work. Splendid ! Splendid ! 
'I like the nun, always have done, and respect 
hin1 . . . But now I come to think of it, I'd be 
afraid to trust him with anything. He's very grey 
and doddery is Anton Antonovich. Still, the tnain 
and most itnportant thing is his Excellency's not 
saying anything, but just letting it pass. That's 
good. I approve of that. Only why's Andrey 
Filippovich got to butt in with his sneers ৒ What's 
it got to do with him ŋ Crafty old devil ! He's 

98 
T H E  D O U B LE 
always in your way, always trying to mess things 
up, always crossing and spiting, spiting and cross­
ing you !' 
Mr. Golyadkin took another look round, and 
was again encouraged. But a vague and un­
pleasant idea that he had, nevertheless troubled him. 
The thought crossed his mind of somehow en­
listing the support of the clerks, of somehow steal­
ing a 1narch on thein, and, approaching them 
ostensibly on business, or as they were all leaving, 
of n1aking in the course of conversation some 
reference to the subject such as ' Such and such, 
and such and such, gentle1nen-a striking resem­
blance-very strange-sailing under false colours, 
that's what it is.' Thus, by treating it as a joke, 
he would gauge the extent of the danger. For still 
waters ran deep, he concluded. But his thought 
remained nothing n1ore than a thought. He 
changed his 1nind in time. He realized that would 
be going too far. 
'That's you all over ! ' he said, tapping his fore­
head. 'Now you'll be full of fun. You're happy ! 
Honest soul that you are. No. We'd better have 
patience, Yakov Petrovich. We'll have patience 
and wait.' 
None the less Mr. Golyadkin was, as we have 
mentioned, filled with renewed hope, and felt 
like son1eone risen from the dead. 
'It's all right,' he thought. 'It's like having a 
ton-weight off your chest. "To open it you 

T H E  D O U B L E 
99 
sin1ply raised the lid."* It's as simple as that. 
Krylov' s right. He knows all about it. He's an 
artful one, Krylov, and a great fable-writer ! 
'And as far as this other fellow is concerned, let 
hin1 work here. Let him, and good luck to him, 
provided he doesn't hinder or interfere with any­
one. Let him-he's got my consent and approval! '  
All this time the hours had been slipping by, 
and four struck before Mr. Golyadkin noticed it. 
Office hours were over. Andrey Filippovich went 
for his hat, and as usual everyone followed his 
example. Mr. Golyadkin hung about for a bit, 
deliberately leaving last, after everyone had gone 
their separate ways. Once out in the street, he 
felt as if he was in paradise, so much so that he 
conceived a desire to make a detour and go along 
the N evsky Prospect. 
'It's fate-everything taking this unexpected 
tun1,' said our hero. 'And the weather's better. 
There's a nice frost, and sledges are out. Frost's 
good for a Russian. I like Russians. And there's 
a bit of snow-fresh-fallen snow as a hunter would 
say. That's the tin1e to go after hares, when there's 
fresh-fallen snow. Ah well ! It doesn't n1atter.' 
Thus did Mr. Golyadkin express his delight, 
but all the while there was a sort of anxiety at the 
* Last line of a fable by I. A. Krylov describing the clever 
attempts made to open a certain box in every way but the obvious, 
and suggesting that difficulties should not be seen where they 
do not exist.- Translator. 

100 
T H E  D O U B L E  
back of his mind, and at times a gnawing pain at 
his heart for which he could find no relief. 
' Still, we'll wait a day before we start rejoicing. 
But what's wrong ? We'll think it all out, and 
see. Well, come on n1y young friend, let's think 
it out then. First of all, there's someone like you, 
exactly like you. Well, what is there in that ? 
Supposing there is-any need for me to cry over 
it ? What's it matter to me ? I' In out of it all. I 
don't care, and that's that. I accept it, and there 
you are. Let him work in the office ! It's strange 
and wonderful, they say, about the Sian1ese 
twins . . . Well, why drag them in ?  Suppose they 
are twins--even great men have looked silly at 
times. History even tells us the great Suvorov 
used to crow like a cock . . . Still, all that was for 
political reasons. And even the great generals . . .  
But what are generals ? I go my own way. I 
don't bother about anyone else, and being ino­
cent, I scorn my enemies. I'm no intriguer, and 
proud of the fact. Frank, upright, mild, agree­
able, orderly . .  .' 
Mr. Golyadkin broke off suddenly, began 
tren1bling like a leaf, and shut his eyes for a nlo­
ment. Trusting what had frightened him to have 
been an illusion, however, he opened them again, 
and glanced timidly to the right out of the corner 
of his eye. It was no illusion ! Trotting along 
beside hinl, snuling, looking straight at hiin, and 
waiting, it seemed, for a chance to start a con-

T H E  D O U B L E  
101 
versation, was the person whose acquaintance he 
had tnade that tnorning. But conversation was 
not started. They continued thus for about fifty 
yards. All Mr. Golyadkin' s efforts were directed 
towards muffling himself up as much as possible, 
burying himself in his overcoat, and pulling his 
hat as far as it would go down over his eyes. To 
add insult to injury, even the other's hat and coat 
were identical with Mr. Golyadkin's-they n1ight 
have been taken fron1 his own back. 
'We go different ways, it seems, sir . . .  ' said 
Mr. Golyadkin finally, not looking at his friend 
and trying to keep his voice to a whisper. 'I'm 
quite sure we do,' he said after a short pause. 'I'm 
sure you at last take n1y n1eaning,' he threw in 
rather stiffiy. 
'I should like . . . ' said Mr. Golyadkin' s friend 
at last. ' I  should like . . . You'll kindly forgive 
me, I hope . . . I don't know who to turn to 
here . . . Placed as I an1 . . . I trust you'll excuse 
my making so bold, but I thought you were so 
sympathetic as to take smne interest in me this 
morning. Speaking for n1ysclf, I felt drawn to 
you fron1 the first. I . . .  
' 
At this point Mr. Golyadkin silently wished 
that his new colleague might disappear through 
the ground. 
' If I might venture to hope that you would con­
descend to hear me out, Y akov Petrovich . . .  ' 
'Here we're, er . . .  We'd better go to my 

102 
T H E  D O U B L E 
place,' replied Mr. Golyadkin. 'Let's cross the 
Nevsky now. It's more convenient for us on the 
other side. Then there's a little side street we can 
take . . . Yes, we'd better do that.' 
'Yes, certainly, we'll take the little side street,' 
said Mr. Golyadkin's submissive companion, seem­
ing to intitnate by his diffident tone that he could 
not pick and choose, and that, situated as he was, 
he was prepared to be satisfied with the little side 
street. 
As for Mr. Golyadkin, he had no idea what was 
happening to him. He could not trust his own 
senses. He had not yet recovered from his aston­
ishtnent. 

7 
ON the stairs and at the door of his roon1s he 
recovered a little. 
'What a dim-wit I a1n !' he chided himsel£ 
'Where am I taking him : I'm putting a rope 
around my own neck. What will Petrushka think, 
seeing us together : What won't the wretch think 
now ! He's suspicious as it is . . .  
' 
But it was too late for any regrets. Mr. Golyad­
kin knocked, the door opened and Petrushka began 
helping guest and master out of their coats. Mr. 
Golyadkin stole a quick look, just a glance at 
Petrushka, in an attempt to read his thoughts fron1 
his face. But to his great astonishment his servant 
showed no surprise-quite the reverse, as if he had 
been expecting something of the sort. Of course, he 
was far from friendly. He wouldn't look you in the 
eye, and seemed all set to bite someone' s head off. 
'What's wrong today ? Is everyone under a 
spell ?' thought our hero. ' Son1e den1on n1ust 
have been around. Certainly something has got 
into them. What a damned worry it is ! ' 
Such were Mr. Golyadkin' s reflections as he 
conducted his guest into his room, and humbly 
invited hin1 to take a scat. The guest showed every 
sign of being acutely embarrassed and overcome 

104 
T H E  D O U B L E 
with shyness, dutifully watched his host's every 
n10ve and caught his every glance, striving, it 
seemed, to divine what he was thinking. There 
was something abject, downtrodden and fearful 
about every gesture he made, so that at this 
moment he was, if one may use the simile, rather 
like a man who, having no clothes of his own, 
has donned someone else's, and can feel the sleeves 
riding up and the waist nearly round the back or 
his neck, and is all the time pulling down the 
miserably short waistcoat ; he edges away, tries 
hard to hide, looks at every face to see if people 
are ashamed on his account or laughing at hin1, 
strains his ears to fmd out if they're discussing his 
affairs ; he goes red, and gets confused ; his pride 
suffers. Mr. Golyadkin had put his hat on the 
window ledge. A sudden careless n1ovement 
knocked it to the floor. At once his guest shot 
forward, picked it up, dusted it off, and carefully 
replaced it, putting his own on the floor beside a 
chair on the very edge of which he meekly perched 
himself. This trivial incident was something of an 
eye-opener to Mr. Golyadkin. Realizing that his 
guest was in sore straits, he no longer felt at a loss 
how to begin, but very properly left it all to him. 
But he would not begin either, and waited for his 
host to make the opening-whether this was out 
of shyness, embarrassment or politeness, would be 
dificult to say. At this moment Petrushka ap­
peared, and stood in the doorway, his eyes fixed 

T H E  D O U B L E  
105 
on the opposite com.er of the room to that in 
which his master and the guest were sitting. 
' Shall I bring dinner for two :' he asked casually, 
in his rather husky voice. 
'I-I don't know . . .  Er, yes-dinner for two.' 
Mr. Golyadkin glanced at his guest, and saw 
that he had gone as red as a beetroot. Being a 
kind-hearted person, he formed a theory accord­
ingly. 
'Poor fellow,' he thought, 'only been at the 
office a day. Probably been through it in his time. 
Only got what he stands up in, perhaps, and can't 
afford diner. What a downtrodden specin1en 
he is ! Well, it doesn't matter. It's better like that 
. 
' 
m some ways . . .  
'Forgive my asking,' began Mr. Golyadkin, 'but 
what are your Christian names ? 
' 
'I'm-I'm Yakov Petrovich,' said the guest 
almost in a whisper, as though ashamed, embar­
rassed and apologetic that this should be so. 
'Y akov Petrovich ! ' echoed our hero, unable to 
hide his confusion. 
'Yes, that's right. . . . We're namesakes,' 
replied Mr. Golyadkin's lowly visitor, making so 
bold as to smile and say something jocular. But 
seeing his host was in no mood for jocularity, 
he immediately stopped short and assumed a most 
serious but rather embarrassed look. 
'Er . . . May I ask to what I can attribute the 
honour . . .  : ' 

106 
T H E  D O U B L E  
'Knowing you to be upright and generous,' inter­
posed his guest quickly but timidly, half rising 
from his seat, 'I have ventured to appeal to you 
for your friendship and protection,' he concluded, 
finding obvious dificulty in expressing himself, and 
selecting words that were not too adulatory and 
not too self-abasing, to avoid hurting his pride, 
nor yet too bold and savouring of an equality that 
was not proper. Mr. Golyadkin' s guest was, as 
one might put it, behaving like a beggar of gentle 
birth who, with dams in his coat and the papers 
appropriate to his true status in his pocket, has not 
yet learnt how to stretch out his palm. 
'You embarrass me,' replied Mr. Golyadkin, 
looking down at himself, at the walls of his 
room, and then at his guest. 'How can I . . . 
what I mean is, in what respect can I be of service 
' 
to you ? 
'I felt drawn to you at first sight, Y akov Petro­
vich, and-be so generous as to forgive me-l 
dared to put my trust in you. I . . .  I'm all at sea 
here, Yakov Petrovich. I'm poor. I've suffered 
much, Y akov Petrovich, and I'm still new here. 
Discovering that you, with all the innate good 
qualities of a noble spirit, were of the same name 
as myself . . .  
' 
Mr. Golyadkin frowned. 
' . . . And were from the same parts, I resolved 
to come and acquaint you with my difficult posi-
. 
, 
uon. 

T H E  D O U B L E  
107 
' Quite so, quite so. I don't know what to say, 
I'm sure,' replied Mr. Golyadkin disconcertedly. 
'Look, we'll have a talk after dinner.' 
The guest bowed. Ditu1er was brought in. 
Petrushka placed everything on the table, and guest 
and host set about satisfying their appetites. The 
meal did not last long for both ate hurriedly-the 
host because he was not his usual self and felt 
ashamed that the dinner was bad when he would 
have liked to do his guest well, and show that he 
did not live like a pauper-the guest because he 
was extremely shy and embarrassed. Having once 
helped himself to a slice of bread and eaten it, he 
was afraid to reach out a second time. He scrupu­
lously avoided taking the best of anything, and 
every minute assured his host that he wasn't 
hungry, that the meal was excellent, and that he 
was completely satisfied and would remember it 
till the day he died. The meal over, Mr. Golyad­
kin lit his pipe, and offered another that he had 
acquired for friends, to his guest. They seated 
themselves facing each other, and the guest began 
his tale. 
The tale ofGolyadkinjunior lasted three or four 
hours, and was composed of the most trivial, one 
might almost say the most footling, incidents. It 
spoke of service in some provincial law-courts, of 
presidents and prosecutors, of office intrigues, of 
the rottenness of one of the chief clerks, of an 
inspector, of a sudden change of departmental 

108 
T H E  D O U B L E  
head, and ofhow Golyadkin II had suffered entirely 
through no fault of his own ; it spoke of his aged 
aunt Pelageya Semyonova, of how through the 
various machinations of his enemies he had lost 
his post and walked to St. Petersburg ; it spoke of 
his wretched and painful existence in that city, of 
his long, fruitless search for a job, of how he 
exhausted his funds, spent his last penny on food, 
practically lived in the street, ate stale bread 
moistened by his own tears, and slept on bare 
boards ; it spoke fmally of how some kind person 
had taken trouble on his behalf, had given him 
introductions and magnanimously found him a 
new position. In the telling of this Mr. Golyad­
kin's guest wept and dabbed away his tears with a 
blue check handkerchief that looked very much 
like a piece of oilcloth. In conclusion he opened 
his heart to Mr. Golyadkin, and confessed that he 
was for the mmnent not only without means to 
support himself and settle in somewhere, but also 
quite unable to fit himself out properly. He had 
not even been able to raise the price of an old pair 
of boots, and his uniform he had borrowed for a 
short while. 
Mr. Golyadkin was moved, was genuinely 
touched. Trivial as his guest's story had been, he 
had received every word of it like manna from 
heaven. Forgetting his recent misgivings, he 
allowed himself to feel joyously free, and mentally 
wrote himself down as a fool. It was all so natural ! 

T H E  D O U B LE 
109 
What a thing to get distressed and alarmed about ! 
Actually there was one thorny point, but it didn't 
matter. It couldn't disgrace you, damage your 
pride and ruin your career when you were inno­
cent-when Nature herself was involved. More­
over the guest had begged his protection, had 
\Vept and accused fate ; he seemed so simple, so 
completely without malice or artifice, so pathetic 
and insignificant ; and now, although it might 
have been for other reasons, he too appeared em­
barrassed by the strange resemblance he bore to 
his host. His behaviour was completely depend­
able. His very expression was intended to please 
his host, and was that of a man tormented by pangs 
of conscience and a feeling of guilt. If, for in­
stance, conversation touched on any doubtful 
point, the guest at once agreed \Vith Mr. Golyadkin. 
If, by an oversight, he somehow advanced an 
opinion that was contrary to Mr. Golyadkin' s, 
and then noticed his slip, he would immediately 
correct himself, explain, and give his host to under­
stand that he thought exactly the same and viewed 
the whole thing in precisely the same light as he. 
In short, he did his level best to win Mr. Golyad­
kin over, and the latter fmally decided he must be 
a most likable fellow in every way. 
Tea was served. It was now after eight. Mr. 
Golyadkin felt in excellent spirits. He livened up, 
began to enjoy himself and get into his stride a 
bit, and finally launched out into a most lively and 

110 
THE D O U B LE 
entertammg conversation with his guest. Some­
titnes, in n1erry mood, Mr. Golyadkin was fond 
of recounting odd iten1s of interest. So it was now. 
He told his guest a great deal about the capital, its 
entertaintnents and its beauties ; he told of the 
theatre, the clubs and of Brulow' s latest picture ; 
of the two Englishmen who travelled from 
England to St. Petersburg expressly to sec the 
railings outside The Sumn1er Gardens, and then 
went straight home again ; of his work at the 
office, of Olsufy Ivanovich and Andrcy Filippo­
vich ; he told how Russia was hourly approaching 
perfection, and literature and learning were thriv­
ing ; he told of an anecdote he had read lately in 
The Northern Bee ; he told of an extraordinarily 
powerful boa constrictor in India ; and lastly he 
spoke of Baron Brambeus. In brief, Mr. Golyad­
kin was perfectly happy. His mind was completely 
at ease ; far from fearing his enemies, he was now 
ready to challenge the lot of them to a decisive 
battle ; and he was acting as someone' s protector, 
and at last doing good. But in his heart of hearts 
he confessed that he was still not quite happy, and 
that even now another tiny little worry was 
gnawing away inside him. He was much tor­
mented by the memory of the previous evening at 
Olsufy Ivanovich's. At that moment he would 
have given a lot to ·wipe out some of the events of 
the day before. 
'Still, it doesn't matter,' decided our hero 

THE D O U B LE 
, 
111 
fmally, firn1ly resolving that he would henceforth 
behave himself, and not perpetrate such blun­
ders. 
Now that he had let himself go and was happy, 
Mr. Golyadkin had a mind to enjoy life a bit. 
Rmn was brought in by Petrushka, and punch 
made. Guest and host drank one glass, then a 
second. The guest became more likable than 
ever, and more than once gave evidence ofhaving 
a happy forthright nature. He entered whole­
heartedly into Mr. Golyadkin's joyous 1nood, 
seemed to rejoice at his rejoicing, and to look 
upon him as his one true benefactor. Taking a 
pen and a small sheet of paper, he begged Mr. 
Golyadkin not to watch, and then when he had 
finished showed him what he had written. It 
was a quatrain, rather sentimental but elegantly 
phrased, beautifully penned, and evidently of the 
amiable guest's own composition. It ran thus : 
If me thou ever shouldst forget, 
I'll remember thee ; 
Much in life may happen yet, 
But remember me ! 
With tears in his eyes, Mr. Golyadkin embraced 
his guest, and finally, overcome with emotion, 
let him into some of his secrets, with particular 
reference to Andrey Filippovich and Klara 01-
sufyevna. 

112 
T H E  D O U B L E  
' Yes Yakov Petrovich, we'll be friends, you 
and I,' said our hero. 'We were made for each 
other. We're like twin brothers. We'll fox 'em, 
my dear fellow. We'll fox 'em together. We'll 
start an intrigue of our own to spite them, that's 
what we'll do. Don't you trust any of them. I 
know you, and understand you, Y akov Petrovich. 
You're an honest soul. You'd go and tell them 
everything. You keep away from them all, my 
dear chap.' 
The guest agreed to everything, thanked Mr. 
Golyadkin, and shed a few tears of his own. 
'I tell you what, Yasha,' continued Mr. Golyad­
kin, his voice weak and quivering, ' you come and 
move in here for a time, or come for good. We'll 
get on all right. How does that appeal to you, eh ? 
It's no good worrying or grumbling about this 
strange thing between us. It's a sin to grumble, 
1ny friend. It's Nature ! And Mother Nature is 
generous, Yasha ! I'm saying this because of my 
affection, my brotherly affection for you. We'll 
fox 'em, Y asha, you and I. We'll do some under­
hand work of our own, and make 'em laugh on 
the other side of their faces.' 
They had had a third and a fourth glass of punch, 
and Mr. Golyadkin was becoming aware of two 
things : an extraordinary feeling of happiness, and 
an inability to stand. 
The guest was naturally 
invited to spend the night, and somehow a bed 
was made by placing together two rows of chairs. 

T H E  D O U D L E 
1 13 
-
Mr. Golyadkin junior declared that under a 
friendly roofbare boards would make a soft couch, 
and that he would sleep anywhere, humbly and 
gratefully ; he was now in Paradise ; he had been 
through a great deal in. his tin1e, had known 
tears and sorrow, and had endured much ; and 
might, for who knew what the future held, have 
more to endure. Mr. Golyadkin senior protested 
at this, and began to argue that one should put full 
trust in God. The guest entirely agreed, remark­
ing that there was, of course, no one like God. 
Mr. Golyadkin senior observed that the Turks were 
in some respects right to invoke the name of God 
even in sleep. Then, while disagreeing with the 
aspersions cast by son1e scholars upon the Turkish 
prophet Mohammed, and recognising him as a 
great politician in his way, Mr. Golyadkin pro­
ceeded to an extremely interesting account of an 
Algerian barber's shop that he had read in some 
miscellany. Guest and host laughed heartily at the 
artlessness of the Turks, but could not help mar­
velling at their opium-engendered fanaticism . . .  
At last the guest began undressing, and Mr. 
Golyadkin, itnagining in his goodness of heart 
that he might not have a proper shirt, disappeared 
behind the partition, partly to avoid embarrassing 
his guest, who had suffered quite enough already, 
and partly to reassure himself as far as possible 
about Petrushka, to sound hitn, cheer hitn up if 
possible and be nice to him, so that everyone 

1 14 
T H E  D O U B L E 
should be happy, and that there should be no ill 
feeling. Petrushka, it tnust be observed, still made 
Mr. Golyadkin feel a bit uncomfortable. 
'You get along to bed now, Petrushka,' said 
Mr. Golyadkin gently, walking into his servant's 
room. 'Go to bed now, Pyotr, and wake me 
tomorrow at eight, will you ŋ '  
Mr. Golyadkin' s voice had been unusually soft 
and tender. But Petrushka remained silent. He 
was fussing about by his bed, and didn't even 
tum to face his n1aster, as he should have done 
n1erely out of respect. 
'Do you hear what I say, Pyotr ŋ' continued Mr. 
Golyadkin. ' Go to bed now, and tomorrow wake 
me at eight. Is that clear ŋ '  
'I've got a memory, haven't I ŋ ' muttered Pet­
rushka under his breath. 
' Now now, Petruskha. I'm only telling you so 
that you can be happy and easy in your mind. 
We're all happy now, and you should be happy 
and contented too. And now I wish you good 
night. Get some sleep Petrushka, get some sleep. 
We all have our work to do. And don't you go 
thinking anything . . .  
' 
Mr. Golyadkin left his sentence unfinished. 
'Haven't I said a bit too much ŋ' he thought. 
'Haven't I gone too far ŋ  It's always the same. I 
always overdo it.' 
· 
Feeling very dissatisfied with himself, our hero 
left Petrushka. Apart from anything else, he had 

T H E  D O U B LE 
115 
been rather hurt by the latter's rudeness and in­
tractability. 
'You're nice to him-you show hin1 some 
respect, and the scoundrel doesn't appreciate it. 
Stil, they've all got the same nasty way, that 
sort ! '  thought Mr. Golyadkin. 
Rather unsteadily he made his way back to his 
room, and seeing that his guest had turned in, 
sat down beside his bed for a nunute. 
'Come on, own up, Yasha,' he began in a 
whisper, wagging his head. 'You're the one who's 
in the wrong, aren't you, you rascal ? You've got 
n1y name, you know . . . ' he went on, bantering 
his guest in a rather familiar manner. 
At last, bidding him a friendly good night, Mr. 
Golyadkin retired to bed. The guest began to 
snore. As Mr. Golyadkin climbed between the 
sheets, he chuckled and whispered to himself: 
'You're drunk tonight, Yakov Petrovich old boy. 
What a rascal you are. Poor old Golyadkin ! 
And what's it you've been so pleased about ? 
Tomorrow it'll be all tears-you're a proper one 
for snivelling. What's to be done with you ?' 
At this moment a rather peculiar sensation of 
something approaching doubt or remorse per­
vaded his whole being. 
'I let myself go,' he thought, 'and now 1ny 
brain's fuddled, and I'm drunk. I didn't keep a 
grip on myself. What a fool I an1 ! I talked a 
string of nonsense when I meant to be cunning. 

1 16 
T H E  D O U B L E  
To forgive and forget is the first of all virtues, of 
course, but it's bad all the same ! It is ! " 
Here Mr. Golyadkin got up, and taking a 
candle, tiptoed to have another look at his sleeping 
guest. For a long time he stood over him, deep 
in thought. 
' Not a very pleasant picture ! Sheer lampoonery 
-and that's all you can say about it ! ' 
Finally Mr. Golyadkin went to bed. His brain 
was fuddled. His head was splitting. Gradually 
he began to doze . . . There was something he 
was trying hard to think of and remember, some 
very important and extremely ticklish matter he 
was trying to decide, but could not. Sleep de­
scended upon his poor unfortunate head, and, as 
is customary with those who, being unused to it, 
suddenly consume five glasses of punch in a 
friendly evening, he was dead to the world. 

8 
NEXT day Mr. Golyadkin woke as usual at 
eight, instantly ren1en1bered all that had hap­
pened the night before, and frowned. 
'I let myself go like a proper fool yesterday,' 
he thought, raising himself a little to take a look 
at his guest's bed. But in1agine his amazement to 
find not only the guest but also the bed on which 
he had slept, gone from the room ! 
'What's this Т' he almost shrieked. 'What's 
happened Т What does this new thing mean ? '  
While Mr. Golyadkin was staring perplexed and 
open-mouthed at the empty space, the door 
creaked and in came Petrushka, bearing the tea­
tray. 
'Where is he ? Where is he ? ' said our hero in 
a barely audible voice, pointing at the place that 
had been given over to the guest the previous 
night. Petrushka did not reply or even look at 
his master at first, but directed his gaze at the 
right-hand corner of the room, obliging Mr. 
Golyadkin to do likewise. Then, after a silence, 
he replied rather gruffly that his master was not 
at home. 
' I'm your master, Petrushka, you fool !' faltered 
Mr. Golyadkin, staring open-eyed at his servant. 

1 1 8  
T H E  D O U B L E  
Petrushka made no answer, but cast an offen­
sively reproachful look at Mr. Golyadkin that was 
tantamount to a piece of downright abuse, and 
made him go as red as a beetroot. Mr. Golyadkin 
gave up, as the saying is. At length Petrushka 
announced that the other had left about an hour 
and a half ago, not wishing to wait. This of course 
was both probable and plausible. Clearly Pet­
rushka was not lying, and his offensive look and 
use of the words 'the other' were merely a result 
of the whole odious occurrence of which we have 
heard. All the same Mr. Golyadkin realized, albeit 
vaguely, that there was something not quite right 
about it, and that fate had something else in store 
for him. 
'Very well, we'll see,' he thought. 'We'll see, 
and in due course we'll get to the bottom of it 
all.' 
' Oh God,' he moaned, his voice now quite 
different. 'Why did I invite him here ŋ What was 
the point ŋ I'm sticking my neck right into their 
noose, and pulling the rope tight myself Oh, 
what a fool I am. I've got no restraint. I go blab­
bing away like a kid, like some miserable clerk, 
like someone with no position to think of, like 
some gutless, weak-willed creature ! What a gos­
sip, what an old won1an I a1n ! Saints above ! He 
wrote verses, the rascal, and said how he liked me ! 
What's the best way of showing him the door if 
he comes back, I wonder ŋ There are lots of ways 

T H E  D O U B L E 
1 
119 
of putting it, of course. I could say that with my 
limited salary and so forth . . . Or frighten hi1n 
up a bit and say that taking such and such into 
consideration, I'm obliged to ask hitn to pay half 
the rent and half the cost of food in advance. 
Oh damn it ! That's no good. That's giving 
myself a bad name. It's not quite the thi.ng. 
Perhaps I could tip off Petrushka to be nasty to 
him or slight hitn in some way, or be rude to 
him, and get him out like that ? Set one off against 
the other. No, blast it ! That's risky, and looked 
at from another point of view, it's not very nice. 
Not nice at all. And supposing he doesll't come ? 
That'll be bad too. I let my tongue run away 
with me yesterday. It's a bad state of things. Very 
bad indeed. What a danu1ed fool I am ! I just 
can't hammer any sense into my head. What if 
he comes and won't agree ? I hope to God he 
does come. I'd be jolly glad-!' d give a lot if he 
would.' 
Such were Mr. Golyadkin' s thoughts as he 
gulped his tea, keeping an eye on the clock. 
' Quarter to nine. Tin1e to be off Something's 
going to happen, but what ? I'd like to know 
what's behind all this--the ain1 and object, and 
what the various snags are. It would be nice to 
know what these people are trying to get at, and 
what their first step is going to be . . .  
' 
Mr. Golyadkin could bear it no longer, and 
leaving his pipe half smoked, he dressed and set 

120 
T H E  D O U B L E  
off for th৏ office, desiring, if possible, to take the 
source of danger by surprise, and to satisfy him­
self about everything at first hand. There was 
danger. He knew it. 
'Now we'll find out all about it,' he said, re­
moving his coat and galoshes in the entrance hall. 
'Now we'll go into it.' 
Having thus decided on a course of action, our 
hero straightened his jacket, and, assuming a 
correct and official air, was about to pass into the 
next room, when suddenly, right in the doorway, 
he came face to face with his friend and acquaint­
ance of the day before. Golyadkin junior seemed 
not to notice him, even though they practically 
bumped noses. He was, it seemed, busy. He was 
dashing off somewhere, and was out of breath. 
His expression was official and business-like : ' On 
a special errand,' it said for all to see. 
' 0  h, it's you, Y akov Petrovich,' said our hero, 
seizing him by the hand. 
'Not now, not now. Excuse me. You can 
tell me later,' cried Golyadkin junior, bursting 
forward. 
'But excuse me, Y akov Petrovich. I believe 
, 
you, er . . .  
'What's that ? Hurry up. What's it about ? '  
Here Mr. Golyadkin's guest halted as though it 
were an effort and against his will to do so, and 
stuck an ear right in front of Mr. Golyadkin's 
face. 

T H E  D O U B L E 
121 
'I'm surprised at your behaviour, Yakov Petro­
vich, I n1ust say. It's not what I should have 
expected at all.' 
'There's a proper forn1 for doing everything. 
Apply to his Excellency through his Excellency's 
secretary in the proper way. Got a petition ? ' 
' Really, Yakov Petrovich ! You astound me ! 
Perhaps you don't recognize me, or perhaps in 
your usual jolly way you are joking.' 
' Oh, it's you ! '  said Golyadkinjunior, as if only 
now seeing and recognising Golyadkin senior. 
' So it's you. Well, did you have a good night ? ' 
Here Golyadkin junior gave a little smile, a 
fonnal official smile, not at all like the one he 
should have given, since at all events he owed 
Golyadkin senior a debt of gratitude, and added 
that he was extremely glad the latter had had a 
good night. Then he bowed slightly, took a few 
quick steps, looked left, right, and then at the 
floor, made for the door at his side, and with a 
muttered 'special business,' slipped into the next 
room, and was gone. 
'There's a nice thing for you ! ' whispered our 
hero, momentarily stunned. 'There's a nice thing ! 
So that's how it is.' He felt his flesh creep. 
' Still, I've been saying that for a long titne,' he 
continued as he made his way to his section. 'I 
had a presentiment ages ago about his being on 
special business. I said as much only yesterday.' 
'Have you finished that document you were 

122 
T H E  D O U B L E 
doing yesterday ŋ Have you got it here ŋ' asked 
Anton Antonovich Setochkin as Mr. Golyadkin 
took his seat beside him. 
'It's here,' whispered Mr. Golyadkin, regard­
ing his chief clerk with a rather lost expression. 
' Ah  yes. I only mention it because his Excel­
lency has asked for it twice already. I'm afraid 
he'll ask again any minute.' 
'It's all right. It's ready.' 
' Oh well, that's all right then.' 
'I have, I believe, always performed my duties 
properly, Anton Antonovich, taken care over the 
tasks entrusted to me by my superiors, and dealt 
with them assiduously.' 
'Yes. But what do you mean by that ?' 
'Nothing, Anton Antonovich. I only want to 
explain that I . . .  That is, I was trying to say that 
sometimes no one is spared, as ill-will and envy 
seek their noisome daily bread . . .  ' 
'Forgive me, I don't quite follow you. Who 
. 
' 
are you gettmg at now r 
'All I mean, Anton Antonovich, is that I keep 
to the straight path and scorn beating about the 
bush. I'm not one for intrigue, and that, if you'll 
allow me to say so, is something I can very justly 
be proud of.' 
'Yes. Quite so. And as I understand it, I 
concede the full justice of what you say. But 
allow me to point out to you, Yakov Petrovich, 
that ren1arks about other people are not allowed 

T H E  D O U B L E 
123 
in good society ; and that I, for exan1ple, can put 
up with what goes on behind my back, but will 
permit no one to be in1pertinent to my face, sir. 
I, sir, have grown grey in the service, and will 
allow no one to be irnpertinent to me in my old 
age ! '  
'No Anton Antonovich, you see . . . You 
don't seem to have quite taken my meaning. 
Good gracious, Anton Antonovich, I personally 
can only account it an honour . . .  ' 
'In that case I beg your pardon too. I've been 
brought up in the old school. It's a bit late for 
me to go learning your new ways. I've had 
enough wit to serve my country up to now. I 
hold, as you are aware, sir, a medal for twenty­
five years' unblemished service . . .  ' 
'I know, Anton Antonovich, I fully realize all 
that. But that's not what I was getting at. I was 
talking about a mask, Anton Antonovich.' 
' A  mask ? '  
'That is, you again . . . I'm afraid you'll take 
it the wrong way-the sense of what I say, that 
is-as you yourself put it. I'm merely developing 
the theme, putting forward the idea that people 
who wear masks are no longer uncommon, and 
that it's difficult nowadays to recognize the man 
underneath.' 
'It's not so hard as all that, you know. Some­
times it's fairly easy. Sometimes you don't have 
to go far to fmd him.' 

124 
T H E  D O U B L E  
'No, Anton Antonovich. Speaking of myself 
for instance, I only put on a mask in the literal 
sense when there's some call to-when there's a 
carnival or a merry gathering ; I don't, in a more 
cryptic sense, go about in one every day.' 
' Oh well, let's leave it at that for now. I haven't 
got time . .  .' said Anton Antonovich, rising fron1 
his seat, and gathering up some papers he was to 
report on to his Excellency. 'I don't suppose it'll 
be long before this affair of yours is cleared up. 
You'll see yourself who to blame and who to 
accuse, and I must ask you to spare me any 
further explanations and discussions to the detri­
ment of the work.' 
'No, Anton Antonovich. That's not \vhat I 
was thinking . .  .' began Mr. Golyadkin, paling 
slightly. But Anton Antonovich was walking 
away. 
'What is iu ' he continued, now to himsel£ 
'Which way is the wind blowing now : What 
does it mean, this new piece of pettifoggery : '  
Just as our dazed, half-annihilated hero was 
preparing to solve this new question, there was a 
sudden noise and burst of activity in the next 
room. The door opened, and there, quite out or 
breath, stood Andrey Filippovich, who a short 
time before had betaken himself to his Excellency 
on some matter. He called Mr. Golyadkin, and 
the latter realizing what it was about and not 
wishing to keep hitn waiting, sprang up, and as 

T H E  D O U B L E 
125 
was fitting, made a great fuss about getting the 
required papers tidy and in order preparatory to 
following both them and Andrey Filippovich to 
his Excellency's room. Suddenly, and from prac­
tically under the arm of Andrey Filippovich, who 
was standing right in the doorway, in shot Golyad­
kin junior. 
He \vas breathless, he appeared 
exhausted by his official labours, and he had an 
earnest and decidedly formal air about him. He 
can1e bustling into the room, and marched straight 
up to Golyadkin senior-the very last thing the 
latter had expected. 
'The papers, Y akov Petrovich, the papers, his 
Excellency has been pleased to inquire if you've 
got then1 ready,' gabbled Mr. Golyadkin's 
friend under his breath. 'Andrey Filippovich is 
. 
. 
' 
wa1tmg. 
' I  know without your telling me,' shot back 
Golyadkin senior, also in a low voice. 
'No, I didn't mean that. I didn't n1ean that at 
all, Y akov Petrovich. I feel for you, and I' 111 
prompted by genuine concern.' 
' Spare me your concern, I beg you. Now, 
' 
excuse me. 
' Of course, you'll put them in a folder, Yakov 
Petrovich, and insert a page as a marker. Allow 
me, Y akov Petrovich . . .  ' 
' No. Allow tne, please . . .  
' 
'But there's a blot here, Yakov Petrovich. Did 
. 
. 
, 
you notice 1t ? 

126 
T H E  D O U B L E 
At that 1110111ent Andrey Filippovich called Mr. 
Golyadkin for the second time. 
'Coming, Andrey Filippovich. I've just got 
to . . . ' Then to Golyadkin junior : 'Can't you 
understand plain language, sir ? ' 
'The best thing is to get it out with a pen­
knife, Y akov Petrovich. You'd better leave it to 
tne. Best not touch it yourself, Y akov Petrovich. 
Leave it to me. I'll get it out.' 
Andrey Filippovich called Mr. Golyadkin for 
the third time. 
'Where is it, for goodness' sake Έ I can't see 
any blot.' 
'It's an enormous one. Look, here's where I 
saw it. Just allow me, Y akov Petrovich. I'll do 
it with a pen-knife. I'll do it out of friendship 
and pure goodness of heart. . . . There ! That's 
done it.' 
Getting the better of Golyadkin senior in the 
momentary struggle that had arisen between them, 
Golyadkin junior at this point suddenly, quite 
unexpectedly, for no apparent reason, and quite 
against the other's will, seized the document re­
quired by their chief, and instead of attending to 
it with a pen-knife, 'out of pure goodness of 
heart' as he had perfidiously assured Golyadkin 
senior, he quickly rolled it up, thrust it under his 
arm, and in two bounds was at the side of Andrey 
Filippovich ; the latter having noticed none of his 
pranks, shot off with him to the Director's room. 

T H E  D O U B L E  
127 
Mr. Golyadkin stood glued to the spot, a pen­
knife in his hand, looking as if he was getting 
ready to scratch something out with it. 
He had not yet grasped what had happened to 
him, or gathered his senses. He had felt a sudden 
blow, but thought it was nothing serious. Filled 
with indescribable anguish, he at last tore himselr 
away, and rushed straight off to the Director's 
roon1, praying to heaven as he went that the whole 
thing n1ight somehow turn out for the best, and 
be all right. With one romn still to go, he came 
face to face with Andrey Filippovich and Golyad­
kin junior, who were both on their way back. 
Andrey Filippovich was smiling and talking gaily. 
Mr. Golyadkin's namesake was also smiling. He 
was trotting along, keeping a respectful distance 
from Andrey Filippovich, but playing up to him 
and whispering delightedly into his ear, while the 
latter affably nodded assent. Our hero saw the 
whole situation in a flash. His work, as he dis­
covered later, had exceeded his Excellency's ex­
pectations, and had, in fact, been delivered by 
the time appointed. His Excellency had been 
most gratified, and had, it was even rumoured, 
thanked Golyadkin junior, thanked him warn1ly 
and said he would bear it in mind when the titne 
came, and wouldn't forget. The first thing for 
Mr. Golyadkin to do, of course, was to protest 
with the utmost possible vigour. Pale as death 
and almost out of his mind, he rushed up to 

128 
T H E  D O U B L E  
Andrey Filippovich. But the latter, hearing that 
Mr. Golyadkin' s business was of a personal nature, 
refused to listen, remarking bluntly that he hadn't 
a tninute to spare for his own requiren1ents. His 
flat refusal and matter-of-fact tone left Mr. 
Golyadkin dun1bfounded. 
'I'd better go about it a different way. I'd 
better go to Anton Antonovich,' he thought. 
Unfortunately for Mr. Golyadkin Anton An­
tonovich was not available. He was also busy 
somewhere. 
' So there was some purpose in his asking to be 
spared discussions and explanations,' thought our 
hero. ' So that's what he was getting at, the ctm­
ning old devil ! In that case I'll sin1ply be bold 
and petition his Excellency.' 
Still pale, feeling his head to be in a state ot 
complete chaos, and at an utter loss what to 
decide on next, Mr. Golyadkin sat down on his 
chair. 
'It would have been much better if it had all 
been a mere nothing,' he kept thinking to hinl­
sel£ 'Anything as black as this was really quite 
inconceivable. It's nonsense. It can't happen. It's 
probably been some sort of an illusion-either 
something different happened from what actually 
did-or it was n1e who went, and smnehow I 
took myself for someone else. To put it briefly, 
the whole thing is i1npossible.' 
No sooner had Mr. Golyadkin decided that the 

T H E  D O U B L E 
' 
129 
whole thing was impossible, than all of a sudden 
Golyadkinjunior came flying into the room, with 
papers in both hands and under both arms. Saying 
a few needful words to Andrey Filippovich as he 
passed, exchanging a remark or two with one, 
civilities with another and banter with a third, 
Golyadkin junior, having apparently not a mo­
ment to waste, seemed just on the point of going 
out again, when, fortunately for Golyadkin senior, 
he stopped by the door to have a word in passing 
with two or three young clerks who happened to 
be standing there. Golyadkin senior hurled him­
self forward. Noticing this, Golyadkin junior 
began looking round uneasily to see how to make 
good his escape. But Mr. Golyadkin had already 
got him by the sleeve. The clerks surrounding 
the two officials stepped back to give them room, 
and stood inquisitively awaiting events. Golyad­
kin senior realized only too well that opinion was 
not now disposed in his favour, and that he was 
the victim of intrigue. This made it all the more 
necessary that he should now stand up for himsel£ 
It was a decisive moment. 
'Well ?' inquired Golyadkin junior, looking 
rather impudently at hin1. 
Golyadkin senior was barely breathing. 
'I don't know how you can explain your 
strange behaviour to me now, sir,' he began. 
'Well, go on.' Here Golyadkin junior looked 
aronnd and winked at the surrounding clerks as 

130 
T H E  D O U B L E  
if giving then1 to understand that the comedy 
would now begin. 
'The impertinent and shameless manner in 
which you have treated me in the present instance, 
exposes your true nature better than any words of 
mine could do. I shouldn't rely on the game you're 
playing. It's not a very good one.' 
'Tell me, what sort of a night did you spend, 
Y akov Petrovich :' asked Golyadkin junior, look­
ing hi1n straight in the eye. 
'You're forgetting yourself, sir ! ' said our hero, 
utterly flabbergasted, hardly knowing vvhether he 
was on his head or his heels. 'I trust you will 
change your tone.' 
'There, n1y dear chap ! '  said Golyadkin junior, 
1naking a rather improper grimace at Golyadkin 
senior, and all of a sudden, moving as if to caress 
hin1, he pinched his chubby cheek. Our hero 
flushed scarlet. As soon as he saw that his adver­
sary, now speechless with rage, red as a lobster, 
and shaking in every limb, had been driven to 
breaking point and might attempt an assault, 
Golyadkin junior at once forestalled him in a most 
shameless manner. After playing with him a few 
seconds n1ore, patting his cheeks and tickling him 
in the ribs while he stood motionless and out of 
his mind with rage, Golyadkin junior, to the huge 
delight of the young 1nen standing around, and 
with an effrontery that was nothing short of dis­
gusting, finished by giving Golyadkin senior a 

T H E  D O U B L E 
131 
prod in his rather prmninent stomach, and saying 
with an insinuating and positively malicious leer : 
'You're a tricky one you are, Y akov Petrovich 
old chap. We'll fox 'em, you and I.' 
Then, before our hero had time to make even 
a partial recovery, Golyadkin junior, after a pre­
liminary grin at his audience, assumed a most 
brisk, business-like and official air, drew liimself 
in, and with a rapid 'on a special errand', jerked 
his stumpy little legs into life, and darted off into 
the next room. Our hero could not believe his 
eyes. He was still in no state to regain his 
senses. 
At last he recovered. Realizing in a flash that 
he was done for, that he had in a manner of 
speaking destroyed himself, that he had been dis­
graced, that his reputation was ruined, and that 
he had been scorned and ridiculed in front of 
others-realizing that he had been perfidiously 
abused by him he had considered his greatest and 
most trusty friend, and fmally, realizing that he 
had been utterly shamed, Mr. Golyadkin charged 
in pursuit ofhis enemy. He tried not to think of 
those who had witnessed the outrage. 
'They're all hand in glove together,' he said to 
himself 'They all back each other up, and one 
sets the other against me.' 
Seeing after a dozen steps, however, that pur­
suit was in vain, he turned back. 
'You won't get away ! '  he thought. 'I'll beat 

132 
T H E  D O U B L E 
you in good time. You'll pay for all the misery 
you've caused ! '  
Filled with cold fury and violent determination, 
he went to his chair and sat down. 
'You won't get away,' he repeated. 
Any form of passive defence was now out of 
the question. There was something decisive, 
something of an offensive in the air, and anyone 
who at that moment saw Mr. Golyadkin, Bushed 
and hardly able to control his agitation, jab his 
pen into the inkstand, and saw the fury with 
which he started scribbling on the paper, could 
have told that the matter would not be allowed 
to pass and end in some old-womanish way. In 
his heart of hearts he had formed a resolution 
which in his heart of hearts he had sworn to carry 
out. To be truthful, he still did not quite know 
or rather, he had no idea what steps to take. But 
it didn't matter. 
'Imposture and effrontery, sir, get you nowhere 
today. In1posture and effrontery, sir, lead to no 
good. They lead to destruction. The False De­
metrius was the only one to gain by in1posture, 
sir-after deceiving a blind people-but not for 
long.' 
In spite of this Mr. Golyadkin thought he would 
wait for the masks to fall from certain faces, and 
one or two things to come to light. The first 
requisite was that office hours should end as 
quickly as possible, and until they did, he pro-

T H E  D O U B L E 
133 
posed to do nothing. When office hours were 
over, he would take a certain step. After that he 
would know how to act, and how to plan his 
whole campaign to shatter the horn of arrogance 
and crush the serpent, as in i1npotent rage it 
gnawed the dust. He could not allow anyone to 
wipe their dirty boots with him. He could not 
agree to that, particularly in the present case. But 
for the last hunlliation, our hero might have swal­
lowed his feelings, said nothing, and given in 
without too stubborn a protest ; he would have 
argued a bit, taken slight offence, aired a few 
grievances, proved himself in the right, and then 
would have climbed down a little ; he might 
perhaps have climbed down a little further, and 
then agreed entirely ; then, and especially then, 
when the other party solemnly acknowledged 
him to be in the right, he might even have made 
peace and displayed a little emotion ; and who 
knows, a new friendship might have been born­
a firm, warm friendship on a broader basis than 
that of the preceding evening-a friendship that 
might fmally have so eclipsed the unpleasantness 
of the rather improper resemblance between them, 
that both would have known unbounded delight 
and lived to be a hundred, and so on. 
To tell all, Mr. Golyadkin was beginning rather 
to regret that he had stuck up for himself and his 
rights when disagreeableness had been his imme­
diate reward. 

134 
T H E  D O U B L E  
'If he'd give in, and say it was a joke, I'd for­
give him,' thought Mr. Golyadkin. 'I'd forgive 
him all the more if he'd only admit it out loud. 
But I won't be used as a boot-rag. I haven't 
allowed others to wipe their boots with me, and 
that's all the more reason for not letting some 
depraved fellow try to do so. I'm not a boot-rag, 
. 
I' 
I ' 
s1r. 
m not . 
Our hero had in short made up his mind : 
'You yourself are the guilty one, sir ! ' 
He had made up his mind to protest with all his 
power and to the uttermost. That was the sort of 
man he was ! He could not permit himself to be 
insulted, still less to be used as a boot-rag by 
someone depraved. 
But let there be no argument about it. Per­
haps if anyone had wanted-had suddenly felt a 
desire to tum Mr. Golyadkin into a boot-rag, 
they could have done so with impunity, encoun­
tering no resistance-Mr. Golyadkin had occasion­
ally sensed that himself--and a boot-rag there 
would have been, and not a Golyadkin ; a nasty 
dirty boot-rag, it's true, but stil no ordinary 
one ; this boot-rag would have had pride, would 
have been alive and had feelings ; pride and feelings 
might have remained concealed deep in its filthy 
folds and been unable to speak for themselves, 
but all the same they would have been there. 
The hours seemed incredibly long, but at last 
it struck four. A few minutes later everyone got 

T H E  D O U B L E  
135 
up, and following out their departtnental head, 
Blade for home. Mr. Golyadkin tningled with 
the crowd, keeping his quarry in sight. He saw 
him dash up to the porters who were handing 
out the overcoats, and stand ingratiating hirnself 
with thetn in his usual blackguardly way while 
waiting for his. The moment had come. Sonle­
how Mr. Golyadkin pushed his way through the 
crowd and tried to get his overcoat, not wishing 
to be left behind. But the first to be served was 
Mr. Golyadkin's friend, for here too he had 
tnanaged in his own inin1itable fashion to wheedle 
and whisper his way round people. 
Flinging on his coat, Golyadkin junior glanced 
ironically at Golyadkin senior, spiting him boldly 
and openly. Then, surveying all around with an 
impudence peculiarly his own, he Blade a last 
rapid round of the clerks-probably so as to 
leave them with a good impression-having a 
word with one and a whisper with another, 
oozing respect to a third, snlling at a fourth, giving 
his hand to a fifth-and finally darted gaily down 
the steps. Golyadkin senior followed. To his 
indescribable delight he overtook Golyadkin junior 
on the last step, and seized him by the coat-collar. 
Golyadkinjunior seemed a little scared and looked 
round with a bewildered expression. 
'What do you mean by this ? ' he said in a half­
whisper. 
'If, sir, you are a gentletnan, I trust you will 

136 
T H E  D O U B L E 
recollect our cordial relationship of yesterday,' 
said our hero. 
' Ah, yes. Well, did you have a good night ?' 
For the moment Golyadkin senior was speech­
less with rage. 
'Yes I did. But let me tell you, it's a com­
plicated game you're playing.' 
'Who says so ?-My enemies ! '  retorted the 
self-styled Mr. Golyadkin, breaking away from 
the feeble grasp of the real one. Once free, he 
dashed away, and catching sight of a cab, rushed 
up to it, climbed in, and a moment later was out 
of sight. 
Abandoned by al and filled with despair, our 
minor civil servant gazed aroWld, but there was 
no other cab. He tried to rWl, but his legs bent 
beneath him. Looking utterly downcast, his 
mouth sagging open, he leant against a lamp-post, 
feeling shrivelled up and fmished. And thus for 
several minutes he remained, in the middle of 
the pavement. For Mr. Golyadkin al seemed 
lost . . .  

9 
EVERYTHING, even Nature herself, seemed to be 
up in arms against Mr. Golyadkin. But he 
was still on his feet and unbeaten. He was ready 
to do battle. He would not give in-so much 
was plain from the spirit and vigour with which 
he rubbed his hands on recovering from the first 
of his amazement. But danger, obvious danger 
was upon him. He sensed it. Yet how to tackle 
it ?-that was the question. 
'Why not leave it like this ? Why not just break 
with him without any formality ? ' flashed across 
his mind. 
'Why not ? There's nothing to it. I'll keep to 
myself as if it isn't me. I'll let it all pass. It isn't 
me, and that's all there is to it. He'll also keep to 
himsel£ Maybe he'll break with me. He'll be all 
over me for a bit, the wretch, then he'll turn round 
and break with m.e. That's how it wil be. I'll 
triumph through meekness. Where' s the danger 
in that ? What danger is there ? I'd just like some­
one to show me. It's a mere nothing. The sort 
of thing that happens every day ! '  Here Mr. 
Golyadkin stopped short. The words died on his 
lips. He cursed himself for thinking such thoughts, 
and accused himself of being mean and cowardly. 

138 
T H E  D O U B L E 
However, his cause was still no further advanced. 
To make some sort of decision at this n1on1ent was, 
he felt, a n1atter of absolute necessity. But he 
would have given a lot to anyone who could have 
told him what exactly the decision should be. 
How was he to fmd out ? Still, there was no time 
for that now. To avoid wasting any more titne 
he took a cab and hastened homewards. 
'Well ? -How are you feeling now ?' he thought 
to himself. 'How are you feeling now, Yakov 
Petrovich ? What will you do ? What will you 
do now, you abject wretch ? You brought your­
self to this, and now you're snivelling and crying ! '  
Thus did Mr. Golyadkin taunt himself as he jogged 
up and down in his rickety cab. He derived con­
siderable pleasure from turning the knife in his 
wound in this fashion-there was son1ething 
almost voluptuous about it. 
'If son1e magician were to come along now,' he 
thought, 'or if it were put to me in some official 
sort of way : "You give a fmger of your right 
hand, Golyadkin, and we'll be quits. There won't 
be any other Golyadkin, and you'll be happy but 
minus a finger"-I'd give it willingly, without 
' 
a n1urmur. 
'Damn and blast it all ! ' he cried at last in 
despair. 'What's it all for ?  Why did this of all 
things have to happen ? As if nothing else were 
possible ! And it was all all right at first. Everyone 
was happy and content. But no, this had to 

T H E  D O U B L E  
, 
139 
happen ! Still, talking won't get me anywhere. 
Action is what's needed.' 
With this much decided, Mr. Golyadkin, once 
back in his rooms, grabbed his pipe without a 
moment's delay, and sucking away at it as hard 
as he could and emitting clouds of smoke to left 
and right, began pacing to and fro in extreme 
agitation. Meanwhile Petrushka started laying the 
table. Suddenly, his mind at last made up, Mr. 
Golyadkin threw down his pipe, dragged on his 
overcoat, and announcing that he would not be 
in for dinner, charged out. On the stairs, he was 
caught up by Petrushka, panting for breath and 
holding the hat he had forgotten. Mr. Golyadkin 
took it, and meant to say something about 'There ! 
I forgot my hat' by way ofjustifying himself, and 
to stop Petrushka thinking anything out of the 
ordinary ; but as the latter did not so much as 
look at him and immediately went back, he put 
on his hat without more ado, and ran downstairs, 
repeating to himself that everything might be for 
the best and that the business would be settled 
somehow, although he was conscious amongst 
other things of a nasty chill sensation all over hin1. 
He went into the street, took a cab, and shot off 
to Andrey Filippovich' s. 
'Wouldn't tomorrow be better ? ' he wondered, 
reaching for the bell-pull at the door of Andrey 
Filippovich' s flat. 'Besides, have I got anything 
special to say ? There's nothing special about it. 

140 
T H E  D O U B L E 
It's such a paltry business-it really is. It's paltry, 
piffling-or almost-the whole thing . . .  ' 
Suddenly Mr. Golyadkin pulled the bell ; it 
tinkled, and footsteps were heard within. At this 
juncture Mr. Golyadkin cursed himself for his 
boldness and precipitance. Certain recent dis­
tressing incidents, which he had almost forgotten 
while at . work, and his misunderstanding with 
Andrey Filippovich, immediately recurred to him. 
But it was too late for flight. The door opened. 
As good luck would have it, Mr. Golyadkin was 
informed that Andrey Filippovich had not re­
turned from the office, and was dining out. 
'I know where-by the Izmaylovsky Bridge­
that's where he dines,' thought our hero, over­
joyed. On the footman inquiring what message 
he would leave, he replied, ' Oh, that's all right. 
I'll pop back later, my man,' and ran down the 
stairs with an almost jaunty air. In the street he 
decided to dismiss the cab, and settled with the 
driver. When the latter solicited a tip, pleading 
that he had had a long wait and hadn't spared his 
horse for the gentleman, he gave him an extra five 
kopeks quite cheerfully, and then set off on foot. 
'Really it's the sort of business you can't just 
leave like that,' thought Mr. Golyadkin. 'But if 
you think about it-if you really think about it 
sensibly, what actually is the point of fussing about 
here ?-No. I stil repeat what I've said-why 
should I have all the bother ? Why should I kill 

T H E  D O U B L E  
141 
myself, toiling, worrying and making all the 
effort ? What's done can't be undone, for a start. 
It can't ! We'll argue it this way : along comes a 
1nan with adequate references, a capable clerk, 
well-behaved, but badly-off--had an unpleasant 
time of it one way and other-been some trouble. 
Well, poverty's no crime. It's nothing to do 
with me. What's all the nonsense about then : 
It so happens that Nature has made someone 
the spit and image, the exact replica, of someone 
else. Can you refuse to employ him because of 
that : If it's fate-if it's only fate or blind fortune 
that's to blame, how can you treat him like 
dirt and refuse him a job ? What justice would 
there be after that ? There he is, penniless, brow­
beaten, forlorn. . . . Your heart aches for him. 
Fellow-feeling demands you should look after 
him. Fine people departmental heads would be 
if they argued the same way as a ruffian like 
n1e ! What a brain I've got ! Sometimes I'm as 
stupid as a dozen fools put together ! No. They 
did well, and I say thank you to them for taking 
cafe of the poor wretch . . .  
'Well, suppose for the sake of example that we 
are twins-twin brothers. What of it ? Nothing ! 
All the clerks can be got used to it. And no one 
coming in from outside would think there was 
anything unseemly or outrageous about it. It's 
rather touching even ; divine Providence creates 
two identical beings, the beneficent authorities 

142 
T H E  D O U B L E  
behold the divine handiwork, and here they are 
g:ving them a place of refuge. It would of course 
have been better,' went on Mr. Golyadkin, taking 
breath and lowering his voice, 'if there'd been 
none of this touching business, and no twins 
either . . . Why did it have to be, blast it ! What 
particular and urgent necessity was there for it ? 
God ! What a damned mess ! Look at the sort of 
person he is ! He's frivolous and beastly. He's a 
blackguard. 
He's here there and everywhere. 
He's a toady and a lick-spittle. That's the sort of 
Golyadkin he is ! He'll misbehave some more, I 
shouldn't wonder, and drag my name in the mud, 
the scoundrel. And now I've got to look after 
him and hmnour him, if you please ! What a 
punishment ! Still, what of it ? It doesn't matter. 
He's a blackguard. Well, suppose he is-the 
other Mr. Golyadkin' s straight. He'll be the 
blackguard, and I'll be the honest one, and people 
will say, "That Golyadkin' s a blackguard. Don't 
you take any notice of him, and don't mix him 
up with the other one who's honest, virtuous, 
gentle and forgiving, who's very reliable at work 
and deserves promotion." That's it ! All right, 
then . . . But . . . But what if they do get us 
mixed ? He's capable of anything. Oh God ! 
He's the sort of blackguard who'll deliberately 
take your place as though you were just dirt. He 
won't stop to think that you're not. Oh God ! 
What horrible luck ! ' 

T H E  D O U D L E 
143 
Reasoning and con1plaining thus, Mr. Golyad­
kin scuttled along, heedless and almost unaware of 
where he was going. He came to in the Nevsky 
Prospect, and then only by virtue of a head-on 
collision with someone, that made hin1 see stars. 
He n1uttered an apology, keeping his head lowered, 
and only when the other, after growling sonle­
thing uncomplimentary was well on his way 
again, did he raise it to sec where he was and how 
he had got there. Finding himself to be right by 
the restaurant in which he had taken his ease prior 
to the di.Imer-party at Olsufy lvanovich's, he be­
came suddenly conscious of a nunbln1g and 
rattling i.I1 his ston1ach, and re1nen1bered he had 
not di.I1ed. There was no prospect of a di.Imer­
party anywhere, and so, without losing precious 
time, he darted up the stairs and i.I1to the restaurant, 
to snatch a quick bite of something to avoid delay. 
The restaurant was rather on the expensive side, 
but that did not stop Mr. Golyadkin. There was 
no time to stop over trifles like that now. In the 
brightly illuminated room, quite a crowd of cus­
ton1ers was standing at a counter heaped with an 
assortment of all the good things that respectable 
people might consume by way of light refresh­
Inent. The waiter was hard put to it, filling 
glasses, serving, taking money and giving change. 
Mr. Golyadkin waited, and as soon as his tun1 
came, reached modestly for a fish pasty. Retiring 
to a comer and turning his back on the company, 

144 
T H E  D O U B L E  
he ate with relish. When he had fmished he went 
and returned his plate, and knowing the price, 
left a ten-kopek piece on the counter, catching the 
waiter's eye to let him know he'd had one fish 
pasty and had left the money, etc. 
'That'll be one rouble ten kopeks,' said the 
waiter contemptuously. 
Mr. Golyadkin was amazed. 
'What's that you say ? I-I've only had one, I 
think.' 
'You've had eleven,' retorted the waiter with 
conviction. 
'I think you're making a mistake. I took one, 
I assure you.' 
'Eleven you took. I counted. You must pay 
for what you've had. We don't give stuff away.' 
Mr. Golyadkin was stupefied. 'What's hap­
pening to n1e ? Is it some piece of wizardry ? '  he 
thought. The man stood waiting for him to make 
up his mind. A crowd had gathered. Mr. Golyad­
kin slipped his hand into his pocket for a rouble, 
meaning to square up at once and avoid further 
trouble. 
'If he says eleven, eleven it is,' he thought, 
turning a lobster red. 'Well, what's wrong with 
eating eleven pas ties ? If a chap's hungry and cats 
eleven pasties, well, let him, and good luck to him. 
There's nothing funny or wonderful about that . . .  ' 
Feeling a sudden stabbing pain in his side, he 
looked up. The mystery, the wizardry became 

T H E  D O U B L E  
145 
suddenly clear. He was perplexed no longer . . .  
Standing in the doorway of the next roon1, almost 
directly behind the waiter and facing Mr. Golyad­
kin-standing in the doorway, which till then he 
had taken to be a mirror-was a little man. It 
was Mr. Golyadkin, not Golyadkin the elder, the 
hero of our tale, but the other, the new Golyadkin, 
and evidently in the best of spirits. He kept 
smiling, nodding and winking at Golyadkin I, 
shifting restlessly from one foot to the other, and 
looking as though he might at the least provoca­
tion disappear into the next room and slip out by 
a back way, foiling all attempts at pursuit. He held 
in his hand the last morsel of his tenth pasty, and 
this, before Mr. Golyadkin' s very eyes, he consigned 
to his mouth, smacking his lips with enjoyment. 
'He's passed himself off as 1ne, the blackguard ! ' 
thought Mr. Golyadkin, flushing red with shame. 
'He's got no qualms about other people being 
present ! Can they see him : I don't think so.' 
Mr. Golyadkin threw down the rouble as 
though it burnt his fingers, and without noticing 
the waiter's insolent smile of triumph and cool 
mastery, broke out of the crowd, and dashed off, 
not daring to look back. 
'Thank goodness he at least didn't compron1isc 
anyone completely,' he thought. 'Thanks are due 
to him, the villain, and to fate that it still got 
settled all right. There was just the cheekiness of 
the waiter. Still, he was within his rights. It 

146 
T H E  D O U B L E  
should have been one rouble ten kopeks, so he was 
within his rights. "We don't give stuff away," he 
said. He could have been a bit n1ore polite about 
it though-the horrible man ! ' 
All this Mr. Golyadkin said to himself as he 
1nade his way downstairs to the street-door. On 
the last step, however, he stopped dead in his 
tracks, his face grew suddenly red and tears started 
to his eyes as he suffered a paroxysm of injured 
pride. After standing motionless for half a n1inute, 
. he gave a determined stamp, bounded out into 
the street, and panting for breath and unconscious 
of his weariness, he headed for Shestilavochnaya 
Street and home without once looking back. As 
soon as he was indoors he seated himself on the 
ottoman, still wearing his overcoat-which was 
quite contrary to his custom of making himself 
con1fortable in his own house-and without even 
observing the preliminary of reaching for a pipe, 
drew the inkstand towards him, took a pen and 
a sheet of notepaper, and began, his hand trem­
bling with suppressed excitement, to scribble the 
following missive. 
Dear Y akov Petrovich, 
I should never have taken up my pen, had not 
circumstances, and you yourself, sir, compelled me 
to do so. Believe me when I say that necessity alone 
has obliged me to embark upon explanations with 
you, and I beg above all, sir, that you will regard 

T H E  D O U B L E 
147 
this not as a deliberate attempt to insult you, but 
as an inevitable consequence of those things which 
are now a link between us. 
'I think that's all right-polite and proper­
although at the same time, firm and forceful. . . . 
I don't think there's anything for him to take 
exception to there. Besides, I'm within my rights,' 
thought Mr. Golyadkin, reading over what he had 
written. 
Your appearance, sir, singular and unheralded on 
a tempestuous night, following upon coarse and un­
seemly conduct towards me on the part of my 
enemies, whose names I shall not mention for the 
contempt I bear them, was the genesis of all those 
misapprehensions which at present exist between 
us. Your persistence in forcing an entry into the 
circle of my existence, and into all my relationships 
in practical life, exceeds the bounds dictated by 
common courtesy and social custom. There is, I 
think, little need to remind you here of your appro­
priation of papers of mine, together with my own 
good name, for the purpose of currying favour 
with those in authority-a favour you have not 
merited. I need hardly make mention here of the 
offensive and calculating manner in which you have 
avoided tendering those explanations which these 
acts have rendered indispensable. Finally, to with­
hold nothing from you, I do not allude to your 

148 
T H E  D O U B L E 
recent peculiar-one might almost say incompre­
hensible-behaviour towards me in the coffee 
house. 
Far be it from me to complain of what 
proved the needless expenditure of one rouble. 
Nevertheless I cannot but vent my indignation at 
the recollection of your flagrant attempt to pre­
judice my honour, and what is more, to do so in 
the presence of several persons of breeding, albeit 
not personal acquaintances of mine . . .  
'Am I going too far ?' wondered Mr. Golyadkin. 
'Isn't it a bit strong ? Isn't it being too touchy­
that hint about breeding for instance ? No, it 
doesn't matter ! Firmness is the thing with him. 
Still, to soften the blow, I can butter him up a bit 
at the end. We'll see.' 
I should not however be wearying you with 
this letter, were I not firmly persuaded that yoqr 
nobility of heart and forthrightness will suggest 
to you the means of rectifying all omissions and 
restoring the status quo ante. 
I venture to hope and trust that you will not 
take this letter as offensive to yourself, and that at 
the same time you will not decline to write ex­
plaining yourself-sending your reply 
by 
my 
servant. 
In anticipation, I remain, Sir, 
Your obedient servant, 
Y. Golyadkin. 

T H E  D O U B LE 
" 
149 
'There, that's all right. It's done now. It's got 
to the stage ofletter-writing. But who's to thank 
for that ? He is. He's the one who reduces you to 
the necessity ofhaving something in writing. I'm 
within my rights.' 
After reading over the letter for the last time, 
Mr. Golyadkin folded it, sealed it up, and sum­
moned Petrushka, who appeared as usual looking 
bleary-eyed and extremely put out about some­
thing. 
'I want you to take this letter. You under­
stand ? '  
Petrushka remained silent. 
'I want you to take it to the office, and fmd 
Vakhrameyev-he' s duty secretary today. You 
understand ? ' 
'Y ' 
es. 
'"Y 
I " c ' 
"Y 
·. 
" 
A k £ 
es . 
an t you say, 
es, s1r 
? 
s 
or 
Vakhrameyev, and tell him your master sends his 
compliments, and wonders ifhe would be so good 
as to look up the office address book and fmd 
where Golyadkin the clerk is living.' 
Petrushka made no reply, and Mr. Golyadkin 
thought he detected him smiling. 
'Well, that's it, then. Ask the address, and fmd 
out where Golyadkin the new clerk is living.' 
'Right.' 
'Ask the address, and then take this letter there, 
. 
' 
got 1t ? 
'Y ' 
es. 

150 
T H E  D O U B L E 
'If, when you get there, this gentleman you're 
taking the letter to-this Golyadkin . . .  What are 
you laughing at, dolt ? ' 
'Me Έ  What have I got to laugh about ? It's 
not for the likes of me to laugh.' 
'Very well then . . . If this gentleman should 
ask how your master is, or how he's getting on or 
anything like that, you just keep your tongue to 
yourself, and say "My master's all right, and asks 
for a written reply." You understand Έ' 
'Y 
. ' 
es, s1r. 
'Very well then. "My master's all right," 
you'll say. "He's quite fit and is just going visit­
ing," you'll say. "And he asked for a written 
answer." Got than' 
'Y ' 
es. 
'Well, off you go.' 
'What a job it is with this blockhead too ! He 
just laughs. And what at Έ Things have come to a 
pretty pass ! Still, perhaps it will all tum out for 
the best . . . The wretch will probably loiter 
about for a couple of hours now, then disappear 
somewhere. You can't send him anywhere. 
What a mess it is. What a mess ! ' 
Being thus sensible of how full was the cup of 
his affliction, Mr. Golyadkin resolved to adopt a 
passive role for the two hours during which he 
should await Petrushka. For one of them he paced 
the room, smoking. Discarding his pipe, he sat 
down to a book. He had a short lie-down on 

T H E  D O U B L E  
151 
the ottoman. He resmned his pipe. He began 
coursing about the room again. He tried to 
thrash things out, but found himself quite unable 
to do so. Finally, as the agony of remaining passive 
reached its peak, he made up his mind to do some­
thing. 
'Petrushka will be back in an hour,' he thought. 
'I can give the key to the porter, and go and, 
urn . . .  investigate on my own meanwhile.' 
Losing no titne in his haste to investigate, he 
took his hat and went out, locking up behind him. 
He handed the key to the porter together with a 
ten-kopek tip-he had become unusually liberal of 
late-and set off. 
He headed first for the Izmaylovsky Bridge, a 
walk of half an hour or so. On arriving at his 
goal, he went straight into the courtyard of the 
house with which he was familiar, and glanced 
up at the windows of Civil Counsellor Beren­
deyev' s apartments. All save three hung with red 
curtains were in darkness. 
'I don't suppose Olsufy Ivanovich has got any 
visitors today,' thought Mr. Golyadk.in. 'They're 
all at home on their own.' 
He stood in the courtyard quite a while, trying 
to make a decision. But the decision was evidently 
fated to remain unmade, for suddenly he thought 
better of it, and with a wave of the hand returned 
to the street. 
' No, I shouldn't have come here. What is there 

152 
T H E  D O U B LE 
for tnc to do here : I'd better go now, and, mn, 
. 
. 
. 
, 
mvcsugate 1n person. 
With that Mr. Golyadkin set off for the office. 
He had a long walk ahead ofhim, added to which 
it was dreadfully slushy underfoot, and great 
soggy flakes of snow were falling fast. But diffi­
culties seemed not to exist for him. True, he was 
drenched to the skin and not a little bespattered 
with mud, but that was just by the way, provided 
his object were attained. And he was indeed 
nearing his goal. He could see the huge govern­
ment building looming dark in the distance. 
'Hold on ! '  he thought suddenly. 'Where am 
I going ? And what am I going to do when I 
get there ? Suppose I fiJ!d out where he lives­
Petrushka will have got back meanwhile with the 
answer. I shall just be wasting my valuable time 
for nothing, as I've done already. It doesn't 
matter, though. The whole thing can still be put 
right. But oughtn't I to go and see Vakhrameyev ? 
No ! I can do that afterwards. Confound it ! I 
needn't have come out at all. But that's what I'm 
like. I've got a knack of trying to rush ahead 
whether there's any need to or not. Hm . . . 
What time is it : Nine, I suppose. Petrushka 
may get back and fmd me gone. I was a fool to 
come out. Oh, what a fuss and bother it is !' 
After frankly admitting himself to have been a 
fool, our hero dashed back to Shestilavochnaya 
Street, and got there tired and exhausted. From 

T H E  D O U B L E  
153 
S 
the porter he learnt that Petrushka had not yet 
appeared. 'There ! Just as I foresaw,' he thought. 
'And it's nine already. What a useless thing he 
is. Always boozing somewhere. 
Oh, God ! 
What a miserable day it's been for me ! ' 
Reflecting and lamenting thus, Mr. Golyadkin 
let himself into his rooms. He got a candle, un­
dressed, lit a pipe, and weak, weary, worn and 
hllllgry, lay down on the ottoman to await Pet­
rushka. The candle burnt dimly. Its light flickered 
on the walls. He gazed thoughtfully into space, 
and fmally fell dead asleep. 
Late at night he awoke. The candle, which had 
burnt right down, was smoking and on the point 
of going out altogether. Mr. Golyadkin sprang to 
his feet, jerked himself into life, and remembered 
everything. Through the partition came the 
resonant snores of Petrushka. He rushed to the 
window-not a light anywhere. He opened the 
vent-not a sound. The city slept. It must there­
fore have been two or three in the morning. 
And indeed it was, for with a sudden effort the 
clock behind the partition struck two. 
Mr. 
Golyadkin charged into the next room. 
Somehow after prolonged effort he roused 
Petrushka and succeeded in getting him to sit up 
in bed. At that precise moment the candle went 
out for good. It was about ten 1ninutes before he 
found and lit another, and during that time Pet­
rnshka managed to drop off again. 

154 
T H E  D O U B L E 
'Blackguard ! Villain ! ' shouted Mr. Golyadkin, 
rousing him once more. 'Get up ! Wake up, will 
you ! '  
After half an hour's solid effort Mr. Golyadkin 
succeeded in stirring his servant into life, and 
dragging him into his own room. Only then did 
he see that Petrushka was, as the saying is, as 
drunk as a lord, and hardly able to stand. 
'Lounger ! 
Rogue ! '  cried Mr. Golyadkin. 
' Shamed me, that's what you've done ! 
' Oh God ! Where has he got rid of the letter ? 
What's happened to it ? And why did I write it : 
Was there any need : Like a damned fool I let 
myself get carried away by my pride. And this 
is where it's got me. So much for your pride ! 
'What have you done with the letter, you thief: 
Who did you give it to : '  
' I  didn't give any letter to anybody. I didn't 
have any letter. So there ! ' 
Mr. Golyadkin wrung his hands in despair. 
'Listen Pyotr, listen to me.' 
' I'm listening.' 
'Where've you been ? Tell me.' 
'To see nice people, that's where I've been. 
What do I care ! ' 
'God help me ! Where did you go first : The 
office : Listen Pyotr-perhaps you had a drop too 
much.' 
'Me :  Strike me dead on the spot-n-n-not a 
d-d-drop. So there ! ' 

T H E  D O U B L E  
155 
'It doesn't matter your being dnmk, I was 
only asking. It's all right your being drunk. I 
don't mind, Petrushka, I don't mind. Perhaps 
you've just forgotten for a bit, but you'll remem­
ber. Now come on, try. Did you see the clerk 
Vakhra1neyev, or not À ' 
'No. There wasn't any clerk. Strike me dead.' 
'No, no, no, Petrushka. I don't mind, you 
know. You can see I don't. Well, then. It was 
cold out, and wet, so you had a quick one. I 
don't mind. I'm not angry. I had one today 
myself, old chap. Now come on, and try to 
remember, old fellow. Did you see Vakhra-
' 
meyev ? 
'Well, it was like this. Honest truth-! did go, 
straight I did . . .  ' 
'That's fme, Petrushka. Fine. I'm not angry, 
you see,' continued our hero, coaxing his servant 
still more, patting him on the shoulder and 
smiling at him. ' So you had a quick one, you 
rogue ? Ten kopeks' worth, eh ? You bad man ! 
Well, it doesn't matter. You can see I'm not 
angry. I'm not, old chap. I'm not at all.' 
'I'm not a bad man. You can say what you 
like . . . Just because I went to see some nice 
people. I'm not a bad man, and I never have 
been.' 
'No, Petrushka, of course not. Listen, Pet­
rushka, I'm not scolding you, you know, when I 
call you a bad man. I mean it in a nice sense, to 

156 
T H E  D O U B L E 
cheer you up. You know Petrushka, it's a com­
pliment to some n1en, if you call them rogues or 
sly ones. It means they're no fools and don't let 
themselves get taken in. Some people like that. 
Well, never mind. Now, come on Petrushka. 
No beating about the bush. Tell me straight­
like you would a friend. Did you go to Vakhra­
meyev and did he give you an address ? '  
'Yes, he did. He gave me that too. He's a nice 
official. "And your master's a nice man too," he 
said, " a  very nice man." "And give your master 
my compliments," he said, "and thank him, and 
tell hin1 how much I like and esteem him," he 
said. " For your n1aster' s a good n1an, Petrushka, 
d 
' 
d 
"' 
an you re a goo man too. 
'God give me strength ! The address, the ad­
dress, you Judas ! ' These last words he almost 
whispered. 
'Yes, he gave me that.' 
'He did ? Well, where does he live, this Golyad-
kin ?' 
"'You'll find Golyadkin in Shestilavochnaya 
Street," he said. "As you walk down it, you'll 
see a staircase on the right, and it's the fourth 
floor. That's where you'll find Golyadkin," he 
said.' 
' Swindler, cutthroat ! ' shouted our hero, fmally 
losing all patience. 'That's me you're talking 
about. There's another Golyadkin, and I mean 
him} you twister ! ' 

T H E  D O U B L E  
157 
'Just as you like. I don't care. Have it your 
' 
own way. 
'But the letter ! The letter ! ' 
'What letter ? There wasn't any letter. I didn't 
see any letter.' 
'What did you do with it, you crook ? ' 
'Delivered it. "My compliments and thanks 
to him," he said. "He's a good man, your master. 
Give him my compliments," he said.' 
' Who said ? Golyadkin ? ' 
For a moment Petrushka remained silent, then, 
staring his master straight in the face, he gave a 
broad smile. 
'Listen, you villain ! ' began Mr. Golyadkin, 
breathless and losing his head in his fury. 'What 
have you done to me ? Come on, tell me ! Played 
me a filthy trick-landed me in the cart ! You 
horrible wretch ! You-Judas ! ' 
'Have it your own way. What do I care ?' said 
Petrushka firmly, retiring behind the partition. 
'Come here ! Come here, you idle fool ! ' 
' Shan't now ! Shan't ! I don't care ! I'm going 
to nice people. Nice people live honestly. Nice 
people don't live falsely and don't have doubles.' 
Mr. Golyadkin's hands and feet turned to icc. 
He couldn't breathe. 
'Yes/ continued Petrushka, 'they don't have 
doubles-ever. They aren't an insult to God and 
honest n1en.' 
'You're drunk, you lazy lun1p ! Sleep now, you 

158 
T H E  D O U B L E  
miserable thing, and to1norrow you'll get what's 
coming to you ! '  said Mr. Golyadkin, his voice 
almost a whisper. Petrushka n1uttered something 
else, and then could be heard making the bed creak 
as he lay down. He gave a prolonged yawn, 
stretched himself out, and fmally began snoring 
away in what is called the sleep of the just. 
Mr. Golyadkin felt more dead than alive. 
Petrushka's behaviour, his strange albeit vague 
insinuations-which were nothing to get annoyed 
about, especially as he had been drunk-and the 
whole ugly turn of things had shaken him to the 
core. 
'Whatever possessed me to go for hin1 in the 
nuddle of the night ? ' said our hero. A morbid 
sensation was causing him to tremble all over. 
' Something egged me into getting tied up with 
him when he was drunk ! What sense can you 
get out of anyone in that state ! It's a lie every 
time he opens his mouth. What was he getting 
at, though ? Good God ! And why did I go 
writing all those letters ? My own executioner 
-that's what I a1n ! I can't keep quiet. I must 
blab ! And that of all things ! I'm heading for 
destruction, I'n1 like a boot-rag, and yet I've got 
to bring my pride into it. "My pride's hurt, I 
must save it ! "  I'm my own executioner ! '  
Thus spoke Mr. Golyadkin, sitting on his otto­
man and too frightened to stir. Suddenly his 
eyes lighted upon an object that excited all his 

T H E  D O U B L E  
159 
-
attention. Dreading that it nught prove an illu-
sion or figment of his imagination, he reached 
out his hand timidly, hopefully and with rm­
utterable curiosity towards it. No ! It was no 
illusion, no figment of the imagination. It was 
without a single shadow of doubt a letter, and it 
was addressed to hitn. He picked it up from the 
table. His heart was pounding within him. 
'That scormdrel must have brought it, put it 
down here, and forgotten about it,' he thought. 
'That's probably what happened. That's it.' 
The letter was from Vakhrameyev, a young 
colleague who at one time had been a friend of 
his. 
' Still, I anticipated all this,' thought our hero. 
'And I've anticipated what it'll say.' 
The letter. was as follows : 
Dear Y akov Petrovich, 
Your man is drunk, and as no sense is to be got 
from him I prefer to reply by letter. I hasten to 
inform you that I shall carry out faithfully and 
exactly the commission you have laid upon me, 
namely of handing a letter to you know who. 
This person, who has taken the place of a friend 
to me-l refrain from mentioning his name, not 
wishing to sully needlessly the reputation of one 
who is completely innocent-lodges with us at 
Karolina Ivanovna's in the room which, when you 
were staying here, was occupied by an infantry 

160 
T H E  D OU B L E  
oflicer from Tambov. He is, however, always to be 
seen in the company of sincere and honest folk, 
which is more than I can say for some. I intend to 
sever my connexions with you as from today, it 
being impossible for us to preserve the same friendly 
spirit and unanimity of our former association. 
And therefore I request, sir, that you forward me 
on receipt of this candid epistle, the two roubles 
owing for razors of foreign manufacture which, if 
you remember, I sold to you on credit seven months 
ago when you were living with us under the roof 
of Karolina Ivanovna, a lady for whom I have a 
most profound respect. I am acting thus because 
according to accounts I have received from people 
of intelligence, you have lost your reputation and 
sense of honour, and become a moral menace to the 
innocent and uncontaminated. For there are some 
who abide not by the truth ; their words are a lie, 
and their air of good intent is suspect. 
As to standing up for Karolina Ivanovna-who 
has always been an honourable lady, decorous in 
demeanour, and who, albeit a spinster no longer in 
the bloom of youth, is the daughter of a good 
foreign house-people capable of so doing can 
always be found everywhere. 
This I have been 
asked by several persons to mention to you here in 
passing, and I do so also on my own behalf. In any 
case you will learn all in good time, if you have not 
done so already, for you have by all accounts been 
making yourself notorious from one end of the 

T H E  D O U B L E  
161 
capital to the other, and may consequently have 
heard what you should hear about yourself in many 
quarters. In conclusion, sir, I must tell you that the 
person you know, whose name I do not for certain 
honourable reasons mention-is highly esteemed 
by right-minded people, and is moreover of a 
pleasant and cheerful disposition, as successful at his 
work as he is in intelligent society, and true to his 
word and to his friends, not insulting them behind 
their backs while being nice to their faces. 
At all events I remain, 
Your obedient servant, 
N. Vakhrameyev. 
PS. Get rid of your man-he is a drunkard and 
probably causes you a lot of trouble-and take on 
Yevstafy, who used to be in service here and is now 
without a place. Your present servant is not only a 
drunkard but a thief as well. Only last week he 
sold Karolina Ivanovna a pound of lump sugar on 
the cheap, which in my opinion he could only have 
done by steadily stealing small quantities from you 
over a period. I tell you this as a well-wisher, 
although all some individuals can do is to insult 
and deceive everybody, preferably those who arc 
honest and good-natured, slandering them behind 
their backs, and making them out to be the opposite 
of what they are, out of pure envy and because 
they're not as good themselves. 
v. 

162 
T H E  D O U B LE 
After reading Vakhratneyev's letter, our hero 
retnained n1otionless on the ottoman for a long 
while. Some new light was breaking through 
the vague n1ysterious mist that had been sur­
rounding him for the past two days. He was 
beginning to understand a little . . . He was 
about to try and get to his feet and take a tum 
or two up and down to refresh himself, collect 
his scattered thoughts, focus them on a certain 
subject, and then, having got himself straight a 
bit, to give the position his mature consideration. 
But no sooner did he attempt to stand, than he 
at once fell back again, weak and feeble. 
'I anticipated all this, of course. But how did 
he come to write that, and what do those words 
really mean ? Suppose I do know their sense, 
where does that lead ? He should have told me 
straight, " Such and such, and such and such, and 
this and that is required," and I'd have done it. 
The thing has taken such an unpleasant tum ! I 
wish tomorrow would hurry up and come, and 
then I could get down to it ! I know what to do. 
" Such and such a thing," I'll say. "I agree to 
argue it, but I won't sell n1y honour, etc." But 
how' this person we know of . . . How's this 
beastly individual come to get mixed up in iu 
Why, exactly ? Oh, I wish it would soon be 
tomorrow ! Till then they'll slander me ! They're 
intriguing, they're working to spite n1e ! The 
main. thing is not to waste any time, and to write 

T H E  D O U B LE 
163 
, 
a letter now simply mentioning this and that, 
and just saying I agree to such and such. And 
tomorrow at the crack of dawn I'll send it off, 
then get to the office as early as possible myself, 
before they do, and forestall these pleasant gentle­
men . . . They'll slander me, they will ! ' 
Mr. Golyadkin drew some paper towards him, 
took pen, and wrote the following reply to 
Vakhrameyev' s letter : 
Dear Nestor Ignatyevich, 
I have read your obnoxious letter with sorrow 
and amazement, for I clearly perceive that in speak­
ing of certain indelicate persons and others of false 
good intent, you are referring to mysel£ With 
genuine distress I perceive with what rapidity and 
success and to what great depths has calumny spread 
its roots to the detriment of my prosperity, honour 
and good name. And what is all the more deplor­
able and outrageous, is that even decent men, 
genuinely high-minded, and, what is most impor­
tant, endowed with open, forthright natures, should 
abandon the interests of honourable folk and attach 
themselves and all their best qualities to that per­
nicious putridity which has, unfortunately, been so 
widely and so very insidiously propagated in our 
own dificult and unprincipled time. Let me say 
in conclusion that I shall consider it my sacred duty 
to repay in full the debt of two roubles that you 
mention. 

164 
T H E  D O U B L E  
Your allusions to a certain female, as also to the 
intentions, speculations, and various designs of 
same;tl do not, let me tell you, sir, clearly or fully 
apprehend. I must beg you, sir, to allow me to 
preserve my high thoughts and good name un­
sullied. 
At all events I shall be pleased to enter 
into explanations with you in person, preferring 
personal contact to correspondence as being more 
trustworthy, and am moreover ready to make 
various peaceable agreements, on mutual terms of 
course. To this end, sir, I beg that you will intimate 
to this person my readiness to come to a personal 
understanding, and request her furthermore to name 
time and place for the interview. Your insinuations 
about my having offended you, betrayed our 
original friendship and spoken slightingly of you, 
made bitter reading. The whole of this I attribute 
to misunderstanding, base calumny, and the envy 
and malevolence of those whom I may justly call 
my bitterest enemies. They are probably unaware, 
however, that innocence is the strength ofinnoccncc, 
that their brazen impudence and infuriating fami­
liarity will sooner or later earn them common 
contempt, and that they will come to destruction 
solely through their own impropriety and depravity. 
In conclusion, I beg that you will convey to these 
persons that their strange pretensions, and their 
ignoble and chimerical desire to oust others from 
the places that they occupy by their very existence 
in the world, and to supplant them, arc deserving 

T H E  D O U B L E  
165 
, 
of consternation, contempt and pity, and what is 
n1ore, qualify them for the madhouse. Moreover, 
attitudes such as these are strictly forbidden by law, 
and in my opinion, quite justly so. There are limits 
to everything, and if this is a joke, it is a pretty poor 
one. 
I will say more-it is utterly immoral, for 
I venture to assure you, sir, that my own ideas about 
keeping one's place, and these I have amplified 
above, are purely moral. 
I have the honour to remain, Sir, 
Your obedient servant, 
Y. Golyadkin. 

10 
MR. GOLYADKIN had been shaken to the core 
by the events of the preceding day. He 
passed an extremely bad night, being unable to 
get a full five minutes' sleep. It was as if some 
mischievous person had sprinkled his bed with 
bristles. He spent the whole time in a semi­
somnolent condition, tossing from one side to 
another, sighing and groaning, dropping off one 
moment and waking the next ; and all this was 
attended by a strange feeling of anguish, vague 
memories, hideous visions-in short, by every 
conceivable unpleasantness. 
Sometimes he saw the figure of Andrey Filippo­
vich in a weird mysterious twilight, a gaunt angry 
figure, with a cold harsh look on its face and some 
stonily polite word of reprimand on its lips ; he 
would be on the point of going up to Andrey 
Filippovich to justify himself in some way, and 
prove that he was not as his enemies made him 
out to be, but like this and like that, with such and 
such, and such and such in his favour, over and 
above his usual inate qualities ; but the moment 
he did so, a certain notoriously beastly person 
appeared, ruined everything at a single blow and 
by the most infuriating means, blackened Mr. 

T H E  D O U B L E  
167 
Golyadkin' s reputation there and then, practic­
ally to his face, trampled his pride in the mire, 
and immediately supplanted him, both at the 
office and in society. 
Sometimes he felt his head tingling from a 
blow that he had recently received and meekly 
accepted, either in the society of his fellow men 
or while performing his duties, when remonstra­
tion would have been difficult. As he racked his 
brains to discover why it should have been diffi­
cult, his thoughts on this subject would without 
his noticing it run over into others concerning a 
certain small but also rather important act of 
meanness that he had recently witnessed, heard 
about, or had himself committed, and com­
mitted often not for any mean motive or through 
any mean impulses ; sometimes, for instance, it 
had just been by chance-for reasons of delicacy ; 
another time-because he was completely de­
fenceless ; and lastly because . . . But Mr. Golyad­
kin knew perfectly well what it was because of. 
At this point he would blush in his sleep, and as 
he tried to hide his blushes, would mutter that 
there, for instance, one might have shown resolu­
tion, a great deal of resolution ; and then con­
cluded by asking what that was, and why he need 
mention it then. But what enraged and exas­
perated him most of all was that a certain person 
notorious for his revolting behaviour and scurrilous 
tendencies would at that moment, whether bidden 

168 
T H E  D O U B L E 
or not, unfailingly appear, and with a nasty little 
smile n1utter quite gratuitously, 'Resolution ? 
What's that got to do with it ? What resolution 
could you and I show, Y akov Petrovich ? ' 
Sometimes he would dream that he was in the 
splendid company of people celebrated for their 
breeding and wit. He, too, distinguished himself 
by his amiability and wit, and everyone took a 
liking to him-even certain of his enemies who 
were present-and this pleased him greatly. 
Everyone gave hitn precedence, and at last he 
had the agreeable experience of overhearing the 
host speak flatteringly of him to one of the guests 
whom he had drawn aside. And all of a sudden, 
for no apparent reason, a person notorious for 
his evil intentions and brutish impulses in the 
shape of Golyadkin junior appeared, and by so 
doing demolished at one fell swoop all the glory 
and triumph of Golyadkin senior, eclipsing him, 
dragging him into the mire and clearly demon­
strating that Golyadkin senior, the real Mr. 
Golyadkin, was not real at all but a fraud ; he was 
the real one, and Golyadkin senior was not what 
he seetned, but this and that, and consequently 
had no right to the society of well-intentioned, 
·well-bred people. And all this happened so 
quickly that Golyadkin senior did not even have 
time to open his mouth, before everyone was heart 
and soul with the revolting and false Golyadkin 
junior, disowning Golyadkin senior, real and 

T H E  D O U B L E 
169 
innocent as he was, in a most prof৐undly con­
temptuous nuru1er. There was no one whose 
opinion had not in a twinkling been changed by 
the revolting Golyadkin to suit his own. There 
was no one, even amongst the lowliest of the 
company, on whom the spurious and good-for­
nothing Golyadkin had not fawned in his n1ost 
sugary manner-no one with whon1 he had not 
ingratiated himself, and over whom he had not 
poured sweet unction that brought tears of delight 
to their eyes. And the n1ain thing was that it 
all happened in a matter of seconds. The speed 
with which the suspect and worthless Golyadkin 
moved was astonishing. No sooner had he got 
one well-disposed towards him, than before you 
could blink, he was quietly making up to another. 
The moment he had drawn a benevolent smile 
from this one, he jerked his rather dumpy little 
legs into life, and was off wooing a third. Before 
you had time to register surprise, he was at the 
same game with a fourth. It was horrible. It 
was sheer wizardry. Everyone was pleased with 
him, everyone liked him, everyone praised him 
to the skies and proclaimed in chorus that for 
amiability and satirical humour he was far and 
away above the real Golyadkin, so putting the 
latter to shame. They disowned and pushed out 
the upright and well-intentioned Golyadkin, and 
showered insults upon him who was well-known 
for the love he bore his neighbour. 

170 
T H E  D O U B L E  
Anguished, terrified and enraged, the Mr. 
Golyadkin who had suffered so much, rushed out 
into the street, and tried to hire a cab to take him 
straight to his Excellency's, or failing that, at 
least to Andrey Filippovich's. But horror of 
horrors ! The drivers flatly refused him, saying, 
'We can't take two people exact! y alike, sir. A 
good man tries hard to live honourably, not just 
anyhow, and never has a double.' 
Looking about him, distracted with shame, the 
entirely honourable Mr. Golyadkin saw that the 
cabmen and Petrushka, who had thrown in his 
lot with them, were right. The depraved Golyad­
kin was actually standing close beside him, and 
in his usual blackguardly fashion was at that 
critical mon1ent preparing to do something very 
improper that would in no way display the 
nobility of character acquired by breeding that 
he, the abominable Golyadkin II, was so fond of 
vaunting on every suitable occasion. 
Out of his mind with sha1ne and despair, the 
ruined but rightful Mr. Golyadkin fled blindly 
wherever fate n1ight lead. But as often as his foot­
falls rang upon the granite pavement, an exact 
image of Golyadkin the depraved and abon1in­
able, would spring up out of the ground. And 
each of these exact i1nages would cmne waddling 
along behind the next, in a long. procession like 
a gaggle of geese, after Golyadkin senior. Escape 
was impossible. The pitiable Golyadkin grew 

T H E  D O U B L E  
171 
breathless with terror. In the end trierc sprang 
up so fearful a multitude of exact images that the 
whole capital was blocked with thetn, and a police 
officer, perceiving this breach of decorum, was 
obliged to grab the lot by the scruff of the neck 
and fling them into a police-box that happened 
to be near at hand . . .  
Our hero awoke, stark frozen with horror. And 
stark frozen with horror, he realized that his waking 
hours were hardly any better. He felt torn1ented 
and oppressed. His anguish was such that his heart 
felt as if it were being gnawed from his breast. 
Finally he could bear it no longer. 'It shall not 
be ! ' he cried, boldly sitting up in bed, and at 
once came to. 
Evidently it had been day for some time. The 
room was unusually light. Rich sunlight was 
filtering through the frost-encrusted panes and 
flooding the walls, which surprised him not a 
little for this normally happened only at noon, 
and there had been, to the best of his recollection, 
no such anomaly in the course of the heavenly 
luminary before. No sooner had he registered 
surprise at this, than the wall-clock behind the 
partition began to make a whirring solUld pre­
paratory to striking. 
'There ! '  thought Mr. Golyadkin, and listened 
anxiously . . .  
But the clock, to his final and utter consternation, 
summoned all its energy, and struck once. 

172 
T H E  D O U B L E  
'What's this : '  cried our hero, leaping out of 
bed. Clad as he was, he dashed round the partition, 
unable to believe his ears. The clock really did 
say one. He looked at Pctrushka's bed, but there 
was no sign of Petrushka there or an ywherc else. 
The bed had clearly been tnade for some ti1ne and 
left, and Petrushka' s boots \Vere nowhere to be 
seen-a sure indication that he really was out. Mr. 
Golyadkin rushed to the door. It was shut. 
'Where is he : '  he whispered, strangely agitated 
and feeling his whole body trembling violently. 
Struck by a sudden thought, he charged to his 
table, and searched and run1maged about. But 
Vakhrameyev' s letter was gone. Petrushka was 
gone, the clock said one, and several new points 
about Vakhrameyev's letcer which had been 
obscure the day before, now became quite clear. 
At last it was obvious-even Petrushka had been 
bought ! Yes, that was it ! 
' So that's where the tnain plot has been 
hatched ! ' cried Mr. Golyadkin, striking his fore­
head, with a look of growing amazement on his 
face. 'In the den of that odious German woman 
-that's where the whole evil genius is hidden 
now ! Telling me to go to the Izmaylovsky Bridge 
was only a strategic diversion. She was putting 
me off the scent, throwing dust in my eyes-the 
wicked old hag ! That's how she's been under­
mining me ! That's it ! If you look at it that 
way, that's the whole thing exactly-and it 

T H E  DO UBLE 
173 
# 
accounts for that scoundrel turning up. It all 
boils down to the san1e thing. They've been 
keeping hin1 for a long time, preparing him and 
saving hin1 up for the fatal day
. And sec now 
how it's all turned out-what it's all con1c to ! 
Ah well, it doesn't tnatter. No time has been 
lost ! '  
Here Mr. Golyadkin rcmen1bered with horror 
that it was now after one. 
'What if they've now had time . .  .' He uttered 
a groan. 'No. They won't have. They're telling 
lies. We'll see . . 
. ' 
He flung on some clothes, and seizing pen and 
paper scribbled the following : 
Dear Y akov Petrovich, 
It's either you or me. There isn't room for both 
of us. And therefore I tell you plainly that your 
strange, ridiculous and unattainable desire to appear 
1ny twin and to pass yourself off as such, will serve 
to achieve nothir:g more than your complete dis­
grace and discomfiture. Thus for your own good 
I must ask you to step down, and make way for 
those who arc genuinely noble and well-inten­
tioned. 
Failing this, I am prepared to decide in 
favour of most extreme measures. I lay down my 
pen, and wait . . . 
I remain ready to oblige-even with pistols. 
Y. Golyadkin. 

174 
T H E  D O U B LE 
When he had finished this note, our hero 
rul>bed his hands vigorously. Then, donning his 
hat and overcoat, he unlocked the door with a 
spare key, and set off for the office. But when he 
got there, he could not make up his mind to go 
in. It was too late. His watch showed half past 
two. Suddenly an apparently trivial thing oc­
curred to relieve him of some of his doubts. 
Around the corner of the office building popped 
a small, breathless, red-faced figure of a man, 
who scuttled in a furtive rat-like manner up the 
steps and into the vestibule. It was Ostafyev, a 
clerk, who was quite well known to Mr. Golyadkin. 
He was a useful fellow who would do anything 
for ten kopeks. Knowing Ostafyev' s weakness, 
and suspecting that after absenting himself from 
the office 'on some most urgent business', he 
would be more avid for kopeks than before, our 
hero made up his mind to be lavish, and slipping 
up the steps after him, called to him, and with 
an air of n1ystery, motioned him into a secluded 
comer behind an enormous iron stove. Here he 
began interrogating hin1. 
'Well, my friend, how are things-if you take 
. 
' 
my meanmg ? 
'How do you do, sir. At your service, I'm 
' 
sure. 
'All right, all right, my friend. I'll make it 
worth your while. Look-how is it ?' 
'What's that you want to know ?' For a mo-

T H E  D O U D L E  
175 
ment Ostafyev held his hand up to his mouth 
which had unexpectedly dropped open. 
' Look my friend, I, er . . . Don't go thinking 
anything-
Is Andrey Filippovich here ? '  
' He is.' 
' And the clerks ? ' 
' Here as they should be.' 
' And his Excellency as well ? ' 
' And his Excellency as well.' Here the clerk 
again held his hand up to his gaping n1outh, and 
gave Mr. Golyadkin, or so it seemed, a strangely 
inquisitive look. 
' And there's nothing special, my friend ? '  
' No, nothing.' 
' About me, I mean . . . Isn't there anything . . .  
You take n1 y n1eaning ? ' 
' No, nothing at the moment.' The clerk again 
covered his mouth and looked strangely at Mr. 
Golyadkin. The latter was now trying to fathom 
Ostafyev' s expression, and discover whether he 
was keeping anything back. It seemed in fact that 
he was. 
He had grown more and more dis­
courteous and unfriendly, and was no longer 
showing the same sympathetic interest in Mr. 
Golyadkin' s affairs as at the begining of the con­
versation. 
'He's partly within his rights,' thought Mr. 
Golyadkin. 'What am I to him ? Perhaps the other 
side has given him something, and that's why he 
was off" on urgent business ". Ah well, I'll urn . . .  ' 

176 
T H E  D O U D L E  
He realised the tin1e for disbursing kopeks had 
come. 
' Here you are, n1y dear chap.' 
' Very tnuch obliged, sir.' 
' I'll give you tnore.' 
'Y 
. 
' 
es sir ? 
' I'll give you more in a minute, and as much 
again when we're finished, nnderstand ? ' 
The clerk said nothing, but stood stiff as a 
ranuod, staring fixedly at him. 
' Tell me now, have you heard anything about 
' 
me ? 
' I  don't think so . . . 
Not so far . . . ' replied 
Ostafyev, pausing as he spoke, and maintaining, 
like Mr. Golyadkin, an air of mystery, wrinkling 
his brow a little and staring at the floor-in short, 
doing his utmost to earn what he had been 
promised. 
The money he had been given he 
regarded as earned already. 
' Isn't there anything ? ' 
' Not so far.' 
' But listen-there may be something, eh ? ' 
'Yes, there may of course.' 
' Not so good ! ' thought our hero. 
' Listen, here's something else for you, old fellow.' 
' Much obliged, sir, I'm sure.' 
'Was Vakhrameyev here yesterday ? ' 
' H  
. ' 
e was, sir. 
'And anyone else ? See if you can reineinber, 
old chap.' 

T H E  D O U B L E 
177 
, 
The clerk searched his men1ory for a minute, 
but could fmd nothing suitable. 
' No sir, no one.' 
' H  
I '  
m .  
A silence followed. 
' Look, here's something else for you, 1ny fi-iend. 
Now tell 1ne all the ins and outs of it.' 
' Very good, sir.' 
Ostafycv was now as meek as a lan1b, which 
was just what Mr. Golyadkin wanted. 
' Tell me old chap, how does he stand now ? '  
' Al right, quite well,' answered the clerk, 
staring hard at hitn. 
' How well ? '  
'Well, urn . . .  
' Ostafyev twitched his brows 
significantly. But he had fmally con1e to a dead 
end and didn't know what to say. 
' It's bad,' thought Mr. Golyadkin. 
'Wasn't there some further development with 
V akhrameyev ? ' 
' Everything's as it was.' 
' Try to think.' 
' They say . . .  
' 
'Well ? '  
Ostafyev put his hand in front of his mouth for 
a moment. 
'Wasn't there a letter for me fron1 there ? ' 
'Mikheycv the caretaker has been to V akhra-
111eyev's lodgings today-to that Gernun lady 
there-so I'll go and ask if you like.' 

178 
T H E  D O U B L E  
' If you would, my dear chap. Please do, for 
God's sake. I'm just . . . Don't go thinking any­
thing-I'm just-you know. 
You inquire and 
find out whether they're cooking up anything to 
do with me-what action he's taking-that's what 
I want. 
You find that out my friend, and I'll 
make it worth your while.' 
'I will sir-and Ivan Semyonych sat in your 
place today.' 
' Ah !  He did, did he ? '  
' Andrey Filippovich told hin1 to.' 
' He did ? What for ?  Find that out, my friend. 
For God's sake find that out ! You do all that, 
and I'll make it up to you, my dear chap. That's 
what I want to know. And don't you go thinking 
anything.' 
' Very good sir. I'll go at once. Won't you 
be coming in today ? ' 
' No. I, er . . . I just, un1 . . .  I just came to 
have a look-but I'll make it worth your while 
after.' 
' All right.' 
The clerk ran quickly and eagerly up the stairs, 
and Mr. Golyadkin was left to himself. 
' It's bad,' he thought. ' Bad, bad ! Things don't 
look too good for me. What was the meaning of 
it all ? What did that drunkard mean by some of 
his hints ? Who's at the back of this ? Ah ! Now 
I know. They probably found out, and then put 
him there . . . 
But did they ? 
It was Andrey 

T H E  D O U B L E 
179 
Filippovich put Ivan Semyonovich tlfere. 
But 
why did he do that ? What was the point ? Very 
likely they found out . . .  This is Vakhrameyev's 
work-no, not Vakhrameyev-he's as stupid as 
they n1ake 'em. They're all doing the work for 
hi1n. They put that other scoundrel up to coming 
here for the same thing. 
And that one-eyed 
Gernun woman made her complaint ! I always 
suspected all this intrigue had more in it than 
n1et the eye, and that there was bound to be 
something in all that old wives' gossip. I said as 
much to Dr. Rutenspitz. " They've sworn to cut 
someone' s throat, in the moral sense," I said "­
and they've got hold of Karolina Ivanovna." No. 
This is the work of master hands, you can see 
that. 
It's not Vakhrameyev. No sir, this is the 
work of a master ! Vakhrameyev' s stupid, as I 
said . . . 
But I know now who's doing their 
work for them-it's that in1postor ! 
That's the 
foundation of his career, and that explains why 
he's successful in better society. 
But really I'd 
like to know how he stands with them now. 
Only why have they taken on Ivan Semyonovich ? 
What danmed use is lze to them ? It's as if they 
couldn't fmd anyone else. 
Still, whoever they 
put there it would have been the same. 
All I 
know is, this Ivan Semyonovich has been on my 
list of suspects for a long time. I ren1arked what 
a nasty horrible old man he was ages ago. Lends 
out money on interest, they say-like a Jew. All 

180 
T H E  D O U B L E 
this is the Bear's handiwork. He's been mixed 
up in the whole thing. At the Izmaylovsky 
Bridge-that's where it all started . . .  ' 
Here Mr. Golyadkin screwed up his face as if 
he had bitten a lemon. Evidently he had remem­
bered something very unpleasant. 
' Still, it doesn't n1atter,' he thought. 'It's just 
that I keep coming back to my own troubles. 
Why doesn't Ostafyev come : He's probably sat 
down to something, or been detained somehow. 
It's good to have this intrigue afoot and be doing 
some undermining of my own. I only have to 
give Ostafyev ten kopeks and he's on my side. 
But is he : That's the thing ! Maybe they've got 
at him too, and he's agreed to be part of their plot. 
He looks a thorough crook ! He's keeping some­
thing back, the scoundrel ! "No, nothing," he 
says. "Very much obliged to you sir, I'm sure," 
he says. Cutthroat that he is ! ' 
Hearing a sudden noise, Mr. Golyadkin cowered 
back behind the stove. Someone came down the 
stairs, and passed out into the street. 
'Who could that have been now :' thought our 
hero to himself. A minute later other footsteps 
were heard. Unable to bear the suspense, he 
popped just the tip of his nose out of cover, and 
instantly drew it back as if it had been jabbed 
with a pin. This time it was someone he knew. 
It was the scoundrel, the intriguer, the pervert­
flouncing past with his usual quick horrible little 

T H E  D O U B L E  
181 
, 
steps, and throwing out his feet as ifhe was getting 
ready to give son1eone a kick. 
'Blackguard,' nmttered our hero to h.irnself, 
but he could not help noticing that the black­
guard had tmder his arn1 an enonnous green 
dispatch-case belonging to his Excellency. 
'Another special errand,' he thought, flushing 
with vexation and shrinking back still further. 
No sooner had Golyadkin junior flashed past, 
unaware of the presence of Golyadkin senior, 
than a third lot of footsteps were heard, which 
the latter guessed to be those of the returning 
clerk. And a clerk it was, a sleek-haired clerk­
not Ostafyev, but one Pisarenko-who peered 
round the stove at Mr. Golyadkin. The latter was 
amazed. 
'Why has he let others into the secret ?' he 
thought. ' Nothing is sacred to this barbarous 
lot ! '  
'Well ? '  he said, turning to Pisarenko. 'Who 
sent you, my friend ?' 
'I've come about your business. There's nothing 
from anyone so far. But if there is, we'll let you 
know.' 
'What about Ostafyev ? '  
' Couldn't get away. His Excellency's walked 
through the section twice already, and I can't 
stay now. ' 
'Thanks, old man. But tell me . . .  ' 
'Really, I can't stay . . .  He's asking for us every 

182 
T H E  D O U B LE 
n1inute . . . You just stand here for a bit, and if 
there's anything about your business we'll let you 
know.' 
'No, tell me, my friend . . .  
' 
'Please ! I can't stay,' said Pisarenko breaking 
away from Mr. Golyadkin, who had seized him 
by a lapel. 'Truly, I haven't time. You stand 
here for a bit and we'll let you know.' 
'Just a minute ! Just a minute ! Look, here's a 
letter. I'll make it worth your while.' 
' All right.' 
'Tty and give it to Mr. Golyadkin.' 
'Golyadkin ŋ' 
'Yes, Mr. Golyadkin.' 
'All right. As soon as I get off, I'll take it. You 
stay here meanwhile. No one will see you here.' 
'No. Don't go thinking I'm standing here so 
as not to be seen. I \von' t be here, I'll be in the 
side street. There's a coffee-house-that's where 
I'll be waiting. If anything happens, you'll let 
me know everything-is that understood ŋ '  
' All right. But let me go. I understand.' 
'And I'll make it worth your while, old man ! ' 
he shouted after Pisarenko, who had at last suc­
ceeded in freeing himsel£ 
'That rogue seemed to get ruder towards the 
end,' thought our hero, creeping out from behind 
the stove. 
'He's another twister-that's clear. First it was 
this and that . . . Still, he really was in a hurry. 

T H E  D O U B L E 
183 
There tnay be a lot of work. And his ্xcellency 
walked through the section twice . . . What was 
that for ?  Ah well, it doesn't tnatter ! It may be 
nothing. We'll see.' 
He was about to open the door and go, when 
at that very nwment his Excellency's carriage 
catne thundering up to. the entrance. Before he 
could recover, the occupant had opened the door, 
and jumped down. It was none other than Golyad­
kin junior, who had gone out ten minutes before. 
Golyadkin senior suddenly remembered that the 
Director's apartments were only a step or two 
away. 
'He's on his special errand,' he thought. 
After removing the fat green dispatch-case and 
some papers frmn the carriage, and giving some 
orders to the driver, Golyadkin junior flw1g open 
the door, nearly hitting our Mr. Golyadkin, and 
cutting hin1 dead to spite him, shot up the office 
stairs. 
'It's awful,' thought our hero. 'This is what 
we've cmne to now. Heavens above, just look at 
hin1 ! '  
For about half a minute our hero stood motion­
less. At last he n1ade up his mind. Without wait­
ing to think, his heart pounding, and trembling 
all over, he charged upstairs after his friend. 
'Here goes, and I don't care what happens. I'm 
out of it all,' he thought, as he ren1oved his hat, 
overcoat and galoshes in the ante-room. 

184 
T H E  D O U B L E  
It was nearly dark as Mr. Golyadkin walked 
into his section. Neither Audrey Filippovich nor 
Anton Antonovich was there. Both were with 
the Director handing in their reports, and the 
Director, as could be plainly heard, was in a hurry 
to report to a still more exalted person. Because 
of this, and also because darkness was falling and 
office hours were drawing to a close, certain clerks, 
the senior ones mainly, were, at the moment of 
Mr. Golyadkin's entry, engaged in whiling away 
the time. They were gathered together talking 
and laughing, while some of the most junior, the 
lowest of the low among the clerks, were taking 
advantage of the general hubbub to have a quiet 
game of pitch and toss in a comer by the window. 
Knowing what was proper, and feeling at that 
moment a particular need to fmd and win favour, 
Mr. Golyadkin went up to some of those he knew 
best to pass the time of day and so forth. But his 
colleagues reacted somewhat strangely to his greet­
ings. He was unpleasantly struck by a certain 
iciness, abruptness, and one might almost say 
sternness, in the way they received him. No one 
held out a hand. Some simply said hello and 
walked away ; some merely nodded ; one turned 
his back, pretending not to have noticed him ; 
while others-and this is what was more offensive 
to Mr. Golyadkin than anything else-others, that 
is to say some of the n1ost junior ungraded clerks, 
mere lads, who, as he had rightly said, were only 

T H E  D O U B L E 
185 
good for playing pitch and toss and r<1aming the 
streets, gradually surrounded him in such a way 
as to n1ake escape aln1ost impossible. They all 
looked at hitn with a sort ofitnpudent curiosity. 
It was an ill omen. He sensed that, and wisely 
prepared to ignore it. Then all of a sudden some­
thing quite unexpected happened, that finished­
that completely sank him, as the saying is. 
Suddenly, almost as if on purpose, at what was 
his most anxious moment, Golyadkin junior 
appeared among the encircling clerks. Gay, smil­
ing, full of beans as ever, nimble-footed, nimble­
tongued, he frolicked, toadied, gambolled and 
guffawed. He was, in short, his usual self­
exactly as he had been the day before, when he 
had also turned up at a most unpleasant moment 
for Mr. Golyadkin. 
Skipping, simpering and whirling around with 
a smile that wished 'Good evening' to all as­
sembled, he burst in on the little crowd of clerks. 
One he shook by the hand, another he clapped on 
the shoulder, a third he lightly embraced, to a 
fourth he explained the business on which he had 
been employed by his Excellency-where he had 
been, what he had done, and what he had taken 
with him-and a fifth, who was probably his best 
friend, he kissed resoundingly on the lips . . .  To 
put it briefly, everything was happening just as 
in Golyadkin senior's dream. 
When he had capered about to his heart's 

186 
T H E  D O U B LE 
content, when he had dealt with them all in his 
own inimitable way, disposing each and every 
one of them favourably towards himself, whether 
there was any need or not, suddenly and probably 
in error, having so far failed to notice his oldest 
friend, Golyadkin junior even stretched out his 
hand to Golyadkin senior. 
The latter, probably 
also in error, although he had had ample time to 
observe the ignoble Golyadkin junior, eagerly 
seized the unexpectedly proffered hand, and im­
pelled by some sudden strange inner urge, tear­
fuly grasped it in the firmest and friendliest 
manner. Whether he had been deceived by his 
enemy's first move, whether he had lost his pres­
ence of mind or sensed and realized in his heart 
of hearts how completely defenceless he was, is 
difficult to say. The fact remains that Golyadkin 
senior, in full possession of his faculties, of his 
own free will and before witnesses, solemnly 
shook the hand of him he called his mortal foe. 
But how great his amazement and fury, horror 
and shame, when his foe and mortal enemy, per­
ceiving the error of the innocent man he had 
persecuted and perfidiously deceived, suddenly, 
with insufferable effrontery and grossness, bra­
zenly, callously, and showing neither conscience 
nor compassion, snatched his hand away ! 
Not 
satisfied with that, he shook it as if it had been 
contaminated. Even worse, he spat, and made a 
most offensive gesture ! And worst of all, taking 

T H E  D O U B L E  
187 
out his handkerchief, he wiped each tmger that 
had momentarily rested in the hand of Golyadkin 
senior. All the while he looked about hin1 
deliberately, in his usual blackguardly way, so that 
all should see what he was doing, and looked 
everyone in the face in an obvious attempt to 
convey to them most unpleasant things about 
Golyadkin senior. The behaviour of the odious 
Golyadkin junior seemed to arouse general indig­
nation amongst the encircling clerks. Even the 
empty-headed juniors indicated their disapproval. 
There were murmurs on all sides. The general 
stir did not fail to impress itself on Golyadkin 
senior, but a sudden well-timed sally from Goly­
adkin junior shattered and destroyed our hero's 
last hopes, and restored the balance in favour or 
his deadly foe. 
'Our Russian Faublas, gentlemen ! Allow me 
to present the young Faublas,' squeaked Golyadkin 
junior with his customary insolence, rapidly weav­
ing his way through the clerks and pointing at the 
petrified but genuine Mr. Golyadkin. 
'Let us embrace, my dear fellow ! ' he continued 
with unbearable familiarity, making towards the 
man he had treacherously insulted. The worth­
less Golyadkin junior's sally found a ready re­
sponse, containing as it did a cunning allusion with 
which all were evidently familiar. Our hero felt 
the hand of his enemies heavy upon him. But 
his mind was finally made up. With eyes ablaze 

188 
T H E  D O U B L E  
and a rigid smile upon his pallid face, he somehow 
broke out of the crowd, and with uneven hurried 
steps made straight for his Excellency's sanctum. 
With one room to go, he met Andrey Filippovich 
1 ust returning from his Excellency's presence, and 
although there were quite a number of people 
about who were at that moment strangers to Mr. 
Golyadkin, he tried not to pay any attention to 
them. Boldly, openly and resolutely, amazed by 
his own temerity and yet inwardly praising him­
self for it, he accosted Andrey Filippovich on the 
spot. The latter was very much taken aback by 
this unexpected assault. 
'Ah ! What do you, er . . . What do you want ? '  
asked the departmental head, not listening to what 
Mr. Golyadkin was trying to stutter. 
' Andrey Filippovich . . . Audrey Filippovich, 
can I talk to his Excellency confidentially ?' asked 
our hero clearly and distinctly, giving Andrey 
Filippovich one of his most determined looks. 
'What ? Of course not.' Andrey Filippovich 
looked Mr. Golyadkin up and down. 
'I say all this, Andrey Filippovich, because I am 
amazed that no one here should have unmasked 
this rogue and impostor.' 
'Wha-at ?' 
'This impostor . 
. . ' 
'Who are you calling that ?' 
'A certain person, Andrey Filippovich-it' s 
a 
certain person I'm getting at. 
I'm within my 

T H E  D O UB L E  
189 
, 
rights. I think our superior ought to encourage 
such action,' added Mr. Golyadkin, obviously 
beside himself. 'You can probably see yourself, 
Andrey Filippovich, that it's acting honourably 
and that it shows every kind of good intention 
on tny part to regard our superior as a father. I 
look upon our benevolent superior as a father, 
and blindly trust him with my fate. That's how 
. 
. 
' 
lt lS 
.
.
•
 
His voice began to tremble, his face grew red, 
and two tears ran down his eyelashes. 
So amazed was Andrey Filippovich by what 
Mr. Golyadkin had said, that he involuntarily 
started back a couple of paces. He looked around 
uneasily. How things would have ended it is 
difficult to say. But all of a sudden the door of his 
Excellency's sanctum opened, and his Excellency 
himself emerged, accompanied by several officials. 
Everyone in the ro01n followed on after the1n. 
His Excellency beckoned Andrey Filippovich and 
walked beside him, opening conversation on some 
matter ofbusiness. When they had all moved off, 
Mr. Golyadkin recovered. Now in a quieter 
state, he took refuge beneath the wing of Anton 
Antonovich, who can1e hobbling along last of all, 
with what seemed a stern and apprehensive look 
on his face. 
'I've let n1y tongue run away with me, and I've 
made a n1ess of it this tin1e too,' he thought to 
himself. 'Well, it doesn't tnattcr.' 

190 
T H E  D O U B L E  
'I hope that you at least will consent to hear me, 
Anton Antonovich, and consider my case,' he 
said softly, his voice still trembling a little with 
emotion. 
' Spurned by al, I appeal to you. I'm still won­
dering what Andrey Filippovich meant by what 
he said. Please explain to me if you can.' 
'It will all be explained in good time,' replied 
Anton Antonovich severely, and paused with a 
look that seemed to make it quite clear that he 
had no desire to continue the conversation. 
'You'll soon know all about it. You'll be informed 
officially today.' 
'What do you mean by " officially", Anton An­
tonovich ? Why " officially" ŋ '  he inquired timidly. 
'It's not for us to discuss what our superiors 
are deciding, Yakov Petrovich.' 
'Our superiors ? ' said Mr. Golyadkin, growing 
still more timid. 'Why our superiors ? I see no 
reason for both_ering them, Anton Antonovich. 
Perhaps you mean something about yesterday.' 
'No. It's nothing to do with yesterday. This is 
something else that's wrong with you.' 
"'Wrong", Anton Antonovich ? I don't think 
there is.' 
'Weren't you going to " fox" somebody ŋ ' 
asked Anton Antonovich, sharply cutting short 
the perplexed Mr. Golyadkin. 
The latter shuddered and went as white as a 
sheet. 

T H E  D O U B L E 
191 
'Of course, Anton Antonovich, ir you pay 
attention to slander, and listen to people's enemies 
without hearing what the other side has to say, 
then of course one just has to suffer, innocently 
and for nothing,' he said in a voice that was barely 
audible. 
'Precisely. And how about your improper 
behaviour that prejudiced the good name of a 
noble young lady, of a highly moral, respected 
and well-known family that had done you a lot of 
good ? '  
'What behaviour, Anton Antonovich ? '  
'Precisely. And the laudable way you've acted 
towards another lady who, although poorly-off, 
is of honourable foreign extraction-you don't 
know anything about that either ?' 
'Listen, Anton Antonovich-listen to me, please!' 
'And your treachery, and slandering of some­
one else-accusing him of something you're 
guilty of yourself-what d'you call that, eh ? '  
'I didn't drive him out, Anton Antonovich,' 
said our hero, begining to quake. 'And I didn't 
put Petrushka-my man that is-up to anything 
like that either . . . He ate my bread, Anton 
Antonovich. He enjoyed my hospitality,' added 
our hero with such expression and deep feeling 
that his chin began to tremble slightly, and tears 
were all ready to start to his eyes. 
'That's what you say, Yakov Petrovich,' 
smirked Anton Antonovich, and there was a 

192 
T H E  D O U B L E 
note of slyness in his voice that clawed at Mr. 
Golyadkin' s heart. 
'Let me humbly ask you one more thing, 
Anton Antonovich. Does his Excellency know 
about all this ? ' 
' Of course ! But you must let me go now. 
I haven't got time to spend with you. You'll hear 
all you should today.' 
'Please, Anton Antonovich, just one minute 
more, for God's sake ! ' 
'You can tell me afterwards.' 
'No, Anton Antonovich, you see I . . . Please 
just listen . . . I'm no advocate of free-thinking. 
I keep away from it. I'm quite prepared myselr 
-and have on the contrary been known to 
' 
say . . .  
'Al right, all right. I've heard that.' 
'No, Anton ..A..ntonovich, you haven't-not 
this. This is different, Anton Antonovich. This 
is good-really it is. It makes pleasant listening . . .  
I have, as I've said before, made it known as my 
view that these two identical beings were created 
by Providence, and that our beneficent superiors, 
seeing the hand of Providence, gave the twins 
refuge. That's good, Anton Antonovich-very 
good, you can see it is, and you can see I'm far 
from being a free-thinker. I look upon our bene­
ficent superior as a father. " Such and such," says 
our beneficent superior, "and you, er . . . A 
young man must have employment," he says . . .  

T H E  D O U B L E 
193 
-
'Back me up, Anton Antonovich. Take my 
part. I don't mean anything . . .  For God's sake, 
Anton Antonovich,just one more word . . .  Anton 
Antonovich ! ' 
But Anton Antonovich was already some dis­
tance away. So shaken and bewildered was our 
hero by all that he had heard and experienced, 
that he had no idea where he was, what he had 
been told, or what he had done. He had no idea 
of what had happened to him, or of what was 
going to happen. 
With an imploring gaze he searched the throng 
of clerks for Anton Antonovich, intending to 
justify himself still further in the latter's eyes, and 
make some extremely reasonable, generous and 
agreeable remark about himsel£ But gradually 
new light was begining to penetrate his troubled 
mind, a new and terrible light that suddenly re­
vealed a whole vista of things hitherto quite 
unknown and totally unsuspected. At that mo­
ment our disconcerted hero felt a nudge in his 
ribs, and looking round saw Pisarenko. 
'A letter, sir.' 
'Ah ! You've been round then, old chap ?' 
'No. It came here this morning at ten o'clock. 
Sergey Mikheyevich, the porter, brought it from 
Vakhrameyev' s place.' 
'All right, all right old chap. I'll make it up 
to you. 
' 
So saying, Mr. Golyadkin concealed the letter 

194 
T H E  D O U B L E  
in a side-pocket, and buttoned his jacket right up. 
He then took a look round, and noted to his 
astonishment that he was in the vestibule, and 
standing amidst a crowd of clerks who, since 
office hours were over, had been making for the 
door. Nor was this last fact the only thing that 
had escaped his notice, for he had no memory or 
recollection of how he can1e suddenly to be 
wearing his overcoat and galoshes, and holding 
his hat. 
The clerks were all standing stack-still, waiting 
respectfully. His Excellency had stopped at the 
bottom of the steps, and while awaiting his 
carriage, which for some reason was delayed, was 
having a very interesting conversation with 
Andrey Filippovich and a couple of counsellors. 
Somewhat removed from these three, stood Anton 
Antonovich Setochkin and some other clerks, 
who, seeing his Excellency laughing and joking, 
were themselves all smiles. The clerks gathered 
at the top of the steps were also smiling as they 
waited for another laugh from his Excellency. 
The only one who was not s1niling was Fedoseich, 
the corpulent commissionaire who stood, stiff as 
a ramrod, grasping the handle and waiting impa­
tiently for his diurnal portion of pleasure, which 
consisted in flinging open one of the doors with 
a single sweep of his arm, bowing to the ground, 
and ceren1oniously allowing his Excellency to 
pass. But the one whose pleasure and happiness 

T H E  D O U B L E 
195 
seemed greatest of all, was Mr. Golyadk.in' s un­
worthy and ignoble enemy. He was for the 
moment oblivious of all his colleagues, had even 
left off fussing and trotting round them in his 
usual odious way, and \Vas even neglecting a 
suitable opportunity for making up to someone. 
He was all eyes and cars, his gaze did not shift 
fron1 his Excellency, and he seemed in some 
strange fashion to have shrunk-probably in the 
effort to hear better. Only an occasional and 
barely perceptible twitch of arm, leg or head 
betrayed his secret impulses. 
'He's quite giddy with it ! '  thought our hero. 
'He looks the favourite, the scoundrel ! I'd like 
to know just how he manages to succeed in good 
society-no brains, no character, no refinement, 
no feeling ! He's got luck, the villain. Good God ! 
When you think of it, how quickly one can get 
on, and make friends with everybody. And he'll 
get on ! He'll go a long way, I swear he will ! 
He'll get there, he's got luck ! Another thing 
I'd like to know is what he keeps whispering in 
everyone's ear all the time, what mysteries they're 
starting between then1, and what secrets they talk 
about. Oh God ! How could I just . . .  How 
could I get in with them as well ? "Such and such," 
I'd say-perhaps I should ask him . . . "Such and 
such," I'd tell him, "and I won't do it again. It 
was all my fault," I'd say, " but a young man can't 
live without work nowadays, your Excellency. 

196 
T H E  D O U B L E 
My obscure position doesn't trouble me at alL" 
That's it ! I won't protest in any way. I'll put up 
with it all humbly and patiently-that's what I'll 
do. But is that really the way to act ? No. You'll 
never get the scoundrel to see reason-he's too 
thick-skinned. You can't hammer any sense into 
him-he doesn't give a damn for anything. Still, 
we'll have a try. If I happen to hit on a good 
mon1ent, I'll try . . .  ' 
Sensing in his anguish, agitation and bewil­
derment that things could not be left like that, 
that the decisive moment was at hand, and that 
there was someone he must come to an under­
standing with, our hero was just moving a little 
closer to where his unworthy and enigmatic 
friend was standing, when his Excellency's long­
awaited carriage came thundering up to the en­
trance. 
Fedoseich flung open the door, and 
bowing low, let his Excellency out. All those 
who had been waiting at once rushed for the 
door, and Golyadkin senior was for the moment 
thrust away from Golyadkin junior. 
'You won't get away ! '  thought our hero, 
forcing his way forward, and keeping his quarry 
in sight. The crowd opened out at last, and sud­
denly feeling himself free, he charged in pursuit 
ofhis enemy. 

I I  
HIS hmgs bursting, Mr. Golyadkin sped after 
his rapidly retiring adversary as if on wings. 
He felt tre1nendous energy inside him. But for 
all his energy he had no doubt that a 1nere nlos­
quito, had such a creature been able to exist in 
St. Petersburg at such a time, could easily have 
knocked him down with one wing. He felt that 
he had grown utterly weak and feeble, and that 
he was being borne along not by his own legs 
-for these were buckling beneath him and no 
longer obedient-but by some quite peculiar 
external force. Still, all that might tum out for 
the best. 
'It might, and it might not,' thought our hero, 
almost stifled for lack of breath after running so 
hard. 'But the game's up-there isn't a shadow 
of doubt. I'm sunk-that's certain. The whole 
thing is signed sealed and delivered.' 
All the same, he felt suddenly resurrected-felt 
as if he had lasted out the battle and snatched a 
victory, as he succeeded in seizing his enemy's 
overcoat, just as the latter had one foot on the 
step of a cab. 
' Sir ! Sir ! ' he cried to the ignoble Golyadkin 
junior-' I trust that you will . . .  ' 

198 
T H E  D O U B L E 
'Please don't then,' replied his callous enemy 
evasively, one foot on the step, the other waving 
uselessly in the air, as he strove to get it into the 
cab, maintain his balance, and at the same time 
to wrench his coat away from Golyadkin senior, 
who was clutching it with all the strength nature 
had bestowed upon him. 
'Yakov Petrovich-just ten minutes . . .  ' 
'E 
I h 
' 
. 
' 
xcuse me, 
aven t tune. 
'You must agree, Y akov Petrovich . . . Please, 
Y akov Petrovich . . . For God's sake, Y akov 
Petrovich. Let's have it out . . . Man to man . . .  
One second, Y akov Petrovich ! ' 
'My dear good fellow, I must dash,' replied the 
other with discourteous familiarity disguised as 
sincere bonhomie. ' Some other time . . . With the 
best will in the world, believe me . . . I really 
' 
' 
can t now. 
'Blackguard ! ' thought our hero. 'Y akov Petro­
vich ! ' he cried, filled with anguish, ' I  have never 
been your enemy. Spiteful people have given 
an unfair picture of me. For my part I'm pre­
pared . . . If you like, let's go somewhere this 
minute-you and !-shall we, Y akov Petrovich ? 
Let's go into this coffee-house, and with the best 
will in the world, as you rightly said just now, 
let's talk it over, nobly, man to man. Everything 
will explain itself, Y akov Petrovich. It's bound 
to. 
' 
'This coffee-house ŋ All right, I don't mind. 

T H E  D O U B L E 
199 
, 
But on one condition, old chap, and on one con­
dition only, that everything docs explain itself,' 
said Golyadkin junior, getting down fron1 the 
cab and brazenly clapping our hero on the shoul­
der. 'You're a dear good friend, and for you 
I'm ready " to take a little side street", as you once 
put it. You really are a rascal, you do just what 
you like with a n1an,' he continued with a smile, 
coaxing and cajoling him. 
The coffee-house into which the two Mr. 
Golyadkins went, stood secluded from the main 
streets, and was at that moment quite deserted. 
No sooner had they sounded the bell, than a 
plumpish German woman appeared behind the 
counter. Mr. Golyadkin and his tmworthy enemy 
passed through into a second room, where a 
pasty-faced urchin with dose-cropped hair was 
fiddling around by the stove with a bundle of 
firewood, making an effort to bring son1e life 
back into a dead f1re. At Golyadkin junior's 
request, chocolate was served. 
'There's a nice full-bodied won1an,' said Golyad­
kin junior, with a roguish wink at Golyadkin 
seniOr. 
Our hero blushed and said nothing. 
'But forgive me, I forgot. I know what you 
fancy. We're sweet on slim little Frauleins you 
and I, aren't we, Yakov Petrovich ৎ Not-un­
attractive, slim little Frauleins ? We lodge with 
then1, we lead them astray, we give them our 

200 
T H E  D O U B L E  
hearts for their Biersuppe and their Milchsuppe, we 
give thetn various written undertakings-that's 
what we do, isn't it-you Faublas, you serpent ! '  
While n1aking these utterly futile albeit fiend­
ishly subtle allusions to a certain person of the 
female sex, Golyadkin junior had been fawning 
on Golyadkin senior, and affecting an amiable 
smile in a false show of affability and pleasure at 
their meeting. But noticing that Golyadkin senior 
was by no means so stupid or lacking in education 
and breeding as immediately to take him at his 
word, the ignoble man decided to change his 
tactics and come into the open. With infuriating 
effrontery and familiarity, the spurious Golyad­
kin followed up his odious speech by slapping 
the trustworthy Golyadkin on the back-not con­
tent with which, he began to frolic in a manner 
quite unbecoming in good society, and suddenly 
took it into his head to repeat his former heinous 
trick of pinching-regardless of his resistance and 
subdued cries-the indignant Mr. Golyadkin's 
cheek. Confronted with such depravity, our hero 
seethed with rage, and remained silent-but only 
for a while. 
'That is what my enemies say,' he replied 
fmally, prudently keeping himself in check. His 
voice trembled. Golyadkin junior was evidently 
in excellent spirits, and ready to indulge in all 
sorts of pranks inadmissible in a public place, and, 
generally speaking, in good society. 

T H E  D O U B L E  
201 
'Just as you please,' answered Golyadkin junior 
gravely, draining his cup in a shan1efully greedy 
fashion, and placing it on the table. 
'Well, I haven't tnuch time to spend with you. 
How are you getting on now, Yakov Petrovich : '  
'There's only one thing I can say to you, Yakov 
Petrovich,' replied our hero coolly and with 
dignity, 'I have never been your enemy.' 
'Hm-m . . . Well, how's Petrushka : I think 
that's his name, isn't it : How is he-all right : 
Same as ever : '  
'The same as ever,' answered Golyadkin senior, 
a little taken aback. 'I don't know, Yakov Petro­
vich, but for my part-from a candid and hon­
ourable point of view-you'll agree yourself . . .  ' 
'Yes. But you know yourself, Yakov Petro­
vich, these are hard times we live in,' replied 
Golyadkin junior quietly and expressively, making 
himself out to be sorrowful, repentant, and worthy 
of pity. 'I appeal to you, Yakov Petrovich­
you're a clever n1an and will judge fairly,' he 
threw in as an abject piece of flattery. 'Life isn't 
a game-you know yourself,' he concluded, 
making himself out to be the wise and learned 
man able to discourse on lofty subjects. 
' For my part, Y akov Petrovich,' answered our 
hero animatedly, 'scorning beating about the 
bush, speaking honourably, openly, man to man 
and straight from the shoulder, and putting the 
whole thing on an honourable level, I tell you, 

202 
T H E  D O U B L E  
Y akov Petrovich-! can assert frankly and hon­
ourably that I am perfectly blan1eless, and that, 
as you know yourself . . . an error on both sides 
. . .  anything is possible . . .  the world's judgment, 
the opinion of the servile throng . . . I tell you 
frankly, Yakov Petrovich, anything is possible. 
I'll say more, if one considers the matter thus, if 
one regards it from a noble and lofty point of 
view, then I will say boldly, without any false 
shame, that it will be a pleasure to fmd I've been 
mistaken, and a pleasure to admit it. You know 
yourself-you're intelligent and generous . . . 
Without shame, without any false shame, I'm 
ready to admit it . . .  ' he concluded, nobly and 
with dignity. 
'It's fate, Y akov Petrovich. But let's leave all 
this,' sighed Golyadkin junior. 'Let us rather 
employ these brief minutes together in pleasant 
and profitable conversation, as two colleagues 
should. Really, all this time I don't seem to have 
said two words to you. I'm not to blame for that.' 
'Nor I ! ' interrupted our hero eagerly. ' My 
heart tells me that. Let's blame it all on fate,' he 
added in a thoroughly conciliatory tone. His voice 
was gradually beginning to weaken and quaver. 
'Well, how are you keeping ?' inquired the 
erring one agreeably. 
'Coughing a bit.' answered our hero still more 
agreeably. 
'Look after yourself With all the epidemics 

T H E  D O U B L E  
203 
that arc going about, you can easily get throat 
trouble. I don't mind telling you, I'm starting to 
wear flannel.' 
'Yes. You can easily get throat trouble,' said 
our hero after a short silence. 'Y akov Petrovich, 
I see I've been wrong ! I'm touched by the 
memory of those happy mon1ents we passed 
together beneath my humble, but I venture to 
say hospitable roof.' 
'That's not what you said in your letter,' re­
joined Golyadkin junior somewhat reproach­
fully. And for once he was perfectly right. 
'I was wrong, Y akov Petrovich ! I now see 
clearly I was wrong in that unfortunate letter or 
mine. I feel ashamed to look at you. You can't 
believe . . . Give me that letter so that I can tear 
it up in front of your eyes. And if that's not 
possible, then I beseech you, read it the other way 
round in a deliberately friendly way, giving each 
word its reverse meaning. I was wrong. Forgive 
me, Yakov Petrovich-I've been utterly, griev­
ously wrong.' 
'What's that ?' inquired Mr. Golyadkin's per­
fidious friend in an indifferent, absent-minded 
sort ofway. 
'I say I've been utterly wrong, Yakov Petro­
vich, and for my part, I'm completely without 
false shan1e . 
. . ' 
'Ah well, that's all right then,' retorted Golyad­
kin junior rudely. 

204 
T H E  D O U B L E 
'I even had the idea,' added our hero nobly, 
con1pletely unaware of the dreadful perfidy of his 
false friend, ' I  even had the idea of two identical 
beings being created . . .  
' 
'You did :' 
At this point the notoriously worthless Golyad­
kin junior rose, and reached for his hat. Stil 
blind to the hoax, Golyadkin senior rose also, 
smiling generously and good-naturedly at his 
false friend, and endeavouring in his inocence to 
be nice to him, to reassure him, and so to strike 
up a new friendship. 
' Farewell, your Excellency ! '  cried Golyadkin 
junior suddenly. 
Our hero shuddered, noticing something almost 
Bacchanalian in his enemy's face, and with the 
sole object of getting rid of him, thrust two 
fmgers into the reprobate's outstretched hand. 
But the brazenness of Golyadkin junior exceeded 
all limits. After first gripping his two fingers, the 
worthless man decided to repeat before his very 
eyes the shameless trick he had performed that 
afternoon. It was more than flesh and blood could 
stand . . .  
He was just pocketing the handkerchief with 
which he had wiped his fmgers, when Mr. 
Gol yadkin recovered his senses, and rushed after 
hi1n into the next room, whither in his usual 
noxious way he had hastened to effect his escape. 
There he was, standing by the counter as if it 

T H E  D O U B L E  
205 
, 
were the n1ost natural thing in the world, eating 
pastries and n1aking polite conversation to the 
Gern1at1 confectioneress-just like any decent 
n1oral person. 
' Not in front of ladies,' thought our hero, and 
went up to the counter, ahnost beside himself in 
his agitation. 
' She's not bad. What do you think : '  said 
Golyadkin junior, up to his sn1utty pranks again, 
counting no doubt on Mr. Golyadkin's infinite 
patience. 
The plun1p Gcnnan wonun looked at both 
customers with her dull stupid eyes, md s1niled 
affably, obviously not understanding a word of 
Russian. Our hero flushed fiery red, and unable 
to control himself, sprmg at the shameless man, 
evidently intending to tear him limb from limb, 
and finish hin1 for good. But Golyadkin junior 
was as usual far away-he had taken to his heels 
and was already out of the door. Needless to say, 
Golyadkin senior, as soon as he had recovered 
from the first 1nomentary feeling of bewilder­
rr.৔.ent that had naturally beset him, charged as 
fast as his legs would carry him in pursuit of his 
abuser, who was getting into the cab which had 
obviously been waiting for hin1 by agreement. 
At that mmnent however, the plump German, 
seeing the flight of her two custmners, gave a 
shriek and rang her little bell as hard as she could. 
Turning almost in 1nid-air, our hero threw her 

206 
T H E  D O U B LE 
some money to cover himself and the shameless 
man who had left without paying, and without 
waiting for change, succeeded, in spite of this 
delay and again almost in mid-air, in catching up 
with his enemy. He seized hold of the splash­
board by every means in his power, and was 
carried some way along the street, struggling to 
clan1ber onto the carriage, while Golyadkin 
junior did his utmost to fight him off. The driver 
urged on his sorry horse, using words, whip, reins 
and feet, until quite unexpectedly it burst into a 
gallop, taking the bit between its teeth and kicking 
up its hind legs in a peculiarly nasty fashion. At 
last our hero managed to hoist himself up into a 
position where he sat back to back with the 
driver, and face to face and knee to knee with 
his brazen, depraved and most obdurate foe, 
gripping the moth-eaten fur collar of the latter's 
overcoat in his right hand. 
The enemies were carried some way in silence. 
Our hero could scarcely recover his breath. The 
road was terrible, and he was continually being 
thrown into the air and in danger of having his 
neck broken, added to which his enemy, still re­
fusing to admit defeat, strove to topple him into 
the mud. To crown everything, the weather was 
as bad as it could possibly be. Snow fell in huge 
flakes which did their best in every way to creep 
inside the unbuttoned overcoat of the real Mr. 
Golyadkin. All around not a thing could be seen. 

T H E  D O U B L E 
207 
, 
It was difficult to tell through what streets and in 
which direction they were going. It seen1ed to 
Mr. Golyadkin that there was son1ething fanuliar 
about what was happening to him. For a moment 
he tried hard to ren1e1nber whether he had not 
had smne presentiment or other the day before 
-in a drean1 for instance. His anguish at last 
becan1e acute agony. He pressed hin1self against 
his pitiless foe, and was about to utter a cry, but 
it died on his lips. 
It was at this mon1ent that Mr. Golyadkin forgot 
everything, and decided the whole thing didn't 
n1atter ; it was all just happening in some in­
explicable way, and it would be vain and so n1uch 
wasted effort to protest. But suddenly, almost as 
he was deciding this, an inconsiderate jolt altered 
the whole complexion of the matter. He fell from 
the carriage like a sack of potatoes and rolled 
over and over, confessing as he did so, and quite 
rightly, that his fit of temper had really been 1nost 
inopportune. jun1ping to his feet, he saw that the 
cab had stopped in the nuddle of a courtyard 
which he recognised at a glance as that belonging 
to the house wherein resided Olsufy lvanovich. 
The san1e instant he noticed his ene1ny mounting 
the steps, probably on his way to visit Olsufy 
lvanovich. In indescribable anguish he was about 
to rush and catch him up, but fortunately and 
sensibly thought better of it. Not forgetting 
first to settle up with the cab-driver, he dashed 

208 
T H E  D O U B LE 
out into the street and ran on blindly as fast as 
his legs would carry him. 
It was wet, dark and snowing hard, just as 
before. Our hero did not run, he flew, bouncing 
off and bowling over men women and children 
as he went. From all quarters came shrieks, 
shouts and a fearful hubbub of voices, but Mr. 
Golyadkin seemed barely conscious, and heeded 
none of it. He came to by the Semyonovsky 
Bridge, and then only because he had collided 
awkwardly with two peasant women, knocking 
them over together with the goods they were 
hawking, and falling down himself. 
'It doesn't matter,' he thought, 'it can all be 
settled for the best,' and immediately slipped his 
hand into his pocket for a rouble to make good 
the gingerbreads, apples, peas and various other 
things he had upset. Suddenly new light dawned 
upon him ; in his pocket he felt the letter he had 
been handed that afternoon. Remembering there 
was an in he knew close by, he ran off to it, and 
once inside, lost no time in establishing himself 
at a small table lit by a tallow candle. Heedless 
of all around, and ignoring the waiter who ap­
peared for his order, he broke the seal, and began 
to read the following, which utterly amazed him : 
To the noble one who suffers for my sake and is 
eternally dear to my heart. 
I am in distress, I perish, save me ! A slanderer, 

T H E  D O U D L E 
209 
-
intriguer and notoriously worthless man has en-
snared me and I am undone, lost ! Him I abomin­
ate, while you . . . We have been kept apart, my 
letters to you have been intercepted, and all this 
has been done by an immoral man availing himself 
of his one and only good quality-his likeness to 
you. One can however be ugly, but still fascinate 
by one's wit, strong sensibilities and good man­
ners . . .  
I perish ! I am being forcibly married, and the one 
who has schemed most in this, desiring probably 
to secure my place and connexions in good society, 
is my father, my benefactor, the Civil Counsellor 
Olsufy Ivanovich. But my mind is made up, and 
I protest by every means in my power. Await me 
in your carriage outside Olsufy Ivanovich's windows 
tonight at nine exactly. 
We are having another 
ball, and the handsome lieutenant is corning. 
I 
shall leave, and we shall fly. 
Besides, there are other official posts where one 
may still be of service to one's country. Remem­
ber at all events, my friend, that innocence is the 
strength of innocence. 
Farewell. 
Be waiting with the carriage at the 
entrance. I shall rush to your protecting embrace 
at 2 a.m. precisely. 
Yours till the grave, 
Klara Olsufyevna. 
For some minutes he remained thunderstruck. 

210 
T H E  D O U B L E  
Then, in a fearful state of anguish and agitation, 
and with his face as white as a sheet, he paced 
several times up and down the room, holding the 
letter in his hand. To complete the awfulness of 
his situation, although he was not at that moment 
aware of it, every eye in the place was upon him. 
His disordered clothes, his lack of control, his 
\valking, or rather dashing up and down the room, 
his two-handed gesticulations and the few enig­
tnatic words he addressed absent-mindedly to the 
\vorld at large, all this can have done little to 
commend hin1 to the other customers. Even the 
waiter began to look at him suspiciously. Re­
covering his senses, our hero found himseh 
standing in the middle of the room, and staring 
in a rude and almost shameless way at a very 
respectable-looking old man who, having finished 
diner and offered thanks before an ikon, had 
resumed his seat, and was staring back. Our hero 
looked about him uneasily, and sa\v everyone 
looking at him in a most ominous and suspicious 
fashion. Suddenly a retired army man with a 
red collar to his tunic called loudly for The Police 
Gazette. Mr. Golyadkin shuddered, blushed, and 
chancing to look down suddenly, noticed that 
his attire was unseemly to a degree that would 
have been inadn1issible in his own hmne, let alone 
in a public place. His boots, trousers and the whole 
of his left side were plastered in mud. His left 
trouser-strap had been ripped off, and his coat was 

T H E  D O U B L E 
211 
torn in many places. In sore distres(, he went 
over to the table at which he had been reading, 
and saw the waiter approaching with a strange, 
intpudently insistent look on his face. Bewildered 
and utterly dejected, Mr. Golyadkin began to 
examine the table at which he was standing. 
There were plates left from somebody's dinner, 
a dirty serviette, and a recently-discarded knife, 
fork and spoon. 
'Who's been eating here ŋ' he wondered. 
' Could it have been me ŋ Anything is possible.' 
Looking up, he again saw the waiter standing 
beside hint, and on the point of saying something. 
'What do I owe you, old chap ŋ' inquired our 
hero in a voice that quavered. 
There was loud laughter all around. The waiter 
smiled. Mr. Golyadkin realised he had put his 
foot in it, and comnutted some awful blunder. 
He was so overcome with confusion, that he was 
constrained to feel for his handkerchief, just for 
the sake of something to do, instead of simply 
standing there. But to his indescribable amaze­
ment as well as to that of all around, in place of 
his handkerchief he pulled out the bottle of medi­
cine prescribed by Dr. Rutenspitz four days 
earlier. 'Get it at the same chemist's,' Rashed 
through his mind. Suddenly he shuddered and 
almost screamed with terror. New light was 
dawning. The dark loathsome reddish Ruid 
gleamed ominously before his eyes. The bottle 

212 
T H E  DOUBLE 
slipped from his grasp and was instantly smashed. 
With a cry he leapt back to avoid the spilled 
liquid. He was tren1bling in every limb. Sweat 
was breaking out upon his brow and temples. 
' So my life is in danger !' 
The room was f1lled with uproar and excite­
ment. They were all surrounding hin1, they were 
all saying things to hitn, some were even laying 
hold ofhim. But our hero was speechless, motion­
less, unseeing, unhearing and unfeeling. At last, 
tearing himself away, he rushed from the in, 
shaking off all and sundry who sought to detain 
him. He collapsed almost unconscious into the 
first cab that came along, and hurtled back to his 
rooms. 
On his way in he met Mikheyev the office 
porter, holding an official envelope in his hand. 
' I  know, my friend. I know it all, it's official,' 
said our exhausted hero, weakly and miserably. 
The envelope did in fact contain an order signed 
by Andrey Filippovich to the effect that he should 
hand over to Ivan Sen1yonovich. Taking it and 
giving the porter ten kopeks, Mr. Golyadkin 
entered his rooms to find Petrushka piling all his 
belongings and odds and ends together, obviously 
intending to leave him and go to Karolina Ivan­
ovna, who had enticed him into replacing Y evstafy. 

12 
PETRUSHKA came swinging into Mr. Golyadkin's 
room. His manner was singularly casual, and 
he had the menial's look of triumph on his face. 
He had evidently got some idea into his head, and 
was feeling quite within his rights. He looked a 
complete stranger, that is, like someone else's 
servant, and nothing like the former servant ot 
Mr. Golyadkin. 
'I say old fellow,' began our hero, still short 
of breath, 'what's the time now ¿ ' 
Without a word Petrushka went behind the 
partition, and coming back, annolUlced in a rather 
independent tone of voice that it was nearly 
seven-thirty. 
' Oh, that's fme. Well, if I may say so my dear 
fellow, everything seems over between us.' 
Petrushka said nothing. 
' Since it is, tell me frankly now, as you would a 
friend, where it is you've been.' 
'Me ?-With nice people.' 
'I know, my friend, I know. You've always 
given me satisfaction, and I'll give you a refer­
ence. So you're with them now, are you ?' 
'Well sir, you know yourself, a good man 
won't teach you any bad ways, of course.' 

214 
T H E  D O U B LE 
'I know, I know old fellow. Good people are 
rare nowadays. Treasure them, n1y friend. And 
how arc they ? ' 
'You know how they are, sir. Only I can't 
work for you any n1ore now, you can see 
that.' 
'I do, I do my dear chap. I know how keen 
and hard-working you are. I've seen it all, I've 
noticed. I respect you, my friend. I respect a 
good honest man, even if he's a servant.' 
'Yes, I know. Our sort, of course, as you 
know yourself, must go where things are best. 
That's how it is. And what can I do about it ? 
It's well known sir-without a good n1an, it's 
impossible.' 
'Y cs, yes. I appreciate that. Well, here's your 
money and your reference. Now let's shake hands 
and say good-bye. There's just one last thing I'd 
like to ask you to do,' said Mr. Golyadkin sol­
emnly. 'You see my dear chap, anything can 
happen. Sorrow lurks e'en in gilded halls, my 
friend, and you can't get away from it. I think 
I've always been kind to you, you know . . .  ' 
Petrushka said nothing. 
'I think I've always been kind to you . . .  How 
am I off for linen, my dear fellow ?' 
'It's all there. Six shirts linen, three pairs socks, 
four shirt-fronts, one vest flannel, two sets under­
wear. You know all that yourself. I've got 
nothing of yours. I look after my master's things. 

T H E  D O UB LE 
215 
You know me, sir. That's never been ৌne of my 
weaknesses. You know that.' 
'I believe you, my friend. I believe you. That's 
not what I mean. You see . . .  ' 
'I know. We all know that, sir. Why, when I 
was with General Stolbnyakov-he let me go 
when he went to Saratov-he had an estate 
there . . .  
' 
'No, my friend. I don't mean that. I don't 
mean anything like that. Don't go thinking any­
thing, my dear fellow . . . ' 
'I know. The likes of us can be slandered any 
minute, as you're well aware. But I've given 
satisfaction everywhere. Ministers, generals, sena­
tors, counts, I've been with them all. Prince 
Svinchatkin, Colonel Pereborkin, General Nedo­
barov-he also went away to his estate . . .  ' 
'Yes my friend, yes. Very good. And now 
I'm going away. We all have different roads to 
travel, my dear fellow, and no one knows on 
which he n1ay find himself. Now give me a 
hand to get dressed. Lay out my uniform jacket, 
my other trousers, sheets, blankets, pillows . . .  ' 
' Shall I make a bundle of it all ? ' 
'Yes please, my dear fellow. A bundle. Who 
knows what may happen to us : And now you 
go and fmd me a carriage.' 
' A  carriage ? ' 
'Yes my friend, a big roomy one, and for a 
definite time. And don't go getting any ideas . . .  
' 

216 
T H E  D O U B L E  
'Do you wish to go far Ǌ' 
'I don't know, my friend. That's also some­
thing I don't know. My feather-bed had better 
go in too, I think. What do you think, n1y dear 
chap Ǌ I'm relying on you.' 
'Are you actually thinking of going now, sir Ǌ' 
'I am, my friend. I am. That's how things 
have turned out. So there it is.' 
'I know, sir. Same thing happened to a lieu­
tenant in our regiment. He carried off the daughter 
of the local landowner.' 
' Carried her offǊ How do you mean, my dear 
good fellow Ǌ' 
'Yes. He carried her off, and they got married 
from another house. Everything had been got 
ready beforehand. There was a pursuit. But the 
late prince stuck up for them, and it was all 
settled.' 
'They got married, did they Ǌ But how is it­
how did you get to know Ǌ '  
'We know, sir. The world's full of rumours. 
We know it all. It could happen to anyone. 
Only let me tell you, sir, in plain servants' talk, 
if it's come to that, you've got a rival, sir, a strong 
' 
one. 
'I know, my friend, I know. So I'm relying on 
you. What are we to do now Ǌ What do you 
advise ŋ' 
'Well sir, if roughly speaking that's the style 
of thing you're going in for, there are things you'll 

T H E  D O U B L E  
217 
have to get, sheets, pillows, another £lather-bed 
-a double one, a good blanket . . . There's a 
woman underneath here, sir, a con1mon woman, 
she's got a fine fox cloak. You nught have a look 
at that, and buy it. You could pop down and see 
it now. It's just what you need now, sir, a fine 
fox cloak lined with satin . . .  ' 
'Al right my friend, I agree. I rely on you 
entirely. Let's have that then. But be quick 
about it. For God's sake be quick ! It'll soon be 
eight. For God's sake be quick !' 
Dropping the linen, pillows, blankets and various 
oddments he had been about to bundle up, 
Petrushka rushed headlong from the room. Mr. 
Golyadkin dragged out the letter again, but was 
unable to read it. Clutching his poor head in his 
hands, he leant against the wall, dazed and in­
capable of thought or action. He didn't know 
what was happening to him. At last, seeing the 
time getting on, and still no sign of Petrushka or 
the cloak, he decided to go himself. Opening 
the door into the hall, he heard a hubbub and 
clamour of voices down below. A number ot 
women living in the same block were jabbering, 
shouting and arguing. He knew exactly what 
about. Petrushka' s voice could be heard for a 
moment, then there was the sound of footsteps. 
'Good God ! They're bringing the whole world 
into it ! '  groaned Mr. Golyadkin, wringing his 
hands in despair. Diving back into his room, he 

218 
T H E  D O U B L E  
fell almost senseless onto the ottoman, face down­
wards on the cushion. After lying there for about 
a minute, he leapt to his feet, and deciding not to 
wait for Petrushka, put on his hat, overcoat and 
galoshes, snatched up his note-case and charged 
blindly down the stairs. 
'Don't bother ! It doesn't nutter. I'll see to 
it all myself. I shan't need you for the time being, 
and everything will probably be settled for the 
best meanwhile,' muttered Mr. Golyadkin, Ineet­
ing Petrushka on the stairs. Then he dashed out 
into the courtyard, and away. He felt sick at 
heart, and was still unable to make up his 
mind what to do, and how to act at this critical 
juncture. 
'What in heaven's name am I to do, that's the 
question,' he cried in despair, as he hobbled 
blindly and aimlessly along the street. 'Why did 
all this have to happen ? But for this, everything 
would have been settled. One stroke, one deft, 
resolute, vigorous stroke, would have put the 
whole thing right at once. I'd give a fmger to 
do that. I even know how it could be done­
like this. " Such and such," I'd say, "it's neither 
here nor there, sir, if you'll allow me to say so. 
Things aren't done that way-no, sir. Impersona­
tion won't get you anywhere here. An impostor, 
sir, is good for nothing, and no use to his country. 
Do you understand, sir ? " That's how it would 
be. But no. That's not how it is, not at all. I'm 

T H E  D O U B L E 
219 
 
talking through my hat like a fool-my own 
executioner, that's what I an1. You're your own 
executioner ! But you can see how it's happening 
now, you depraved 111an ! Still, where an1 I to 
go, what an1 I going to do with tnyself now : 
What am I fit for : Just what, for instance, poor 
unworthy fellow that I am ! 
'Well, what now ? We must get a carriage. 
"Have a carriage here," she says, "we'll get our 
little feet wet if you don't . . .  " And who would 
have thought it : Well well, my virtuous young 
miss, who everyone thinks the world of, you've 
surpassed yourself and no mistake. And it all 
comes of an immoral upbringing. Now I've gone 
into it a bit and got the hang of it, I can sec it's 
nothing more nor less than that. Instead of taking 
the stick to her now and then when she was 
young, they stuffed her with sweets and con­
fectionery, and the old tnan slobbered all over 
her with his "You're my daddy's this and that, 
and we'll marry you to a count ! '' And this is 
what they get for it. She's shown us her hand 
now. "This is what we're up to," she says. 
Instead of keeping her at home, they send her to 
a boarding-school-to some French emigree, 
Madame Falbala, or something of the sort. And 
a lot of good she's learnt there ! Now she turns 
out like this. "Come and be happy," she says ! 
"Be outside the windows at such and such a time 
in a carriage," she says, "and sing a tender Spanish 

220 
T H E  D O U B LE 
ballad. I'll be waiting. I know you love 1ne, and 
we'll fly together and live in a cottage." But it 
won't work, young lady. If that's what it's come 
to, it won't work, because it's against the law to 
take an honest, innocent young lady from her 
parents' house without their consent. Why do it ? 
What need is there ? She should marry who she's 
supposed to, as fate intended, and that's that. I'm 
in the service. I could lose my job through it. 
I might finish up in court, young lady ! So that's 
how it is, if you didn't know. It's the work of 
that German woman. It all goes back to her, the 
witch. She's the one who started all the rumpus. 
Slandering a man, making up some old wives' 
gossip and a cock-and-bull story about him on 
the advice of Andrey Filippovich. It all goes back 
to her. How would Petrushka have got into it 
otherwise ? What's he want here ? Is it any of 
that scoundrel's business ? No, young lady, I 
can't. I can't possibly. This once you must 
excuse me somehow. You're the source of the 
whole thing, young lady, not the German, not 
the old witch, it doesn't come from her at all, 
but simply and solely from you. She's a good 
woman, she's not to blame for anything, but 
you are, young lady. You're getting me accused 
of something I'm not guilty of . . . Look, here's 
a man losing control of himself, losing sight of 
himself, on the point of vanishing for ever­
and you're talking about a wedding ! And what 

T H E  D O U B L E 
, 
221 
wil be the end of it all : And how will it tum 
out ? I'd give a lot to know.' 
Thus reasoned our hero in his despair. Re­
turning suddenly to his inunediate surroundings, 
he noticed that he was standing son1ewhere in 
Liteynaya Street. The weather was terrible. A 
thaw had set in, and it was snowing and raining 
just as it had been at that dreadful and never-to­
be-forgotten midnight hour when all his mis­
fortunes had begun. 
'How can you go a journey in this :' he thought. 
'It's certain death. Oh God ! Where am I to 
fmd a cab here, for instance : There seems to be 
some dark object on the corner there. Let's go 
and investigate. Oh God ! ' continued our hero 
as he tottered feebly in the direction of what 
looked like a cab. 'No. This is what I'll do. I'll 
go and throw myself at his feet, if I can, and make 
humble entreaties. " Such and such," I'll say, "I 
put my fate into your hands, into the hands of 
my superiors. Protect me, your Excellency, show 
n1e your support. This and that and such and such 
a thing is an unlawful act," I'll say. "Don't ruin 
me. I look upon you as a father. Don't forsake 
me. Rescue my dignity, name and honour . . .  
Deliver me fron1 a depraved villain. He's one 
1nan, your Excellency, and I an1 another. He 
goes his way, and I go 1nine. I do, your Excel­
lency, indeed I do. I can't rese1nble him," I'll 
say. "Replace him, your Excellency. Order 

222 
T H E  D O U B L E 
hin1 to be replaced, I beg you, and put an end to 
an ungodly and unwarranted impersonation, that 
it may not serve as a precedent for others. I look 
upon you as a father." A benevolent superior 
having the welfare of his subordinates at heart 
must surely encourage such action. There's a 
touch of chivalry about it. "You, my benevolent 
superior, I regard as a father," I'll say. "I put my 
fate in your hands. I'll n1ake no objections. I 
trust in you. I myself withdraw from the affair." 
That's it ! '  
' Are you a cabman : '  
, I 
' 
am. 
'I want a cab for the evening.' 
' Going far, sir : ' 
' For the evening, I want it, and to go wherever 
may be necessary.' 
'You don't n1ean out of town : '  
'Maybe, my friend. I don't know myself yet, 
and can't tell you. The point is, it may all turn 
out for the best, you see. You know how it 
. ' 
lS. 
'Yes, of course, sir. God grant as much to 
' 
everyone. 
'Yes, my friend. Yes. Thank you. Well, how 
much will it be :' 
'D 
, 
o you want to go now : 
'Yes, that is-no. You'll have to wait a little 
at a certain spot . . . Just a little, not long . . .  ' 
'Well, if you hire me for the whole time, I 

T H E  D O U B LE 
223 
# 
couldn't do it for less than six roubles in weather 
like this.' 
' All right, all right. I'll make it worth your 
while, old chap. You'll take me now then, will 
' 
you ? 
'In you get. Excuse me, I'll just put it right a 
second. That's it. Now in you get. Where 
to ? ' 
'Izmaylovsky Bridge, my friend.' 
The driver clambered onto the box, and with 
some difficulty dragged his two miserably-thin 
horses away from the hay-trough, and roused 
them to move in the direction of the Izmaylovsky 
Bridge. But all of a sudden Mr. Golyadkin tugged 
the cord, stopped the cab, and implored the driver 
to turn and go to another street instead. The 
driver did so, and ten minutes later Mr. Golyadkin 
and his newly-acquired carriage drew up before 
the house in which were his Excellency's apart­
ments. He jumped down, urged the driver to 
wait, and with his heart in his boots, charged up 
to the second floor and pulled the bell. The door 
opened, and he found himself in his Excellency's 
hall. 
'Is his Excellency at home ?' he inquired of the 
servant who had opened to him. 
'What do you want ?' asked the servant, look­
ing him up and down. 
'I-I'm Golyadkin, the clerk, n1y friend. I've 
come to explain, tell him.' 

224 
T H E  D O U B L E  
'W . 
, 
' 
a1t, you can t . . .  
'I can't wait, my friend. My business is impor­
tant, and doesn't admit of any delay.' 
'Who are you from Т Have you brought 
' 
papers ? 
'No. I've come on my own account. Announce 
me, my friend, and say I've come to explain.' 
'I can't. Orders are to receive no one. He has 
visitors. Come at ten in the n1orning.' 
'Announce me. I can't wait-it's impossible. 
You'll answer for this . . .  ' 
' Go on, announce him. What's the matter, 
saving shoe-leather or something ? ' said another 
lackey, who til then had merely been lolling on a 
seat in the hall. 
' Shoe-leather be damned ! Orders were not to 
receive anyone, see : Their tum is mornings.' 
'Go on. Afraid your tongue wil come off?' 
'All right, I wil. I'm not afraid of my tongue 
coming off, but orders were as I said.-Come in 
here.' 
Mr. Golyadkin went into the first room. There 
was a clock on the table. He glanced at it. It 
was eight-thirty. He felt tom with anguish. He 
was about to tum back, but at that very moment 
a lanky footnun stationed at the door of the 
next romn, loudly announced Mr. Golyadkin' s 
natne. 
'What a voice ! '  he thought, in indescribable 
agony. ' " Such and such a thing," he ought to 

T H E  D O U D L E  
225 
, 
have said, "he has n1ost dutifully and humbly 
come to explain. Will you kindly sec hitn ? "  
Now it's ruined. All I've done has been thrown 
away. Still, it doesn't matter.' 
There was no time for reflection however. The 
lackey returned, and with a 'cmne on', took Mr. 
Golyadkin into the study. 
The moment he walked in, he felt as if he had 
been suddenly blinded, for he could see nothing. 
He had, however, caught a glimpse of two or 
three figures. 
'Ah yes, those are the visitors,' flashed through 
his mind. 
At last he was able to make out the star upon his 
Excellency's frock-coat ; then by a gradual pro­
cess he proceeded to an awareness of the black 
frock-coat itself, and finally received the faculty of 
complete vision. 
'What is it ? '  asked a familiar voice above his 
head. 
'Titular Counsellor Golyadkin, your Excel-
lency.' 
'Well ? '  
'I've come to explain.' 
'What's that ?' 
'Yes, it's like this. I said I've come to explain, 
your Excellency, sir.' 
'Who arc you ?' 
'M-M-Mister Golyadkin, your Excellency, a 
titular counsellor.' 

226 
T H E  D O U B L E  
'Well, what do you want ?' 
'I'll tell him this and that,' he thought. 'I look 
upon him as a father. "I'm withdrawing from 
the matter, and protect me from my enemies," 
that's what I'll say.' 
'What's that ?' 
' Of course . . .  ' 
' Of course what ? ' 
Mr. Golyadkin said nothing. His chin was be­
ginning to twitch slightly. 
'Well ? '  
' I  thought it chivalrous, your Excellency. 
There's chivalry about it, I thought. And I look 
upon my departmental head as I would a father . . . 
Protect me, I b-b-beg you with t-t-tears in my 
eyes . . . s-s-such action m-m-must b-b-be en­
couraged . . .  ' 
His Excellency turned away. For some minutes 
our hero's eyes could distinguish nothing. There 
was a great weight upon his chest. His lungs were 
bursting. He did not know where he was. He 
felt ashamed. He felt sad. What happened next, 
he had no idea. 
When he recovered, he saw that his Excel­
lency was talking to his visitors ; he seemed to be 
debating something with them in an abrupt and 
forceful manner. One of the visitors our hero 
recognised at once. It was Andrey Filippovich. 
Another he did not recognise, although his face 
seemed familiar. He was tall, thick-set, elderly, 

T H E  D O U B L E 
227 
, 
with very bushy side-whiskers, and a keen and 
expressive gaze. About his neck he wore a 
decoration, and in his mouth was a cigar. He 
smoked steadily, keeping the cigar in his mouth, 
and every now and then glanced towards Mr. 
Golyadkin and nodded meaningly. Mr. Golyad­
kin began to feel uneasy. Shifting his gaze, he 
caught sight of yet another strange visitor. In a 
doorway, which till then our hero had as on a 
previous occasion taken for a 1nirror, he appeared, 
the he who is already fan1iliar to the reader, Mr. 
Golyadkin' s very intimate friend and acquaint­
ance ! Golyadkin junior had until this moment 
been in another s1nall ro01n, writing something 
in a hurry. Now, because it had evidently become 
necessary to do so, he emerged carrying the papers 
under his arm, went up to his Excellency, and 
while awaiting the latter's undivided attention, 
succeeded very cleverly in worming his way into 
the general counsel and confabulation, taking up 
a position behind Andrey Filippovich' s back, and 
partly hidden by the cigar-smoking stranger. 
Golyadkin junior was clearly acutely interested in 
the conversation, to which he was listening in a 
genteel fashion, nodding assent, shifting from one 
foot to the other, and smiling and glancing every 
other minute at his Excellency, as if imploring to 
be allowed to put his word in. 
'Wretch ! ' thought Mr. Golyadkin, and in­
voluntarily took a step forward. Just then his 

228 
T H E  D O U B L E  
Excellency turned, and came rather uncertainly 
towards Mr. Golyadkin. 
'Well, that's all right. Off you go then. I'll 
look into your case, and I'll get someone to show 
you out.' The general glanced at the stranger 
with the bushy side-whiskers. The latter nodded. 
Mr. Golyadkin sensed and realized quire clearly 
that they were taking him for something that he 
wasn't, and not at all as they ought. 
'I must explain somehow or other,' he thought. 
' " Such and such a thing, your Excellency," I'll 
' 
say. 
In his perplexity he looked down at the floor, 
and was amazed to observe large white patches 
on his Excellency's boots. 
' Surely they haven't spliu ' he thought. He 
soon discovered they had not, but were merely 
acting as powerful reflectors, a phenomenon 
fully explained by their being of shining patent 
leather. 
'Those arc what they call "high-lights",' he 
thought. 'That's the name that's reserved for 
them, especially in artists' studios. Elsewhere 
they're known as "bright spots".' 
At this point he looked up, and saw it was 
time to speak, as things might easily take a tum 
for the worse and end badly. He took a step 
forward. 
' " Such and such a thing," I said, your Excel­
lency, "but impersonation will get you nowhere." ' 

T H E  D O U B LE 
229 
-
The general n1ade no answer, but tugged hard at 
the bell-pull. Our hero took another step forward. 
'He's vile and perverted, your Excellency,' he 
said, highly agitated and sick with fear, but still 
pointing boldly and resolutely at his unworthy 
twin, who was at that moment fidgeting about 
near his Excellency. 'That's what I say, and I'm 
alluding to someone we all know.' 
These words were followed by general com­
motion. Andrey Filippovich and the stranger 
nodded their heads. His Excellency, in his impa­
tience, tugged the bell-pull with all his might to 
summon servants. At this juncture Golyadkin 
junior stepped forward. 
'Your Excellency,' he said, 'I crave your per­
mission to speak.' There was a decisive ring in 
his voice. Everything about him showed that he 
felt completely within his rights. 
'May I ask,' he began, anticipating his Excel­
lency's reply in his eagerness, and now addressing 
Mr. Golyadkin, ' may I ask if you know in whose 
presence you are thus expressing yourself, before 
whom you are standing, and in whose study you 
' 
are ? 
Golyadkin junior was unusually agitated, his 
face was completely red, and he was burning with 
anger and indignation. There were even tears in 
his eyes. 
'The Bassavryukovs ! ' roared a footman at the 
top ofhis voice, appearing suddenly at the door. 

230 
T H E  D O U B L E  
'A fme noble name-they're from the Ukraine,' 
thought Mr. Golyadkin, and immediately felt a 
friendly hand rest upon his back. This was fol­
lowed by another. He saw clearly that he was 
being steered towards the study door, while his 
vile twin fussed about in front, showing the way. 
'It's just as it was at Olsufy Ivanovich's,' he 
thought, and found himself in the hall. Looking 
round he saw two of his Excellency's footmen and 
his twin. 
'My friend's coat ! My friend's coat ! My best 
friend's coat ! ' babbled the perverted man, snatch­
ing the overcoat from one of the servants, and 
throwing it right over Mr. Golyadkin' s head to 
put him to ridicule in a most blackguardly and 
outrageous manner. As he fought his way out 
from under the coat, Mr. Golyadkin could clearly 
hear the two footmen laughing. But paying no 
heed to the sounds around him, he marched out 
of the hall and found himself on a lighted stair­
way. Golyadkin junior followed. 
' Good-bye, your Excellency,' he shouted after 
Golyadkin senior. 
'Villain !' said our hero, beside himself. 
'I d ' 
. d 
' 
on t mm 
.
.
.
 
'Pervert !' 
'Just as you like . . .  ' answered the worthy 
Golyadkin' s unworthy foe from the top of the 
stairs, looking the former unblinkingly straight in 
the eye, in that peculiarly vile way ofhis, begging 

T H E  D O U B L E 
231 
, 
him to go on, as it were. Our hero made an 
indignant gesture, and ran down and out into the 
street. Such was his state of despair that he had 
no recollection at all of how or by whose agency 
he got into the carriage. On regaining his senses, 
he found that he was being driven along the 
Fontanka. 
'We must be going to the Izmaylovsky Bridge,' 
he thought. There was something else he was 
trying to think of, but could not. It was so terrible 
as to defy explanation. 
'Well, it doesn't n1atter,' he concluded, and 
proceeded to the Izmaylovsky Bridge. 

1 3 
THE weather, it seemed, was trying to change 
for the better. The wet snow which till then 
had been falling in prodigious quantities, began 
gradually to ease, and finally stopped altogether. 
The sky appeared, and here and there a tiny star 
began to twinkle. But it was wet and muddy 
underfoot, and it was muggy ; Mr. Golyadkin, 
who had dificulty in catching his breath as it was, 
found it particularly so. His overcoat, which 
had become sodden and heavy, made him feel 
disagreeably warm and wet all over, while his 
enfeebled legs buckled beneath its weight. Sharp 
feverish shivers ran through his whole body. He 
broke into a cold sickly sweat from sheer exhaus­
tion. Appropriate as the moment was, he quite 
forgot to reiterate with his customary resolution 
and determination his favourite phrase that it 
would all perhaps, somehow, in all probability, 
certainly tum out for the best. 
' Still, none of this matters for the time being,' 
said our sturdy hero, still undismayed, wiping 
from his face the cold drops of water which were 
trickling from all round the brim of his saturated 
hat. Adding that that didn't matter either, he 
tried sitting down for a while on a fair-sized log 

T H E  D O U B L E  
233 
lying near a stack of firewood in 6lsufy Ivano­
vich' s courtyard. Spanish serenades and silken 
ladders were, of course, past thinking about. 
What he n1ust try to think of, was son1c quiet 
little corner which, if not altogether warn1, would 
at least be convenient and concealed. He was, it 
may be observed in passing, strongly tempted by 
that particular comer on Olsufy Ivanovich's land­
ing where, on an earlier occasion, almost at the 
begining of this true story, he had spent over 
two hours of his time standing between a cup­
board and some old screens an1idst all sorts or 
lumber and rubbish. He had now stood waiting 
two hours in Olsufy Ivanovich's courtyard. As 
far as his former quiet and convenient little spot 
was concerned, there were certain disadvantages 
that had not existed before. Firstly, it had prob­
ably been marked since the to-do at Olsufy 
Ivanovich's last ball, and safety precautions had 
probably been taken ; and secondly, he had to 
await the agreed signal fron1 Klara Olsufyevna, 
for there was bound to be something of the sort. 
There always was, and as he said, 'We aren't the 
first, and we won't be the last.' He immediately 
remembered quite opportunely and by the way a 
novel he had read long ago, in which the heroine 
had given an agreed signal to her Alfred under 
exactly similar circumstances by tying up a pink 
ribbon at her window. But now, after dark, 
with a St. Petersburg climate notorious for its 

234 
T H E  D O U B L E 
wetness and unreliability, a pink ribbon was out 
of the question ; to put it briefly, it was inlpos­
sible. 
' No. This is no tin1e for silken ladders,' thought 
our hero. 'I'd better stay quietly where I am, 
out of sight. That's what I'd better do.' And 
he selected a position facing the windows, and 
near the wood-stack. There were, of course, pos­
tilions and coachmen, and a number of other 
people walking about the courtyard, added to 
which there was the rattle of wheels, the snorting 
of horses and so forth. But for all that it was a 
convenient position, whether anyone saw him or 
not, having at least the advantage of being to 
some extent in shadow, so that he could observe 
positively everything without being himself ob­
served. The windows were all lit up. Son1e sort 
of gala reunion was taking place at Olsufy lvano­
vich' s, but no music could be heard as yet. 
' So it's not a ball. They're gathered for some 
other occasion,' thought our hero with a sinking 
heart. 'But was it today ?' flashed through his 
mind. 'Maybe there's a mistake in the date. 
Anything is possible. Or perhaps the letter was 
written yesterday, and didn't reach me because 
that scoundrel Petrushka got mixed up in the 
business. Or perhaps it said tomorrow. Perhaps 
that's when I'm supposed to do everything and 
be waiting with the carriage.' 
With a sudden thrill of horror, he felt in his 

THE D O U B L E  
235 
pocket for the letter to check the point. But to his 
amazement the letter was not there. 
'How's this ?' whispered Mr. Golyadkin, feeling 
more dead than alive. 'Where've I left it ? Have 
I lost it ? That's all I needed ! ' he concluded with a 
groan. 'What if it gets into the wrong hands ? 
Perhaps it has already ! Oh God ! What will 
come of this ? What will happen if. . . Oh, what 
hideous luck !' 
He began trembling like a leaf, as it occurred 
to him that his shameful twin might have thrown 
the overcoat over him for the express purpose or 
purloining the letter, having got wind of it from 
his enemies. 
'And what's more, he's seized it as evidence ! '  
thought Mr. Golyadkin. 'But why ?' 
After the first numbing blow of horror, the 
blood rushed back to his head. Groaning, gnash.-. 
ing his teeth and clutching his heated brow, he 
sank down on the log, and tried to think. But his 
thoughts would not connect themselves to any­
thing. Faces, and various long-forgotten events 
flashed through his mind, some vague, some vivid ; 
silly song-tunes crept into his head. His anguish 
was such as it had never been before. 
' Oh God,' he thought, recovering a little and 
suppressing his dull sobs, 'oh God, grant me 
firmness of spirit in the lllfathomable depths of my 
misfortune ! That I am ruined, that I have ceased 
to exist, there is no longer any doubt at all. And 

236 
T H E  D O U B L E  
this is in the nature of things, for it could not be 
otherwise. In the first place, I've lost tny job­
I've certainly done that. It was inevitable. 
'Now let's suppose it all cmnes right somehow. 
We'll assume I've got enough tnoney to begin 
with. I'll need a new place to live, and some sort 
of furniture. I won't have Petrushka for a start. 
I can manage without the scoundrel-get help 
from the people in the house. Splendid ! I can 
come and go when I like, and there won't be any 
Petrushka to grumble because I'm late. That's a 
good way of doing it. Well, let's suppose it is, 
but how is it I'm talking about completely the 
wrong thing ? ' 
His predicament again dawned upon him. He 
looked around. 
' Oh God ! What on earth have I just been 
talking about ? '  he wondered, clutching his burn­
ing head in utter bewilderment. 
'You'll be going soon, won't you, sin ' said a 
voice above him. He shuddered. Standing before 
him, also wet through and chilled to the bone, 
was the driver, who, growing impatient at having 
nothing to do, had conceived the idea of coming 
to take a look at Mr. Golyadkin behind the 
firewood. 
' I'm all right, my friend. I won't be long. You 
. 
' 
watt . . .  
The driver went away, muttering to himself 
'What's he grumbling abouu' thought Mr. 

T H E  D O U B L E 
237 
, 
Golyadkin tearfully. 'I hired him for the evening, 
didn't I ?  I'm within 1ny rights ! I've taken him 
for the evening, and that's all there is to it. He 
can stand there the whole tiine-it' s all the same. 
It's as I please. I go ifl want to-ifi don't, I don't. 
My standing here behind the firewood doesn't 
matter at all, and no one dare say anything to the 
contrary. If a gentleman wants to stand behind 
the firewood, he stands behind the firewood. 
He's not spoiling anyone's reputation doing that. 
So there it is, young lady, if you really want to 
know. As to living in a cottage, as you say, no 
one does nowadays, no one. And in our indus­
trial age, young lady, you won't get anywhere 
without good behaviour. You're a dreadful 
example of that. "·Work as a chief clerk, and 
live in a cottage by the sea," you say. In the 
first place, young lady, there are no chief clerks 
by the sea ; and in the second, the post of chief 
clerk is something you and I won't get. Suppose, 
for the sake of example, I put in a petition, and 
g0 along and say this and that, "make n1e chief 
clerk and protect me fron1 n1y enemies". "We've 
plenty of chief clerks," they'll tell you. "You're 
not at Madan1e Falbala' s learning good behaviour 
now," they'll say, " and a pretty poor example you 
give of that." Good behaviour n1eans staying at 
home, honouring your father, and not thinking or 
suitors before you should, young lady. There'll 
be suitors at the proper time. You n1ust, or 

238 
T H E  D O U B L E  
course, exhibit talent in various ways, by play­
ing the piano a bit sometimes, speaking French, 
and knowing your history, geography, scripture 
and arithmetic, but nothing more. And then 
there's cooking. Cooking must be included in 
every nicely-behaved girl's store of knowledge. 
But what's the position : To begin with, my fine 
young lady, they won't let you go. They'll 
pursue you, then they'll play their trump card, 
and into a nunnery with you. Then what, young 
lady : What will you have me do then : Come to 
a nearby hill as they do in certain silly novels, 
and pine away in tears, watching the cold walls 
that shut you in, and fmally die as habitually 
described by smne horrid German poets and 
novelists ŋ Is that iu Firstly, let tne tell you in 
a friendly way, things aren't done like that ; and 
secondly, you ought to have been given a sound 
beating, and your parents as well, for giving you 
French books to read. You learn no good from 
them. They're poison, deadly poison, young 
lady ! Or do you think we'll get away with it, 
may I ask, and find a cottage by the sea, and bill 
and coo, and discuss our various feelings, and live 
happily ever afterwards ŋ And then when there's 
a little one, shall we go to our father, the Civil 
Counsellor, and say, "Look, Olsufy Ivanovich, 
there's a little one. Will you take this as a suitable 
occasion to remove your curse and bless us both ? '' 
No, young lady, it's not done like that. And the 

T H E  D O U B L E 
239 
main thing is there won't be any billing and 
cooing, so don't hope for it. Nowadays, young 
lady, the husband is n1aster, and a good well­
brought-up wife must hmnour him in every 
way. Tender words aren't popular any tnore, in 
our industrial age. Jean-Jacques Rousseau's times 
arc past. Nowadays the husband cmnes hmnc 
from the office hungry, and says, " Can't I have 
a little son1ething before dinner, darling, just a 
mouthful of herring and a nip of vodka :" And 
you must have it ready, young lady. Your hus­
band will tuck in with relish, and won't so much 
as give you a glance. " Run into the kitchen, 
poppet, and keep an eye on the dinner," he'll say. 
And just once a week perhaps, he'll give you a 
kiss, and a cold peck at that. That's what it will 
be like, young lady-just a cold peck. And what 
have I got to do with it : Why have you got me 
mixed up in your fancies : "To the beneficent 
one who suffers for n1y sake, and is in every way 
dear to my heart, etc.," that's what you said. 
To start with, I'm no good for you, young lady. 
I'm no adept at compliments, as you know your­
sci£ I'm not fond of talking sweet-scented non­
sense for the ladies. I don't like gay deceivers, and 
I must confess, I've never got anywhere on my 
looks. You'll find no bounce or false shame 
about me, and I tell you that now in all sin­
cerity. An open forthright nature and common 
sense are the two things I possess. I have nothing 

240 
T H E  D O U B L E  
to do with intrigues. I'm no intriguer, and proud 
of it. I don't go about in front of good people 
wearing a 1nask, and to say all there is to be 
"d 
, 
sa1 . . .  
He gave a sudden start. The dripping-wet red 
beard of the cabman was again peeping over the 
firewood at hi1n. 
'I'm coming now, my friend. I'm coming 
directly, you know,' he quavered feebly. 
The cabman scratched the back of his head, 
ran his hand over his beard, stepped back a pace, 
stopped, and looked at him mistrustfully. 
'I'm coming now, my friend. I must just wait 
a teeny second, you see.' 
'Don't you want to drive anywhere at all :' 
asked the cabn1an, making a direct and deter­
Inined approach. 
'Yes, I'm coming. I'm waiting, you see.' 
, I 
, 
see. 
'You sec, I . . . What village are you from, 
In y friend ? ' 
'I' 
f' 
In a ser . 
' Got a good master : ' 
'Not bad.' 
' Stay here for a bit, my friend. Have you been 
in St. Petersburg long ?' 
'A year I've been driving.' 
' And are you all right :' 
'Not bad.' 
'Well, you should thank Providence, my friend. 

T H E  D O U B L E  
241 
, 
You look for a good n1an. They' rc rare now­
adays. A good man will see to your c01nfort, 
will give you meat and drink. But somctin1es, 
tny friend, you see even rich men weeping . . .  
You see a pitiful example-that's how it is, my 
dear fellow . . .  ' 
The cabtnan suddenly scen1cd to feel sorry for 
him. 
'I'll hang on, sir. Will you be waiting long ?' 
' No, my dear chap, I-cr-you know what it 
is . . . I won't \Vait any more. What do you 
think ? I rely on you. I won't wait any more.' 
' Don't you want to drive anywhere ?' 
' No, my friend, no. But I'll make it worth 
your while. What's the dan1age, n1y dear fel­
low ?' 
'What we agreed, sir. I've had a long wait, 
and you wouldn't do a chap down, sir.' 
'Well, here you are then.' He gave the cabman 
the full six roubles, and having seriously made 
up his mind to waste no tnore time, but to clear 
off before something unpleasant happened-par­
ticularly, as with the matter settled and the 
cabman dismissed, there was nothing else to wait 
for-he walked out of the courtyard, turned left 
through the gate, and breathless but rejoicing, 
set off as fast as his legs would carry hin1. 
'It Ina y all turn out for the best,' he thought. 
'And this way I've avoided trouble.' His tnind 
suddenly felt unusually at case. 

242 
T H E  D O U B L E 
'If it only would tum out for the best ! '  he 
thought, but did not believe that it would. 
'I know what . . .  No. I'd better try a different 
approach. Or wouldn't it be better for 1nc to . . . ' 
While searching to relieve the doubts that were 
thus assailing hin1, he ran as far as the Scmyonovsky 
Bridge, where he cautiously decided to go back. 
'That's the best thing,' he thought. 'I'd better 
try a different approach. This is what I'll do-I'll 
just be an outside observer, and nothing tnorc. 
"1'111 an onlooker, an outsider, that's all," I'll 
say. And whatever happens it won't be me who's 
to bla1nc. That's it. That's how it will be now.' 
Our hero did indeed do as he had decided and 
went back, and went all the more readily for 
having, thanks to a happy thought, become an 
outsider. 
' It's the best thing. You're not answerable for 
anything, and you'll sec what you should.' 
His calculations were perfectly correct, and 
there was nothing more to it. Reassured, he stole 
back into the peaceful and soothingly protective 
shadow of the wood-stack. This time he did not 
have to watch and wait for long. All of a sudden 
there was a strange comn1otion at every window ; 
figures appeared and disappeared ; the curtains 
were drawn back, and Olsufy Ivanovich's win­
dows were cramn1cd with people peering out 
and looking for son1ething in the courtyard. 
Our hero followed the general comn1otion with 

T H E  D O U B LE 
243 
 
interest and curiosity from the security of his 
wood-stack, craning his head just as far out to 
left and right as the short shadow afforded by 
his cover would allow. Suddenly he was filled 
with panic, he shuddered, he aln1ost collapsed with 
the horror of it. He realized at once. They were 
not just looking for anything or anybody, but 
for him. They were all gazing and pointing in 
his direction. Escape was in1possible-they' d see ! 
Panic-stricken, he pressed hi1nsclf to the wood­
stack as tightly as he could. Only then did he 
observe that the treacherous shadow had played 
hin1 false by failing to cover hin1 con1pletely. 
Had it only been possible, he would at that 
n1oment with the greatest pleasure in the world 
have crawled into any n1ouse-hole the wood­
stack might offer, and sat quiet. But it was out 
of the question. In his agony he stared at all the 
windows at once, boldly and openly. It was the 
best thing to do. Suddenly he blushed with 
fiery shan1e. They had all seen hin1 at the same 
time. They were all beckoning, nodding, calling. 
Several of the windows clicked open. Several 
voices began shouting something at him simul­
taneously. 
' I'tn surprised they don't whip these wretched 
girls when they're children,' he muttered, conl­
pletely disconcerted. 
All of a sudden, tripping, whirling and pranc­
ing down the steps, breathless, hatless and wearing 

244 
T H E  D O U B L E  
just his wuform, canle he-someone we know­
with an air that treacherously expressed how most 
frightfully glad he was to see Mr. Golyadkin. 
'You here, Y akov Petrovich ? '  warbled the 
notoriously worthless man. 'You'll catch a cold. 
It's dully. Come along in.' 
'No. I'm all right, Yakov Petrovich,' mumbled 
our hero submissively. 
'You must, Yakov Petrovich. 
They most 
humbly beg you-they're waiting for us. "Do 
us the pleasure of bringing in Yakov Petrovich," 
they said.' 
'No, Yakov Petrovich, you see, I'd better . . .  
I'd better be off home,' said our hero, so horrified 
and abashed that he felt he was being frozen to 
death and roasted alive at the same time. 
'Not at all, not at all !' twittered the odious 
man. 'Nothing of the sort ! Come on ! '  he said 
firmly, dragging Golyadkin senior towards the 
steps. The latter did not want to go in the least, 
but went, because to kick and struggle with 
everyone watching would have been stupid. To 
say that he went is not, however, strictly accurate, 
for he had little idea what was happening to 
him. 
Before he had tin1e to tidy himself or recover 
his senses, he was in the reception-room. Pale, 
ruffled and dishevelled, he gazed dully around, 
and saw a multitude of people. It was horrible ! 
The reception-room and everywhere else was 

T H E  D O U B L E  
245 
 
filled to overflowing. There were people without 
nun1ber, there were galaxies of lovely ladies, and 
they were all tnilling and pressing around hitn, 
and bearing him, as he clearly perceived, in a 
definite direction. 
'This isn't the way to the door,' flashed through 
his nund, and indeed it was not. He was heading 
straight for the comfortable arm-chair of Olsufy 
lvanovich. On one side of this, pale, languid and 
melancholy, but sumptuously arrayed, stood Klara 
Olsufyevna. 
Mr. Golyadkin was particularly 
struck by the wonderfully effective tiny white 
flowers adorning her raven hair. On the other 
side, in a black n1orning coat, and wearing his 
new decoration in his buttonhole, stood Vladimir 
Sen1yonovich. Mr. Golyadkin was, as we have 
already intimated, being conducted straight to­
wards 0 lsufy I vanovich ; steering him by one 
arn1 was Golyadkin junior, who had now assumed 
an extraordinarily decorous and well-intentioned 
air-which was a source of some gratification to 
our hero-and at the other, looking very grave, 
was Andrey Filippovich. 
'What's this ŋ' wondered Mr. Golyadkin. 
The mon1ent he saw before whon1 he was being 
taken, his brain cleared with lightning rapidity. 
He thought in a flash of the purloined letter . . .  
With a feeling of immeasurable anguish, he stood 
before Olsufy Ivanovich' s chair. 
'What am I to do now ŋ· he thought. 'Be 

246 
T H E  D O U B L E  
bold, speak out, of course-but with a certain 
nobleness of manner. This and that, I'll say, and 
' 
so on. 
But what our hero had apparently been fearing, 
did not happen. Olsufy Ivanovich seen1ed to 
receive him quite well, and although he did not 
proffer his hand, he did at least gaze at him, and 
shake his awe-inspiring grey head in a sad, solemn, 
but at the same time affable manner. So at least 
it seemed to Mr. Golyadkin. In those lustreless 
eyes he seemed even to detect a glistening tear. 
Looking up, he saw what appeared to be a tiny 
tear sparkling upon the lashes ofK.lara Olsufyevna. 
Vladimir Semyonovich seemed also to have some­
thing of the sort in his eyes. No less eloquent of 
sympathy than the general lachrymation, was the 
calm, inviolable dignity of Andrey Filippovich ; 
while the young n1an who at one time had looked 
very much the in1portant counsellor was at this 
moment sobbing bitterly. Or perhaps it all 
1nerely seemed so to Mr. Golyadkin because he 
was himself overcome \Vith powerful emotion, 
and could distinctly feel the hot tears coursing 
down his frozen cheeks. Reconciled with man and 
destiny, filled at that moment with affection not 
only for Olsufy Ivanovich, but for all the guests put 
together-even for his pernicious twin, who was 
now apparently not pen1icious at all and not even 
his twin, but a stranger and a perfectly amiable 
person in his own right-Mr. Golyadkin was about 

THE D O U D L E  
247 
 
to pour forth his soul to Olsufy Ivanovich in a 
moving speech, his voice choked with sobs. But 
his feelings were too much for him. His voice 
failed him, and he could only point eloquently 
at his heart. At last, wishing no doubt to spare 
the grey-haired old nun, Andrey Filippovich 
drew Mr. Golyadkin a little to one side, and left 
hin1, completely at liberty it seemed. Snliling, 
muttering to himself, a little perplexed but at all 
events almost reconciled with man and destiny, 
our hero began to move through the dense throng 
of guests. Everyone made way and regarded him 
with strange curiosity, and a concern that was 
puzzling and unaccountable. Our hero passed 
into the next room, and received the same atten­
tion. He was dimly aware of the whole crowd 
following him, watching his every step, dis­
coursing quietly on smnething of extreme interest, 
shaking their heads, debating and whispering. 
He would have liked to know \vhat it was all 
about. Looking round, he noticed Golyadkin 
junior beside him. Feeling obliged to catch hold 
of his arm and take him aside, Mr. Golyadkin 
earnestly begged him to support him in all future 
undertakings, and not to abandon him at a critical 
moment. Golyadkin junior nodded gravely, 
and gave him a firm squeeze of the hand. 
So overwhelnling was our hero's emotion, that 
his heart tretnbled within him. But then he 
gasped for breath. He felt a terrible weight upon 

248 
T H E  D O U B L E 
his chest. He felt oppressed and stifled beneath 
the stare of so 1nany eyes . . .  He caught a glitnpse 
of the counsellor wearing a wig. He was eyeing 
him in a sten1, searching 1nanner, that showed he 
had been quite munollified by the general aura 
of sympathy. Our hero was on the point of 
marching over to him, giving him a stnile, and 
clearing things up immediately, but somehow 
did not manage to do this. For a moment he 
almost lost consciousness ; memory and senses 
forsook hin1. When he came to, he noticed that 
the guests had formed a large circle around him. 
His name was suddenly shouted from the next 
room, and the shout was immediately taken up 
by the whole crowd. Uproar and excitement 
ensued. Everyone rushed for the door, almost 
carrying him along with them. Close beside 
him was the stony-hearted counsellor in the wig. 
The latter fmally took him by the arm, and sat 
him on a chair next to his, directly opposite but 
some distance away fron1 where Olsufy Ivanovich 
was sitting. Everyone else in the place sat down 
on several rows of chairs arranged around Mr. 
Golyadkin and Olsufy Ivanovich. All grew 
hushed and still. Everyone was observing a 
solemn silence and gazing towards Olsufy Ivano­
vich, obviously expecting something rather out 
of the ordinary. Mr. Golyadkin noticed the other 
Mr. Golyadkin and Andrey Filippovich sitting 
next to Olsufy Ivanovich, and facing the coun-

T H E  D O U B L E  
249 
 
sellar. The silence lasted a long time. They were, 
in fact, waiting for something. 
'Just as it is in any fatnily when someone's 
going on a long journey,' thought our hero. 
'It only wants us to get up, and say a prayer.' 
All Mr. Golyadkin's reflections were interrupted 
by a sudden strange cotntnotion. The long­
expected was happening. 
'He's coming ! He's coming ! ' ran through the 
crowd. 
'Who's coming ?' ran through Mr. Golyadkin's 
head. A peculiar sensation caused him to shudder. 
'Now !' said the counsellor, looking intently 
at Andrey Filippovich. The latter shot a glance 
at Olsufy lvanovich, who nodded gravely and 
solemnly. 
' Up we get,' said the counsellor, hoisting Mr. 
Golyadkin to his feet. Everyone rose. The coun­
sellor then took Golyadkin senior by the ann, 
Andrey Filippovich did the same to Golyadkin 
junior, and surrounded by the eagerly expectant 
crowd, they solemnly brought these two com­
pletely identical beings together. Our hero, per­
plexed, began to look about him, but was 
i1nmediately checked, and shown Golyadkin 
junior, who was offering him his hand. 
'They want to reconcile us,' thought our hero 
suddenly, and greatly touched, he held out his 
hand to Golyadkin junior, then offered his cheek. 
The other did likewise. At this juncture Golyadkin 

250 
T H E  D O U B L E 
senior thought he saw his treacherous friend 
smile, and give a quick mischievous wink to all 
arow1d ; he thought he detected something sinister 
in his face, and thought he even grimaced as he 
gave his Judas kiss. His head rang. Darkness 
swam before his eyes. A whole procession of 
identical Golyadkins seemed to be bursting loudly 
in at every door. But it was too late. The re­
sounding treacherous kiss had been given. 
At this point something quite unexpected 
occurred. The door flew open with a bang, and 
on the threshold stood a man whose very appear­
ance made Mr. Golyadkin's blood run cold. He 
stood rooted to the spot. His cry died away 
unuttered. His chest felt constricted. But he had 
known it all beforehand, and had long anticipated 
something of the sort. Gravely and solemnly, 
the stranger advanced towards him. It was a 
figure he knew very well, and had seen often, 
very often-that same day even. It was a thick­
set man in a black morning coat ; about his neck 
he wore the cross of an important decoration ; 
he had very black bushy side-whiskers ; all that 
was missing was the cigar. His eyes froze Mr. 
Golyadkin with horror. With a grave, solemn 
visage, this terrible man approached the sorry 
hero of our tale. Our hero stretched out his 
hand. The stranger took it, and pulled him along 
after hitn . . . Our hero gazed around, crushed 
and bewildered. 

T H E  D O U B L E  
251 
, 
'It's Krestyan lvanovich Rutenspitz, doctor of 
n1edicine and surgery, an old friend of yours, 
Y akov Petrovich,' twittered a repulsive voice 
right in Mr. Golyadkin' s car. He glanced round. 
It was his abominable blackguardly twin. His 
face was shining with an unseemly glee that boded 
ill. He was rubbing his hands in ecstasy, raptur­
ous! y rolling his head, and fussing delightedly 
around all and sundry. He looked ready to dance 
with joy on the spot. Finally he leapt forward, 
and seizing a candle from one of the servants, 
lighted the way for Dr. Rutenspitz and Mr. 
Golyadkin. The latter clearly heard everyone 
in the room rushing after them, crowding and 
squashing each other, and all repeating with one 
accord : 'It's all right. Don't be afraid, Yakov 
Petrovich. It's an old friend and acquaintance of 
yours-Dr. Rutenspitz.' 
They came at last to the brightly-illuminated 
main staircase, and this too was crowded with 
people. The front door was thrown open with 
a crash, and Mr. Golyadkin found himself on the 
steps with Dr. Rutenspitz. Drawn up at the 
bottom was a carriage and four. The horses were 
snorting impatiently. Three bounds, and the 
maliciously gloating Golyadkin junior was down 
the steps and opening the carriage-door. Dr. 
Rutenspitz motioned Mr. Golyadkin to get in. 
There was no need for that at all, however, for 
there were quite enough people to help him up. 

252 
T H E  D O U B L E  
Sick with horror, he looked back. The whole 
uf the brightly-lit staircase was thick with people. 
Inquisitive eyes were watching hin1 frmn all sides. 
On the topmost landing in his comfortable ann­
chair, presided Olsufy Ivanovich, watching with 
attentive interest all that was taking place below. 
They were all waiting. A murmur of impatience 
ran through the crowd as Mr. Golyadkin looked 
back. 
'I trust there is nothing reprehensible . . .  con­
cerning my official relationships . . . that could 
provoke any severe measure . . .  and excite public 
attention,' said our hero in his confusion. There 
was general hubbub. Everyone shook their heads. 
Tears gushed fron1 Mr. Golyadkin's eyes. 
'In that case I am ready . . . I have complete 
faith in Dr. Rutenspitz, and give my fate into his 
hands . . .  
' 
No sooner had he said this, than there burst 
from those around a shout of joy, ear-splitting 
and terrible, that was echoed ominously by the 
whole waiting throng. Then Dr. Rutenspitz and 
Andrey Filippovich each took one of Mr. Golyad­
kin's arms and started putting him into the 
carriage-the double, in his usual blackguardly 
way, assisting from behind. The unhappy Golyad­
kin senior took one last look at everything and 
everybody, and trembling like a drenched kitten 
-if one may use the sin1ile-he climbed into the 
carriage. Dr. Rutenspitz got in immediately 

T HE D 0 U B L E 
253 
" 
after. The door slamn1ed. The whip cracked. 
And the horses drew the carriage away . . . 
Everyone dashed in pursuit. The shrill, frantic 
cries of all his enemies rang after him like so n1any 
farewells. For a while he caught glimpses of 
people around the carriage as it bore him away, 
but gradually they were left behind, and fmally 
they were lost to sight completely. Mr. Golyad­
kin' s unseenliy twin stayed longer than all the 
rest. Hands thrust into the pockets of his green 
uniforn1 trousers and with a satisfied look on his 
face, he kept pace with the carriage, jumping up 
first on one side, then on the other, and sometimes, 
seizing and hanging from the window frame, he 
would pop his head in and blow farewell kisses 
at Mr. Golyadkin. But he, too, began at last to 
tire. His appearances became fewer and fewer, 
and fmally he vanished for good. Mr. Golyad­
kin's heart ached dully within him. Fiery blood 
was rushing to his head. He was suffocating. 
He wanted to unbutton coat and shirt, bare his 
breast, and fling snow and cold water upon it. 
At last he fell unconscious . . .  
When he ca1ne to, he saw the horses were 
taking hin1 along a road he did not know. Dark 
forest loomed to lett and right. It was lonely and 
desolate. Suddenly he grew stark with horror. 
Two burning eyes were staring out of the dark­
ness at him, two eyes bun1ing with evil and 
infernal glee. This wasn't Dr. Rutenspitz ! Who 

254 
THE D O U B L E 
was in Or was it him ? It was ! Not the earlier 
Dr. Rutenspitz, but another, a terrible Dr. Ruten­
spitz ! 
'1-I'm all right, I think, Dr. Rutenspitz,' began 
our hero, timid and trembling, and wishing to 
propitiate the terrible Dr. Rutenspitz by a show 
of meekness and obedience. 
'You vill haf lodging, viz firevood light and 
service, vich is tnore zan you deserf,' came Dr. 
Rutenspitz' reply, stern and dreadful as a judge's 
sentence. 
Our hero gave a scream, and clutched his head. 
Alas ! He had felt this con1ing for a long titne ! 


