
The Gambler 
B' 
.. : FYODOR DOSTOEVSKY 
With Polina Suslova's Diary 
Created reluctantly, under pressure, in less 
than a month in 1866, The Gambler is more 
directly autobiographical than any other of 
Dostoevsky's works. Xowhere else in his fiction 
are the personal passions of gambling and love 
used with so little artistic distancing, and 
nowhere else do we get such a direct reflection 
of the three women he lo\"ed in his life. Iri this 
edition \"ictor Terras's new translation is 
supplemented by Edward \Vasiolek's Intro­
duction and several key works that illuminate 
The Gambler and the period of Dostoevsky's 
life on which it is based. 
In 1866 Dostoevsky was busy finishing and 
publishing Crime and Punishment. His turbulent 
and destructive affair with Polina Suslova 
had run its course, and he was exhausted by 
work, poor health, and financial distress. 
Attempting to come to grips with the complex 
interconnections between his gambling and 
his loving, he dictated The Gambler to the 
woman who would become his second wife. 
In the novel, Aleksei comes to understand 
everything but what moves him-his love for 
Polina and his passion for gambling. Daring 
to risk his last gulden on the irrational turn 
of the roulette wheel gives him what position, 
money, and love do not-a feeling of revolt 
against the fixities of life and reason. 
Polina Suslova's Diary, published here in 
English for the first time, is a pricelsss window 
on the character of a woman Dostoevsky 
loved during his most destructive and creative 
{Continued on back jlajJ) 

period. Also appearing in English for the first 
time is her short story, "The Stranger and 
Her Lover," a fictional account of Dostoevsky's 
love for her. Together with selected letters 
of Dostoevsky and Polina Suslova, these works 
deepen the context of The Gambler, and comple­
ment Mr. Terras's authoritative translation 
in a way that should revive interest in an 
important but relatively neglected novel. 
VICTOR TERRAS is professor of Slavic 
languages and chairman of the Department 
of Slavic Languages at Brown university. 
He has also taught at the (;niversities of Illinois 
and Wisconsin. Among his many publications 
are The J'oung Dostoevsky, and translations of 
Dostoevsky's otebooks for The Possessed and 
A Raw Youth. 
EDWARD WASIOLEK is chairman of the 
Committee on Comparative Studies in 
Literature, chairman of the Department of 
Slavic Languages and Literature, and Avalon 
Foundation Professor of Slavic and Comparative 
Literature at the University of Chicago. 
He edited and translated Dostoevsky's otebooks 
for Crime and Punishment and The Brothers 
Karamazov, and edited the Notebooks for 
The Idiot, The Possessed, and A Raw Youth. 
He is the author of Dostoevsky: The Major 
Fiction, coauthor of Xine Soviet Portraits, and 
author or editor of numerous other works. 
ISBN: 0-226-15970-1 
Printed in U.S.A. 

The 
Garfihler 

Edited by Edward Wasiolek 

Fyodor 
DOstoevsky 
with Polina Suslova's Diary 
Translated by VictorTerras 
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 
Chicago and London 

The University of Chicago Pres, Chicago 606!17 
The University of Chicago Pres, Ltd., London 
© 1972 by The University of Chicago 
All rights reserved. Published 1972 
Printed in the United States of America 
International Standard Bok Number: b22c1597b1 
Libnry of Congres Catalog Card Number: 72-80227 

Vll 
1 99 
303 
335 
Contents 
Introduction 
THE GAMBLER, Fyodor Dostoevsky 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
THE STRANGER AND HER LOVER, 
Polina Suslova 
Selected Letters 


Introduction 
D
ostoevsky never wanted to write 
The Gambler. He was forced to 
write it by the threat of financial 
ruin, and he wrote, or dictated, it in less than a month to 
a young stenographer who was in a matter of months to 
become his second wife. \Ve have to thank Stellovsky, an 
unscrupulous editor, for these two happy events. Dostoev­
sky had, with characteristic carelessness, signed a contract 
in 1865 with Stellovsky with the condition that he deliver 
a new novel to him by 1 November 1866. If the novel 
was not in Stellovsky's hands by that time, Stellovsky 
would have the right for nine years to publish anything 
Dostoevsky had written without paying Dostoevsky any­
thing. Stellovsky had taken advantage of Dostoevsky's 
straitened circumstances and imprudent temperament, 
and he refused Dostoevsky's subsequent attempts to annul 
the contract by paying a fine.1 Dostoevsky was in no con­
dition to undertake another major work. In 1866 he was 
busy publishing and finishing Crime and Punishmen t, 
and he put off doing anything about the novel promised 
to Stellovsky as long as possible. By 1 October 1866 he 
I. See (in this volume) letter 9, to A. V. Korvin-Krukovskaia, and let· 
tcr 10, to Polina Suslova, in which arc contained Dostoevsky's dcscrip· 
tion of the financial straits that led him to conclude the contract with 
Stcllovsky and the difficulties the contract entailed. 
vii 

vm 
Introduction 
had not written a line and in desperation hired a young 
student from a school of stenography. From 4 October 
to 29 October Dostoevsky accomplished the impossible 
by dictating and completing The Gam lJler. In the process 
he fell in love with the young stenographer, Anna Gri­
gorievna Snitkina. 
Anna was destined to bring order and efficiency to 
Dostoevsky's practical affairs, and to judge from the rem­
iniscences she left us,2 she had already begun to do so 
during the dictation of the novel. Dostoevsky was prone 
to ramble about matters unconnected with the novel, and 
it was the timid and awed young stenographer who would 
bring him back repeatedly to the task at hand. It was her 
practical sense also that saved Dostoevsky from the final 
stratagem of Stellovsky's. The novel was ready for trans­
mittal to Stellovsky on 30 October, but the wily publisher 
absented himself from the city and made it impossible for 
them to deliver the novel to him. Anna suggested that 
they register the manuscript at a police station and in 
that way the conditions of the contract were successfully 
met. 
Although Dostoevsky had not written a line of The 
Gambler by the beginning of 1 October 1866, he had 
sketched a plan for it in a Jetter to Strakhov in 1863 (in­
cluded in this volume),3 and if we are to believe Leonid 
Grossman, he was thinking of writing a novel about gam­
bling as early as 1859.4 It was understandable that Dos-
2. Dostoevsky Portrayed by His Wife, trans. and ed. S. S. Kotcliansky 
(:-o:ew York: Duuon, 1926). 
3. See letter 4, to:-.:.:-.:. Strakhov. 
4. L. Gwssman is a distinguished Russian critic of Dostoenky's works 
and the spare reference in his 1962 biography of Dostoevsky probably 
refers to an account of the gambling halls of Europe that Dostoevsky 
must have read about in the April issue of Russkoe slovo (Russian 
\\"ord), 1 859, in an article by F. Dershau entitled "hom the Notes of a 
Gambler." The author gives a vivid account of the atmosphere of the 
halls and of the habits of the characters who !locked to Hornburg, a pop­
ular gambling spa. Many of the details seem to find some reflection in 

Introduction 
ix 
toevsky did nothing about implementing his plan from 
1863 to 1866. These years were among the most creative 
and the most turbulent of his career. It was during this 
time that he burst from literary respectability to literary 
genius: after a ten-year hiatus in his literary career be­
cause of imprisonment and exile, Dostoevsky's literary 
career between 1859 and 1863 had been repeating itself. 
His output was respectable but there was little in it to 
indicate the volcanic creaave energy that was to erupt 
with the publication of Notes from the Underground in 
1864 and the publication of Crime mzd Punishment in 
1866. It is especially remarkable that his creative energies 
incandesced during a period when his personal life was 
almost unbelievably difiicult and complicated. The jour­
nal Time} which he edited with his brother Michael, 
was closed down in 1863 hy a government censor because 
of a misunderstood article on the Polish revolution of 
186;; his unloving, wrathful , and con sum pti ve first wife 
died in 1864; and his beloved brother M ichael died also 
in 1864, leaving a desperate widow and five children to 
be cared for by a generous but overburdened Dostoevsky. 
It was in 1862 during his first trip to Europe he began to 
gamble, a passion that was to serve his destructive instincts 
for almost a decade; and it was about the same time that 
he fell in love with a student half his age, Polina Suslova, 
who was to repeat the havoc and suffering he had experi-
Dostoevsky"s descriptions. Perhaps more significant than this general in­
lluence is the specific case, which is detailed, of a young man, a barber, 
who wins an enormous sum of money the first time he gambles, as did 
Alcksei in The Gambler and who leaves the gambling resort presumably 
to enjoy his sudden fortune. Several years later, however, the narrator 
meets the barber in Berne, Switzerland, where he is again practicing his 
trade. From him he learns the melancholy details of how the barber had 
returned to the gambling table, convinced that if he had won once he 
could do so again, and proceeded to lose everything he had won except 
his passion to try again and again. 

x 
Introduction 
enced with his first wife. By 1866 his turbulent and des­
tructive affair with Polina Suslova had run its course, 
but he was exhausted by work, poor health, and financial 
worries.5 His strength and emotions had been drained 
by the preceding three years and there seemed little of 
either left over for The Gambler. Yet there was enough 
for him to record in the novel, as he did nowhere else, the 
workings of the passions of gambling and love. 
The Gambler is more directly autobiographical than 
many of Dostoevsky's works. The press of the circum­
stances in which it was written drove him, it seems to 
impressions and events that were present in his immediate 
memory and imagination. The use of recently lived 
events is what makes it less of a novel artistically than 
Crime and Punishment and the three great novels that 
were to follow, but it is also what makes it somewhat 
unusual among his works. Except for The House of the 
Dead nowhere else is his own life brought in as directly, 
and nowhere else are the passions of gambling and love 
used with so little artistic distance. Indeed it is astound­
ing, considering how much his gambling cost him in 
shame and misery, that the roulette table appears so sel­
dom in his works. And nowhere else do we get with any 
directness a reflection of the three women he loved in his 
life. 
The diary of Polina Suslova, which is published here 
in English for the first time, is a priceless window on the 
character and temperament of a woman Dostoevsky loved 
during the most destructive and creative period of his 
life. The portrait we have of her in the novel, the diary, 
and the short story she wrote, "The Stranger and Her 
5. In April 1865 he wrote to Polina's sister, ::\'adezhda Prokofievna, 
that he still JoYed Polina, although he was frank about her faults (letter 
5 in this mlume). In August 1865 he felt still close enough to Polina to 
ask her for money. But his letter of 5 ělay 1867 (about fiye months after 
marrying Anna) is matter-of-fact and informative, although he obliquely 
invites more letters from her (letter 10). 

Introduction 
xi 
Lover" (a fictional account of Dostoevsky's love for her 
and published here in English for the first time), adds 
up to considerable material from which to gain some 
sense of her character and temperament. Somewhere in 
the triple reflection from these three sources the truth of 
Dostoevsky's relationship with Polina and something 
about his emotional needs in regard to women are to be 
found. By way of introduction one can say that Dostoev­
sky was far more generous about his relationship with 
her than was Polina about hers with him. Her accounts 
are self-serving and insensitive to any part of Dostoevsky's 
character and actions that do not bear directly on her 
own feelings and needs. Dostoevsky's Polina in The 
Gambler is far more attractive and complex than is the 
living prototype, and he uses his relationship with her 
in the novel as a premise on which to explore relation­
ships between gambling and love that go far beyond the 
immediate and literary experience. 
Slonim wrote a whole book about Dostoevsky's three 
loves,(! but the enigma of Dostoevsky's loving remains. 
The three women were different morally but similar in 
intelligence and sensitivity. All three were limited 
women. They hear in that sense very little relationship to 
the complex and enigmatic women he imagined and 
brought to life in his novels. Maria, the first wife, and 
Polina may share some of the destructive instincts of 
Nastasya Fillipovna, Lise, Katerina Ivanovna, and others, 
but they share none of their multidimensional response 
to life. \Ve know the least about the first wife, the most 
about the third love and the second wife, Anna. Anna 
kept a diary and recorded reminiscences, and Dostoevsky 
wrote her many letters, which she dutifully preserved. 
Anna is the good woman in his life: faithful, loyal, sac-
6. Mark Slonim, 
Tri littbui Dostoevskogo 
(New York: 
Chekhov, 
1953), English trans., Three Loves of Dostoevsky (New York: Rinehart, 
1955). 

xii 
Introduction 
rificing, the devoted servant in life and, after his death, 
the tireless worker dedicated to protecting his name and 
fame. 
Maria Dmitrievna Isaeva was, as far as we can tell, the 
very opposite of Anna. Dostoevsky's daughter, Aimee, 
has only the vilest things to say about her:7 she was cal­
culating, unloving, and unfaithful. According to Aimee, 
ઍIaria slept with her lover on the eve of her marriage to 
Dostoevsky, and after marriage she inflicted upon him 
the cruelty of disclosing all the vile things she had done 
in secret. Aimee is grossly inaccurate about many elemen­
tary facts and her account must be taken as part fancy and 
part bile. Yet some of what she says must be true. There is 
enough in the letters Dostoevsky wrote to Baron Vrangel 
about ؈I aria in I 85G to indicate that she had been playing 
with his emotions and inflicting needless suffering on 
him. Dostoevsky met her in Semipalatinsk after he was re­
leased from prison at Omsk in I 854 and fell in love with 
her while she was still married to a civil servant, with 
whom Dostoevsky got along very well. In May 1855 
Љfaria's husband got a job in Kuznevtsk and died shortly 
afterward. From about March of I 85G to December I 85G 
Dostoevsky wrote letter after letter to Maria filled with 
all the torments of love and passion. He wrote to Vrangel, 
"I can't think of anything else. If I could only see her, 
hear her. I am unhappy and half-crazy with love." He 
told Vrangel in almost every letter that he was out of his 
mind with love, that he could not possibly live without 
her, and that he would commit suicide if he lost her. 
He must have been writing the same thing to Maria, 
and she seems to have made the most of his passions and 
his willingness to suffer. She asked his advice about what 
to say and do if a certain middle-aged man proposed to 
7. Aimee DostoeYsky, Fyodor Dostoevsky, a Study (London, 1921). 

Introduction 
xiii 
her, knowing full well what the effect of such a mock­
nai"ve request would have on him. Dostoevsky recorded 
the effect in a letter to Vrangel on 23 March 1 856: "I was 
struck as if by lightning, swayed, fell into a faint, and 
cried all night." His nights were filled with wild dreams, 
cries, spasms, and torrents of tears. Though she made up 
the matter of the middle-aged suitor, she did not make 
up the love for a young schoolteacher, the details of 
which she communicated to the hapless Dostoevsky. Dos­
toevsky forgave her everything and did not waver in his 
belief that she was an angel. He was convinced that she 
had been cruelly abandoned to poverty, misery, and the 
responsibility of a young son because of the death of her 
husband. She was the embodiment for him of charm, in­
telligence, and purity. He even forgave her her lover and 
her intention to marry, and busied himself in pleading 
with Vrangel to use his influence to get her fiance a better 
job so that his beloved Maria would not have to suffer. 
઎Iaria saw finally that her security lay with Dostoevsky 
and her passion with her lover, Vergunov. She reconciled 
both by marrying Dostoevsky and keeping her lover, and 
then repaid Dostoevsky's generosity with open contempt 
and distaste. 
The affair with Polina, which began before his wife 
was dead, is something of a repetition of his love for his 
first wife. Dostoevsky's love for Maria was one of violent 
compassion and pity. Maria was not as helpless as Dosto­
evsky imagined, since she pursued her interests cleverly 
and ruthlessly. Polina was not in an especially difficult 
position when Dostoevsky met her: she was young, high­
spirited, and firm of will, and apparently well-off enough 
to pursue with some comfort her studies and her travels 
abroad. But she was young, an aspirant to a literary ca­
reer, and Dostoevsky must have been flattered and moved 
by a compassion for youth and the difficulties of literary 

XIV 
Introduction 
ambition. He conceived of himself as the protector of 
.Maria while he was courting her (he even compared 
himself in one letter with Makar Devushkin of his first 
novel, Poor Folk, a middle-aged bureaucrat who protects 
a young maiden Varvara, abandoned to the trials of mis­
ery and assaults on her virtue), and he must have con­
ceived of himself also as the protector of the young Pol ina, 
who came to him with admiration, and a manuscript to 
be submitted to his journal Time. \Vhether she intro­
duced herself to him by writing him the love letter 
Aimee Dostoevsky claimed she did will probably never 
be known, since it has come down to us only in Aimee's 
hook and probably through her imagination. The affair 
was at its height in the first half-year of 1863, when Dos­
toevsky suggested to Polina that they spend the summer 
abroad together. Pol ina agreed and went off to Paris in the 
early summer, where Dostoevsky was to meet her as soon 
as he was able to get away. He was, however, delayed by 
the closing of his journal in May 1863 and the complica­
tions arising from its closing. It was not until the middle 
of August that he was able to get away. Despite the delays 
and presumably his impatience to get to his mistress, 
Dostoevsky interrupted his passionate journey to stop off 
at Wiesbaden and Baden-Baden for gambling. At Wies­
baden he won I 0,400 francs and had the prudence to send 
half of the sum back to St. Petersburg to relatives for his 
dying wife. But a few days later he lost what remained at 
Baden-Baden and wrote his wife asking for part of the 
sum back. The passions of gambling and love are inter­
linked in Dostoevsky's life at this point, as they are in 
more complex fashion in the novel itself. 
When he reached Paris in late August, he did not find 
his young mistress impatiently waiting for him. Fresh 
from the humiliations of his gambling losses, he now 
faced the humiliation of having lost his mistress. During 

Introduction 
xv 
her wait for him in Paris she had fallen in love with a 
young South American, who had taken her and then 
abandoned her. \Ve have Polina's version of the meeting 
with Dostoevsky, not once but twice: in her diary and in 
her short story "The Stranger and Her Lover." In the 
first pages of the diary Polina tells us that she had writ­
ten a letter to him asking him not to come to her, but the 
letter had been written too late, and it is with these words 
that she greets him when he appears at her apartment. 
The scene of their meeting, which Polina records in de­
tail, speaks volumes about their relationship, and about 
Dostoevsky's reactions to losing at love: 
I saw him through the window, but waited until the message 
came that he was there, and even then it was a long time 
before I could make myself go out to meet him. "How are 
you?" I said, in a trembling voice. He asked me what was the 
matter with me, which only intensified my agitation, along 
willt his own uneasiness, which was also growing. "I thought 
that you were not going Lo come," I said, "because I wrote 
you a letter." 
"What letter?" 
"So you wouldn't come." 
"Why not?" 
"Because it is too late." 
He hung his head. 
"I must know everything, let's go somewhere, and tell me, 
or I'll die." 
I suggested that we go to his room. \Ve were silent all the 
way. I did not look at him. Once in a while he would yell 
"Vite, vite" to the cabman, in a desperate and impatient 
voice, so that the man would turn around and give us a 
puzzled look. I tried not to look at F[yodor] M[ikhailovich]. 
He was not looking at me either, but kept holding my hand 
all the way, pressing it hard from time to time and making 
some sort of convulsive movements. "Calm down, I am with 
you," I said. 

xvi 
Introduction 
\Vhen we got to his room, he fell at my feet, and, putting 
his arms around my knees, clasping them, and sobbing, he 
exclaimed between sobs: "I have lost you, I knew it!" Then, 
having regained his composure, he began to ask me about 
the other man. "Perhaps he is handsome, young, and glib. 
But you will never find a heart such as mine." 
For a long time I did not have the heart to answer him. 
"Have you given yourself to him completely?" 
"Don't ask, it is not right," I said. 
"Polia, I don't know what is right and what is wrong. Who 
is he, a Russian, a Frenchman, not my doctor? That one?" 
[An illegible word.] 
"No, no." 
1 told him that I loved the man very much. 
"Are you happy?" 
"No." 
"How can that be? You love and you are not happy, why, 
is this possible?" 
"He does not love me." 
"He does not love you!" he exclaimed, clutching his head 
in despair. "But you don't )0\·e him like a slave, do you? Tell 
me, I must know! Isn't it true that you would follow him to 
the end of the world?" 
"No, I . . .  I'll be going to the country," I said, bursting 
into tears. 
"Oh, Polia, why must you be so unhappy! It had to happen 
that you would fall in love with another man. I knew it. Why, 
you fell in love with me by mistake, because yours is a gen­
erous heart, you waited until you were 23, you are the only 
woman who does not demand of a man that he obligate 
himself in any way, but at what price: a man and a woman 
are not one and the same. He takes, she gives." 
The situation has its analogies with the love for Maria. 
\Vhat Dostoevsky cherished was given to a person of no 
particular distinction or character. Maria mocked his 
love with her affair with the insignificant and half-illit­
erate Vergunov, and Polina mocked it with a trivial and 

Introduction 
xvii 
insensitive medical student. Just as Maria treated Dosto­
evsky to the details of her love for another man, so too 
Polina treats him with all the details of her love for Sal­
vador. Dostoevsky had willingly and eagerly accepted the 
torments of Maria's confessions, and he implores Polina 
to regale him with all the details of another humiliation 
in love. In both cases, too, he adopts the role of the pro­
tector and consoler. Polina will be his sister and he her 
brother, and he succeeds in persuading her to continue 
their trip to Italy under that improbable arrangement. 
When Polina realized that neither the delights of resum­
ing the affair with Salvador nor the satisfaction of ven­
geance upon him was possible, she accepted Dostoev­
sky's proposal, knowing undoubtedly that she would be 
able to purge her humiliation by passing it on to Dosto­
evsky. This she did with great liberality, provoking Dos­
toevsky's passion so as to frustrate it. Dostoevsky's gener­
ous offer that they travel through Italy as brother and 
sister was disingenuous, since it became rapidly clear 
from Polina's diary that he hoped to resume his liaison 
with her; and it became even clearer that Polina was de­
termined that this would not happen: "\Vhile we were 
on route here he told me that he had some hope, though 
he had earlier insisted that he had none. I did not say 
anything to this, but I knew that it was not going to hap­
pen." But what was going to happen and what Polina 
manipulated with determined and unrelenting cunning­
ness was the arousal of Dostoevsky's passions and the spec­
tacle of his suffering. She was proud of this and naive 
enough to record it in her diary. In the entry of 6 Sep­
tember at Baden-Baden, she wrote the following: 
We had tea around I 0 o'clock. Having finished it, I felt very 
tired and went to bed, asking F[yodor] M[ikhailovich] to sit 
close to me. I felt good. I took his hand and for a long time 
held it in mine. He said that he felt good sitting like that. 

xviii 
Introduction 
I told him that I had been unfair and unkind to him in 
Paris, that it may have seemed as though I had been thinking 
only of myself, yet I had been thinking of him, too, but did 
not want to say it, so as not to hurt him. Suddenly he got up 
and started to leave, but then stumbled over my shoe which 
was lying by the bed, and just as quickly turned around and 
sat down again. 
"You wanted to go somewhere, didn't you?" I asked. 
"I wanted to shut the window." 
"Shut it then, if you want to." 
"1'\o it isn't necessary. You don't know what just happened 
to me!" he said, with a strange expression. 
"\\'hat do you mean?" I looked at his face; it showed 
great agitation. 
"I was just going to kiss your foot." 
"Ah, why that?" I said, greatly embarrassed, almost fright­
ened, and tucked my legs under me. 
"I just got the urge, and decided that I'd kiss it." 
Then he asked me if I wanted to sleep, but I told him 
no, I would like to sit with him some more. Thinking of get­
ting undressed and going to sleep, I asked him whether the 
maid was going to clear the tea table. He assured me that 
she wasn't. Then he looked at me in a way that made me feel 
embarrassed, and I told him so. 
"I feel embarrassed, too," he said, with a strange smile. 
I hid my face in my pillow. Then I asked him again whether 
the maid would be coming, and he assured me again that 
she wouldn't. 
"All right then, go back to your room, I want to sleep," 
I said. 
"Right away," he said, but stayed for some time. Then he 
kissed me very ardently and, finally, started to light a candle 
for himself. l\ly candle was burning low. 
"You won't have any light," he said. 
"l\'ot so, I have a whole candle there." 
"But this is mine." 
"I have another one." 
"There will always be an answer," he said, smiling, and 

Introduction 
xix 
left. He did not close his door and soon came back to my 
room, under the pretext that he wanted to shut my window. 
He came up to me and suggested that I get undressed. 
'Til get undressed," I said showing him by my attitude 
that I was only waiting for him to go away. 
He left once more, and came back still another time, under 
some pretext, after which he left again and closed his door. 
Today he mentioned yesterday to me and said that he had 
been drunk. Then he said that I must probably find it most 
unpleasant, the way he was annoying me. I answered that I 
didn't mind, and refused to be drawn into a discussion of 
the subject, so that he could neither cherish hope nor be 
quite without it. He said that he had noticed I had a very sly 
smile, that, most probably, he appeared foolish to me, that he 
was well aware of his own foolishness, but that it was some­
thing unconscious. 
Polina made her program quite explicit with the words 
"so that he could neither cherish hope nor be quite with­
out it." When his interest flagged she provoked it by sug­
gestive gestures: "I feel once more a tenderness toward 
F[yodor] M[ikhailovich]. It happened that I was upbraid­
ing him, and later I felt that I had been wrong, so I 
wanted to make up for it, and I got tender with him. He 
responded with such joy that I was moved by it, and I 
became twice as tender. \Vhen I was sitting next to him, 
looking at him caressingly, he said: 'There is that famil­
iar look, it's a long time since I saw it last! I let my head 
fall on his chest and began to cry.' " \Vhen Dostoevsky at­
tempted to liberate himself from her game, by one of his 
own, she saw his attempt to overcome his humiliation as 
a means of spiting her: 
\Vhen he woke up he became unusually free and easy, 
cheerful, and importunate. It was as though he wanted in this 
fashion to conquer his own inner hurt and sadness, and 
spite me. 
I watched these strange antics with bewilderment. It was 

xx 
Introduction 
as though he were trying to turn everything into a joke, so 
as to hurt me, but I only looked at him with astonishment. 
"I don't like you that way," I said simply at last. 
"\\'hy? \\'hat have I done?" 
"Just so, in Pari[s] and in Turin I liked you much better. 
\\'hy are you so cheerful?" 
"It is a cheerfulness born of disappointment," he said and 
left, but he returned soon. 
She conquers his cheerfulness by embracing him "with 
ardor" and his ardor by distance and taunting: "F[yodor] 
̼likhailovich again turned everything into a joke, and 
said, as he was leaving my room, that it was humiliating 
for him to leave me in this fashion (it was I o'clock at 
night, and I was lying in bed, undressed) : 'For the Rus­
sians never did retreat.' " 
Polina repeated the essential outlines of these scenes 
in the story "The Stranger and Her Lover." Though the 
facts as recorded in the diary and as they appear in the fic­
tional variant are basically the same, they are suffused 
with a romantic and self-flattering coloring. The fictional 
Polina, Anna Pavlovna, is elevated into a purity and 
majesty that is far beyond realism and probability. Anna 
Pavlovna is the epitome of all virtues. Anxiety and suf­
fering as well as "unconquerable strength and passion" 
are apparent in "her gentle and kind features.'' She is 
beautiful, complex, gentle, pensive, and trustful, chaste, 
modest, considerate, and on more than one occasion she 
is compared to the ؊ladonna and the Christian martyrs. 
Losnitsky, on the other hand, the fictional surrogate of 
Dostoevsky, is petty, boastful, and vulgar; his only re­
deeming features consist in his appreciation of her ma­
jestic character and beauty, in his astonishment at having 
possessed her, and in his contrition at having lost her. As 
in the diary, they travel together, though the locale is 
changed, and during the course of the traveling he basely 

Introduction 
xxi 
becomes importunate and Anna remains pure and suf­
fering before his insensitive demands. Anna expires by 
drowning herself in a river. Her motive for doing so is 
not clear, but it is strongly implied that her spirit was too 
sensitive and pure to persevere in the presence of the 
coarseness of Losnitsky's character and in the state of the 
world about her. 
One wonders whether this story and the manner of 
Anna's death were in Dostoevsky's mind when he sati­
rized such romantic suicides in The Brothers Karama­
zov. In commenting on the mystery as to why Adelaida 
lvanovna Miusov had consented to marry someone as 
repulsive as Fyodor Karamazov, he speculates on the pos­
sibility of some romantic madness, and he recalls the case 
of a romantic lady who threw herself off a high bank into 
a river (rather than marry a gentleman she was in love 
with) from the motive apparently of trying to be like 
Shakespeare's Ophelia. He adds that if the spot over the 
river had not been so picturesque, it is likely that the sui­
cide would not have taken place. 
The portrait we get of Polina in the story testifies to 
the power and tenacity of her fantasies about herself, and 
the portrait we get of her in the diary-though not in­
consistent with the fictional portrait-is probably more 
realistic. The constraints of real life and real people, as 
well as the practical exigencies of everyday life, compel 
her to record facts about herself and the world about her 
that are less influenced by her tendency to idealize her 
character and motives. The intimate and less public form 
also permitted her to express more directly her disap­
pointments and despairs. 
I I  
If the story "The Stranger and Her Lover" bears almost 
no relationship to the public and historical image of 

xxii 
Introduction 
Polina that has come down to us, neither does the image 
that emerges in the diary correspond with the public im­
age. She has come down to us in history as fitful, tempes­
tuous, destructive, vengeful, cruel. She has been seen, 
with some justification, as the prototype of Dostoevsky's 
"electric" and punishing women. Aimee Dostoevsky saw 
Polina as the prototype of Aglaya, Grushenka, and Liza, 
as well as of Polina of The Gambler. The list is not 
wholly fanciful, but we have to remind ourselves that the 
destructive and contradictory female had already ap­
peared in Dostoevsky's imagination long before he met 
Polina Suslova-Katerina of The Landlady is an exam­
ple-and that Polina was more a confirmation than a 
provocation. The image, too, may be a little too much of 
one piece. It is based on Dostoevsky's evaluation of her 
in his letter to her sister,8 Rozanov's bitter comments,0 
and selected portions of her diary. However true Roza­
nov"s estimate of her may be, we must keep in mind that 
he was talking of a woman in her forties and not the girl 
in her twenties that Dostoevsky fell in love with. 
Polina's character seems much smaller and less sinister 
when we read the entire diary. The femme fatale who 
tortured Dostoevsky for more than half a decade and then 
resurfaced to make the life of one of his devotees, Roza­
nov, miserable for several decades is not recognizable in 
the diary. There is the tenacity with which she holds on 
8. Letter 5, to ::\"adezhda Prokofievna Suslova. He says of Polina: "I 
feel sorr)· for her, because I can foresee that she will always be unhappy. 
::\"owhere will she find either friend or happiness. \\'hoever demands 
everything from others, while not feeling any obligation on his part, will 
nC\"er find happiness." 
9. \'. \'. Rozano\· (1 856-1919), important prose writer, something of a 
miniaturist in his philosophical reflections and the author of a distin­
guished critical assessment of Dostoe,·sky's works. He married Suslova in 
1 880 and separated from her in 1 886. She refused to gi,·e him a divorce 
and he had w Iil·e with the woman he loved outside of marriage. Ro­
zano,· compared Suslova to Catherine de Medici and believed that she 
would have light-heartedly committed a crime. 

Introduction 
xxiii 
to her desire to avenge herself on her South American 
lover, but even this tenacity appears in a less than lurid 
light. Though she fantasizes killing him or killing her­
self, all she actually does is pester him with somewhat 
silly letters. 'Vhat the diary shows us more than anything 
else is a young woman at sea, rootless, and in search of 
something she thinks she is. She is drawn to the cosmo­
politan life she lives, but is consciously repelled by it. 
She is moved by an aimless desire to be loved, to be use­
ful, to he intelligent. She finds none of these and consoles 
and excuses herself with criticism of the life of the cosmo­
politan; instead of finding love she drifts apparently from 
one trivial love affair to another. The diary is studded 
with a procession of Russian emigrants, some distin­
guished in character, who in one way or another had par­
ticipated in the liberal and radical disturbances of the 
early sixties and who had emigrated to Europe. To judge 
from the references to rather well-known liberals and 
revolutionaries and the snatches of conversation that are 
recorded, Polina lived among people who were intellec­
tually alive and socially conscious and who answered to 
her own vaguely radical sentiments. Yet what she learned 
of these people and what significance they held for her 
are invariably casual and unimportant. 'Vhat she per­
ceives and records of the environment about her is banal 
and listless. Neither the enthusiasm of agreement nor the 
passion of dissent is felt in her account. She seemed to 
occupy a political and social stance without understand­
ing that stance or having been sufficiently interested to 
reflect on it. 
The Soviets have a higher opinion of her than the facts 
of the diary justify. They have seized on her l iberal pro­
nouncements, her desire to he of use, and her admiration 
of the people. But these liberal sentiments are diffuse and 
casual, the product of idle conversations in French pen-

xx1v 
Introduction 
sions. She flares up at one point in conversation with two 
men about the uselessness of conventional views of love 
and answers in the best tradition of midcentury liberal 
thought, and in words remarkably similar to those of the 
radical critic Pisarev: 10 "I said that I had found these 
ideas medieval, that love and pride may be there, but that 
it was ridiculous to cultivate them, at a time when there 
is so much to be done, so much that is urgent; that there 
was not time for such luxury when there was a shortage 
of bread, when people were starving to death, or if they 
had enough to eat, had to defend that privilege with mil­
lions of soldiers, gendarmes, and so on." But the facts of 
the matter are that she never did anything, to our knowl­
edge, of particular note or usefulness. Upon her return 
to Russia she made one attempt to open a school for 
young ladies, which was promptly closed down by the 
authorities. Her sister, on the other hand, with whom 
Dostoevsky corresponded and whom he respected, was 
apparently a very talented young lady and became one 
of the first female doctors in Russia. Polina Suslova is in 
a minor way an example of that migration to Europe of 
Russians who felt alienated from the conditions of their 
native land, some of whom found their causes abroad in 
dreams of a better Russia, and some of whom found an 
outlet for their energy and talent in political action 
abroad against the repressive regime at home. 
Polina is more in the tradition of the high-minded and 
useless liberals who peopled the works of Turgenev, Gon­
charov, and Dostoevsky, among others. She talks of free­
dom, nationalism, England's place in international af­
fairs, and even of Hegel. But the conversations are 
fragmentary, never very clear, always banal. They tell us 
10. Dmitri Ivanovich Pisarev (184Q-68), radical critic and social activ· 
ist who believed that Russia's social ills and their alleviation should take 
precedence o\·er such idle pursuits as art. 

Introduction 
xxv 
of a mind that yearns for depths but can only skim on 
surfaces. She reads books, attends lectures, engages in in­
tellectual conversations, writes stories, seeks out impor­
tant people, but the activity and energy find no sustained 
pattern and the words reflect no clear intellectual interest 
or sustained belief. What she talks about more than any­
thing else and what interestએ her most of all are men and 
love. The intellectual skirmishes and the flirtations '"''ith 
ideas are lost in an almost uninterrupted series of flirta­
tions, significant glances, squeezings of hands, and, as 
best as one can tell from the guarded references, a num­
ber of trivial affairs. 
Yet for all her intellectual deficiencies she is the em­
bodiment of a distinct feminine type, almost indeed the 
incarnation of the verbal polemics that heated the jour­
nals of Russia at this time with the "woman question." 
She could have come out of Chernyshevsky's novel What 
Is To Be Doue,11 with, of course, less resolution and in­
telligence than his feminine heroines. \Vhat is most con­
sistent about her is her determination to be a new kind 
of woman: free in her feelings and her acts. She attended 
the University of St. Petersburg, participated in dem­
onstrations, traveled openly with a married man. She 
wanted to be more than the conventional woman, but 
she wasn't sure how to be it, and she wasn't all of one 
piece. She desired an image of herself that she could not 
sustain, either emotionally or intellectually: She doesn't 
want to have children, because she doesn't know how to 
bring them up, but she cries after saying that. The fol­
lowing self-estimate tells us something about her under­
standing of herself and something about the limitations 
of that understanding: "Only here I came to appreciate 
1 1 .  Nikolay Gavrilovich Chernyshevsky (1828-89), radical critic, aes· 
thctician, political activist, and revolutionary. His novel What Is To Be 
Done (1863) exercised considerable influence on revolutionary thought. 

xxvi 
Introduction 
the true value of the friendship and respect of people 
who go beyond common standards, and in the security of 
this friendship I found courage and self-respect. \Viii my 
pride ever desert me? No, this couldn't be. I'd rather die. 
Better die of grief, but free, independent of things ex­
ternal, true to one's convictions, and return one's soul to 
God as pure as it was, rather than make concessions, even 
for a moment allow oneself to be touched by base and 
unworthy things, but I find life so coarse and so sad that 
I bear it with difficulty. My God, is it always going to be 
this way! \Vas it worthwhile to have been born!" 
\Vhat she wants more than anything else, and what she 
fails at, both because of her temperament and because of 
the limitations of her own understanding of herself, is a 
certain kind of independence. Apart from a determined 
flouting of conventions and a certain boldness in her ac­
tions, she is not rea II y very free and has ,·ery little idea of 
what form that freedom should take, in positive content, 
if she could achieve it. She is slavishly tied to the lover 
who has spurned her and seems incapable of either pride 
or independence in coming to terms with her situation. 
She wants freedom for herself but does not hesitate to 
subject others, like Dostoevsky, to her whims and plea­
sures. ̼lost of all the image she pursues of herself, even 
when mildly or partially achieved, brings her no con­
tentment. She cries a great deal and chums restlessly in 
a mire of repetitious thoughts and actions. There is some­
thing pathetic about her as she valiantly tries to wrest 
some significance from the banalities of her life and those 
of her character. One is not even sure how sincere her ex­
pressions of despair are, for so much of the diary is pos­
ture. She must have read ,Hadame Bovary and thought of 
herself as something of a Russian counterpart of poor 
Emma, because in one diary entry she tells us of a visit 
to a local priest, as Emma had gone to the village cure, 

Introduction 
xxvii 
for solace to her soul ; but where she finds, as did Emma, 
only irrelevancies and indifference. She writes, too, but 
as the story that is included in this volume shows, she was 
entirely without talent. She wanted to be a George Sand 
and worked doggedly at her literary ambitions and lib­
eral sentiments, but she was unfortunately without lit­
erary talent or intellectual distinction. No wonder then 
that her life passed so quickly into disillusion and bile. 
Apart from the opening scene, in which she tells him 
of his loss and her loss of Salvador, and the bedroom 
scenes in Italy, which she apparently relished enough to 
describe in more detail than anything else, she interested 
herself very little in Dostoevsky's character or their rela­
tionship. \Vhen she bothers to refer to him it is to con­
sider the effect that he has had on her feelings. One is 
dismayed to find that it is only our interest that lifts the 
image of Dostoevsky in her diary from the mesh of her 
prosaisms. Dostoevsky disappears from the pages of her 
diary for long periods, and the pages are filled with such 
inconsequential details as her efforts to get the maid to 
clean her shoes, about the width of I talian streets and the 
style of Italian clothes, how a sympathetic shopkeeper 
gave her two sheets of paper for nothing, conversations 
that are about nothing, and, of course, the minute re­
cording of every significant glance and attention that 
numberless men pay her. But her casual remarks about 
Dostoevsky show a consistency in her attitude toward 
him. Though she may think of him with fondness and 
tenderness at times, she is more likely to think of him 
with anger and contempt. She repeats more than once 
that he used her, that she came to him fresh with new 
love, and that he had in his insensitivity failed to appre­
ciate her and her love. When in one of her many fantasies 
she thinks of how best she could revenge herself on Salva­
dor and asks herself what she wants from him, she an-

xxviii 
Introduction 
swers that "he should confess his guilt, be remorseful, 
that is, that he be a Fyodor Mikhailovich." In another 
entry she says: "I hear about F(yodor] M(ikhailovich]. I 
simply hate him. He made me suffer so much, when it 
was possible not to suffer." And in yet another entry: "As 
I remember what had happened two years ago, I begin to 
hate D(ostoevsky]. He was the first to kill my faith." Even 
after we make allowances for her need to find a scapegoat 
for the converging fai:wes and banalities of her life, her 
anger at Dostoevsky and her interpretation of their rela­
tionship may have some truth in them. And the justifi­
cation for considering that Dostoevsky could be insensi­
tive and even cruel toward the women he loved comes, 
remarkably enough, from the diary and reminiscences of 
another young lady in Dostoevsky's life, his wife Anna. 
Anna has left us some intimate reminiscences of the 
first months of her marriage, dealing mostly with Dosto­
evsky's gambling, and they give us some insight into his 
treatment of her and possibly some basis for Polina's 
criticism. \Vith due allowance for the stress he was under 
in gambling and his inevitable losses, one is still appalled 
by the insensitivity he shows to the costs his young bride 
must bear on his account. There is no reason to doubt 
the veracity of the reminiscences, since Anna never wa­
vered in her respect and admiration for, and especially 
her justification of, her husband. The pattern Anna r..:­
cords with monotonous regularity from March to August 
186i is the systematic depredation by Dostoevsky of their 
meager resources. Dostoevsky would go to the gaming 
table with 5 or 10 louis d'or, return crestfallen and 
ashamed, and after an outburst of penitence and self­
abuse would implore Anna to give him a few more louis 
d'or, and then return again to the gaming table and then 
to her with the money lost, again to breast heating and 
to an appeal for a few more coins from the meager and 

Introduction 
xx1x 
dwindling household fund. Anna would beg him to de­
sist at least to the next day; Dostoevsky would become 
furious and insist on the money, and Anna would in the 
end relent and give him what he asked. There were in­
frequent variations: when Dostoevsky would return and 
pour out his winnings to Anna. But shortly afterward the 
raiding of the fund would begin all over again. After the 
money was gone, Dostoevsky would go the round of 
pawnshops, getting what he could for coats, boots, wed­
ding rings. Anna's saintlike and unreal forbearance 
would be rent from time to time in the diary with half­
permitted complaints to herself, but not to him, about 
his disregard of her feelings. 
The picture is not pretty. Dostoevsky shows no regard 
for the feelings of his young wife; he is so absorbed in his 
conviction that fortune can be wrested from the gaming 
table that Anna exists for him only as an object to ab­
sorb his wrath, his self-contempt, and his penitence. He 
did not hesitate to pawn her winter coat, her boots, and 
even her wedding dress; he left her to face loneliness, 
worry, and the wrath of the landlord, as he took their last 
gulden to the gaming table. If Polina asserts with some 
consistency that he took her love without appreciating 
what she gave him, there are traits in Dostoevsky's char­
acter which would support such an assertion. He had an 
enormous appetite for suffering, but he also had a capac­
ity to inflict suffering on others. He may have even in­
flicted the suffering so that he could suffer in return. The 
Anna we find in her diary and reminiscences bears little 
resemblance to the Polina we find in her diary. Anna is 
good, patient, unbelievingly self-sacrificial ; Polina is fret­
ful, selfish, engrossed in her feelings and the harm others 
are doing to her. Pol ina is concerned almost entirely with 
herself, and Anna almost entirely with Dostoevsky's wel­
fare. But the opposites meet, perhaps, in Dostoevsky's 

xxx 
Introduction 
needs. One is almost appalled at the superhuman role of 
self-sacrificઌ that Anna imposed on herself, and aston­
ished at her lack of sensitivity in recognizing the burden 
that her self-burdening placed on Dostoevsky. There is 
little doubt that at times Dostoevsky seemed to multiply 
his irritations, bickerings, and cruelty so as to provoke 
some reaction in Anna. He seemed to be asking for re­
jection, and Anna gave him patience and shame. It is 
hard to believe that Dostoevsky was not aware of the toll 
Anna exacted from him, but it was a toll that he seemed 
only too eager to accept. It is quite possible that in the 
beginning Polina suffered from Dostoevsky's insensitiv­
ities, but if that is true-as she repeatedly asserts-she 
learned quickly to pay him back fivefold. One is hard 
put to determine whether the deliberate and cruel suf­
ferings of taunting and frustration that Polina delighted 
in visiting upon him were harder to bear than the unde­
liberate suffering that Anna's virtue imposed on him. 
\Vhat seems dear, though , is that Dostoevsky needed one 
or the other. Both women gave him money to feed his 
passion for gambling, Anna reluctantly, Polina more 
eagerly. 
Polina complied with Dostoevsky's request for money 
with seeming generosity and promptitude, as several en­
tries in her diary prove. Given the hate and contempt she 
expresses for Dostoevsky and the ungenerous side of her 
character that is clearly in evidence in her diary, it is diffi­
cult to understand her motives. She knew Dostoevsky 
well enough to know that the money she sent would find 
its way immediately to the roulette table, and one can 
only conclude that she enjoyed feeding, when she could, 
the sources of Dostoevsky's self-abasement and self-con­
tempt, even at some cost to herself. 
The complex interconnections between Dostoevsky's 
gambling and htʊ loving are not easy to grasp from the 

Introduction 
xxxi 
biographical events themselves. Dostoevsky himself 
seemed determined to grasp them, and he attempted to 
do so in writing The Gambler. According to Anna, Dos­
toevsky had the insane idea that he would become rich by 
gambling. Dostoevsky voiced the same sentiment, but his 
whole life warred against this explanation. Though he 
complained about lack of money almost more than any 
writer I know, he had no passion for money, let alone for 
hoarding it. The recklessness with which he divested 
himself of whatever money he made suggests that he en­
joyed being without money more than having it. He ex­
pressed frequently a contempt for money, especially for 
money accumulated in any systematic way, a practice he 
identified especially with the German mentality. At the 
roulette table, no matter how large the temporary win· 
nings, he would play until he lost everything he had. He 
seemed at peace with himsel f only when there was noth­
ing left and no possibility of getting more. 
He was possessed with an irrational belief that he 
could win, no matter how many times he lost. All one 
had to do was to follow a "system," which seemed to con· 
sist of remaining calm, deliberate, and rational, and not 
permitting oneself to be carried away. He was, of course, 
carried away each time. He told himself and Anna that 
he could not remain calm and deliberate because others 
prevented his remaining so: people jostled him, or they 
put on airs as they played for small stakes, or they had too 
strong a scent on their persons. There is evidence that it 
was Dostoevsky who did the jostling or picked the quar­
rels; at least Anna was sufficiently persuaded of this to 
worry that he would get a reputation at the casinos for 
being quarrelsome and rude. If the "system" was as much 
a rationalization as the possession of a large sum of 
money, it is hard to understand what it was that left him 
in a trance at the gaming table and looking like a drunk 

xxxii 
Introduction 
with bloodshot eyes when he left it.12 He surely sought 
the humiliation, guilt, and suffering that followed each 
orgy of gambling; the breast-beating and penitence he 
sought from his wife are evidence of that, as well as the 
pattern of his habits in other things. It was humiliation 
that he seemed to look for when he insisted on accom­
panying Pol ina on the trip to Italy, and it was humiliation 
in surfeit that Polina gave to him. The biographical evi­
dence does not take us beyond these motives but if he 
wrote The Gam bler, as I am convinced he did in part, to 
discover something about his compulsive gambling, then 
other explanations come into prominence. 
Ill 
Most of the characters in The Gam bler, all in fact except 
for Aleksei and Polina, are so fixed in their identities as 
to teeter on caricature. The General is the pathetic Rus­
sian cosmopolitan, prey to all the evils Dostoevsky imag­
ines come with rootlessness; de Grieux is the prototypal 
Frenchman, smooth, well-mannered, and unprincipled; 
ઋ؋ r. Astley is the quintessential Englishman, laconic, 
honest, unperturbed on the surface; Mile Blanche is the 
beautiful, predatory, superficial French seductress. Even 
the grandmother, no matter how likable, is the stock out­
spoken and shocking headstrong old woman. The stock 
types would make poor literature, except for the fact that 
Dostoevsky wanted them stereotyped so as to set off the 
enigma and complexities of Aleksei's character and the 
understandings and misunderstandings of Aleksei in 
comprehending those enigmas and complexities. 
Aleksei is a person without social consequence, dis­
dained by all; yet he comes to terrify those who disdain 
1 2. Anna describes Dostoevsky in the following way, as he left a gam­
bling hall: "It was terrible to look at him: he was all flushed, with reel 
eyes as though drunk." Dostoevsky Portrayed by His Wife, p. 122. 

Introduction 
xxxiii 
him and to dominate those 'vho are his social superiors. 
He is a buffoon, social maladroit, and lackey, but he 
chooses his roles and as such is superior to them. He looks 
back to the Underground Man, who displays and glorifies 
his insignificance and knows that multiple identities and 
denials give him an advantage over those who define, fix, 
and cling to their identities. Aleksei pays no tribute to 
appearances because he has no appearances to protect, 
but he learns quickly enough that almost everyone about 
him has something to protect. This is the bond between 
him and the grandmother, who in her age and wisdom 
cares nothing for appearances and terrifies everyone 
about her by her non-caring. A good part of the dramatic 
interest in the novel has to do with the manner in which 
Aleksei translates his insignificance into significance, so 
that progressively he gains power over the General, de 
Grieux, and finally and most important, over Polina. All 
of them, in one way or another, insult and humiliate him, 
but before he is through with them, they come to implore 
his aid. The motive he gives himself, and Dostoevsky 
gives us, for his doing so is to penetrate the mysteries that 
envelop the General's household, especially de Grieux's 
hold over Polina. The movement of events is structured 
on clarifications that Aleksei seeks, but the mysteries are 
somewhat artificial and manipulated. It is perfectly clear 
to the reader almost from the beginning that the General 
is waiting for the grandmother to die and for the receipt 
of his inheritance, that he is in debt to de Grieux, and 
that both de Grieux and Blanche hope to profit from his 
hapless wit and his wealthy inheritance. De Grieux's hold 
over Polina is a bit more complex, but only because 
Polina herself and her motives make it complex. \Vhat is 
not elucidated for us until the very end, and perhaps 
never to Aleksei, is the hold that Polina has over him and 
the feelings he has for her. 

xxxiv 
Introduction 
Aleksei comes to understand everything but what 
moves him, and what moves him are his feelings for 
Polina and his passion for gambling. He had confessed 
and professed his love for her again and again, but on the 
night she comes to his room to offer herself to him, he 
must first rush off to the gaming table, where he is phe­
nomenally successful. He returns to his room, where Po­
lina has been waiting for him, v•ith his pockets bulging 
with gold and gulden. There he proceeds, as if it is a 
drama necessary before the act of love, to pour out the 
money on the table and floor. Aleksei believes he is pay­
ing tribute to his love, and by such tribute permitting 
Polina to regain her honor before de Grieux. Yet Polina 
sees something more than the impulse of the lover in his 
act. Aleksei narrates at this critical juncture: " 'I wonder 
if I should put it in my suitcase until tomorrow,' I said, 
turning toward Polina, as if I had suddenly remembered 
her. She was still sitting there without stirring, yet l\'atch­
ing me intently. It was a strange expression she wore on 
her face; I did not like that expression ! I would not be 
wrong if I said that there was hatred in it." Loathing 
there is in Polina toward him, but also love. Polina gives 
herself to him between love and hate, and the next morn­
ing she pays him back for giving herself to him with hate, 
flinging the fifty thousand francs he had offered her to 
a\·enge herself on de Grieux in his face. 
Aleksei asks the question the reader wants answered: 
"But what could have been the cause of that condition, 
and, abO\·e all, of this last performance of hers?" He gives 
us not one answer but several: ""\Vas it wounded pride? 
\\'as it despair at having brought herself to come to me? 
Had I perhaps suggested to her, by my behavior, that I 
was exultant over the happiness she had granted me, and 
that, like de Grieux, I was about to get rid of her by giv­
ing her fifty thousand francs? But it was simply not true, 

Introduction 
xxxv 
that much I can say in good conscience. I think that to 
some extent it was her own vanity that was at fault: her 
vanity prompted her to distrust and to insult me, even 
though, most likely, she had no clear conception of her 
own motives. At any rate, I absorbed de Grieux's punish­
ment and became guilty without doing too much on my 
own. To be sure, it all happened in a delirious state, and 
I knew it all too well, and . . .  yet I refused to take that 
fact into consideration." His explanations explain some­
thing, but not everything. \Vhat he fails to notice is that 
his passion for gambling eclipses his passion for Polina, 
that when she comes to offer him love, he offers her 
money, no matter how noble his motives. She perceives 
something about him that he had not perceived about 
himself, and what this is becomes clear after she rushes 
out of his room and by the decisions that Aleksei later 
makes. 
He turns unexpectedly and unaccountably from Po­
lina to lllanche. The act confounds us and seems unpre­
pared for in any way. Given the pressured manner in 
which the novel was written, one is tempted to think that 
this is the desperate stratagem of a writer attempting to 
dispose of his hero. But the technique is not uncharac­
teristic of Dostoevsky: he uses often the sudden and 
paradoxical gesture or act to confound our sense of prob­
ability and proportion, and in that way jostles us into 
rethinking what may have been settled in our minds. 
There is surely no reason to believe that Aleksei would 
turn at a critical moment in his life to Blanche, especially 
since he had hardly noticed or spoken to her throughout 
the novel. He does not go off with her because he has 
contracted some passion for her, nor does he turn from 
Polina because she has rejected him. Patina had insulted 
him repeatedly before, but he had only redoubled his 
efforts to prove his love for her. But when she flings the 

xxxvi 
Introduction 
fifty thousand francs in his face and finds refuge with Mr. 
Astley, he shows no perseverance in explaining or seek­
ing explanation, making only the most perfunctory in­
quiries about her. It is only hours after possessing the 
love he had pursued throughout the novel that he is off 
to Paris with a professional courtesan, one would say 
almost with relief. He goes from a difficult love to an easy 
love. Polina demands his love; Blanche demands only his 
money. His flight from one to the other must be some 
unspoken recognition that the one hundred thousand 
gulden he thought were destined for the love of his life 
were in reality destined for something dirtier. Blanche 
is a cmn-enient way of getting rid of the money and get­
ting rid of the love. He seeks throughout the novel for 
social position, money, and love, and when he has all 
three, he is frantic to give them up. Aleksei is remarkably 
at peace with himself during the weeks he spends as 
Blanche's pet; neither the torments of lost love nor the 
anxieties of lost money afflict him. He seems to under­
stand something of what he really wants when he says to 
himself about the money Blanche spends: "The faster it 
goes, the better I like it." 
After a little more than three idiotic weeks with 
Blanche, he is packed off with a few thousand francs to 
pursue the life of the obsessed and compulsive gambler. 
Before the climactic scene with Polina and the vegetative 
weeks with Blanche, he had pursued love and power over 
others; he had intrigued, competed, had opinions, felt 
insults, and given insults. He was alive with plans, goals, 
and the feelings of accomplishment. Now he seems like a 
man drained of the goals and motives that had driven 
him: only the passion for gambling remains. \Ve can con­
clude merely that what had driven him before, he now 
recognizes as illusion. Love, social importance, and even 
money hold no importance for him. He becomes a 

Introduction 
xxxvii 
flunkey again when his money runs out, and confesses to 
himself that he gam hies not for money, because he would 
squander whatever he might win on another Blanche. 
What is it then that drives him to gamble? He explains 
it to himself in this way: "That night, the only thing I 
wanted was that the next day all these Hinzes, all these 
Oher-Kellners, all these elegant Baden ladies, that they 
should all be talking about me, that they should all be 
telling my story, that they should all wonder at me, ad­
mire me, and worship my renewed success." But he had 
had all that when he won two hundred thousand francs 
at Roulettenburg and he had thrown it away. Mr. Astley 
gives us a better explanation when he says to him: 
" 'You've become completely stale; not only have you 
renounced life, all your interests, private as well as pub­
lic, your duties as a citizen and as a human being, your 
friends (yes, you had some friends), not only have you 
renounced having any goal at all, except winning at rou­
lette, but you have even renounced your memories.' " 
The daring to risk the last gulden on the irrational 
turn of the wheel gives him what the fixities of position, 
money, and love do not: the feeling of being open to the 
irrationalities of the turning wheel, and one suspects for 
Dostoevsky, the irrationalities of human life. Dostoevsky 
knew and said many times that the deepest urge in hu­
man beings is the revolt against definition and the fixities 
of life; the violation of reason, which sanctified definition 
and fixity, had, as he was well aware, its destructive side 
and it may be that side that he was celebrating in the por­
trait of Aleksei. Aleksei's passion for Polina seemed to 
have no bounds, at least no rhetorical bounds, when it 
was fed by frustration, scorn, willfulness, humiliation, 
and the vagaries of Polina's character. But when the love 
is offered to him as a goal attained, he rushes to divest 
himself of the love and the money he has won. For it was 

xxxviii 
Introduction 
not the love of Polina that he had thirsted for, but the 
quest for that love. \Vhen that quest is done, he turns to 
the irrationalities of the table as a substitute for the irra­
tionalities of her character. Dostoevsky, too, had rushed 
off to the gaming tables of Baden-Baden and Wiesbaden, 
while he was rushing to a love he felt to be secure and 
fixed. \Vhen he found in Paris a love lost and to be won 
again, he faced the situation with calm and even relief. 
A whole vista of new emotions, complexities, difficulties 
opened up to him v.·hen Polina announced that he had 
come too late. It is clear from Polina's diary that he had 
drunk in the details of his humiliation, and then planned 
as recompense a trip with her through Italy which he 
knew would bring, given her character, a further and 
more excruciating round of insults, frustrations, and hu­
miliations. He had won in St. Petersburg and lost in 
Paris, and the loss and the possibility of winning again 
was better than the winning that was solid and immov­
able. It is true, of course, that Dostoevsky gave up the 
gambling and gave up Polina-or she him-and settled 
into what one must acknowledge to have been a healthy 
love for Anna. But not without a struggle. Anna's diary 
is eloquent testimony to the fact that Dostoevsky at­
tempted to replay with variation something of the same 
drama of hurt and humiliation that he had provoked and 
enjoyed with Polina. Anna refused to play the game, and 
this both infuriated and pleased him, for despite the fact 
that he knew that man must churn spiritually and psy­
chologically in order to live, he knew also that some of 
the churnings were sterile traps. His destructive tenden­
cies came to be deflected more and more, and with mag­
nificent results, into his works, and the gallery of tor­
mented characters of the great novels that followed The 
Gambler is testimony to that. The Gambler itself, among 
its significances, is a wrenching of biography into fiction 

Introduction 
XXXIX 
and a purification by creation. Dostoevsky had been for 
a time what Aleksei had been, but he was able to give 
some of the destruction and doom to Aleksei. The life 
and work of no other writer shows so eloquently that art 
is a salvatory force. 
Editorial Note 
The Gambler has been translated from the fourth vol­
ume of F. M. Dostoevsky, Sobranie sochinenii, edited by 
L. P. Grossman et al. (Moscow, 1 956); Polina Suslova's 
diary, short story, and letters to Dostoevsky from A .  P. 
Suslova, Cody blizosti s Dosloevskim, edited with an in­
troduction by A. S. Dolinin (Moscow, 1928); Dostoev­
sky's letters from Pis'ma, edited by A. S. Dolinin, vols. I 
and 2 (Moscow, 1 928 and 1930). Victor Terras has done 
the translation; I have written the Introduction, made 
the selection of materials included in the volume, and 
compiled the footnotes. I am indebted in part to Do­
linin's excellent notes in his edition of the Suslova 
materials. 
E. W. 


The 
Ga'Hihler 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 


One 
! have returned, finally, from my two 
weeks' absence. :My friends have been 
here, in Roulettenburg, for three 
days already. I thought that they would be expecting me 
God knows how eagerly, but I was wrong. The General 
had an extremely unconcerned air, talked to me conde­
scendingly for a few minutes, then sent me off to his sister. 
Clearly, they had managed to borrow some money along 
the way. It even appeared to me that the General looked 
somewhat embarrassed. Maria Filippovna seemed to be 
extremely busy and barely exchanged a few words with 
me. She took the money, however, counted it, and listened 
to my whole report. They were expecting Mezentsov for 
dinner, also the little Frenchman and an Englishman. As 
usual, the moment there was some money in the house, 
there had to be a dinner party. That's Moscow style for 
you. Polina Aleksandrovna, upon seeing me, asked why I 
had been away so long, and, without giving me a chance 
to answer, went off somewhere. Of course, she did that on 
purpose. ·we ought to have a heart-to-heart talk, though. 
There is a lot of talk about. 
I was assigned a tiny room on the fourth floor of the 
hotel. They know here that I belong to the General's 
suite. It all shows that they have managed to impress peo­
ple. Everybody here takes the General for a fabulously 

4 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
wealthy Russian magnate. Even before dinner he man­
aged to let me, among other errands, change two thou­
sand-franc bills for him. I changed them at the hotel office. 
Now, at least for a whole week, we'll be looked upon as 
millionaires. I was about to take Misha and Nadia for a 
walk, but when I was on the stairs, the General called me 
back. He felt it necessary to ask where I was taking them. 
This man positively can't look me straight in the eye. He 
would like to very much, but every time he tries it, I re­
spond with such an intent, or rather, disrespectful gaze 
that he seems embarrassed. In very pompous language, 
piling one sentence on another and getting hopelessly en­
tangled in the end, he let me know that I was to take the 
children for their walk somewhere away from the casino, 
in the park. Finally, he became quite angry and added 
sternly: "Or else you might, perhaps, take them to the 
casino, to the roulette tables. You must excuse me," he 
added, "but I know you are still young and lack proper 
judgment, and you might, perhaps, be inclined to take up 
gambling. In any case, though I am not your mentor, nor 
do I want to play that role, at least I have the right to ex­
press my wish that you should not, so to speak, compro­
mise me . . .  
" 
"But I haven't got any money," I answered calmly, 
"and in order to lose some money, you must have some in 
the first place." 
"You shall have it at once," the General answered, 
flushing a little. Having rummaged through his bureau, 
he checked his notebook, and it turned out that he owed 
me about a hundred and twenty rubles. 
"How are we to settle?" he went on to say; "we'd have 
to convert it into thalers. Here, why don't you take a hun­
dred thalers, for a round figure, and we'll settle the bal­
ance later." 
I took the money without a word. 

The Gambler 
5 
"Please, don't feel offended by my words; you are so 
touchy . . .  If I gave you a hint, it was only, so to speak, by 
way of warning you, and I have, of course, a certain right 
to do so . . .  
" 
As I was returning home with the children before din­
ner, I ran into a whole cavalcade. Our party had been out 
for a drive to some ruins. Two magnificent carriages, 
beautiful horses! In one carriage, Mademoiselle Blanche, 
Maria Filippovna, and Polina; the little Frenchman, the 
Englishman, and our General on horseback. Passersby 
stopped and stared: the effect was there. However, it 
would have to end badly for the General. I figmed that 
with the four thousand francs which I had brought, 
added to what they had evidently managed to borrow in 
the meantime, they had now seven or eight thousand 
francs, which was not nearly enough for Mile Blanche. 
Mile Blanche and her mother are also staying at our 
hotel, and our little Frenchman isn't very far away either. 
The servants call him Monsieur le Comte; Mile Blanche's 
mother is called Mme Ia Comtesse. \Veil, who knows, 
maybe they are really comte and comtesse. 
I knew beforehand that l\Jonsieur le Comte would not 
recognize me when we met at dinner. The General, of 
course, would not have thought of introducing us or even 
mentioning me to him, and as for Monsieur Comte, he 
had been to Russia himself; he knows that there a tutor1 
is very small fry indeed. However, he knows me very well. 
But I must confess that I showed up at dinner uninvited. 
Apparently the General had forgotten to make arrange­
ments for me, or else he would certainly have sent me to 
have my dinner at the table d'hote.2 So I came of my own 
accord, and the General looked at me with displeasure. 
I. Dostoevsky uses the French transliteration of the Russian word for 
"'tutor"-()utchite/-here and throughout. 
2. Used here in the archaic sense of "common table."' 

6 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
Kindhearted Maria Filippovna immediately made a place 
for me, but it was my having met Mr. Astley that saved 
the situation for me; because of this, I could not help 
seeming to belong to the party. 
I first met this strange Englishman in Prussia on a 
train, where we were seated facing each other. This was 
when I was on my way to join the family. Later, I ran 
into him on my way to France and, finally, in Switzerland. 
Twice then, during those past two weeks, and now there 
he was again, in Roulettenburg. I never met a man so 
shy in my life. He is shy to the point of being stupid, and 
he knows it very well, of course, because he is by no 
means stu pi d. Yet he is a very sweet and gentle person. 
I made him talk when we first met in Prussia. He told 
me that he had been at i\'orth Cape earlier in the sum­
mer, and that he was very anxious to visit the fair at 
.:'\izhni :\fovgorod. I do not know how he became ac­
quainted with the General. It seems to me that he is 
hopelessly in love with Polina. \Vhen she entered he 
Hushed crimson. He was very glad that I sat next to him 
at the table, and apparently he already considers me his 
bosom friend. 
At dinner the little Frenchman seL the tone of the con­
versation in quite singular fashion. He is nonchalant and 
condescending with everybody. In Moscow too, as I re­
member, he used to be full of hot air. He talked a great 
deal about finance and about Russian politics. The Gen­
eral would sometimes venture to contradict, but dis­
creetly, just enough so as not to lose his dignity altogether. 
I was in a strange mood. Of course, before the dinner 
was half over I was asking myself that invariable and fa­
miliar question: "\Vhy do I hang around with this Gen­
eral, and why didn't I leave this crowd long ago?" From 
time to time I glanced at Polina Aleksandrovna. She took 

The Gambler 
7 
no notice of me whatever. Finally I got mad and decided 
to be rude. 
I t  all started when I suddenly in a loud voice, and for 
no reason at all, barged into someone else's conversation. 
Most of all, I wanted to pick a quarrel with the little 
Frenchman. I turned around to the General and, quite 
loudly and distinctly interrupting him, observed that this 
summer it was virtually impossible for a Russian to dine 
at a hotel table d'hote. The General stared at me in 
disbelief. 
"If you have any self-respect at all," I went on, "you'll 
surely wind up being abused and suffering all kinds of 
affronts to your dignity. In Paris and on the Rhine, and 
even in Switzerland, the tables d'hote are so crowded with 
all sorts of little Poles, and little Frenchmen sympathizing 
with them, that you couldn't get a word in edgewise so 
long as you are a Russian." 
I said this in French. The General was looking at me 
bewilderedly, not knowing whether he should get angry 
or simply be amazed at my forgetting myself to such an 
extent. 
"So someone, somewhere, gave you a lesson in man­
ners," said the little Frenchman, nonchalantly and con­
temptuously. 
"In Paris I first had a fight with a Pole," I answered, 
"and then with a French officer who was backing the 
Pole. But then some of the French came over to my side, 
as I told them how I almost spit into a monsignor's 
coffee." 
"Spit?" asked the General, with dignified perplexity, 
casting glances around the table. The little Frenchman 
looked at me suspiciously. 
"Exactly so, sir," I answered. "Since I was convinced for 
two whole days that I might have to take a short trip to 

8 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
Rome in connection with that business of ours, I went to 
the office of the Holy Father's embassy in Paris to get my 
visa. There I was met by a little abbe, fiftyish, all dried up 
and with a frosty expression on his face. After listening to 
me politely, though extremely coldly, he asked me to wait. 
Though I was in a hurry, I sat down, of course, took out 
my Opi11 io11 nationale,3 and began reading some horribly 
abusive verbiage directed against Russia. Meanwhile I 
heard someone else being ushered into the monsignor's 
office through the next room, and also saw my abbe bow 
to that person. I addressed the same request to him once 
more and, again, he asked me to wait, but still more coldly 
this time. A little later another caller came in, but on busi­
ness, an Austrian apparently. He was listened to and led 
upstairs without delay. N"ow I became very much an­
noyed. I got up, walked up to the abbe and told him 
resolutely that, since the monsignor was receiving callers, 
he might as well take care of me also. At once the abbe 
drew back, extraordinarily surprised. It was simply be­
yond his comprehension how a worthless Russian could 
put himself on an equal footing with the monsignor's 
guests. And, in the most insolent tone, as if it gave him 
pleasure to insult me, he measured me from head to foot 
and shouted: "Do you really expect the monsignor to 
leave his coffee on your account?" Then I ,  too, shouted, 
but still louder than he did: "Let me tell you that I spit 
on your monsignor's coffee! If you won't take care of my 
passport this very moment, I'll go and see him myself." 
"What! When the Cardinal is there with him!" cried 
the little abbe, backing away from me in horror. Then he 
rushed to the door, spread his arms wide, and stood there 
like a cross, with an air of being ready to die rather than 
let me through. 
3. French newspaper founded in 1859 with the support of l\'apolcon 
III. Policy of opposition to Russian oligarchy. 

The Gambler 
9 
To which I responded that I was a heretic and a bar­
barian, "que je suis heretique et barbare," and that I did 
not care a bit for all his archbishops, cardinals, mon­
signors, etc., etc. In short, I let him know that I wasn't 
giving up. The abbe gave me a look full of the deepest 
hatred, then snatched my passport from me and took it 
upstairs. A minute later I had my visa. Here, would you 
care to see it? And I took out my passport and showed the 
Roman visa.4 
"You should, however," the General began . . .  
"\Vhat saved you was that you declared yourself a bar­
barian and a heretic," the little Frenchman remarked, 
with a smile. "Cela n'etait pas si bete." 
"Really, why should I model myself on our Russians 
here? Here they are, sitting around not daring to utter a 
word and ready, I suppose, to deny that they are Russians. 
At my Paris hotel, at least, they began to treat me much 
more attentively after I had told them about my run-in 
with the abbe. A fat Polish pan/' my greatest enemy at the 
table d'h6te, faded away into the background. The 
Frenchmen even showed no resentment when I told them 
that two years ago I had met a man at whom, in 1 8 1 2, a 
French chasseurG had fired simply in order to discharge 
his rifle. The man was then a child of ten, and his family 
had not managed to leave Moscow in time. 
"That's impossible," the little Frenchman shouted, fly­
ing into a rage; "a French soldier wouldn't fire at a child! "  
"Yet i t  happened," I answered. "The man who told me 
this story was a most respectable retired captain, and I 
saw the bullet scar on his cheek myself." 
The Frenchman now began talking rapidly and at 
great length. The General made an effort to back him up, 
4. See reference to this scene in Polina Suslova's diary, p. 214, below. 
5. Polish word meaning "lord" or "mister." 
6. "Rifleman" or "infantT}man." 

10 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
but I suggested that he read, for instance, some excerpts 
from the memoirs of General Perovsky,i who was a pris­
oner of the French in 18 12. Finally, Maria Filippovna 
started talking about something else to change the sub­
ject. The General was very much displeased with me, for 
the Frenchman and I had almost shouted at each other. 
But Mr. Astley apparently enjoyed my argument with the 
Frenchman very much. Getting up from the table, he 
asked me if I would like to have a glass of wine with him. 
That night I duly succeeded in having a talk with Polina 
Aleksandrovna. It lasted for about a quarter of an hour 
and took place while we were all out for a walk. \Ve went 
to the park by the casino. Polina sat down on a bench 
facing the fountain and let Nadia play with some children 
not far away. I, too, let !\fish a run off to the fountain, and 
we were at last alone. 
Business was discussed first, naturally. Polina was sim­
ply furious when I handed her only seven hundred gul­
den. She had been quite sure that I was going to pawn 
her diamonds in Paris for at least two thousand gulden, 
or even more. 
"I absolutely need some money," she said, "and have 
to get it, or else I am simply lost." 
I went on to ask her about what had happened during 
my absence. 
":\'othing but two messages from Petersburg, first that 
Grandmother was very ill, and two days later, that she 
had, apparently, died. The news came from Timofei 
Petrovich," Polina added, "and he is a reliable man. \Ve 
are expecting a final, definitive message." 
"So everybody here is full of anticipation?" I asked. 
7. \". A. Perovsky (1 795-1 857) reports in his memoirs that the French 
shot prisoners who were not able to keep with the marching columns. 
Portions of his memoirs were published in Russk)' arkhiv (Russian 
Archi,·e), 1 865, no. 3, pp. 257-86, where Dostoenky probably read them . 

The Gambler 
I I  
"Of course, each and every one; this has been every­
body's only hope for the past six months." 
"Are you hoping too?" I asked. 
"Why, I'm no relation of hers, I'm only the General's 
stepdaughter. But I am positively sure that she will re­
member me in her will." 
"I would imagine that you might get a great deal," I 
said affirmatively. 
"Yes, she was fond of me. But what makes you think 
;l" 
so. 
"Tell me," I answered with a question, "our marquis, 
it seems, is also initiated into all family secrets?" 
"And what about you, why are you so interested in 
this?" asked Polina, giving me a cold and stern look. 
"Of course I'm interested! If I'm not entirely wrong, 
the General has already managed to borrow some money 
from him." 
"You have guessed quite correctly." 
"Well, do you think that he would have gi,·en him any 
money if he had not known about Grandmother? Did 
you notice at dinner: some three times he referred to 
Grandmother as babulenka: 'Ia baboulinka.'8 \Vhat inti­
mate and cordial relations!" 
"Yes, you are right. The moment he finds out that I, 
too, have inherited something from her, he will imme­
diately propose to me. Is that what you wanted to know?" 
"So he will propose? I thought that he had been pro­
posing to you for a long time." 
"You know perfectly well that isn't tme!" Polina said 
testily. "Where did you meet the Englishman?" she 
added after a moment's silence. 
"I k11ew that you were going to ask about him!" 
I told her about my previous meetings with Mr. Astley 
8. Affectionate diminutive for "grandmother." 

12 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
on my journey. "He is bashful and romantic, and, quite 
naturally, in love with you, isn't he?" 
"Yes, he is in love with me," answered Pol ina. 
"And also quite naturally, he is ten times as rich as the 
Frenchman. Do you think that the Frenchman really has 
something? Isn't that open to doubt?" 
"No, it is not. He has some sort of chateau. Only yester­
day the General mentioned it to me quite positively. 
\Veil, are you satisfied?" 
"If I were you I would definitely marry the English­
tnan." 
"\Vhy?" asked Polina. 
"The Frenchman is more handsome, but he is a lower 
sort. And the Englishman, besides being honest, is ten 
times as rich," I snapped. 
"Yes, but on the other hand, the Frenchman is a mar­
quis and more clever," she answered in the calmest man­
ner possible. 
"Are you sure?" I continued, in the same vein. 
"Absolutely." 
Polina didn't like my questions at all, and I could see 
that she was trying to make me angry by the tone and the 
absurdity of her answers. All of which I let her know at 
once. 
"\Veil now, it really amuses me to see you getting 
worked up about this. You ought to pay for the mere fact 
that I'm allowing you to ask such questions and to make 
such suppositions." 
"As a matter of fact, I do consider myself entitled to 
ask you all kinds of questions," I answered calmly, "pre­
cisely because I am ready to pay any price for them, and 
my life means nothing to me now." 
Polina burst out laughing. 
"You told me last time at the Schlangenburg that you 
were ready at a single word from me to throw yourself 

The Gambler 
1 3  
down head first, and it's a thousand-foot drop there, I 
think. Some day I shall say the word, just to see how you 
pay your debts, and you can be sure that I'll stand firm. 
I loathe you, precisely because I have allowed you so 
much, and I loathe you even more because I need you 
so. But for the time being I need you, and so I must spare 
you." 
She got up. She had spoken with irritation. Of late she 
would invariably end up irritated and hating me after 
talking to me, truly hating me. 
"Allow me to ask, what about Mademoiselle Blanche?" 
I asked, not wanting to let her go without an explanation. 
"You know all about Mademoiselle Blanche yourself. 
Nothing has happened since. Mademoiselle Blanche is 
probably going to be the General's wife, that is, of course, 
if the rumor of Grandmother's death is confirmed, for 
Mademoiselle Blanche, her mother, and her third cousin 
the marquis, they all know very well that we are ruined 
financially." 
"And is the General hopelessly in love?" 
"That does not matter now. Listen and remember: 
take these seven hundred florins and go gambling. 'Vin 
for me as much as you can at roulette; I need some money 
now, come what may." 
Having said this, she called Nadia and walked away 
toward the casino, where she joined the rest of the party. 
I turned into the first path to the left, thinking and won­
dering. I felt as if someone had hit me over the head, after 
her orders to play roulette for her. Strange thing: there 
was plenty for me to think about, yet I lost myself in ana­
lyzing my reactions to my feelings for Polina. Actually, 
I felt better during those two weeks away from her than 
now, on the day of my return, even though I had been 
constantly fretting and had run about like a madman, 
even dreamed of her all the time. Once (that was in Switz-

14 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
erland) I fell asleep on the train and, it seems, started 
talking aloud to Polina, to the amusement of all the other 
passengers. And so again I asked myself the question, "Do 
I love her?" And again I found myself unable to answer 
it, or, rather, for the hundredth time I answered to my­
self that I hated her. Yes, she was hateful to me. There 
were moments (especially every time we concluded one 
of our conversations) when I would have gladly given 
half my life for the privilege of strangling her! I swear 
that if I had been given a chance to bury a sharp knife 
slowly in her breast, I probably would have reached for 
that knife with relish. Yet I swear by all that is sacred 
that if she had really told me, up there at Schlangen berg's 
tourist point, to throw myself down, I would have done 
so at once, and even relished it, too. I knew that. One 
way or another, this thing had to be settled. All this she 
understands amazingly well, and the thought that I knew, 
quite positively and distinctly, how utterly beyond reach 
she was for me, this thought, I am convinced, gave her 
extraordinary pleasure. \Vhy else would she, a prudent 
and clever girl, be on so intimate and open terms with 
me? l1 p to now she seemed to look on me as if she were 
that empress of antiquity who began to undress before 
her slave because she did not consider him a man. Yes, 
many a time she has refused to look on me as a man . . .  
I had her command, however, to win at roulette, come 
what may. I had no time to give any thought to why or 
how soon I had to win, or what new scheme had taken 
shape in that ever calculating brain of hers. Moreover, 
there had apparently developed, in the course of these 
two weeks, a multitude of new facts of which I had yet 
no idea. I had to figure it all out and try to get to the hot­
tom of things as quickly as possible. But at this point 
there was no time for it; I had to go and play roulette. 

Two 
/ must admit that I didn't like the 
idea. Though I had decided that I 
was going to do some gambling, I 
wasn't at all inclined to start it by playing for somebody 
else. It actually threw me off a bit, and so I entered the 
gambling hall with a most disagreeable feeling. From the 
first glance I disliked everything about it. I hate those 
corny feuilletons in newspapers the world over, but espe­
cially in our Russian newspapers, in which the same two 
stories are told over and over again each spring: first, 
about the extraordinary magnificence and luxury of the 
casinos of the gambling towns on the Rhine, and second, 
about piles of gold which are supposedly lying on the 
gaming tables. I am sure that the columnists are not even 
paid for this, but tell such stories simply from disinter­
ested compliance. There is nothing magnificent at all 
about these shabby halls, and as for gold, not only are 
there no piles of it lying on the tables, but there is hardly 
any of it at all to be seen. Of course, once in a while, dur­
ing the season, some eccentric or other will show up, ei­
ther an Englishman or an Asiatic of some kind, like a 
Turk, as was the case this summer, and will suddenly lose 
or win a lot. Everybody else plays for a few paltry gulden, 
and on the average there is very little money lying on the 
tables. ·when I first entered the gaming hall (it was the 
1 5  

16 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
first time in my life) I couldn't make myself play right 
away. Besides, it was very crowded. But even if I had been 
there all by myself, I think that even then I'd rather have 
left than started to play. I confess my heart was beating 
hard, and I was far from cool and composed. I knew then, 
as I had known a long time before, that something would 
happen to me in Roulettenburg, that there would be 
something, quite without fail, which would affect my 
destiny radically and definitively. So it must be and so it 
will be. Ridiculous though it is for me to expect so much 
much of the roulette wheel, the conventional opinion, 
held by everybody, that it is foolish and absurd to expect 
anything of gambling seemed even more ridiculous. \Vhy 
should gambling be worse than any other means of mak­
ing money, such as business, for instance? It is true that 
only one out of a hundred wins. But what do I care about 
that? 
Anywa)·, I decided to size things up first and not to try 
anything serious that night. Even if something did hap­
pen that night, it would happen as if by accident and be 
of little consequence, and I bet my money accordingly. 
Besides, I had to study the game itself, in spite of thou­
sands of descriptions of roulette which I had read avidly 
over the years, I understood nothing of how it worked, 
until I saw it myself. 
In the first place, it all struck me as so very sordid, 
somehow, morally rotten and sordid. I am not speaking 
at all about the greedy and troubled faces which by the 
dozens, or even by the hundreds, crowd around the gam­
ing tables. I can see absolutely nothing sordid about a 
person's desire to win as quickly and as much as possible. 
I always felt that it was stupid, that answer of a well-fed 
and prosperous moralist to a man who justified himself 
by saying that "the game was for very small stakes": So 
much the worse, for then it is petty covetousness." As if 

The Gambler 
17 
there were any difference between petty covetousness and 
covetousness on a large scale. I t  is a matter of proportion. 
\Vhat is a paltry sum to a Rothschild is great wealth to 
me, and as for profit and gain, people try to take or win 
something from one another not only at roulette but 
everywhere. \Vhether or not profit and gain are immoral 
as a matter of principle is a different question. I am not 
going to solve it here. Since I was myself possessed by a 
very intense desire to win some money, all this covetous­
ness and all this sordid greed seemed, if you like, even 
rather friendly and agreeable, as I entered the hall. It 
is so much more pleasant when people don't stand on 
ceremony but act candidly and informally. And, indeed, 
why should one deceive oneself? A most frivolous and 
extravagant pursuit! One thing that struck me as partic­
ularly unpleasant, at first sight, about the riffraff lining 
the roulette tables, was their respect for the business at 
hand, the seriousness and even reverence with which they 
all were crowding around the tables. This is why a sharp 
distinction is drawn here between the kind of game 
which is called mauvais genre, and the kind which a 
decent person might indulge in. There are two kinds of 
gambling: the genteel kind, and the plebeian or mer­
cenary, such as that played by all sorts of riffraff. The 
distinction is sternly observed here, and how base it 
really is! A gentleman, for example, may bet five or ten 
louis d'or; rarely more, though he may bet as much as a 
thousand francs if he is very rich, but solely for the sake 
of the game as such, simply for amusement, and actually 
only in order to watch the process of winninw or losing. 
only in order to watch the process of winning or losing. 
winning per se. If he wins, he may, for instance, laugh 
aloud, he may remark something to one of the bystanders, 
he may even place another bet or double his stakes, but 
solely out of curiosity, for the sake of watching the 

1 8  
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
chances, or even calculating them, never out of a plebe­
ian desire to win. In a word, he must look upon all these 
gaming tables, roulette wheels, and trente et quarante 
sets as no more than a pastime, arranged entirely for his 
amusement. He must not even suspect the existence of 
the mercenary motives and snares upon which the bank 
is founded and built. In fact, it wouldn't be a bad idea 
at all if he thought, for instance, that all this rabble, trem­
bling over a gulden , were men of great wealth and gentle­
men entirely like himself, and that they too, were 
gambling solely for their diversion and entertainment. 
Such total ignorance of the actual state of affairs and 
such an innocent view of people would be, of course, ex­
ceedingly aristocratic. I have seen many a mother push 
forward her innocent and elegant daughter, a lass of fif­
teen or sixteen, give her a few gold coins, and teach her 
how to play. The young would win or lose, invariably 
with a smile, and leave the table very well pleased. Our 
General walked up to the table solidly and with dignity. 
An attendant rushed to offer him a chair, but he didn't 
notice him, spent a long time taking out his wallet, then 
an equally long time producing from it three hundred 
francs in gold, put them on black, and won. He did not 
pick up his winnings, but left them on the table. Black 
came out again. He let it ride again, and when it was red 
the next time around he had lost twelve hundred francs 
at one stroke. He walked away with a smile, keeping his 
composure. I am positive that he was sick at heart, and if 
the bet had been two or three times higher he would not 
have remained so cool but would have betrayed his 
excitement. However, I was present when a Frenchman 
won, and then lost, as much as thirty thousand francs 
gaily and without getting in the least excited. A true 
gentleman doesn't get excited even when he loses his 
entire fortune. Money must be so much below a gentle-

The Gambler 
19 
man's dignity as to be hardly worth bothering about. Of 
course it would be highly aristocratic to ignore com­
pletely the sordidness of all this motley rabble and of 
this entire setting. Sometimes, however, the opposite ap­
proach may be no less aristocratic: to take notice of all 
the rabble, that is, take an occasional look at them, or 
even examine them, say, through a lorgnette, though 
never in any manner other than to take the whole crowd 
and all the filth for a diversion of sorts, something like 
a spectacle staged for the amusement of gentlemen. One 
may jostle with people in the crowd, yet one must look 
around with the absolute conviction that one is really 
only an observer and certainly in no way a part of it. 
However, one should also make sure not to study the 
crowd too intently; that would again be ungentlemanly 
because the spectacle is, in any case, not worthy of much, 
or excessively close, attention. As a matter of fact, there 
are few spectacles which deserves a gentleman's exceed­
ingly close attention. Meanwhile it seemed to me per­
sonally that all this was certainly worth some very close 
obsevation indeed, especially for one who had come not 
just as an observer but considered himself, sincerely and 
in all honesty, to be a part of the rabble. As for my inner­
most moral convictions, there is no place for them, of 
course, in my present reasoning. I'll leave it at that. I 
am saying this to relieve my conscience. But I would like 
to take notice of one thing: of late I have been finding it 
somehow extremely repulsive to apply any kind of moral 
standard to my actions and thoughts. I was guided by 
something quite different . . .  
It is true that the rabble play very dirtily. In fact, I 
am inclined to believe that a great deal of the most ordi­
nary thievery goes on at the gaming tables. The croupiers 
who are seated at each end of the table check the stakes 
and pay the winnings, which keeps them terribly busy. 

20 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
·what a rabble! For the most part they are French. I 
make these observations, however, and am taking mental 
notes not because I would like to describe the game of 
roulette, certainly not. I am trying to get the hang of it 
for my own purpose, and so I'll know how to work it 
in the future. I noticed, for example, that nothing was 
more common than for somebody else's hand to reach 
out and grab one's winnings. There would be an argu­
ment, often some shuu.ing, and "\Vould you, please, 
kindly prove, or find witnesses, that this was really your 
bet!" 
At first the whole thing was Greek to me. All I could 
guess and figure out was that you could bet your money 
on numbers, on odd and even, and on the colors. I de­
cided to risk a hundred gulden of Polina Aleksandrovna's 
money that night. The thought that I was not going to 
play for myself somehow distracted me. It was an ex­
tremely unpleasant sensation, and I wanted to get rid of 
it as soon as possible. I kept thinking that by playing for 
Polina I would be spoiling my own luck. Can one even as 
much as touch a gaming table without becoming imme­
diately infected with superstition? I started by taking out 
fifty gulden, and placing them on even. The wheel spun 
around and out came thirteen; I had lost. \Vith a vaguely 
sick feeling, solely in order to get it over with and leave, 
I bet fifty more gulden on red. Out came red. I placed a 
hundred gulden on red, and it was red again. I put it all 
on red, and it was red again. Having collected four hun­
dred gulden, I bet two hundred on the second dozen, not 
knowing what would come of it. I was paid three times 
my stake. In this way, instead of one hundred I had sud­
denly eight hundred gulden. I felt overcome by a strange 
and unusual feeling which I found so unbearable that I 
decided to leave. It appeared to me that I would have 
played quite differently if I had been playing for myself. 

The Gambler 
2 1  
Nevertheless, I staked the whole eight hundred on even 
once more. This time four came out. Another eight hun­
dred was poured out to me, and, having gathered up my 
whole pile of sixteen hundred gulden, I left to look for 
Polina Aleksandrovna. 
They were all out for a walk somewhere in the park, 
and I wasn't able to see her until supper. This time the 
Frenchman was not around, and the General was in fine 
fettle. Among other things he thought fit to let me know 
once more that he did not wish to see me at the gaming 
tables. In his opinion, it would compromise him greatly 
if by any chance I were to lose badly. "But even if you 
were to win a lot, even in that case I'd be compromised," 
he added significantly. "Of course, I have no right to 
dictate your actions, but you must agree . . .  " He left 
the phrase incomplete, as was his habit. I answered, drily, 
that I had very little money and that, consequently, I 
couldn't possibly lose too conspicuously, even if I were 
to play. Going upstairs to my room I managed to hand 
Polina her winnings and let her know that I wouldn't 
play for her again. 
"But why not?" she asked anxiously. 
"Because I want to play for myself," I answered, look­
ing at her with surprise, "and playing for you interferes 
with playing for myself." 
"So you are still absolutely convinced that roulette is 
your only solution and salvation?" she asked derisively. 
I answered, again very seriously, that I was. As for my 
being so certain that I was going to win, let it be ridicu­
lous, I'd agree with that, "but why don't you leave me 
alone." 
Polina Aleksandrovna insisted that I keep half of 
today's winnings and tried to make me accept eight hun­
dred gulden, suggesting that I continue to play on those 
terms. I refused the half, resolutely and definitely, and 

22 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
declared that I couldn't play for other people, not be­
cause I didn't want to, but because I would surely lose. 
"And yet I, too, as stupid as it may seem, see virtually 
my only hope in roulette," she said thoughtfully. "And 
this is why you must absolutely go on playing, half and 
half with me, and of course you will." Here she left me, 
without listening to my further objections. 

Three 
A 
ll the next day she did not say one 
word to me about gambling. In 
fact, she avoided having any word 
with me. The manner in which she treats me has not 
changed. The same absolute nonchalance on meeting me, 
and even something contemptuous and hostile in her 
mien. She doesn't bother to hide her aversion to me at all, 
this I can see. But she also does not conceal from me ei­
ther the fact that she needs me for some purpose and that 
she is saving me for some future use. A kind of strange re­
lationship has developed between us which, in many ways, 
I cannot fathom, considering her pride and haughtiness 
with everyone. She knows, for instance, that I am madly 
in love with her, actually allows me to speak of my pas­
sion; surely there couldn't be a better way to show her 
contempt for me than to permit me to speak to her of 
my love so freely and unrestrictedly. "That is to say," 
she tells me, "that your feeling mean so little to me I 
couldn't care less what you're telling me, or what your 
feelings are toward me." As for her own affairs, she had 
already discussed them with me before, though never 
with full sincerity. What is more, her disdainful treat­
ment of my person included, for instance, the following 
subtleties: she would know, let's say, that I was familiar 
with a certain circumstance in her life, or knew of some 
23 

24 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
matter which was greatly worrying her; in fact, she would 
tell me herself something about her circumstances, when­
ever it was opportune to use me for her ends, like a slave, 
or to run errands for her; but she would tell me exactly 
as much as a man employed on her errands need know; 
and, seeing herself how worried and anxious I was about 
her worries and anxieties, what with the whole chain of 
events being obscure to me, she would not deign to re­
assure me of her full confidence as a friend. Though, 
inasmuch as she would use me often for errands which 
were not only troublesome but outright dangerous, more 
candor on her part ought to, in my opinion, have been 
in order. Indeed, why bother about my feelings? \Vhat 
of it if I was, perhaps, worried too, and feeling three times 
as troubled and anxious about her troubles and failures 
as she v•as herself? 
I had known about her intention to play roulette as 
early as three weeks before. She had given me advance 
notice that I would have to play in her stead, since it 
would be improper for her to do any gambling herself. 
From the tone of her words I gathered, even then, that 
she had a serious problem rather than a simple desire 
to win some money. \Vhat could money as such mean to 
her? There must be some purpose, there must be certain 
circumstances, at which I can only guess, but of which I 
know nothing so far. Of course, the humiliation and 
slavery in which she keeps me could give me a chance, and 
often does, to ask rude and direct questions of her. Since 
I am only her slave and utterly insignificant in her eyes, 
there is no reason for her to take offense at my crude 
curiosity. But the fact of the matter is that while she 
allows me to ask questions, she doesn't answer them. 
Sometimes she doesn't even notice them. That's what it's 
like between us! 
Yesterday there was a lot of talk about a telegram which 

The Gambler 
25 
had been sent to Petersburg four days earlier and to 
which no reply had been received. The General is ob­
viously upset and is doing a lot of thinking. It is, of course, 
connected with Grandmother. The Frenchman is upset 
too. Yesterday, for example, they had a long and serious 
conversation after dinner. The Frenchman's attitude 
toward all of us is exceedingly haughty and condescend­
ing. To this, the saying applies: "Seat [a pig] at the table, 
and he will soon put his feet on it." Even \Vith Polina he 
is casual to the point of being rude. However, he most 
happily takes part in our family outings, on foot in the 
casino park or on horseback and by carriage in the nearby 
countryside. I have been familiar, for some time, with 
some of the circumstances which tie the Frenchman to 
the General. In Russia they made plans together to start 
a factory. I don't know whether this project has fallen 
through, or whether they are still discussing it. Besides, 
I am in on a part of their family secret: the Frenchman 
realy did bail out the General last year, giving him thirty 
thousand to make up a shortage in a government account 
on the occasion of the General's resignation from his 
post. It goes without saying that he has got the General 
in his clutches. Yet at the present moment, it is still Mile 
Blanche who plays the main role in this whole business, 
and I am quite sure that I am not mistaken about that. 
Who is this Mile Blanche? In our circle it is assumed 
that she is of the French nobility, that she is traveling 
with her mother, and that she has a huge fortune. It is 
also known that she is somehow related to our marquis, 
though very distantly, being his second cousin or some­
thing of the sort. I gather that before my trip to Paris, 
the Frenchman and Mile Blanche were on much more 
formal terms with each other, on a more refined and 
delicate footing, one might have said. But now their 
sociaઈ relations, their mutual attitudes as friends and 

26 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
relatives, have acquired a rather coarse and intimate 
character. It may well be that our affairs look so extremely 
wretched to them that they don't even think it's very 
important to stand on ceremony or to keep up appear­
ances before us. The day before yesterday I noticed how 
Mr. Astley was looking at Mile Blanche and her mother. 
I had the impression that he knew them. It seemed to 
me that e\'en our Frenchman has met Mr. Astley before. 
؉fr. Astley is so shy, bashful, and taciturn, however, that 
one can be almost sure of him; he won't wash anybody's 
dirty linen in public. At any rate the Frenchman barely 
says hello to him and pays almost no attention to him, 
which means that he is not afraid of him. One can under­
stand that, but why does l\flle Blanche pay almost no 
attention to him either? Especially considering the fact 
that the marquis let out the secret yesterday: he suddenly 
said, in the course of a general conversation, I forgot in 
what connection, that Mr. Astley is colossally rich, which 
he, the marquis, knew for a fact. So Mile Blanche ought 
to have ample reason to pay some attention to Mr. Astley! 
All things considered, the General looks very worried. 
One can understand what a telegram announcing his 
aunt's death could mean to him! 
Though I felt fairly certain that Polina was avoiding a 
con\'ersation with me, and apparently for a purpose, I 
assumed a cool and indifferent air myself: I kept think­
ing that sooner or later she'd have to come to me. Instead, 
yesterday and today, I've been concentrating my attention 
mostly on Mile Blanche. Poor General, he is most defi­
nitely done for! To fall in love at fifty, with such violence 
of passion, is of course a calamity. Add to this his widow­
erhood, his children, a completely ruined estate, debts, 
and, on top of it, the kind of woman he has had the mis­
fortune to fall in love with. :\file Blanche is a beautiful 
woman. Yet I don't know whether I'll be properly under-

The Gambler 
27 
stood if I say that she has one of those faces which one 
might feel frightened of. At least I have always feared 
such women. She must be about twenty-five. She is tall, 
with broad, strong shoulders. Her neck and bosom are 
magnificent. Her complexion is a swarthy yellow, her 
hair raven black, and she's got a great deal of it, enough 
for two coiffures. Her eyes are black with yellowish whites, 
her look insolent, her teeth very white, and her lips al­
ways painted. Her perfume smells of musk. She dresses 
spectacularly, expensively, and with chic, yet with much 
taste. Her hands and feet are a marvel. Her voice is a 
husky contralto. Sometimes she will laugh aloud, show­
ing her teeth, but as a rule she wears an uncommuni­
cative and insolent expression on her face, at least in 
the presence of Polina and Maria Filippovna. (There 
is a strange rumor: Maria Filippovna is returning to 
Russia.) I think that Mile Blanche is wholly uneducated, 
perhaps not even clever, but she is cunning and always on 
her guard. I would imagine that her life has not been 
totally uneventful. And, to tell the whole truth, it may 
well be that the marquis is not her relative at all, and that 
her mother is not her mother. But there is evidence that 
in Berlin, where we first met them, she and her mother 
had some reputable acquaintances. As for the marquis 
himself, though I still doubt that he is a marquis, it 
seems to be an indubitable fact that he is received in de­
cent society, as for instance, in Moscow, and in some 
places in Germany. I wonder, though, about France? 
They say that he owns a chateau. I had thought that 
much water would flow under the bridge in those two 
weeks, and yet I still don't know for sure whether any­
thing definitive has been said between Mile Blanche and 
the General. By and large, everythnig now depends on 
our fortune, that is, whether or not the General will be 
able to show them a lot of money. If, for instance, news 

28 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
were to come that Grandmother had not died, I am posi­
tive that Mile Blanche would disappear immediately. I 
find it amazing and quite funny myself what a gossip I've 
become, haven't I? Oh, how repulsive it is, all of it! ·with 
what relish would I get rid of all of them, and all of it! 
But how could I leave Polina? How could I quit my spy­
ing on her? Spying is base, of course, but what do I care! 
I was quite intrigued by Mr. Astley, also, yesterday and 
today. Yes, I am convinced that he is in love with Polina! 
It is curious and funny to see how much the glance of a 
bashful and painfully chaste man, very much in love, 
may sometimes express, particularly when that man 
would certainly much rather be swallowed by the earth 
than betray or express anything at all, by word or glance. 
\Ve often meet Mr. Astley on our walks. He takes off his 
hat and walks on, though he is dying, of course, to join 
us. And, whene,·er invited to do so, he immediately re­
fuses. \Vherever we go to take the air, around the casino, 
at the bandshell, or by the fountain, he'll be seen stand­
ing, quite without fail, not far from our bench ; and no 
matter where we might be, in the park, in the forest, or 
on the Schlangenberg, all one has to do is raise one's 
eyes and scan the landscape, and there, sure enough, on 
the nearest footpath or behind a bush a piece of Mr. 
Astley will pop up. I am under the impression that he is 
looking for an opportunity to talk to me personally. This 
morning we met and exchanged a few words. On occasion 
he will speak somehow very abruptly. Having barely said 
"good morning," he said straightaway: 
"Ah, Mademoiselle Blanche! . . .  I have seen many 
women like Mademoiselle Blanche!" 
He paused, giving me a significant look. I don't know 
what he wanted to say by that, because when I asked him 
"what do you mean by this?" he only nodded his head 

The Gambler 
29 
with a sly smile and added: "That's the way it is. Is 
Mademoiselle Pauline very fond of flowers?" 
"I don't know, I don't know at all," I answered. 
"What? You don't know that either!" he cried, greatly 
astonished. 
"I don't know, I just never noticed," I repeated, laugh­
mg. 
"H'm! That gives me something very special to think 
about." Here he nodded his head and walked on. He 
looked very pleased, though. He and I converse in the 
most dreadful French. 

Four 
T
oday was a funny, grotesque, ab­
surd day. It is now eleven o'clock 
at night. I am sitting in my little 
room, reviewing it. It all started with my having to go 
to the casino to play for Polina Aleksandrovna. I took 
all of her sixteen hundred gulden, but under two con­
ditions: first, that we were not going to play it fifty-fifty, 
if I win, that is, and second, that Polina would explain 
to me that same night why she needed to win some money, 
and how much precisely. I simply cannot make myself 
believe that it is just the money. Apparently the money 
is needed, as quickly as possible, for some particular pur­
pose. She promised to tell me, and I went. It was tremen­
dously crowded in the gambling halls. How shameless 
and how greedy all these people are! I forced my way 
to the very middle and stood right next to the croupier. 
Then I began timidly trying my game, betting two or 
three coins at a time. Meanwhile, I was watching and I 
noticed a thing or two. It seemed to me that calculating 
your chances really means rather little, and certainly 
isn't as important as some gamblers make it out to be. 
They sit there with sheets of graph paper before them, 
mark every stroke, reckon, compute the odds, calculate, 
and finally place their bets. Then they lose, exactly as 
we simple mortals who play without calculating anything. 
30 

The Gambler 
31 
But then again, I came to one conclusion which is, I think, 
correct: there is in fact, though not a system, some son 
of order in the sequence of fortuitous chances-which 
is, of course, very strange indeed. For instance, it will 
happen that after twelve straight numbers from the sec­
ond dozen, the third dozen will finally come up; twice, 
let's say, it will hit there, then switch to the first dozen. 
Having fallen on the first dozen only once, it will then 
return to the second dozen with three or four straight 
hits, whereupon it is once more the third dozen with two 
straight n urn bers, and back to the first dozen for a single 
time, and again three straight hits in the middle, and so 
on and on in the same fashion for an hour and a half or 
two hours. One, three, and two; one, three, and two. This 
is very amusing. There will be a day, or a morning, for 
example, where red and black will alternate almost with­
out any order, shifting every moment, so that red or 
black won't turn up more than twice or three times in 
succession. Next day, or next night, it will be nothing 
but red. It will happen that red, for instance, will come 
up as many as twenty-two times in a row, and that it will 
continue that way for some length of time, say, the whole 
day. I learned a gTeat deal about these things from Mr. 
Astley, who spent the whole morning at the gaming ta­
bles without once placing a bet. As for myself, I lost every 
penny I had, and very quickly, too. I put two hundred 
gulden on even right off the bat, and won, bet another 
five and won again, and so two or three more times. I 
think I must have picked up about four thousand gulden 
in five minutes or so. This is where I should have quit, 
but some kind of strange sensation built up in me, a kind 
of challenge to fate, a kind of desire to give it a flick on 
the nose, or stick out my tongue at it. I placed the larg­
est bet allowed, four thousand gulden, and lost. Then, 
flushed with my loss, I took out all the money I still had 

32 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
left, staked it on the same spot, and lost again, after which 
I walked away from the table, stunned. I actually couldn't 
comprehend that it was I to whom this had just hap­
pened, and I didn't tell Polina Aleksandrovna of my 
losing until a while later, shortly before dinner. In the 
meantime I wandered through the park aimlessly. 
At dinner I was again in an excited frame of mind, just 
as three days earlier. The Frenchman and Mile Blanche 
were dining with us again. It tumed out that Mlle 
Blanche had been at the casino in the morning and had 
witnessed my exploits. Since she was talking to me this 
time, she seemed to be paying more attention to what I 
was saying. The Frenchman took a shorter way and sim­
ply asked me if I had really lost my own money. Appar­
ently he suspects Polina. In short, there is something go­
ing on here. I lied without hesitating, saying that it was 
my money. 
The General was extremely surprised: where did I get 
that kind of money? I explained that I started out with 
one hundred gulden, that six or seven straight wins, dou­
bled, had brought me up to five or six thousand gulden, 
whereupon I had lost everything in two turns. 
All this, of course, sounded plausible enough. As I was 
explaining it I stole a glance at Polina, but could make 
out nothing from her face. She let me go through with 
my lying, however, and did not set me right, from which 
I concluded that I was correct in telling my lie and that 
it was to remain a secret that I had played for her. In any 
case, I thought to myself, she owes me an explanation and 
promised me only this morning to reveal something to 
me. 
I had thought that the General would reprimand me 
somehow, but he said nothing. However, I noticed a wor­
ried and uneasy expression on his face. Perhaps in his 
straitened circumstances it was simply painful to him to 

The Gambler 
33 
sit there and hear how such a respectable pile of gold had, 
within a quarter of an hour, come into and passed out of 
the hands of an improvident fool such as I. 
I suspect that he had a rather hot encounter with the 
Frenchman last night. They were shut up together for 
a long time, talking heatedly about something. The 
Frenchman left looking irritated, and early this morning 
he came back to see the General again, very likely to con­
tinue yesterday's conversation. 
Having listened to the story of my gambling loss, the 
Frenchman remarked caustically, even spitefully, that I 
ought to have had more sense than that. I don't know 
why he had to add that, though a great many Russians 
were gamblers, Russians were, in his opinion, lacking in 
talent even for gambling. 
"Yet in my opinion, roulette is simply made for Rus· 
sians," I said; and when the Frenchman responded to my 
comment with a contemptuous sneer, I observed that 
surely I had to be right, since by saying that Russians 
were gam biers I was certain) y a busing them far more 
than praising them, so there was no reason to doubt my 
statement. 
"And on what do you base your opinion?" asked the 
Frenchman. 
"On the fact that the faculty of amassing capital has 
become, through a historical process, virtually the main 
point in the catechism of the virtues and qualities of civi­
lized 'Vestern man. A Russian, on the other hand, is not 
only incapable of amassing any capital, but even when he 
squanders it, does so to no purpose and in hideously bad 
form. Nevertheless we Russians need money, too," I 
added, "and consequently are very fond of, and suscepti· 
ble to, methods such as, for example, roulette, allowing 
one to get rich suddenly, in two hours, and without work. 
We find this exceedingly alluring. And since we gamble 

34 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
to no purpose, and also without real effort, we tend to be 
losers!" 
"You may be right to some extent," the Frenchman 
remarked smugly. 
"ઉo. you are not right, and you ought to be ashamed 
to speak like that of your country," observed the Gen­
eral, sternly and with authority. 
"For goodness' sake!" I answered, "really, who can tell 
which of the two is more repulsive, Russian shapelessness 
and lack of discipline, or the German method of saving 
money by honest work?" 
"\Vhat a monstrous thought! " exclaimed the General. 
"\Vhat a Russian thought!" exclaimed the Frenchman. 
I laughed. I wanted very much to provoke them. 
"Personally, I would much rather spend my whole life 
in a Kirghiz nomad's tent," I cried, "than worship the 
German idol." 
"What idol?" cried the General, getting angry in 
earnest. 
"The German method of accumulating wealth. I've 
not been here long, but yet I must tell you that what I 
have managed to observe and to verify makes my Tatar 
blood boil. So help me, I want no part of these virtues! 
Yesterday I took a hike of six or seven miles around the 
countryside. I'm telling you, it's all exactly as in those 
edifying German picture books. They have here, in every 
house, a Vater who is extremely virtuous and extraordi­
narily honest. So honest you dare not go near him. I hate 
honest people whom one is afraid to approach. Every 
such Vater has a family, and in the evenings they read 
instructive books aloud to each other. Elms and chestnut 
trees rustle over the little house. Sunset, a stork on the 
roof, and all of it so extraordinarily poetic and touch­
mg . . .  
"Please, don't get angry, General, and allow me to 

The Gambler 
35 
make it as touching as possible. I can remember how my 
own father, God bless his soul, used to read from similar 
books to my mother and myself, and also under the lin­
den trees in our front garden . . .  So I am in a position to 
judge these things. \Vell then, each and every one of these 
families around here is in a condition of complete servi­
tude and submission to their Vater. They all work like 
mules, and they all save money like Jews. Suppose Vater 
has already saved up so-and-so-many gulden and is count­
ing on his eldest son to take over his shop, or his piece of 
land. And so the daughter is left without a dowry, and 
she becomes an old maid. Also, the younger son is hired 
out to slave for someone else, or is sold for a soldier, and 
the money realized is added to the family fortune. This 
is really done here; I've inquired about it. And all this is 
done out of honesty alone, an honesty so intense that the 
younger son, who has been sold, actually believes that he 
was sold from out of honesty alone. And that's really 
ideal when the victim himself rejoices as he is led away 
to slaughter. What else? What is more, the eldest son isn't 
any better off: he has found his Amalchen, and their 
hearts are united, but he can't marry her, because they 
haven't saved enough gulden yet. So they wait virtuously 
and, sincerely and with a smile, let themselves be led to 
slaughter. Amalchen's cheeks have already grown hollow, 
and she is wasting away. Finally, in some twenty years or 
so, their fortune has grown: a lot of gulden have been 
saved, honestly and virtuously. Vater gives his blessings 
to his forty-year-old firstborn and his thirty-five-year-old 
Amalchen, her chest dried up and her nose red . . .  As he 
does so, he sheds tears, reads them a moral sermon, and 
dies. The eldest son now becomes himself a virtuous 
Vater, and the same story starts all over again. In fifty or 
seventy years, the grandson of the first Vater has already 
realized what amounts to a considerable capital, which 

36 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
he proceeds to hand down to his son who, in turn, leaves 
it to his son, and he to his, so that after five or six genera­
tions you've got Baron Rothschild himself, or Hoppe and 
Company,9 or the devil knows whom. Well, sir, isn't this 
a majestic spectacle: a hundred or two hundred years of 
continuous toil, patience, intelligence, honesty, charac­
ter, firmness, economy, a stork on the roof! What more 
do you want? Why, you can't possibly top that. And so, 
from that standpoint they then begin to judge the whole 
world and to punish the guilty, meaning those who are in 
any way unlike them. \Veil, sir, that's what it amounts to; 
I'd much rather indulge in debauchery, Russian style, or 
make my fortune at roulette. I don't want to be Hoppe 
and Company in five generations. I need my money for 
myself. Nor am I willing to consider my person a neces­
sary accessory to capital. I realize that I have been talk­
ing dreadful nonsense, but that's all right. Such are my 
convictions." 
"I don't know whether there is much truth in what 
you've been saying," the General said thoughtfully, "but 
I know for certain that you begin to swagger insufferably 
the moment you are allowed to forget yourself even a 
little . . .  
" 
As was his habit, he failed to finish the sentence. When­
ever our General would broach a subject which was even 
slightly more significant than ordinary small talk, he 
could never finish his sentences. The Frenchman was lis­
tening casually, with rather wide-open eyes. He had un­
derstood almost nothing of what I had said. Polina was 
just looking, with a sort of haughty indifference. She 
seemed not to hear what I, or anyone else, was saying at 
table that day. 
9. Famous bank of the time, with branches in Amsterdam and 
London. 

Five 
S
he seemed unusually thoughtful, but 
immediately after we got up from 
the table she ordered me to escort 
her for a walk. \Ve took the children and walked to the 
park toward the fountain. 
Since I was in a particularly excited mood, I blurted 
out the following question, stupidly and rudely: why was 
it that our Marquis de Grieux, the little Frenchman, was 
not only not escorting her on the present occasion, or 
whenever she went out, but hadn't even talked to her for 
days? 
"Because he is a scoundrel," she answered strangely. I 
had never heard her speak of de Grieux in that way and, 
being afraid to interpret such irritability on her part, 
said nothing in response. 
"Did you notice that he was at odds with the General 
today?" 
"You want to know what's going on," she responded, 
drily and irritably. "You know that the General is com­
pletely mortgaged to him; his whole property is his, and 
if Grandmother doesn't die, the Frenchman will immedi­
ately claim title to everything that is mortgaged to him." 
"So it is really true that everything is mortgaged? I had 
heard about it, but did not know that absolutely every­
thing was involved." 
37 

38 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
"How else could it be?" 
"And on top of it, good-bye Mademoiselle Blanche," I 
observed. "She won't be the General's wife, then! You 
know what, it seems to me that the General is so much in 
love that he may, perhaps, shoot himself if she leaves him. 
At his age it is dangerous to be so in love." 
"I also feel that something will happen to him," Polina 
Aleksandrovna remarked thoughtfully. 
"How very beautiful!" I exclaimed. "There isn't a 
cruder way to show that she was marrying him only for 
his money. No attempt, even, to observe the rules of pro· 
priety, totally without ceremony, the whole thing. Just 
marvelous! And about Grandmother, could one imagine 
anything more comic and sordid than to keep sending 
telegram after telegram, asking: is she dead, is she dead? 
Eh? How do you like it, Polina Aleksandrovna?" 
"That's all nonsense," she said disgustedly, interrupt­
ing me. "Rather, I am surprised about your being in such 
a cheerful mood. \Vhat are you so happy about? Perhaps 
because you lost all my money?" 
"Why did you give it to me to lose? I told you that I 
couldn't play for other people, least of all for you. I do 
whatever you tell me to do, but I can't answer for the re­
sult. Didn't I warn you that it would all come to nothing? 
Tell me, are you very unhappy about losing so much 
money? \Vhy do you need so much money?" 
"\Vhy these questions?" 
"Didn't you promise to explain to me? . . .  Listen, I am 
absolutely convinced that when I start playing for myself 
(I've got one hundred and twenty gulden) I'm going to 
win. Then you can borrow from me as much as you 
need." 
Her face assumed a contemptuous expression. 
"Don't be angry at my suggestion," I continued. "I am 
so imbued with the feeling that I'm a cipher before you, 

The Gambler 
39 
that is, a nonentity in your eyes, that I feel you could 
even accept money from me. You couldn't possibly take 
offense at a present from me. Besides, I lost yours." 
She gave me a quick look, and seeing that I was speak­
ing irritably and with sarcasm, cut me short once more: 
"There is nothing that might interest you about my 
circumstances. If you want to know, I'm simply in debt. 
I owe some money and would like to pay it back. I had 
the crazy and strange idea that I was definitely going to 
win, here, at the gaming tables. \Vhy I had this idea I 
can't understand, but I had faith in it. \Vho knows, per­
haps I believed it because of all the alternatives, this was 
the only one left." 
"Or because you needed to win so badly. It is just like 
a drowning man clutching at a straw. You must agree 
that if he were not drowning he would never take a straw 
for a branch of a tree." 
Polina was surprised. 
"Really?" she asked, "and aren't you counting on the 
same thing? Two weeks ago you told me at great length 
how you were absolutely convinced that you were going 
to win at roulette, right here, and that I shouldn't think 
you were crazy; or were you joking then? But I remember 
that you were so serious about it that it couldn't have 
been a joke." 
"It is true," I answered thoughtfully, "I am still con­
vinced that I am going to win. I must really admit that 
you have just made me ask myself a question: why is it 
that my failure today, muddleheaded and utterly dis­
graceful though it was, has not left the trace of a doubt in 
my mind? I am still fully convinced that as soon as I start 
playing for myself I'll most certainly win." 
"\Vhy are you so positive about it?" 
"If you insist, I just don't know. I only know that I 
m ust win, also that it is the only way out that's left for 

40 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
me. \Veil, maybe that's why it seems to me that I'll win 
for sure." 
"Is this to say that you, too, need it very badly, since 
you are so fanatically sure?" 
"You probably doubt that I am capable of feeling a 
serious need?" 
"I don't care," Polina answered quietly and indiffer­
ently. "If you insist, yes, I doubt that anything could ever 
worry you seriously. You may worry and be unhappy, but 
not seriously. You are a confused and unstable person. 
\Vhat do you want money for? There was nothing serious 
in any of the reasons you presented that time." 
"Incidentally." I int errupted, "you said that you had 
to repay a debt. l\f ust be some debt! Could it be to the 
Frenchman?" 
"\Vhat a question! You're particularly sarcastic today. 
You aren't drunk by any chance, are you?" 
"You know that I feel free to say anything, and that 
sometimes I ask very blunt questions. I repeat, I am your 
slave, and one isn't ashamed of slaves, a slave couldn't 
possibly insult you." 
"All this is nonsense! And I can't stand that 'slave' the­
ory of yours." 
"Please note that I refer to my condition of servitude 
not because I like being your slave, but simply because 
it is a fact which I can't do anything about." 
"Tell me straight, what do you need money for?" 
"And why should I tell you?" 
"As you please," she replied, tossing her head proudly. 
"You can't stand my 'slave' theory, yet demand that I 
act as a slave. 'Answer, and no arguments!' All right, so 
be it. \Vhy money, you're asking me? How can you ask 
that? ઊIoney is everything!" 
"I understand. But you won't fall into such madness 
just wanting it! \Vhy, you've reached a condition of abso-

The Gambler 
41 
lute frenzy, where you care for nothing anymore. You 
must have some special object in mind. Tell me without 
beating about the bush, I wish it." 
She seemed to be getting angry, and I was very pleased 
that she was interrogating me so testily. 
"Of course there's an object," I said, "but I don't know 
how to explain what it is, really. Nothing more except 
that with money I'll be a different man, even for you, and 
not a slave." 
"What? How do you think you'll achieve that?" 
"How shall I achieve that? ·why, you can't even imag­
ine how I could ever make you look at me as anything 
but a slave! That's precisely what I don't care for, such 
astonishment and incredulity." 
"Didn't you say that you were enjoying your slavery? 
I certainly thought so myself." 
"Is that what you thought!" I cried, with a strange feel­
ing of delight. "Oh, how beautiful your naivete is! Oh, 
sure, sure, I enjoy being your slave. Oh, yes, yes, there is 
enjoyment in extreme degradation and insignificance!" 
I went on raving. "\Vhat the devil! Perhaps the whip is 
pleasurable when it is laid on your back, tearing your 
flesh to pieces . . .  But perhaps I would like to try, for 
once, some other kind of enjoyment. The other day, at 
dinner and in your presence, the General gave me a lec­
ture for those seven hundred rubles a year which I may 
not even get from him. The Marquis de Grieux keeps 
looking at me, eyebrows raised, yet at the same time takes 
no notice of me. \Vhereas I have perhaps a passionate de­
sire to pull the Marquis de Grieux's nose in your pres­
ence!" 
"\Vhat an immature youth! One can behave with dig­
nity in any situation. And if it's hard, the struggle will 
make you grow in stature, not lower you." 
"Straight from the copybook! \Vhy won't you assume, 

42 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
for a moment, that perhaps I merely don't know how to 
behave decently. That is, perhaps I am a decent person, 
but I just don't know how to behave like one. Do you 
understand that this may actually be the case? In fact, all 
Russians are like that, and you know why? Because Rus­
sians are too richly and many-sidedly endowed to find the 
proper form of behavior in a hurry. It's a matter of form. 
For the most part, we Russians are so richly endowed 
that, to know how to behave we need genius. Well, and 
much more often than not there simply isn't any genius 
available, since it's a very rare commodity. It is only 
among the French, and perhaps some other Europeans, 
that certain forms of behavior have been developed to 
such perfection that a man may very well have an air of 
the utmost dignity and yet be a quite worthless character. 
That's why good form means so much to them. A French­
man will put up with an insult, a real, deep insult, with­
out batting au eyelid, yet he won't put up with a tweak 
of the nose for anything, because that is a violation of 
their accepted forms of propriety, perpetuated by the 
ages. That's why our Russian ladies have such a weakness 
for Frenchmen-they have such good form. Though, as 
far as I'm concerned, they really haven't any form; it's 
just the rooster in them, le coq gaulois. However, I don't 
pretend that I can understand it; I'm not a woman. Per­
haps, roosters are just great. And finally, I'm talking non­
sense, and you aren't stopping me. Shut me up more 
often; whenever I talk to you I feel like telling you every­
thing. just everything. I lose all my form. Actually, I'm 
ready to admit that I am lacking not only in good form, 
but in moral qualities of any kind as well. This is to let 
you know. In fact, I'm not worried about my moral qual­
ities. Everything has come to a stop within me. You know 
yourself why. I haven't got one human idea in my head. 
It's a long time since I knew what was going on in the 

The Gambler 
43 
world, in Russia or here. I've been through Dresden and 
I don't even remember what Dresden was like. You know 
yourself what I'm all wrapped up in. Since I have no hope 
whatsoever and since I am a nonentity in your eyes, I'm 
telling you right out: I see nothing but you everywhere, 
and I don't care about the rest. I don't know why or how 
I love you. You know, perhaps you aren't beautiful at all? 
Imagine, I even don't know whether you are beautiful 
or not, even your face! Your soul, I'm sure, is not beauti­
ful, and your mind ignoble. That may very well be." 
"Perhaps that's why you count on buying me with 
money," she said, "because you don't believe in my noble 
soul?" 
"When did I count on buying you with money?" I 
cried. 
"You've let your tongue run away with you, and you've 
lost your thread. If you aren't thinking of buying me, you 
certainly think that you can buy my respect with money." 
"Oh no, that's not quite the way I mean it. I've told 
you that I have trouble making myself clear. You are too 
much for me. Don't be angry at my jabbering. You can't 
be angry with me; I'm simply mad. However, what dif­
ference does it make? Go ahead and be angry. Upstairs 
in my little room, all I have to do is remember and imag­
ine the rustle of your dress, and I'm ready to chew my 
own hands. So why are you angry with me? Because I 
called myself your slave? Go ahead and use me, use me 
as your slave, use me! Do you know that some day I am 
going to kill you? Kill you, not because I'll no longer love 
you, or from jealousy, no, simply kill you because some­
times I have the urge to devour you. You're laughing . . .  " 
''I'm not laughing at all," she said, enraged. "I order 
you to stop talking." 
She stopped, almost breathless with anger. I swear it, I 
don't know if she was beautiful, but I always liked to look 

44 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
at her when she stood before me like that. That's why I 
liked often to provoke her anger. Perhaps she had noticed 
this, and so got angry on purpose. I went on to tell her all 
of this. 
"\Vhat filth!" she exclaimed in disgust. 
"I don't care," I continued. "You know, there's an­
other thing; it is really dangerous for us to walk together: 
I'm often overcome by an irresistible urge to beat you 
up, to disfigure you, to strangle you. And don't be so sure 
it will never come to that. You are driving me mad. Do 
you think that I'd be afraid of the scandal? Your anger? 
\\'hat is your anger to me? I love you without any hope, 
and I know that after a thing like that, I'd love you a 
thousand times more. If I ever kill you, I shall have to 
kill myself also. Oh well, I'll put off killing myself as long 
as possible, so that I can feel the insufferable pain of be­
ing without you. I'll tell you something incredible: I love 
you m o re every day, even though that is almost impossi­
ble. After all this, how can I help being a fatalist? Re­
member, the day before yesterday, on the Schlangen berg, 
I whispered, provoked by you: 'Say the word, and I'll 
jump down into the abyss.' If you had said the word, I'd 
have jumped. Don't you believe that I would have 
jumped?" 
"What stupid jabber!" she cried. 
"I don't care if it is stupid or clever," I cried. "I know 
that in your presence I must talk, talk, talk, and so I talk. 
I lose all my self-respect when I'm with you, nor do I care 
if I do." 
"Why should I make you jump off the Schlangen­
berg?" she said drily and in a peculiarly insulting man­
ner. "That would be absolutely useless to me." 
"Magnificent!" I cried. "You said your magnificent 
'useless' on purpose, so as to crush me. I see through you. 
Useless, you say? Yet pleasure is always useful, and sav-

The Gambler 
45 
age, unlimited power, if only over a fly, is also a kind of 
pleasure. Man is a despot by nature, and loves to be a tor­
mentor. You love it, awfully." 
I can remember she was looking at me with a sort of 
particularly fixed attention. It must be that my face was 
expressing all of my confused and absurd sensations. I 
remember now that our conversation that time went al­
most word for word as I have described it here. l\1y eyes 
were bloodshot. I was beginning to foam at the mouth. 
And as for the Schlangenberg, I swear it, even today: if 
she had told me that day to fling myself down, I'd have 
flung myself down! If she had said it only in jest, in con­
tempt, with a scoff, I'd still have jumped! 
"Oh no, sure, I believe you," she uttered, but in a man­
ner only she can sometimes say things, with such con­
tempt and venom, with such arrogance that, by God, I 
could have killed her that very moment. She was taking 
a risk. I wasn't lying about that either. 
"You are not a coward?" she asked me suddenly. 
"I don't know, perhaps I am a coward. I don't know 
. . .  I haven't thought of that in a long time." 
"If I said to you, 'Kill this man,' would you kill him?" 
"Whom?" 
"\Vhomever I might choose." 
"The Frenchman?" 
"Don't ask questions, answer me. \Vhomever I point 
out to you. I want to know if you were speaking seriously 
right now." She was anticipating my answer so seriously 
and so impatiently that I suddenly felt very strange. 
"Will you tell me, finally, what is going on here!" I 
cried. "Are you afraid of me, or something? I can see the 
whole mess myself. You are the stepdaughter of that mad 
and ruined man affiicted with a passion for that devil, 
Blanche. Then there is this Frenchman and his mysteri­
ous influence on you, and now you are asking me, in dead 

46 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
earnest, such a question. At least let me know, or else I'll 
go out of my mind and do something. Or are you ashamed 
to deign to draw me into your confidence? You couldn't 
possibly be ashamed of me!" 
"That's not what I was talking about. I asked you a 
question, and I'm waiting for an answer." 
"Of course I will kill," I cried, "anyone you tell me to, 
but could you possibly . . .  could you actually tell me to 
do it?" 
"What do you think? That I'd feel sorry for you? I'll 
just tell you to, and look on. \Vould you stand the test? 
Of course not, how could you? Perhaps you would actu­
ally kill, if I told you to, but then you would co,ne back 
and kill me for having dared to make you do it." 
I felt as though her words had gone to my head and 
stunned me. Naturally, even then I took her question for 
half-facetious, a challenge, perhaps. And yet she had said 
it too seriously. Nevertheless, I was quite struck by the 
frankness with which she had asserted her right over me, 
and her willingness to take such power over me, and the 
way she simply said, "Go and perish, while I look on." 
There was something so cynically outspoken about these 
words that I felt she had gone too far. So then, what did 
she really think of me? What she had said really went be­
yond slavery and insignificance. If you look at a man like 
that, you lift him up to your own level. And, absurd and 
implausible though our entire conversation had been, I 
felt a sudden throb in my heart. 
Suddenly she burst out laughing. \Ve were sitting on 
a bench, with the children playing before us, across from 
the place where carriages stopped to let off passengers 
headed for the parkway to the casino. 
"Can you see that fat baroness?" she cried. "That is 
Baroness von \Vurmerhelm. She arrived here three days 
ago. Do you see her husband, that tall, lean Prussian car-

The Gambler 
47 
rying a cane? Remember how he was looking at us the 
day before yesterday? Get up immediately, approach the 
Baroness, take off your hat, and say something to her in 
French." 
"Why?" 
"You swore that you would jump off the Schlangen­
berg. You swear that you are ready to kill a man, if I tell 
you. Instead of all these murders and tragedies, I just 
want a good laugh. I want no excuses, just go. I want to 
see how the Baron will thrash you with his cane." 
"You are provoking me. Do you think that I won't do 
it?" 
"Yes, I'm provoking you. Go, I want you to!" 
"All right, I'm going, though this is a crazy idea. Only 
one thing: couldn't this make trouble for the General, 
and through him for you, too? I swear it, I'm not worried 
about myself, but about you, and, well, about the Gen­
eral. What an idea to go and insult a woman!" 
"No, I can see that you're nothing but a windbag," she 
said contemptuously. "Your eyes were bloodshot a while 
ago, that's all. Though, perhaps only because you had too 
much wine at dinner. Do you think that I don't know 
that this is silly, and vulgar, and that the General will be 
angry? I simply want a good laugh. I want it, and that's 
all there is to it! And why should you insult a woman? 
And be thrashed with a cane, most probably." 
I turned around and, without a word, went to carry 
out her orders. Of course, it was stupid and of course I 
was doing it only because I hadn't found a way out of 
it. But as I approached the Baroness, I remember how 
suddenly something within myself egged me on to go 
through with it, schoolboyish mischief, perhaps. \Veil, 
and besides I was terribly overwrought, as though I were 
drunk. 

Six 
T
wo days have already passed since 
that stupid day. And how much 
fuss, noise, talk, and uproar there 
has been! And how confused, messy, stupid, and vulgar 
it was, and I the cause of it all. Yet at times it looks funny, 
to me at least. I can't really tell myself what has happened 
to me, whether I am really in a state of frenzy, or whether 
1'\'e simply become unhinged and will continue in this 
way until they tie me up. Sometimes I have the feeling 
that I am going out of my mind. And then again, it seems 
to me that I haven't really outgrown my childhood, that 
there is a lot of the schoolboy in me, and that I am simply 
playing crude schoolboy pranks on people. 
It is Polina, it is all Polina's fault! Perhaps there 
wouldn't have been any schoolboy pranks if it hadn't 
been for her. 'Vho knows, maybe it is all from despair 
(how stupid of me, though, to reason that way). And I 
don't understand, I simply don't understand what I find 
in her. All right, she is beautiful, that she is; or it seems 
that she is. She drives other men out of their minds, too. 
She is tall and slender, though very slim. It seems as if one 
could tie her in a knot or bend her double. Her foot is 
long and narrow: tormenting. Exactly so: tormenting. 
Her hair has a reddish tint. Her eyes are regular eat's 
eyes, but how proudly and disdainfully she can look with 
48 

The Gambler 
49 
them. About four months ago, when I had just started on 
my job, she had a long and heated conversation with de 
Grieux in the drawing room one night. And she was giv­
ing him that look . . .  later, when I was going to bed, I 
imagined that she had slapped his face, slapped him that 
very moment, and that she was standing there and giving 
him that look . . .  That night I fell in love with her. 
However, back to business. 
I walked down the path to the parkway and stood 
there, right in the middle, awaiting the Baroness and the 
Baron. \Vhen they were five paces from me, I lifted my 
hat and bowed. 
I remember the Baroness was wearing a huge light gray 
dress, with ruffles and a crinoline and train. She is short 
and exceptionally stout, with an ugly, fat double chin, so 
that you can't see her neck at all. Her face is crimson. Her 
eyes small, malicious, and insolent. She walks as though 
she were doing everybody an honor by her presence. The 
Baron is tall and lean. His face, in the usual German 
manner, is taut and covered with thousands of fine wrin­
kles. He wears glasses. He is about forty-five. His legs start 
almost from his chest: that is "race" for you. Proud as a 
peacock. A little awkward. A certain sheepishness in the 
expression on his face, passing, in its own way, for pro­
fundity. 
All this flashed across my eyes in three seconds. 
My bow and the hat in my hand barely caught their 
attention at first. Only the Baron frowned slightly. The 
Baroness kept floating straight at me. 
"Madame Ia Baronne," I said loudly and distinctly, 
rapping out each word, "j'ai l'honneur d'etre votre 
esclave."10 
Then I bowed, put on my hat, and walked past the 
10. "I have the honor of being your slave." 

50 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
Baron, politely turning my face toward him, and smiling. 
Pol ina had told me to take off my hat, but the bow and 
the schoolboy behavior were of my own invention. The 
devil only knows what made me do it. I felt as though I 
had just jumped off a cliff. 
"Hein!" cried, or rather croaked, the Baron, turning 
toward me in angry surprise. 
I turned around and stopped in respectful expectation, 
continuing to look at him and smile. He was evidently 
puzzled by it all and had raised his eyebrows to a point 
n e  plus ultm. His face grew more somber every moment. 
The Baroness also had turned in my direction and was 
staring at me in angry surprise. Some passersby were be­
ginning to look. A few stopped. 
"Hein! "  the Baron croaked again, the guttural sound 
of his voice and his wrath redoubled. 
"Ja wahl," I drawled, still looking him straight in the 
eye. 
"Sind sie rasend?"11 he cried, waving his cane and be­
ginning, apparently, to feel a little scared. Perhaps my 
external appearance puzzled him. I was dressed very de­
cently, even elegantly, like a man belonging to the best 
society. 
"ja wo-o-ohl!" I shouted suddenly at the top of my 
voice, drawling my o like the Berliners, who use the ex­
pression ja wahl all the time and drawl the letter o more 
or less, to convey various nuances of thought as well as of 
feeling. 
The Baron and Baroness turned quickly and almost 
ran away in fright. Some of the spectators began to talk, 
others just stared at me in amazement. I don't remember 
it very well, though. 
I turned and walked back to Polina Aleksandrovna 
1 1 .  ""Are you mad?" 

The Gambler 
51 
with my ordinary stride. But as I came within a hundred 
paces of her bench I saw her get up and walk with the 
children in the direction of our hotel. 
I caught up with her at the front entrance. 
"I've performed . . .  the foolishness," I said, as I reached 
her. 
"\Veil, so what? Now see how you'll get out of it," she 
answered, without even giving me a look, and went up­
stairs. 
I spent all that evening walking in the park. As I 
walked through the park and then through a forest, I ac­
tually crossed over into a different principality. I had 
some scram bled eggs and wine at a cottage. They charged 
me a whole thaler and a half for this idyllic repast. 
It was eleven o'clock when I got back. I was immedi­
ately sent for by the General. 
Our party occupied two suites at the hotel, four rooms 
altogether. The first is a large one, a salon with a piano 
in it. There is another large room next to it, which is the 
General's study. He was awaiting me there, standing in 
the middle of the room in an exceedingly majestic atti­
tude. De Grieux was there, too, lolling on a sofa. 
"My dear sir, allow me to inquire what you have been 
up to," the General began, addressing me. 
"I'd very much like to get straight to the point, Gen­
eral," said I. "You apparently want to discuss my encoun­
ter with a certain German which took place today." 
"A certain German?! That German is Baron \Vurmer­
helm, and a very important person, sir! You have been 
rude to him and the Baroness." 
"Not in the least." 
"You frightened them, dear sir!" cried the General. 
"But no, not at all! It is just that, ever since we were in 
Berlin, that ja wohl of theirs, continually repeated in 
every sentence and drawled in such disgusting fashion, 

52 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
has heen ringing in my ears. \Vhen I met this man in the 
park, this ja wohl suddenly came to my mind, I really 
don't know why, but it had an irritating effect on me . . .  
And besides, the Baroness, whom I have met three times 
so far, has the habit of walking straight at me, as if I were 
a worm to be trampled underfoot. You must admit that I, 
too, am entitled to some self-respect. I took off my hat 
and politely (let me asstJie you, politely) said: 'Madame, 
j'ai l'honneur d'etre VJtre esclave.' \Vhen the Baron 
turned around and shouted, 'Heinl' I suddenly felt an 
impulse to shout back, 'Ja wohl!' That's what I did, 
twice: the first time in my ordinary voice, the second time 
as loud as I could. That is all." 
I must confess I was terribly pleased with this exceed­
ingly schoolboyish statement. I was driven by an amaz­
ingly strong desire to work this story to the hilt, giving it 
the most absurd twist I could think of. 
And as I went on, I was really getting the taste of it. 
"Are you making fun of me?" cried the General. He 
tumed to the Frenchman and explained to him in 
French that I was positively going out of my way to pro­
voke a scandal. De Grieux laughed contemptuously and 
shrugged his shoulders. 
"Oh, please do not think so, far be it from me!" I cried, 
addressing the General. "Mine was of course a reprehen­
sible act, which I am most sincerely willing to admit. it 
may be even called a foolish and improper schoolboy 
prank, but-nothing more. And you know, General, I 
regret it very much indeed. However, there is one cir­
cumstance which, at least in my own eyes, almost saves 
me even from the remorse which I should othenvise feel. 
Of late, for the past two or even three weeks, I have not 
been feeling well. I have been feeling ill, nervous, irri­
table, subject to strange fancies, and at times I have lost 
control of myself. Frankly, there have been moments 

The Gambler 
53 
when I had a terrible urge to address myself suddenly to 
the Marquis de Grieux and . . .  However, I shall not com­
plete this sentence, for he may perhaps feel offended. In 
short, these are signs of an illness. I do not know whether 
Baroness \Vurmerhelm will take this fact into considera­
tion when I beg her to forgive me (for I intend to beg her 
forgiveness). I suppose that she won't, especially since, as 
far as I know, this particular fact has been rather abused 
lately by the legal profession: counsels for the defense in 
criminal trials have taken to absolving their clients, the 
criminals, from any blame by arguing that they were un­
aware of what they were doing at the moment of their 
crime, since crime is a form of disease. 'He beat up so­
and-so,' they say, 'but has no memory of it.' And imagine, 
General, medical theory actually supports them, affirm­
ing, in effect, that such a condition exists, that there is 
such a thing as temporary insanity, a condition in which 
a man may be almost totally unaware of what he is doing, 
or only half aware, or a quarter aware. However, the 
Baron and Baroness belong to the older generation and 
are, besides, junkers and of the landed gentry. It may be 
assumed, therefore, that these advances in the world of 
jurisprudence and medicine have not as yet come to their 
attention, so that they may not accept my explanation. 
\Vhat do you think, General?" 
"Enough, sir!" pronounced the General, sharply and 
barely restraining his indignation. "Enough ! I will try 
once and for all to rid myself of your schoolboyish tricks. 
You will not apologize to the Baron and Baroness. Any 
contact with you, even if it were to consist solely of your 
offering them your apology, would be too much of an in­
sult to them. The Baron, having been informed that you 
are a member of my household, has already had a talk 
with me at the casino, and let me tell you, it was touch 
and go for a moment whether or not he would ask me to 

54 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
give him satisfaction. Do you understand what you have 
subjected me to, me, my dear sir! I, I was forced to ask 
the Baron's pardon, and to give him my word that imme­
diately, as of this very day, you would cease to be a mem­
ber of my household . . .  
" 
"Allow me, allow me, General, so it was he who in­
sisted that I should cease absolutely to belong to your 
household, as it was your pleasure to put it just now?" 
"No, but I felt obliged to give him this satisfaction, 
and, of course, the Baron was satisfied. My dear sir, we 
must part now. I owe you forty gulden and three florins 
in local currency. Here is the money, and here is your 
settlement, you can check it. Good-bye. From now on we 
shall be strangers. I've had nothing but trouble and un­
pleasantness from you. I will immediately call a waiter 
and tell him that, beginning tomorrow, I am no longer 
responsible for your hotel expenses. This concludes our 
conversation." 
I took the money and the sheet of paper on which my 
settlement had been written in pencil, bowed to the Gen­
eral, and said to him very seriously: 
"General, this matter cannot he concluded like this. I 
regret very much that you have suffered such unpleasant­
ness from the Baron, but, forgive me, you must blame 
yourself for it. \Vhy did you take it upon yourself to an­
swer for me to the Baron? \Vhat is the meaning of the 
expression that 'I am a member of your household'? I am 
simply a tutor in your house, that's all. I am neither your 
son nor your ward, and you cannot be in any way respon­
sible for my actions. I am a legally responsible person. I 
am twenty-five years of age, a university graduate, a no­
bleman, and I am no relation or associate of yours. If it 
were not for my boundless respect for your personal qual­
ities, I should demand that you give me satisfaction on 
the spot, as well as a further, full explanation of why you 

The Gambler 
55 
took upon yourself the right to answer for me in this 
matter." 
The General was so thunderstruck that he threw up 
his hands, then suddenly turned to the Frenchman and 
hurriedly informed him that I had just all but challenged 
him to a duel. The Frenchman burst out laughing. 
"However, I have no intention of letting the Baron 
off," I continued with perfect sangfroid, not in the least 
embarrassed by M. de Grieux's laughter, "and inasmuch 
as you, General, by consenting today to listen to the Bar­
on's complaints and professing an interest in this matter, 
have made yourself, as it were, a party in the whole affair, 
I have the honor to advise you that no later than tomor­
row I shall ask the Baron, in my own name, to give me a 
formal explanation of the reasons which led him to ad­
dress himself, in a matter which was strictly my concern, 
to another person, bypassing me, as if I were unfit or un­
worthy to answer for myself." 
What I had foreseen actually happened: the General, 
upon hearing this new bit of nonsense, got cold feet, and 
badly. 
"\Vhy, do you really mean to keep this confounded 
business going?" he exclaimed. "How can you do this to 
me, my God! Don't dare, don't dare, sir, or, I swear . . .  
they have authorities here, too, and I . . .  I . . .  in short, 
considering my rank . . .  and the Baron's, too . . .  in short, 
you'll be arrested and deported by the police, for creating 
a disturbance! Do you understand this, sir?" And though 
he was breathless with anger, he was also terribly scared. 
"General," I answered, with a composure quite insuf­
ferable to him, "you couldn't have me arrested for creat­
ing a disturbance before there has been one. I haven't as 
yet begun to make my explanations to the Baron, and 
you are at this time entirely ignorant of my intentions 
regarding the procedure which I shall follow or the 

56 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
grounds on which I'll proceed. ·what I wish to clear up 
is the assumption, insulting to me, that I am under the 
guardianship of some other person who is alleged to have 
authority over my free will. There is absolutely no rea­
son for you to be worried or uneasy." 
"For God's sake, for God's sake, Aleksei Ivanovich, 
don't go through with this pointless intention!" mut­
tered the General, suddenly changing his angry tone to 
a pleading one, and even clasping my hands. "Imagine 
what this will lead to! More unpleasantness! You will 
realize that I must be particularly careful here, especially 
now! . . .  especially now! . . .  Oh, you don't know all my 
circumstances! . . .  After we leave here I'll be ready to 
take you back. It's just that, well, in short, you must see 
my reasons!" he cried in despair, "Aleksei lvanovich, 
Aleksei lvanovich!" 
Retreating to the door I once more asked him emphat­
ically not to worry, promised that everything would go 
well and properly and left in a hurry. 
Sometimes Russians traveling abroad are entirely too 
apprehensive, and terribly afraid of \•hat people will say, 
or how they will look at them, and whether this or that is 
the proper thing to do. In short, they behave as if they 
were all wearing corsets, especially those who have some 
pretensions to consequence. \Vhat they like best is some 
kind of ready-made, established code of behavior , .. ·hich 
they can follow slavishly-in hotels, on their walks, in 
assemblies, on the road . . .  But the General had let slip 
that, in addition to all this, there were some special cir­
cumstances, that he must be "particularly careful." That 
must be why he suddenly was so upset and changed his 
tone with me. I took note of it and registered it in my 
mind. And, of course, he could very well be foolish 
enough to get in touch with some authority or other in 
the morning; so I really had to watch my step. 

The Gambler 
57 
However, I had no particular desire to make the Gen­
eral himself angry. Rather, I felt very much like playing 
on Polina's nerves now. Polina had treated me so cruelly, 
having pushed me into this stupid situation, that I 
wanted very much to drive her to the point where she 
would have to plead with me to stop it. My school boyish 
tricks might get to where they might compromise her too. 
Besides, certain other feelings and desires were taking 
shape in my mind: for instance, if I am indeed ready to 
be reduced to a nonentity before her, this must not at all 
mean that I am a milksop before other people, and cer­
tainly not somebody whom the Baron could "thrash with 
his cane." I felt like having a good laugh at all of them, 
while looking great myself. I'll show them. Most likely 
she'll be afraid of a scandal and call me back. And even 
if she won't, she'll still see that I'm no milksop . . .  
(An amazing hit of news: I have just heard from our 
nurse, whom I met on the stairs, that Maria Filippovna 
left for Karlsbad today, all hy herself, by the evening 
train, to see her cousin. \Vhat does this mean? The nurse 
says that she has been intending to go for a long time. But 
why did no one else know about it? Though maybe I was 
the only one who didn't. The nurse also let out the secret 
that Maria Filippovna had some serious words with the 
General only the day before yesterday. I understand. 
That must be Mile I3lanche. Yes, we are approaching a 
critical juncture.) 

Seven 
/n the morn ing I rang for a waiter 
and told him to bi l l  me separately as 
of that day. 1\ly room was not really 
expensive, and so there was no reason for alarm and to 
move out righ t away. I had one hun dred and sixty gul­
den , and th ere . . .  th ere , perhaps, wealth! Strange thing, 
I haven 't won anything yet, but I act, I feel ,  and I th ink 
as if I were a rich man and can ' t  i magine mysel f any other 
way. 
In spite of the early hour I was getting ready to go and 
see Љ؋ r. Astley, who was staying at the Hotel d'Angleterre, 
not \·ery far from ours, when suddenly de Grieux en tered 
my room. That had never happened before, and besides, 
that gentleman and I had of late been on the most aloof 
and strained terms. He had been making no effort to con­
ceal his contempt for me or, rather, had been tryi ng not 
to conceal it, and I-I had my own reasons for disl iking 
him. To put it plainly, I hated him. His visi t greatly sur­
prised me. I understood at once that something special 
was brewing here. 
He entered very pol itely and compli mented me on my 
room. Seei ng that I had my hat in my hand, he inquired 
whether I could be going out for a wal k  so early in the 
morning. When I told him that I in tended to pay a visit 
58 

The Gambler 
59 
to Mr. Astley on some business, he stopped to think for a 
moment, got the point, and then assumed an exceedingly 
troubled expression. 
De Grieux was like all Frenchmen, that is, gay and po­
lite whenever this might be necessary and profitable, and 
insufferably boring when there was no longer any need 
to be gay and polite. A Frenchman is rarely naturally 
polite. His politeness is always made to order, with an 
ulterior motive. For instance, if he finds it necessary to 
be eccentric, original, and out of the ordinary, even his 
silly and affected fantasy will be made up of long-ac­
cepted and trite details. But when he is natural, a French­
man is composed of the most trivial, petty, commonplace 
practical sense; in short, he is the most tedious creature 
in the world. In my opinion, only novices, and especially 
young Russian ladies, are taken in by the French. A per­
son amounting to anything at all will immediately rec­
ognize the dead conventionality of their drawing-room 
politeness, ease of manner, and gaiety, and find it insuf­
ferable. 
"I have come to see you on business," he began, with 
a very unconcerned air, though politely, "and I will not 
conceal from you that I have come as an ambassador, or 
rather as a mediator, from the General. Having only a 
very poor knowledge of Russian, I understood almost 
nothing last night, but the General has explained i੾ to 
me in detail, and I must confess . . .  
" 
"But listen, Monsieur de Grieux," I interrupted, "here 
you have again undertaken to be a mediator in this mat­
ter. I am of course a tutor, and never pretended to the 
honor of being a close friend of the house or of being 
close to this family; so I am not familiar with its circum­
stances; but tell me, have you now become an actual 
member of this family? For you take such an interest in 

60 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
everything, and insist on stepping in as a mediator in 
every matter . . .  
" 
He did not like my question. He could see through it 
too well, and he was not going to let out any secrets. 
"I am connected with the General partly by business, 
and partly by certain special circumstances," he said 
coldly. "The General has sent me to ask you to abandon 
the intentions you spoke of yesterday. All the things that 
you were proposing to do were, of course, contrived with 
great ingenuity. However, the General has asked me to 
impress on you that you would nevertheless be utterly 
unsuccessful ; what is more, the Baron will not receive 
you, and he is, in any case, well equipped to protect him­
self against further unpleasantness on your part. You 
must see as much yourself. And so, tell me, what's the use 
of going on with this thing? The General, meanwhile, 
promises quite definitely to take you back into his house 
at the first convenient opportunity; and until that hap­
pens, he will continue to pay your salary, vos appointe­
ments. \Vouldn't that be very much to your advantage?" 
I replied very calmly that he was slightly mistaken 
there; that it might very well be that I wouldn't be kicked 
out of the Baron's, but, on the contrary, admitted and 
listened to; and I asked him to admit that he had prob­
ably come precisely with the idea of finding out how I in­
tended to go about this matter. 
"Good Lord! If the General is indeed so interested, 
then of course he would like to know what you intend to 
do, and how. Isn't that natural?" 
I proceeded to explain, while he listened in a lounging 
position with his head inclined toward me and an uncon­
cealed ironic expression on his face. On the whole he be­
haved very condescendingly. I did my best to give him 
the impression that I took this thing very seriously in­
deed. I explained that by complaining about me to the 

The Gambler 
61 
General, as if I were the General's servant, the Baron 
had, first, deprived me of my position, and second, had 
treated me as an individual whom he considered unfit to 
answer for himself and not worth speaking to. Of course, 
I said, I had a right to feel insulted. Hm-'.'ever, being 
aware of the difference of age, our respective positions in 
society, and so on and so forth (at this point I could 
scarcely restrain my laughter), I was not going to commit 
yet another indiscretion, that is, confront the Baron with 
a direct demand, or even a suggestion, of his giving me 
satisfaction. N e\·ertheless, I considered that I would be 
entirely within my rights if I offered him, and especially 
the Baroness, my apologies, especially since I had been 
feeling ill lately, overwrought, and, one might say, sub­
ject to strange whims, and so on and so forth. However, 
by having talked to the General rather than to me, which 
I took as an insult, and by insisting that the General dis­
miss me, the Baron had put me in such a position that I 
could no longer offer him and the Baroness my apologies, 
because if I did so, he and the Baroness and all the world 
would probably think that I had come to apologize out 
of fear, and in hope of getting back my position. From 
all this it had to follow, inevitably, that I was now forced 
to ask the Baron to apologize to me first, in the most mod­
erate terms, by stating, for example, that he had not at 
all meant to insult me. Once the Baron had apologized, 
my hands would be untied, and I would with perfect 
candor and sincerity offer him my apologies, too. In 
short, I concluded, I was only asking the Baron to untie 
my hands. 
"Fie, what scrupulousness and what refinement! And 
why should you apologize? Come on, monsieur . . .  mon­
sieur . . .  admit that you are starting all this on purpose, 
to annoy the General . . .  or could it be that you have 
something special in mind? . . .  man cher monsieur, par-

62 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
don, j'ai oublie votre nom, monsieur Alexis? . . .  N'est ce 
pas?"t2 
"But allow me, mon cher marquis, what business is this 
of yours?" 
"Mais le general . . .  " 
"But what about the General? He said something last 
night about having to be particularly careful . . .  and was 
so alarmed . . .  I couldn't understand a thing, though." 
"There is, there definitely is a particular circum­
stance," de Grieux joined in pleadingly, in a tone which 
sounded increasingly annoyed. "Do you know Mademoi­
selle de Cominges?" 
"That is, Mademoiselle Blanche?" 
"\Veil, yes, .Mademoiselle Blanche de Cominges . . .  et 
madame sa mere . . .  you know yourself, the General . .  . 
in short, the General is in love and in fact . . .  in fact, the 
nuptials may be performed here. :\'ow, imagine if there 
were a scandal, an affair . . .  
" 
"I can see no scandal, or affair, connected with these 
nuptials." 
"But le baron est si irascible, un caractere prussien, 
,·ous sa\·ez, enfin il fera une querelle d'AIIemand.U 
"\Vith me, to be sure, and not with you, since I am no 
longer a member of your household . . .  " (I was trying to 
act as muddleheaded as possible). "But, allow me, it is 
settled, then, that Mademoiselle Blanche is to marry the 
General? 'Vhat are they waiting for? Or rather, why keep 
it a secret, at least from us members of the household?" 
"I cannot . . .  however, it is not as yet entirely . . .  
though . . .  you know, they are expecting news from Rus­
sia; the General must settle his affairs . . .  " 
12. ""My dear sir, excuse me, l"l·e forgotten your name, Mr. Alexis? . . .  
Isn't it?'' 
13. ""The baron is so irascible, the Prussian character you know, he 
will finally pro,·oke a quarrel in the German fashion." 

"Aha! Grandmother!" 
The GambleT 
63 
De Grieux looked at me with hatred. 
"In short," he interrupted, "I fully rely on your innate 
courtesy, your intelligence, your tact . . .  of course you will 
do this for the family which received you like one of them, 
loving and respecting you . . .  
" 
"Come now, they threw me out! You assure me now 
that for the sake of appearances only, but you must admit 
that if somebody were to tell you : 'Look here, I don't 
want to pull your ears, of course, but let me pull your ears 
anyway, for the sake of appearances . .  .' Isn't that pretty 
much the same thing?" 
"\Veil, if this is what you want, if no request will pre­
vail on you," he began sternly and disdainfully, then 
allow me to assure you that the proper measures will be 
taken. There are authorities here; you'll be deponed this 
very day--que diable! un blanc-bee comme vous14 wants 
to challenge a personage like the Baron to a duel! And 
you think that you will get awa)· with this? Believe me, 
nobody here is afraid of you! \Vhen I made my request to 
you, it was rather of my own accord, so you wouldn't dis­
turb the General. And do you really believe that the 
Baron won't simply have you turned out by a servant?'' 
"But I am not going there myself," I replied, with the 
utmost composure. "That's where you are wrong. Mon­
sieur de Grieux; all this will proceed much more decor­
ously than you think. This very moment I am about to 
get in touch with ੿Jr. Astley and ask him to be my inter­
mediaf")', or in other words, mon second. The man has a 
liking for me and surely will not refuse. He will go to the 
Baron, and the Baron will receive him. Even if I am my­
self a tutor and might appear to be subalteme and, well, 
defenseless, :\lr. Astley is a nephew of a lord, a real lord, 
1 4. "What the deYil! A nobody like you . . .  
" 

64 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
a fact known to all, Lord Peabroke, who is present here. 
Believe me, the Baron will be courteous to Mr. Astley 
and will hear him out. And if he won't, Mr. Astley will 
look upon it as a personal insult (you know how persistent 
Englishmen are), and will send a friend of his to call on 
the Baron. And his friends are men of quality. Consider­
ing all this, don't you agree that things may not turn out 
the way you think they will?" 
઀ow the Frenchman was decidedly becoming worried. 
All that I'd been saying sounded as if it could be true, and 
so there was a real chance that I might indeed stir up a 
scandal. 
"But I'm begging you," he started, in an undisguisedly 
pleading voice, "drop this whole thing! You seem to 
relish the notion that there will be a scandal! \Vhat you 
want is not satisfaction, but a scandal! As I said earlier, it 
will all turn out to be most amusing and even witty, 
which may be what you are really after, but, in short," he 
concluded, seeing me reach for my hat, "I've come to 
hand you this brief note from a certain person; read it, 
since I was asked to wait for your answer." 
Having said this, he produced from his pocket a little 
note, folded and sealed with a wafer, and gave it to me. 
It was in Polina's handwriting: 
"I am under the impression that you may intend to go 
on with this affair. You are angry and you are beginning 
to act silly. Hm•;ever, there are some special circumstances 
which I will tell you of later, perhaps. Meanwhile, please 
stop it and restrain yourself. It is all so stupid! I need you, 
and you promised yourself to obey me. Remember 
Schlangenberg. I beg you to be obedient, and, if neces­
sary, I am ordering you. Your P. 
"P.S. If you are angry with me for what happened yes­
terday, please forgive me." 
I felt suddenly giddy having read these lines. My lips 

The Gambler 
65 
turned white, and I began to tremble. The accursed 
Frenchman was standing there looking pointedly dis­
creet, with his eyes turned away as if trying not to per­
ceive my confusion. I'd have felt better had he laughed 
at me outright. 
"Very well," I answered, "tell mademoiselle not to 
worry. Allow me, however, to inquire," I added sharply, 
"why you vJaited so long to give me this letter? Instead of 
chattering about all kinds of trifles, you ought to have 
started by handing it to me . . .  as long as you came here 
entrusted with it." 
"Oh, I wanted . . .  All of this is so strange that you must 
forgive my natural impatience. I was eager to find out for 
myself, and from you personally, what your intentions 
were. Besides, not being familiar with the contents of this 
note, I thought that there was no hurry about conveying 
it to you." 
"I understand. To put it more simply, you were told to 
give me the note only in the last resort, and if you could 
settle it orally, not to give it to me at all. Right? Tell me 
right out, Monsieur de Grieux!" 
"Peut-etre," said he, assuming an air of peculiar reserve 
and giving me a rather peculiar look. 
I took my hat. He gave me a nod and left. I thought I 
noticed a sarcastic smile on his lips. And how could it be 
otherwise? 
'Til get even with you yet, Frenchman, we'll see who 
wins!" I muttered as I walked down the stairs. I was still 
in a daze, as if I had been struck a blow on my head. The 
fresh air revived me a little. 
A mere two minutes later, as soon as my head had 
cleared up sufficiently, two thoughts stood out vividly be­
fore me: the first, that from such trifles, from a few school­
boyish and quite implausible threats, uttered casually by 
a green youth, there had arisen such a general state of 

66 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
alarm! And the second thought: what kind of influence 
could it be that this Frenchman has over Polina? A word 
from him, and she does everything he wants, writes a 
note, and actually begs me. Of course, their relations had 
been a mystery to me from the very beginning, ever since 
I got to know them. Yet during the last few days I had 
observed in her a positive revulsion and even contempt 
for him, while he did not even pay any attention to her 
and, in fact, was just plain rude to her. I had noticed this. 
Polina herself had told me about her aversion; of late she 
had let out some extremely significant secrets . . .  So he 
simply had her in his power; she was tied to him by 
certain bonds . . .  

Eight 
0 n the promenade, as they call it here, 
that is, on the walk under the chest­
nut trees, I met my Englishman. 
"Oh, oh!" he began as he caught sight of me, ''I'm on 
my way to see you, and you are on your way to me. So you 
have already left your people?" 
"Tell me, first of all, how do you know all this?" I 
asked, quite surprised; "is it possible that everybody 
knows about it?" 
"Oh, no, nobody knows. And why should everybody 
know? Nobody is saying a thing." 
"'\Veil, then, how do you know about it?" 
"I know it, that is, it so happened that I learned about 
it. Now, where are you going after leaving here? I like you 
and this is why I was coming to see you." 
"You are a nice person, Mr. Astley," I said (I was, how­
ever, terribly surprised; how did he find out?), "and since 
I haven't had my morning coffee yet, and you can surely 
stand another cup, let's go to the cafe in the casino. 'Ve'll 
sit there a while, smoke a cigarette, and I'll tell you every­
thing . . .  and you'll tell me something, too." 
The cafe was only a hundred steps away. We ordered 
coffee, I lighted my cigarette, Mr. Astley did not light one, 
but, fixing me with his eyes, got ready to listen. 
''I'm not going anywhere, I'm staying here," I started. 
67 

68 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
"I was sure you were going to stay," Mr. Astley ob­
served, approvingly. 
On my way to see Mr. Astley I hadn't had the slightest 
intention of telling him anything about my love for 
Polina; in fact, I had expressly told myself not to say a 
thing about it. During all those days I had hardly said a 
word to him that might have hinted at it. Besides, he 
was himself very bashful. I noticed, from their very first 
meeting, that Polina had made a great impression on 
him ; yet he never as much as mentioned her by name. But 
strangely enough, now suddenly, no sooner had he sat 
down and fixed me with his intent, metallic gaze, I felt, 
I don't know why, a desire to tell him everything, that is, 
all about my love, and with all its nuances. I spoke for a 
whole half-hour, finding it to be a most agreeable experi­
ence, since it was the first time I had ever told anybody 
about it! ::'\oticing that at certain particular ardent junc­
tures he became embarrassed, I purposely increased the 
ardor of my narrative. Only one thing I regret: I said, 
perhaps. more than I should about the Frenchman . . .  
؉fr. Astley listened, sitting there facing me, motionless, 
without uttering a word or a sound and looking me 
straight in the eye. But when I mentioned the French­
man, he suddenly cut me short and asked me sternly if I 
had a right to bring up this circumstance, which was none 
of my concern. Mr. Astley always formulated his ques­
tions very strangely. 
"You are right. I am afraid not," I answered. 
"You can say nothing about :'\I iss Polina and this mar­
quis, except for your own speculations; am I right?" 
I was again taken aback by so categorical a question 
coming from the otherwise so bashful Mr. Astley. 
"ʉ o, nothing definite," I answered, "nothing, of 
course." 
"If so, you have done wrong not only by bringing it up 

The Gambler 
69 
before me, but even by thinking of it in your own mind." 
"All right, all right! I admit it, but that is not the point 
now," I interrupted, wondering to myself. Here I told 
him all about yesterday, the whole story with all the de­
tails: Polina's prank, my encounter with the Baron, my 
dismissal, the General's exceedingly cowardly behavior, 
and finally, I described in detail de Grieux's visit earlier 
that morning, giving all the nuances. Finally I showed 
him the note. 
"\Vhat do you make of all this?" I asked. "I have come 
expressly to find out what you think of it. As for myself, I 
could have killed that miserable Frenchman, and maybe 
I shall do it yet." 
"I share your feelings," said Mr. Astley, "but in regard 
to Miss Polina, then . . .  you know that one may enter 
into relations even with people whom one detests if one 
is compelled by necessity. There may exist here certain 
relations of which you have no knowledge, and which 
depend on extraneous circumstances. I believe that you 
may set your mind at rest-partly, of course. As for her 
action yesterday, it was strange, of course-not because 
she decided to get rid of you by ex posing you to the 
Baron's walking stick (which, for reasons beyond my un­
derstandiug, he failed to make use of, though he had it 
in his hand), but because such a prank is for such . . .  for 
such a wonderful young lady . . .  improper. Of course, she 
couldn't foresee that you would carry out her wish ut­
tered in jest, so literally . . .  
" 
"You know what?" I cried suddenly, looking closely at 
Mr. Astley. "It seems to me that you have already heard 
about all this, and do you know from whom? From 
Miss Polina herself!" 
Mr. Astley looked at me with surprise. 
"You have a twinkle in your eyes and I can read your 
suspicion in them," he said, quickly regaining his former 

70 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
composure, "yet you haven't the slightest right to express 
your suspicions. I cannot allow you this right and abso­
lutely refuse to answer your question." 
"Well, enough of it! Nor do you have to!" I cried, 
getting strangely excited and not knowing why this 
thought had suddenly occurred to me. And really, when, 
where, and how could Mr. Astley have been chosen by 
Pol ina to be her confidant? Though, of late, I had to some 
extent lost sight of ઁfr. Astley, and Polina had always 
been an enigma to me, so much so that now, for instance, 
having launched into an account of the story of my love 
to Mr. Astley. I was suddenly struck, even as I was telling 
my story, by the fact that I could say hardly anything 
precise or positive about my relations with her. Quite 
on the contrary, everything about them was fantastic, 
strange, unlikely; in short, I had myself never seen any­
thing quite like it. 
"All right. all right. I am utterly confused by it all, 
and right now there is a great deal that I just can't under­
stand," I answered, breathlessly. "However, I can see that 
you mean well. Now, there is another matter, and I am 
asking, not your advice, but your opinion." 
I stopped for a moment, then continued: 
"Why do you think the General got so scared? \Vhy did 
they all get so wrought up about my silly antics? So 
wrought up that even de Grieux himself deemed it nec­
essary to intervene (and he will intervene only on the 
most important occasions), paid me a visit (imagine!), 
begged me, pleaded with me-he, de Grieux, pleaded 
with me! Finally, note that he came at nine o'clock, 
rather before nine, and Miss Polina's letter was already 
in his hands. If this is so, one can't help asking: when 
was it written? Could it be that they waked Miss Po­
lina to get it? (Apart from the fact that Miss Polina is 

The Gambler 
71 
obviously his slave for she even begs my forgiveness!), 
quite apart from that, how is she involved in all this, 
she personally? What is her interest in this? Why are they 
frightened by some Baron? And what of it, if the Gen­
eral is marrying Mademoiselle Blanche de Cominges? 
They say that they must be particularly careful on ac­
count of that circumstance, hut isn't this a little too 
particular, wouldn't you agree? What do you think? I 
can tell by your eyes that in this matter, too, you know 
more than I do." 
Mr. Astley laughed and nodded. 
"You are right, it seems that I know in fact a great deal 
more than you," he said. "The whole thing has to do with 
no one hut ંlademoiselle Blanche, and I am quite sure 
that this is the truth of it." 
"Well, what about Mademoiselle l3lanche?" I ex­
claimed impatiently (I suddenly had a hope that now I'd 
hear something about Mile Polina's secrets). 
"It appears to me that Mademoiselle Blanche has at the 
moment a very special reason for avoiding any encounter 
with the Baron and Baroness, even more an unpleasant 
encounter, and worse still a scandalous one." 
"Well, well!" 
"Two years ago Љlademoiselle Blanche was here dur­
ing the season. I was then in Roulettenhurg also. :\fade­
moiselle Blanche was not called ؊lademoiselle de Co­
minges then, and her mother, ઃfadame veuve Cominges 
was nonexistent then, at least there was never any men­
tion of her. As for de Grieux, there was no de Grieux 
either. I am most deeply convinced that they are not only 
unrelated but also have only \'ery recently made each 
other's acquaintance. Likewise, de Grieux has become a 
marquis only very recently-I am sure of that in view of a 
special circumstance. It can he assumed, in fact, that he 

72 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
began to call himself de Grieux only recently. I know a 
man here who has met him before under a different 
name." 
"But he really has a most respectable circle of acquaint­
ances." 
"Oh, that may be. This may be true even of Made­
moiselle Blanche. But two years ago Mademoiselle 
Blanche, following a complaint by this same Baroness, 
was asked by the police to leave town, and did so." 
" How did this happen?" 
"She showed up here first with an Italian, a prince of 
some sort, with a historic name, Barberini15 or something. 
A man all bedecked with rings and v.•ith diamonds, and 
not false ones either. They drove around in a magnifi­
cen t carriage. Mademoiselle Blanche played trente et 
quarante, winning at first; but then her luck changed, as 
I remember. As I recall, one night she lost a very large 
sum. But l\·orst of all, 11 11 beau malin her prince disap­
peared, and also the horses and the carriage; everything 
disappeared. A huge bill at the hotel. Mademoiselle 
Selma (no longer a Barberini, she suddenly had become 
̼lademoiselle Selma) was in the utmost despair. She 
wailed and shrieked all over the hotel, and rent her dress 
in a fit of fury. There was a Polish count staying at the 
same hotel (all Polish travelers are counts), and Made­
moiselle Selma, rending her garments and scratching her 
face like a cat with her lovely, perfumed hands, made an 
impression on him. They talked things over, and by din­
ner time she had overcome her grief. That night he 
showed up at the casino with her on his arm. Mademoi­
selle Selma was laughing again, and as usual rather loudly. 
Her manner was somewhat more free and easy than be-
15 .  Distinguished Roman name. 

The Gambler 
73 
fore. She now definitely joined the ranks of those ladies at 
the casino who, as they approach the roulette table, give a 
shove to another player to clear a space for themselves. 
This is considered particularly chic among such ladies. 
You must have observed them, of course?" 
"Oh, yes." 
"Really not worth it. To the annoyance of the decent 
public there are always many such women here, those 
who can change thousand-franc bills at the table every 
day. The moment they cease doing that, however, they 
are asked to leave. Mademoiselle Selma still continued to 
change hers, but her luck was even worse than before. 
You will note that these ladies are often quite lucky in 
their play; they have marvellous self-control. However, 
this is where my story ends. One day, just as the prince 
had done before him, the count disappeared. That night 
Mademoiselle Selma showed up at the casino alone, and 
this time no one offered her his arm. In two days she had 
lost everything. Having staked her last louis d'or and lost 
it, she glanced around and saw standing next to her Baron 
\Vurmerhelm, who was scrutinizing her intently and 
with deep indignation. But Mademoiselle Selma failed 
to notice the Baron's indignation and accosted him with 
that familiar smile, asking him to put ten louis d'or on 
red for her. Thereupon, following a complaint from the 
Baroness, she was asked that same night not to show her­
self at the casino again. If you are wondering how I 
could be familiar with all these trivial and entirely im­
proper details, it is because I heard them, finally, from 
Mr. Feeder, a relative of mine, who that very night car­
ried off Mademoiselle Selma in his carriage, going with 
her from Roulettenburg to Spa. Now, you must under­
stand this: Mademoiselle Blanche would like to become 
the General's wife so that in the future she will no longer 

74 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
receive invitations such as she had from the police at the 
casino two years ago. She no longer does any gambling, 
but this is because there is reason to believe that she now 
has capital of her own which she lends out at interest to 
gam biers here. Much better business, this. I even suspect 
that the unfortunate General owes her money, too. Per­
haps also de Grieux. Though maybe de Grieux is her 
associate. You will agree that, at least until the wedding, 
she would prefer not to attract the attention of the Baron 
and Baroness in any circumstances. In a word, the last 
thing she needs in her present position is a scandal. Now, 
you are connected with their party, and your actions 
could very easily lead to a scandal, especially as she is 
seen every day walking ann in arm with either the Gen­
eral or ઄fiss Polina. !\'ow do you understand?" 
"અo, I don't understand!" I cried, banging my fist on 
the table so hard that the garron came running in alarm. 
"Tell me, આfr. Astley," I repeated frantically, "if you 
knew this whole story and, consequently, read Made­
moiselle Blanche de Cominges like an open book, why 
didn't you at least warn me, or the General himself, or, 
most of all, l\Jiss Polina, who has been showing herselt 
here at the casino, in public, arm in arm with Mademoi­
selle Blanche?" 
"I had no reason to warn you, because you couldn't 
have done a thing," i\lr. Astley answered calmly. "Be­
sides, warn of what? It is quite possible that the Generaઇ 
knows as much about :\Iademoiselle Blanche as I do, or 
even more, and still keeps walking around with her and 
:\fiss Polina. The General is a most unfortunate man. I 
saw :\lademoiselle Blanche yesterday, galloping along on 
a beautiful horse with Monsieur de Grieux and that little 
Russian prince, and the General galloping after them on 
a chestnut. In the morning he told me that his legs ached, 
but he rode his horse well. And there, that very moment, 

The Gambler 
75 
the thought occurred to me that this was an utterly ruined 
man. Besides, all this is no business of mine, and it is only 
lately that I have had the honor o£ making Miss Polina's 
acquaintance. And moreover," Mr. Astley suddenly re­
called, "I have already told you that I do not recognize 
your right to ask certain questions, even though I have a 
sincere liking for you . . .  " 
"Enough," I said, getting up, "it is clear as daylight to 
me now that Miss Polina, too, knows everything about 
Mademoiselle Blanche, but that she cannot give up that 
Frenchman, and so brings herself to taking walks with 
Mademoiselle Blanche. Believe me, no other influence 
in the world could have made her walk around with 
Mademoiselle Blanche and beg me in a note not to touch 
the Baron. There must definitely be that influence, to 
which everybody yields! And yet, it was she herself who 
egged me on to get at the Baroni The devil take it all, 
I can't figure it out!" 
"First, you are forgetting that this Mademoiselle de 
Cominges is the General's fiancee, and second, that Miss 
Polina, the General's stepdaughter, has a little brother 
and sister, the General's own children, whom this crazy 
man has already utterly abandoned and, it seems, robbed 
as well." 
"Yes, yes! That must be it! To leave would mean to 
abandon the children altogether, to stay means to pro­
tect their interests and, perhaps, to save some fragments 
of their property. Yes, yes, all this is true! But still, but 
still! Ah, now I understand why they are all so concerned 
about Granny!" 
"About whom?" asked Mr. Astley. 
"That old witch in Moscow who won't die, and about 
whom they are expecting a telegram saying that she is 
dead." 
"\Veil, yes, o£ course, that is the only thing that matters 

76 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
now. It's the inheritance that courts! If the inheritance 
comes through the General will marry; Miss Polina will 
be set free also, and de Grieux . . .  
" 
"\Veil, what about de Grieux?" 
"De Grieux ,..,·ill get his money; that's all he is waiting 
for." 
"But is it all? Do you really think this is all he wants?" 
"I know of nothing else," said Mr. Astley and lapsed 
into an obstinate silence. 
"But I do, I do!" I repeated, Hying into a rage. "He is 
waiting for the inheritance too, because Polina will get a 
dowry, and as soon as she has got the money she will throw 
herself on his neck. All women are like that! And it's 
precisely the very proudest among them who later turn 
out to be the most commonplace slaves! Polina is capable 
only of loving with passion, and nothing else! That is my 
opinion of her! Look at her, especially when she sits there 
alone, lost in thought: there is something foreordained, 
fated, damned about her! She is capable of all the horrors 
of life and passion . . .  she . . .  she . . .  but who is calling 
me?" I suddenly exclaimed. "Who is shouting? I heard 
someone shout in Russian: 'Aleksei Ivanovich!' A wom­
an's voice, listen, listen !" 
By this time we were approaching our hotel. We had 
left the cafe a long time ago, almost without noticing it. 
" I  heard a woman calling, but I didn't know who was 
being called; it was in Russian; now I can see where the 
shouting comes from," l\lr. Astley was pointing in a direc­
tion ; "it is that woman sitting in a large armchair who has 
just been carried inside by a crowd of attendants. They 
are carrying her suitcases after her; it must be that the 
train has just arrived." 
"But why is she calling me? She is shouting again; look, 
she is waving to us." 
"I can see that," said l\f r. Astley. 

The Gambler 
77 
"Aleksei I vanovich! Aleksei I vanovich! Good Lord, 
what a dolt he is!" I heard someone shout desperately 
from the hotel entrance. 
We almost ran to the doorway. I took the few steps, 
reached the landing, and . . .  stood there in amazement, 
my feet rooted to the ground, feeling very weak inside. 

Nim 
0 n the top landing of the broad front 
entrance of the hotel, having been 
carried up the steps in her annchair, 
surrounded by servants, maids, and the many members of 
the hotel staff, all eager to give satisfaction, and headed by 
the Ober-Kellner himself, who had come out to welcome 
the exalted guest who had arrived with such fanfare and 
eclat, with her own servants and with all kinds of port­
manteaus and trunks, there was seated-Grandmother! 
Yes. it was she herself, redoubtable and rich, seventy-five­
year-old Antonida Vasilievna Tarasevicheva, landowner 
and grand lady of Moscow, "Ia baboulinka," about whom 
telegrams had been sent and received, who had been dy­
ing but had refused to die and who, like a bolt from the 
blue, had suddenly appeared before us in person. Though 
an invalid and carried in her chair, she had arrived as 
always for the last five years, alert, perky, and sure of 
herself as ever before, sitting upright in her chair, shout­
ing in a loud and imperious voice, scolding every one­
in short, she was exactly the same as she had been on the 
two or three occasions on which I had had the honor of 
seeing her since I became a tutor at the General's house. 
Naturally I just stood there, speechless with amazement. 
But she had detected me a hundred paces away, with her 
lynxlike eyes, as she was being carried inside, and called 
78 

The Gambler 
79 
me by my name and patronymic-which she had remem­
bered, as she invariably did. "And this is the woman they 
expected to see in her coffin, buried, and leaving them her 
fortune," flashed through my mind; "why, she will out­
live us all, and everyone in this hotel! But, my God, what 
will become of our family now, what will the General do? 
She will turn the whole hotel upside down!" 
"Well ,  sir, why do you just stand there, staring at me?" 
she went on shouting at me; "don't you know how to 
make a bow and wish a person good morning? Or have 
you grown too proud to do so? Or, perhaps, you don't 
recognize me. Do you hear that, Potapych," she turned to 
a white-haired old man wearing a dress coat and white tie 
and with a pink bald pate, her butler, who accompanyed 
her on her journey; "do you hear that, he won't acknowl­
edge me! They've buried me! They send one telegram 
after another: 'Is she dead, or isn't she dead?' As you can 
see, I know all about it! And as you can see for yourself, 
I am very much alive." 
"For heaven's sake, Antonida Vasilievna, why should 
I wish you any harm?" I answered cheerfully once I had 
recovered my senses; "I was merely surprised . . .  And 
how could I help being surprised, so unexpected . . .  
" 
"\Vhat's so surprising about it? I just took a train and 
came here. Had a smooth, comfortable ride. You've been 
out for a walk, haven't you?" 
"Yes, I took a walk to the casino." 
"It is pleasant here," said Grandmother, looking 
around; "it's warm, and they've got fine trees here. I like 
that! Are our folks at home? The General?" 
"Oh! Yes, I think so; around this time they ought to be 
in." 
"So they have fixed hours here, and all kinds of for­
malities. Giving themselves airs. I hear that they keep a 
carriage, les seigneurs russes! They've blown everything 

80 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
back home, so they go abroad! And IS Praskovia with 
them?" 
"Yes, Polina Aleksandrovna, too." 
"'Vhat about the Frenchman? Oh, well, I'll see them 
all myself. Aleksei Ivanovich, show me the way, straight 
to him. Do you like it here?" 
"It's all right, Antonida Vasielievna." 
"And you, Potapych, tell that dolt, the Kellner, that I 
want a comfortable suite, a nice one, not too high, and 
take my things there at once. And why are they all so 
anxious to carry me? \Vho asked them? Flunkies! Who is 
that with you?" she asked, addressing me again. 
"This is Mr. Astley," I answered. 
"What Mr. Astley?" 
"A tourist, a good friend of mine. He also knows the 
General." 
"An Englishman. There you see, he is staring at me, 
without unclenching his teeth. I like Englishmen, 
though. 'Veil, carry me upstairs then, straight to their 
rooms. \\7here are they?" 
They carried her upstairs, with me leading the way up 
the broad stairway of the hotel. Our procession was a 
most spectacular one. Everyone we met stopped and 
stared. Our hotel was considered the best, the most ex­
pensive, and the most aristocratic of the resort. On the 
stairways and in the halls one could always meet magnifi­
cently dressed ladies and distinguished looking English­
men. i\fany people were asking the Ober-Kellner down­
stairs about her and he was greatly impressed himself. Of 
course he told everybody who asked that this was a dis­
tinguished foreign lady-une russe, une comtesse, grande 
dame-and that she was going to occupy the same suite 
in which Ia grande duchesse de N. had been staying 
the week before. Grandmother's imperious and authori­
tative appearance as she was carried up in her chair was 

The Gambler 
81 
mainly responsible for the sensation that she created. 
Every time she met someone new she would measure that 
person curiously from head to foot, and question me 
about everybody in a loud voice. Grandmother was a 
woman of substantial build, and though she did not get 
up from her chair, one could see that she was quite tall. 
She kept her back straight as a board and never leaned 
back in her chair. Her large gray head with its massive 
and bold features was held erect. Her face wore a posi­
tively haughty and defiant expression, and one could see 
that her attitude and gestures were perfectly natural. In 
spite of her seventy-five years her complexion was still 
quite fresh, and even her teeth were still rather good. She 
was wearing a black silk dress and a white cap. 
"I find her very interesting," Mr. Astley whispered to 
me as he walked up with me. 
"She knows about the telegrams," I thought. "She is 
also familiar with de Grieux, but I imagine that she 
doesn't know much about Mile Blanche as yet." I imme­
diately communicated this observation to Mr. Astley. 
After the first surprise was over, I was looking forward 
with immense and evil glee to the thunderbolt which was 
about to strike the General. I felt as if something were 
egging me on to it, and I led the way with great alacrity. 
Our family was staying on the third floor. I did not 
announce her arrival or even knock on the door, but sim­
ply flung it wide open, and Grandmother was carried in, 
in triumph. As luck would have it, they were all there, 
assembled in the General's study. I t  was twelve o'clock 
and apparently they were planning some excursion. 
Some were to go by carriage, others on horseback, the 
whole crowd; also, some acquaintances had been invited 
to join the party. Besides the General, Polina and the 
children, and the nurse, there were present in the study: 
de Grieux, Mile Blanche, again wearing her riding habit, 

82 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
her mother 1\fme. veuve Cominges, the little prince, and 
another learned tourist, a German, whom I had not seen 
with them before. Grandmother's chair was set down in 
the middle of the room, right in front of the General. 
Good Lord! I shall never forget this scene! \Vhen we en­
tered the room the General was telling the others some­
thing, and de Grieux was making a correction in his 
narrati,·e. It must be mentioned that Mile Blanche and 
de Grieux, during the last two or three days, had for some 
reason been particularly attentive to the little prince, a 
Ia lJarlJe du fJauvJ·e gbleralY; The atmosphere, though 
perhaps artificial , was cheerful and congenial. Upon see­
ing Grandmother, the General just stood there dumb­
founded, his mouth wide open, unable to finish the word 
he was going to say. He stared at her, his eyes bulging, as 
though spellbound by a basilisk. Grandmother stared at 
him in silence also, without moving, but what a trium­
phant. provocati\·e, and mocking look it was! They gazed 
at each other for a full ten seconds in the midst of com­
plete silence ou the part of everybody present. De Grieux 
seemed petrified at first, but soon an expression of ex­
traordinary uneasiness appeared on his face. Mile 
Blanche raised her eyebrows, opened her mouth, and 
stared wildly at Grandmother. The prince and the 
scholar were watching the whole scene, deeply puzzled. 
Patina's expression revealed extreme surprise and be­
wilderment, hut then, suddenly, she turned white as a 
sheet. A moment later the blood rushed rapidly to her 
face, flushing her cheeks. Yes, this meant disaster for 
e\·erybody! I could do nothing but keep turning my eyes 
from Grandmother to the people around her, and back. 
ЉJr. Astley stood on one side, calm and sedate as usual. 
"Well, here I am! Instead of a telegram!" Grand-
16. "To the General's face." 

The Gambler 
83 
mother finally broke the silence, in her loud voice; "you 
didn't expect me, did you?" 
"Antonida Vasilievna . . .  auntie . . .  but how on earth 
. . .  " muttered the unfortunate General. If Grandmother 
had remained silent for a few more seconds, he might 
have had a stroke. 
"How on earth what? I just took a train and came here. 
\Vhat else is the railway for? And you all thought that I 
had turned up my toes and left you my fortune? I know 
very well how you kept sending telegrams from here. You 
must have spent quite a hit of money on them, too. Must 
he quite a hit, all the way from here. \Veil, and I decided 
to go for a trip, and here I am! Is this the Frenchman? 
Monsieur de Grieux, I imagine?" 
"Oui, madame," de Grieux responded, "et croyez, je 
suis si enchante . . .  votre sante . . .  c'est un miracle . . .  
vous voir ici, une surprise channante . .  .''17 
"Charmante, I dare say. I know you, mountebank that 
you are. I don't helieve you this much! "  and she showed 
him her little finger. "Who is this?" she asked, pointing 
at Mile Blanche. The spectacular Frenchwoman, in a rid­
ing hahit, crop in hand, evidently impressed her. "Is she 
from these pans?" 
"This is Mademoiselle Blanche de Cominges, and this 
is her mother, Madame de Cominges; they are staying in 
this hotel," I reported. 
"Is the daughter maTTied?" asked Grandmother, un· 
ceremoniously. 
"Mademoiselle de Cominges is a maiden lady," I an­
swered, as respectfully as possible and purposely in a low 
voice. 
"Lively?" 
I pretended not to understand the question. 
1 7.  "Yes, madame and be assured that I am so delighted . . .  your 
health . . .  it's a miracle . . .  to see you here, a charming surprise." 

84 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
"Fun to have around? Does she understand Russian? 
De Grieux here, he picked up some Russian in Moscow, 
had a smattering of it." 
I explained that Mile de Cominges had never been to 
Russia. 
"Bonjour!" said Grandmother, suddenly turning 
abruptly to Mile Blanche. 
"Bonjour, madame," Mile Blanche curtsied ceremo­
niously and elegantly, IT1aking haste to express, under the 
cover of extraordinary modesty and politeness, yet with 
her whole face and figure, her extreme astonishment at 
such a strange question and manner of address. 
"Oh, she's casting down her eyes; she is putting on airs 
and graces. Shows what kind of creature she is, some ac­
tress, probably. I am staying downstairs here at the ho­
tel ," she suddenly turned to the General ; "I'll he your 
neighbor, are you glad or aren't you?" 
"Oh, auntie! Believe that I feel sincerely . . .  pleased," 
the General joined in. He had by now recovered himself 
to some extent, and as he could, on occasion, express him­
self aptly, with gravity, and even with some pretension to 
eloquence, he promptly began to display his gifts now. 
"\\'e "·ere so alarmed and upset by the news of your ill­
ness . . .  \Ve received such despairing telegrams, and all 
of a sudden . . .  
" 
"Come on, stop this nonsense!" Grandmother inter­
rupted at once. 
"But how could you," the General, in his turn, quickly 
interrupted her, raising his voice and trying not to notice 
the "nonsense," "how could you bring yourself to under­
take such a long journey? You must admit, at your age 
and considering your health . . .  in any case, it is all so 
unexpected that our astonishment is understandable. 
But I am so very glad . . .  and we all [here he began to 
smile officiously and rapturously] will try our utmost to 

The Gambler 
85 
make your stay here during this season a most pleasur­
able one . . .  " 
"Come, enough of that; so much idle chatter; you're 
talking rubbish as usual; I can take care of myself with­
out your help. However, I don't mind your being around, 
I don't bear a grudge. You're asking me how I got here. 
What's so surprising about it? Very simple. And why is 
everybody so surprised? How are you, Praskovia? 'Vhat 
are you doing here?" 
"How do you do, Grandmother," said Polina, ap­
proaching her, "how long did it take you to get here?" 
"'Veil, she's the only one to ask a sensible question, 
everybody else says nothing but ohl and ah! 'Veil, you 
see, I lay in bed and got all kinds of treatments for a long 
time, until I finally decided to get rid of all my doctors 
and sent for the sexton from St. Nicholas. He had cured 
a peasant woman of that same disease by means of hay 
dust. \Veil, and he helped me, too. On the third day I 
worked up a good sweat and was able to get up. Then my 
Germans gathered around me again, put on their glasses, 
and began to argue: 'If you'd go abroad now,' they said, 
'to a watering place, and take a course of treatment, your 
obstruction may disappear altogether.' And why not, I 
thought to myself. Then the fools started moaning and 
groaning: 'How could you possibly make it there?' Well, 
so here I am. It took me just one day to get packed, and 
last Friday I took a maid, and Potapych, and a footman, 
Fyodor, but I sent Fyodor back home, from Berlin, be­
cause I saw that I didn't need him at all. In fact, I could 
have got here all by myself . . .  I took a private compart­
ment and there are porters at every station. For twenty 
kopecks they'll carry you wherever you like. See! ·what 
a suite you have taken! "  she said in conclusion, looking 
around. ""Where did you get the money for it, my dear 
man? ·why, everything you've got is mortgaged. What a 

86 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
pile of money you owe to the Frenchman here alone! I 
know all about it, every bit of it!" 
"I say, auntie . . .  " said the General , very much embar­
rassed, "I am surprised, auntie . . .  I think I can, without 
anyone checking on me . . .  and besides, my expenses here 
do not exceed my means, and we are here . . .  
" 
"They don't, eh? Is that what you said? Then you must 
have robbed your children of the last penny! Trustee!" 
"After this, after such words . . .  " started the General, 
indignantly. "I really don't know . . .  
" 
"There you are, you don't know! I bet you hang 
around the roulette table here all the time? Have you 
blown everything yet?" 
The General was so startled he almost choked on a 
surge of excited emotion. 
"Roulette! I? In my position . . .  I? You can't mean 
that, auntie; you must still he ill . . .  
" 
"Come, don't lie to me. I bet they couldn't drag you 
away from it. It's all lies! You know what, I'm going to 
see for myself what this roulette is like, this very day. You, 
Praskovia, tell me, what are the sights here, and let Alek­
sei Ivanovich point them out to me, and you, Potapych, 
write down all the places we'll have to see. \Vhat sights 
have they got here?" she suddenly turned to Polina again. 
"੼ot far from here are the ruins of a castle; then there 
is the Schlangen berg." 
"What's the Schlangenberg? A forest, or what?" 
"No, it's not a forest, it's a mountain; it's got a 
point . . .  
" 
"What point?" 
"The very highest point on the mountain; they've got 
an enclosed platform there. The view from there is mag­
nificent." 
"So they'd have to lug my chair up a mountain? Do 
you think they could do it?" 
"Oh, we could lind porters," I answered. 

The Gambler 
87 
At this moment, Fedosia, the nurse, came in to greet 
Grandmother, bringing along the General's children. 
"Come, they don't have to kiss me! I don't like to kiss 
children; their noses are always dirty. Well, how are you 
doing here, Fedosia?" 
"It's very, very nice here, Antonida Vasilievna, 
madam," answered Fedosia. "And how have you been, 
madam? \Ve've been fretting about you something 
terrible." 
"I know, you are a good soul. Say, do you ah•;ays have 
your rooms full of guests?" turning again to Polina. 
"\Vho is this mousy little man wearing spectacles?" 
"Prince Nilsky, Grandmother," Polina whispered. 
"Ah, a Russian? And I thought he wouldn't under­
stand what I said ੽ 1\fayhe he didn't hear it. I've already 
met Mr. Astley. Ah, here he is again," said Grandmother, 
catching sight of him; "how do you do?" she suddenly 
turned to him. 
Mr. Astley bowed to her, without saying a word. 
"\Veil, what's the good word from you? Tell me some­
thing! Translate that to him, Polina!" 
Polina did so. 
"That I am greatly delighted to be in your presence, 
and that I am glad that you are in good health," Mr. Ast­
ley answered seriously, hut without a moment's hesita­
tion. It was translated to Grandmother, and it evidently 
pleased her. 
"\Vhat nice answers an Englishman will always give 
you," she remarked. "For some reason I've always liked 
the English, no comparison between them and those 
Frenchmen! Come and see me some time," she said, ad­
dressing Mr. Astley again. 'Til try not to bother you too 
much. Translate that to him, and tell him that I'm stay­
ing right here, downstairs, downstairs, do you hear?" she 
repeated for l\Jr. Astley, pointing downward. 
Mr. Astley was extremely pleased with this invitation. 

88 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
Grandmother measured Polina from head to foot with 
an attentive and satisfied look. 
"I could be fond of you, Praskovia," she said suddenly, 
"you are a fine wench, the best of the lot, but what a tem­
per-wow! \Veil, I've got a temper myself. Turn around 
a bit. You're not wearing a wig, are you?" 
"No, Grandmother, it's my own." 
"That's better. I don't care for today's silly fashions. 
You are very pretty. I'd fall in love with you if I were a 
young gentleman. Why aren't you married? But it is time 
for me to go. I want to get some fresh air, I've been on the 
train long enough . . .  Well, are you still angry with me?" 
she turned to the General. 
"Oh, heavens, no, auntie, how could I!" the General 
recovered himself, delighted; "I understand, at your 
age . . .  
" 
"Cette vieille est tombee en enfance,"18 de Grieux 
whispered to me. 
" Look. I want to see everything here. Will you let me 
ha\·e Aleksei lvanovich for some time?" Grandmother 
went on to the General. 
"Oh, for as long as you please, but I will myself . . .  and 
Polina, and Monsieur de Grieux . . .  we'll all take plea­
sure in accompanying you . . .  " 
"Mais. madame, cela sera un plaisir," de Grieux 
chimed in, with his most charming smile. 
"Piaisir, to be sure. I find you funny, my dear sir. I'm 
not going to give you any money, though," she added 
suddenly. addressing herself to the General. "\Veil, and 
now to my room: I must look it over, and then we'll go 
and see all the sights. Come, lift me up." 
Grandmother was lifted up again and everybody 
flocked downstairs, following: her chair. The General was 
18. "This old woman has become childish." 

The Gambler 
89 
walking along as though stunned by a blow on the head. 
De Grieux was obviously thinking very hard. Mile 
Blanche at first was going to stay behind but then 
changed her mind and joined the rest of us. The prince 
followed her at once, and there was no one left in the 
General's suite but the German and Madame veuve 
Cominges. 

Ten 
A
t watering places and, I bel ieve, all 
over Eu rope, hotel managers and 
Oher-Kellners, i n  assign ing rooms 
to their guests. arc gu ided not so much by the demands 
and wishes or the guests as by their own personal opi nion 
of them. It ough t  to be added that they are rarely mis­
taken. They had assigned to Grandmother, for reasons 
obscure to me, so sum ptuous a suite that i t  actually over­
shot 
the mark somewha t :  
fou r  splendidly furn ished 
rooms. with a ha th . quarters for the servan ts, a special 
room for her personal maid, and so on and so forth . A 
grand duchess had actually stayed th ere the week before, 
a fact wh ich the new <XTupant WaS i n formed of immedi­
ately in order to en hance the value of the su i te. Grand­
mother was carried , or rather wheeled, through all her 
rooms. and she looked them over atten tively and sternly. 
The Oher-Kellner, bald and advanced in years, accom­
panied her respectfully 011 this first inspection . 
I don't know whom they all took G randmother to be, 
hut they apparent l y  assum ed she was an extremely im­
portant and. above al l ,  wealthy person. They immedi­
ately pu t down in the hook, " àfadamc Ia generale pri n­
cessc de Tarasscvi tcheva, "  though G randmother had 
never hee11 a pri ncess. The servan ts, a special com part­
ment on the train, that mass or superfluous portman-
90 

The Gambler 
91 
teaus, suitcases, and even chests which had arrived with 
her, probably laid the foundation of her prestige; and 
her chair, the abrupt tone of her voice, her eccentric 
questions, asked in the most natural manner and without 
penniuing any contradiction, in short, Grandmother's 
whole appearance, erect, vigorous, imperious, did the 
rest to create the awe in which she was held by all. Dur­
ing the inspection Grandmother would time and again 
tell them to stop her chair, point to some piece of furni­
ture, and address some unexpected question to the Ober­
Kellner, who was still smiling respectfully, though he 
was obviously beginning to get scared. Grandmother 
asked her questions in French, which she spoke rather 
badly; so I translated for her most of the time. The Ober­
Kellner's answers for the most part did not please her and 
left her unsatisfied. Then, too, she seemed to be asking 
questions that were quite beside the point, heaven knows 
about what. For instance, she suddenly stopped in front 
of a picture, a rather mediocre copy of some well-known 
original depicting a mythological scene. 
"Whose portraiL is that?" 
The Ober-Kellner explained that it was most prob­
ably some countess. 
"How is it you don't know? You're living here and 
don't know who it is. Why does it hang here? Why is she 
squinting?" 
The Ober-Kellner was unable to give satisfactory an­
swers to all these questions and became quite flustered. 
"There's a blockhead for you! "  commented Grand­
mother, in Russian. 
They carried her further. The same thing happened 
with a Dresden figurine, which Grandmother looked at 
for a long time and then ordered it removed for some 
unknown reason. Finally, she began to pester the Ober­
Kellner about the bedroom carpets: what did they cost, 

92 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
and where had they been woven? The Ober-Kellner 
promised to make inquiries. 
"\Vhat asses! "  Grandmother grumbled, concentrating 
her whole attention on the bed. 
"\\'hat a fancy canopy! Open it up." 
They opened the bed. 
"More, more, roll it all up. Take off the pillows, the 
pillowcases, lift up the feather bed." 
They turned everything around. Grandmother exam­
ined it carefully. 
"A good thing they haven't got any bedbugs. Take off 
all the linen ! Make it up with my own linen and my pil­
lows. But all this is too fancy. An old woman like me 
won't need this kind of place: I'll be bored all alone. 
Aleksei lvanovich, you must come and see me often, 
whenever you are through teaching the children." 
"I left the General's service yesterday," I answered, 
"and I'm li,·ing at the hotel strictly on my own." 
"Why is this?" 
"Some days ago an important German Baron with his 
wife, the Baroness, arrived here from Berlin. Yesterday, 
in the park, I said something to him in German, without 
keeping to the Berlin accent." 
"\Veil , so what?" 
"He thought it an impertinence and complained to 
the General, and the General dismissed me on the spot." 
"\Veil, did you call the Baron names, or something? 
(Though if you did, so what!)" 
"Oh, no. On the contrary, the Baron raised his stick to 
hit me." 
"And you, sniveler, allowed your tutor to be treated 
that way!" she suddenly turned to the General, "and fired 
him in the bargain! Milksops! You're all milksops, as I 
can see." 
"Don't you worrie, auntie," answered the General, 

The Gambler 
93 
with a touch of condescending familiarity; "I can man­
age my own affairs. Besides, Aleksei Ivanovich has not 
given you quite an accurate account of the matter." 
"And you put up with it just like that?" she turned to 
me agam. 
"I was going to challenge the Baron to a duel," I an­
swered as modestly and calmly as I could, "but the Gen­
eral was against it." 
"And why were you against it?" Grandmother turned 
to the General again. "(And you can go now, my good 
man; I'll call you when I need you," she now turned to 
the Ober-Kellner, "no need to hang around gaping; I 
can't stand these N uremberg faces!)" The man bowed 
and left, of course without understanding Grandmoth­
er's compliment. 
"For heaven's sake, auntie, you can't fight duels these 
days!" the General replied, with an ironic smile. 
"Why not? All men like to strut and swagger, so let 
them fight, too. Milksops, that's what you all are, as I can 
see, can't stand up for your country. Come, pick me up! 
Potapych, see that two porters are always ready, hire 
them, and make all arrangements. I don't need more 
than two. They have to carry me only up and down stairs; 
where it is level, in the street, they can wheel me. Explain 
that to them. And pay them beforehand, that'll make 
them more respectful. But you yourself, always stay near 
me, and you, Aleksei Ivanovich, show me that Baron 
when we take our walk: so I know what this 'Von' Baron 
looks like, at least. 'Veil, where is the roulette?" 
I explained that the roulette tables were located at the 
casino, in several halls. Then she asked more questions: 
were there many of them? were there many people play­
ing? did they play all day long? how were they set up? I 
finally said that it would be best if she saw it all with her 
own eyes, and that it was rather difficult to describe it. 

94 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
"Well, then, take me straight there! Lead the way, 
Aleksei lvanovich!" 
"\Vhy, auntie, aren't you at least going to take a rest 
after your journey?" the General asked solicitously. He 
was beginning to look a little worried; in fact, they all 
seemed a bit Hurried and were exchanging significant 
glances. Probably they felt somewhat uneasy, or even em­
barrassed, about acLompanying Grandmother straight to 
the casino, \•here she was naturally likely to commit some 
of her eccentricities, but this time in public; neverthe­
less, they all offered to accompany her. 
"And why should I take a rest? I'm not tired, I've been 
sitting still for five days anyway. And then, later, we'll go 
and see what springs and medicinal waters they have 
here, and where they are. And then . . .  what did you call 
it, Praskovia, the 'point,' or what?" 
"That's right, Grandmother, point." 
"\\'ell, point, if that's what you call it. And what else 
have you got here?" 
"There are many objects of interest here, Grand­
mother,'' said Pol ina, hesitating a little. 
"\\'ell, you don't know yoursel f! Marfa, you'll come 
with me, too,'' she said addressing her maid. 
" But why should she come with us, auntie?" the Gen­
eral said, getting flustered, "and in fact it's impossible, 
and I also doubt whether Potapych will be admitted into 
the casino." 
"\Veil, that's nonsense! So she is a servant, so I have to 
leave her behind! She is a human being, too, isn't she? 
Here we are, on the road for a whole week, so she'd like 
to see a few things, too. How could she go anywhere, ex­
cept with me? She wouldn't dare show her nose in the 
street by herself." 
"But, Grandmother . . .  " 
"So you're ashamed to be with me, is that so? Then 

The Gambler 
95 
stay home, I didn't ask you to come. Look, what a general 
he is! I'm a general's widow myself. And why should the 
whole crowd of you drag behind me? I can look at it all 
just with Aleksei Ivanovich . . .  
" 
However, de Grieux insisted categorically that we 
should all accompany her, and entered upon the most 
polite phrases about what a pleasure it was to accompany 
her, et cetera. \Ve all started. 
"EIIe est tombee en enfance," de Grieux repeated to 
the General, "seule elle fera des hetises . . .  "10 I could not 
hear what he said then, but he evidently had his plans, 
and, perhaps, he was cherishing some hope again. 
It was about a third of a mile to the casino. The way 
led along a park lane lined with chestnut trees and then 
to a square. The General felt somewhat reassured now, 
for our procession, though rather eccentric, was, never­
theless, seemly and decorous. There was after all nothing 
surprising about the fact that an ailing and disabled per­
son, an invalid, had come here to take the waters. How­
ever, quite obviously, the General was afraid of the ca­
sino: why should a sick person, an invalid, and an elderly 
lady at that, go to the roulette tables? Polina and Mile 
Blanche walked on each side of the chair as it was wheeled 
along. Mile Blanche was laughing in a modestly cheerful 
way and telling Grandmother polite pleasantries, so very 
well that the latter finally said something approving of 
her. Polina, on the other side, had to answer Grandmoth­
er's incessant and innumerable questions, such as: ""\Vho 
was that? who was that woman driving by? how large a 
city is this? how large is this garden? what are those trees? 
what are those mountains? have they got eagles here? 
what is that funny looking roof?" Mr. Astley who was 
walking beside me whispered that he expected a great 
1 9. "Alone she will do some stupid things." 

96 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
deal from that morning. Potapych and Marfa walked be­
hind, close to the chair; Potapych had on a dress coat and 
white tie and a visored cap; Marfa, a fortyish, red-cheeked 
woman with graying hair, wore a cap, a cotton dress, and 
creaking goatskin shoes. Grandmother turned back to 
talk to them quite often. De Grieux and the General 
trailed behind by a few steps, discussing something very 
heatedly. The General looked very crestfallen, while de 
Grieux talked with an air of determination. Maybe he 
was trying to reassure the General; evidently he was giv­
ing him some sort of advice. Yet Grandmother had al­
ready pronounced, a while ago, the fateful words: ''I'm 
not going to give you any money." Perhaps to de Grieux 
this announcement seemed incredible, but the General 
knew his aunt. I noticed that de Grieux and Mile 
Blanche kept winking at each other. As for the prince 
and the German tourist, I could see them at the farther 
end of the parkway; they had fallen behind and were now 
walking away from us. 
\Ve entered the casino in triumph. The doorman and 
attendants displayed the same respectfulness as the peo­
ple at the hotel. However, they looked at us with some 
curiosit)'· Grandmother at first asked to be shown all the 
various rooms, some of which she approved of, remaining 
indifferent to others. She had questions about them all, 
though. Finally they got to the gambling halls. The at­
tendant who was standing at the closed door like a sen­
tinel, suddenly flung it wide open, looking thunder­
struck. 
Grandmother's appearance at the roulette tables made 
a deep impression on the public. There was a crowd of a 
hundred and fifty or two hundred players, several rows 
deep around the roulette tables and at the other end of 
the hall, where there was a table for trente et quarante. 
Those who had succeeded in pushing their way through 

The Gambler 
97 
the crowd right up to the table would usually stand finn 
and give up their place only when they had lost every­
thing; for those who are only spectators are not allowed 
to occupy a place at the gaming tables. Though there are 
chairs set around each table, few gamblers ever use them, 
especially when there is a large crowd, because one can 
pack them more tightly when they are standing, and so 
save some space, and besides, it's more convenient to 
place one's bets standing up. The second and third rows 
were crowding around the first, waiting and watching 
for their turn; but sometimes an impatient gambler 
would push a hand through the front row and place a 
bet. In this way some players managed to squeeze. a bet 
through even from the third row. As a result of this prac­
tice ten or even five minutes rarely passed without some 
"incident" over disputed stakes at one end of the table 
or the other. The casino police are fairly efficient, though. 
There is no escaping these crowded conditions, of course, 
since large numbers of people are naturally welcome on 
account of the profits. But eight croupiers seated around 
each table keep a close eye on the stakes; they also keep 
score of all winnings, and whenever there is an argument 
they are ready to settle it. In extreme cases the police are 
called, and the incident is all over in a minute. The po­
lice officers wear plain clothes and mingle with the crowd 
of spectators so that they cannot be recognized. They are 
especially on the lookout for thieves and other shady op­
erators who are particularly numerous at the roulette 
tables because of the extraordinary ease with which they 
can ply their trade there. Indeed, in any other place a 
thief must pick pockets or break locks, which, if some­
thing goes wrong, may cause him a great deal of trouble. 
But here, all a thief has to do is to walk up to the roulette 
table, start playing, and suddenly, openly and publicly, 
pick up someone else's winnings and put them in his 

98 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
pocket. If there is an argument, the crook insists, loudly 
and emphatically, that the money is his. If the whole 
thing is done cleverly and the witnesses are hesitant, the 
thief very often walks off with the money, if it is not a 
very large sum of course. If it is a large sum, either the 
croupiers or one of the other players is virtually certain 
to have taken note of it beforehand. But if it is not too 
large a sum, the real owner may sometimes simply give 
in, shrinking from a scandal, and walk away. But when­
ever a thief is exposed, he is at once ignominiously ejected 
from the casino. 
Grandmother was watching all these goings-on from a 
distance, with wide-eyed curiosity. She very much ap­
proved of a thief's being turned out of the casino. She 
showed little interest in trente et quarante; she liked 
roulette much better, what with the little rolling hall. 
She declared finally that she would like to have a closer 
look at the game. I don't know how it happened, but the 
attendants and a few other officious agents (mostly little 
Poles who, having themselves lost, were now foisting 
their services on more fortunate players and foreigners 
of all sorts) at once, and in spite of the crowd, found and 
cleared a place for Grandmother near the very middle of 
the table, next to the chief croupier, and wheeled the 
chair to it. ̼lany visitors who were not playing but just 
watching the play (mostly Englishmen with their fam­
ilies) immediately crowded around that table to watch 
Grandmother from behind the players. Numerous lor­
gnettes were turned upon her. The croupiers perked up: 
such an eccentric player certainly seemed to promise 
something quite special. Naturally, an old lady of sev­
enty, an invalid, yet wanting to gamble, was not a sight 
to be seen every day. I jostled my way up to the table also 
and took my stand at Grandmother's side. Potapych and 
Marfa were left somewhere far behind, among the crowd. 

The Gambler 
99 
The General, Polina, de Grieux, and Mile Blanche also 
stood aside among the spectators. 
Grandmother started by looking over the players. In a 
half whisper she asked me curt, abrupt questions: who is 
this man? who is this woman? She took a particular fancy 
to a very young man at the end of the table who was play­
ing for very high stakes, putting down thousands at a 
time. The rumor was that he had already won as much 
as forty thousand francs, and piles of gold and bank notes 
lay in front of him. He was pale. His eyes were flashing 
and his hands were trembling. He was already making 
his hets quite aimlessly, just putting down what he could 
grab with his hand, yet he kept on winning and winning, 
raking in more and more money. The attendants were 
busying themselves around him, moving up a chair for 
him, clearing a place around him so that he would be 
more comfortable, making sure that the other players 
would not crowd in on him-all in expectation of a big 
tip. Some players who have won a lot tip the croupiers 
without counting the money and from sheer joy just give 
them a handful. At the young man's side a little Pole had 
already established himself. He was trying very hard to 
make himself useful, whispering in his ear solicitously 
and uninterruptedly, probably telling him how to play, 
giving advice, and directing the game-of course, he, too, 
expected a gratuity later. The gambler scarcely looked 
at him, but kept betting at random and raking in the 
money. He obviously no longer knew what he was doing. 
Grandmother watched him for several minutes. 
"Tell him," she suddenly got very excited and nudged 
me, "tell him to quit, tell him to take his money quickly 
and go away. He will lose it all, he'll lose it all if he 
doesn't quit right away!" she was so concerned that she 
almost lost her breath from excitement. "\Vhere is Pota­
pych? Send Potapych over to him! Come, tell him, tell 

100 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
him," she kept nudging me; "where, indeed, is Potapych! 
Sortez, sortez!" she began herself shouting to the young 
man. I leaned over to her and whispered, very resolutely, 
that one wasn't allowed to shout like that here, that even 
talking just a bit loud was forbidden, because it inter­
fered with people making their calculations, and that 
they would throw us out directly. 
"What a shame! The man is lost. \Veil, it's his own 
doing . .
. I can't look at him, it makes me sick. What a 
dolt!" And Grandmother quickly looked the other way. 
There, on the left, on the other side of our table, a 
young lady, accompanied hy a dwarf of some sort, caught 
her attention. I don't know who this dwarf was, whether 
some relative of hers or just brought along to make an 
impression. I had noticed the lady before; she showed up 
at the gaming tables every day, at one o'clock in the after­
noon, and left exactly at two, playing one hour every day. 
They already knew her at the casino, and a chair was set 
for her at once. She would then take out some gold, a 
few thousand-franc bills, and proceed to place her bets 
quietly, coolly, and calculatingly, taking notes with a 
pencil on a sheet of paper of the numbers that were com­
ing up and trying to find the pattern according to which 
the chances fell at a given moment. She bet considerable 
sums. Every day she would win a thousand, two thou­
sand, or at the most three thousand francs-not more, 
and having won this much, she would immediately walk 
away. Grandmother observed her for a long time. 
"\\'ell, that one won't lose! That one won't lose for 
sure! \\'hat sort is she? You don't know? \Vho is she?" 
"She must be a Frenchwoman of some kind," I whis­
pered. 
"Ah, one can tell a bird by its flight. This one has a 
sharp claw, you can see that. Tell me now what every 
turn of the wheel means and how you place your bets." 

The Gambler 
101 
"I explained as best as I could the many different com­
binations in which the bets could be placed: rouge et 
noir, pair et impair, manque et passe, and, finally, the 
various subtleties in the system of numbers. Grand­
mother listened attentively, remembered, asked ques­
tions, and was learning the game. Since examples for 
each system of play were readily available all the time, a 
lot of it could be learned and remembered very quickly 
and easily. Grandmother was quite pleased. 
"But what is zero? Look, that croupier, the curly­
haired one, the head man, shouted u!ro just now? And 
why is he raking in everything that's on the table? Look 
at the pile he has grabbed, all for himself. \Vhat's going 
on?" 
"Zero means that the bank wins, Grandmother. \Vhen­
ever the little ball stops at zero, everything that's on the 
table goes to the bank. It is true, you get another chance 
to recover your loss, but at any rate the bank cannot lose." 
"Is that so! And so I get nothing at all?" 
"No, Grandmother, if you had put your money on 
zero, and zero came up, you'd have been paid thirty-five 
times the amount you had put down." 
"\Vhat? thirty-five times, and does it come up often? 
Why don't they put their money on it, the fools?" 
"The odds are thirty-six to one against it, Grand­
mother!" 
"What nonsense! Potapych! Potapych! Wait, I've got 
some money myself, there!" She pulled out her tightly 
packed purse and took out ten gulden. "There you are, 
place it on zero at once." 
"Grandmother, zero has only just been up," I said, 
"which means that it will be a long time before it turns 
up again. You'll lose a great deal; wait a little, anyway." 
"Stop talking nonsense and put it down!" 
"As you please, but it may take all night before it 

102 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
comes up again ; you may lose a thousand; it has hap­
pened." 
"Come on, nonsense, nonsense! If you're afraid of the 
wolf, stay out of the forest. What? I lost? Bet again!" 
Ten more gulden were lost, and ten more bet. Grand­
mother could hardly sit still in her seat. Her eyes were 
eagerly fixed on the little ball dancing along the notches 
of the turning wheel. The third ten gulden were also 
lost. Grandmother was quite beside herself; she couldn't 
sit still at all, and she even banged her fist on the table 
when the croupier announced trente six instead of the 
expected zero. 
"There, look at it!"' Grandmother said angrily; "how 
long will I have to wait until that miserable little zero 
comes up? For the life of me, I'm not going to leave here 
before zero comes up! It's all that cursed curly-headed 
little croupier's fault; he will never let it come! Aleksei 
Ivanovich, put down two gold pieces at once! At this rate, 
even if zbo comes up finally, you won't get much." 
"Grandmother!" 
" Put it down, I told you! It's not your money." 
I bet twenty gulden. The ball whirled around the 
wheel for a long time, then at last began to bounce 
around the notches. Grandmother froze in anticipation 
and squeezed my hand, and suddenly: bang! 
"Zbo," announced the croupier. 
"You see, you see!" Grandmother turned to me 
quickly, all beaming and pleased. "Didn't I tell you! The 
Lord himself put it into my head to stake two gold pieces. 
Well, how much do I get now? Why aren't they paying 
up? Potapych, Marfa, where are they now? Where is 
everybody? Potapych, Potapych!" 
"Later, Grandmother," I whispered, "Potapych is at 
the door, they won't let him in here. Look, Grandmother, 
they are giving you the money, take it!" A heavy roll of 

The Gambler 
103 
gold pieces, worth five hundred gulden and sealed in 
blue paper was tossed to Grandmother, and two hundred 
extra gulden were counted out to her. I scooped it all to­
gether with a little shovel and pushed it toward Grand­
mother. 
"Faites Ie jeu, messieurs! Faites Ie jeu, messieurs! Rien 
ne va plus?20 called the croupier, inviting the players to 
place their bets and getting ready to turn the wheel. 
"Oh, my God! we're late! he'll start turning it! put it 
down, put it down!" Grandmother urged me, excitedly; 
"don't dally, quick"; she was quite beside herself and 
kept nudging me with all her might. 
"\Vhere do you want me to put it, Grandmother?" 
"On tero, on zero! On zero again! Bet as much as you 
can! How much have we got altogether? Seven hundred 
gulden? No need to worry about them, put down two 
hundred gulden at once." 
"Think what you are doing, Grandmother! It may not 
come up two hundred times running! I assure you, you'll 
lose your whole capital." 
"Oh, nonsense, nonsense! put it down! And stop wag­
ging your tongue! I know what I am doing," Grand­
mother was actually beginning to shake with excitement. 
"According to the rules you can't place more than one 
hundred and twenty gulden on zero, Grandmother; here, 
I've done that." 
"Why can't I? Aren't you lying to me? Monsieur! Mon­
sieur!" she started nudging the croupier who was sitting 
to her left and was just getting ready to spin the wheel, 
"combien zero? cent vingt? cent vingt?"21 
I quickly explained the question in French. 
20. "Place your bets, gentlemen! Place your bets, gentlemen! No more 
bets?" 
21. "How much [on] zero? one hundred and twenty? one hundred and 
twenty?" 

104 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
"Oui, madame," the croupier confirmed politely. "Just 
so that no single stake shall exceed four thousand florins, 
according to regulations," he added in explanation. 
"'Veil, too bad, put down a hundred and twenty, 
then." 
"Le jeu est fait!" said the croupier. The wheel began 
to turn, and thirteen came out. We had lost! 
"Once more! once more! put it down once more!" 
cried Grandmother. I no longer argued with her, but, 
shrugging my shoulders, placed another hundred and 
twenty. The wheel spun around for a long time. Grand­
mother was positively shaking as she watched the wheel. 
"Does she really think that zero is going to win again?" 
I thought, looking at her with wonder. Her face'beamed 
with a secure conviction of her winning, a certain expec­
tation that in another moment they would shout zero! 
The ball jumped into a slot. 
"Zero!" the croupier announced. 
"Wow!!!" Grandmother turned to me in a frenzy of 
triumph. 
I was myself a gambler; I felt it that very moment. My 
limbs were trembling, and I felt dazed. Of course, this 
was a rare occurrence, zero coming up three times in 
some ten turns of the wheel; yet there was nothing par­
ticularly amazing about it. I had myself witnessed, two 
days earlier, how zero came up three times in a row, and 
a player who had been keeping track of the winning num­
bers observed aloud that only the day before that same 
zero had turned up only once during a twenty-four-hour 
period. 
Since Grandmother had won a most significant sum, 
her winnings were counted out to her with particular 
care and attention. She was to receive exactly forty-two­
hundred gulden. They gave her the two hundred in gold, 
and the four thousand in bank notes. 

The Gambler 
105 
This time Grandmother no longer called for Potapych. 
She had other things on her mind. She no longer nudged 
anybody, or shook outwardly. She was, if one may say so, 
shaking inwardly. Her whole mind was concentrated on 
only one thing, as if she were aiming directly at some­
thing: 
"Aleksei Ivanovich! didn't he say that you can bet only 
four thousand florins at a time? There, take it, put the 
whole four thousand down on red," Grandmother said 
firmly. 
There was no sense contradicting her. The wheel be­
gan to turn. 
" Rouge!" the croupier proclaimed. 
Again she had won four thousand florins, that is, eight 
thousand in all. " Let me have these four, and put the 
other four on red," Grandmother commanded. 
I bet another four thousand. 
"Rouge!" the croupier announced again. 
"Makes twelve thousand! let me have it all. Pour the 
gold here into my purse, and put away the bank notes." 
"Enough! Home! \Vheel my chair out!" 

Eleven 
T
he chair was wheeled to the door 
at the other end of the hall. Grand­
mother was beaming. Our whole 
group at once thronged around her with congratula­
tions. Eccentric though Grandmother's behavior had 
been, her triumph made amends for a great deal of it, 
and the General was no longer afraid of being compro­
mised in public by his relationship with so strange a 
woman. \Vith a condescending and cheerfully familiar 
smile, as though he were humoring a child, he congratu­
lated Grandmother. He ,.,·as, however, visibly impressed, 
as were all the other spectators. All over the place people 
were talking and pointing at Grandmother. Many passed 
by to get a closer view of her. At one side Mr. Astley was 
talking about her with two of his English friends. Several 
majestic ladies were examining her with awed amaze­
ment, as though she were a marvel of some kind. De 
Grieux, all smiles, profusely congratulated her. 
"Quelle victoire!" he said. 
"Mais, madame, c'etait du feu !"22 Mile Blanche added, 
with an ingratiating smile. 
"Yes, I just went and won twelve thousand. Twelve, 
indeed, but what about the gold? Together with the gold 
22. "But, madame, it was terrific!" 
106 

The Gambler 
107 
it will be almost thirteen; how much is that in our 
money? Must be about six thousand, right?" 
I reported that it made more than seven, and that, at 
the present rate of exchange it might go as high as eight 
thousand. 
"Really? eight thousand! And you milksops just sit 
around here, doing nothing! Potapych, Marfa, did you 
see it?" 
"Madam, how did you do it? Eight thousand rubles!" 
cried Marfa admiringly. 
"Here you are, I 'm giving you five gold pieces, take 
them!" 
Potapych and Marfa rushed to kiss their mistress's 
hand. 
"And let the porters have ten gulden each, also. Give 
each of them a piece of gold, Aleksei Ivanovich. What 
about that flunkey bowing, and the other one, too? Con­
gratulating me? Give each of them ten gulden, too." 
"Madame Ia princesse . . .  un pauvre expatric . . .  mal­
heur continue) . . .  les princes russes sont si genereux," a 
mustachioed character in a shabby jacket and gay colored 
waistcoat came around fawning, holding his cap in his 
outstretched hand and wearing a servile smile . . .  
"Give him ten gulden, too. No, give him twenty. \Veil, 
that's enough, or there will be no end with them. Pick 
me up and carry me! Praskovia," she turned to Polina 
Aleksandrovna, "I'll buy you some material for a dress 
tomorrow, and I'll buy mademoiselle . . .  what's her 
name, Mademoiselle Blanche, isn't it? I 'll buy her some, 
too. Translate that for her, Praskovia!" 
"Merci, madame," Mile Blanche curtsied sweetly, 
twisting her lips in an ironic smile, which she exchanged 
with de Grieux and the General. The General was rather 
embarrassed and was very glad when we had reached the 
parkway. 

108 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
"Fedosia, well, won't Fedosia be surprised," said 
Grandmother, remembering the General's nurse, whom 
she knew. "I must buy her a dress also. Hey, Aleksei 
Ivanovich, Aleksei Ivanovich, give something to this 
beggar!" 
A ragged looking character was passing by, his back 
bent, and looking at us. 
"But, Grandmother, maybe he isn't even a beggar, but 
some sort of crook, or something." 
"Give it to him, I tell you! Give him a gulden!" 
I went up to the man and gave h im a gulden. He 
looked at me in wide·eyed amazement, but took it with­
out saying a word. He smelled of liquor. 
"And )'OU, Aleksei Ivanovich, have you tried your luck 
yet?" 
"No, Grandmother." 
"But your eyes were burning, I saw it." 
'Til try it yet, Grandmother, I surely will, later." 
"And bet on zero right away! You'll see! How much 
money have you got?" 
"Only two hundred gulden, Grandmother." 
"That isn't much. I can loan you five hundred, if you 
want. Here, take this roll, but as for you, my dear man, 
don't you expect anything, for I won't give you any­
thing!" she suddenly turned to the General. 
It nearly doubled him over, but he said nothing. De 
Grieux frowned. 
"Que diable, c'est une terrible vieille!"23 he muttered 
to the General through clenched teeth. 
"A beggar, a beggar, another beggar!" shouted Grand­
mother. "Aleksei Ivanovich, give him a gulden, too." 
This time it happened to be a white-haired old man 
with a wooden leg, wearing a long blue frock coat and 
carrying a long cane in his hand. He looked like an old 
23. "The devil take it, she's a terrible old woman!" 

The Gambler 
109 
soldier. llut when I held out my gulden to him, he took 
a step back and gave me a menacing look. 
"\Vas ist's der Teufel!" he shouted, adding a dozen 
other oaths. 
"Well, he's a fool!" cried Grandmother, giving up on 
him. "Let's get going! I'm hungry! Now we'll have din­
ner directly, then I'll have some rest, and then we'll go 
back there." 
"You want to gamble again, Grandmother?" I ex­
claimed. 
"And what did you think? If you keep sitting around 
here and moping, must I watch you all the time?" 
"Mais, madame," de Grieux approached her, "les 
chances peuvent tourner, une seule mauvaise chance et 
vous perdrez tout . . .  surtout avec votre jeu . . .  c'etait 
terrible!"24 
"Vous perdrez ahsolument," chirped Mile Blanche. 
"\Vhat business is that of yours, all of you? It won't he 
your money, hut my own! But where is that Mr. Astley?" 
she asked me. 
"He stayed at the casino, Grandmother." 
"Too had. Now that's a nice man for you." 
On returning home, Grandmother met the Ober­
Kellner on the stairs, stopped him, and bragged to him 
about her winnings; she then sent for Fedosia, gave her 
thirty gulden, and ordered dinner to he served. Fedosia 
and Marfa showered her with compliments at dinner. 
"I was watching you, madam," Marfa twittered, "and 
I told Potapych: '\Vhat is it our lady intends to do?' And 
there's money on the table, money, good gracious! All my 
life I haven't seen so much money, and it's all gentlefolk 
standing there, nothing but gentlefolk sitting there. 'And 
where," said I, 'do all these gentlefolk come from, Pota-
24. "But, madame . . .  your luck can change, one bad bet and you will 
lose everything . . .  especially the way you're playing . . .  it was terrible!" 

I IO 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
pych?' So I thought to myself: 'May Our Lady herself 
help her.' And there I was, praying for you, madam, and 
my heart sinking, simply sinking, and myself trembling 
all over, just trembling. 'Lord help her,' I thought, and 
there's where the Lord gave it to you. I am still trem­
bling, madam, still trembling all over." 
"Aleksei Ivanovich, after dinner, around four o'clock, 
get ready and we'll go. And now let's say good-bye for a 
while, and don't forget to get me a doctor. After all, I'm 
here for the waters, too. Go now, and don't forget it.'' 
I left Grandmother in a sort of stupor. I was trying to 
imagine what would happen to all our people and what 
turn things might take now. I saw clearly that they (and 
the General in particular) had not yet recovered from 
the first shock, not from the very first impression, even. 
Grandmother's appearance, instead of a telegram an­
nouncing her death (meaning, of course, the inheritance 
of her fortune), had so completely shattered all their 
previous plans and decisions that their reaction to 
Grandmother's further exploits at the roulette table was 
evidently one of bewilderment and a sort of shock. 
؈leanwhile this second fact was almost more important 
than the first, for even though Grandmother had said 
twice that she was not going to give the General any 
money, yet, who could know-there was no need to give 
up hope altogether. Certainly de Grieux, involved as he 
was in all the General's affairs, was not losing hope. I am 
convinced that Mlle Blanche, also very much involved 
(and with ample reason : becoming a General's wife, plus 
a substantial inheritance!), could not have given up hope 
either, but would use every bit of her beguiling coquetry 
on Grandmother-in contrast to the stubborn and proud 
Polina, who was incapable of currying anybody's favor. 
But now, now that Grandmother had scored such a tri­
umph at roulette, now that her personality had shown 

The Gambler 
I l l  
itself so clearly and tangibly (an obstinate, domineering 
old woman, et lombee en enfance), now, it would seem, 
all was lost. \Vhy, she had been pleased as a child to have 
tried it, and of course she would lose her last penny even­
tually. Lord! I thought (and, God forgive me, with a 
most malignant laugh), why, every ten-gulden piece 
Grandmother bet just now must have touched an open 
sore in the General's heart, must have infuriated de 
Grieux, and driven Mile de Cominges to a frenzy, as she 
saw the prize slipping from her grasp. And there was an­
other fact: even after she had won and was so overjoyed 
that she handed out money to everybody and took every 
passerby for a beggar, even then Grandmother had felt 
compelled to say to the General: ''I'm not going to give 
anything to you, though !" That means that she had been 
thinking about it for a long time, that she was going to 
stick to it, and that her mind was set about it--dangerous, 
very dangerous! 
All these considerations were going around in my head 
as I walked up the front stairs from Grandmother's suite 
to my own little room on the top floor. I was greatly in­
trigued by it all. To be sure, I had been able, even earlier, 
to make some conjectures regarding the most important 
and the strongest threads that might be linking the actors 
before me; yet I still had no definite knowledge of all the 
factors and secrets of the play. Polina had never been en­
tirely open with me. Though on occasion she would, in­
deed, sort of inadvertently open her heart to me, yet I 
noticed that often, in fact almost every time, after such 
confidences she would turn everything into a joke, or 
would try to confuse things so that I might get a wrong 
slant on everything. Oh, yes, she was hiding a great deal! 
At any rate, I had the feeling that the finale of this mys­
terious and tense situation was approaching. Another 
stroke, and everything would come to an end and be re-

I 12 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
vealed. I felt almost no concern about my own fortunes, 
though I was involved in it all, too. What a strange mood: 
there I was, with two hundred gulden in my pocket, far 
away from home in a foreign land, without a job or means 
of support, without hope, without plans, and-not in the 
least worried! If Polina hadn't been so much on my mind, 
I would have simply abandoned myself to the pure comic 
interest of the impending denouement and laughed my 
head off. But Polina worried me. I could feel her fate 
being decided; but I must confess it was not at all her fate 
that was troubling me. I wanted to get to the bottom of 
what she was hiding. I wanted her to come to me and say, 
"Don't you know that I love you." And if not, if this was 
just senseless madness, then . . .  what was I to wish for? 
Do I even know what I want? I'm as if in a trance my­
self. All I want is to be with her, to be in the light of her 
halo, to be irradiated by her radiance, forever, all my 
life. I knm.o,· nothing beyond that! And how could I 
leave her? 
On the third floor, as I was passing through the corri­
dor by the General's suite, I felt as if something stopped 
me. I turned around and saw, some twenty paces from 
me, Polina coming out of a door. It seemed as if she had 
been waiting and watching for me. She beckoned me to 
her. 
"Polina Aleksandrovna . . .  " 
"Quiet! "  she warned me. 
"Imagine," I whispered, "I just felt as if something 
nudged me in the side; I look around, and it's you! It's as 
though you were emitting electric signals!" 
"Take this letter," Polina said with a frown, and in a 
worried tone, probably not hearing what I had just said, 
"and deliver it to Mr. Astley in person. As fast as you can, 
I beg you. There is no need of an answer. He will him­
self . . .  " 

The Gambler 
1 1 3  
She did not finish her sentence. "To Mr. Astley?" I 
made sure I had it right, in surprise. 
But Polina had already disappeared behind the door. 
"Aha, so they are in correspondence!" Of course I im­
mediately went to look for Mr. Astley, first at his hotel, 
where I failed to find him, then at the casino, where 
I ran through all the halls without seeing him, and, fi. 
nally, as I was returning home quite frustrated and almost 
desperate, I met him by accident in a cavalcade of some 
English men and women on horseback. I waved to him, 
stopped him, and handed him the letter. 'Ve had no time 
even to exchange glances. But I suspect that Mr. Astley 
purposely spurred his horse on. 
Was I tormented by jealousy? Certainly I was in a most 
depressed state of mind. I did not even care to find out 
what their correspondence was about. And so he was her 
confidant! "A friend is a friend," I thought, "so much is 
clear (though when did he manage to become her 
friend?); was there any love involved here? Of course 
not," my common sense whispered to me. But in cases 
such as this, common sense alone just won't do. At any 
rate, this matter, too, had to be cleared up. The whole 
thing was growing unpleasantly complicated. 
No sooner was I back at the hotel than the doorman 
and the Ober-Kellner, who came out of h is room let me 
know that I had been wanted, looked for, and asked for 
three times; I had been asked to come as quickly as possi­
ble to the General's suite. I was in a singularly bad mood. 
ln the General's study I found, besides the General him­
;elf, de Grieux and Mile Blanche, alone, without her 
mother. The mother was decidedly an ad hoc person, 
llsed strictly for the sake of appearances; when it came to 
:eal business Mile Blanche acted for herself. Besides, the 
nother probably knew very little about her so-called 
laughter's affairs. 

1 14 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
The three of them were in the middle of a heated dis­
cussion, and the door of the study was actually locked, 
which had never happened before. As I approached the 
door, I could make out three loud voices: the insolent 
and caustic tone of de Grieux, Blanche's impudent abuse 
and furious sCTeams, and the plaintive voice of the Gen­
eral, who was apparently trying to defend himself about 
something. As I entered the room they all made an effort 
to pull themselves together and assume a more proper 
pose. De Grieux smoothed his hair and changed his angry 
face into a smiling one, with that wretched, formally po­
lite French smile which I hated so much. The General, 
crushed and confused, assumed somehow a mechanical 
air of dignity. Only Mile Blanche hardly changed expres­
sion of her face, which was blazing with rage, but merely 
fell silent, fixing her eyes on me in impatient anticipa­
tion. Let me note that she had so far treated me without 
any regard whatsoever, had even refused to respond to my 
polite bows-she had simply refused to take notice of me. 
"Aleksei Ivanovich," the General began in a tone of 
delicate reproach, "let me tell you that I find it strange, 
\·ery strange indeed . . .  in short, your actions in relation 
to my family and myself . . .  in short, very strange in­
deed . . .  
" 
"Eh, ce n'est pas r;a," de Grieux interrupted him, an­
grily and contemptuously. (Obviously he was in charge!) 
··̼lon cher monsieur, notre cher general se trompe,25 
to use this tone" (I give the rest of his speech in Russian), 
"but he wanted to tell you . . .  that is, warn you, or, rather, 
to beg you most earnestly that you should not ruin him­
well, yes, that you should not ruin him! I use this term on 
purpose . . .  
" 
"But how, how?" I interrupted. 
25. "Яfy dear sir, our dear general is mistaken." 

The Gambler 
1 15 
"Heavens, you undertake to act as the guide (or how 
should I call it?) of this old woman, cette pauvre terrible 
vieille," even de Grieux was beginning to get confused, 
"but she will lose everything; she will lose everything to 
the last penny! You saw it yourself, you were a witness of 
the way she gambles! Once she starts losing she'll never 
quit, from obstinacy, from anger, but keep on playing 
just keep on playing; and in such cases luck never turns, 
and then . . .  then . . .  
" 
"And then," the General joined in, "then you will have 
ruined the whole family! My family and I, we are her 
heirs, she has no nearer relations. I tell you frankly: my 
affairs are in a bad way, in an extremely bad way. You 
are yourself partly aware of it . . .  If she loses a considerable 
sum or worse, her whole fortune (my Lord!)-what will 
become of them, of my children!" (The General stole 
a glance at de Grieux.) "Of me!" (He looked at Mile 
Blanche, who turned away from him with contempt.) 
"Aleksei Ivanovich, save us, save us! . . .  
" 
"llut tell me, General, how can I . . .  \Vhat have I to 
say in this matter?" 
"Refuse to go with her, just refuse, leave her alone! . . .  " 
"Then someone else will tum up!" I exclaimed. 
"Ce n'est pas Јa. ce n'est pas Јa," de Grieux interrupted 
again, "que diable! No, don't leave her alone, but at least 
try to talk some sense into her, dissuade her, try to divert 
her attention . . .  \Veil, and if nothing else, don't let her 
lose too much; divert her in some way." 
"llut how am I supposed to do it? \Vhy won't you un­
dertake this task yourself, Monsieur de Grieux?" I added, 
as naively as possible. 
Here I intercepted a quick, fiery, questioning glance 
from Mile Blanche at de Grieux. And in de Grieux's own 
face there was a flicker of something peculiar, something 
like sincerity, something he could not help expressing. 

1 16 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
"That's exactly the point, she won't receive me now!" 
he exclaimed, with a wave of his hand. "If only she would! 
. . .  later . . .  
" 
De Grieux gave Mile Blanche a quick and meaningful 
look. 
"0 mon cher Monsieur Alexis, soyez si bon," Mile 
Blanche herself, in person, took a step toward me and, 
with a seductive smile on her lips, seized both of my hands 
and pressed them fim.ly. Damn it all! That devilish face 
of hers could change in a second. At that instance she 
suddenly had such an imploring, sweet face, such a child­
like and even mischievous smile. As she finished speak­
ing, she gave me a roguish wink, to me alone and for no 
one else to see; did she mean to wrap it up right there? 
It was really very well done; but it was terribly coarse. 
Then the General leaped up. too, and I mean "leaped 
up." 
"Aleksei Ivanovich, forgive me for talking to you as I 
did, a moment ago, I really did not mean it that way . . .  
I beg you, I implore you, I bow down before you, Russian 
style, you alone, you alone can save us! Mademoiselle de 
Cominges and I, we both implore you-you must under­
stand, you do understand, don't you?" he pleaded, indi­
cating Mile Blanche with his eyes. He was very pathetic. 
At that instant there were three subdued and respectful 
knocks at the door. \Ve opened; it was a bellboy and bl!­
hind him, a few steps away, Potapych. They had been 
dispatched by Grandmother. They had been ordered to 
locate and deliver me at once. "Madam is angry," re­
ported Potapych. 
"But it is only half past three!" 
"Madam couldn't fall asleep, kept tossing about, then 
suddenly got up, told me to get her chair, and you. Madam 
is at the front entrance now, sir . . .  
" 

The GambleT 
1 17 
"Quelle megerel"26 exclaimed de Grieux. 
And in fact I found Grandmother already sitting at 
the front entrance, having lost all her patience because 
I wasn't there. She could not wait until four o'clock. 
"Well, pick me up!" she cried, and we were on our 
way back to the casino. 
26. "What a shrew!" 

Twelve 
G
rand mother was in an impatient 
and irritable mood; one could see 
that she was deeply preoccupied 
with roulette. She paid little attention to anything else 
and seemed generally distracted. Thus, for instance, she 
did not ask any questions along the way as she had before. 
When she saw a tmly splendid carriage whirl by. she per­
functorily raised her hand and asked, "\Vhat is that? 
Whose is it?" But I believe that she did not even hear my 
answer. She was sunk deep in thought and awoke now 
and then to gestme fitfully and impatiently. As we were 
approaching the casino I pointed out to her, at a distance, 
Baron and Baroness \Vurmerhelm. She took an absent­
minded look and said, with complete indifference: "Ah!" 
Then, turning around quickly to Potapych and Marfa, 
who were walking behind her, she snapped out to them: 
"Why must you drag along? I can't take you with me 
every time! Go back home! All I need is you," she added, 
addressing me, as the other two hurriedly made their 
bows and walked back home. 
They were already expecting Grandmother at the 
casino. They immediately vacated the very same place 
for her, right next to the croupier. The croupiers, who 
were always so well-mannered and who seemed to be 
1 18 

The Gambler 
1 19 
just ordinary officials almost ordinarily indifferent to 
whether the bank won or lost, were in reality very much 
concerned about the bank's losses. And most certainly 
they are given instructions regarding how to attract 
players and how to protect the interests of the establish­
ment, for which they no doubt receive prizes and bo­
nuses. At least they were already eyeing Grandmother as 
their sure prey. Then, what my friends had anticipated 
actually happened. 
This is how it went. 
Grandmother pounced at once on zero and imme­
diately ordered me to stake one hundred and twenty 
gulden at a time. \Ve bet once, twice, a third time-zero 
r1ever came up. "Put it down, put it down!" Grandmother 
mdged me impatiently. I did as she said. 
"How many times have we played it now?" she finally 
1sked, gnashing her teeth with impatience. 
"That was already the twelfth time, Grandmother. \Ve 
1ave lost fourteen hundred and forty. I tell you, Grand­
nother, maybe it won't come up until tonight . . .  " 
"Quiet!" Grandmother interrupted. "Put it down on 
ero} and also lay a thousand gulden on red. Here, take 
he bank note." 
Red came up, while zero lost again. \Ve had won back 
. thousand gulden. 
"You see, you see!" Grandmother whispered, "we've 
mn back almost everything we lost. Put it down on zero 
gain. We'll play it ten more times or so and then give it 
tp." 
But after the fifth time Grandmother was already quite 
ired of it. 
"Let this wretched zero go to the devil. Here, put all 
mr thousand gulden down on red," she ordered. 
"Grandmother! \Von't this be too much? What if red 

I 20 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
doesn't turn up?" I pleaded, but Grandmother almost 
hit me. (By the way, she kept nudging me so hard it felt 
as if she were hitting me.) So there was nothing to be 
done, and I placed the whole four thousand gulden, 
which we had won earlier, on red. The wheel turned. 
Grandmother sat there, calmly and proudly erect, fully 
confident that she would win. 
"Zero," the croupier announced. 
At first Grandmother failed to realize it, but when she 
saw that the croupier was raking in her four thousand 
gulden, along with everything else on the table, and 
learned that zero, which hadn't turned up for so long and 
on which we had staked and lost nearly two thousand, 
had turned up the very moment she had sent it to the 
devil, she gasped and flung up her hands in view of the 
whole hall. A few snickers were actually heard around us. 
"For heaven's sake! That's where the cursed thing had 
to turn up!" Grandmother wailed, "the accursed, mis­
erable thing! It's your fault! It's all your fault!" she fell 
upon me furiously, pushing me. "You told me not to 
play it." 
"Grandmother, I was just telling you a fact; how can I 
answer for all the chances?" 
'Til give you a chance!" she whispered threateningly; 
"go away, leave me alone." 
"Good-bye, Grandmother," I turned to leave. 
"Aleksei lvanovich, Aleksei Ivanovich, stay here! 
Where are you going? Come on, what's the matter with 
you? Are you mad at me? Fool! Come on, stay a while. 
Come, don't be angry, I'm a fool myself! Well, tell me, 
what shall I do now?" 
"Grandmother, I'm not going to tell you anything, be­
cause you'll blame me if you lose. Play for yourself; just 
tell me and I'll place the bets." 
"\Veil, come on then! Put down another four thousand 

The Gambler 
121 
gulden on red! Here, take my pocketbook." She took it 
out of her pocket and handed it to me. "Come, take it 
quickly, here's twenty thousand rubles in cash." 
"Grandmother," I whispered, "such a large sum . . .  " 
"As sure as I'm alive, I'm going to win it back. Put it 
down!" I did, and we lost. 
"Put it down, the whole eight thousand, put it down!" 
"You can't, Grandmother, the highest stake is four 
thousand! . . .  
" 
"All right, put down four!" 
This time we won. Grandmother took heart. "You see, 
you see!" she started nudging me again, "put down an­
other four thousand!" 
\Ve staked it and lost; then we lost again and again. 
"Grandmother, the whole twelve thousand are gone," 
I announced. 
"I see they're gone," she said with the calm of fury, if 
this is a correct expression; "I see, my dear man, I see," 
she muttered, with a fixed stare and as if trying to make 
up her mind; "eh! as sure as I'm alive, put down another 
four thousand guldens!" 
"But there's no money left, Grandmother. Here in 
your pocketbook you've got some Russian 5 percent 
bonds, and some money orders, but no cash." 
"What about my purse?" 
"There's some small change, Grandmother." 
"Have they any money changers here? I was told that 
one could change any of our notes here," Grandmother 
inquired resolutely. 
"Oh, as much as you like! But what you'll lose on the 
exchange, well . . .  it would make a person's hair stand on 
end!" 
"Nonsense! I'll win it all back! Take me there. Call 
those blockheads!" 
I wheeled the chair away, the porters came, and we left 

122 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
the casino. "Faster, faster, faster!" Grandmother com­
manded. "Lead the way, Aleksei Ivanovich, take the 
shortest way . . .  is it very far?" 
"Just a few steps, Grandmother." 
But as we were turning from the square into the park­
way we were met by our whole party: the General, de 
Grieux, Mile Blanche with her mother. Polina Aleksan­
drovna was not with them, nor was Mr. Astley. 
"Come on, come on, don't stop!" Grandmother cried; 
"come, what do you want? I have no time for you now!" 
I was walking behind. De Grieux came running up to 
me. 
"She lost everything she won earlier, plus twelve thou­
sand gulden of her own money. \Ve are on our way to 
cash some 5 percent bonds," I whispered to him quickly. 
De Grieux stamped his foot and ran to tell the Gen­
eral. We kept rolling along. 
"Stop her, stop her!" the General whispered to me 
frantically. 
"\Veil, why don't you try to stop her?" I whispered 
back. 
"Auntie!" said the General, approaching her, "auntie 
. . .  right now we . . .  right now we . . .  " his voice was trem­
bling and failing him, "we're going to hire some horses 
and drive out into the country . . .  a magnificent view . . .  
the point . . .  we were on our way to invite you to join us." 
"Leave me alone, you and your point!" Grandmother 
waved him off petulantly. 
"There's a village there . . .  we're going to have tea 
. . .  " the General continued, utterly desperate. 
":'1/ous boirons du lait, sur l'herbe fraiche,"27 added de 
Grieux, who was seething with fury. 
"Du lait, de l'herbe fraiche," that is the Parisian hour-
27. "We"ll drink milk out on the fresh grass.'" 

The Gambler 
123 
geois's whole conception of the perfect idyll; that, in sub­
stance, is his view of "Ia nature et Ia verite"! 
"Oh, go away with your milk! Guzzle it yourself, it 
gives me a bellyache. And why do you pester me?" Grand­
mother shouted angrily, "I tell you, I haven't got time for 
you! "  
"Here we are, Grandmother!" I cried, "right here!" 
We had reached the building where the bank was. I 
went in to cash the securities, leaving Grandmother wait­
ing at the entrance. De Grieux, the General, and Blanche 
stood to one side, not knowing what to do. Grandmother 
gave them a wrathful look, and they walked away in the 
direction of the casino. 
The exchange rate offered me was so ruinous that I 
hesitated to accept it but went back to Grandmother for 
instructions. 
"Ah, but that's highway robbery! "  she cried, flinging 
up her hands. "Well, never mind, change it anyway!" she 
went on, resolutely; "wait, call the banker out to me!" 
"Maybe one of the clerks will do, Grandmother?" 
"Well, a clerk, what's the difference. Ah, highway 
robbers!" 
The clerk consented to come out when he learned that 
he was being asked by an aged, invalid countess who 
couldn't walk. Grandmother spent a long time reproach­
ing him in a loud and angry voice for trying to swindle 
her, and wrangled with him in a mixture of Russian, 
French, and German, with the help of my interpreting. 
The clerk, a serious faced man, kept looking at the two 
of us and shaking his head, without saying anything. In 
fact, he was staring at Grandmother with such intent 
curiosity that it bordered on disrespect; at last he broke 
into a smile. 
"Well, be off!" Grandmother cried, "I hope you'll 
choke on my money! Change it with him, Aleksei Iva-

124 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
novich, there's no time, otherwise we'd go elsewhere . . .  " 
"The clerk says that the other banks will give you even 
less." 
I don't remember the exact figures, but they were ex­
orbitant. I received close to twelve thousand florins in 
gold and bank notes, got my receipt, and carried it out to 
Grandmother. 
"\Veil, let's go! Come on! No time to count it," she 
said, waving her hands, "faster, faster, faster!" 
'Til never bet again on that accursed zero} nor on the 
red either," she said, as we arrived at the casino. 
This time I tried my best to impress on her that she 
should keep her stakes low, assuring her that with a 
change of luck she would always be able to raise them. 
But she was so impatient that, even though she agreed 
with this at first, there was no way to stop her once she 
had started to play. !'\ o sooner had she won a few bets at 
a hundred or a hundred and twenty gulden than 
she started pushing me: "There, you see! There, you 
see! I won, didn't I? If we had put down four thousand, 
instead of a hundred, we'd have won four thousand, 
and what have we got now? It's all your fault, your 
fault!" 
And so, though I felt exasperated by the way she was 
playing, I finally decided to keep quiet and to give no 
more advice to her. 
Suddenly de Grieux leaped into action. All three of 
them had been standing nearby. I noticed that Mile 
Blanche was standing to one side with her mother, flirt­
ing with the little prince. The General was obviously out 
of favor, almost in the doghouse. Blanche would not even 
look at him, though he was trying to ingratiate himself 
as best he could. Poor General! He alternately flushed 
and grew pale, he was shaking all over, and he had even 
given up watching Grandmother play. Blanche and the 

The Gambler 
125 
little prince finally left the hall, and the General ran after 
them. 
"Madame, madame," de Grieux whispered to Grand­
mother in a honeyed voice, bending all the way down to 
her ear. "Madame, such a bet is impossible . . .  no, no, it 
is impossible . . .  " he said in broken Russian, "no!" 
"How, then? \Veil, teach me!" said Grandmother, 
turning to him. De Grieux suddenly started babbling 
something very rapidly in French. He gave her his advice, 
fussed about, and told her that she must bide her time; 
he then began to make some sort of calculation, jotting 
down various figures . . .  Grandmother did not under­
stand a word of it. He kept turning to me, asking me to 
translate; he poked his finger at the table, pointing at 
something; finally, he grabbed a pencil and started figur­
ing something on a sheet of paper. At last Grandmother 
lost her patience. 
"\Veil, he off, get going! you're talking a lot of non­
sense! 'Madame, madame! '  He doesn't know a thing 
about it himself; he off!" 
"Mais, madame," de Grieux kept up his chatter, con­
tinuing to poke at the table and showing her something. 
The whole thing had really got to him. 
"All right, then place a bet once the way he says," 
Grandmother ordered, "let us see: maybe it will work 
out that way." 
All de Grieux wanted was to stop her from betting 
large sums. He suggested that we lay bets on numbers, 
individually, and as groups. Following his instructions, I 
put a ten-gulden piece each on the series of odd numbers 
in the first twelve, and a fifty-gulden piece, each on the 
groups of numbers from twelve to eighteen, and from 
eighteen to twenty-four, a hundred and sixty in all. 
The wheel turned. "Zero," said the croupier. \Ve had 
lost it all. 

126 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
"What a blockhead!" shouted Grandmother, address­
ing de Grieux. "Why, you miserable little Frenchman! 
That's the kind of advice you get from him, the monster! 
Be off, be off! Doesn't know a thing, and comes butting 
in!" 
De Grieux, terribly offended, shrugged his shoulders, 
gave Grandmother one contemptuous look, and walked 
away. He was himself feeling embarrassed that he had 
got into this. He just hadn't been able to restrain himself. 
An hour later, try everything as we did, we had lost it 
all . 
"Home!" Grandmother shouted. 
She did not say a word until we had reached the park­
way. There, as we were approaching the hotel, she finally 
broke down, exclaiming: 
"What a fool ! What a silly fool! Oh, you old, old fool, 
you!'' 
The first thing when we were back at her suite: "I'll 
have some tea!" And then, "Start packing right away! 
we're leaving!" 
"\Vhere, madam, where are we going?" Marfa tried to 
ask. 
"\Vhat business is it of yours? Mind your own business! 
Potapych, get everything ready, all the baggage. We are 
going back to Moscow! I've just verspielt fifteen thou­
sand rubles!" 
"Fifteen thousand, madam! My God!" Potapych cried, 
flinging up his hands pathetically, probably meaning to 
humor her. 
"Come, come, you fool ! No use whimpering! Quiet! 
Get packed! Let me have the bill, quick, quick!" 
"The next train goes at half past nine, Grandmother," 
I inserted, to stop her frenzy. 
"And how late is it now?" 
"Half past seven." 

The Gambler 
127 
"What a nuisance! Well, all right! Aleksei Ivanovich, 
I haven't a penny left. Here are two more notes. Run 
over and change these for me, too. Or I'll have nothing 
for the journey." 
I set off. When I returned to the hotel half an hour 
later, I found our whole party at Grandmother's. Having 
learned that Grandmother was returning to Moscow, 
they were apparently more upset about that fact than 
even by her gambling losses. Granted her departure 
would save her fortune, but then, what was going to be­
come of the General now? \Vho was going to pay de 
Grieux? Mile Blanche, of course, would not wait until 
Grandmother died, but would most certainly take off 
with the little prince or with somebody else. They were 
all standing before her, consoling her and trying to per­
suade her not to take it to heart. Polina was still not there. 
Grandmother was shouting at them furiously. 
"Leave me alone, you devils! \Vhat business is it of 
yours? Why does that goat's beard come and poke his 
nose into my affairs?" she was screaming at de Grieux, 
"and you, my fine bird, what do you want of me?" she 
turned to Mile Blanche; "what are you fussing about?" 
"Diantre!"28 whispered Mile Blanche, with an angry 
flash of her eyes, but then suddenly she burst into loud 
laughter and left the room. 
"Elle vivra cent ans!"29 she shouted to the General, as 
she was leaving. 
"Aha, so you are counting on me to die?" Grand­
mother screamed at the General. "Out with you! Tum 
them all out, Aleksei Ivanovich! What do you care? I've 
blown my own money, not yours!" 
The General shrugged his shoulders, bowed, and 
walked out. De Grieux followed him. 
28. "Damn itl" 
29. "She'll live a hundred years." 

128 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
"Call Praskovia," Grandmother told Marfa. 
Five minutes later Marfa returned with Polina. All 
this time Polina had been sitting in her room with the 
children, and apparently had not been out all day on pur­
pose. Her face was serious, sad, and preoccupied. 
"Praskovia," began Grandmother, "is it true, as I 
learned recently by accident, that this fool, your step­
father, wants to marry that silly featherhead of a French­
woman-an actress, or worse than that? Tell me, io; this 
the truth?" 
"I don't know anything about it for certain, Grand­
mother," answered Polina, "but I gather from the words 
of Mademoiselle Blanche herself, who does not bother 
to conceal anything, that . . .  " 
"Enough!" Grandmother interrupted her energeti­
cally, "I understand everything! I always reckoned that 
he would do such a thing, and I've always considered him 
a most worthless and frivolous person. He is full of swag­
ger about being a general (they promoted him from colo­
nel on his retirement), and thinks he is terribly impor­
tant. My dear girl, I know everything about how telegram 
after telegram was sent to Moscow, asking: 'Will old 
granny tum up her toes soon, will she?' Waiting for their 
inheritance. \Vithout money that vile hussy, what's her 
name, de Cominges or whatever, won't take him for her 
flunkey, false teeth and all. She's got a lot of money her­
self, they say, she lends it out at interest, and I won't ask 
how she made it. Praskovia, I'm not blaming you. You 
weren't the one who sent those telegrams, and let by­
gones be bygones. I know that you have a bad temper­
stings like a wasp. And your sting hurts. But I feel sorry 
for you, because I was fond of your mother, the late 
Katerina. Well, what about it? Leave everything here and 
come with me. You have no place to go, you know. Nor 
is it fitting for you to stay with them now. Wait!" Grand-

The Gambler 
129 
mother stopped Polina, who was about to reply, from in­
terrupting her, ''I'm not through yet. I'm not asking any­
thing of you. As you well know, my Moscow horne is 
really a mansion. You can have a whole floor to yourself, 
and you need not come down and see me for weeks at a 
time, if you can't stand my temper. Well, what about it?" 
"Allow me to ask you first: do you really mean to leave 
right away?" 
"Do you think I'm joking, my dear? I said so, and this 
is it. Today I squandered fifteen thousand rubles playing 
that accursed roulette of yours. Five years ago I promised 
that I would rebuild that wooden church on my estate 
near Moscow in stone, and now I've blown my money 
here instead. Now, my dear, I'm going home to build my 
church." 
"But what about the waters? Didn't you come here for 
the waters, Grandmother?" 
"You and your waters! Don't make me angry, Pra­
skovia. Are you doing it on purpose? Tell me, are you 
coming or aren't you?" 
"I thank you very, very much, Grandmother," Polina 
began, with feeling. "I thank you for the refuge which 
you are offering me. In a way you've guessed right what 
position I am in. I am so very grateful to you, and, believe 
me, I'll come to you, and maybe even soon. But right now 
there are reasons . . .  important ones . . .  and I can't make 
a decision now, not at this very moment. If you'd stay 
only for two weeks . . .  " 
"This means you don't want to come?" 
"This means that I can't. Besides, at any rate, I can't 
leave my brother and sister here, and since . . .  since . . .  
since it actually could happen that they'd be abandoned, 
in that case . . .  if you'd take me together with the little 
ones, Grandmother, in that case I'd come to you of 
course, and, believe me, I'd earn it!" she added ern-

130 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
phatically, "but without the children I couldn't, Grand­
mother." 
"All right, don't whimper!" (Polina had no intention 
of whimpering, in fact, she never cried.) "\Ve'll find a 
place for the chicks, too, the chicken coop is big enough. 
Besides, it's time for them to start going to school. So you 
are not coming now? Well, Praskovia, watch out! I wish 
you well, but I know why you aren't coming. I know 
everything, Praskovia! That Frenchman will bring you 
no good." 
Polina blushed. I positively started. (Everybody knows 
all about it! I must be the only who knows nothing!) 
"All right, all right, don't frown. I'm not going to 
make a big thing of it. Just keep out of harm's way, un­
derstand? You are a clever girl; I'd feel sorry for you. 
Well, enough, I wish I'd never seen any of you! Go! 
Good-bye!" 
"But I'll see you off, Grandmother," said Polina. 
"You don't have to; don't get in my way; I'm sick and 
tired of you all." 
Polina kissed Grandmother's hand, but she pulled her 
hand away and kissed Polina on the cheek. 
As she was passing me, Polina gave me a quick glance, 
then looked the other way. 
"Well, good·bye to you, too, Aleksei Ivanovichl It's 
just an hour unt il train time. I must have tired you out, 
I think. Here, take these fifty pieces of gold." 
"੻o. thank you, Grandmother, I'm ashamed . . .  " 
"Come, come!" cried Grandmother, but so energeti­
cally and menacingly that I dared say no more and took 
the money. 
"If you should find yourself in Moscow, running 
around without a job, come to see me. I'll recommend 
you to someone. ::\fow, leave mel" 
I went to my room and lay down on my bed. I think 

The Gambler 
1 3 1  
that I lay there for half an hour, flat on my back, with my 
hands clasped behind my head. Disaster had struck, and 
there was a lot to think about. I decided that I would talk 
to Polina seriously the next day. Ah! That miserable 
Frenchman? So it was true then! But what was at the bot­
tom of it all? Polina and de Grieux! My God, what a 
match! 
It was all simply unbelievable. I suddenly jumped up, 
quite beside myself, intending to look up Mr. Astley and 
at all costs make him speak out. \Vhy, of course, even in 
this matter he knew more than I did. Mr. Astley? There 
I had another mystery facing me! 
But suddenly there was a knock at my door. I looked, 
and there was Potapych. 
"Aleksei Ivanovich, sir; madam wants you, sir!" 
"\Vhat is it? She isn't leaving, is she? It's twenty min­
utes until train time." 
"Madam is nervous, sir, so that she can barely sit still. 
'Quick, quick!' she says, meaning you, sir. For the sake 
of Christ, sir, come quickly." 
I immediately ran downstairs. Grandmother was al­
ready waiting in the corridor. She had her pocketbook in 
her hand. 
"Aleksei Ivanovich, lead the way, let's go! . . .  " 
"\Vhere, Grandmother?" 
"As sure as I'm alive, I'll win it back! Come, let's go, 
and no questions asked! You can play there until mid­
night, can't you?" 
I was stunned for a moment, but thought it over 
quickly, and made my decision right there. 
"Do as you please, Antonida Vasilievna, but I'm not 
coming." 
"\Vhy not? What now? Are you all out of your heads, 
or what?" 
"Do as you please: I would blame myself afterward. I 

132 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
just won't. I don't want to see it, I don't want any part 
of it. Forgive me, Antonida Vasilievna. Here are your 
fifty pieces of gold. Good-bye!" And, after having put the 
fifty pieces on the little table near Grandmother's chair, 
I bowed and walked away. 
"\Vhat nonsense!" Grandmother shouted after me; "so 
don't come if you don't want to; I'll find my own way! 
Potapych, come with me! Come, lift me up, let's go." 
Mr. Astley was not in, and I returned home. Late that 
night, going on one o'clock, I learned from Potapych 
hO\-\' the day had ended for Grandmother. She lost every­
thing that I had converted into cash for her that evening, 
that is, another ten thousand rubles in our money. That 
same little Pole, to whom she had given twenty gulden 
earlier in the day, attached himself to her and directed 
her game all night. At first, before the Pole came around, 
Grandmother had tried to use Potapych and made him 
place the bets for her, but she got rid of him soon, and 
that's when the little Pole jumped in. As luck would 
have it, he understood some Russian and even babbled 
away, after a fashion, mixing three languages, so that 
they understood each other, more or less. Grandmother 
abused him mercilessly all along, and though he was in­
cessantly "laying himself at the lady's feet," yet of course, 
"there was no comparing him with you, Aleksei Ivanov­
ich," Potapych was telling me. "She treated you exactly 
like a gentleman} while that man-well, sir, I saw it with 
my own eyes, so help me God-stole her money right off 
the table. She caught him at it herself, once or twice, and 
did she give it to him, sir, did she give it to him, calling 
him all sorts of names, even pulled his hair once, upon 
my word, I'm not lying, so everybody around was laugh­
ing, sir. She lost it all, sir, every bit of it, everything you 
had cashed for her. \Ve brought her back here, the dear, 
and she only asked for some water to drink, crossed her-

The Gambler 
133 
self, and went to bed. She must have been worn out, to 
be sure, for she fell asleep at once. May the Lord send her 
heavenly dreams! Oh, damn these foreign countries!" 
Potapych concluded his account, "I said that it would 
lead to no good. If we could only go back to Moscow as 
soon as possible! What is it that we don't have back home 
in Moscow? A garden, flowers of the kind they haven't 
even got here, sweet air, the apples getting ripe, lots of 
space-no, we had to go abroad! Oh, oh, ohl . . .  " 

Thirteen 
A 
lmost a whole month has passed 
since I last touched these notes of 
mine, which were begun under the 
influence of impressions that, though quite disorganized, 
were nevertheless intense. The catastrophe which I then 
felt to be approaching actually came, but a hundred 
times more suddenly and unexpectedly than I had ever 
thought. It was all very strange, hideous, and even tragic, 
at least as far as I was concerned. A few things happened 
to me that bordered on the miraculous; or, at least, this 
is how I see them at this very moment, while from an­
other point of view, and especially considering that I was 
then in the middle of a \·.-hirl of events, the same things 
would have appeared as no more than slightly unusual. 
But what amazes me most is my own attitude to all these 
events. To this day I cannot understand myself! And all 
this has passed like a dream, even my passion, and it was 
a powerful and sincere one, but . . .  where is it now? To 
be truthful, it just isn't there, and at times the thought 
flits through my brain, "Could it be that I was out of my 
mind then, and spent all that time in an insane asylum, 
1.nd perhaps I'm in one right now-so that the whole 
thing took place only in my imagination, and I am still 
imagining it to have been true? . . .  
" 
I have put my notes together and read them over. 
(\Vho knows, perhaps simply to make sure that I did not 
134 

The Gambler 
1 35 
write them in an insane asylum?) Now I am all by my­
self. It is fall, and the leaves are turning yellow. I'm stuck 
in this dismal little town (oh, how dismal little German 
towns can bel), and instead of giving thought to what I 
should do next, I continue to live under the influence of 
those recent sensations, under the influence of my fresh 
memories, under the influence of that whirl of events 
which caught me in its vortex only to spew me out again, 
leaving me high and dry. At times it seems to me that I 
am still caught up in that whirlwind, and that any mo­
ment the storm will he hack and carry me off on its wings, 
that I will again lose all sense of order and proportion, 
and, again, go whirling, whirling. whirling around . . .  
However, I may perhaps settle down and quit whirling 
around, if I give myself a clear account, as best I can, of 
what has happened to me during this past month. I feel 
like writing again. Besides, there is absolutely nothing 
to do in the evenings. Strangely enough, just to do any­
thing at all, I even take from the wretched local lending 
library the novels of Paul de Kock (in German transla­
tion!), which I can't stand, and read them, wondering at 
myself-as if I were afraid of breaking the spell of what 
has just happened by a serious book or any serious occu­
pation. Is it really true that this grotesque dream and all 
the impressions it has left in my mind are so dear to me 
that I'm actually afraid to touch it with something new, 
lest it go up in smoke? It must be very dear to me still, 
all of it, it seems? \Vhy, of course, it is dear to me. Perhaps 
I'll remember it even forty years from now . . .  
And so I am taking up my notes again. However, I can 
give a brief and partial account of it all now: the actual 
impressions were altogether different . . .  
First of all, let me finish with Grandmother. The fol­
lowing day she really lost everything. It was quite inevi­
table: any time a person such as she gets started on that 

1S6 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
road, it's like sliding down a snow-covered hill on a sled; 
you pick up speed, going faster and faster. She gambled 
all day, until eight o'clock at night. I was not present and 
know what happened only from what I heard from other 
people. 
Potapych was in constant attendance on her at the 
casino all day. Several little Poles took turns guiding 
Grandmother's play during the day. She started by get­
ting rid of the little Pole of the day before, the one whose 
hair she had pulled, and hired another, who turned out 
rather worse than the first. She fired that one and rehired 
the first, who had refused to leave but during the whole 
period of his disgrace had kept breathing down her neck, 
poking his head in from behind her chair continually. 
They were positively driving her to despair. The second 
little Pole, having been fired, also refused to budge, and 
so one of them stationed himself to her right and the 
other to her left. They argued and abused each other 
over e..-ery bet that was placed, calling each other lajdak30 
and other such compliments in Polish, then making up 
again and throwing money around without rhyme or 
reason. \Vhen they quarreled, each would place bets on 
his side; one of them would play red, the other black. In 
the end they had Grandmother so bewildered and con­
fused that she finally, almost in tears, appealed to the 
croupier, a man of advanced age, to, please, help her get 
rid of the pair. They were, in fact, immediately turned 
out, in spite of all their screams and protests. They were 
both yelling at once, claiming that Grandmother owed 
them money, that she had deceived them about some­
thing, and that she had treated them dishonorably, 
basely. Poor Potapych told me all this with tears that very 
night, after she had lost all. He complained that they had 
stuffed their pockets with money, that he had seen how 
30. Polish word meaning ··scoundrel." 

The Gambler 
1 37 
they shamelessly stole her money, slipping quantities of 
it into their pockets all the time. For instance, one of 
them would beg her to give him fifty gulden for his ef­
forts and would promptly put down the money right next 
to Grandmother's bet. Grandmother would win, but he 
would scream that his money had won and that hers had 
lost. As they were being ejected from the casino, Potapych 
came forward and reported that they had their pockets 
full of gold. Grandmother immediately asked the crou­
pier to look into this matter, and in spite of the outcries 
of the two little Poles (they cackled like two trapped 
roosters), the police appeared on the scene and their 
pockets were immediately emptied and the money re­
turned to Grandmother. Until she lost everything, 
Grandmother had enjoyed obvious prestige with the 
croupiers and the whole casino staff the whole day long. 
Her fame had gradually spread all over town. Visitors of 
every nationality who had gathered at the watering place, 
ordinary ones as well as the most prominent, all thronged 
to have a look at "une vieille comtesse russe, tombee en 
enfance," who had already lost "several millions." 
But Grandmother profited very, very little from being 
rescued from the two little Poles. They were replaced 
immediately by a third Pole, one who spoke perfectly 
pure Russian and was dressed like a gentleman, even 
though he still had a touch of the lackey, with huge mous­
taches and "a sense of honor." He, too, kissed "the lady's 
footsteps" and "laid himself at the lady's feet," but to 
those around them, he behaved haughtily, took charge 
of things despotically-in short, he immediately estab­
lished himself not as Grandmother's servant but as her 
master. He continually and at every bet addressed her, 
swearing with terrible oaths that he was himself an "hon­
orable pan/' and that he wasn't going to take a single 
kopeck of Grandmother's money. He repeated his oaths 
so many times that Grandmother was completely intimi-

138 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
dated. But since this pan actually seemed to improve her 
game and in fact almost started winning, there simply 
was no way for Grandmother to rid herself of him, even 
on her own account. An hour later the two little Poles of 
before, who had been ejected from the casino, turned up 
behind Grandmother's chair again, offering their services 
once more, if only to run errands for her. Potapych swore 
that the "honorable pan" winked at them and actually 
slipped something to them. Since Grandmother had gone 
without dinner and had hardly left her chair all day, one 
of the two Poles, in fact, made himself useful: he ran once 
to the casino dining room to get her a cup of bouillon, 
and later brought her some tea. But toward the end of 
the day, when it was clear to everybody that she was about 
to lose her last bank note, as many as six little Poles were 
standing behind her chair, having appeared from no­
'"here. But when Grandmother was at the point of losing 
her last coins, they all not only ceased to obey her, but 
barely took notice of her anymore; they reached over her 
head to the table, snatched up the money themselves, 
made their own decisions and placed the bets as they 
pleased, quarreled among themselves, shouted, talked 
things over with the "honorable pau" with whom they 
were now on the most familiar terms, while the "honor­
able pau" himself seemed by then almost oblivious to 
Grandmother's existence. Even after Grandmother had 
definitely lost everything and was returning to the hotel 
at eight o'clock, three or four little Poles still refused to 
leave her alone, but kept running after her, on both sides 
of her chair, shouting at the top of their voices and claim­
ing, in an incessant patter, that Grandmother had 
cheated them out of something and was supposed to give 
them something. They followed her right up to the hotel, 
whence they were finally kicked out by the staff. 
According to Potapych's reckoning Grandmother had 

The Gambler 
139 
lost on that day close to ninety thousand rubles in all, not 
counting her losses of the day before. She had converted, 
one after another, all of her securities: the 5 percent 
bonds, the government bonds, all of the stocks and bonds 
which she had with her. I expressed my wonder at how 
she could endure sitting there in her chair for seven or 
eight hours, scarcely leaving the table at all, but Potapych 
told me that she had actually had about three significant 
winning streaks, so that, carried away by new hope, she 
was quite incapable of tearing herself away. But any 
gambler will tell you that a man may spend as much as 
twenty-four hours at cards, glued to his seat and without 
ever taking his eyes off the game. 
Meanwhile, at our hotel very critical things were also 
happening all day. That morning, before eleven o'clock, 
when Grandmother was still at home, the family, that is 
the General and de Grieux, decided to take one final 
step. Having learned that Grandmother had no intention 
of leaving but, on the contrary, was getting ready to go 
back to the casino, they went to see her in full conclave 
(excepting Polina) to have one final and even open talk 
with her. The General, trembling and with a sinking 
heart in view of the frightful consequences it might have 
for him, actually overdid it: after having pleaded and 
begged for half an hour, and even having made a clean 
breast of everything, including all his debts and his pas­
sion for Mile Blanche too (he had quite lost his head), 
the General suddenly assumed a menacing tone; in fact, 
he began shouting and stamping his feet at Grand­
mother; he yelled that she was disgracing their name, 
that she had become a scandal to the whole town, and 
finally . . .  finally: "You are bringing shame upon the 
name of Russia, madam!" cried the General, "and there's 
still the police for such cases!" Grandmother finally drove 
him out with her stick (a real stick). The General and 

140 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
de Grieux got together another time or two that morn­
ing, consulting this possibility: would it perhaps be pos­
sible, after all, to bring in the police under some pretext? 
Say, that there was that unfortunate but venerable old 
lady, evidently senile, who was losing her last savings, 
and so on. In short, would it be possible to have her put 
under some sort of guardianship or restraint? . . .  But de 
Grieux only shrugged his shoulders and openly laughed 
at the General, who was by now talking complete non­
sense as he ran back and forth in his study. Finally, de 
Grieux gave up and walked out. In the evening it was 
learned that he had moved out of the hotel altogether, 
after a most earnest and highly secret consultation with 
Mile Blanche. As for Mile Blanche, she had taken deci­
sive measures early in the morning: she cast off the Gen­
eral quite definitely and would no longer admit him to 
her presence. And when the General ran after her to the 
casino and met her there, arm-in-arm with the little 
prince, neither she nor Mme veuve Cominges deigned to 
recognize him. The little prince did not greet him either. 
All that day Mile Blanche kept sounding out the prince 
and needling him so that he would finally declare his in­
tentions. But alas! She was cruelly deceived in her hopes 
regarding the prince! This little catastrophe took place 
in the evening, when it suddenly became clear that the 
prince was as poor as a church mouse and, what is more, 
had been himself counting on borrowing some money 
from her on a promissory note to try his luck at roulette. 
Blanche turned him out with indignation and locked 
herself up in her room. 
In the morning of the same day I went to see Mr. Ast­
ley, or rather, I went looking for Mr. Astley but could 
find him nowhere. He was not at home, or in the casino, 
or in the park. He was not dining at his hotel that day. It 
was going on five o'clock when I suddenly saw him walk-

The Gambler 
141 
ing from the railway station straight toward the Hotel 
d'Angleterre. He was obviously in a hurry and seemed 
preoccupied, though it is always hard to detect any mark 
of anxiety or any other perturbation in his face. He held 
out his hand to me cordially, and uttered his habitual 
exclamation, "Ah!" But he did not stop and walked on 
with a rather rapid step. I joined him, but he managed 
to answer me in such a way that I ended up not even ask­
ing him about anything. Besides, I found it terribly em­
barrassing, for some reason, to bring up Polina in our 
conversation, and he did not ask a thing about her. I told 
him about Grandmother. He listened attentively and 
earnestly and shrugged his shoulders. 
"She'll lose everything," I observed. 
"Oh, yes," he answered, "didn't she start playing the 
other day, when I was about to leave? That's why I knew 
for sure that she would lose everything. If I get the time, 
I'll walk over to the casino and have a look, because I find 
it interesting . . .  
" 
"\Vhere have you been?" I exclaimed, surprised at my-
self for not having asked that question earlier. 
"I've been to Frankfort." 
"On business?" 
"Yes, on business." 
Well, what else could I ask him? However, I kept walk­
ing along with him, until he suddenly turned into the 
Hotel des Quatre Saisons, which was on our way, nodded 
to me and disappeared. On my way home I realized, little 
by little, that even if I had kept talking to him for two 
hours, I still wouldn't have learned anything at all, be­
cause . . .  there was nothing that I could have asked him! 
Yes, of course! There simply was no way to formulate my 
question. 
All that day Polina was either out, walking in the park 
with the children and their nurse, or she just s;tt at home. 

142 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
She had been avoiding the General for some time and 
hardly spoke to him, about anything serious at any rate. 
I had noticed that a long time ago. But knowing what 
condition the General was in that day, I thought that he 
could hardly have avoided her, that is, there ought to 
have been some sort of heart-to-heart family talk between 
them. However, as I was returning to our hotel after my 
conversation with Mr. Astley, I met Polina and the chil­
dren, and her face expressed nothing but the most serene 
calm, as if she alone had remained quite untouched by 
the recent family tempests. I bowed to her, and she re­
sponded with a nod of her head. I got home in an ugly 
mood. 
I had, of course, avoided talking to her and had not 
met her face to face ever since the incident with the Wur­
merhelms. There was some pose and affectation in this, 
to be sure; but as time went on, there was more and more 
genuine indignation smoldering in my heart. Even if 
she had no fondness for me at all, it would still seem to 
be wrong to trample on my feelings in this fashion and to 
receive my avowals with such disdain. Didn't she know 
that I really loved her? Didn't she herself allow me to 
speak to her as if I did? To he sure, our relationship had 
had a strange beginning. Some time ago, in fact, quite 
some time ago, maybe two months back, I had noticed 
that she was trying to make me her friend, her confidant, 
and that she was actually sounding me out. For some 
reason it did not work out at the time, and instead, there 
remained this present, strange relationship of ours; this 
is why I had begun to speak to her as I did. But if she 
found my love offensive, why didn't she simply forbid 
me to mention it? 
I was not forbidden ; in fact, there had been times when 
she had herself provoked me to talk, and . . .  of course, she 
did it just for fun. I know certainly; I had noted it all 

The Gambler 
14-3 
too well: she liked to listen to me and work me up to a 
point where I was so excited it actually hurt, then sud­
denly send me reeling by a display of utter contempt and 
disregard. And yet she knows that I can't live without her. 
It is now three days since that incident with the Baron, 
and already I can't endure our separation any longer. 
When I met her near the casino just now, my heart 
started beating so hard that I turned pale. But isn't it 
true that she couldn't get on without me, either? She 
needs me, and--could it really be true that she needs me 
only the way Anna the Empress needed Balakirev, her 
court jester? 
She was guarding a secret-that was clear! Her ex­
change of words with Grandmother had really given me 
a stab in the heart. Hadn't I begged her a thousand times 
to be sincere with me, and didn't she know that I was truly 
ready to give my life for her? But she always kept me at 
a distance with her almost contemptuous treatment of 
me and, instead of the sacrifice of my life which I offered 
her, she demanded that I commit some silly prank, such 
as the one with the Baron! \Vasn't that outrageous? Could 
it really be true that this Frenchman meant everything 
in the world to her? And what about Mr. Astley? But 
at that point the whole thing became utterly incom­
prehensible, yet in the meantime-my God, how I suf­
fered! 
Back in my hotel room, in a fit of fury, I snatched up 
my pen and scribbled the following note to her: 
"Polina Aleksandrovna, I see clearly that the denoue­
ment is at hand which is bound to affect you also. I re­
peat for the last time: do you or don't you need my life? 
If you need me in any way whatever, dispose of me as 
you wish, and I shall stay meanwhile in my room, at 
least most of the time, and I most certainly shall not 
leave town. If you need me, write or send for me." 

144 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
I sealed this note and sent it off by a bellboy, telling 
him to deliver it to her in person. I did not expect a reply, 
but three minutes later the bellboy returned with the 
message that "the lady extended her greetings." 
It was past six o-clock when the General sent for 
me. 
He was in his study, dressed as though he were ready 
to go out. His hat and cane were lying on the sofa. It 
looked to me as I entered the room as if he had been 
standing in the middle of the room with his legs wide 
apart, his head hanging, talking aloud to himself. But as 
soon as he saw me he rushed to meet me almost crying 
out, so that I involuntarily backed up a step and was 
ready to turn around and run. But he seized me by both 
hands and dragged me to the sofa. He then sat down on 
the sofa himself and offered me a seat in an armchair fac­
ing him. Then, without releasing my hands, his lips trem­
bling, and with tears in his eyes, he addressed me in an 
imploring voice: 
"Aleksei lvanovich, save me, save me, don't let me 
down!'' 
For some time I could not understand a thing he was 
saying. He kept talking, talking, talking, and repeating: 
"Don't let me down, don't let me down!" Finally I 
realized that he expected something in the way of advice 
from me; or, rather, abandoned by all, in his anguish 
and anxiety, he remembered me and had sent for me 
simply to talk and talk and talk to me. 
He was incoherent, or at least utterly confused. He 
clasped his hands and was on the point of falling on his 
knees before me, to implore me (what do you think?) 
to go at once to Mile Blanche and to prevail upon her, 
by appealing to her conscience, to return to him and 
marry him. 
"For heaven's sake, General," I cried, "why, Mile 

The Gambler 
145 
Blanche at this point scarcely knows that I exist! \Vhat 
could I do?" 
But it was quite useless to object: he did not under­
stand what was said to him. He fell to talking about 
Grandmother, too, but in a most incoherent way; he 
was still clinging to the idea of sending for the police. 
"In Russia, in Russia," he started, suddenly boiling 
over with indignation, "in short, in Russia, in a well­
organized state, where we have government authority, 
this old woman would have been put under guardian­
ship at once! Yes, sir, yes, my dear sir," he went on, 
suddenly falling into the tone of a superior giving a 
tongue-lashing to a subordinate, jumping to his feet, and 
beginning to pace about the room, "you may not have 
been aware of this fact, my dear sir," he said, addressing 
some imaginary "dear sir" in the comer, "so you shall 
learn about it . . .  yes, sir . . .  in our country, such old 
women are brought under control by force, by force, by 
force, sir, yes, sir . . .  oh, what the devil!" 
And he flung himself on the sofa again, and, a moment 
later, told me, almost sobbing, gasping for breath, and 
rushing on, that Mile Blanche was not going to marry 
him because, instead of the telegram, Grandmother had 
arrived, and it was clear that he would not come into the 
inheritance. Apparently he thought that I did not know 
any of these things. I brought up the subject of de Grieux, 
but he waved me off: "He's gone! He's got a mortgage 
on everything that's mine. I'm stripped of everything! 
That money you brought . . .  that money, I don't know 
how much there is of it, I think there are about seven 
hundred francs left, enough, sir, that's all I've got, and 
what's to come-Idon's know, sir, that I don't know, 
. ' 
" 
SIT. 
.
•
•
 
"How, then, will you pay your hotel bill?" I cried in 
alarm, "and . . .  what then?" 

146 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
He gave me a thoughtful glance, but evidently had not 
understood my question, perhaps not even heard it. I 
made an attempt to bring up the subject of Polina Alek­
sandrovna and the children, but he gave me a hurried 
"Yes! yes!" and immediately went back to talking about 
the prince, about how Blanche was now going to take off 
with him, and then . . .  and then, "What am I to do then, 
Aleksei Ivanovich?" he suddenly turned to me again, 
"I swear, by God! What am I to do? Tell me, isn't this 
ingratitude? Isn't this ingratitude?" 
Finally he burst into a flood of tears. 
\Vhat could one do with a man like that? It would have 
been dangerous, too, to leave him alone; really, some­
thing might have happened to him. However, I man­
aged to take leave of him, though not without telling 
the nurse to keep an eye on him. I also spoke to the bell­
boy, a very sensible fellow. He, too, promised to stand 
by and keep his eyes open. 
I had hardly left the General when Potapych came to 
summon me to Grandmother. It was eight o'clock and 
she had just returned from the casino after her final loss. 
I l\'ent down to see her. The old lady was sitting in an 
armchair. utterly exhausted and evidently ill. Marfa 
was offering her a cup of tea, almost forcing her to drink 
it. Grandmother's voice and tone were strikingly changed. 
"How are you, my dear Aleksei Ivanovich," she said, 
inclining her head slowly and with dignity; "forgive 
me for bothering you once more, you must excuse an 
old woman. I left it all there, my dear, nearly a hundred 
thousand rubles. You were right yesterday, refusing to 
go with me. :\'ow I am penniless, I haven't anything left. 
I don't want to wait another moment, I'll be leaving at 
half past nine. I've sent to that Englishman of yours, 
Astley is his name, I think, asking him to let me have 
three thousand francs for a week. So could you persuade 

The Gambler 
147 
him not to take it wrong and turn me down? I am still 
fairly rich, my dear. I've got three villages and two houses. 
And there is still some money left, I didn't take it all with 
me. I'm telling you this so he wouldn't have any second 
thoughts about it . . .  Ah, here he isl One can see he is 
a good man." 
Mr Astley had hastened to come at Grandmother's 
first invitation. \Vithout hesitation or wasting any words 
he promptly counted out three thousand francs for a 
promissory note, which Grandmother signed. Having 
concluded this transaction, he took his leave and left 
without further delay. 
"And now you can go, too, Aleksei Ivanovich. I have 
a little over an hour left. I want to lie down, my bones 
ache. Forgive a silly old woman. From now on I shall no 
longer blame young people for doing foolish things, and, 
yes, it would be sinful for me now to blame that hapless 
General of yours. I'm still not going to give him any 
money, as he wants me to, because, to my thinking, he's 
just too stupid; though I myself, old fool that I am, can't 
)ay that I'm more clever than he is. Verily, even in our 
old age God exacts retribution and punishes us for our 
pride. \Veil, good-bye. Marfush<t, lift me up." 
I wanted to see Grandmother off, however. Besides, 
[ was in a state of suspense, expecting all the time that 
in another moment something would happen. So I 
:ouldn't sit still in my room. I went out into the corridor 
;everal times, even went for a short stroll along the 
parkway. My letter to her had been clear and resolute, 
md the present catastrophe was quite definitely a final 
one. I heard in the hotel that de Grieux had left. Finally, 
:f she was indeed rejecting me as her friend, perhaps she 
would not reject me as a servant. I could be useful to her, 
.f for nothing else, then at least to run her errands. Surely 
['d be useful, what else? 

148 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
At train time I ran over to the railway station and saw 
Grandmother off. Her whole party took their seats in 
a special family compartment. "Thank you, my dear, 
for your selfless sympathy," she said, as we parted, "and 
remind Praskovia of what I told her yesterday-I'll be 
waiting for her." 
I went home. Passing by the General's suite I met the 
nurse and inquired about the General. "Oh, he's all 
right, sir," she answe. eC: dejectedly. I went in, however, 
but stopped in absolute amazement as I reached the door 
of the General's study. Mile Blanche and the General 
seemed to be outdoing each other in laughing aloud 
about something. La veuve Cominges was sitting right 
there, on the sofa. The General was evidently quite be­
side himself with delight; he was babbling all kinds of 
nonsense and kept going off into prolonged fits of ner­
vous laughter, which twisted his face into innumerable 
wrinkles, hiding his eyes altogether. I later found out 
from Blanche herself that, having kicked out the prince 
and heard about the General's tears, she had decided to 
comfort him and had dropped in at his suite for a mo­
ment. But the poor General did not know that in the 
meantime his fate had been decided and that Blanche was 
already packing, intending to catch the first train to Paris 
in the morning. 
Having stood still in the doorway of the General s 
study for a moment, I changed my mind and walked 
away unnoticed. I walked upstairs to my room, opened 
the door, and suddenly noticed, in the half-dark comer 
by the window, a figure sitting on a chair. She remained 
seated as I entered. I went up quickly, looked, and my 
heart stood still: it was Polina! 

Fourteen 
I 
actually cried out. 
"What is it? What's the matter?" 
she asked in a strange voice. She was 
pale and looked wretched. 
"\Vhat's the matter, you ask? You? Here, in my room?" 
"If I come, then I come with all of me. I've got that 
habit. You'll see that immediately; light a candle." 
I lit a candle. She got up, stepped up to the table, and 
put a letter with a broken seal before me. 
"Read," she commanded. 
"This is de Grieux's hand!" I cried, snatching up the 
letter. My hands were trembling and the lines danced 
before my eyes. I have forgotten the exact wording of 
the letter, but here it is-not verbatim, but at least the 
gist and general drift of it. 
"Mademoiselle," wrote de Grieux, "unfortunate cir­
cumstances force me to leave without delay. You must, 
of course, have noticed yourself that I purposely avoided 
a definitive explanation with you until the whole situa­
tion had cleared up. The arrival of your aged relation 
(de la vieille dame) and her absurd action have resolved 
all my doubts. The unsettled state of my own affairs 
definitely forbids me to nurture any further the delight­
ful hopes which I had allowed myself to ੸ntertain for 
some time. I regret the past, but I trust that you will find 
149 

150 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
nothing in my behaYior that might be unworthy of a 
gentleman and man of honor (gentilhomme et honnete 
homme). Having lost almost all my money in loans to 
your stepfather, I find myself compelled by necessity to 
take advantage of what is left me. I have already advised 
by Petersburg friends to make immediate arrangements 
toward the sale of the property mortgaged to me. Know­
ing, however, that your frivolous stepfather has also 
squandered the money that properly belonged to you, 
I have decided to remit to him fifty thousand francs, and 
I am returning him pan of my claims to his property in 
that amount. This will put you in a position to recover 
all that you have lost by demanding restitution of your 
property by due process of law. I trust, mademoiselle, 
that as things stand now, my action will be very much to 
your advantage. I trust, also, that by this action I have 
fully met my obligations as a gentleman and man of 
honor. Rest assured that the memory of you will forever 
remain imprinted upon my heart." 
"\Veil, that is all clear," I said, turning to Polina; "did 
you really expect anything else?" I added, with indigna­
tion. 
"I expected nothing," she answered, with seeming 
composure, but still with a hint of a tremor in her voice; 
"I made up my mind a long time ago. I could read his 
mind and knew very well what he was thinking. He 
thought that I was seeking . . .  that I was going to insist . . .  " 
(She stopped without concluding her sentence, bit her 
lip, and fell silent.) "I purposely increased my contempt 
for him," she started again, "I waited to see what he 
would do. If a telegram had come telling of our inheri­
tance, I would have flung him the money which that 
idiot (my stepfather) owed him, and kicked him out! 
I've loathed him for ages and ages. Oh, he used to be 
a different man, .l thousand times different, but now, 

The Gambler 
151 
but now! . . .  Oh, how gladly I would fling those fifty 
thousand in that· foul face of his and spit at it . . .  then 
spread the spit all over his face!" 
"But the paper, I mean the mortgage which he re­
turned, doesn't the General have it? Take it and give it 
back to de Grieux." 
"Oh, that's not it! That's not it!" 
"Yes, you're right, it isn't the same thing! Besides, 
what could you expect of the General now? But what 
about Grandmother?" I cried suddenly. 
Polina gave me what seemed to me a distracted and 
impatient look. 
"\Vhat about Grandmother?" she said with a tone 
of annoyance, "I can't go to her . . .  Nor do I want to ask 
anybody's forgiveness," she added irritably. 
"\Vhat's to be done?" I exclaimed, "and how, tell 
me, how could you have loved de Grieux? Oh, the 
scoundrel, the scoundrel! \Veil, do you want me to kill 
him in a duel? Where is he now?" 
"He is in Frankfort now and will stay there for three 
days." 
"A word from you and I'll leave tomorrow by the 
first train!" I said with a sort of stupid enthusiasm. 
She began to laugh. 
"Why, he'll probably say: 'Return those fifty thousand 
francs first.' And why should he fight a duel with you? 
. . .  \Vhat nonsense!" 
"But where, where shall we get these fifty thousand 
francs?" I repeated, gnashing my teeth, as though there 
were a chance to pick them up from the floor at once. 
"Listen, what about Mr. Astley?" I asked, turning to her 
with a strange idea beginning to dawn on me. 
Her eyes flashed. 
"\Vhat? Could it be that you yourself want me to leave 
you for that Englishman?" she said, looking straight at 

152 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
me with a piercing glance and giving me a bitter smile. 
It was the first time she had ever addressed me with the 
familiar pronoun. 
I believe that she began to feel giddy with emotion that 
moment; she suddenly sat down on the sofa as though she 
were utterly exhausted. 
I just stood there, as though struck by lightning, just 
stood there, not believing my eyes, or my ears! 'Why, that 
meant that she loved me! She came to see me, and not 
Mr. Astley! She, a young girl, had come alone to my 
hotel room, meaning that she had com promised herself 
before everybody, and I, I was just standing there, re­
fusing to understand it! 
A wild idea flashed through my mind. 
"Polina! Give me just one hour! ·wait here only an 
hour and . . .  I shall return! This . . .  this must be! You'll 
see! Stay here, stay here!" 
And I ran from the room, without reacting to her 
amazed and questioning glance. She yelled something 
after me, but I did not turn back. 
Yes, sometimes the wildest idea, an idea which would 
seem utterly impossible, will become fixed in one's mind 
so firmly that one finally begins to take it for something 
practicable . . .  Even more than that: once such an idea 
is connected with a powerful, passionate desire, one 
may eventually take it for something fated, inevitable, 
predestined, for something that simply must be and is 
bound to happen! Perhaps there is even more to it, some 
sort of coincidence of presentiments, some kind of extra­
ordinary exertion of the will, self-poisoning by one's own 
imagination, or something else yet-I don't know what, 
but anyway, that night (which I shall never in my life 
forget) something miraculous happened. I t  is fully backed 
up by laws of arithmetic, but to me it is nevertheless a 
miracle to this day. And why, why had that conviction 

The Gambler 
153 
taken such deep and such firm roots in my mind, and for 
so long a time? Oh yes, I certainly had been thinking of 
it, and let me repeat this, I had been thinking of it not as 
a chance possibility among others (that is, something that 
might or might not happen), but as something that was 
absolutely bound to happen! 
It was a quarter past ten. I entered the casino with 
such firm confidence, yet, at the same time, in a state of 
such excitement as I had never experienced before. There 
were still plenty of people in the gambling halls, though 
only half as many as in the morning. 
After ten o'clock only the truly desperate gamblers 
are left at the gaming tables, those for whom nothing else 
exists at a spa but roulette, those who have come there 
for that alone, who hardly notice what is going on around 
them and take no interest in anything during the entire 
season, but play from morning until night and would 
probably play all night until dawn, if it were possible. 
And they always leave unwillingly when the game of 
roulette is finally shut down at midnight. And when the 
chief croupier announces, at closing time, just before 
midnight, "Les trois derniers coups, messieurs!" they 
are ready to stake on those last three strokes every penny 
they have in their pockets-and this is precisely where 
they most often lose everything. I went to the very table 
where Grandmother had sat the other day. It was not 
very crowded; so I could soon take my place standing at 
the table. Right in front of me the word Passe was scrib­
bled on the green cloth. Passe is the series of numbers 
from nineteen to thirty six, while the series from one to 
eighteen is called Manque. But what did I care for that? 
I was not calculating; I hadn't even heard what number 
had been up on the last stroke, nor did I inquire about 
it as I began to play-as any half-way circumspect player 
would have done. I pulled out all of my two hundred 

1 54 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
gulden and plunked them down on passe, the word in 
front of me. 
"Vingt deux!" cried the croupier. 
I had won and again staked everything: my initial 
bet plus what I had just won. 
"Trente et un," cried the croupier. I had won again! 
This meant that I now had eight hundred! I moved the 
whole eight hundred on the twelve middle numbers 
(you win three to one, but so are the chances against 
you). The wheel turned and twenty-four carne up. I was 
given three rolls at five hundred gulden each and ten 
gold coins; in all, I had now two thousand gulden. 
I was virtually delirious by then, and put the whole pile 
of money on red-and suddenly realized what I was 
doing! And for the only time that night, while playing, 
I was seized by such cold fear that my hands and feet 
began to tremble. I felt the horror of the thought which 
came to me in a flash: what it would mean to me if I lost 
now; my whole life was at stake! 
"Rouge!" cried the croupier, and I drew a breath, as 
I felt the tingle of fiery pins and needles all over my body. 
I was paid in bank notes. It amounted to four thousand 
eight hundred. (I could still keep count at that stage.) 
Then, if I remember it right, I placed two thousand 
gulden on the twelve middle numbers again, and lost; 
then my gold and eight hundred gulden, and lost. I was 
in a frenzy: I grabbed the two thousand left me and put 
them on the first dozen-haphazard, at random, quite 
without thought! There was a moment, though, as I 
was waiting, which may perhaps have resembled the 
feeling experienced by Mrne Blanchard31 when she was 
hurtling to the ground from her balloon, in Paris. 
"Quatre!" cried the croupier. I was back at six thou-
31. Marie Blanchard (1778-1 819), wife of a pioneer of balloon Hying. 
She died in a balloon fire. 

The Gambler 
155 
sand, counting the money I had bet. Now I felt like a 
winner and was afraid of nothing, of nothing in the 
world, as I plunked down four thousand on black. At 
least nine people hastened to follow suit and also placed 
on black. The croupiers were exchanging glances and 
trading remarks. People all around were talking and 
waiting. 
Black won. From here on I don't remember any count, 
nor the order of my bets. I only remember, as though it 
had been in a dream, that I had already won something 
like sixteen thousand, then lost twelve of these by three 
consecutive unlucky strokes, moved the last four thou­
sand on passe (feeling, however, hardly anything at all 
as I did it; I was just waiting, mechanically, without 
thinking)-and won again. Then I won four times in a 
row. I only remember that I raked in money by the 
thousands. I also remember that the middle twelve came 
up most often, so that I stuck to them. They kept turning 
up with some sort of regularity, certainly three or four 
times in a row, then they would fail to show up twice 
running, and then come back for three or four times 
in succession. Sometimes streaks of such amazing regu­
larity will occur, and this is precisely what throws off 
inveterate gam biers who with pencil in hand calculate 
their odds. And what terrible ironies of fate sometimes 
happen here! 
I believe that no more than half an hour had passed 
since I had arrived when the croupier suddenly informed 
me that I had won thirty thousand gulden, and that, 
inasmuch as the bank had a policy of not meeting any 
claim higher than this at one time, the roulette game 
would be closed until next morning. I seized all my gold, 
poured it into my pockets, grabbed all the banknotes, 
and immediately went to the adjoining hall, where they 
had another roulette going. The whole crowd rushed 

1 56 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
after me. There a place was cleared for me immediately, 
and I went back to betting as before, haphazardly and 
without keeping count. I don't understand what saved 
me! 
There were moments, though, when certain calcula­
tions went through my mind briefly. I would begin to 
stick to certain numbers and chances, then quickly aban­
don them again and go back to placing bets almost uncon­
sciously. I must have been very absent-minded. 1 can 
recall that the croupiers several times corrected my game. 
I made gross mistakes. My temples were wet with per­
spiration and my hands were trembling. Some little Poles 
tried to offer me their services, but I just didn't listen 
to anybody. My luck was holding up! Suddenly there was 
a lot of loud talk and laughter around me. "Bravo, 
bravo! "  everybody shouted, and some people even 
clapped their hands. I had just taken thirty thousand 
here also, and the bank was again closed until the next 
day! 
"Go away, go away," a voice whispered on my right. 
It was a Frankfort Jew who had been standing beside 
me all the time and, it seems, had helped me here and 
there in my play. 
"For heaven's sake, go away," another voice whispered 
in my left ear. I glanced about hurriedly. It was a lady 
of about thirty, very modestly and properly dressed, 
with traces of her former, marvellous beauty still visible 
in spite of the sickly pallor of her tired face. At that 
moment I was stuffing my pockets with bank notes, which 
I simply crumpled up as best I could, and gathering up 
the gold that was left on the table. Picking up the last 
roll of five hundred gulden, I managed to slip it to the 
pale lady without anybody's noticing it. I had an over­
whelming desire to do it, and I remember how her 

The Gambler 
1 57 
delicate, thin little fingers firmly pressed my hand to 
show her warm gratitude. All this happened in an instant. 
Having gathered up all my winnings, I moved on to 
trente et quarante. 
The game of trente et quarante is patronized by an 
aristocratic clientele. It is not roulette; it is a card game. 
Here the bank will meet claims of up to a hundred 
thousand thalers at once. The maximum stake is also 
four thousand gulden. I wa.; not familiar with the game at 
all, and hardly knew any other way of placing my money 
except on the red and the black, which one could play 
here also. So I stuck to red and black. The whole casino 
was crowding around me. I don't remember whether 
I thought of Polina even once in all that time. I was then 
experiencing an overwhelmingly pleasurable feeling 
which I got from scooping up and raking in the bank 
notes which were piling up before me. 
Certainly it looked as though fate were pushing me. 
This time, as luck would have it, a special circumstance 
occurred, though I must say that it was something which 
happens quite often in games of chance. For example, 
luck will stay with red for something like ten or even 
fifteen times in succession. I had heard, just two days 
earlier, that on one day of the previous week red had 
come up twenty-two times in succession. No one at the 
casino could remember having seen anything like this 
before, and people were talking about it with amazement. 
It goes without saying that everybody stays away from 
red, so that after the tenth time, for instance, almost no 
one will dare to bet on it. But no one of the seasoned 
players will bet on black either in a situation such as this. 
The seasoned player knows well what a "caprice of 
chance" means. For example, after red has been up six­
teen times running it would seem a cinch that black will 

1 58 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
come up next. This is where novices believe they see their 
chance. They jump at it, whole crowds of them, doubling 
and trebling their stakes, and lose heavily. 
But I, having noticed that red had been up seven times 
in succession, by some strange perversity made a point of 
putting my money on it. I am convinced that half of it 
was vanity; I wanted to impress the spectators by taking 
mad risks. And then-what a strange sensation!-! re­
member distinctly how all of a sudden a terrible craving 
for risk took possession of me, now quite apart from any 
promptings of vanity. It may be that, in passing through 
so many sensations, the soul does not become sated but is 
only stimulated by them and will ask for more and ever 
stronger sensations until utterly exhausted. And I am not 
lying as I say that if the rules of the game had allowed me 
to bet fifty thousand at once, I'd certainly have done so. 
People around were shouting that this was madness, that 
red had won fourteen times in succession! 
"Monsieur a gagne deja cent mille," I heard a voice 
near me. 
I suddenly recovered my senses. ·what? I had won 
a hundred thousand gulden that night? \Vhat more did 
I want? I pounced on my bank notes, crumpled them 
up and stuffed my pockets with them, then I scooped up 
all my gold, all the rolls of it, and ran out of the casino. 
As I walked through the halls everyone around laughed 
as they saw my bulging pockets and my uneven gait under 
the weight of all that gold. It must have weighed over 
twenty pounds. A number of hands were held out to me; 
I passed it out by the handful, as much as I could hold. 
Two Jews stopped me at the exit. 
"You are brave! You are very brave!" they told me, 
"but be sure to leave tomorrow morning, as early as 
possible, or else you will lose it all . . .  
" 
I didn't listen to them. It was so dark in the parkway 

The Gambler 
159 
that I could barely see my own hand. It was about a 
third of a mile to the hotel. I never was afraid of thieves 
or robbers, even when I was a small boy; I was not think­
ing of being robbed then. However, I don't remember 
what I was thinking on my way home; I had no thoughts. 
I was only aware of a tremendous feeling of exhilaration 
-success, triumph, power-I don't know how to express 
it. Polina's image flitted through my mind also. I remem­
ber her and knew that I was on my way to her, that in a 
moment I would be with her, telling her, showing her . . .  
Yet I could hardly remember what she had told me 
earlier, and why I had gone to the casino; and all the 
feelings that I had experienced a mere hour and a half 
earlier now seemed to me remote, long since changed, 
old-fashioned-something that would not be brought up 
again, because everything would begin anew now. Almost 
at the very end of the parkway I was suddenly gripped 
by fear: "What if I were murdered and robbed right 
now?" My fear increased with every step. I was almost 
running. Suddenly, there was the end of the park, and I 
saw our hotel in the glare of its innumerable lighted 
windows-thank God, I was home! 
I ran up to my room and quickly opened the door. 
Pol ina was there, sitting on my sofa with her arms crossed, 
with a lighted candle in front of her. She looked at me 
with amazement, and it goes without saying that I must 
have presented a rather strange sight at that moment. I 
stood before her and began to throw all my money on the 
table in one large pile. 

Fifteen 
I 
remember her terribly intent gaze as she 
looked at my face without moving from 
her seat or even changing her position. 
"I have won two hundred thousand francs," I cried, 
as I threw out my last roll of gold. A huge pile of bank 
notes and rolls of gold filled the whole table, and I could 
not take my eyes off it. There were moments when I com­
pletely forgot about Polina. At one moment I was sort­
ing my bundles, folding them up together, at the next I 
was arranging all the gold in a single pile; then I left it 
all and began to pace up and down the room with rapid 
steps, suddenly lost in thought; then, a moment later, I 
was back at the table, counting the money again. Sud­
denly, as though coming to, I rushed to the door and 
hurriedly locked it, turning they key twice. Then I 
stopped beside my little suitcase and stood there ponder­
mg. 
"I wonder if I should put it in my suitcase until 
tomorrow," I said, turning toward Polina, as if I had sud­
denly remembered her. She was still sitting there without 
stirring, yet watching me intently. It was a strange ex­
pression she wore on her face; I did not like that expres­
sion! I would not be wrong if I said that there was hatred 
in it. 
I took a quick step toward her. 
160 

The Gambler 
161 
"Polina, here are twenty-five thousand gulden-that's 
fifty thousand francs, or even more. Take them, throw 
them in his face tomorrow." 
She gave me no answer. 
"If you want me to, I'll take them to him myself, first 
thing in the morning. Shall I?" 
She suddenly began to laugh. She laughed for a long 
time. 
I looked at her with surprise and with a feeling of 
sadness. This laughter of hers was a lot like the sarcastic 
laughter I had heard so often, even recently, every time 
I made one of my passionate declarations to her. She 
finally stopped laughing and frowned, looking at me with 
a stern and sullen expression on her face. 
"I won't take your money," she said contemptuously. 
"What? What is it?" I cried, "Polina, why?" 
"I won't take money for nothing." 
"I offer it to you as a friend, I offer you my life." 
She gave me a long, searching look, as though she 
wanted to see right through me. 
"You are giving too much," she said, with a laugh, "de 
Grieux's mistress is not worth fifty thousand francs." 
"Polina, how can you talk to me like that!" I cried, 
reproachfully; "am I de Grieux?" 
"I hate you! Yes . . .  yes! . . .  I don't love you any more 
than I love de Grieux," she cried, her eyes suddenly 
flashing. 
Here she covered her face with her hands and became 
hysterical. I rushed to her side. 
I realized that something had happened to her in my 
absence. She seemed quite out of her mind. 
"Buy me! Don't you want to? Don't you want to? 
For fifty thousand francs, just like de Grieux?" she 
gasped between convulsive sobs. I embraced her, kissed 
her hands, her feet, fell on my knees before her. 

162 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
She began to get over her hysterics. She put both hands 
on my shoulders and looked at me intently; it seemed 
as if she were trying to read something in my face. She 
was listening to me but apparently did not hear what I 
said to her. A careworn and thoughtful expression ap­
peared on her face. I was afraid for her: I very definitely 
had the impression that she was going out of her mind. 
At one moment she would begin to draw me softly to 
her, with a trustful smile beginning to play on her face, 
then, suddenly, she would push me back again, and, her 
face darkened once more, renew her scrutiny of me. 
All of a sudden she began em bracing me. 
"Tell me, you do love me, don't you?" she said; "tell 
me, you did want to fight the Baron for me, didn't you?" 
And then she burst out laughing, as though something 
that was funny as well as sweet had suddenly come to her 
mind. She was crying and laughing all at once. Well, what 
was I to do? I was myself almost delirious. I remember 
that she began saying ੹mething to me, but that I could 
understand almost nothing of what she said. It was a son 
of delirium, a son of incoherent babble-as though she 
were in a great hurry to tell me something-a delirium, 
interrupted from time to time by the merriest laughter, 
which began to frighten me. "No, no, you dear, dear!" 
she kept repeating. "You are my faithful one!" And again 
she put her hands on my shoulders, again giving me that 
intent look and saying over and over again: "You love 
me . . .  love me . . .  will you love me?" I could not take 
my eyes off her. I had never seen her in anything like 
these fits of tenderness and love; to be sure, this was just 
her delirious state, but . . .  after noticing the passion in 
my eyes, she would give me a sly smile, then, apropos of 
nothing, suddenly stan talking about Mr. Astley. 
Anyway, she kept bringing up Mr. Astley again and 
again (especially when she tried to tell me something 

The Gambler 
1 63 
particular that night), but I was unable to grasp exactly 
what she meant. It seemed that she was actually making 
fun of him; she kept repeating that he was waiting . . .  
and did I know that he was most probably standing under 
the window right now? "Yes, yes, under the window-go, 
open it, look, look, he's here, he's here!" She pushed me 
toward the window, but the moment I made a move in 
that direction she immediately went off into peals of 
laughter. I stayed close to her, and she again flung herself 
into my embrace. 
"Are we going to leave? \Ve're leaving tomorrow, aren't 
we?" she suddenly asked, growing restless, "well . . .  " 
(here she lost herself in thought). "Well, do you think 
we'll catch up with Grandmother? I suppose we'll catch 
up with her in Berlin. What do you think, what is she 
going to say when we get there and she sees us coming? 
And what about Mr. Astley? . . .  Well, he isn't the kind 
that will jump off the Schlangenherg, or is he, what do 
you think?" (She burst out laughing.) "Come, listen: do 
you know where he is going next summer? He wants to 
go to the North Pole, on a scientific expedition, and asked 
me to join him, ha-ha-ha! He says that we Russians know 
nothing and can do nothing without European help . . .  
But he has a good heart! Do you know that he tries to 
find excuses for the General? He says that Blanche . . .  
that passion-well, I don't know, I don't know," she 
repeated all of a sudden, as though her mind were wan­
dering and she had forgotten what she was talking about. 
"The poor dears, how I feel sorry for them, and for 
Grandmother . . .  Come, listen, listen, really, how would 
you go about killing de Grieux? And did you really think 
that you were going to kill him? Oh, silly! How could 
you think that I would let you fight de Grieux? Come, 
you aren't going to kill the Baron either," she added, 
beginning to laugh again. "Oh, how funny you were with 

164 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
the Baron that time. I watched the two of..,ou from my 
bench. And how reluctantly you went, when I ordered 
you to go. How I laughed, how I laughed then," she 
added, laughing aloud. 
And all at once she was kissing and em bracing me again., 
pressing her face to mine passionately and tenderly. I 
no longer thought of anything at all and I could no 
longer hear anything. My head began to go around . . .  
I think it was about seven o'clock in the morning when 
I woke up. The sun was shining into my room. Polina 
was sitting beside me. She was looking around in a strange 
way, as though she had just emerged from some darkness 
and was now trying to collect her thoughts. She, too, had 
only just awakened and was gazing intently at the table 
where the money was. My head was heavy and it ached. 
I tried to take Polina's hand; she pushed me away and 
jumped up from the sofa. The new day was overcast. It 
had been raining before dawn. She went up to the win­
dow, opened it, and leaned out, her head and chest 
outside, her hands on the windowsill and her elbows 
against the sides of the window frame. She remained in 
that position for about three minutes, without turning 
around or listening to what I was saying to her. A dread 
thought went through my head: what would happen now 
and how was this going to end? Suddenly she stepped 
back from the window, went up to the table, and, look­
ing at me with infinite loathing, her lips trembling with 
rage, she said to me: 
"Well, give me my fifty thousand francs now!" 
"Polina, not again, not again!" I tried to retort. 
"Or have you thought better of it? Ha-ha-ha! Maybe, 
you're already regretting it, too?" 
There were twenty-five thousand gulden, counted off 
the night before, lying on the table. I picked them up 
and gave them to her. 

The Gambler 
165 
"So they are mine now, aren't they mine? Aren't they?" 
she asked me, with hatred in her voice, holding the 
money in her hands. 
"Why, they were always yours," I said. 
"Well then, take your fifty thousand francs!" 
She leaned back and flung the money at me. The bank­
roll hit me painfully in the face and scattered all over the 
floor. Having done this, Polina ran out of my room. 
I know, of course, that she was not in her right mind at 
that moment, though I have no explanation for such 
temporary insanity. It is true that she is still ill today, a 
month later. But what could have been the cause of that 
condition, and, above all, of this last performance of hers? 
Was it wounded pride? \Vas it despair at having brought 
herself to come to me? Had I perhaps suggested to her, by 
my behavior, that I was exultant over the happiness she 
had granted me, and that, like de Grieux, I was about to 
get rid of her by giving her fifty thousand francs? But it 
was simply not true, that much I can say in good con­
science. I think that to some extent it was her own vanity 
that was at fault: her vanity prompted her to distrust and 
to insult me, even though, most likely, she had no clear 
conception of her own motives. At any rate, I absorbed 
de Grieux's punishment and became guilty without do­
ing too much on my own. To be sure, it all happened in 
a delirious state, and I knew it all too well, and . . .  yet I 
refused to take that fact into consideration. Could it be 
that now she won't forgive me because I didn't? Yes, but 
that is now. \Vhat about then? Why, she wasn't all that 
delirious and all that ill as to be totally oblivious of what 
she was doing when she came to me with de Grieux's let­
ter, or was she? So it must be that she knew what she was 
doing. 
I hurriedly thrust all my bank notes and gold into my 
bed, covered it up somehow, and left my room some ten 

166 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
minutes after Polina. I was convinced that she had run 
home and so I meant to slip quietly into their suite and 
ask the nurse how the young lady was that morning. But 
how great was my surprise when I met the nurse on the 
stairs and learned from her that Polina had not yet re­
turned home, and that she, the nurse, was on her way to 
me to get her. 
"She just left my room no more than ten minutes ago," 
I said; "where could she have gone?" 
Nurse gave me a reproachful look. 
In the meantime the thing had turned into a regular 
scandal and was all over the hotel in no time. In the door­
man's room and at the Ober-Kellner's it was whispered 
that Fraulein had run out of the hotel, into the rain, at 
six o'clock in the morning, and that she had run off in 
the direction of the Hotel d'Angleterre. From their words 
and hints I gathered that they all knew already that she 
had spent the night in my room. However, it was the 
General's whole family that was the subject of discussion. 
It had become known all over the hotel that the General, 
the night before, had gone mad and had been crying all 
over the place. It was also said that Grandmother, who 
had just left, was really his mother, who had come here 
all the way from Russia to stop her son from marrying 
Mlle de Cominges, and to disinherit him if he disobeyed 
her. And since he had in effect refused to listen to her, 
the Countess had purposely and under his very eyes lost 
all her money at roulette, just so he should get nothing. 
"Diese Russen!" the Ober-Kellner kept repeating, shak­
ing his head indignantly. Others were laughing. The 
Ober-Kellner was making out the bill. My winning at 
roulette was generally known. Karl, my bellboy, was the 
first to congratulate me. But I had no time for any of 
them. I stormed to the Hotel d'Angleterre. 
It was still early in the morning, and Mr. Astley was 

The Gambler 
167 
seeing no one. But learning that it was I, he came out into 
the hall to meet me. He stopped in front of me and, with­
out saying a word, fixed his metallic eyes upon me, wait­
ing for me to do the talking. I asked him about Polina at 
once. 
"She is sick," answered Mr. Astley, still staring and re-
fusing to take his eyes off me. 
"Then she is really with you?" 
"Oh yes, she is with me." 
"But how will you . . .  do you mean to let her stay with 
you?" 
"Oh yes, I do." 
"Mr. Astley, this is going to create a scandal, you just 
can't do it. Besides, she is quite ill. Perhaps you haven't 
noticed that?" 
"Oh yes, I have noticed it, and I've already told you 
that she is ill. If she hadn't been ill she wouldn't have 
spent the night with you." 
"So you know that, too?" 
"I know it. She was on her way here yesterday, and I 
would have taken her to a lady relative of mine. But as 
she was ill, she made a mistake and went to you." 
"Imagine that! Well, my congratulations, Mr. Astley. 
By the way, you make me think of something: weren't 
you standing all night under our window? Miss Polina 
all night long kept asking me to open the window and 
look for you standing there. She kept laughing very hard 
about it, too." 
"Is that so? No, I was not standing under the window. 
I was waiting in the hall and walking around." 
"But she needs medical care, Mr. Astley." 
"Oh yes, I have already called for a doctor, and if she 
dies you will answer to me for her death." 
I was amazed. "But Mr. Astley, for heaven's sake, what 
is it you want?" 

168 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
"And is it true that you won two hundred thousand 
thalers yesterday?" 
"Only a hundred thousand gulden." 
"Well, )'OU see! So why don't you leave for Paris this 
morning?" 
"Why?" 
"All Russians, when they have some money, go to 
Paris," Mr. Astley explained, in a tone as if he were quot­
ing information from a book. 
"\\'hat am I going to do in Paris now, in the summer? 
I love her, Mr. Astley! You know that yourself." 
"Are )'OU sure? I am convinced that you don't. And 
besides, if you are going to stay here, you will most prob­
ably lose everything and you will have nothing left to go 
to Paris with. But good-bye now, for I am perfectly sure 
that you will leave for Paris today." 
"All right, good-bye then, only I'm not going to Paris. 
Mr. Astley, think of what's going to happen to our fam­
ily now, I mean, the General . . .  and now this thing must 
happen to Miss Polina-why, it will be all over town." 
"Yes, all over town. But I believe that the General 
won't give much thought to that, having other things on 
his mind. Besides, ੺1iss Polina has every right to stay 
wherever she pleases. And, speaking of that family, I 
think it is correct to say that the family no longer exists." 
As I was walking home I laughed to myself at the En­
glishman's strange confidence about my going away to 
Paris. "He also wants to kill me in a duel," I thought, 
"if Mademoiselle Polina dies-there's another thing to 
worry about!" I swear, I felt sorry for Polina, but 
strangely enough, from the moment I had touched that 
gaming table the night before and had begun to scoop up 
those bundles of money, my love had somehow receded 
to the background. I say this now, but at the time I had 
yet no clear realization of it. Could it be that I am really 

The Gambler 
169 
a gambler, could it be true that I really . . .  loved Polina 
in such a strange fashion? No, I still love her, God is my 
witness! And when I was walking home after talking to 
Mr. Astley, I genuinely suffered and blamed myself. But 
. . .  here a very strange and silly thing happened to me. 
I was hurrying to see the General when suddenly, not 
far from his suite, a door opened and someone called me. 
It was Mme veuve Cominges and she was calling me, for 
Mile Blanche had told her to. I entered Mile Blanche's 
suite. 
It was a small one, with only two rooms. I could hear 
Mile Blanche laugh and call out from the bedroom. She 
was just getting up. 
"A, c'est lui!! Viens done, betel Is it true, que tu as 
gagne une montagne d'or et d'argent? j'aimerais mieux 
l'or."32 
"Yes, it is true," I answered, laughing. 
"How much?" 
"A hundred thousand gulden." 
"Bibi, comme tu es bete. Come on in here, I can't hear 
a thing. Nous ferons bombance, n'est ce pas?"33 
I went in. She was relaxing under a pink satin quilt, 
from which her dark, healthy, amazing shoulders were 
showing-shoulders such as one only dreams about­
covered flimsily by a batiste nightgown bordered with 
shining white lace, wonderfully becoming to her dark 
skin. 
"Mon fils, as-tu du coeur?"34 she cried, seeing me, and 
burst out laughing. Her laughter was always very gay, 
and at times quite genuine. 
"Tout autre . . .  " I began, paraphrazing Corneille. 
32. "Ah, it's he! Come here you silly thing! . . .  that you have won a 
mountain of gold and silver? I'd prefer gold." 
33. "We'll have a good time, won't we?" 
34. "My son, do you have the courage?" A quotation from Comeille"s 
Le Cid (1636). 

1 70 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
"You see, vois-tu," she suddenly went into a patter, 
"first of all, find my stockings for me and help me put 
them on, and second, si tu n'es pas trop bete, je te prends 
a Paris. You know I'm about to leave." 
"Right away?" 
"In half an hour." 
And, indeed, all her belongings were already packed. 
All her suitcases and things were standing there ready. 
Coffee had been served some time before. 
"Eh bien! Do you want to? Tu verras Paris. Dis done 
qu'est ce que c'est qu'un outchitel? Tu etais bien bete 
quand tu etais outchitel.35 But where are my stockings? 
Come, put them on for mel" 
She stuck out her positively delightful little foot, dark­
skinned, tiny, not in the least disfigured, as feet that look 
so small in shoes almost invariably are. I laughed and 
began drawing her silk stocking on for her. Meanwhile 
!\Hie Blanche just sat there, on her bed, prattling away. 
"Eh bien, que feras·tu, si je te prends avec? First of all, 
je veux cinquante mille francs. You will give them to me 
in Frankfort. N ous allons a Paris. \Ve'll be living together 
there et je te ferai voir des etoiles en plein jour.36 You 
will see women such as you have never seen. Listen . . .  
" 
"\Vait a moment, so I'll give you fifty thousand francs, 
and what will be left for me?" 
"Et cent cinquante mille francs, you have forgotten, 
and besides, I'll be willing to share an apartment with 
you for a month, or two, que sais·je! In those two months 
we'll certainly run through those one hundred and fifty 
thousand francs; you see, je suis bonne enfant and I tell 
you this beforehand, mais tu verras des etoiles." 
35 .
.. You'll see Paris. Tell me what is an outchitel [tutor; see note I 
abm·e]. You were indeed silly when you were an outchitcl ... 
36 .
.. Well then, what will you do, if I take you with me? . . .  I want 
fifty thousand francs . . .  We will go to Paris . . .  and I'll make you see 
stars in the daytime ... 

"What? all in two months?" 
The Gambler 
1 7 1  
"What? Does this scare you? Ah, vii esclave! Don't you 
know that one month of that life is worth more than your 
whole existence. One month-et apres, le deluge! Mais 
tu ne peux comprendre, va! Go away, go away, you don't 
deserve it! Ouch, que fais-tu?" 
That very moment I was putting a stocking on her 
other little foot, but could not resist kissing it. She pulled 
it away and began kicking my face with the tip of her 
foot. Finally she chased me away altogether. "Eh bien, 
mon outchitel, je t'attends, si tu veux, I'm leaving in a 
quarter of an hour!" she called after me. 
On returning to my room I felt as though my head 
were going around. \Veil, it wasn't my fault that Mile 
Polina had thrown the whole pile of money in my face 
and had only yesterday preferred Mr. Astley to me. Some 
of the scattered bank notes were still lying all over the 
floor. I picked them up. At that moment the door opened 
and the Ober-Kellner stood there in person (before, he 
hadn't ever as much as looked at me). He had come to 
suggest that I move downstairs, into a magnificent suite 
which had just been vacated by a Count V. 
I stood there, giving it some thought. 
"My bill!" I cried suddenly, ''I'm leaving in ten min­
utes." And I was thinking to myself: "If it must be Paris, 
Paris it is; must be fate, or something!" 
A quarter of an hour later the three of us were actu­
ally seated in a private compartment of the train: Mile 
Blanche, Mme veuve Cominges, and I. Mile Blanche 
laughed gaily as she looked at me; she was almost hysteri­
cal with laughter. Mme veuve Cominges seconded her. I 
can't say that I felt very cheerful. My life was breaking in 
two, but since the previous day I had been conditioned 
to risking everything on one card. Perhaps, too, all that 
money was really too much for me and it had turned my 

172 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
head. Peut-etre, je ne demandais pas mieux. It seemed to 
me that this was merely a temporary change of scenery, 
only temporary. "But in a month I'll be back here, and 
then . . .  and then, watch out, Mr. Astley, we'll see who 
wins!" No, as I recall it now, I was terribly sad even then, 
even though I tried to laugh as heartily as that silly goose 
Blanche. 
"But what do you want? How silly you are! Oh, how 
silly!" Blanche kept crying, interrupting my laughter and 
beginning to scold me in earnest. "All right, all right, we 
are going to run through your two hundred thousand 
francs, but in return, mais tu seras heureux comme un 
petit roi. I'll tie your tie for you myself, and I'll introduce 
you to Hortense. And when we've spent all our money, 
you'll come back here and break the bank again. What 
did the Jews tell you? The main thing is couqtge, and 
you've got it. You'll be back in Paris, bringing me more 
money, not once, but often. Quant a moi, je veux cin­
quante mille francs de rente et alors . . .  "37 
"And what about the General?" I asked her. 
"Well, the General, as you know very well, every day 
at this time goes out to get a bouquet of flowers for me. 
This time I purposely told him to get me some very rare 
flowers. The poor dear will come back and find the birdie 
has flown away. He'll come flying after us, you'll see. 
Ha-ha-ha! I'll be very glad to see him. I can use him in 
Paris. And Mr. Astley will pay his bill here . . .  
" 
And so that's the way I left for Paris that day. 
37. "As for me, I want fifty thousand francs of income and then . . .  
" 

Sixteen 
W
hat shall I say about Paris? Of 
course it was all madness, and 
silly. I spent a little over three 
weeks in Paris, and in this time a hundred thousand 
francs of my money were totally finished. I am speaking 
of one hundred thousand only, for the other hundred 
thousand I gave to Mile Blanche in cash-fifty thousand 
in Frankfort and three days later, in Paris, another fifty 
thousand by check. She cashed it a week later, "et les cent 
mille francs qui nous restent, tu les mangeras avec moi, 
mon outchitel."38 She used to call me "outchitel" all the 
time. It is difficult to imagine anything in the world more 
calculating, stingy, and niggardly than the class of crea­
tures such as Mile Blanche. But that was in the spending 
of her own money. Regarding my hundred thousand 
francs, she openly told me later that she needed them to 
establish herself in Paris. "So now I have established my­
self in decent style once and for all, and nobody is going 
to put me out, not for a long time, at least that's the way 
I've got it planned," she explained. I hardly saw those 
hundred thousand, however. She kept the money the 
whole time, and my wallet, into which she looked every 
38. "And the hundred thousand francs that we have left, you'll de­
vour them with me, my outchitel." 
173 

174 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
day, never contained more than a hundred francs, and 
usually less. 
"\Vhat do you need that money for?" she would say, 
sometimes, in the most natural manner, and I wouldn't 
argue the point. But it must be said that with the money 
she furnished and decorated her apartment very nicely 
indeed, and later, when she showed me the rooms as she 
was about to move in, she said: "Do you see what care and 
good taste can do e\'en with the scantiest means." These 
"scanty means," though, amounted to no more and no 
less than fifty thousand francs. For the remaining fifty 
thousand she bought a carriage and horses; also, we gave 
two balls, two parties, that is, which were attended by 
Hortense and Lisette and Cleopatre, remarkable women 
in a number of ways and not at all bad looking. At those 
parties I was forced to play that most stupid role of host, 
to recei,·e and entertain the dullest small-time business­
men of recently acquired wealth, armies of incredibly ig­
norant and insolent lieut«;nants, and a bunch of wretched 
minor authors and journalistic insects, who showed up 
wearing the most fashionable swallowtails and pale yel­
low gloves and displayed a vanity and conceit of such 
proportions as would be unthinkable even back home, 
in Petersburg-and that is saying a great deal. They ac­
tually took it into their heads to make fun of me, but I 
got drunk with champagne and passed out in a back 
room. I found the whole thing loathsome to the last de­
gree. "C' est un outchitel," Blanche said about me, "il 
a gagne deux cent mille francs, and without me he 
wouldn't know how to spend them. And after it's all over 
he'll go back to teaching-does anyone know of a job for 
him? We must do something for him." I started to take 
recourse to champagne quite often, because I was very 
sad all the time, and terribly bored. I was living in the 
most bourgeois, in the most mercenary milieu, where 

The Gambler 
175 
every sou was calculated and accounted for. Blanche dis­
liked me heartily during the first two weeks, that much I 
noticed. To be sure, she dressed me up in elegant clothes 
and personally did my tie for me every day, but at heart 
she genuinely despised me. I paid no attention to it what­
ever. Bored and downcast, I got into the habit of going 
down to the Chateau des Fleurs,39 where I got drunk 
regularly every night and learned to dance the cancan 
(which they dance disgustingly there), in the end even 
acquiring a fame of sorts. Eventually Blanche gauged my 
true character. Initially, she had somehow got the idea 
that, during the entire period of our cohabitation, I 
would be trailing her, pencil and paper in hand, to check 
how much she had spent, how much she had stolen, how 
much she was going to spend, and how much she was go­
ing to steal. And of course she expected that we were 
going to have battles over every ten francs she spent. And 
so, to every anticipated attack on my part, she had an an­
swer ready ahead of time. Then, seeing that there was no 
attack, she took to defending herself even though I had 
said nothing. There were times when she would launch 
into a heated explanation, hut then, seeing that I wasn't 
saying a thing-most of the time I'd be just lounging 
around on a couch and staring at the ceiling, motionless 
-she would at last stop, really puzzled. At first she 
thought that I was simply stupid, "un outchitel," and 
simply cut short her explanation, most probably thinking 
to herself: "\Vhy, he is stupid, so let's not give him any 
ideas, as long as he hasn't caught on himself." So she 
would walk away, then come back ten minutes later (this 
would happen at the time she was doing her most reck­
less spending, including some expenses that were entirely 
beyond our means: for instance, she had traded in our 
39. A popular dance hall in Paris. 

176 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
horses and had bought another pair for sixteen thousand 
francs). 
"Well, Bibi, you aren't angry, are you?" she said, com­
ing up to me. 
"N-o-o! You're boring me!" I said, pushing her away 
from me. But this thing fascinated her so much that she 
immediately sat down beside me: 
"You see, I decided to o;pend so much on them because 
they were such a barg<tin. I could sell them again for 
twenty thousand francs." 
"I believe it, I believe it. Fine horses. You've really got 
yourself a fine equipage there. It'll come in handy. Well, 
enough of that." 
"So you aren't angry?" 
"For what? You are very smart getting yourself some of 
the things you need. They'll be good to have, later. I can 
see that you really must establish yourself in such style, 
or you'll never make a million. Here our hundred thou· 
sand francs are a mere beginning, a drop in the bucket." 
Blanche, who had been expecting anything but reflec­
tions of this order from me (instead of outcries and re­
proaches!), seemed to come down from the clouds. 
"So you . . .  so that's the kind you are ! Mais tu as l'es­
prit pour comprendre! Sais-tu, mon garЈon, though you 
are only a tutor, you should have been born a prince! So 
you don't mind that our money is going so quickly?" 
"To hell with it, the quicker the better!" 
"Mais . . .  sais-tu . . .  mais dis done, you aren't rich, are 
you? Mais sais-tu, you're overdoing it, this despising of 
money. Qu'est ce que tu feras apres, dis done?" 
"Apres, I'll go to Homburg and win another hundred 
thousand francs." 
"Oui, oui, c'est Јa. c'est magnifique! And I know that 
you will win that much and bring it all here. Dis done, 
why, that way some day you'll make me really love you! 

The Gambler 
177 
Eh bien, for being like that, I'll love you the whole time 
you're here, and I won't be unfaithful to you once. You 
see, all this time, though I did not love you, parce que je 
croyais que tu n'etais qu'un outchitel (quelque chose 
comme un laquais, n'est-ce pas?), I've still been faithful 
to you, parce que je suis bonne fille."40 
"Come, you're lying! Didn't I see you with Albert, that 
swarthy little officer, last time?" 
"Oh, oh, mais tu es . . .  
" 
"Come, you're lying, you're lying. Do you really think 
I'm angy-y? Why, I don't give a damn, il faut que Ia 
jeunesse se passe. How could you chase him away, since 
he was there before me, and you love him? Only don't 
give him any money, do you understand?" 
"So you aren't angy-y about that either? Mais tu es un 
vrai philosophe, sais-tu? Un vrai philosophe!'' she cried 
enthusiastically. "Eh bien, je t'aiiPerai, je t'aimerai-tu 
verras, tu seras content!" 
And in fact from that time she actually seemed to be­
come attached to me, perhaps even fond of me, and so 
our last ten days passed. I never saw the "stars" promised 
me, but in some respects she really did keep her word. 
Moreover, she introduced me to Hortense, a woman 
truly remarkable in her own way, whom we used to call 
Therese-philosophe41 in our circle . . .  
However, there is no need to go into that here. It all 
might make a separate story, of a different color, which I 
do not want to introduce into this story. The fact of the 
matter was that I hoped from the bottom of my heart that 
the whole affair would be finished as soon as possible. 
Our hundred thousand francs, as I have already men-
40. "Because I thought }"OU were only a tutor (something like a lackey, 
isn"t it?) . . .  because I"m a god girl." 
41. From an anon}mous erotic book Therese-philosophe; ou Memoire 
pour servir a l'histoire de D. Dirray et de Melle Erodice Ia Haye (1748). 

178 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
tioned, lasted us nearly a month, which frankly surprised 
me: Blanche had spent at least eighty thousand on things 
which she bought hersel f; so there were only twenty thou­
sand francs left for our living expenses-and we still 
made it. Blanche, who toward the end was almost honest 
with me (at least there were some things about which she 
didn't lie to me). declared that at least I wouldn't be re­
sponsible for the debts she had been forced to incur. "I 
didn't let you sign any bills or promissory notes," she 
told me, "because I felt sorry for you. Most any other 
girl would have certainly done it and got you in prison. 
You see, you see how I loved you, and what a kind heart 
I have! Think of what that damned wedding alone is go­
ing to cost me! " 
There was really going to be a wedding. It took place 
toward the \·ery end of that month of ours, and it may be 
assumed that the last remains of my hundred thousand 
francs were spent on it. And that's how it all ended, that 
is, that's how "our month" ended, as immediately there­
after I was formally dismissed. 
This is how it happened. A week after we had estab­
lished ourselves in Paris the General arrived. He came 
straight to Blanche, and from his first visit virtually lived 
with us. To he sure, he had a small flat of his own some­
where. Blanche received him most heartily, with happy 
squeals and laughter, and even rushed to embrace him. 
It turned out that it was she herself who insisted he stay 
around and follow her everywhere: on the boulevards, 
driving around in her carriage, to the theater, seeing 
friends. The General was still good for this kind of em­
ployment. He was a man of rather imposing and deco­
rous presence: rather tall, with dyed sideburns and huge 
moustaches (he had served in the Cuirassiers), and a 
handsome though somewhat flabby face. His manners 
were excellent, and he wore his evening dress well. In 

The Gambler 
179 
Paris he began wearing his decorations. To walk down 
the boulevard with a man like this was not only permis­
sible, it was, if I may say so, even commendable. The 
good-natured and muddleheaded General was terribly 
pleased with all this. He had been expecting something 
quite different when he first showed up at our apartment 
after his arrival in Paris. He had come then, almost trem­
bling with fear, thinking that Blanche would start yelling 
at him and have him kicked out. Therefore, when things 
took this turn, he was positively delighted and spent the 
whole month in a state of senseless rapture. And he was 
still in that state when I left him. I learned only later 
that after our sudden departure from Roulettenburg he 
had suffered something resembling a fit the same morn­
ing. He had collapsed, unconscious, and later had been 
like a madman all week, talking incoherently. He had 
been getting some medical treatment, but suddenly he 
had quit everything and taken the train to Paris. Natu­
rally, the reception Blanche gave him was the best pos­
sible cure for him. The symptoms of his ailment, how­
ever, remained long after, in spite of his cheerful and 
rapturous frame of mind. He was now quite incapable 
of thinking or even of conducting any kind of halfway 
serious conversation. \Vhenever this became necessary, 
he would just say "H'm!" and nod his head at every word 
-which would be his whole contribution to the conver­
sation. He used to laugh a great deal, but it was a nervous, 
sickly sort of laugh, as though he were hysterical. Then 
again he would just sit there for hours, gloomy as night, 
knitting his bushy eyebrows. There were many things 
which he didn't even remember. He had become dis­
gracefully absent-minded and had acquired a habit of 
talking to himself. Only Blanche could revitalize him. 
And, indeed, his fits of gloom and depression, when he 
would sit in a corner moping, merely signified that he 

180 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
had not seen Blanche for a long time, or that she had 
gone off somewhere without taking him with her, or that 
she had forgotten to be nice to him before leaving. Fur­
thermore, he was not capable of telling what he wanted, 
or why he was gloomy and sad. After just sitting around 
for an hour or two (I noticed this a couple of times when 
Blanche was gone for the whole day, probably to be with 
Albert), he would suddenly begin to look around, get 
flustered, cast nervous glances in all directions, then 
seemingly remember something and start looking for it; 
but, seeing nobody, and not remembering, after all, the 
question he was going to ask, he would lapse into silence 
again, until Blanche suddenly appeared, gay, playful, all 
dressed up, and with her ringing laughter. She would 
run up to him, tease him, even kiss him-the latter, 
though, was a rare treat, granted only rarely. There was 
one time when the General was so glad to see her he actu­
ally began to cry-it really made we wonder. 
From the very first day he appeared at our establish­
ment, Blanche had started to plead his cause before me. 
She even waxed eloquent in doing so. She reminded me 
of the fact that she had betrayed the General for my sake, 
that she had been virtually engaged to him, that she had 
given him her word, that he had abandoned his family 
on her account, and, finally, that I had been in his service 
and ought to feel accordingly, so-why, really, wasn't I a 
bit ashamed . . .  I kept saying nothing to all this, and she 
just kept prattling away. At last I began to laugh, and 
that's where the matter ended, or, rather, she thought, at 
first, that I was a fool, whereas later she came to the con­
clusion that I was a very nice and understanding person. 
In short, I had the good fortune, in the end, to gain un­
doubtedly the fullest favor of this excellent young 
woman. (Blanche, it ought to be said, was indeed a very 
nice, good-natured girl-in her own way, of course; I did 

The Gambler 
181 
not appreciate her enough in the beginning.) "You are 
a kind and a clever man," she used to tell me toward the 
end, "and . . .  and . . .  it's just a pity you're such a fool! 
You'll never, but never amount to anything!" 
"Un vrai russe, un calmouk!"42 Several times she sent 
me to take the General for a walk, exactly the way she 
would tell a servant to walk her dog. I took him to the 
theater, though, and to the Bal-Mabile, and to various 
restaurants. For this, Blanche would even give me money, 
although the General had some of his own, and he very 
much liked to take out his wallet before people. Once I 
almost had to resort to force to prevent him from buying 
a brooch for seven hundred francs which caught his eye 
at the Palais Royal and which he definitely wanted to 
give to Blanche. Really, what was she going to do with a 
brooch worth seven hundred francs? Besides, the Gen­
eral had no more than a thousand francs in all. I never 
found out where he got them. I presume it was from Mr. 
Astley, especially as the latter had also paid their bill at 
the hotel. Regarding the General's attitude toward me 
during all this time, he didn't even seem to suspect what 
my relations with Blanche were like. Though he had 
heard, in a sort of vague way, that I had won a large sum 
of money, he probably assumed that I was something like 
a private secretary to Blanche, or perhaps even a servant. 
At least he always spoke to me condescendingly, as supe­
rior to inferior, and occasionally went as far as to give me 
a tongue-lashing. One morning, as we were having coffee 
together, he reduced Blanche and me to fits of laughter. 
He was not normally quick to take offense, but that time 
he suddenly got very angry at me, and for what?-I have 
no idea to this day. Of course he didn't know himself ei­
ther. In short, he just kept rambling on and on, a batons-
42. From "Kalmyk," region, now Kalmyk Autonomous Soviet Socialist 
Republic, on northwest shore of Caspian Sea. 

182 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
rompus, shouted that I was a no-good, that he was going 
to teach me a lesson . . .  that he was going to show me 
. . .  and so on and so forth. Nobody could understand 
a word of what he \•;as saying. Blanche laughed and 
laughed. At last we somehow managed to calm him down 
and took him out for a walk. However, there were many 
times when he became sad, when he seemed to be regret­
ting something or feel sorry for somebody, when he ap­
peared to be missing somebody, even though Blanche was 
present at the time. On these occasions he would some­
times start talking to me of his own accord hut never 
managed to express clearly what was on his mind. In­
stead, he would reminisce about his military service, 
about his late wife, about his family affairs, about his 
country estate. Often he would hit upon some word and 
be so pleased about it that he would repeat it a hundred 
times that day, even though it did not at all express either 
his feelings or his thoughts. I tried a few times to talk to 
him about his children. But he would fend this off by 
keeping up his rapid chatter and by quickly changing the 
subject: "Yes. yes, the children, the children, you are 
quite right, the children!" Only once he became sen­
timental about it. \Ve were on our way to the theater 
together: "Those are unhappy children! "  he said sud­
denly, "yes, sir, yes, those are un-n-happy children!" And 
then, later that night, he repeated the phrase: "unhappy 
children !"' a number of times. Once, when I turned the 
com·ersation to Polina, he actually flew into a rage. "She 
is an ungrateful woman," he exclaimed; "she is wicked 
and ungrateful ! She has disgraced the family! If they had 
any laws here, I'd make her knuckle under! Yes, sir, I 
would!" As for de Grieux, he could not hear even to hear 
his name. "He has ruined me," he used to say; "he has 
robbed me blind, he's been my undoing! He was my 
nightmare for two long years! He used to haunt me in 

The Gambler 
183 
my dreams for months! It's-it's, it's . . .  Oh, don't men­
tion him to me, ever!" 
I could see that the two of them were coming to an un­
derstanding, but, as usual, I kept quiet about it. Blanche 
was the first to tell me. It was exactly a l\'eek before we 
parted. "II a du chance," she jabbered away; "bahouchka 
is really sick now and will certainly die. Mr. Astley has 
sent a telegram. You must agree, he is her heir, after all. 
And even if not, he won't be in the way. To begin with, 
he's got his pension, and second, he'll live in a back room, 
where he'll be perfectly happy. I shall be "madame Ia 
Generate." I'll belong to a nice social set (Blanche 
dreamed of that all the time), later I'll be a Russian land­
owner; j'aurai un chateau, des moujiks, et puis j'aurai 
toujours mon million." 
"Well, but what if he becomes jealous, if he demands 
. . .  God knows what, you understand?" 
"Oh, no, non, non, non! How dare he! I've taken mea­
sures, don't you worry. I've already made him sign sev­
eral promissory notes in Albert's name. Let him just try 
the least thing, and he'll be punished right away. Besides, 
he won't dare!" 
"All right, then marry him . . .  
" 
The wedding was celebrated without any great pomp, 
a quiet family affair. Only Albert and a few other inti­
mate friends were invited. Hortense, Cleopatre, and the 
rest were strictly excluded. The bridegroom took great 
interest in his position. Blanche personally tied his tie 
for him, pomaded his hair, and in his swallowtails and 
white tie he looked tres com m e  il faut. 
"II est pourtant tres comme il faut," Blanche herself 
observed to me emerging from the General's room, as 
though the idea that the General was "tres comme il 
faut" were a surprise even to her. I took so little interest 
in all the details, participating in the whole proceedings 

1 84 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
as a mere idle spectator, that I have actually forgotten a 
lot of what took place there. I remember only that it 
turned out that Blanche wasn't "de Cominges" at all, 
just as her mother wasn't "veuve Cominges," but rather 
"du-Placet." \-Vhy they had been de Cominges up to that 
point, I don't know. But the General was perfectly con­
tent with this, too, and in fact he liked du-Placet even 
better than de Cominges. On the morning of the wed­
ding, all dressed up for the part, he kept pacing up and 
down the drawing room, repeating to himself with an 
unusually serious and grave air: "Mademoiselle Blanche 
du-Placet! Blanche du-Placet! Du-Placet! Miss Blanca 
Dew-Piassett! . . .  " And his face beamed with a certain 
smugness, even. In church, at the maire's, and at the wed­
ding repast at home he appeared not only cheerful and 
content but even proud. Something had happened tu 
both of them. Blanche, too, was beginning to wear an air 
of particular dignity. 
"I must behave quite differently from now on," she 
told me, very seriously, "mais vois-tu, I never gave any 
thought to one nasty detail: imagine, I still can't remem­
ber my new surname: Zagoriansky, Zagoziansky, madame 
Ia generale de Sago-Sago, ces diables des noms russes, 
enfin madame Ia generale a quatorze consonnes! comme 
c'est agreable, n'est-ce pas?"43 
At last we parted, and Blanche, that silly Blanche, ac­
tually had tears in her eyes when she said good-bye to me. 
"Tu etais bon enfant," she said, sniveling. "Je te croyais 
bete es tu en avais l'air, but it suits you." And, pressing 
my hand just before parting, she suddenly exclaimed: 
"Attends!" rushed to her boudoir, and returned a minute 
later with two thousand-franc bills. I would have never 
43. ":\ladame general from Sago·Sago, damn these Russian names, 
well then madame general with a name of fourteen consonants! pleasant, 
isn't it?" 

The Gambler 
185 
believed that! "This will come in handy; maybe you are 
a very learned outchitel, but you are an awfully stupid 
man. I won't give you more than two thousand no matter 
what, because you'll gamble it away in any case. 'Veil, 
good-bye! Nous serons toujours bons amis, and if you 
should win again, be sure to come back to me, et tu seras 
heureuxl" 
I also had five hundred francs left of my own. Besides, 
I've still got a beautiful watch worth a thousand francs, 
some diamond cufflinks, and a few other things, so that 
I could go on for quite some time without having much 
to worry about. I am staying in this little town on pur­
pose, to get ready for my next step, and, what is more 
important, I am waiting for Mr. Astley. I found out for 
sure that he will pass through this town shortly and stay 
here for twenty-four hours, on business. I'll find out 
about everything . . .  and then, straight on to Homburg. 
I am not going to Roulettenburg, perhaps next year. In 
fact, it is said that playing the same table twice in a row 
gives you bad luck, and, besides, Homburg really is the 
place for gambling. 

Seventeen 
A 
year and eight months have gone 
by since I last looked at these notes, 
and I do so now only because, in 
my dejection and misery, I suddenly decided to amuse 
myself by reading them over. So that's where I left off, 
planning to go to Homburg. My God! How lightheart­
edly, relatively speaking, I wrote those last lines! Not 
really with a light heart, that is, but with what self-confi­
dence, with what unflagging hopes! Did I have even the 
slightest doubt of m)·self? And now more than a year and 
a half has passed, and I am, to my own mind, a lot worse 
than a beggar! So what if I am a beggar! Being a beggar 
doesn't mean a thing. I've only ruined myself! It is vir­
tually impossible to make any comparisons, though, and 
what's the use of moralizing to oneself At a time like 
this, nothing could be more absurd than speaking of 
morals! Oh, these self-satisfied people: with what proud 
self-satisfaction are these l\'indbags ready to deliver their 
lectures! If they knew to what extent I am myself aware 
of the complete loathsomeness of my present condition, 
they certainly couldn't force themselves to continue their 
admonitions to me. 'Veil, what, what can they tell me 
that's new to me, that I don't know? And is this the 
point? The point is that one turn of the wheel could 
change everything, that these very same moralists (of this 
186 

The Gambler 
187 
I am convinced) would be the first to congratulate me 
with friendly banter. And no longer would everybody 
turn away from me, as is the case now. To hell with them 
all! What am I right now? Zero. \Vhat can I be tomorrow? 
Tomorrow I may rise from the dead and begin a new 
life! I may still discover the man in me, so long as he is 
not lost altogether! 
I actually went to Homburg that time, but . . .  later I 
went back to Roulettenburg, and I also went to Spa. 
Once I was even in Baden, where I went as valet to a man 
named Hinze, a "councillor," a scoundrel, and my former 
master here. Yes, I was a flunkey for five whole months! 
This happened immediately after I got out of jail. (Yes, 
I did some time in prison in Rouletten burg for a debt I 
incurred there. An anonymous friend paid my debt and 
got me out. I wonder who it was? Mr. Astley? Polina? I 
don't know, but, anyway, the debt was paid, two hundred 
thalers in all, and I was set free.) \Vhat was I to do? So I 
entered the service of this Hinze. He is a young man, and 
of a frivolous temper, as well as lazy, and I can speak and 
write in three languages. At first I was to he a kind of 
secretary to him for thirty gulden a month. But I ended 
up being a regular valet: he no longer could afford to 
keep a secretary, so he reduced my wages. I had no place 
to go, and I stayed on-and so I automatically became a 
flunkey. I didn't have enough to eat or to drink in his 
service, but I did save seventy gulden in five months. 
One night, in Baden, I announced to him that I was quit­
ting his service. That same night I went to the casino. Oh, 
how my heart was pounding! No, it wasn't the money 
that I wanted so much ! That night, the only thing I 
wanted was that the next day all these Hinzes, all these 
Ober-Kellners, all these elegant Baden ladies, that they 
should all be talking about me, that they should all be 
telling my story, that they should all wonder at me, ad-

188 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
mire me, and worship my renewed success. All these are 
but childish daydreams and anxieties, but . . .  who knows: 
perhaps I would meet Polina, and I'd tell her everything, 
and she would see that I was above all these absurd acci­
dents of fate . . . Oh, it isn't money that's dear to mel I 
am convinced that I would have thrown it away once 
more to some Blanche, and for three weeks of driving 
around Paris in my own carriage driven by a pair of 
horses worth sixteen thousand francs. I know for sure 
that I am not avaricious; I even think that I am a spend­
thrift. And yet, with what trepidation, with what pal pi­
tation of my heart, I hear the croupier's cry: "Trente et 
un, rouge, impaire et passe!" or, "Quatre, nair, pair et 
manque!" 'Vith what avidity I stare at the gaming table 
on which louis d' or, gulden, and thalers are scattered, at 
those little columns of gold pieces, when the croupier's 
shovel breaks them down into piles of gold that glow like 
embers, or at those huge rolls of silver, over two feet long, 
that lie around the wheel. Even as I approach the gam­
bling hall, as soon as I hear, still two rooms away, the 
jingle of money poured out on the table, I almost go into 
convulsions. 
Oh, that night I took my seventy gulden to the roulette 
table, was quite remarkable, too. I started off with ten 
gulden, and again from passe. I am prejudiced in favor 
of passe. I lost. I had sixty gulden in silver money left. I 
thought for a moment, then chose zero. I began placing 
five gulden at a time on u!ro. At the third turn u!ro came 
up, all of a sudden; I almost died of joy, receiving one 
hundred and seventy-five gulden. The time I won a hun­
dred thousand gulden I wasn't nearly so glad. I immedi­
ately placed a hundred gulden on rouge, and won; then 
the whole two hundred on rouge, and won; the whole 
four hundred on noir, and won again; the whole eight 
hundred on manque-it won also. Counting what I had 

The Gambler 
189 
had in hand, I now had seYenteen hundred gulden, and 
this in less than five minutes! Yes, it is at moments like 
this that one forgets all one's earlier failures! \Vhy, I had 
got this at the risk of more than my life it.self. E ·_a I had 
dared to risk it, and there I was once again, a man among 
men! 
I took a room at a hotel, locked myself in, and just sat 
there, counting my money, until three o'clock at night. 
When I woke up in the morning I was no longer a 
flunkey. I decided to leave for Homburg that very same 
day: I had not been a flunkey or been in prison there. 
Half an hour before train time I went to the casino to try 
two bets, no more, and lost fifteen hundred gulden. Yet 
I went to Homburg all the same, and now I have been 
here for a whole month . . .  
Of course I live in a state of continuous excitement. I 
play for the smallest stakes and keep waiting for some­
thing, calculating. standing around the gaming tables for 
whole days, and observi,Jg the game. I even dream of 
gambling. Yet at the same time I have a feeling that I 
have grown numb, somehow, as though I were buried in 
some kind of mire. I gather this from my impressions 
when I met Mr. Astley. \\re had not seen each other since 
that time [in Roulettenburg], and we met here b)· acci­
dent. This is how it happened. I was walking in the gar­
dens, figuring that I had almost no money left, but that 
I still had fifty gulden and, besides that, I had paid my 
hotel bill in full just the other day. This meant that I 
had one more chance to try my luck at roulette. If I won 
anything at all, I'd be able to continue playing; if I lost, 
I'd have to get myself another job as a flunkey, unless I 
could find some Russians who needed a tutor. Absorbed 
in these thoughts, I took my daily route through the park 
and through the forest and to the adjoining principality. 
Sometimes I spent up to four hours walking like this and 

190 
Fyodor Dostoevskv 
returned to Homburg tired and hungry. I had just en­
tered the park, coming from the gardens, when I sud­
denly saw Mr. Astley sitting on a bench. He noticed me 
first and called my name. I sat down beside him. But de­
tecting in him a certain reserve, I immediately restrained 
my delight. But I was very glad to see him. 
"So you are here! I actually thought that I was going 
to run into you," he told me. "Don't bother to tell me 
your story: I know it, I know everything; I am familiar 
with all the details of your life during this last year and 
eight months." 
"Oh! Look what a watch you keep on your old 
friends!" I answered. "It is very much to your credit that 
you haven't forgotten . . .  \Vait a moment, though, you've 
just given me an idea. Wasn't it you who got me out of 
prison in Roulettenburg, where I was being held for non­
payment of a debt in the amount of two hundred gulden? 
Some unnamed person paid it for me." 
"No, but no! I never got you out of Roulettenburg 
jail, where you were locked up for a debt of two hundred 
gulden. I knew, though, that you were in prison for a 
debt of two hundred gulden." 
"That means, at least you know who got me out?" 
"Oh, no, I can't say that I know who got you out." 
"Strange. I don't know any Russians here, and, be-
sides, our Russians here are hardly the kind who would 
do such a thing. Back home in Russia it might happen 
that an Orthodox Christian would get another Orthodox 
Christian out of prison. So I thought that it might have 
been some eccentric Englishman who did it to be dif­
ferent." 
Mr. Astley listened to me with some surprise. Ap­
parently he had expected to find me despondent and 
crushed. 
"I am very glad, though, to see that you have fully 

The Gambler 
191 
maintained your independence of spirit, and even your 
cheerfulness," he observed, rather unpleasantly. 
"That is, deep inside you're gritting your teeth with 
vexation at not finding me crushed and humble," I said, 
laughing. 
He did not immediately understand my remark, but 
when he did, he smiled. 
"I like your observations. I recognize in these words 
my former, clever, enthusiastic, yet, at the same time, 
cynical, old friend. Only Russians can combine in them­
selves so many opposites at the same time. I t  is true, a man 
likes to see his best friend humbled, and much of what 
friendship is, is based on this fact. This is an old truth, 
well known to all wise men. But in the present case, let 
me assure you that I am sincerely pleased to see that you 
haven't lost hean. Tell me, don't you intend to give up 
gambling?" 
"To hell with gambling! I'll quit immediately, as soon 
as . . .  " 
"As soon as you've won back what you lost? That's 
what I thought. You don't have to tel l me-l know-you 
said that inadvertently, and, therefore, you were telling 
the truth. Tell me, besides gambling, is there anything 
else you're doing?" 
"No, nothing at all . . .  " 
He began examining me. I knew nothing. I had hardly 
looked into the newspapers, and I definitely had not 
opened a single book during that entire time. 
"You've become completely stale," he observed; "not 
only have you renounced life, all your interests, private 
as well as p:1blic, your duties as a citizen and as a human 
being, your friends (yes, you had some friends), not only 
have you renounced having any goal at all, except win­
ning at roulette, but you have even renounced your mem­
ories. I remember you at an ardent and intense moment 

192 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
of your life. But I am convinced that you have forgotten 
all the best impressions which you had then. Your 
dreams, your most urgent desires, I mean those that you 
have now do not go beyond pair and impair, rouge, noir, 
the twelve middle numbers, and so on and so forth, I'm 
quite sure of that!" 
"Enough, Mr. Astley, I beg you, I beg you not to re­
mind me of this," I cried out, quite annoyed and almost 
angry; "let me tell you that I have forgotten nothing at 
all, but that I have temporarily cleared my mind of all 
these things, including even my memories- until I have 
effected a radical improvement in my circumstances; then 
. . .  then you shall see me rise again from the dead!" 
"You'll be here still in t੷n years," he said. "I bet I'll 
remind you of this on this very bench, if I'm alive by 
then." 
"\\'ell, enough," I interrupted him impatiently, "and 
to prove to you that I'm not quite so forgetful of the past 
as you think, allow me to ask: where is 1\fiss Polina now? 
If it wasn't you who got me out of jail, it must have been 
she, for sure. I haven't had any news about her since that 
one day. 
"No, oh no! I don't think that it was she who got you 
out of jail. She is now in Switzerland, and you will do me 
a great favor if you'll stop asking me questions about Miss 
Polina," he said resolutely, even angrily. 
"This is to say, she hurt you quite a bit, too!" I laughed 
involuntarily. 
"Miss Polina is the finest human being I've known and 
deserves the highest respect, but, let me repeat, you'll do 
me a great favor if you'll stop asking me questions about 
Miss Polina. You never knew her, and it outrages my 
moral sentiments to hear her name from your lips." 
"Is that so! However, you are wrong there. Listen, 
what else is there for me to talk to you about, except that, 

The Gambler 
193 
think for yourself? Why, that's what the shared mem­
ories of both of us amount to. Don't worry, please, I'm 
not trying to find out anything that's private or secret 
between you and her . . .  I am only interested, so to say, 
in Miss Polina's external circumstances, in her present 
external condition. That's something you could tell me 
in a few words." 
"All right then, but under the condition that these 
few words will be the end of it. Miss Polina was ill for a 
long time. She is still not well today. She spent some time 
with my mother and sister in the north of England. Half 
a year ago her grandmother-remember, that same crazy 
woman-died and left her, personally, a fortune of seven 
thousand pounds. At the present time Miss Polina is trav­
eling with the family of my sister, who was married in the 
meantime. Her little brother and sister, too, are provided 
for by their grandmother's will and are attending school 
in London. The General, her stepfather, died in Paris of 
a stroke a month ago. Mademoiselle Blanche treated him 
well, hut managed to transfer everything that he received 
from the grandmother to her name . . .  there it is, I think 
this is about all." 
"But what about de Grieux? Isn't he traveling in Switz­
erland, too?" 
"No, de Grieux is not traveling in Switzerland, and I 
don't know where de Grieux is. Besides, I warn you once 
and for all to avoid such insinuations and dishonorable 
linking of names, or else I shall certainly make you regret 
it." 
"What? In spite of our friendly relations in the past?" 
"Yes, in spite of our friendly relations in the past." 
"A thousand apologies, Mr. Astley. But allow me, nev­
ertheless: there is nothing insulting or inappropriate 
about what I said, and I am not blaming Miss Polina for 
anything. Besides, a Frenchman and a young Russian 

194 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
lady-that's a combination, Mr. Astley, which neither 
you nor I could ever hope to explain or fully under­
stand." 
"If you will not mention de Grieux's name in conjunc­
tion \Vith that other name, I would ask you to explain to 
me what you mean by your expression: 'a Frenchman 
and a young Russian lady.' And what kind of 'combina­
tion' is this? Why, precisely, a Frenchman, and why ab­
solutely a young Russian lady?" 
"There you are, I've got you interested in it. But that's 
a long story, ʈh. Astley. There's a lot one must know 
before going into it. But it is an important question, how­
ever silly it may appear at first sight. A Frenchman, Mr. 
Astley, is the perfection of beautiful form. You, being 
British. may disagree with this. I, a Russian, certainly 
disagree, though perhaps from envy-I'll admit that. But 
our young ladies may be of a different opinion. You may 
find Racine affected, tortuous, and perfumed. Most prob­
ably you don't even read him. I, too, find him affected, 
tortuous, and perfumed, even ludicrous from a certain 
point of view. But he is still delightful, Mr. Astley, and, 
what is more, he is a great poet, whether you and I like 
it or not. The national character of a Frenchman, that 
is, of a Parisian, began to he molded into an elegant form 
at a time when we were still bears. The Revolution con­
tinued the traditions of the aristocracy. Today the most 
ordinary little Frenchman may have manners, gestures, 
modes of expression, and even thoughts, the form of 
which is perfectly elegant, even though his own initia­
ti,·e, his own soul, his own heart have had no part what­
ever in the creation of this form. It has all come to him 
through inheritance. As individuals, they may be the 
shallowest of the shallow, or the vilest of the vile. 'Veil, 
̼lr. Astley, let me tell you that there is not a creature on 
earth more trustful and more candid than a kindhearted, 
cle\"er, and not too sophisticated young Russian lady. A 

The Gambler 
195 
de Grieux, appearing in any given role, so long as he is 
wearing a mask, can conquer her heart with extraordi­
nary ease. He's got elegance of form, Mr. Astley, and the 
young lady takes that form for his own soul, for the natu­
ral form of his heart and soul, and not for what it is: an 
external garment, which has come to him by inheritance. 
To your great displeasure, I must confide to you that 
Englishmen are for the most part angular and inelegant, 
and Russians are rather sensitive to beauty and are easily 
captivated by it. But in order to detect beauty of soul and 
originality of character a person will need incomparably 
more independence and freedom than is found in our 
women, let alone in our young ladies, and, needless to 
say, a great deal more experience. And so, Miss Polina­
forgive me, what's said can't he unsaid-will need a very, 
very long time before she could make up her mind to 
prefer you to that scoundrel de Grieux. She may think 
very highly of you, she may become your friend, she may 
open all her heart to you ; and yet, who will continue to 
reign over that heart-who hut that hateful scoundrel, 
that despicable and petty money-lender de Grieux! If for 
no other reason, this will continue out of mere stubborn­
ness and vanity, for that very same de Grieux appeared 
to her at one time in the guise of an elegant marqtlis, a 
disillusioned liberal, a man who had ruined himself (as 
though he did!) helping her family and that frivolous 
General. All his tricks came to light later. But what does 
it matter that they came to light? 'Vhat she wants is still 
the de Grieux of old-that's what she wants! And the 
more she loathes the present de Grieux, the more she 
pines for the former one, though the former never ex­
isted except in het: imagination. Are you in the sugar­
refining business, Mr. Astley?" 
"Yes, I am a partner in the well-known sugar refinery 
Lovell and Company." 
"There you have it, Mr. Astley. On the one side, a man 

196 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
who deals in sugar, and on the other-the Apollo Belve­
dere. It's all somewhat incongruous. And as for me, I 
even haven't got a sugar refinery; I am simply a small­
time gambler at roulette; I've even been a flunkey, which 
I suppose Miss Polina knows very well, because she seems 
to have some good informants. 
"You are bitter, that's why you talk all this nonsense," 
l'vfr. Astley said coolly, after giving the matter some 
thought. "Besides, there is nothing original about what 
you're saying." 
"Agreed! But the terrible thing is, my high-minded 
friend, that all these accusations I've just made, no matter 
how out dated, stale, and farcical they may sound, still 
happen to be true! And you and I are still nowhere!" 
"This is vile nonsense . . .  because, because . . .  you shall 
know it, then!" Mr. Astley proclaimed, his voice trem­
bling and his eyes flashing. "Know then, thankless and 
unworthy, shallow and miserable man that you are, that 
I've come to Hamberg expressly at her wish, to get to­
gether with you, to have a long and sincere talk with you, 
and to report everything to her-your feelings, your 
thoughts, your hopes, and . . .  your memories!" 
"Really! Really!" I exclaimed, as tears came gushing 
from my eyes. I just could not hold them back. I believe 
that it was the first time in my life this had happened. 
"Yes, unhappy man, she loved you, and I can reveal this 
to you, because you are a lost man! \Vhat's worse, even 
if I were to tell you that she still loves you, why, you 
would stay here just the same! Yes, you have destroyed 
yourself. You had some abilities, a lively disposition, and 
you were not a bad man. In fact, you might have been 
of service to your country, which needs men so badly. 
But you are going to stay here, and your life is finished. 
I am not blaming you. It seems to me that all Russians 
are like that, or are disposed to be like that. If it isn't 

The Gambler 
197 
roulette, it's something else, but similar to it. The excep­
tions are all too rare. You are not the first who does not 
understand what work is (I'm not talking of your plain 
people). Roulette is preeminently a Russian game. So 
far you've remained honest and have preferred being 
a flunkey to stealing . . .  But I dread to think what may 
happen in the future. Enough, good-bye! You need some 
money, of course? Here, take these ten louis d'or, I'm 
not going to give you more, for you'll gamble it away in 
any case. Take it, and good-bye! Come, take it!" 
"No, 1\fr. Astley, after all the things said here today . . .  " 
"Ta-a-ke it! " he cried. "I am convinced that you're 
still an honorable man, and I'm giving you the money 
as a friend to a true friend. If I could only be sure that 
you would quit gambling immediately, leave Homburg, 
and go back to your country, I'd be willing to give you 
at once a thousand pounds so that you could start a new 
career. The reason why I'm not giving you a thousand 
pounds, but only ten louis d'or, is that Lhere is absolutely 
no difference for you right now between a thousand 
pounds and ten louis d'or-you'll gamble away one as 
well as the other. Take it, and good-bye." 
"I'll take it if you'll allow me to embrace you for a 
farewell." 
"Oh, with pleasure!" 
\Ve embraced with sincere feeling, and 1\fr. Astley left. 
No, he is wrong! If I was harsh and silly about Polina 
and de Grieux, then he was harsh and rash in judging 
Russians. I'm not saying a word about myself. However 
. . .  however, that is not the point at all. These are words, 
words, nothing but words, when deeds are in order! 
Switzerland is the thing now! Tomorrow, first thing­
if I could only leave tomorrow! To be reborn, to rise 
from the dead! I must show them . . .  I,.et Polina see 
that I still can be a man. All I need is . . .  it's too late today, 

198 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
though, but tomorrow . . .  Oh, I have the presentiment, 
and how could it be otherwise? I have now fifteen louis 
d'or, and there were times when I started with fifteen 
gulden! If I'd stan carefully . . .  oh, really, am I really 
childish enough to believe this? Could it be that I still 
refuse to admit that I am hopelessly lost? But then, why 
couldn't I rise again? Yes! All it takes is to be calcu­
lating and patient just once in your lifetime-that is 
al l !  All it takes is to keep control of yourself just once, 
and your whole life will he changed in one hour! Con­
trol yourself, that's the main thing. Only remember what 
happened to me in Roulettenhurg, seven months ago, 
just before I defini tely lost everything. Oh, there was 
a remarkable case of determination: I had lost every­
thing then. ahsolmdy everything . . .  As I was leaving 
the casino I looked. there was still one gulden in my vest 
pocket: "Ah, so there's money for my dinner!" I thought. 
But then, having walked a hundred more paces, I 
changed my mind and went hack to the casino. I staked 
my gulden on mar1que (that time it was manque), and, 
belie\"c me. there is something special about that feeling 
which you have, all alone, in a foreign country, far from 
home and from your friends, not knowing what you'll 
eat tomorrow. as you het your last, your very, very last 
gulden ! I won, and left the casino twenty minutes later, 
with one hundred and se,·enty gulden in my pocket. That 
is a fan. yes. si r !  That's what the last gulden can some­
times mean for you ! And what if I had lost heart that 
time , if I had not dared to take that last chance? . . .  
Tomorrow, tomorrow i t  will he all over! 

l!olina . 
Suslova's Dzary 


Wednesday, 19 A ugust [1863] 
I visited with Salvador. He began asking me what I had been 
doing, and whether I had been thinking of him. I told him 
that the other day I had recalled the lines: "Show me the 
way to the thorny path."1 He asked me to explain to him 
what kind of verses these were. I told him their meaning. He 
liked it. He was listless at first; I wondered if he had been 
working a lot. And I was right. But in spite of that, there 
was still something else wrong with him, even though he 
assured me that this was his normal condition. He told me 
that he was having some trouble with his brother-in-law, be­
cause of money-the brother-in-law is something like a 
guardian, or father, to Salvador-and that he will have to go 
to A[ merica]. Although I had been expecting this, it still came 
as a shock: my feelings of fright and suffering must have ex­
pressed themselves in my face. He kissed me. I bit my lips 
and made an unbelievable effort not to begin to sob. He 
kept kissing me and said that most probably he would be 
gone for a short while only, but perhaps forever, he added, 
when I had gained control of myself and had calmed down. 
"But you can go with me," [he] said, and I hastened to as­
sure him that I certainly could, that my father would allow 
it and let me have the funds. He asked me again when I 
would start learning Spanish. I have just received a letter 
I .  From a poem by Nikolai Alekseyevich Nekrasov, "Rytsar' na chas" 
(Knight for a While) (1860). 
201 

202 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
from F[yodor] M[ikhailovich). He is due to arrive in a few 
days. I had wanted to see him, so I could tell him everything, 
but now I have decided to write him a letter. 
19 August 
You are coming a little too late . . .  Only very recently I 
was dreaming of going to Italy with you, and I even began 
to learn Italian: nerything has changed within a few days. 
You told me one day that I would never surrender my 
heart easily. I have surrendered it within a week's time, at 
the first call, without a struggle, without assurance, almost 
without hope that I was being loved. I was right to get 
angry with you, when you began to sing my praises. Don't 
think that I am blaming you, but I want only to tell you 
that you did not know me, nor did I know myself. Good­
bye, dear! 
I would like to see you, but what would it lead to? I 
would like very much to talk to you about Russia. 
At this moment I am very, very sad. How generous, how 
high-minded he is! \'\'hat an intellect! What a smal! This 
time Salvador asked me for my portrait, and inquired 
whether I had been taking his medicine, and whether I 
was feeling better. "Bien vrai?" he asked when I said that I 
was better. He also asked me when I was going to Italy (that 
was before he told me about his own departure), as I had 
once told him about that when we were still only friends. I 
told him that I didn't know when. Perhaps I wasn't going 
there at all, that I had wanted to go there with a man whom 
I loved. 
Su11day, 23 A ugust 
Yesterday I was with Salvador. It seemed to me that he was a 
little angry with me, because I did not stay with him for 
breakfast and because I was a little sad. I looked at the lines 
in the palm of his hand and told him that he would be happy 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
203 
in one respect (I was thinking of marriage). He kept badger­
ing me: in what? I told him that I couldn't tell him because 
I didn't want to think of it without being sad. He kept 
pestering me something awful, but I didn't give way. Later 
he began to talk about himself, that he would like to stay in 
Paris for some four years, but then, again, he might be 
going to America. From all this I could see that he was not 
giving any thought to me. I leaned my head against his 
breast, as tears were welling up in my eyes. He tried to look 
at my face, and kept asking why I was sad, and what I was 
thinking about. I told him that I was thinking of him and 
tried to remain calm. He asked me: what was it, exactly, that 
I was thinking? I answered that I could not tell him. "So you 
have secrets from me," he said. Later he asked if I would like 
to have breakfast with him, and I refused. "As you wish," 
he said. Somebody knocked. He said that it was his friend, 
and again asked if I would like to have breakfast. I refused, 
and as the friend entered the room, I started putting on my 
hat. Salvador escorted me to the other room and asked me 
when I was going to come. "\Vhcn arc you free? \Vhat ahout 
Tucsday?"-"Comc on Tuesday, if you can't come earlier." 
He asked me if I was taking the medicine, and remarked that 
I was not cleaning my teeth, that this was bad, and that I had 
fine teeth. 
It appeared to me this time that he docs not IO\'C me, and 
I felt a strong desire to make him love me. This is possible, 
only one must act more coolly. I know his weaknesses: he is 
very vain. 
The last time, in his friend's presence, he asked what the 
title of my novel was, having never spoken of it earlier. He 
asked me what I was doing, and asked me to say something in 
Italian. Today I have been thinking a great deal, and I 
almost felt glad that Salvador loves me so little; it makes me 
freer. I feel like seeing Europe and America, going to London 
for some a<h·ice, and then joining the beguny scct.2 The life 
2. Russian text has sektu begunov but sektu beginov, "the Beguine 
sect," may be meant. The Beguine sect was a •·cligious association of lay 
women dating from the thirteenth century. 

204 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
which I had been planning for myself is not going to satisfy 
me. One must liver a fuller and ampler life. 
\Vhat do I want? . . .  Oh, how many desires I have! 
How their energy needs an outlet! 
So much, it seems at times that by their inner anxiety 
My brain will be incinerated and my breast rent asunder.a 
Tuesday, 24 A ugust 
Today I went to see S[alva]dor, but he was not at horne. I 
waited for him a whole hour, but he did not come . . .  There 
were many thoughts and feelings flitting through my head, 
as I was sitting in his room, but I am not going to discuss 
them here. I sat there, with my head between my hands, 
without taking my eyes off the hands of the clock, my heart 
throbbing. :\leanwhile the tears kept welling up in my eyes, 
and I started at the slightest sound. I wanted to write him a 
\'ery serious letter, but resisted the temptation, writing only: 
I was at the hotel G today, but you were not in. Tell me 
what this is to mean, and why you did not write me that 
you were not going to be at horne. Don't you know that 
your absence causes me pain? I thought about you a great 
deal and even meant to write you several times. However, 
I ha\'e also been working a lot. Soon I shall be looking for 
a Spanish teacher. I am wondering how to go about it. 
I am waiting for your reply. 
A. S. 
I am very sad that I did not sec you, but I hope that this 
did not give you any pleasure. I am saddened by your 
absence, but I am still trying to persuade myself that you 
love me. 
I recall how at our last meeting I said, in some connec­
tion: "Don't deceive me." "Me deceive you?" he said with 
3. Quatrain from Ɲ. P. Ogarev. The first line is not quoted correctly 
by Suslova. Should be "What do I want . . .  Oh, so many desires I have." 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
205 
dignity. This is a remarkable trait. However, it seems to me 
that he is entirely dependent on his family. 
Wednesday, 27 [August] 
I have just received d letter from F[yodor] Mikh[ailovich], 
this time through the local mail. How glad he is that he is 
going to sec me soon. I sent him a very short letter which I 
had prepared beforehand. I feel very sorry for him. 
"\Vhat diverse thoughts and feelings will agitate him, once 
the first sensation of grief has worn off! I am only afraid that, 
having got tired of waiting for me (my letter won't reach him 
very soon), he may come here today, before he ever gets my 
letter. I won't keep my composure if it comes to such a meet­
ing. It is good that I warned him to write me first, or else 
something might happen. And Salvador still has not written 
me . . .  I'll sec much grief from that man. 
Same date, evening. 
That's precisely what happened. I had barely managed to 
write the above lines when F[yodor] l\l[ikhailovich] showed 
up. I saw him through the window, but waited until the 
message came that he was there, and even then it was a long 
time before I could make myself go out to meet him. "How 
are you?" I said, in a trembling voice. He asked me what was 
the matter with me, which only intensified my agitation, 
along with his own uneasiness, which was also growing. "I 
thought that you were not going to come," I said, "because I 
wrote you a letter." 
"What letter?" 
"So you wouldn't come." 
"Why not?" 
"Because it is too late." 
He hung his head. 

206 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
"I must know everything, let's go somewhere, and tell me, 
or I 'll die." 
I suggested that we go to his room. \.Ye were silent all the 
way. I did not look at him. Once in a while he would yell 
"Vite, vitc" to the cabman, in a desperate and impatient 
\"Oicc, so th·at the man would turn around and give us a 
pu;ulcd look. I tried not to look at F[yodor] M[ikhailovich]. 
He was not looking at me either, but kept holding my hand 
all the way, pressing it hard from time to time and making 
some sort of convulsi,·c mo\"cments. "Calm down, I am with 
you,'" I said. 
\\"hen we got to his room, he fell at my feet, aJI(l, putting 
his arms around my knees, clasping them, and sobbing, he 
exclaimed between sobs: "I ha\"c lost you, I knew it!" Then, 
ha\'ing regained his composure, he began to ask me about the 
other man. "Perhaps he is handsome, young, and glib. But 
you will never find a heart such as mine ." 
For a long time I did not have the heart to answer him. 
"Have }'OU given yourself to him completely?" 
"Don't ask, it is not right, " I said. 
"Polia, I don't know what is right and what is wrong. Who 
is he, a Russian, a Frenchman, not my doctor? That one?'' 
[An illegible word.] 
"No, no." 
I told him that I loved the man very much. 
"Arc you happy?" 
"How can that be? You lo\"e and you are not happy, why, 
is this possible?" 
"He does not love me." 
"He docs not love you!" he exclaimed, clutching his head 
in despair. "But you don't love him like a slave, do you? Tell 
me, I must know! Isn't it true that you would follow him to 
the end of the world?" 
"!\o, I . . . I'll be going to the country," I said, bursting 
into tears. 
"Oh, Polia, why must you be so unhappy! I t  had to happen 
that you would fall in love with another man. I knew it. \Vhy, 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
207 
you fell in love with me by miswke, because yours is a gen­
erous heart, you waited until you were 23,4 you arc the only 
woman who does not demand of a man that he obligate him­
self in any way, hut at what price: a man and a woman arc 
not one and the same. He takes, she gives." 
\Vhcn I told him what kind of a man the other was, he 
said that he experienced a feeling of disgust at that moment: 
that he felt better knowing that this was not a serious person, 
no Lcrmontov. \Ve went on to talk about a lot of extraneous 
subjects. He told me that he was happy to have met a human 
being such as I was, in this world. He begged me to remain 
his friend, and to continue to write him, particularly when­
ever I was especially happy or unhappy. Then he suggested 
that we travel to Italy together, while remaining like brother 
and sister. \\'hen I told him that, most probably, he would 
he writing his novel, he answered : "\Yho do you take me for! 
Do you think that all this is going to pass without leaving 
any impression!" I promised him that I would come to sec 
him the next day. I felt relieved after I had talked to him. 
He understands me. 
I still haven't got a letter from Salvador, ami to make sure, 
I am writing him this letter: 
"You were not at the hotel on Tuesday, nor did you write 
me a word about it. Perhaps you did not get my letter. But 
in any case you could have written me. Or don't you know 
how I love you? I love you to distraction. I am beginning to 
think that some great calamity has befallen you, and this 
thought causes me great distress. I can't tell you how much 
I love you, and if you knew it, you would not have made me 
suffer what I have suffered during these last two days, waiting 
for word from you." 
I am writing him still another letter, which I shall give him 
later. 
"I want to tell you how much I love you, even though I 
know that it is beyond my powers to express it in words. I 
feel that you ought to know it, though. I have never been 
4. This would indicate that the alTair started in 1862. Polina was born 
in 1839. 

208 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
happy. All the people who loved me made me suffer, even 
my father and mother. All my friends are kind people, but 
weak and poor in spirit; they are abundant in their words, 
but por in their deeds. I haven't met a single one among 
them who would not be afraid of the truth, or who wouldn't 
have retreated before the conventions of life. They also con­
demn me. I cannot respect such people. I consider it a crime 
to talk one way and act another. As far as I am concerned, I 
fear only my conscience. And if it were to happen that I had 
sinned before it, I would admit it only to myself. I am not 
particularly indulgent to myself, I think, but weak and timid 
people are hateful to me. I avoid people who deceive them­
schcs, without knowing it-so I won't have to depend on 
them. I am thinking of settling in the country, among 
peasants, and trying to be of some use to them, because to 
live without being of any usc to other people I consider un­
worthy of a human being." 
Monday, 1 September 
I did not mail those last two letters to Salvador, because here 
is what happened: one night I came home from F[yodor] 
M[ikhailovich]'s rather late, went to bed, without lighting a 
candle, and slept poorly all night, thinking about Sal[vador]. 
I woke up when it was still dark, at daybreak. I began walk­
ing from room to room, and suddenly noticed a letter on my 
table. I did not recognize the handwriting. It was a letter 
from his friend. He told me that Salvador had typhus, that 
he had been sick ever since the last time he saw me, and that 
I could not see him now, because he was with some friends, 
recommended by his family, and that this gentleman would 
take care of him, and would become suspicious if I were to 
go there. I immediately wrote an answer to the letter, telling 
him that I considered it barbaric that I could not see Sal 
[vador] and begging him to write to me more often and tell 
me about his friend's health. That same day I wrote still 
another letter to Sal[vador], thinking him on the edge of the 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
209 
grave. I wrote to assure him that he would get well, that it 
would be an injustice if he didn't. I was in a state of terrible 
despair, having heard that the dispease was particularly 
dangerous to young people. F[yodor] M[ikhailovich] gave me 
some reassurance, for he told me that what with the air they 
have here, and the medical care available, it shouldn't be 
dangerous. I moved to Mir., and all day Saturday I waited for 
a letter. On Sunday, I was expecting him [Salvador's friend] 
in person (I had invited him, so I could ask him about 
Sal[vador]). At 6 o'clock on Saturday I went out for a walk in 
the rue de Ia Sorbonne a.nd ran into Sal[vador]. I saw him 
at a distance, but simply could not believe that it was he. It 
seemed so incredible to me, until he walked up to me, smiling 
but very pale, and took my hand. My legs almost gave way 
under me, and for some time I could not say a word. I did not 
suspect anything as yet, but I felt hurt about his not having 
written me. His first words were that he had been very ill and 
that this was the first time he had been out for a walk. "Yes, 
you are very pale," I said. At that mument I raised my eyes, 
and looked at him. There were red spots on his cheeks. 
"You weren't angry with me about my not coming on 
Tuesday, but hadn't you said that you were coming on 
Thursday?" 
At these words, my head was beginning to clear, but I was 
suffering so much that I hadn't the strength to become in­
dignant even. Tears gushed from my eyes. 
"Where are you going?" he asked. 
"] ust taking a walk, and you?" 
''I'm going to see a friend, in the rue de Souffie." 
"Let's walk together a little. I thought that you were dying. 
Your friend wrote me that kind of a letter. Here it is,"-I 
took the letter from my handbag-"look what it says in it, 
read it. I wrote him twice, asking him to come and see me." 
"I am very angry that he put it that way. I thought that it 
was typhus, but it turned out otherwise." 
He looked at the letter and, apparently, saw nothing in it, 
or else it was known to him. He gave it back to me. 
"Read it," I said, "read it later, at home." 

210 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
But he opened it again, perhaps in order not to have to 
talk to me. Before we c\·er reached the rue de Souffic, he said 
that he had to turn left (he was feeling embarrassed with me). 
"In that case, good-bye," I said, "] must walk straight on." 
"But I can walk with you," [he] said. (Was he feeling pity, 
or was his conscience bothering him?) 
\\'c reached the rue de Souffic in silence (he was reading 
his friend's letter). 
"That is where I have to go," he said, pointing at a house 
directly [across] the street from which we had come. 
Once alone, I quickly understood what had happened. 
\\'hen I found myself alone i1\ my room, I became hysterical. 
I screamed that I was going to kill him. Nobody heard it. 
Then I lay down and for a while thought of nothing. I felt 
the fc,·cr rising to my head, I thought that I was going to fall 
ill and was glad about it. Then I began to think about what 
I should do and made up my mind . .
. I C\'Cn wanted to write 
my sister a letter. I made c\·crything ready, burned some of 
my notebooks and letters (those letters which could com­
promise me). I felt wondcrf ully well. I only felt sorry for my 
mother, and for the l logcrmans, who might he placed in a 
dilfimh position because of me. I kept wondering whether 
there wasn't a way to keep them out of it, to say that I had 
nc,·cr Ji,·cd with them. I did not sleep all night and on the 
following morning, at 7 o'clock, went to sec Dost[ocvsky]. He 
was asleep. \\'hen I came, he got up, opened the door for me, 
and went bark to hcd, wrapping himself up in his blanket. 
He looked at me with astonishment and apprehension. I was 
ra thcr calm. I told him that he should come to my place right 
away. I wanted to tell him C\'crything and ask him to he my 
judge. I did not want to stay at his place because I was cx­
jccting Salv[ador]. When F[yodor] M[ikhailovich] came to 
me, I met him with a piece of bread in my hand, as I was 
just ha,·ing my breakfast. "\Veil, you can sec that I am calm," 
I said laughing. 
"Yes," he said, "and 1 am \'cry glad about that, but who 
can tell anything for sure, when it comes to you?" 
After a few unimportant questions, I began to tell him the 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
2 1 1 
whole story of my love, and then about the encounter yester­
day, not concealing anything. 
F[yodor] M[ikhailovich] said that I should pay no atten­
tion to this matter, that I had, of course, sullied myself, but 
that it had been only an accident, that Sal[vador], being a 
young man, needed a mistress and I happened to be avail­
able, so he took advantage of me, and why shouldn't he have 
done so? A pretty woman, agreeable to all tastes. 
F[yodor] M[ikhailovich] was right, I understood perfectly 
well, but how hard it was for mel 
''I'm only afraid that you may come up with some foolish­
ness" (I had told him about my thoughts, once, when 
Salva[dor] had failed to keep an appointment). 
"I would not like to kill him," I said, "but I would like to 
torture him for a very long time." 
"Enough," he said, "he isn't worth it, he won't understand 
a thing, he's a pest that ought to be exterminated with insect 
powder," and it would be foolish to ruin one's own life on 
account of him. 
I agreed. But I still love him very much, and I am ready 
to give away half my life just to make him feel the pangs of 
conscience, before he comes hack to me to repent. Of course, 
I can hardly ex pen this to happen on his part, and sometimes 
I become depressed again. Right now I suddenly feel a desire 
which I thought I had overcome-a desire to avenge myself, 
but how? By what means? 1\fost probably he has a mistress, 
some lady who has innumerable admirers. Most likely he had 
quarreled with her, and on account of that had this affair 
with me. But now, it must be that they have made up again. 
He did not come yesterday, and, of course, he won't come 
today either, nor tomorrow, but what, then, is he going to 
do? Didn't he promise to come, at a time when I still hadn't 
been begging him for it? It seems to me that his vanity won't 
allow him to remain a liar iri my eyes. \Vhat could it have 
been he was hoping for, when he made up that story about 
his illness? I have made up my mind to send him the money 
for . . .  [one illegible word] F[yodor] M[ikhailovich] is going 
to tell me that this is unnecessary. He despises him too much, 

212 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
and besides, it seems that he finds I ought to suffer (renounce 
my vengeance) for my stupidity, yet his stupidity had a 
meaning. 
2 September 
F[yodor] M[ikhailovich] actually said that it was not neces­
sary to send him the money, that this was just a trifle. He 
thought that, subconsciously, I was using this as a pretext to 
get in touch with Sal[vador]. F[yodor] M[ikhailovich] said 
that this would lead to his getting a chance to set himself 
right with me again and deceiving me once more. "Should 
one really be afraid of this, refusing to trust oneself?" said I; 
"if one must be afraid of being deceived, one ought not have 
any self-respect." 
F[yodor] M[ikhailovich] definitely failed to understand 
me, and did not know about this letter; here it is: 
"Dear Sir, on a certain occasion I received from you a 
senice, which is usually reimbursed in money. I believe that 
one may accept free services only from people whom one 
considers one's friends and whom one respects. I am sending 
you this money to correct my mistake in regard to you. You 
have no right to interfere with this intention of mine. 
"P.S. I would like to add that there is no reason for you to 
hide and to be afraid of me: I have no intention of pursuing 
you. You can meet me (perhaps this will happen) as though 
we had never known each other; I am even asking you to. I 
tell you this, assuming that you will take my money. If other­
wise, I do advise you to hide yourself somewhere away from 
me, as far away as you can (because, in that case, I will be 
angry with you, which might be rather dangerous). 
"This will be better for you, since I am a person of no 
culture (I am eruirely a barbarian) and don't appreciate your 
affected pleasantries at all. I say this in all seriousness." 
I told F[yodor] M[ikhailovich] about the content of this 
letter, whereupon he said that I could send it, of course, since 
at least it would not make me look too passive. I mailed the 
letter the day before yesterday, and so far I have not received 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
213 
a reply (and, most probably, I never will). I must admit that 
I did not expect that. The man is not so sophisticated as to 
remain silent from a sense of dignity, nor is he so shameless 
as to act that way from sheer insolence. He must have got 
cold feet. However, it may be that he will think of something 
to answer me, though I doubt it. Judging by his character, I 
presume that if he weren't afraid of me, he would have re­
turned the money to me, even without a letter. This letter 
must have greatly hurt more than his vanity, for he has a 
sense of honor of sorts, which is not part of his nature, or 
even of his intellect, but it is in his memory, taken from the 
Catholic catechism. 
Baden-Baden, 5 September 
I was very sad before leaving Paris. It is not just a matter of 
having grown accustomed to a place, for I left Pet[ersburg] 
with a light heart. I left it with hope, while in Paris I lost a 
great deal [of hope]. It seems to me that I shall never love 
anybody. A thirst for revenge burned in my soul for a long 
time after, and I decided that, if I do not become distracted 
in Italy, I will return to Paris and do as I had planned . . .  
Along the way F[yodor] M[ikhailovich] and I got to talking 
about Lermontov. I recalled [one of his] characters, and all 
that had happened to me appeared so petty, so unworthy of 
any serious attention . . .  
"And he wanted to bless nothing in the world.":; 
He was right. ·why let oneself be carried away? 
I feel sick. That would be too unjust. It seems to me that 
certain laws of justice exist in nature. 
Baden-Baden, 6 September 
The journey here with F[yodor] M[ikhailovich] was rather 
entertaining. As he was getting our visa, he hෛd a row at the 
5. "And he wanted to bless nothing in the world," from Lermontov's 
"Demon." 

214 
Po1ina Suslova's Diary 
papal embassy;8 he spoke in verse during the entire trip, and, 
finally, here, where we had some trouble finding 2 rooms 
with two beds, he signed the guest register as "Officier," at 
which we had to laugh a lot. He plays roulette all the time 
and is generally very carefree. Vlhile we were en route here 
he told me that he had some hope, though he had earlier 
insisted that he had none. I did not say anything to this, but 
1 knew that it was not going to happen. He liked my having 
left Paris so resolutely; he had not expected it. But he should 
not build any hopes 011 this, quite the contrary. Last night 
these hopes were expressed by him with particular emphasis. 
\\ෞe had tea around 10 o'clock. Having finished it, I felt very 
tired and went to bed, asking F[yodor] M(ikhailovich) to sit 
close to me. I felt good. I took his hand and for a long time 
held it in mine. He said that he felt good sitting like that. 
I told him that I had been unfair and unkind to him in 
Paris, that it may have seemed aෟ though I had been thinking 
only of myself, yet 1 had been thinking of him, too, but did 
not want to say it, so as not to hurt him. Suddenly he got up 
and started to leave, but then stumbled over my shoe which 
was lying by the bed, and just as quickly turned around and 
sat down again. 
"You wanted to go somewhere, didn't you?" I asked. 
"I wanted to shut the window." 
"Shut it then, if you want to." 
"No, it isn't necessary. You don't know what just happened 
to me!" he said, with a strange expression. 
"\\'hat do you mean?'' 1 looked at his face; it showed great 
agitation. 
"I was just going to kiss your foot." 
"Ah, why that?" 
1 said, greatly embarrassed, almost 
frightened, and tucked my legs under me. 
"I just got the urge, and decided that I'd kiss it." 
Then he asked me if I wanted to sleep, but I told him no, 
I would like to sit with him some more. Thinking of getting 
undressed and going to sleep, I asked him whether the maid 
was going to clear the tea table. He assured me that she 
6. This scene of obtaining a visa at the papal embassy appears in a 
fictional and expanded form in The Gambler itself. Sec p. 9. 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
215 
wasn't. Then he looked at me in a way that made me feel 
embarrassed, and I told him so. 
"I feel embarrassed, too," he said, with a strange smile. 
I hid my face in my pillow. Then I asked him again 
whether the maid would be coming, and he assured me again 
that she wouldn't. 
"All right then, go back to your room, I want to sleep," 
I said. 
"Right away," he said, but stayed for some time. Then he 
kissed me very ardently and, finally, started to light a candle 
for himself. My candle was burning low. 
"You won't have any light,' 'he said. 
"Not so, I have a whole candle there." 
"But this is mine." 
"1 have another one." 
"There will always be an answer," he said, smiling, and 
left. He did not close his door and soon came back to my 
room, under the pretext that he wanted to shut my window. 
He came up to me and suggested that I get undressed. 
''I'll get undressed," I said, showing him by my attitude 
that I was only waiting for him to go away. 
He left once more, and came back still another time, under 
some pretext, after which he left again and closed his door. 
Today he mentioned yesterday to me and said that he had 
been drunk. Then he said that I must probably find it most 
unpleasant, the way he was annoying me. I answered that I 
didn't mind, and refused to be drawn into a discussion of the 
subject, so that he could neither cherish hope nor be quite 
without it. He said that he had noticed I had a very knowing 
smile, that, most probably, he appeared foolish to me, that 
he was well aware of his own foolishness, but that it was 
something unconscious. 
In the evening of the same day. 
I just remembered my sister; she would have censured me 
for my trip to Italy, but I don't feel that way myself. I have 
a kind o£ passion for traveling: to learn, to see, and isn't this 

216 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
legitimate? And actually, that catechism which I made up 
for myself, and which I was so proud to have lived by, now 
seems very narrow to me. It was an involvement which would 
lead to narrowness and dullness of spirit. Isn't this, though, a 
transition to an entirely new and opposite course . . .  No, in 
that case I would have admitted it to myself. Didn't I give it 
mature thought? And besides, I have my peace of mind now. 
I notice that a revolution is taking place in my thinking. 
F[yodor] M[ikhailovich] has lost some money gambling 
and is a bit worried about not having enough money for our 
journey. I feel sorry for him, sorry, to some extent, about not 
being able to pay him for all these troubles of his, but what 
is there to do--l can't. Do I really have an obligation? No, 
this is nonsense. 
Turin, 14 September 1863 
Yesterday F[yodor] M[ikhailovich] and I had dinner at the 
table d'hote in our hotel. The people having dinner with 
us were all French, young men. One of them gave me most 
insolent looks, and even F[yodor] M[ikhailovich) noticed 
that the man motioned somehow suggestively in my direc­
tion, as he talked to his friend. It angered F[yodor] M[ikhail­
ovich] and placed him in a difficult position, because it 
would be rather hard for him to protect me, if there were a 
need. \\'e decided to have dinner at a different restaurant. 
After the Frenchman had motioned in my direction to his 
neighbor, F[yodor] ොl[ikhailovich) gave him such a look that 
he dropped his eyes and tried to say something witty, quite 
unsuccessfully. 
Turin, 17 September 1863 
I feel once more a tenderness toward F[yodor] M[ikhailo­
vich). It happened that I was upbraiding him, and later I 
felt that I had been wrong, so I wanted to make up for it, 
and I got tender with him. He responded with such joy that 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
217 
I was moved by it, and I became twice as tender. When I was 
sitting next to him, looking at him caressingly, he said: 
"There is that familiar look, it's a long time since I saw it 
last!" I let my head fall on his chest and began to cry. 
As we were having dinner, he said, looking at a little girl 
who was taking her lessons: "\Veil, imagine, there you have 
a little girl like her with an old man, and suddenly some 
Napoleon says, 'I want this city destroyed.' It has always 
been that way in this world." 
Genoa, Tuesday, 22 September 
What a city! The houses are as tall as bell towers, while the 
streets are very narrow. The houses are all decorated and of 
appalling design, the roofs overgrown with grass. Barechested 
Italians and women with white headdresses fill the streets. 
The headdresses are a substitute for hat and mantilla. 
Yesterday, in Turin, I read something about philosophy 
and, contrary to my expectations, understood a thing or two. 
The auth[or] says that Kant stopped at the proposition: "\Ve 
cannot comprehend things in themselves." Meanwhile Hegel 
arrived at the position that things exist only in the concept. 
By the word "concept" he means not any individual concept, 
but the concept which rests with things as such. Then, the 
auth[or] distinguishes between concept and cognition. Cog­
nition is, according to him, universal, absolute, while a con­
cept is particular, individual. Then, about concept and 
reality. He says that, though they are both mediate, they are 
still diametrical opposites: a concept pertains to a thing 
which is or may be, whereas reality is a thing, of which there 
exists, or may exist, a concept. 
Livorno, on board ship, Thursday, 24 September 
Yesterday we were tossed so badly I thought we were going 
to be lost. There is a sailor on board who speaks Russian, 
and a Norwegian writer who has read and translated a few 

218 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
things from Russian literature, a man advanced in years. 
Today we must stay in Livorno all day, as a new cargo is 
being put on board ship. The sailor who speaks Russian 
took me all over the ship, whenever I had to go anywhere, 
and kept saying "thou" to me, which I liked a great deal (it 
reminds me of the Russian muzhik, who never uses "you"), 
and, why not, since he had learned his Russian from muzhiks. 
I have just met two Italians who were with us when we 
crossed the Mont Cenis. One of them is very young, the other 
a bout 32. Both are very serious, even stern. En route the 
older of the two was reading Petit Napoleon.1 The younger 
offered me some grapes that time. I like them both. That 
other Italian who is on board with us, the one who keeps 
inquiring about my health and takes care of all the sick 
people, I don't like him, he is rather like a Frenchman, 
especially when he talks to a young girl whom he is courting 
rather after the French fashion. 
At this moment I am sitting on the upper deck, quite close 
to the two Italians. A Frenchwoman who is on a pilgrimage 
to St. Peter's said, in passing by, that I probably would not 
like to waste any time. I answered that I had too much work 
and that I felt sorry about having to lose so much time while 
en route. 
Rome, 29 September 
Yesterday F[yodor] M[ikhailovich] was importunate again. 
He said that I took too serious and stern a view of things that 
really were not worth it. I said that I had one reason which 
so far I had not been forced to reveal. Later he said that my 
utilitarian attitude was my ruin. I said that there was no 
such attitude in me, though I might have some tendency 
toward it. He did [not] agree, saying that he had proof. Ap­
parently he wanted to know the reason for my stubborn 
refusal. He tried to make a guess. 
7. Reference to Victor Hugo's Napoleon /e petit, a pamphlet he wrote 
in 1852 against :-.'apoleon III's seizure of power in 1 851. 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
219 
"You don't know, that's not it," I answered to his various 
assumptions. 
He had the notion that it was just a caprice, a desire to 
torture him. 
"You know that," he said, "you can't torture a man this 
long, for he will eventually quit trying." 
I could not help smiling and almost asked why he said that. 
"There is one main reason for all of this," he began, in a 
tone of conviction (later I learned that he had not been sure 
of what he was saying), "a reason which inspires me with 
loathing: it's the peninsula."8 
This unexpected reminder disturbed me very much. 
"You are still hoping." 
I remained silent. 
"Now you are not objecting.'' he said, "now you are not 
saying that this is not it." 
I remained silent. 
"I feel nothing toward that man, because he is much too 
worthless a person." 
"I entertain no hopes at all, I have no reason for hope," I 
said, having given it some thought. 
"That does not mcaෝ1 a thing; you may be rejecting all 
expectations with your reason; that still won't prevent you." 
He was expecting some objection, but none came, as I felt 
the truth of his words. 
He suddenly got up and lay down on his bed. I started 
pacing up and down the room. The thought suddenly came 
hack to me, and, indeed, some kind of hope flashed through 
my mind. I began hoping again, without being ashamed of it. 
·when he woke up he became unusually free and easy, 
cheerful, and importunate. It was as though he wanted in 
this fashion to conquer his own inner hurt and sadness, 
and spite me. 
I watched these strange antics with bewilderment. It was as 
though he were trying to turn everything into a joke, so as 
to hurt me, but I only looked at him with astonishment. 
"I don't like you that way," I said simply at last. 
8. Reference to Spain and thus to Salvador, who is of Spanish origin. 

220 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
"Why? What have I done?" 
"just so, in Par[is] and in Turin I liked you much better. 
\Vhy are you so cheerful?" 
"It is a cheerfulness born of disappointment," he said and 
left, but he returned soon. 
"I am unhappy," he said, seriously and sadly, "I look at 
everything as though it were my duty, as though I were 
learning a lesson; I had thought that at least I would manage 
to distract you." 
I embraced him with ardor and said that he had done a 
lot for me, and that I found it very pleasant. 
"No," he said sadly, "}'ou'll be going to Spain." 
Any mention of S[alvador] gives me a terrifying, painful, 
and sweet feeling. However, what rubbish that whole thing 
was, e'<·erything that happened between me and Salv[ador]. 
\Vhat a mass of contradictions in his attitude toward mel 
F[yodor] M[ik.hailm·ich] again turned everything into a 
joke, and said, as he was leaving my room, that it was humil­
iating for him to leave me in this fashion (it was I o'clock 
at night, and I was lying in bed, undressed): "For the 
Russians never did retreat." 
Naples, 6 October 
In Rome I saw a procession in the street: they were taking 
two thieves somewhere; they were young men (20 and 16). 
:\ huge crowd had gathered to watch the spectacle. Ladies 
stopped their carriages and stood up to watch. 
In Naples, the moment we stepped out into the street on 
our first day there, a woman thrust a yellow flower into my 
hand and started asking for money. I met several such women 
that first day, but now I don't see them anymore. Children, 
too, keep begging for [illegible word], and if you give one of 
them something, a whole crowd will gather around you. If 
you won't give them anything, they keep up their begging 
by any means: they try to make you laugh, they make faces at 
you, they do somersaults, they open up their rags and show 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
221 
their naked bodies. Any time you give a cabman an extra 
dime, he will rush to kiss your hands. In the streets, any time 
you ask a question and have trouble understanding what 
you've been told, a whole crowd of people will gather around 
you, trying to explain things to you. Yesteiday I was at the 
Coliseum. The soldier who escorted us there told me right 
away that I was a Russian; he had recognized it by my face. 
In a restaurant next to the Coliseum I ran across a gentleman 
who began talking Russian to me. He started by saying that 
he had experienced such a sharp change in climate in just a 
few days (he is from Petersburg), then went on to say that 
Genoa was dull, that there was no intellectual life there, 
that he did not like it there, though he had himself been 
born there; his ancestors had lived there for seven hundred 
years, and he had an estate there. 
He managed to tell me that he had a wife and I 0 children 
in Russia, that he knew Russia and had been managing an 
estate there, that he was now employed here, in Naples. 
On our way from Rome to Naples we were searched very 
often, and we had to show our passports all the time. 
Paris, 22 October 
I arrived here at 4 o'clock, and at 5 I was at M.['s]. As I got 
out of the cab I asked the cabman how much I owed him 
(even though I knew that the fare was 2 francs). He said 2 
francs, and I gave them to him, but then he suddenly said 
2Y2. Without a word, I gave him the balance. He carried my 
bag into the yard (cabmen here usually don't do that) and 
tried to be of some service, as though he were embarrassed. I 
knocked at l\I.'s door, and everybody was still asleep, though 
it was 5 o'clock. Mme R. met me with great solicitude, asked 
me if I wanted something to eat, and went to make my bed 
for me. She brought me my breakfast upstairs, and all in all 
she was most solicitous. 
All this goodwill for an old skirt that I had given her . . .  
poor people! Now, corning downstairs for some ink, I met 

222 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
Katherine. She asked obligingly if it was ink that I needed, 
offered to get me some, and I let her, as I intended to give 
her some cufflinks which I had bought for her in Naples. 
\Vhen she came back I gave them to her, and she was de­
lighted . She asked me right away always to turn to her when 
I needed something. 
Poor, poor people! 
En route, on board ship, right in Naples we met Her[zen], 
with his whole family. F[yodor] M[ikhailovich] introduced 
me as a relative, in very vague terms. He conducted himself 
in their presence as though he were my brother, or even 
closer, which must have puzzled H[erzen] somewhat. F[yodor] 
M[ikhailovich] told him a great deal about me, and H[erzen] 
listened attentively. I also talked to young H[erzenp He is 
a kind of desperate young man. Speaking of my impressions 
abroad, I said that I had found more or less the same dis­
gusting situation everywhere, and he went on to prove that 
it was not "more or less" hut equally disgusting everywhere. 
As I was conversing with him, being quite animated myself, 
F[yodor] M[ikhailovich] walked by, without stopping, and I 
asked him to join us, which made him glad. Young H[erzen] 
said that he was going to be in Paris in the winter and would 
look me up. He asked for my address, but added that he 
would get it from B. [illegible surname]. I told F[yodor] 
M[ikhailovich] about it, and he suggested that I give him my 
address, so as to show him more attention. As we parted (in 
Li\·orno), I gave my address to H[erzen]. F[yodor] M[ikhailo­
vich] accompanied H[erzen] and was with them at their 
hotel. \\'hen he returned he told me nervously that I abso­
lutely must write him if H[erzen] were to see me. This I 
promised to do. And in general, he did not discuss young 
H[erzen] with me at all, though when I brought up his name 
first, in a rather casual manner, he responded and spoke of 
him, not enti rely in favorable terms. He also told me that at 
H[erzen's] he had seen my calling card, which I had given 
9. Aleksandr Alcksandrovich Herzen (1839-1906), famous physiolo­
gist. He was a professor of physiology in Florence from 1 877 and in Lau­
sanne from 1 881. 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
223 
him with my address. On it, Alexander had written his 
father's phrase: "\\lith reason alone people wouldn't have 
got very far." 
On the day of our departure from Naples F[yodor] 
M[ikhailovich] and I quarreled, but on board ship, that same 
day, under the influence of our meeting with H[erzen], which 
animated us, we had a heart-to-heart talk and made up again 
(it was about the emancipation of women). From that day 
on we no longer had any arguments. I was with him almost 
as I had been before, and I felt sorry having to part with him. 
My sister writes me that it is quite impossible to stay at 
the academy any longer, on account of the silly tricks played 
hy students, and she asks me to find out if it might be possible 
to attend some lectures in Paris. It seems that it ought to be 
possible. Yes, I shall find out about that from Monsieur 
Emile. Monsieur Emile is turning out to be a serious young 
man, and yet, how I felt about him at one time . . .  
Immediately after arriving home, I felt sleepy, lay down, 
but could not fall asleep. 1\Iy thoughts were somehow con­
fused, but little by little I got them straightened out .
. . I 
recalled how I had left Paris . . .  As I was thinking, certain 
hopes kept going through my head against my own will, a 
wish to hurt, to take revenge, or was there something else 
about it . . .  My heart was suffering and exacting its due, 
persuading, flattering with hope. Oh, how it ached, how it 
churned inside me! I went out for a walk and found myself 
on St. Denis, ncar St. Andre des Artes. Poor heart, what's the 
use deceiving oneself? As I got home and back to my room, 
I immediately noticed a spot on the floor-a trace of my 
burning those papers the day I had last seen him. 
Paris seems positively revolting to me. 
27 October 
Yesterday I received a letter from F[yodor] M(ikhailovich]. 
He had lost all his money gambling and asked me to send 
him some money. I did not have any money: I had just given 

224 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
all I had to Mme Mir. I decided to pawn my watch and chain, 
and asked Tum.'s advice about it. He thought that I should 
ask M. for the amount I would fall short, and, besides, of­
fered some of his own money, of which he had 50 francs. 
Mme M. gave me the whole 300 francs, for a month. There 
was some trouble with sending the money. Tum. explained 
to me how I was to go about it, and I set off. But then I lost 
my way a little, came back, and met-Alkh[azov],10 who had 
come to explain to me how to go about sending money. But 
it did not end there, for I had to go back home and start out 
again. I had just got there when T. arrived, also to help. As 
I was talking to the pos[tmaster] about that letter, there came 
to the post office a young man who looked to me like Baskov. 
He was standing behind me. I turned around and threw a 
quick glance at him. I am almost sure that it was he, and I 
started talking to Tu. He walked away and began reading 
the announcements on the wall. As I was leaving, I gave him 
a look, though not a very intent one, and I know that it was 
he. He saw why I had been there, and must have heard the 
name of the city, Hamburg.11 He also saw that I was sending 
money and was taking it out of my purse, consequently it 
must have been my transaction, and my companion was only 
helping me. 
Today, at table, the conversation turned to cafes. Some­
body said there were no cafes in London, so that the men 
were at home more, which, of course, was agreeable to the 
ladies. A lady remarked that perhaps ladies liked it better 
and found it merrier without their husbands. ·whereupon 
the maitre d'hotel replied that only dishonorable ladies 
would feel that way. Then he went on to defend cafes by 
saying that one could meet friends there and discuss pol[itics]. 
An En[glishman], taking his side, said: "Take, for instance, 
the Russians. They have no need for cafes, since they have 
10. Peter Alkhazov, a Petersburg student who was arrested and im­
prisoned because of his part in stuuent disturbances on I I  October 1 86L 
He was releasell in December of the same year anu managed to escape 
abroad. 
I L Possibly a mistake and Homburg, the gambling spa is meant­
Translator. 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
225 
no political sense either. I wanted to tell him that he knew 
neither the Russian people nor history. 
9 November 
A week ago I sent the following letter to S[alvador]: 
I feel forced to write you this letter in order to ask you 
if you received the letter which I wrote you toward the end 
of August. On account of certain well-known circum­
stances, I am afraid that it may have got lost. I must abso­
lutely know whether or not you have received that letter, 
because I don't want to remain in the position of not 
having sent you, or having told you, what I wanted to send 
and tell you. I am told that letters sent the way I sent mine 
usually do not get lost, but I am not sufficiently reassured 
by these statements, nor am I satisfied with them, but 
rather, I want to know if you got my letter. You know 
very well that this is a commercial and not a private matter. 
You gave me no answer to my first letter, nor to my second 
letter, to which I did not ask you to reply, as a matter of 
fact. 
If you do not give me an answer to this letter, I will 
assume that you did not get the letter which I sent you in 
August, and I shall send you another such letter. 
Sunday, 15 November 
Having received no reply whatsoever to my letter, I sent 
S[alvador] another letter, with the money (I had no money, 
and I pawned my ring). Here is that letter: 
Your silence, dear sir, proves to me that you either did 
not receive the letter which I sent you in August, or, at 
least, that you want to get another, similar letter. I have 
duplicated that letter, with all enclosures, as I had prom-

226 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
iscd you. \'\rhen I had sent you those wretched 15 francs in 
that letter, I wanted to reimburse you for the service which 
you had given me, a service which, at the time, I took for a 
sign of friendship. I do not want to continue being obli­
gated to you, as it is against my principles to be obligated 
to people whom I do not respect. I wrote you in that letter 
that I have nothing against you, just as I would have 
nothing against a piece of debris that fell on me by accident 
in the ÿtrcct. But if you dc<·idcd that you wanted to protest 
against my letter, I would look upon you in a different 
way, i.e., as upon an animate creature. However, right now 
I presume that I can discount that latter reservation . . .  
People like you arc endowed with an instinct of sclf­
prcscr\'ation . . .  You will ha\'C a very long and very happy 
life. 
As I send )'Oll this letter, I am taking every precaution to 
protect mp;clf against fraud, as I am foreign to these parts. 
I sent this letter by messenger, telling the man to deliver 
it to the addrcso;cc in person and to ask for a receipt. I ex­
plained to the mcs.,cngcr that 2 letters which I had sent the 
same way before had got lost and instructed him to tell this to 
S[ ah·ador]. 
"Brothers, let me die with you." 
TRAVEL NOTES 
I did not sec anything of Germany. I spent forty-eight hours 
in Bcr[Iin], and then went all the way to Paris, without 
stopping anywhere. I had meant to sec the Dresden gallery, 
to take a trip on the Rhine, but gave up these plans merely 
after ha,·ing seen the Germans. These l.crm;ms positively 
dro\·c me out of my mimi. The dullness and narrow-minded­
ness of the officials and workers on the railroad arc simply 
legendary. 
This unfortunate nation, so it seems to me, has definitely 
been treated most unkindly by the Lord. Thanks to them I 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
227 
missed my train once, and another time I arrived at a place 
where I was not supposed to go at all, both times when 
changing trains. 
Paris, Monday, 16 November 
Yesterday 1 went to the messenger service through which I 
had sent the letter to Cor. and did not find the man there. So 
1 left a message with the janitor, asking the man to come and 
sec me at fi o'clock . . .  He did not come today, so I went there 
myself. The commi.uionnainƇ barely looked up at me when 
1 walked in and asked him about my commission. He re­
turned my letter to me and said that he had failed to find 
Cor. He had been told, he said, that no such gentleman was 
living there, or had ncr lived there. This made me mad. He 
couldn't even lie well, Cor. Had he at least said: "He isn't in." 
Hut he must say: "Never lived here." So 1 sent the letter by 
mail. 
I almost sent S[alvador] the following letter: 
I would not have thought of writing you, nor would I 
have written you this letter, of course, if you had not de­
cided to hide from me. You bribed that wretch of a mes­
senger, so he would tell me that you don't exist and that 
you never existed. Perhaps I would even have believed 
that, if I hadn't written to that address before, without 
getting any response . . .  This very awkward subterfuge of 
yours gives me the right to assume that you actually re­
ceived all of my letters. I am asking you to tell me if this 
is so, or not. I really [do not want to] see it happen that 
somebody is accused, innocently perhaps, of having em­
bezzled the money. If you won't give me a satisfactory 
reply, I will be forced to petition my embassy to find out, 
with the help of the French police, who stole that first 
letter of mine which I addressed to you. So don't try to 
avoid giving me a direct answer, for you'll get entangled 
even worse, as usually happens with you. 

228 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
17 November 
Today, when I returned home for dinner, Mme R. told me 
that a gentleman had been there asking for me, and that he 
would come back later. I was surprised that somebody had 
come to sec me. In spite of myself I thought of S[alvador], 
and my heart began to throb. 
"A young man?" I asked. 
"Yes, a tall one." 
"With a beard?" I asked, guessing it might have been 
young Her[zen]. 
"With a black beard." 
I could not think of anybody who would fit that descrip· 
tion. After dinner I was called out, as somebody was there 
to sec me. It was a tall, slender young man. He told me that 
S[ah·ador] had sent him. I flushed and began to tremble. I 
took a candle and asked him to follow me to my room. \Vhen 
we got there, I offered him a chair and closed the door. Then 
I sat down and asked him what he wanted of me (my voice 
was trembling ,·cry badly). He had brought me fifteen francs 
and said that S[alvador] had already received the money in 
August and that he did not care to get any more. 
I had a hunch that this was S[alvador's] brother, judging 
by a portrait which he had once shown me . . .  What a mar­
vellous specimen of a planter, this young man: handsome, 
polite, well dressed, serious. \\'hen he said that I had insulted 
S[alndor], his eyes flashed. He really thinks that I insulted 
S[alvador]. I said that I could not discuss with others things 
that pertained solely to Monsieur S[alvador] and myself. I 
spoke ,·ery poorly, I had forgotten every French word I knew; 
I was extremely excited. Our conversation was very brief. I 
got up, ha\·ing remarked that there was nothing else to be 
said between us. He offered to give me S[alvador's] address, 
saying that, perhaps, I would like to write him, but I said 
that I had no use for it whatever. As I saw him to the door, 
I held a candle for him. He asked me not to bother, but I 
saw him to the antechamber, then went to the drawing room 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
229 
myself, hearing the sound of music corning from there, but 
then I quickly went back to my room. My heart was gripped 
by a deep sadness, and I began to recite aloud: 
"Show me the way to the thorny path," etc.-the way one 
reads a prayer to ward off demons. It made me feel better. 
Tuesday, 24 November 
A very strange story! There is at Mir. an Englishman, with 
whom I have conversed a few times. He is no longer young, 
and very serious. Several times, when we were left alone in 
the drawing room after dinner, we talked with great 
sympathy: about the French, about trends in Russian society. 
It was always I who started the conversation. Later I some­
how stopped talking to him, but J was still in the drawing 
room at the usual time, and he would be there, too. 
Neither of us would say a word. 
On Sunday (the 22d) he announced that he was going 
horne in two days. At dinner that day I was very sad and ate 
almost nothing, so that it was noticed (by Turn. and Mrne). 
I felt bored that day especially because I felt so lonely. Mrne 
Mir., A . . .  , Turn., et al. went to a concert, without telling 
me, even though I had earlier mentioned that I would like 
to go to a concert. "To hell with them,"' I thought, and after 
dinner I struck up a conversation with the Englishman. I 
asked him about John Stuart Mill. To this initiative of mine 
he responded with great alacrity. Then Alkhazov joined in 
our conversation. I started telling them about a young man 
in the library who had tried to strike up a conversation with 
me several times and who had shown me, in a book he was 
reading, some philosopher's treatise about love, asking for 
my opinion on the subject, which I found very funny. 
In that essay, the author says that man is born to think, but 
that this is not sufficient for a full development. One should 
also experience passion, love, and pride. 
Alkh[azov] and the Englishman laughed a great deal about 
that. Alkhazov remarked that this young man must have been 

230 
Pol ina Suslova's Diary 
very young. They asked me what I had answered him. I said 
that I had found these ideas medieval, that love and pride 
may be there, but that it was ridiculous to cultivate them, at 
a time when there is so much to be done, so much that is 
urgent; that there l\"as no time for such luxury when there 
was a shortage of bread, when people were starving to death, 
or if they had enough to cat, had to defend that privilege 
with millions of soldiers, gendarmes, and so 011. I related this 
with great ardor; there were many people in the room, and, 
among others, \\'illiam,12 who sat next to the Englishman 
and exchanged an occasional word with him. "This young 
man," said the Englishman, pointing at \Villiam, "just said 
that we arc in sympathy." 
"Ma}'be," I said. 
"Maybe," said he, "and what about the young man (in 
the library)?"' 
"As for that," I said, in a merry mood, "I am not a 
monopolist.'' 
And we laughed a great deal, since the Englishman ap­
parently liked my sauq· reply. 
He returned the cmwcrsation to the young man and said 
that this was funny, but perhaps interesting from a personal 
point of ,·icw. Then he ֵaid that maybe the young man was 
personally interested in lm·c and pride. I said that I did not 
have the right to think that. Suddenly the Englishman tells 
me that within a }Car he will gi,·c me a better explanation of 
his own opinion regarding lo,·c . . .  and pride. I looked at 
him in amazement. ේfmc was sitting not far from us. 
"That is to say, in a year's time I hope to speak better 
Frcm h," he said. 
On the next day, when we met at breakfast, he was gruff 
with me. Mar. asked where he li,·cd in London, since he was 
going to England in .January and would look him up. 
"\\"ill you be in Paris in January?" asked Mme. 
"C"cst probable!"' the Englishman answered coolly. 
After dinner I went to the drawing room as usual, and he 
1 2. Prohahl)· a friend of Herzen, who refers to him in a letter lo his 
daughter of I i August 1 8G3. 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
231 
came there too, soon after. \\'e sat there together for some 
time. He was morose and said nothing . 
The next morning (today, that is) Mmc asked him: 
"Arc you leaving tomorrow, Mousieur?" 
"I don't know," he said; "I can't tell you yet." 
I felt a strong urge to burst out laughing, and leaned back 
in my chair, thus hiding my face from the Englishman's 
glance. Yet I was curious to see what else I would hear from 
him after all this, but so far there has been nothing. 
And yet I still love S[alvador]. 
Saturday, 5 December 
Yesterday I was at the cafe Rotond, where I met and became 
an1uaintcd with a young physician,1=1 a citizen of the l'\cthcr­
lands, who may he, however, <·onsidcrcd a Russian: he speaks 
and thinks in Russian, he was born and raised in Russia, and 
wants to serve Russia. Today he was at my room, and we 
had a long talk. A strange man! \Vhen I said, in some connec­
tion, that in such a case men would have lowered themselves 
to the ]c,·cl of animals, he answered: "So you arc an aristo­
<Tatl" and later tried to prove that animals are wiser than 
people, for they know how to tonduct thcmschcs with people 
and understand them, while man in the company of animals 
is much more of an ignoramus, that he felt that horses were 
saints, and that the only thing that he respected in nature 
were nerves, which, he said, he would never allow himself to 
disturb in animals without having a reason for it, also that 
religion is a very good remedy against scoundrels. When I 
mentioned my desire to go to America, he retorted that there 
was nothing good to be found there, that I could see snakes 
right at the Jardins des Plantes, which would be much more 
convenient, as they were in a cage there. 
1 3. He will figure quite prominently in Polina's notes and the roman­
tic complexities of her thoughts and actions. He will also be referred to 
as Benin, and it is concei\·able that he is the brother of Arthur h"anovich 
Benin, who figured prominently in re\"olutionary circles during the 
sixties. 

232 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
I hate Paris and can't tear myself away from it. Perhaps 
because this city really has something that appeals to those 
who lad their own home and a set goal. I still feel a desire 
to go to America . . .  In spite of the presence of new people, 
new acti\·ities, I am still being punued by one idea, one 
image . . .  And what did I find in him? . . .  Could it be the 
narrownes of his \"iews, the fact that he is incapable of judg­
ing certain things? No, it is simply that there are no men 
around, that in other men everything is so petty, so prosaic. 
Sat11rda)', 12 Dumbr 
Zadler was here today. 
"You know what," he said, "we plan on going to England, 
just so, with a small party. Would you like to join us?" 
"Indeed, but how? And when?" 
"Son. there is a convenient and what's most important an 
inexpemi\·e trip a\·ailable if we go son, 37 francs round trip, 
the ticket is good for a month, we can stay there a week., se 
all the sights, and come back.." 
"Indeed, this sounds pretty god." 
''So will }·ou join us?" 
"All right, but tell me, do you know the language?" 
"No, but that doesn't matter, one can always learn it." 
"But how, and when?" 
"Well, we'll have to hurry, get yourself a teacher, we'll 
work. on it for a week., and that will do." 
"What? only a week.?" 
"Well, yes, and why not? Do you think. we must make a 
thorough study of it? 'gh·e me, get me, allow me to ask, where 
is such-and-such street?'-that's all we need." 
"But onlÎ· one week.! You must se that." 
"\\'h)· waste so much thought on it? Let's start learning 
English tomorrow ; I'll go and look for a teacher today. Look 
what you·,·e got there! Why, you've got Reifs dictionary 
here, it will come in handy, you've got English words in here." 
He opened the dictionary. 

Polina Sus/ova's Diary 
233 
"V.'ell, here you are, let's see what you've got here, really, I 
used to study English at one time." 
"\Veil, look at what he's got here, what words: 'illuminate, 
sanitate . .  .'-well, those we don't need. \.Yhat else? 'rubes­
cence, regeneration," well, we don't need that either . . .  
' !llrn,' there it is: return . . .  turn, take off. 'Sir, allow me to 
ask, how can I turn into such-and-such street?' V/c',·c already 
got 1·eturn, so we must look for 'allow me,' then "street,' you 
look for 'street.' \-\'hy, we'll he prattling away in no time, no 
problem! V.'c'll take a look at the streets, the buildings, we'll 
go to the theater, we'll visit their parliament, we must see 
Palmerston, yell 'Long live!' for him, that we m ust dol I was 
in Berlin and went to their legislative chamber, yelling 
'Hurrah! hurrah!" Wait a moment, how's that in English: 
to see. \\'hy, it actually resembles Gemtan. So then, arc we 
going?'' 
"All right.'' 
"\'\'ondcrful. 37 francs for the passage, 50 for miscellaneous 
cxpcno;es, 10 franrs a day for food, 10 francs in all. \o\'c can 
stay at some cheap hotel, why stand on c·ercmony." 
Later he told me how some professors here behave toward 
their st udcnts. 
An old gentleman of GO will come to his class. "Well, 
gentlemen, I'm starting my lecture, take notes if you please. 
Listen you, in the hack row, why arc you just sitting there, 
and not taking notes? And why arc you staring at me?" 
"To hiss a professor off his podium," he says, "why, would 
you dare to hiss at me?" 
"So-and-so was hissed off his podium only the other day," 
he is told. 
"What? What?" 
"They hissed at G. for such-and-such opinion." 
"\Vhat! You don't say! \\'hy, I am of that opinion, too. 
\'\'ell, come on ! Hiss at me!" 
"Professor, sir, I am not in the least against that opinion, 
on the contrary, I just told you that G. was hissed at." 
"Ah, so you agree with this opinion?" 
"Absolutely." 

234 
Polina Sns lova·D Diary 
" Excellent, let me !ihake hands with y·ou." 
Za<l lcr brought along a book by Thiers, •ǋ which he had 
already read. He said t hat as he was reading about t he Holy 
Alliance he had to blush for m;mk ind. He said that a fter 
having read that book he was ashamed of being a member 
of the h uman rare. 
Sat urda)', 12 Daemba 
Enryt h ing. hut e\'erything is for s;de i n  Paris, e\·crything is 
aga i nst n:l t tuc and ag:t i n.!it rommon !;en.!ie, so m tKh so that I, 
i n  my rapacity ;1s a ba rbarian, will say as t ha t  famous bar­
barian onre s:t id of Rome: "Thi!> nation will perish ! "  The 
be't Emopca n m i nds t h i n k  so. Everything is for sale here, 
c\·er)· t hinř: comrienre, bea uty . This venality shows in c\·ery­
t h i nŚ: in t he po<oe\ ami well-tmned ph rases of :\1omieur M., 
t he wasp waiMs ami ll ulkd u p  hair of t hose young women 
who walk the streets in pa irs. One part iwlarl y  senses this 
vena lity when li,· i ng alone. I ha\'C become Do used to get ting 
C\'cryt h i ng for money- t he w:1 nn :l tmospherc of my room, a 
< onl i:d wcl< omc-th:t t ,  ao; 
a result, I find i t  strange to get 
clll) t hing a t  all without paying for i t. I f  I [ask] anyone a bout 
Domething i n  the street, I feel ill a t  case, I anually become 
apprehemi\'e, im·oluntari ly, a bout paying too m uch, as hap­
pened on one cKrasion . . .  
I remember the gra pes which I a te, free of charge, on 
Mom-Sailll, absol utely free of charge. 
T<xbś· at d i n ner the ron\'ersa t ion t llrncd to t he <Juality of 
rham pagnc wine. Momicur !\f., wi t h  grea t ardor, tried to 
pro\'c its indi\'idual cha racter, whirh somebody had though t 
to challenge. 
11'edtJesdcl)', 2] [)('(em ber 
Sometimes t he stupidity of t he people I meet dri,·es me to 
1 1 .  :\dolphc Th icr5 ( l i9i- 1 87i), hcnch h istorian ;uul man or Sla te, 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
235 
desperation. So it was on Sunday: the maitre d'hotel was 
trying to prove t hat . . .  a marriage of COJl't'enience is a very 
good thing, and nobody presented any serious argument 
against i t :  they j ust did not know how ; some preposterous 
thi ngs were said ; to refute this con tention, i t  was stated t hat 
. . .  if you marry that way, you may go wrong, h itting upon 
an immoral woman, but the maitre d 'hotcl said that one 
couldn't go wrong in such a case, since one could gather t he 
most accurate information, and he was right of course. This 
unsett led me so much that I could no longer stand it and 
went out for a walk. I walked around for a long time, with 
my mind gone blank, forgetting where I was. I don't know 
how many ti mes I simply began to cry. 
I ha,·e begun to study Spanish-1 fi nd it most interesti ng, 
I even l ike the actual pro(·ess of learning a language. I am 
most (:on tent when I am studying Spanish, but sometimes, i n  
the middle o f  my studies, the thought of h i m  suddenly over· 
whelms me, ami my heart is wrung with pa in. 
Tcxlay two new roomers showed 
up, two Americans 
(North America ns). I like t hem very much, especially one 
of them : such an energetic and st:rious f;.ce. He gave me an 
attentive and serious look, ami I met his glanre. These ought 
to he men, thauk God. But perhaps I won't be able to make 
friends with them? 
Th ursday, 31 December 
Today a fter dinner I stayed in the di ning room to read a 
letter which I had j ust recei,·ed. The maitre d'hotcl, his wi fe, 
the Georgian, and one more person were i n  the drawing 
room. The ma itre d'hiltcl said something about me, his wife 
responded, I heard only "Cette pauvre fille" . . .  Then she 
fell quiet (apparently somebody had told her that I was i n  
the next room), then Tum. came in, gave m e  some trivial 
known particularly for his works on the French rC\'olution and the ::"a­
polconic c1 a. Tolstoy consulted him in writi ng H'ar ar1d Peace. 

236 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
phrase, asked me what news I had received, and left again. 
Having read the letter, I went out to tell them the news 
about Chernysh[evsky],15 then left soon after, as some gentle­
man arrived. 
Tomorrow at breakfast I'll strike up a conversation with 
somebody about how miserables travelers look in a foreign 
country, ami especially in Paris, and especially Russians. 
i january 1864 
Recently I attetlded a lecture by Francis. I liked this man 
very much. His ideas, bold, honest, and vivid, do not go to 
the unfortunate extreme of justifying everything by a goal. 
His language is vivid, without affectation. This man perfectly 
personifies my ideal of a Frenchman, I even liked his external 
appearance: a lean old man with a lively face, piercing eyes, 
and a subtle irony in his face; yet at the same time he has a 
certain simplicity and nobility. 
He is an elegant, aristocratic figure; I noticed his hands, 
with thin, long fingers. I observed that he knows how to 
flatter a crowd · . . .  and that he doesn't mind doing it. He 
made a good impression on me. For a long time I haven't 
heard an honest, living word. 
Today I wa෗ at the library. I started going there the day 
before yesterday, and yesterday I met my friend for the first 
time, but I was sitting at a different place, for which he 
reproached me as he came up to me. Today, as I entered the 
library, he was already there. ''I'm sure you'll stay at your 
old place today,'" he said, as I walked by him. 
And I did. \\'e talked a lot. He asked me for my opinion 
about the Polish uprising, he asked me if there were any 
educated women in my country, and if I attended public 
15. See note I I  of Introduction. This reference may be 10 Cherny· 
shenky"s trial. which took place on 2 December 1 863. He spelll from 
1 86:! to 1 884 in prison, where he wrote his most influential work, What 
Is To Be Doru:! (1 863). 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
237 
lectures. Then he asked me about my specialty. I also asked 
him about his. He studies philosophy. He asked me many 
questions about Russia and said that he might go there. He 
told me that he has a friend, a young man who knows 
Russian, and began asking me for the meaning of some 
words, which he tried to understand letter by letter. But I, 
with my usual frank;-ෘss, told him that I could understand 
nothing, that he should rather show me the little note from 
which he was reading. He was a bit embarrassed, but showed 
it to me. I read the words: "My dear, my good, my sweet 
girl." I said that this was all nonsense. "All right, then I'll 
tear it up," he said. He is a dear hoy, a very dear boy. The 
mere fact that he got to talk to me is worth something: that 
takes courage. 
For some time now, I have been thinking of Salvador 
again. I would he rather calm, be doing good work, but then 
suddenly I would remember the insult, and a feeling of 
indignation would well up in me. Now I think of him par­
ticularly often, and the idea that I haven't paid him back 
won't leave me. I do not know how and in what way I shall 
pay him back, I only know that I'll do it for sure, or I'll die 
of anguish. 
I know that as long as the house and the street in which I 
was insulted continue to exist and that as long as this man 
enjoys respect, love, happiness, I cannot find peace of mind; 
an inner feeling tells me that this cannot remain unpunished. 
I have been insulted many times by those whom I loved, or 
by those who loved me, and I suffered it . . .  but the feeling 
of hurt dignity nc\'cr died in me, and right now it is crying 
out to be expressed. E\'crything that I sec and hear every 
day insults me, and, by paying him hack, I'll be paying them 
all back. After long thought, I ha\'C arri\'ed at the conviction 
that one must do everything that one finds necessary. I don't 
know what I will do, I only know that I'll do something. I 
don't want to kill him, because that is not enough. I'll poison 
him with a slow-working poison. I'll take away bis happiness, 
I'll humiliate him. 

238 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
Paris, 13 February 
Today I bought a pair of shoes. It was the second time for me 
in that shop. The dealer and his wife were extraordinarily 
obliging to me, they tried on and showed me an immense 
number of shoes. I even felt embarrassed th;ෙt I only pur­
chased a pair for 3 fram·s, they were so helpful. In the end it 
turned out that they had cheated me by y2 franc. I was 
amazed at that. 
Paris, Sunday, 14 February 
Yesterday I visited Guior.16 I had been terribly unsettled for 
a number of days, and I cried on my way to sec G. Yet it 
Ïeemed to me that I was going to find something very good 
in him. Before my mind's eye there appeared the ideal of a 
kindly old m an , steeped in love and sorrow. I got there at 
one o'clock. Nobody there. I stood there for a long time, not 
kno,.·inÐ where to go. Finally l heard somebody cough be­
hind ;1 door. I knm ked. "Amen," I heard someoue say in a 
loud voire. 
"Excmc me," I said, opening the door. 
I entered : A corpulent, sturdily built man was sitting there 
at a de,k, writinÐ Ïomcthing. Strangely enough, he looked 
to me quite difierellt from what he had looked like to me 
in church. 
"\\"hat can I do for you? " he said, raising his head, with a 
stern and impatient expreǌsion on his face. 
This reception crushed me completely. Even so, my nerves 
were in a highly excitable state. I felt like breaking into tears 
;md was unable to utter a single word. "Well?" he said, look­
ing at me with puzzlemellt and vexation. 
Here I could not restrain myself any longer and burst imo 
tears. He began looking out of the window. At that moment 
Hi .
.
 \ ppwx ima te rendning of a French name spelled in Cyrillic kt· 
tel., "'Gn.""-Transla tor 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
239 
somebody knocked at the door. A workman entered and dis­
cussed with him the purchase of certain things and the 
printing of certain announcements. F[athcr] haggled like a 
.Jew. This discussion gave me time to regain my senses. "You 
arc Russian," he said after the other party had left. 
"You must have some clergyman of yours here. 'Why didn't 
you go to Monsieur B.?" . . .  
"I hcg you to forgi,·c my com ing to sec you. I did this 
from i nexperience, I had heard about you." 
"Oh, that's all right," said the Father condescendingly, 
"but I t h i nk that it would be much more proper if you went 
to your own clergyman." 
I stood there, in silence, ha ngi ng my head. 
"Could I he of any usc to you?" he asked somewhat more 
k i ndly. 
For a long time I could not say anythi ng. 
"Arc you look i ng for a posi tion? You haven't got any 
money, no relati ves, or friends?" t he Fa t her asked me quickly, 
"or ha,·c you sinned aga i nst t he l a ws of mora l i ty?" he asked, 
with particu lar severity. 
I bl ushed and i nvol u n tarily ra ised my head. Seei ng that I 
was not answering, a nd seei ng that i t  was somet h i ng else, he 
could not understand what was wan ted of him, hut at last, 
a pparently having got t he idea, more or less, he began to 
talk to me of God, hut in a tone as i f  he were teaching a 
lesson-he C\'C I I  dosed h is eyes. 
I n  concl usion, he told me that all my ideas were j ust plain 
nonsense. That, if there were crime a11d suffering on Earth, 
t here had to he a law, too. And that only idlers and drunk­
ards suffered. A nd Emperor Alcx[andcr] was an ideal mon­
arch and man. 
17 February 
Once agai n  I am t h inking of vengeance. \Vhat vanity! I am 
alone now and I look at the world as though apart from i t, 
and the more l keep looking at it, the more nauseated I get. 

240 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
\'\'hat are they doing! \'\'hat are they fussing about! What 
are they writing about! I've got this booklet here, G editions 
of it came out in 6 months. And what's in it? Lobulo is all 
carried away by the fact that in America a baker can make 
several tens of thousands a }·ear, that a girl can marry there 
without a dowry, and a 16-}·ear-old can already support him­
self. These arc their hopes, this is their ideal. I could tear 
them to pieces. 
Wrdncsda)', 3 March 
Yesterday I attended a tenure by Philarct Charles and was 
amazed at the clowning of this gentleman. Stepping onto the 
speaker's platform, this gentleman closed his eyes and began 
to lecture, wa\"ing his arms . . .  [illegible] sometimes, for a 
wmic cfTcct; and to the f.,'TCat delight of his public, he would 
bounce around so that he would almost lie down on the table. 
This is how he tenures: 
I am going to give you a lecture in a way no one has ever 
lectured l>cfore: nobody in Europe has C\'Cr thought of 
using this method . . .  Let me talk to you about the age of 
Louis XIV. You think it was a great age? Sure enough, 
all you have to do is read up on it. That's right, go and 
read up on it, just read . . .  Only recently a book has come 
out by a certain German. I expect that you haven't read it. 
\\'hy, I am con\'inccd that none of you here has ever so 
much as heard the name of this German. So then, Louis 
XIV. You think he was a patron of the sciences, the arts, 
literature? \\'ell, yes, it may be true that he liked art: 
Apollo Hch·cdcrc, the Mcdiccan Venus, because there you 
ha,·c beauty, the Sun. But do you know what his attitude 
was toward the Flemish school of painting? That, he would 
say, is trash; they present peasants with pipes in their 
paintings. You know, the Dutch and the English. These 
arc serious people, they did not paint a whole lot-no time 
for it, lots to do, ami when they did paint, they didn't 
chase after beauty, they looked for truth only. They haven't 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
241 
got any sun there, perhaps just a little, a drop of sunshine. 
It is not always beautiful, those southerners don't like it 
too well, don't like it at all, hate it. \.Yell, so there you 
ha\'e Louis XIV-he had all those executioners: the head 
executioner, then an executioner somewhat below the first, 
then his minor executioner, and finally, the very smallest 
executioner of them all. That is how he used to take care of 
literature: he would say to his head executioner: "Outlaw 
literature, persecute it, burn it." Once in a while they 
would still burn a man for a book he'd written . . .  Against 
His Majesty, you think? Against Mme Mentenon [sic]. Oh, 
those were harsh times, very harsh, I am very glad that I 
am not living in those times, or else, who knows, with this 
temperament of mine, I might have fared badly. And 
how do they write novels these da)·s? Take a contemporary 
novel: at the first word you find it entertaining, at the 
second word-a little boring, then, at the third and fourth 
word, you begin to get interested, at the fifth you abso­
lutely want to find out what happ(.ncd to such-and-such a 
girl; that's a French novel for you. English novels are 
written differently; their novels are sermons, lectures. Some 
people fall asleep reading such novels, but there arc some 
who read them easily. 
Speaking of the mutual hatred between the French and 
the English: 
I was brought up in England, and don't you believe that 
I am an Anglomaniac: I am a pure Frenchman. Once I 
went into a church, such a modest little boy I was, standing 
in a corner; so they all began staring at me-they realized 
that I was French, because my necktie wasn't tied the way 
they tie them in England. So they stared at me "There," 
they said, "stands a monster." So help me God (there may 
be Englishmen in the audience, but never mind that). 
\Veil, now even the English agree that Moliere wasn't a 
fool. And we, too, read Shakespeare. 
In the beginning I laughed a lot; soon I noticed that the 
others were laughing also; only they were laughing for a 

242 
Polina Suslova·ා Diary 
different reason-they were laughing and applauding. I felt 
annoyed by it. 
Somehow my person attracts people's attention, and I am 
getting tired of it. It isn't that there arc no women attending 
lectures or using the library, there arc quite a few, but their 
faces arc different from mine. These arc women with flowers, 
with frills and flounces, with veils, accompanied by their 
mothers. There arc some serious women, too, one in par­
ticular-she i' a pcrfcn nihilist. 
The thing is that I behave, while she claps her hands, 
stampැ her feet, and yells "bravo." She is also dressed poorly. 
She wmcs all by herself, hut nobody pays any attention to 
her, because she is no longer young. Everybody finds it quite 
natllral that a maiden lady, grown old while awaiting her 
fate, should have got tired of it all and taken to learned pur­
suits for want of anything better to do. Hut they won't leave 
me alone: every timt' they keep bothering me during breaks 
between lectures: "You must he a teacher of English? Arc 
you a foreigner? Arc you devoting }·ourself to the study of 
some parti( ul;u· subject?" I have grown tired of this, and so, 
during breaks, in order to stop people from asking me ques­
tions, I take a book .
.
.
 Letten from Franu:, ;md pretend 
that I am absorbed in my reading. 
"Is it a PoJi,h or a Greek book that you'\·c got there? You 
arc a foreigner, aren't you?" they invariably ask me. 
"It is neither Polish nor Greek," I respond, without raising 
my eye-; and hlmhing with anger, as I don't want to reveal 
my nationality so as not to draw C\'Cn more attention to 
myself. 
"So what language is it in?" 
I am bored in the extreme. The weather is beautiful, there 
is a mancllous \·icw from my fifth floor window, and I am 
sitting here in my room, like a wild beast in a (·age. Neither 
English verbs, nor Spanish translations-nothing can help 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
243 
me to overcome my feeling of depression. I was about to in­
dulge in some tea, but no, it does not help any, either. 
Ii March 
Yesterday I went to see Macht. He has an elegant flat and a 
large librar}' with Swedish, English, French, and Russian 
books, living in perfect comfort. He sits in front of his fire­
place and keeps scribbling away. What a banal life! And yet, 
how many young men do I know who work hard to get this 
kind of lire for thcmseh·cs. How much strength and how 
many convictions arc sacrificed to the acquisition of such a 
lihrar}' and such pictures! 
2 April 
A nagging feeling of depression won't leave me. I am in the 
grip of a strange, oppressive feeling, as I look down on the 
city from my balcony. The thought of being lost in that 
crowd frightens me. 
3 April 
Yesterday I entered a shop. Nobody was there. After a few 
minutes the owner came in from the street, red [two illegible 
words] in a dirty shirt, with snuff sticking to his nose, and a 
little tipsy. 
"I made you wait, Mile," he said; "I hope that I had a good 
watchman in you?" 
As he was .selling me some paper, he decided that he would 
give me two sheets pour rien. 
"You are very generous," I told him. 
"There can be no generosity great enough when a young 
lady is invohed," he answered. This conversation was con­
ducted in the most serious tone. 

244 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
A few days ago I took a walk along the rue de Medecin in 
the evening. On the corner of the boulevard de Scvastopole 
I saw several young men standing, and with them a pretty 
young woman, bareheaded, with a luxuriant, carefully done 
coiffure. "Dites done," she was saying to one of the young 
men, in a capricious voice and putting her hands on his 
shoulders. This picture left a deep impression on me, and, 
I don't know why, after witnessing it, I felt some relief from 
my earlier sufferings, as if I were illuminated by some light. 
I know nothing more repulsive than these women. I have 
seen women with sharp gestures and impudent facial expres­
sions, and I find them more supportable. 
17 April 
Recently I made the acquaintance of two personages: 
E,·genia Turli and Mar[ko] Vovchok.1B Evgenia Tur had 
heard about me from Koram., and had asked her to send me 
o\·er. She charmed me completely from our very first meeting. 
Lively, passionate, she left a strong impression on me. And 
with all her intellect and learning, she has such simplicity. 
\\'ith her I did not experience that uneasiness and tension 
which I usually feel when I first meet a person, even if I am 
dealing with well-educated and humane people. I talked to 
her as though I were talking to my mother. \Ve cried and 
kissed each other when she told me about the events in 
Poland. After our very first meeting she invited me to move 
in with her (she lives with her son),10 promised to give me 
French and English lessons, and to speak French with me 
1 7. Pseudonym for Eliza\·eta \'asilie\·na Salias de Turnemir (181 5-!12). 
Sister of the writer Sukhm·o-Kobylin, and close friend of Turgenev. She 
enjoЮctl great popularity in the fifties, especially with the short novel 
.\listake, but in the sixties her popularity waned. 
1 8. The pseudonym of the writer Maria Aleksandrovna Markovich 
(I SаH-190i), a Ukranian writer who had the honor of being translated 
by Turgenev and praised by Dobroliubov. A fictionalized biography of 
her is to he found in the Ukranian .\"a Sl'ilallhll (At Daybreak) hy Jurij 
Tys (Chicago: Denysiuk, 1961). 
1 9. E,·geny Andreevich Salias (1 840-1 908). Popular writer of some 
nou· His novel The Pagaclrevtsy enjoyed wide success. He was also quite 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
245 
always. Later, she invited me to visit her at her friend's sum­
mer residence, and said she was very sorry that we had not 
met earlier. On the next day she came to see me with her 
friends, and the 5 of us together went to the cemetery. Along 
the way, Luginin,2° who was sitting across from me (the 
Countess had specially introduced him to me, and had said 
to him: whenever you want to go out somewhere, take Mile 
Suslova along), was trying to entertain me, but I was listening 
to the Countess, who was conversing with the other gentle­
man. She docs not like to compromise. I was amazed at her 
energy. 
"If at 20 years of age," she said about a certain gentleman, 
"he is willing to get reconciled, while I, having lived so much, 
at 40 still have the strength to hate, what will he be doing at 
301 He'll be a police spy by then." 
Then the gentleman with whom she was talking told her 
that conservative ideas, too, had the right to exist. "This is 
precisely what I have been arguing about so much," she said, 
with fervor, "certainly they have a right to exist, but not the 
way it is with us. There arc, for example, conservative parties 
in England, in France, but there has been no precedent for a 
conservative party standing in support of the whip, as is the 
case in our country; on the contrary, it is sometimes more 
liberal and more humane than the revolutionary parties." 
She has broken off her friendship with Tur[gencv] on 
account of the fact that he wrote a letter to the tsar in which 
he said that, out of respect for him, he had broken off all his 
relations with the friends of his youth.21 
active in revolutionary circles at this time and in correspom.lence with 
Herzen and Ogarev. He is referred to later in the notes as ''\'adim," 
which is the peudonym he used for one of his no\·cls. 
20. Vladimir Fyodorovich Luginin (1 834-19 1 1), well-known revolu­
tionary who enjoyed the respect of both Turgenev and Herzen. He left 
Russia in 18G2 and subsequently enjoyed a successful career as a chemist. 
21. This is a reference to Turgenev's letter to Alexander II explain­
ing his relations with Herzen and his anti-government activities. Tur­
genev had been requested by the Third Section to return to Russia to 
explain these relations, but he obtained permission to al'lswer the ques­
tions by letter. Turgenev effectively disavowed any connection with the 
"friends of his youth" and especially with the radical liberalism of 
Herzen_ 

246 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
I went to [Mme] Markovich without any letter of recom­
mendation. She received me cordially and simply, saying that 
she had heard of me and had wanted to come and see me 
herself, but had not had mෑ· address. For a few minutes she 
had me channed. She offered me some tea, which I did not 
refuse because I happened to be terribly thirsty. Then, very 
soon, I realized that I should have declined. Her cordiality 
seemed to me like that of a typical Russian gemlewoman who 
is always ready to welcome anybody to her house and treat a 
guc!.l to food and drink. Having conversed with me for a 
while, she asked me (God only knows why) to wait while she 
wrote a letter and mailed it, then asked me again to wait, but 
I welll home instead, leaving with her. The weather was 
beautiful, Mmc .Mar[km·ich] walked with me to the bus 
station . . .  Along the way we talked about many things: 
about Hcr[zcn], about what she was writing, and about 
what I was writing and had written before. She talked more 
about how much various journals paid, whether I had 
bought myself any summer dresses, for how much, and 
what kind. 
And on the whole, I noticed in her a certain coldness, 
cautiousness; somehow, she observes people very closely. One 
can sec that she is a calculating, sober-minded woman, who 
won't let herself be carried away. The Co[untcss] said that 
this woman was subtle, but I didn't sec her that way at first, 
at least not with me. The Co[untcss] agrees with me that she 
is cold. In spite of mp;clf I compared the two women. I 
thought that with [:\fmc] l\larkovich I wouldn't have started 
to cry, but it turned out dificrelll: the next day I went to sec 
her, having been im·itcd to come at a set hour; she had 
promised to prepare for me those of her works which 1 had 
not yet read. Along the way, as 1 was passing through a nar­
row alley, I met a rather young woman, dressed very poorly 
but neatly, who was crying. She approached me timidly. I 
thought that she wanted to ask me abolll a street. "Please 
gi,·c me 2 sous," she said; "1 haven't eatcu anything." I was 
struck by her decem and sadly submissive air. I gave her I 
franc, the only piece of small change I had on me. She 
thanked me and walked away. I was about to continue on 

Polina Sus/ova's Diary 
247 
my way, but this encounter left a strong impression on me; 
I wondered if I could not perhaps help that woman in some 
way. I turned around and caught up with her. "Listen," I 
told her, "maybe I can be of some usc to you. It must be that 
you have been ill, or that some misfortune has befallen you. 
If you can work, perhaps I can find some work for you. 
Come and sec me." I was going to write down my address, 
but could not find a pencil. She told me that she could not 
remember an address by heart, and suggested that we enter 
a shop and ask for a pencil. I wrote down the address for her 
and asked the shopkeeper how much I owed him for using 
his pencil. He said [I owed him] nothing. I thanked him and 
went on. I was in a great hurry. "I shall nc,·cr forget you," 
said the poor woman with feeling, as she took leave of me. I 
did not find [Mmc] Markovich at home. 
Her mother suggested that I wait, saying that her daughter 
had gone to sec Tur[gencv], and tried to let me know that 
yesterday Tur[gencv] had waited two full hours for her 
daughter, and then had to leave anyway, as she had not 
returned. She also told me that today the wife of the arist 
Yakobi22 would come, a very pretty, very young, and what's 
most important, a very good woman, according to her. And 
sure enough, very soon a pretty young woman showed up. I 
guessed that this must be [Mmc] Yakobi. \Vc started talking. 
She gave herself liberal airs, tried to make an impression on 
me, most unsuccessfully. At last [Mme] l\farkovich arrived. 
"Get acquainted," she said to us, without saying our names, 
though. \\'c shook hands without a word. [Mmc] Markovich 
said that she had not prepared the books for me, then again 
started to talk abollt money. Later we looked at her portraits, 
with which she was greatly dissatisfied. ·what I found un­
fclicitous about these portraits was merely her pose, her 
draping herself in a sort of mantle which was unbecoming 
to her homely face. 
Somehow we got to talking about [Countess] Salias.23 I 
22. Valery Ivanovich Yakobi (1 834-1902), popular painter in the 
sixties, known especially for the compassion for the downtrodden which 
he expressed in his paintings. 
23. Sec note 17, above. 

248 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
happened to say that she had been at my house. They prob­
ably thought that I was name dropping. "If you are going to 
be at the Countess's, please tell her that she should send me 
my books." "Countess Salias?" I asked. She paid no attention 
to my question and went on talking and talking until, at last, 
it became clear what Count[ess] she was speaking of. "Oh, 
I'll be very glad to deliver your message," I said, "but could 
you please give me )'OUr name." "Oh, how careless I am," said 
[Mme] Markovich; "I introduced you, but failed to mention 
your surnames." "Yakobi," said the pretty young woman, 
and though I made a point of expressing my astonishment at 
hearing this name, she most probably thought that I was so 
ignoram as not to be familiar with it, for, looking at me 
with deep commiseration, she offered to write it down for 
me. I said I would not forget it even without that. She in­
sisted that I write it down; so I finally told her that the name 
was familiar to me. I could not help smiling as this was goinි 
on (of course I am not going to tell the Countess about the 
books, and I'll tell the pretty young woman that I forgot). It 
made me terribly sad to look at these "triumphant" and 
"idly chattering" women. I was invited to stay for coffee, but 
since I had had breakfast just before coming on this visit, I 
declined and wem home. The hostess noticed my sadness 
and, as she was seeing me to the door, began to ask me the 
reason. This made me eYen sadder; my nerves were in an 
exceedingly excitable state; I could no longer restrain my­
self, and tears welled up in my eyes. "Tell me, what has hap­
pened to you?" Mme Markovich asked, taking my hand with 
a concerned expression and leading me to the bedroom. I 
followed her instinctually, as the tears were streaming from 
my eyes whether I willed them or not; I was tormented 
by a feeling of helplessness and shame. I blamed it all 
on that scene in the street and soon went home. She told 
me that if I were to have any difficulties, I should turn 
to her. 
"\\'hat difficulties could one have in a civilized state?" I 
said, with an ironic and sad smile. 
"But you had some with your landlady," she said. 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
249 
Then she said that she would come to see me the following 
day, repeating it several times. She arrived punctually. I saw 
her coming through the gate, as I was looking from my 
window, and went to meet her downstairs in the yard. I 
greeted her with all due cordiality, but without any rever­
ence. \\'e talked for about an hour, then I accompanied her 
on her way home, and we talked a great deal more. She re­
minded me of my promise to let her have my works; and, 
since I did not have them with me, made me promise that I 
would come and see her in a week to read my story to her. 
During our walk in the cemetery, Luginin promised to 
give me a list of historical works that might be useful to me. 
Apparently, he wishes to educate me. He very naively tried 
to explain idealism and materialism to me, when I said that 
I could not very well define these concepts. 
[Mme] Markovich asked what my name was. I told her. 
"And they told me that it was 'Nadezhda Suslova,' " she said. 
I have a sister whose name is Nadezhda . .
. 24 
Tuesday, 3 May 1864 
As I was returning from Brussels, I was asleep when we ar­
rived in Paris. My only companion in the car woke me up 
when the train had stopped. I quickly got up and started 
gathering my things. There was almost nobody left on the 
train. The conductor came to my car and opened the door: 
"Ah, you are still here,'' he said, and, seeing that I was hurry­
ing, added: "Don't hurry, there is enough time." "I am 
ready," I said, stepping up to the door. He stretched out his 
hand; I was glad to take it, and jumped down. "It's cold . . .  " 
he started saying, but I was already running toward the 
station building. 
24. Nadezhda Prokofievna Suslova·Erisman, Polina Suslova's sister. 
She studied medicine in Russia, but was forbidden to complete her 
studies there. She finished her work at the University of Zurich and 
became one of the first women in Russia to pursue this career. Dostoevsky 
had great respect for her. See letter 5 in this volume. 

250 
Polina Suslova'11 Diary 
Saturda)', 8 Ma)' 
Yesterda)· I visited [Mme] Markovich. She read my story (the 
first):!5 and liked it. [Mme] Markovich said that this story 
was better than [any by Countess] Salias. I read my unpub­
lished story to her, and she liked it, except the end, which 
she did not like. \Yhile I was reading, (Mme] Markovich kept 
saying: "This is good! Excellent!" Later, during our con­
,·ersation, she said, "One ought to look at people with one's 
eyes wide open." I answered that I could not do that, that I 
felt it to be cynical. 
And indeed, what fun is it to live, having to look and 
watch out at e\ery step? I want no part of happiness, even, 
if it must he acquired b)· such means. That would be manu­
factured happiness . . .  Let people deceive me, let them 
laugh at me, but I want to believe in people, let them 
deceive me. And besides, they can't do very great damage, 
can they? 
21 Ma)' 
Today I got up for the first time after having been sick for 2 
weeks, during which time Countess Salias took care of me in 
a motherly way, so that I 'm now in love with her even more 
than before. 
Luginin and Usov26 visited me frequently during my ill­
ness, and I talked to them a lot. Once we had a dispute about 
the Russian nation; it turned out that they have no respect 
for it. That same time, Usov said that he liked the custom 
of certain savages: their adult sons kill and eat their fathers. 
He said that it might not be a bad idea to adopt the first of 
these two measures. 
25. Polina's first story "Pokuda" (In a While) was published in 
Dostoc\skfs journal Time in 1 86 1 .  
:!G. Peter Stepanovich t:sov (1832-97), engineer and friend o f  Herzen; 
something of a middle-of-the-road liberal. 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
25I 
Today Countess Salias and both of these gentlemen were 
here. The Countess spoke of the education of her nephew, 
whom she is sending to school in Switzerland. 
Among other things, she mentioned that there is one bad 
thing about a Swiss education, that it makes the children into 
cosmopolitans. Luginin tried to assert that this was excellent, 
that cosmopolitanism was a very good thing; wasn't it all 
the same whether it was a Russian or a Frenchman whom one 
wished well? He said that he would most gladly serve France 
or England, but that he would stay in Russia l>ccause he 
knew Russian customs and the Russian language, though he 
had nothing in common with the Russians, either the 
peasant or the merchant, not sharing their beliefs or re­
specting their principles. "I welcome the Parisian associa­
tions much more than . . .  " I did not hear the whole sentence, 
or perhaps he did not complete it. I was furious, but said 
nothing. The Countess also remained silent. In the begin­
ning, she alone defended patriotism a little, though only 
from the viewpoint of tradition. 'When the Countess said 
something about my doctor, I had to express certain opinions 
of mine which were opposed to theirs. The Countess objected 
heatedly. So this is what they arc like! No, I won't join these 
people. I was born into a peasant family, I was brought up 
among the people until I was 15, and I shall live with the 
muzhiks; there is no place for me in civilized society. I'll go 
to the muzhiks, and I know that they arc not going to hurt 
me in any way. 
Spa, 15 june 
It is good here. And here's a miracle for you: I like the 
Germans better than the French. The landlady, who is 
Dutch, stuffs me with tartines and plies me with beer. They 
eat about five times a day. The landlord is sullen, looks like 
a murderer, but is a kind man. Besides myself, a French 
couple also rent a room here. The landlady told me what 
conditions he worked out with her in writing (for 6 weeks), 

252 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
wondering about his distrustfulness. There was one condi­
tion, for instance, that there shouldn't be any fleas. How 
mean, and how much like a Frenchman! The cook, a German 
woman, is the funniest, primitive human being, a naive 
creature. \\'hen the weather was bad, she worried a great deal 
about how back home [in] Mecklenburg les gmins, sown by 
her father, would perish. She even wanted to run away. How 
her presence would help les grains remains unknown. Now 
she sometimes comes up to me and asks: "\Vhat about it, 
Mile, do you think that it will rain tomorrow?" I say, 
"Maybe," but then, remembering those cherished grains, I 
add that, even if it is going to rain, then only in Spa. 
Spa, 16 july 186-1 
Letter 
Dear Countess: I received your letter a few days ago and 
read it with particular pleasure. You arc so kind . . .  27 
Spa, 21 ]ul)· 
More and more I am occupied with the affairs of my sister, 
regarding her education. My further stay in Paris also de­
pends on that. I [have] almost [surrendered] myself to these 
petty things and unpleasant details. But for that, I was 
already beginning to return to my belief that life is meaning­
less . . .  This is man: sometimes he finds life meaningless, 
then again he keeps on waiting (to gratify only) a whim. 
Versailles, 30 A ugust 
Today E[vgcnia] Tur and I had a discussion about Swift. 
She said that he was a wicked and spiteful man. I retorted: 
"He was an embittered man." "By what, against whom? 
\\'hat did he sullcr? \Vasn't he rich and respected?" "The 
27. The unfinished letter seems to be to Countess Salias. 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
253 
fact that he was personally happy even more justifies his 
bitterness." 
"What was it that made him so bitter? That the human 
race is evil; where docs such a vile view come from1 Doesn't 
it prove the absence of higher strivings? A failure to under­
stand that mankind is destined for a high purpose. I know 
an educated, cultured man, who was in Siberia, where he 
was whipped, yet he believes in mankind, and loves it. That 
means that his is a lofty soul." 
"That means that he is a mystic," I thought. 
"\Vhilc Swift," she continued, "sought to obtain an arch­
bishopric, was consumed by ambition, and for that reason 
repeatedly changed sides." 
"Perhaps he sought that office in order to acquire some 
influence." 
"What influence? You say that just to contradict me." 
I did not argue the point. Perhaps she was right and he 
was stupidly ambitious, but can one really blame him for 
that? This is a sad fact, but arc we to accuse him, without 
having any proof? I have a great deal of respect for people 
who suffer in spite of material prosperity and personal hap­
piness; I can understand their suffering. 
Once in my presence she inveighed against a girl who had 
refused to marry a good man, whom she did not love, but 
with whom she surely would have been happy. I sided with 
the girl, saying that one should nc,·cr lower one's standards. 
"So in that case be an old spinster, and live with that witch, 
your mother." "I respect that girl ever so much more because 
she refused to compromise even under such adverse con­
ditions." 
She reproached me for my gloom, presenting to me the 
advantages which I was enjoying compared with other girls. 
As if my melancholy had anything to do with them. 
Then she attacked Pomialov[sky)28 for a phrase of his, 
28. :\'ikolai Gerasimovich Pomialovsky (1 837-63), writer' of some pop­
ularity in the sixties. Influenced by Chernyshevsky and Dobroliubov. 
The reference here is probably to his novel Molotov, which takes his hero, 
after travels about Russia in search of a social ideal, to middle-class 
duties and enjoyments. 

254 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
which I love, saying that man is made not for his own 
pleasure, but for fulfilling his duty. Duty! \Vhat duties can 
a private person have before society, what can he do for it? 
Paris, 15 September 
Today my physician was here. He said that he had read On 
the Eve, and that he was enraptured by Insarov's happiness.29 
"Could it be true," he said, "that there arc such girls?" I said 
that I was surprised to find in him, a medical man, such 
attention to an interest in belles lettrcs. He went on to 
demonstrate that not chemistry, but they (belles lettres) edu­
cate people. "I have just read it, and I have had such 
moments as no chemistry can give me." 
"Yes, I understand that one may have those moments." 
"Those moments leave a deep impression, and they ac­
count for a person's intellectual development." 
Then we talked about Pek.,3o about Stoianov,n about 
Luginin, whom he called a Russian Girondist. He told me 
that when he met him for the first time, Luginin was reading 
Proudhon's book on federalism. He had just finished it and 
kept claiming that patriotism and nationalism were all non­
sense. "A fine fellow that Luginin, he has read Proudhon 
and that's it, everything's definite." 
£,·cr since my arrival I had almost invariably kept silent at 
dinner. To one side, there sat some old ladies, to the other, 
a swdcnt with his mistress, who started coming to dinner 
soon after I had arrived. Bm after a certain time, a gentleman 
started sitting next to me, separating me from the old ladies. 
That gentleman kept talking and talking, until he finally 
succeeded in engaging me in conversation, with the student 
joining in also. The gentleman to my left asked me what I 
29. On the Eve (1 860), novel by Turgenev in which the hero is 
lnsarov, a Bulgarian. 
30. Probably a reference to Peter Petrovich Pekarsky, a Polish emi­
grall! and historian of literature. 
3 1 .  Probably a Bulgarian emigrant. 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
255 
was reading, and, having learned that it was history, recom­
mended several books to me. One of these books the student 
offered to give me. After dinner I immediately got up as 
usual, and went into the garden. ·walking past Robescourt, 
I had to stop, as he accosted me. I had barely reached the 
garden when the student and his lady came down, and he 
gave me the books. The lady also tried to participate in all 
this; at dinner she kept turning toward me in a nervous way. 
This lady is somehow currying my favor: she has her gentle­
man friend pass me dishes at table, and so on. I respond to it 
politely. The Englishwoman refuses to eat with us on the 
grounds that this would mean her having to sit at the same 
table with a prostitute. That's too much. The relationship 
between the student and the lady is a touching one. At table, 
she lets him have the choice morsels; when she pours herself 
some wine, she always lets him have some first. In part, she 
functions as his servant: she sweeps and cleans his room. 
21 September 
My landlady is driving me to distraction: I have asked her a 
thousand times to have my room tidied up, but she won't 
do it, though she keeps promising. She simply won't pay any 
attention, promising as though it were a joke only. I gave 
the maid some money, but even that won't help. 
Marie once took my shoes to clean, and then I had to go 
out. I looked and looked for her and those shoes; the lackey 
helped me find her, yelling that she should get Suslova's 
shoes, then finally she responded from somewhere upstairs, 
saying rudely that she hadn't any time. So I had to go out 
with my shoes uncleaned, which put me in a bad mood. On 
the next day, taking my shoes, she said facetiously that she 
wouldn't do what she had done the day before, and it was I 
who had to blush. Another time she forgot to give me break­
fast, and the next day she was again the first to mention it, 
while I was apologetic about it. 

256 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
A few days ago my physician was here. He told me about 
the gm·erness who had asked him for a cure for her gray 
hair. I told him that I had some gray hairs, too. 
"From unhappiness!" he said. 
This upset me very much. 
"I haven't been unhappy," I tried to say, able to control 
myself for a moment, but then the tears came to my eyes, 
and the muscles of my face began to tremble even more. 
"It happens to everybody," he said, apparently moved. 
I was trying to say something, but could not control myself. 
"You can be helped; at your age this is possible," he began. 
"Do you really think that this is what makes me unhappy?" 
I said with feigned melancholy, and still looking the other 
way. 
"No, I just said it so as to say something," he said ex­
citedly, also looking away, and not at me. 
24 September 
Yesterday my physician was here, and he and I worked on our 
French together. I was in a cheerful mood, as a result of which 
I somehow did not beha\·e decorously. It was simply a case of 
my nerves being upset. He remarked that I was distracted: 
"You are probably thinking of Valakh"32 (I had said some­
thing about Valakh just before). I was angry with myself, 
and I had nothing to say to him, but next time I shall try to 
behave more decorously. He noticed that there were some 
young people walking in our garden and asked if this was 
always so. I told him that whenever I was in the garden 
nobody walked there, and even if they walked past me, they 
always approach me sideways, being afraid of me, which was 
all to the good: it was necessary that they fear somebody. 
Today I went to see l\fme M[arkovich] and along my way 
met him. As I was riding past the hospital in a cab, I saw 
several young people outside the gate. He immediately came 
32. Apparently a code name for an unnamed Russian-"'Rumanian" 
or ""Moldavian."" 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
257 
to my mind, and there, indeed, he was. He came running to 
the gate, without his hat, disheveled, his face flabby, un­
attractive. He immediately recognized me, even though I was 
wearing a veil (I was all in black, except for my hat), and, 
embarrassed, turned toward his companion (I did not bat 
an eye). This is beginning to interest me. And then, after a 
thing like this, I am upset all day. I was angry with myself 
for the agitation that I felt. Am I never going to forget him? 
And I was getting desperate. But why become desperate; 
wouldn't it be better if I were to forget him? But, really, did 
I feel any better during the winter, when I did not see him? 
Did I feel any better even during our time together? I remem­
ber those nights when I would suddenly wake up and re­
member with horror what had happened during the day, 
then run up and down my room, crying. \Vas that any better? 
Perhaps it was when for the first time I heard the words of 
love from him, or the first time he embraced me. Why was 
this so good? Because it was new, unexpected. And can one 
really wish that all this had never happened? Then, there 
would be emptiness, or some other mistake, perhaps a more 
colorless one. And how could it have been better with him? 
Would it have been good, if he and I had stayed together 
until now, even if I had become his wife? He is such a prosaic 
gentleman. And what is it I want of him now? That he should 
confess his guilt, be remorseful, that is, that he be a F[yodor] 
M[ikhailovich]. What would happen then? Meanwhile, now 
I have moments of such triumph, aware of my own strength. 
I hear about F[yodor] M(ikhailovich]. I simply hate him. 
He made me suffer so much, when it was possible not to 
suffer. 
Now I feel and see clearly that I cannot love, that I cannot 
find happiness in the enjoyment of love, because the caresses 
of men will remind me of my humiliations and my sufferings. 
Something new might interest me, but even that only to a 
certain extent. 
A few days ago, after dinner, I went out into the garden, 
and was followed (for the first time) by Valakh, who started 
telling me how pleased he was to see me. I remarked that it 

258 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
couldn't be too much of a pleasure, since he had not come to 
Versailles. He explained that he had had an examination. 
\'\'e talked for a long time, and when I went home he firmly 
pressed my hand. He is ..t simple, naive man; that's a novelty. 
As we were talking, other young men walked by, not talk­
ing so much to their girls. The ladies cast curious glances at 
us. On the following day I did not go to the garden. 
29 Septem ber 
Sick. Valakh comes exactly every other day. My physican 
e\·ery day. The main cause of my illness is, it would seem, 
my encounter with the planter. 
I told my physican that I was upset by an encounter. He 
attached gre;ֶt importance to this, and was s;ֶd. 1 also was sad 
and upset often, and he often was agitated when leaving me. 
Every time he would press my hand several times, on·ering 
his services. \\'hen leaving, he would turn hack at the door, 
just to get another look at me. Once he told me that Mme 
Marko\'ich would be coming on a certain day, and she came, 
just as my physician and I were studying French together. 
She stayed a few minutes, behaving somewhat strangely. She 
spoke very little, saying that she was expected at the 
Pantheon. Mme Yakobi had mentioned that her son was 
learning Russian, and she said that she was not worried about 
his knowing the fine nuances of Russian expressions. I would 
ne\'er ha\'e expected such obtuseness on her part. Though it 
may be true that cultivating a nationality is only a fad, still 
one must be able to grasp meanings. As she prepared to 
leave, she asked what street she ought to take. My physician 
offered to escort her. She declined, saying that she had walked 
alone to quite differe•ll places, but he s;ֶid that he was fin­
ished with me, and they left together. 
Today we really talked a lot, though he was sad at first. I 
said that apparently ݒlme M[arkovich) was displeased with 
me. He hastened to dissuade me from thinking so. I said that 
ݒlme Yakobi was, it seemed, a phrase-monger. He agreed 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
259 
with that. I asked: where were his friends from, America or 
Spain? He replied that they were all from America and told 
me some things about their character, very wittily, saying 
that they were very popular with the French ladies. I asked 
why. He answered: by their appearance, that they were 
young and well-dressed, with eyes as large as this glass, such 
white teeth, fresh gloves, and fine shoes. 
"Oh, how wicked you are!" I said. 
He said that I still did not know him. 
He asked why I wanted to know these things, and whether 
I wanted to make their acquaintance? I said: "No." "Didn't 
I want to take lessons?" I said that I knew an American lady . 
.Just to say something, I said that he should ask what books 
they had in Spain, novels, and added that they probabry 
wouldn't know. "No, this they know," he said, "when it 
comes to a drawing-room education, they've got that." \Ve 
had become much more cheerful; I took notice of it, and he 
agreed, adding that he had come in a very upset and angry 
mood. I asked him the reason. He said that there had been 
a clash involving his sense of duty, pointing out that some­
times one did one's duty from cowardice, and sometimes on 
account of the fact that we haven't got a right to hurt the 
feelings of others. Valakh and I discussed Proudhon,33 and 
Herzen, whom I had been reading. 
Then he told me about Moldavia. There, as in Russia, 
French fashions are imitated in society, and French is spoken. 
He promised to get me Racine. 
1 October 
Yesterday Mile Juliette came to see me. She was sad, for some 
reason, and I made a remark to her about it. She agreed. 
\Vhile she was there, Valakh came and sat for a while. He 
was cooler than usual as he took his leave, even though I was 
33. Pierre Joseph Proudhon (1 809-65), one of the founders of French 
socialist thought and first friend and then opponent of Karl Marx's brand 
of socialism. 

260 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
cordial enough at parting, and invited him to come again. 
For some reason it appeared to me that he might be the cause 
of Juliette's sadness. He asked me about my doctor. As I told 
him some things, I got carried away and pointed out how 
much that young man knew. Valakh said, in a sort of serious 
way, that it was no wonder he knew a lot: when you read 
a lot, you arc bound to find out something. 
Later, the Englishwoman carne by, offered to have tea with 
me, and ordered some. She is a worthless woman and a gossip. 
She has got all the bad (English) qualities, the English ones 
with a few human ones added, yet she lacks any of the English 
virtues. Yesterday I had mentioned, in some connection, that 
I was going to get a sofa, as one of the tenants was moving 
out. She perked up. "\Vho is going to leave? When?" I was un­
able to satisfy her curiosity. Then she suddenly told me, with 
horror, that Mile Stward [sic] had a lover (that is Mile 
Stward's business, not ours, I should say). "But she isn't 
spending her nights at horne!" the Englishwoman continued, 
horrified. So what? She and I won't have to christen her chil­
dren. If Mile S[tward] were my sister, perhaps I should have 
had a word with her about this thing. But Mile S[tward] is 
not a child, she probably knows what she is doing, she is no 
concern of ours, and it is in fact unnecessary and improper 
for us to be aware of her conduct. She wants to move to an­
other house, where only old men and women live-there, 
morality must reign supreme. There shouldn't be any lovers 
or mistresses [there], but why put so much blame on poor 
Mile Stward? I think that she, just as everyone else, is not 
going to have a lover when she grows old. The Englishwoman 
is still undecided about moving away, because the other 
house is filthy and overcrowded. And so, she must make her 
choice between morality and comfort. Then she told me 
about the rnoral[ity] of the young girl who lives far back in 
the garden and whom nobody ever sees. "How can you know 
who lives in that house?" But in England they have homes 
occupied by only one family. This Englishwoman's husband 
is a very funny man; all he does is run about Paris; something 
like five times a day he will run and come back with a bottle 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
261 
or two under his ann. Wherever I go, I almost invariably 
catch up with him, or run into him. He always runs along 
the middle of the street, all bent and contorted as though 
some outside force were driving him. From time to time he 
will dash to the right or to the left, stick his nose into a shop, 
then bounce back and rush on. Sometimes he takes a walk 
with his wife; I have never seen them together, though. But 
in the yard he walks without his usual dash; rather, he drags 
behind his bretonne, slowly and even more bent than usual. 
It would seem that he shows a considerable interest in 
women's gossip. 
Friday, 6 October 
As I was walking to my lesson, I met the Pole who, God only 
knows why, visited me twice. The first time he asked for a 
lady, and I answered him very angrily, standing in the door; 
the other time he came to tell me that he had received a 
letter with its seal broken, and asked me whether I had 
broken the seal. I asked him to come in, listened to what he 
had to say, and when he had finished about the letter, I asked 
him, getting up, if this was all he had to say. He was em­
barrassed, got up, and took his leave. Today, as I was walking 
past l'Ecole de Mcdecine [sic], I heard a voice behind me 
saying: "My compliments." I did not turn around, but kept 
walking. Then, "my compliments" was repeated another 
time, and the Pole appeared before me, saying that I had 
smiled as I walked by him, that most probably I had laughed, 
and was still laughing, at him. I replied that I had not taken 
any notice of him. "But I noticed you," he said, "because I am 
interested." I answered nothing to this banality. Then he 
asked whether I was angry with him for coming to my room 
twice. I replied that, no, since I thought that he had come for 
a serious reason. He started telling me about the deftness 
with which I had sent him about his business, so that he had 
found nothing to say, even though he had wanted to stay and 
talk some more. He was still keeping up this rather empty 

262 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
conversation when I reached the house where Mme B. lives. 
I said, "Good-bye," and crossed over to the other side. He 
stayed on his side, but soon came running over to me, saying: 
"Again you are getting rid of me with the same deftness." I 
said that I had to go to that house, which I promptly did. 
Yesterday before dinner I met Valakh in our garden and 
got to talking with him. I told him that I had bought some 
tea, that I was drinking tea from boredom, that it was my 
substitute for everything: pleasure, friends. He remarked 
that, apparently, it was not a \'cry good substitute. I agreed. 
Then he asked me what nationality I loved most and said: 
"You must love your neighbors, the Romanians." I answered 
that I did not know them, that they had done nothing to 
impress the world; "we Russians, though we are no good, at 
least we make ourselves felt." 
Tllesday, 9 October 
Yesterday, as I was walking to my lesson (Span.) I met the 
planter in the Rue Mcdecins [sic] . He was walking on the 
other side of the street, with that same friend with whom he 
had been talking in front of the hospital. He was walking 
along, talking and chuckling, and bending forward so low, 
that I barely recognized him; probably he saw me before I 
noticed him. 
A few days ago I wrote a very intimate letter to my 
physician after he had missed me at home. He responded 
with a letter which was cold to the point of rudeness, and in 
which he said that he did not have sufficient time to keep 
seeing me at home (he had missed me twice). He offered to 
come once [a week] for lessons and consultation, asking that 
I myself fix the day and hour, under the condition that it 
not be at night, because at night he wanted to rest. At the 
same time he named the day and his fee for the lessons. On 
the set day he showed up with an air [illegible word] and 
started by asking me about my health. I answered and 
reached for my copybook, telling him what I had been 
studying. He suddenly said that he could not give me my 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
263 
lesson and got ready to leave. I still refused to believe that 
he was such a fool and asked him if he was angry with me. 
He made a surprised face and asked where I got that idea. 
"Apparently the struggle with his sense of duty has come to 
an end, with virtue victorious," I thought. This tone of his 
made an unpleasant impression on me; unable to restrain 
my sadness, I answered that, perhaps, I was wrong, and then 
added, with a sad smile: "Go then, go." Thereafter, having 
come on the set day, he immediately started asking me about 
my health, with a grave air, then suddenly broke off the 
con\'ersation in a casual manner and suggested that we ha\'e 
our lesson. \Vhen he sat down, he pointed at his watch. I 
looked at him with astonishment and with curiosity, but 
then suddenly my heart was gripped by some sort of a sad 
feeling. I felt humiliated, like a fool, and I could hardly 
restrain my indignation. Some ideas in the book we were 
reading enhanced my agitation. So in the end I had to leave 
the room in order to conceal it. "\\1hen he had left, I cried. 
Poor heart! It won't stand being touched so rudely. This 
incident ga,·e me some serious thoughts. Naturally, I shall 
act resolutely and come out with honor, for I am hiding 
nothing and I am not equi,·ocating. 
But how much strength must I waste on defending myself 
against such petty attacks! 
Mme Robescourt is ill, she had a nenous fit yesterday. The 
whole house was upside down; all night they kept running 
to get doctors and medicine. I wanted to go to see her, but I 
don't know how to go about it, and whether it would be 
agreeable to her. He had breakfast with us; he came toward 
the end and happened to sit next to me. He asked me about 
my health, then everybody began asking him about his lady, 
and he answered calmly that she was better. I also thought of 
asking him about her, but didn't; it was too embarrassing. 
19 October 
My physician and I almost made up. Later, I told him that 
I could not remember all his calls, that I had not been count-

264 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
ing them, and that it was his own fault, his inconsistency; I 
reminded him that at one time he had actually refused taking 
money from me, but that now, after the comedy was finished, 
one might as well be accurate. He acted perplexed and said 
that there hadn't been any comedy at all on his part, trying 
to justify himself, but I begged him to postpone it at least 
until next time: I was too upset. At our next meeting I was 
cheerful, and after we had conversed for a while, he started 
like this: 
"You are now in a good mood, and so we may take up our 
previous conversation again." 
"\Vhy?'' said I. "You told me that there was no comedy, 
fine; this means, of course, that I must believe you. I admit 
that I really had no right to say what I said to you, and that 
I said it only because I had talked to you so much before." 
"But tell me, for heaven's sake, freely: do you think that I 
wamed to annoy you?'' 
"You didn't even have any way of knowing what might 
annoy me.'' 
"And do you know what annoys me?" 
"You want to tell me that you were sincere with me." 
"I am not going to say this, because it would be too trans­
parent an untruth. I will tell you only that I had my reasons, 
with which you arc not familiar. You don't know the tenth 
part of what is .
. :· 
He spoke with fen·or, and I felt sorry for him. He asked me 
if it wasn't disagreeable to me that he kept coming, and said 
that he could leave me alone. 
"f\,;o," I said, "why? . . .  And why are you asking me about 
this, as if you didn't know that I appreciate your visits," I 
added, as calmly as I could. 
"Yes, but it might become annoying." 
I told him that a Russian acquaintance of mine, Utin,34 
had arrived, that he had no one else here, and that, conse­
quently, he would be seeing me frequently. 
"\\'hy 'consequently'?" he asked, seriously. 
34. Evegenii lsakovich l'tin (1843-94). H is brother :'l:ikolay (1840-83) 
"·as a revolutionary and member of the ruling circles of the secret society 
r.llcd Zemlia i mlia (Land and Will) . 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
265 
I did not understand him, and naively asked him to repeat 
his question. 
\Vhen he repeated it just as seriously, I guessed what he 
meant and blushed crimson. 
When Utin heard his name from me, he told me that his 
brother was a bad man. This startled me and made many of 
his actions clear to me. 
Thursday, 19 October 
Today at breakfast a Frenchman told me that before I got 
there they were having a discussion about the advantages of 
city and country life, and that Monsieur R. was for the city, 
while he was for the provinces. I said that I was surprised at 
Monsieur Robcscourt, that I did not like hig cities, where 
no friendship or anything was possible. He said that he was 
afraid of going stale in the provinces, where there was no 
learning, nothing. (As thought it were impossible to read 
books.) And I thought that life in a big city is life in a herd, 
not the life of an individual, and that man must be a man 
first and foremost, then a citizen, and only then a craftsman 
or scholar. That this petty life in the city, subordinated to 
petty interests, is bad for the development of a personality. 
Friday, 20 October 
Yesterday, all of a sudden, young S[alias] showed up, bringing 
a note from his mother, in which she told me that she was 
coming to sec me that day. I invited him in. \Ve talked non­
sense. Still, I did not like S[alias], though I had not expected 
that I would like him a great deal; but still, I expected some­
thing better: he is somehow flaccid. Certainly, the Georgian 
is taciLUrn, too, but that's different. At the same time he tries 
to create a good impression of himself: it isn't exactly that 
he is trying to show himself as something he is not, but he 
tries to show that he understands such-and-such; yet he may 
look rather simple. He told me that while he was looking 

266 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
me up, he met an old woman who in her day had loyally 
served her master, but now had saved up enough money and 
was living out her life enjoying herself. 
Utin is a thousand times better: a lively, bold, clever boy. 
The Georgian is the best of them all. 
In the evening Ev[gcnia] T[ur] and her son came, also 
U[tin] and the Georgian; the latter arrived first. Not expect­
ing to meet so many people and seeing Ev[gcnia] T[ur] and 
her son, he said quietly to me: "I'd like to bolt." "No, it's 
too late now, you can't," I said, humorously. He stayed. 
Ev[gcnia] T[ur], needless to say, spoke more than anybody 
else, and I met her glance, which seemed to ask, almost out­
right: "vVhat kind of an impression did V[adim] make?" 
Today, in order to meet the C[ountcss], I went to sec her 
cousin, and met everybody there who had been at my place 
the day before (excluding the Georgian); we talked non­
scmc. They ha,·c really become great friends during this 
time. Cons[equcmly] I have done them a favor, by introduc­
ing them. 
To V[adim], I said a few words about language, and I be­
carne animated. 
Utin asked me about Alkhazov. When I went home, U[tin] 
and V[adim] walked with me. The latter spoke <•bout Spain. 
"That is the past," he said. "But it can be turned into the 
present," U[tiu] said, corrcnly. 
"ීo. that wouldn't be it, that's like marrying a second 
time, loving the second time, you can love only once." 
"This is very sad," said U[tin]; "you think this way be­
cause you arc young." 
"This is most unfair," I thought. I mentioned Luc[rczia] 
Floriani,35 who had loved many times, but who always felt 
as though she }0\·cd for the first and last time. V[ a dim] said 
that this was still a thing of the future for him, and very 
distant. "Be ready to die any minute," U[tin] remarked. But 
the other stubbornly refused to agree with him. "You arc a 
35. Lurre:ia Floria11i no\"cl hy George Sand (1 804-76) in wh ich she 
recounts her relations with Chopin. Its social significance consists of 
its bold ,·iews on marriage and family. 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
267 
good Christian," Utin said to him; "you're not afraid of 
death." 
\\'hat a crude and sensuous notion this is. 
They escorted me home. At the gate, I wanted to say 
good-bye, but V[adim] offered to accompany me further. 
"Do you want to pay a visit to me?" I asked. They declined. 
When I stretched out my hand to U[tin ], he pressed it firmly 
and refused to let go. I looked at him in surprise. I invited 
him to come to my house, saying that I was at home every 
night. Then I turned to V[adim] and said that I hoped to 
be seeing him frequently. In the yard, Valakh overtook us. 
He looked sad to me. 
I am looking out of the window right now, the one that 
faces the garden, and I see Julie with one of the Romanians, 
the most unauranive of them. They were walking with their 
backs to me, and it seemed to me that Julie was crying. I 
took a closer look. Julie screamed and fell down, face up. 
The Romanian took a look at her, then calmly stepped over 
her feet, and called the landlady. She entered the garden, 
took a look from a distance, and said, annoyed, "Comme 
c'est inutile." She then called the maid. A lackey and a maid 
dragged the unconscious Julie into the drawing room and 
apparently left her there alone, for soon after I heard the 
landlady conversing with the same Romanian quite cheer­
fully. The words spoken by the Romanian, which I heard, 
were "mauvais sujet."36 "\\'ill you come to dinner?" asked 
the landlady. "I don't know," he answered; "what do you 
have for dinner?" She began to list the courses. The sick girl 
was alone. That's not the way it was the first time. A repeat 
performance is always a failure. 
That same night. 
Ever since Rob[escourt] told me that he was leaving, I've 
been getting ready to ask him up to this day for his picture, 
but somehow I never got around to it. I hoped that he would 
36. "Ne-er-do-well." 

268 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
come to say bood-bye. He was supposed to be leaving today, 
and he came to my room. I said that I was sorry he was leav­
ing and asked him for his picture. He said that he did not 
have any, but that he would send me one, and asked me for 
mine. I wanted to give him his book, but he asked me to 
keep it for a souvenir. At that moment the Englishwoman 
entered. Upon seeing that I had a visitor she tried to with­
draw, saying, "Pardon," but I asked her to come in. She did 
and sat there for a while. We chatted a bit. I told them about 
U[tin]. The Englishwoman left soon. Then Robescourt told 
me, as we were alone again, that he would be coming back 
in April and would try to look me up. Then he asked me to 
write him once in a while, and if I should come to Nancy, 
to see him there. He left me his address. Then, as he was 
about to leave, he pressed my hand and kissed it. At this 
point I began to say something, and my voice trembled. He 
again kissed both my hands. I looked at him, and threw my 
arm around his neck, our lips met . . .  Then there began an 
incoherent conversation, interrupted by kisses. He was 
trembling all over, and he had such a happy, smiling face. I 
was also feeling happy, but kept breaking off our ardent 
embraces with my pleas to be left alone. I kept pushing him 
away, then again passionately stretched out my arms to him. 
He asked me if I preferred that he not go to Nancy, and 
asked when he could come to see me. I said, tomorrow night. 
Several times over we said good-bye to one another. I was 
trying to make him go, but he kept asking for still one more 
kiss. Finally I got his hat for him and opened the door my­
self. After he had left, I recovered my composure a bit, then, 
with my cheeks still burning from his kisses, I went to see 
the Englishwoman. As I was returning from her room to 
mine, I heard the voice of Mme Rob[escourt] on the stairs. I 
went to the window and saw her walking across the yard, to­
gether with him, and accompanied by servants carrying their 
bags. He came back and discussed something with the land­
lady. My head is going around; I don't know what will come 
of all this. It seems to me that he loves me, I even was con­
vinced of it two hours earlier, before I had heard the voice of 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
269 
Mme R[obescourt]. His face was so genuinely happy. And so 
were his trembling, and the tremor in his voice. 
23 October 
Valakh is not here, r'Jr have I any letters from him. 
Yesterday my physician was here. I told him that the 
handsome Spaniard was trash. He replied that this was 
too categoric a statement. I said: "Of course, but he is still 
a bad one. And I've been told by people that he is handsome 
-not at all so." "But his eyebrows, his eyebrows, aren't 
they something, as wide as my whole forehead." Then I 
told him that I had done a favor to three people by intro­
ducing them to one another. "That is, you have contributed 
to the spreading of civilization," he said. 
About Pcchorin he said that he was as much of fool as 
Grush[nitsky].37 This juxtaposition struck me, as I had 
thought exactly the same thing myself. 
Utin defended V[adim], saying that he had had a long 
talk with him, and that he was all right. He was startled 
by my opinion, which was not harsh at all. 
Today the Englishwoman was here and indignantly told 
me that Mme Caubrigneau sews lace on caps for the poor, 
and that in Paris it is quite impossible to determine a per­
son's class by her dress. 
2 November 
Usov and Utin were here. Utin said, in some connection, 
that the English nation is narrow-minded. Usov stood up 
for the English. Utin said that their political influence has 
decreased, since they were defeated both in the Danish 
and in the Polish question. 
"But this does not mean a thing. Foreign affairs are no 
longer so important. They arc sticking to the principle of 
37. Heroes from LemiOntov's novel A Hero of Our Time. 

270 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
nonintervention. Now even Louis Napoleon is taking his 
troops out of Rome." 
"Yes, your principle of nonintervention, to be sure­
today he withdraws them, yet only yesterday they were 
figluing in Mexico; just see, tomorrow they may be fighting 
again somewhere." 
"That is so, but still, this principle of nonintervention 
shows the trend in British public opinion. In England, free­
dom is so uni••crsal it could hardly be outdone anywhere." 
"Yes, cYerything is in the hands of industrialists." 
"The workers arc free also." 
"Yes, they prosper, without the power of capital, without 
money." 
"Lok, even without capital, they have a tremendous 
amount of money; they live better than our government 
officials." 
"They do? 'What arc you talking about! Why then does 
Tainc-1s mention poverty on every page? And whence the 
hunger?" 
"\'thy, it is because there is one minor hitch, namely, that 
not ncrybody can be a worker." 
"\\'ell, there you arc, so we still get the same thing." 
"No, it is not the same. This situation is improving. Now 
e-.-cry worker can himself be a proprietor." 
"But isn't this a very small percentage?" 
"\\'hat can the go,·crnmcnt do about that? The govern­
ment cannot interfere. It is good that it doesn't interfere." 
"\\'e can sec how good this is. Why, then, does it help 
the bourgeoisie? No, this is too uneven a struggle, with one 
side having e\·eqlhing on its side, and the other nothing, 
and you shall see this at the next upheaval, which is bound 
to happen, for it is being prepared." 
"I cannot deny that it might happen. Everything may 
happen. But I am not a worshiper of the rc,·olution. lt seems 
38. H ippolyte Taine ( 1 8::?8-93). Th is is probably a reference to Taine's 
Hi>IOIJ of Engli5h Literallne, wh ich appeared in 1 863. l ie attempted 
to explain literary and h istorical events by the innuence of race, environ­
ment, and weather. 

Polina Sus/ova's Diary 
27 1 
to me that one should have abandoned this idea a long time 
ago, the idea that a revolution is the only way to achieve 
one's ends. Of course, in Russia, where sixty million people 
are totally ignorant, and if there is one among them who 
happens to be educated, they shut him up immediately­
here any means will have to do; but in a country where 
conditions are in any way favorable, it is inexcusable. You 
will sec what comes of these modest beginnings in due 
course, what with the tremendous successes scored even in 
so short a time. \Ve do not notice them, because we arc 
used to spectacular effects. \Vc need a revolution. (I am 
not looking forward to the revolution, rather, I look upon 
it as a sad necessity.)" 
16 November 
Lately, I have been at the Co[untess's] every night. Bak 
[unin?J=l!l was there. I liked him. 
Nothing can he accomplished without faith, he said once, 
hut sometimes faith will kill. That which is credited to 
heaven, is taken away from carth.4° 
A few days ago it happened that my physician asked me 
for some money. Apparently it wasn't easy for him. I im­
mediately gave him some, in the nicest way possible. He 
was happy. \Vc talked a great deal. Toward the end, as he 
was already about to leave, he started to say this: "Tallcy­
rand said that the word was given to man so that he could 
conceal his thoughts, and Heine said that it was there so 
that we could say nice things to one another. \Vhich of them 
is right? Now there is this question: is it necessary to speak 
at all?" I did not understand him . . .  Soon after he left, I 
39. Mikhail Alcksandrovich Bakunin (1814-76), innuential anarchist 
and revolutionary, friend of Herzen. He was perhaps :\larx's most for­
midable antagonist, especially in the struggle over control of the Inter­
national. 
40. It is possible that this is an oblique reference to Feuerbach's and 
subsequently Marx's view that man alienated the best part of himself in 
religion, that is, by crediting it to heaven. 

272 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
got the idea only after he had left. Yesterday he was very 
nice to me. He is a simple and nice man. One could not 
fall madly in lo,·c with him, but one could become passion­
ately enamored of him. 
Yesterday, when we had finished the lesson, he wanted 
to sit closer to the fire and suggested that I move closer to 
the fireplace. I said no, because I had a headache. "All right, 
so I'll stay here also," he said, but then again, some time later, 
suggested that we move. 
"Why don't you sit there by yourself," I said; "isn't it all 
the same? \Yhat whims! We can talk. very well also that way." 
"Yes, it's a whim, exactly, but that's all right, a whim is 
a good thing." 
I wonder how he got up so much courage? 
I moved to the fireplace, hut he put his chair rather far 
from me. Seeing some bread, he asked permission to have 
ෆme. I said yes, and began to cat with him. I offered him 
෇omc tea, hut he declined, saying that this would be too 
much trouble, and that he wanted to talk with me, and 
besides he had to go to a lecture. 
"You don't have to go," I said. 
"You arc right," he said cheerfully, but quickly recovered, 
and added sadly; "I must." 
I did not imist. He s;id nothing special, but as he was 
saying good.byc, he thanked me so simply and naively. 
Once, speaking of a handsome Greek, I said that during 
my first youth I paid no aucntion to beauty, and that my 
first love was a man of 40. 
"You were probably 16 then?" he said. 
"No, twenty three." 
19 ]\' ovcm ber 
Today \'adim was here. \Vc talked about lo\'C. 
"\\'hat a delicate conversation we arc having," I said, 
"however, it is most decorous." 
":\o, it's indecorous." 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
273 
"How then would you talk to a woman about love, about 
flowers, about poetry?" 
"Poetry and flowers arc nonsense, but love is a serious 
thing, it has existed since the beginning of the world, and 
he who has never felt it is unworthy of being called a man." 
"Flowers and poetry have also existed for a long time, 
and who docs nol feel their beauty is not a man." 
Wednesday, 30 November 
On Sunday I attended a gala concert with Carrivc. \Vc rc­
Lurncd on foot, and talked. I asked him about his native 
country, where he plans LO return soon, but he told me 
nothing definite. 
He Laid me that he will follow in his father's foolstcps, Lhat 
he will work the land, raise a family, but perhaps he also 
might get a job somewhere in Lhe ciLy. 
Prior to that I had an incident h;:1>pcn to me: a Russian 
doclor, who arri,·cd here recently, behaved toward me in 
a way which forced me to forbid him the house. Carrive 
had seen him at my place on Sawrday, and asked about him. 
I told him that I had been forced to show him the door, and 
thal I nmsidcred him a fool. He said that this was pre­
cisely what he had Lhought of him. He was glad that I had 
Lold him about it: 'Til know how to conduct myself with 
him." (They meet at the hospital.) I answered him that I 
was not asking him for anything. 
"I am not going to challenge him to a duel," he said, "but 
still, it is better that I know what sort of a person he is." 
He suggested that we take a trip to St. Germain together, 
and I gladly accepted. 
Yesterday, as I was taking my French lesson, Vadim and 
U[tin] came to sec me. The yentered somehow with a lot 
of noise, then, seeing that it was a bad time to come, seem­
ingly got embarrassed, but asked permission to stay five 
minutes, and we talked a bit. "\Vhen I asked Vadim to tell 
his mother that I could not go to Ch;hle that evening, Utin 

274 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
looked at me with such a smile that I felt like going to the 
Countess's that night just to show that I had no particular 
interest in staying at home. But still I didn't go. As he was 
leaving, I said to n., for some reason: 
"Don't go away; we might have a good laugh." 
He said that he had so much to do, and I knew that he 
was telling the truth. 
"Lok, I "·ould very much like to stay. It's good to be here 
with }OU, but I must go to my <·lasses, and then to the hos­
pital. At least )Oll might feel sorry for me," he said, already 
standing at Lhe door. 
"Why won't you feel sorry for your!ielf?" 
"Oh, don't think I am so proud that I wouldn't like to be 
pitied." 
"I must pit)· myself, because there is no one to pity me." 
He rapidly s.teppcd up to me and pressed my hand. 
"Or should I postpone it until /a transformation has taken 
place," he said, remembering the hok we h;.ul been reading, 
then ansl'l·ered hinnclf, "Or it will be late . . .  
" 
"Good-bye." 
He told me that he would try to see me before Saturday. 
Then he remarked that the young men had failed to dose the 
door, and that I should gi\·e them a scolding for that. 
Today the CounteM was. here. As I was returning her son's 
story to her, I s.aid to her that if I were a censor, I would 
forbid it. That was a cle\·er trick . . .  flattering and sincere. 
Saturday, December 1864 
A few days ago I fell ill, and besides there was this silly thing 
with that mone}·. on an·mmt of which I had to go to the bank. 
I asked the Co[untes.s] to come and give me some advice about 
what to do. She came at once, but was cool, advising me to let 
Beni [sic] handle it. I told her that he was busy and that he 
and I were not on friendly terms. She doubted that he was 
busy. She suggested that I turn to Alkhazov. This was more 
ollt of the question than anything else. Then she suggested 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
275 
Utin. I said nothing, and when I had to speak up, I said that 
I would ask the landlady. 
On the next day I sent Utin a letter, asking him to come 
as soon as possible, saying that I was ill. I was told that he 
would be right over, but he came 4 hours later, with Salias. 
He had already been at their house and knew my whole 
problem. I was excited by what I had been reading, and then 
because of their appearance together I was rude to them, and 
especially to Salias. \Vhcn he said, "Should we come to sec 
you?'' I answered, "\-\7hy?" 
Utin came on the following day, and I told him that I 
remembered having been rude to Salias. He admitted that 
this was true and that he had really been surprised by it. He 
also said that the day before Salias had taken offense at 
something that was not legitimate at all. 
I told Utin that I had seen Carrivc and that he had asked 
me for permission to introduce a friend of his to me. "\\'hen 
arc they coming?" he asked. 
I answered, "I don't know." 
There, his vanity is already wounded; they're glad they 
ca n come, while I can very well do without them. 
"Do you feel bored?" Utin asked. 
"No, it's all right," I amwcrcd; "you sec, I am not very ill 
and I can study, and what difference is there between my life 
right now and the life I lead ordinarily?" 
"I asked because you sighed." 
As he was leaving, he told me that I need not be afraid 
with him, that he would always understand my words right. 
\Vhen I fell ill I wrote a note to Benni in the evening. He 
came early in the morning of the following day, when I was 
in hcd. As I opened the door for him, I told him to wait until 
I got hack in bed. He entered. He was greatly worried, and 
when he left he pressed my hand so very hard. I held on 
slightly to his hand. But he left. He came back later that 
night, and on the next day, and on the following day. On 
the second day he sat with me for a long time, lounging 
around in the opposite corner, and talked a lot, and well, 
yet he was completely calm. He said it was too bad that 

276 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
people would not respect the freedom of others who were 
their friends, or just their acquaintances: "Well, he is my 
friend," he said; "what business is it of his that I'm going to 
steal some money tomorrow? Let everyone answer for him­
self." 
Today I took a lesson from him. I got too warm sitting 
next to the fireplace; I moved away from it, and finally 
walked away. He said that I was very far away. "So why 
won"t you come here?" But he didn't. I told him that I needed 
some money exchanged, and he offered to change it for me 
himself. I gave it to him, so I could sec him once more. He 
came, but that time Carrivc was with me. It looked as though 
he loִt his spiritִ when he saw him, and he left soon, saying 
that he would come back on Tuesday, i.e., whenever he was 
needed, because I was almost healthy now. A proud boy! 
Mm1day 
I am now thinking about my return to Ruִsia. Where shall I 
go, to whom? To my brother, to my father? I will never be as 
free as I would like to, and to what end should I suffer this 
dcpcndcnC)'? \\'hat ha,·c I in common with these people? 
Carry out my ideas! Stupid. Why, besides, no one is going to 
give me his children. It seems to me that things in Russia 
arc not nearly so bad as some people say they arc. Really, the 
purpose of it all is, properly speaking, that the people should 
be well off, i.e., that they cat well; and the people today cat 
better than ever before, and with this, they will go far. And 
as to the universities being closed-what docs it matter? 
Once my physician said that he had no f;tthcrland. But 
what does it mean, "to have a fatherland?" 
14 December 
On Sunday Alkhazov was here. He told about the repressions 
back home. He is desperate about not being able to do any-

Polina Suslova's Diary 
277 
thing about it, and wants to go to Turkey: there's more 
freedom there. There you have it, the condition of con­
temporary man! Looking for freedom in Turkey! I liked 
this thought. 
"At least, there you won't have to wear a dress coat and 
gloves," he said. Then he said that at one time he wanted to 
write home that his little brother should join him here­
schools arc bad o\'er there-but then had thought better of 
it, having seen the way of life here. Of course, I could look 
after him, he said, but the many things that I could do for 
him here, wouldn't replace those things that he would miss: 
I couldn't replace his mother or his brothers, or nature, or 
all the things of which those impressions arc composed which 
form one's character-and that's the main thing. An educa­
tion can be added later, whereas a character cannot be ac­
quired. I really had a heart-to-heart talk with him. 
Today I visited with the Co[untcss]. She had just returned 
from a journey, having accompanied Mmc O[garcv].n She 
told me some terrible things: Mmc O[garcv], this woman, of 
whom people of all parties and opinions think so badly, is 
leaving her husband and has gained control over H[crzcn]. 
In her presence, H[crzcn] came to her, drunk, and he had 
hardly entered when she offered him some wine, under the 
pretext that she had no place to pour it. It is said that this 
was also the way she attracted her husband, making him 
drunk. As !\fmc O[garcv] was parting with [Countess] 
S[alias], Mmc O[garcv] ga\'c her a note. "For O[garcv?]" the 
latter asked. "Oh, no, for H[crzcn]. Tell him that he must 
accompany O[garev] and come to me quickly. He is a strong 
person, but I cannot vouch for myself." Speaking of her chil­
dren, she compared her relationship to them with the rela­
tionship of the Holy Virgin to Her Son. 
On Saturday, when I told my physician that I was leaving 
for P., I noticed a certain agitation in his expression. As he 
was about to leave, I said rather simply: 
41. Wife of Nikolay Platonovich Ogarev (181 3-72), childhood friend 
of Heuen, poet, political thinker, and activist. Collaborator with Herzen 
in publishing The Bell. 

278 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
"Could you do me a favor and find an address for me?" 
"\\1hose?" 
··c.·· 
My voice changed when I pronounced that name . . .  
He promised to do it. I asked him not to think that there 
was any hurry alxmt it. Today he brought the address. I was 
very much surprised to sec him at a time other than we had 
agreed on. 
"Let me ha,·c some paper," he said, having greeted me. 
I gave him some paper and expressed my surprise at seeing 
him. He avoided mentioning C.'s name, or the reason why 
he had come. 
I went to get some mal, and as I was dragging it from the 
closet, I asked: 
"You ha,·en't brought me the address which I asked you 
to get for me, have you?" 
Then I asked him to sta)· a while. He stayed a short while 
and was \'Cl")' sad. 
I feel that I'm becoming petty, that I am sinking into some 
kind of "unclean mire," without feeling that enthusiasm 
which med to free me from it, none of that saving indigna­
tion. 
I have been thinking a lot, and I feel better now. I ha\'c 
many prcjudi(e෈. If I hadn't lo\'cd before, if my physician 
were not my doctor, our relationship would be quite dif­
ferent. \\"here has my courage gone? As I remember what 
happened two years ago, I begin to hate D[ostocvsky]. He was 
the first to kill my faith. But I want to shake ofT this sadness. 
20 December 
:\fy physician said about the Countess (after I had told him 
that she docs not like him, which he admitted; it was em­
barrassing to him), that she is incapable of lo\'ing anybody. 
How true this is! 
l\lontagnard said that he prefers the character of Andre 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
279 
Chcnicr's42 poetry to that of the poetry of Alfred de Musset.43 
About the latter he said that he sees evil, finds nothing lofty, 
and all because he is personally unhappy; that he is too much 
preoccupied with himself, that he is an ogoist. 
21 December 
My physician was here. He said that in love there is action 
and reaction, in the life of individuals as well as in the life 
of nations; there arc periods during which a man loves, and 
there arc periods when he tells himself: enough, let others 
love me, if they want, but no, enough is enough. 
31 December 
Today I got a letter from my sister to which I am replying 
as follows. [The letter is not given.] 
14 january 
The number of people in whose minds a man's easy triumph 
over a woman destroys that woman's dignity may be much 
greater than I had assumed. 
15 january 
At last I see the effect of propaganda. The landlady com­
plained to me about my not having told her that I pay 
Leonie. "You should be on the masters' side, not on that of 
the servants," she told me. "Mmc, I can't talk either side, 
42. Andre Chenier (1762-94), French poet who opposed the Terror of 
the Revolution and was guillotined. 
43. Alfred de Musset (1810-57) , renowned French remanlic poet. 

280 
Pol i na Smlova's Diary 
neither that of the masters, nor that of the servants," I said; 
"I j ust stick to what's righ t; however, if you want me to, I'll 
gi\"c you the money which you lost on my account," and I 
left. She later asked t he maid what I had sa id, and she said, 
":'\ot h i ng." A few hours later :\l me R u i t  rame to apologil<' 
to me. However, the matter did uot pass q u i te without some 
quixotry. Leon ie, in order to get some money from the laud­
lady, had said that I had not givcu her a nyth ing, that there 
was a lot to do and a great meŝ i u  my room, and that I was 
t he most troublesome and p; un pered person. 
Today U [ t i n] was here, and we had a J.,•l"e<H d iscussion about 
lo\'C, i u  ron nect iou with A. K. The con\·crsat ion started as 
he o;a w her portra i t  a t  my plare. I argued with him, stood up 
fen ('ntly for \'., prm i ng that there may ha\·e hcen some 
,·;t l id re;l';om for why he was separated from her. I said that i t  
wa' unf:ti r  to demand o f  a ycHiltg m a u  t h a t  he answer for 
h i tmd f  :•  well a for ot hen. I Ic denied t h is, saying that lu· 
ought to ha\ e  married her a mi then, perha ps, get separ;• ted 
i m med i:ttclŞ a fter, oucc he no longer loved her, or he should 
h:l \ e  pro,·idcd for her. I lile this! I n  the first case, i t  meaus 
that a youug man should, on a < routll of t his, rcnouucc hap­
pi ness a nd love fore\·er, for you r:umot marry for a second 
time. Aud pro,·idc for hcr?-this would mean that a poor 
man m mt not lo,·c. 
I :un leaving Paris for some lit tle French town. I am tired 
of social l ies, I wa nt to he ent irely alone-I 'll sec the truth; 
t h i '  way I am a lone, yet a t  t i mes i t  seems as if I weren't alone, 
:1s if I were i m oluntarily wa i t i ng for somethi ng, and hoping, 
:md worrying. 
I would like to he rimer to Nature. She rewards everybody 
al ike, rcfmi ng her gi fts to no one. I would like to set tle down 
on the seashore, th:n would he more gra nd iose. 
:\fomaguanl was somewhat perplexed hy my decision . 
U [tin]. too, a li ttle hit. My physician took i t  with com plete 
imli lferenrc, hut a fter I had twice referred to my departure 
i n  po,i t i \ e  tenm, he asked, "Arc you really goi ng to lca\'c?" 
\\'hat a q uest ion! As i f  I were making riddles for him. 
:\lkhazo\· sa id he was glad for me, my . . .  

Polina Suslova's Diary 
28I 
21 ]a11uary 
Yesterday I had dinner at the Hotel fleures [sir]. They talked 
about a woman who had hanged herself, melllioning details 
about how the coni was pulled tight. "\Vho was it who pulled 
it so tight? her husband, most likely," Mme Verneille [?] 
remarked. 
Today I underwent a medical ordeal. I sought the advice 
of my physician regarding a gocxl place to go and mentioned 
Spain, Valencia. "Go ahead to Valencia," he said; "I am also 
thinking of going there. All you'll have to do is write me." I 
was puzzled. "That's a luxury," I said, just to say something. 
Then, not paying much attelllion to his offer to join me, I 
changed the suhjen, suggesting that he bewme my physician 
"from his beautiful remoteness."H He agreed and offered to 
give me a letter of int nxlunion to a donor. 
He suggested that we h;n-·e our lesson in a few hours, but 
when he came he mggested that we postpone it, finding me 
rather weak. 
After he had left, [I thought] of my grandiose promenade 
to Spain . . .  
26 j a11uary 
Yesterday my physician was here and ga,·e me my lesson. \Ve 
chatted as usual. As I was showing him Katenka's picture, 
I said: "There's a beautiful girl for you." But he did not like 
her very well, saying that his ideal of feminine beauty was 
the Venus de Milo. I said that the latter expresses sensuality. 
He docs not find that this is so, saying that she is so proud. 
The day before yesterday, as I was returning from dinner 
in the evening, I got to thinking about the planter and won­
dered if he was living where I had been told he was living. 
I turned into the rue Racine as I was passing the Odcon. 
44. A quotation from Gogol's Dead Soul.-Translator 

282 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
Getting to the rue Cornel I ran into him, walking with a lady. 
It was quite dark there, and I wondered if it was really he. I 
turned around se\o·eral times, and so did he. \Vhen I turned 
around for the last time, he was standing there with the lady. 
M)' heart pounded like mad; I crossed the street ami walked 
up the steps of the O<lcon. Under the arches, where they 
usuall)' sell books, it was dark. I stole closer to him, like a 
thief, so I could stand across from him and watch him. By 
that time he and the lady had crossed the street and were 
walking under the arches on the side where they sell news­
papers and where it was lighted. I followed him involun­
tarily, watching him in the crowd at a distance. He kept 
walking and walking along the rue Vaugirar, and I kept 
following him. I was still in doubt whether it was really he. 
I caught up v.;th him ncar the Luxembourg and was now 
walking in step with him. I wanted to sec the face of the 
lady, hut I didn't succeed. I only noticed that she was a 
blonde. He was saying very little to her. There was another 
gentleman walking with them, on the planter's side. I could 
hear nothing of their conversation. As they got to the rue M., 
the planter turned around. Here I could sec him well. He 
must have noticed me, hut I don't know whether he recog­
nized me; I don't think he did. He had turned around with­
out any visible reason (the power of magnetism, I suppose?). 
I fell behind a little. I was seized by shame and grief. I did 
not know whether I ought to keep walking, or turn back. I 
stopped, some kind of power kept pulling me forward, and 
I went on. But where, and why? I stopped again, seeing that 
pasֵcrֵhy in this thoroughfare were looking at me. "Mmc, 
what arc you looking for?" some man asked me. "Go away, 
lca\'c me alone," I answered sharply. 
I turned into the dark rue M. and then returned home. My 
first thought was to go to the Hotel du Mcd[ccin] and find 
out for sure if he li\'cd there. But somehow I could not bring 
myself to go there all by myself, and therefore I went to the 
Countess's, hoping to find Utin there, or simply to ask Salias 
himself to accompany me. 
I was terribly excited, talked a kind of silly nonsense, and 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
283 
finally said that I was going home. Usov offered to walk with 
me if I would wait a little, but I said that I had to go right 
away. The Co[untess] asked Usov to stay, saying that I could 
walk home by myself, since it was only 9 o'clock, but I said 
that I was particularly anxious to have someone accompany 
me a short distance, and that he could then return. Now 
Utin more insistently volunteered to come with me. I tried 
to be as calm as I could. "\Vhy do you want to be escorted 
a short distance?" he asked. "Because I ha\·e to drop in at a 
certain place. I have to find out the address of one gentle­
man," I answered casually, and began to talk about his story 
and about my trip. 
He started asking me who the gentlcman was. I answered 
evasively, and he soon began telling me that I was about to 
do something foolish, etc. However, we went into that house. 
He did not want to ask, so I had to do it myself. 
"There is no such name known here," the landlord 
answered me rather rudely. 
"\Veil, how did you make out?" U[tin] asked me. 
"Oh, nothing, I'll know tomorrow," I answered. Then he 
scolded me some more; I made excuses, talking some terrible 
nonsense in a very lively fashion. 
"You arc terribly excited," he told me. 
"Yes," I answered and suddenly broke off our conversa­
tion, released his arm, and walked away. 
And yesterday, as I was saying good-bye to my physician, 
I told him that the address of C. which he had got for me 
was wrong. He offered to find out, since he was seeing him 
every day. And today, as I was on my way to the Countess's, 
I suddenly met him in the rue de Mcdecine. I did not expect 
it. Somehow I became embarrassed and lost my composure; 
I even blushed all over. I did not look at him, but he seemed 
somehow holder, more self-confident. Poor heart! . . . 
It seems that he has grown more handsome. His upper lip 
is now covered by golden down, which gives a stamp of 
manliness to his unusual, energetic face. \Vhat a good face 
it is! There is some youthful power in it that is unaware of 
itself. 

284 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
28 ]anllary 
Yesterday at dinner Usov suggested that we go to the theatre 
Babineau, and the four of us went there: I, he, our landlord, 
and ෉ikalopoulo. That theater presents some awful filth! 
Dirty things arc said on stage and the actresses make gestures 
which one is embarrassed to look at. It is a mixture of filth, 
stupidity, and a soldier's insolence. The public, consisting of 
working women, for the most part laughed heartily. \'\'hat is 
so infectious here is not so much the filth itself, as its bold­
ness and success. If I had seen such a picture in (illegible 
word], it would ha\'C been understandable, but in public, in 
a theater! A crowd of students got into our box, in which 
Uso,· and I sat in the front row. They beha .. ·cd with extreme 
familiarity: they st•nnpcd mercilessly, shouted, made loud 
remarks to the actors. Uso\' assured me that they would be 
ejected, but all that happened was that the usher gave them 
a warning. During the intermission U[sov] suggested that we 
go to ;1 cafe. \-\'hat M:cncs there! A terrible dissoluteness and 
familiarit)' appear in everything and everybody. Next to us 
sat two young men, both looking consumptive. They were 
playing cards. At the side of one of them a lady was sitting, 
alxcm mindcdly drinking something from a cup. From time 
to time she turned toward her neighbor, putting her hand 
on his shoulder. He, as though half-awake, would then turn 
around and pat her cheek. On the other side another lady, 
this one wearing a hat, sat surrounded by men and reading 
Petit journal. The gentleman who sat across from her, with 
whom she seemed to be on more familiar terms, kept turning 
toward her and kissing her hand. These ladies arc so ugly 
and so dull. The proprietress came running to our table with 
extraordinary familiarity. Putting her hand on mine and 
bending down to us, she said that she would serve our beer 
right away. And in the theater I noticed how one young man 
made the acquaintance of a lady who was sitting next to him. 
During the intermission he was talking with her, looking 
her in the face, and adjusting her shawl. 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
285 
LuLTace is zealously courting Mme Vemeille, but how 
stupid and insolent this courtship is. He strikes a picturesque 
pose at one side, where the others can't see him, and keeps 
his lovesick eyes fastened on her; or he sits in the d්rk room 
next to the dining room when dinner ic; about over, and 
fastens his eyes on her from there. 
Today my physician gave me my lesson. My nen·es were 
upset, and several times during the reading I nearly started 
crying. It seemed to me that he was moved, but probably he 
was unable to determine the cause of my agitation. At first 
I was sitting on the sofa, and he by the fireplace, but when 
somebody began to play the piano at the neighbors', he 
moved up rather close to me, leaning his elbows on the sofa, 
so that when somebody knocked (it was the landlady's 
niece), he moved hack a bit. But I was not looking at him, 
and therefore I could see neither his pose, nor the expression 
of his face. \Vhen we had finished, he asked when he should 
come back. I suggested Tuesday, hut he promised to come 
on Monday, to find out about my health. 
I started to say something about my trip to Spain. He said 
that, to go there, I did not need a visa at all. I asserted that 
this was not true. "You know everything that has to do with 
Spain," he remarked (no, I knew very little; if I had known 
enough, things would be different). However, he did not give 
me the planter's address. I'll ask him next time. He said, 
speaking of my trip, that it was a good thing to do, that he 
would like to visit those pans himself. 
I will tell him that the landlady's niece is not greatly taken 
with him, but that I told her that he is a nice man, only 
given to womanish whims. 
Saturday, 4 Febrtta?) 
The other day I got off the bus near the Palais Royal. A little 
girl approached asking me to buy some buttons from her. I 
gave her some money and refused to take any buttons, but 
she insisted that I take them. I took the buttons and gave 

286 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
her some more money, but she again started forcing her 
buttons on me, which I again refused. 
"Enough, she doesn't need any more buttons, leave her 
alone," the conductor, who was standing nearby, intervened. 
Then, turning to me, he explained that this girl never accepts 
money for nothing, giving her credit for it. 
Toda}' my physician was here. He had come to say good. 
b}'C and to give me his last lesson, but it turned out that 
we were going to sec each other again. He was downcast, 
and left without having finished the Jesson, saying that he 
was ill. 
"I can sec that," I answered; "what's wrong with }'Ou?" 
"I don't know myself." 
"Have )OU caught a cold, or didn't you sleep well?" 
"I couldn't sleep, I slept badly. Any time I can't sleep there 
is some reason for it, bm this time there wasn't any." 
I said nothing, and we parted as usual. 
"You'll surely come on Monday?" I asked him. "Oh yes, 
I still mmt get that address for you." Uust for that?) He was 
speaking of Cor.'s address, bllt I pretended that I thought 
he was referring to the address of that doctor in Montpcllicr. 
Earlier, when he was here, I had told him that now, the 
next time we met, he would have to take second place, as 
my doctor, while my sister would take first place. 
"I will be jealous," he said; "I have a right to that, at least." 
Utin was just here. He spoke very sincerely. I told him 
that one could become infatuated with him, but that one 
could not lo,·c him. He became very interested in this and 
kept pestering me for an explanation why this was so. 
"How is that to be explained? . . .  
" 
"You arc a strange man," I said, and stopped. 
He again insisted that I explain it to him. 
"I was just talking nonsense." 
"\\rell, never mind, a fuss about nothing!" 
"I wanted to ask why you don't come to sec me more often. 
It is very simple: you have things to do, and finally, there's 
the honeymoon with Salias." 
"Don't you want to find a more profound reason?" he 
asked. 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
287 
I started making fun of that, and he said that what he 
had said with silly. 
"No, I know why you don't see me more often." 
"Well, then, is there a reason deeper than those you have 
mentioned?" 
"Yes . . .  maybe." 
He insisted that I tell him. 
"The reason is that not much attention has been paid to 
us [you]." 
He protested against that. 
"This is very understandable," I said. "Why go to see a 
woman? There isn't much interesting about me, is there? 
If you arc looking for intellect and erudition, you won't come 
here to find them." 
He said, in a facetious vein, that he was interested in the 
Spanish woman. "Didn't you sec me talking to her by the 
fireplace?" I said that I had seen it, but that I hadn't been in 
society much, so I didn't know the difference between a 
courtship, being in love, and just being polite. He asked me 
why I had left so early. I explained it very simply, saying that 
it was not early for me, and that I wasn't feeling well. 
Then he asked whether I was in correspondence with 
D[ostocvsky], and why I wasn't going to marry him, that I 
really should take him in hand, and his Epoch, too.•:; 
"Because I don't want to," I answered. 
"\Vhy not?" 
"Well, very simply, if I wanted to, I would be there, in­
stead of going to Montpellier." 
"\Veil, maybe it is he who won't marry you," he said, 
facetiously. 
"Maybe," I answered. 
To take in hand his Epoch! As if I were some Iphigenial 
Montpellier, 8 March 
People here are very kind, but they have the most terrible 
45. Epoch was a journal edited by Dostoenky and his brother Michael 
It ran from March 1 864 to June 1865. 

288 
Pol ina Suslova's Diary 
prejudices. \\'hen I was sick, the landlady kept sitting at my 
bedside and offered her services for all kinds of things; the 
maid kept running herself off her feet doing my errands, 
which she imposed on herself, and inquired, at every oppor­
tunity, whether there wasn't something else she could run 
and get for me. I like the plain, uneducated people here 
better than the educated. It is here as everywhere: the un­
educated people arc ready to accept everything: the repre­
hensible as well as the good. l11cy respect courage, though 
they want no part of it themselves, while the educated think 
that they already know everything, that they have reached 
everything, and arc surprised by nothing. The provincials 
hate the Parisians, and this hatred reaches comic extremes, 
something like the hatred of the French for the English. 
Yesterday Gaut෋6 told me that all great minds and talents 
hale come from the provinces, that Parisians arc fools; he 
could prove to a Parisian that a book was not a hook but a 
tree, and the Parisian would agree with it. There is some­
thing spiteful, and at the same time fearful, about my 
teacher's hatred. He and ෌onsicur Chancel love and respect 
me; they speak of freedom and justice: all this is to the good, 
but what do they then say? "Believe me, all this isn't as ter­
rible as it would seem to you." 
"Yes, yes, one must be a philosopher," they say. 
"A little," I answer. 
"෍o, a lot." 
They like to sec others act freely, but they won't do it 
themselves. They love freedom platonically. 
෎fmc O[garcv] is a \cry strange woman. One time she 
wants women to live apart from men, so as not to let all the 
petty troubles of a household interfere with family life, and 
permit them to meet only during their hours of leisure 
(isn't that like a seraglio?); then again she will say that 
women should not get married at all, and, in particular, that 
passions should not exist; another time she wants to emigrate 
from Europe and form a brotherhood, but there's nobody to 
46. Jean Baptist Gaul ( 1 8 1 9-91 ) ,  French 
poet. Principal work is 
Sormcl, Sounelo el Sourraio (18i4). 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
289 
go with yet. She keeps trying to convince H[erzen] that he 
ought to get naturalized and write brochures for the French. 
Today, at last, it seems that we managed to put some sense 
into our conversation. I said that one ought to be useful in 
some way, e,·en if it was no more than teaching one muzhik 
how to reacl. She tried to prove that there was no use in that, 
because so far the muzhik had nothing to read, so he would 
forget how to read, since there were no books available to 
him. Turgenev was of no use to him, being incomprehensible 
to him. Kol'tsov47 was the only one he would understand, 
but you couldn't get very far on Kol'tsov. 
"So this means that the people must write their own 
books." 
"No, not that. What is necessary is that civilized [illegible 
word] create a model society, in which people would not get 
married in church, nor have their children christened; they 
ought to write books for the Russian people (those who have 
not forgotten the Russian language)." 
"But how will you create such a society? I'm afraid nobody 
will e\·er join it." 
"But what about Luginin and Usov?" 
I asked to be considered a candidate. But what am I going 
to do, if Luginin and Usov happen to be there, too? 
Then she asked me to get some poison for her through my 
doctor. I, being the unprejudiced, humane, and educated 
person that I am, promised her that I would do it, but I did 
not know how to approach my doctor with that kind of re­
quest; it was too embarrassing. She got it through her doctor, 
ahead of me, her doctor being a fool who did not understand 
a thing. 
Today a funny thing happened to me. 
As I was out with ƜI me O[garev], to rent a flat, I met a Pole, 
no longer a young man, who, hearing us speak Russian, 
accosted us. And the day I moved, he came in to see me, with 
no reason whatso\'er, as my door was open. I received him 
coolly, and did not see him for about two weeks. 
47. Alcxey \"asilieYich Kol'csov (1 808-42), Russian poet who drew on 
the literary tradition of folk songs. 

290 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
Today I ran into him on the stairs and greeted him, I 
think, first. He responded happily to my greeting and asked 
if he could introduce me to his wife. 
I met an elderly lady in a small room. 
As he was introducing me, I felt ill at case right away. 
"Mmc," I began, "though I am a Russian . . .  
" 
"But . . .  a liberal," said the Polc. 
"I do not share the opinions . . .  " I continued. 
"Of Mur[avicv],"4" said the lady for me; "yours is not a 
Russian soul." 
"Excuse me," I said, "always Russian." And here I sensed 
the whole :1bsurdit)" of this acquaintanceship, and hurriedly 
changed the subject. 
Mo11tpdlier, 24 April 
The other day Hault [sic] and I had a rather nice conversa­
tion. He said that Russian women were more pleasant and 
better than Russian men, the same being true of Italian 
women also. He said that every Italian political leader has a 
wom:m sitting somewhere without fail, she being his inspira­
tion. "I am in correspondence with many Russian women," 
he said, "but why is it that even the flightiest and most 
frivolous among them arc still sad inside?" 
He says that the Russian nation does not promise at all the 
kind of dcvclopmcnt Herzcn and others expect of it. That 
Rmsia, too, had her own civilization and is, in this regard, 
equal to the other countries of the \Vest, that in the French 
people also, there is a lot of untapped power. 
Then he laughed at contemporary Fr[ench] youth, their 
reasonableness, and spoke of his own generation, how they 
had so much clan and enthusiasm in their day. 
Yesterday he talked about Italian and Spanish women 
being so free that a young woman, at an evening party in 
48. đl ikha il :'IO ikolae\·ich Murnicv ( 1 796- 1 866), a gm·crnmcnt official 
who was responsible for the pacification of Poland during the uprising 
of 1 863. 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
291 
her house, would spend most of the time with a man she 
liked. All this would be noticed and found natural. Every­
body would go home, and he would stay. She would undress 
in his presence, even go Lo bed. And all this is done quite 
freely, frankly, and without any abuses. 
Yesterday I was at the fair, which has just started here. It's 
just marvellous. All kinds of show booths, swings. Some 
evening Mme Chancel's niece and I will also go swinging. 
And those show booths! Thhitre de pation, Chiens et singe 
savants,49 etc [sic] And the clowns! There is one most inter­
esting girl who danced on a platform. She danced with grace 
and animation. Later she handed out tickets, showing her 
rare good nature. All kinds of sinewy hands were stretched 
out toward her from the crowd. \Vith what friendliness she 
smiled and nodded to those whom she knew! \Vith what 
liveliness she grabbed a huge, ugly dog, kissing its muzzle. 
There was another, younger girl standing next to her, re­
sembling her and wearing the same costume (she was more 
serious and looked more like a boy). 
Montpellier, 6 May 
The other day I had an operation, which upset and fright­
ened me, especially since the doctor did not warn me before. 
Feeling that I was being cut, I got frightened, and, thinking 
that he was going to cut me some more, I begged the doctor 
to srop it, but as he refused to stop, I felt sure that he was 
going to do some more cutting. The pain, the fear, and the 
hurt at his having performed the operation without telling 
me, upset me in the extreme. I cried and sobbed. This greatly 
embarrassed and moved the docror. He consoled me and 
nearly kissed my hands, and I embraced him, I think. I soon 
recovered my composure, and when I was lying on a sofa a 
few minutes later, tired and chagrined, resigned, and silent, 
he took my hands, seeking to console me, and came so close 
to my face that I felt embarrassed and turned away. 
49. "'Dogs and clever monkeys." 

292 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
(He told me, with satisfaction, that he wouldn't cut or 
burn me anymore. This announcement made me feel very 
glad and grateful.) 
He said, as he was putting away his instruments, that after 
this operation I could have children if I got married. I said 
that I found no comfort in this. "Why so?" he asked; "all 
women want to have children." "Because I don't know how 
to bring them up," I said. The thoughts which occurred to 
me in connection with this conversation made me sad and 
caused me to shed tears, which I did not hold back. 
On the following day I met him calmly and submitted to 
his directions with my usual confidence; but when he started 
torturing me again, I thought for some reason, that he was 
going to cut me again. Despite his assertions that nothing was 
going to happen to me, I continued to beg him anxiously 
that he should leave me alone. My Aesculapian took umbrage 
at this and said: "You are refusing to accept a medical man's 
word of honor.·· There was something in his tone which 
reminded me of my physician, when he once responded to 
my remark that if we were to lock ourseh·es in together, we 
might "suffer for the sake of justice," that this would, indeed, 
mean "to suffer for the sake of justice."50 "Because all people 
are not Machia,·ellians," I answered my Aesculapian, and we 
made up right there. 
Yesterday Gaut was here and I had a sentimental discus­
sion with him: on lm·e, marriage, etc. Gaut ga\'e me a lot of 
equi\'ocal talk; it seemed to me that he was trying to sound 
me out, inquiring how many times I had been in love and 
whether I was cured of my last lo\'e. I answered him that not 
quite, )·et. Then he asked, in a roundabout way, how I in­
tended to arrange my future life, and advised me to get 
married, although only the other day he had spoken out 
against marriage. Throughout this entire conversation he 
mixed in all kinds of stories and witticisms, and in conclusion 
suggested that I rely on him, if I should need any advice, etc. 
He told me some time ago that though marriage was a 
50. A quoution from Gogol's Dead Souls, ironic of course.-Trans­
lator 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
293 
useful institution, it was no good for some people, especially 
those who had known the taste of freedom; that marriage 
was good for a man who owned property and was engaged in 
agriculture, but that a man who supported himself by mental 
work, who wanted to sec and learn a lot, should not be tied 
down. "And love," he said, "passion, what are they? Just a 
needless scandal. Engage yourself in literature, surround 
yourself with sensible people, that's all." 
I agreed with him. And then, on the next day, my teacher, 
who adores his young wife and their child, told me that 
happiness could be found in love only. They arc all con­
tradicting each other. \Vhom should I listen to? Yesterday 
Gaut told me that I ought to get married, only not for pas­
sion; that J ought to select a man with mental, moral, and 
physical qualities, and with a position in society. 
Perhaps he is right, perhaps, if J got married in this 
fashion, I would not be too far removed from his program 
for an intellectual life; but be this as it may, and no matter 
what the meaning of his words might be, I shall not sur­
render cheaply. 
Tuesday, 17 .May 
"Life is a most amusing joke, once you have tried it. You 
look, and you sec that it's had. BLH then you think, no, that 
isn't it, I've been too rash, too quick, and the next time a man 
will no longer be either rash or quick," says Gaut. "And you, 
like everybody else, you'll deceive others, and will be de­
ceived by them." 
27 [May] 
Today Gaut explained to me why the houses on Espelani are 
so low. It is because they are across from the citadel built 
during the reign of Louis XIII. 

294 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
Zurich 29 June 
Today I watched a kind of national festival, a meeting of 
riflemen. The first to tell me about ·it was the old man who 
works in the circulation department of the library, as I was 
leaving there. Then, when I went4'Jown, I met Verigo,fit 
who explained it to me and offered to watch it with me. This 
gentleman has been somehow especially attentive toward 
me for a long time, ever since I arrived here. Once, at tea, 
when I ordered wine and was served water instead, I did not 
want to embarrass the waitress hut to show her that it was ex­
actly what I had wanted, but I did not know what to do with 
the water, since I did not feel like drinking it at all. Then, 
he boldly poured himself a full glass, gave me an expressive 
look, and drank it niT at one draft. Fortunately, no one saw it. 
Today, having had our fill of watching the riflemen and then 
the mountains, we went for a cup of tea together. As we were 
leaving the dining room after tea, I suggested to [Miss] 
Knia1lmin that we take a walk. She joined me and said that 
V. would he coming with [us], hut that he needed to drop 
in at his laboratory first; we went together. In the laboratory, 
he showed me all kinds of things, some very beautiful sub­
stance, and then he produced some artificial lighting. I kept 
heg,t෠ing him not to do anything dangerous, saying that I was 
a coward. He said that there was nothing dangerous about it. 
I believed him and stayed next to him, whereas [Miss] 
K[nialhnin], a chemist, ran away, and when there was a bang, 
I grabbed his hand ami drew hack quickly. 
Zurich, 2i June 
One day we were all at the riflemen's festival. At a station 
along the way, some children who had missed their train 
were crying. I watched them with some anxiety. A young 
51 . .-\ ld.sandr Andrcc\·ich Vcrigo (183.3- 1905), a chemist and professor 
at Odessa Uni\ crsity. 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
295 
man who was sitting across from me said, to reassure me, that 
he would soon move to a different carriage. I have constant 
arguments with the girls; when we were in Geneva it was the 
same way . . .  
Yesterday, as I was telling them about some Americans 
who travel all over Europe on foot, they said that this was 
stupid, that it was unnecessary to know a country, or to see 
its sights. After that, I wanted to leave, but it did not work 
out, and why, really? . . .  The wife of my neighbor, the doctor, 
keeps talking about the natural sciences, but tolerates only 
inferior painting. She says that there is nothing in historical 
painting, and that no one can understand it. \\'ho, then, can 
understand a person who does not understand grief [illegible] 
of whom my Spanish friend made a drawing? 
"How do you mean that, you can't study a country?" 
"Of course, without the natural sciences you can do 
nothing." 
Zurich, 30 june 
Yesterday Lidenka and I went for a walk. She keeps talking 
about her nonsense; I regret that l argued against it. She 
asked me to stop and look at some pictures. I pointed the 
Venus de Milo out to her, and slw turned away disdainfully, 
meaning that this was art, which must be rejected, whereas 
views of Switzerland on penny postcards-there you have 
your famous nineteenth-century women. "Hey, you, son-of­
a-bitch, kamarinsky muzhik."52 Rien n'est sacre pour un 
tapeur.53 
Spa, 17 September 1865 
I arrived here only yesterday, coming from Paris, which I 
left for good, having stayed there en route for three weeks. 
52. The first line of a popular Russian song, proverbial for its vulgar­
ity.-Translator 
53. "Nothing is sacred for a chronic borrower." 

296 
Pol ina Suslova's Diary 
I won't say that it was easy for me. Usov offered to escort me 
to the railway station, and I accepted his offer very gladly: I 
was afraid of being alone during those last minutes. And so, 
I have left Paris, I have torn it from my heart by the roots, 
and I think that I have acted honestly toward myself, and 
with resolution. In the evening of the day before yesterday 
I cried desperately, and I had not thought that I would have 
the courage for those tears. Yesterday I arrived here, very 
tired, flung myself on my bed and for the first time after 
the three "·ccks in Par[iව] slept soundly and peacefully. As I 
woke up, I saw a clear sky, and greenery, with joy . . .  
Along the way I thought of my future and decided that I 
should live in a prov[incial] to[wn], have my own circle, 
organize a private school on the model of antiquity, but not 
in Petersburg, for it is better to be important in the country, 
etc., not [just to exist] in the country and die of boredom. 
In this way, the wolves will cat, while the sheep stay hcalthy.5ශ 
That"s decided, then. Stand still at this point and stick to this 
line. 
I"ll tell what happened in Paris. Having arrived, with 
my sister, I called for my physician, without any particular 
end in mind, mo\cd simply by my desire to sec him. He 
came immediately. I w;p; on the balcony when he came in . 
.\fy si•acr was in our room. Hearing somebody come, I turned 
around ;md at first failed to recognize him. Having recog­
nized him, I qui<kly walked up to him and cordially stretched 
out [my hand to him]. \\'c spoke of all and sundry. I told 
him about Gaut, told him that I was going to live with my 
cats and plant potatoes myself, inasmuch as flowers won't 
grow in Russia. Then he came another time and disappeared 
for a week. Finally, he showed up, saying that he had been 
ill. \\"c talked about important people and about art; how­
C\ Cr, my sister and I did most of the talking. He sided with 
me rather than with her. I felt so sirk and tired of these 
con\"Crsations that I ran out, letting them finish the talk. 
During all these visits he kept looking for an opportunity 
5-t. A Russian pro\"Crh suggt.-sting a happy com promise.-Translator 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
297 
to speak to me alone, but I did not want to and my sister 
never left us alone. Once in the evening he asked what kind 
of a balcony we had and went out to take a look, but I did 
not follow him. Then he came on the following day. I told 
him a hit of news, my eyes red with weeping. v\'hcn he came 
the next time, I was very sad; I had decided to leave and was 
writing him a letter asking him to come to say good-bye. 
He noticed that I was upset; I said that I was not quite 
myself and for a long time could not tell him the reason. He 
kept pestering me, asking if he couldn"t help in any way, 
saying that he was ready to do anything for me, but I re­
fused; finally I said that I was lca,·ing. He [asked] when, 
etc. 
"Since I am not going to sec you, and you won"t let me 
hear from you . . .  " he started. I sat down by the window, 
sad and resigned. 
"Strange thing," he said. "Sometimes people arc like chil­
dren, now looking for each other, now hiding again, as in 
some fairy talc. There he is, looking, while she is hiding; 
there, again, it is she who is looking-and so they never find 
each other." 
Then he walked up to me, agitated, and stretched out his 
hands. I gave him mine. A familiar fire ran through my 
,·cins, blll I was holding his hands firmly and did not let 
him come ncar me. He was all excited and was devouring 
me with his eyes. 
"Sit down," I said to him, in a gentle and sad voice. 
"No," he answered abruptly, pressing my hands convul-
sively. 
"Sit down," I repeated. 
'Til sit down, if you'll sit down," he said. 
\\'e sat down on the sofa, our eyes met, and we embraced. 
'Ve sat like that for about two hours. His arms were around 
my waist, and I pressed his head to my breast. I stroked his 
hair and kissed his forehead. We talked all kinds of light­
hearted nonsense, no worries or doubts of any sort entered 
my mind. Then I drO\·e over to the Co[untess's]. He accompa­
nied me. As we were sitting in the carriage hand in hand, I 

298 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
felt that his love was not a good one, if this can be called 
love. \\'c got up. \\'e parted in the park. Having walked a 
considerable distance I turned around and saw him stand­
ing there, following me with his eyes, but it was a farce, and 
an awkward one, in fact. He came the next night. There 
was no limit to his rapture and passion, and I surrendered 
to these moments without any anxiety or doubt. 
He wanted more than that, but 1 wouldn't let it happen, 
and he saw his mistake. 1 said that 1 was leaving. My de­
parture was postponed only until the following day, a Thurs­
day. He came on the next day, that is, Wednesday, showed 
himself remorseful and apologized for what had happened. 
He said that he is incapable of love, that he was not created 
for it, that he wouldn't want any circumstances or feelings 
to govern his life, etc., etc. 
1 postponed my departure for another day, until Friday; 
on Thurෂlay 1 expected the Countess, who had promised 
to sec me to the station. 1 was at her place on the morning of 
that day. For a farewell, she gave me some friendly, motherly 
advice. Tired of strange people, who were all trying to take 
advantage of me, each in his own interest, I was deeply 
moved. "Don't forget God, Polinka," she said, "that will 
give you strength: "''ithout that, you'll be in a bad way. You 
sec where people get to without it . . .  " I could not restrain 
myself, but dropped on my knees before her and began to 
sob aloud. She was frightened and wanted to get me a glass 
of water. "No, no," I said, "forget it; I feel good this way." 
And I was sobbing on her breast and kissing her hands. 
"1 am too unhappy," 1 told her. 
"Polinka," she answered, "who isn't unhappy? just ask if 
there is a single happy woman among those who have loved." 
On Thursday she came to my place, and we had another 
farewell scene, which upset me so much that I fell ill and was 
fon-cd to postpone my departure another day. 
He came in the evening, on Thursday. Usov was there, at 
my place. Usov wouldn't leave, and he had to go away with­
out seeing me alone. 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
299 
"I am not saying good-bye to you yet," he said as he left, 
"I hope to see you tomorrow." 
"I don't know whether you will find me still here," I said 
to him, rather coolly. 
"\Veil, I shall try to sec you somehow," he said rather 
i nsistcntly. 
He came in the evening of the following day. I was glad, 
nor did I conceal it. I greeted him cheerfully and asked him 
to sit down, thinking that he would sit down not on a chair, 
but next to me. I was sitting on the edge of the sofa, with its 
other half blocked by the table. He asked me to move a bit on 
the sofa, so there would be some space for him ncar me. I 
did that. He took my hands, I said that I still did not know 
if I was going to leave on the next day, since I still felt ill. He 
suggested that I stay. I said that I would be staying at Spa, 
waiting for some money. I lc asked why not in Paris. Tea was 
scr\'cd. Casually, I offered him some. He was almost going to 
accept. "All right, let's play the role of cool heroes," he said. 
"Why keep wringing your hands?" I retorted. 
He was stung to the quick by my reticence. I drank up my 
cup alone. He began to say something. 
"Listen," I began, "why did you, at the time when I was 
sad, express your readiness to help and to do anything to 
straighten out the thing, if ever possible?" 
"I was ready to do anything." 
"\Veil, what did you do?" 
"I thought that I would help you with my sympathy, my 
understanding." 
"I never begged for your charity]" 
"My God, what terrible words you're saying!" 
"\'\'hy did you go this far, if you don't love me?" 
"I went as far as my love and my feeling for you told me 
to go, but I was quite wrong. I thought that I was going to 
help you, and I made it worse. I thought that I would be 
loved, without anything being demanded of me, that I would 
be loved the way I wanted: today I want it this way, so it will 
be this way, tomorrow I'll want it different, and that's what 

300 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
it is going to be. It is always that way in love. There's one who 
loves, and there are others who are loved. 
"But what egoists all people arel Everybody loves only for 
his own sake. I had thought that you had some feeling for 
me, but I was Y.Tong." 
I was struck by his words. He wanted to take my hands, but 
I would not let him. 
"Leave me alone," I said; "sit further away, go away." 
"\Vhat does this mean?" he said; "why is this, you loved 
me before, didn't you? I haven't changed a bit." 
"You are saying terrible things." 
"\Vhat is it, then, I told you?" 
"To approach a woman like this, without loving her." 
"Oh, my God, but aren't these all merely conventional 
phrases? How often another man, in my place, would have 
said that he lo\'cd you? I like you very much in many re­
spects, and we shouldn't hate the people who love us." 
"Go away, go away," I said. 
"\\'hy? What's so terrible about what I said?" And he kept 
pestering me with these questions, but I was unable to say 
anything. I turned away, moved over to the side, while he 
was trying to justify himself. My heart was heavy, I wanted 
to justify him in my own eyes. 
"My God, what is this?" I said; "either I am sick, or I want 
to decci\'c myself." I impetuously took his hands and burst 
into tears. "Embrace me as firmly as you can," I told him, 
"and then go." I wanted to forget myself for one minute, to 
think that he loved me. 
"Shall I come to sec you tomorrow?" he asked. 
"No, don't," I answered, bathed in tears, ''I'm leaving 
tomorrow." 
I pushed him away, then drew him to me again, crying 
bitterly. 
"Kiss me," he said. 
"No, no." 
'Til come tomorrow." 
"Don't." 
"Let me kiss your hand." 

Polina Suslova's Diary 
301 
"No, no." 
And we parted. I kept on crying for a long time, and I felt 
worse than before, but I decided to leave, and I left. 
At that time of grief and despair I thought a lot about 
Gaut, and perhaps this thought, the certitude of his friend­
ship, sympathy, and understanding, saved me. Sure of it, I 
felt as though I stc d outside this wretched life and was 
capable of rising above it. Only here I came to appreciate the 
true value of the friendship and respect of people who go 
beyond common standards, and in the security of this friend­
ship I found courage and self-respect. \Viii my pride ever 
desert me? No, this couldn't be. I'd rather die. Better die of 
grief, but free, independent of things external, true to one's 
convictions, and return one's soul to God as pure as it was, 
rather than make concessions, even for a moment allow one­
self to be touched by base and unworthy things, but I find life 
so coarse and so sad that I bear it with difficulty. My God, is it 
always going to be this way! \Vas it worth while to have 
been born! 
Petersburg, 2 November 
Today F[yodor] M[ikhailovich] was here and we argued and 
contradicted each other all the time. For a long time now he 
has been offering me his hand and his heart, and he only 
makes me angry doing so. Speaking of my character, he said: 
"If you were to get married, you'd begin to hate your hus­
band three days later, and leave him." Remembering Gaut, I 
said that he was the only man I knew who did not try to get 
somewhere with me. He said, in his usual manner: "This 
Gaut may have been trying it, too." Then he added: "Some 
day I am going to tell you something." I began pestering him 
to tell me what. "You can't forgive me that you gave yourself 
to me, and so you are avenging yourself; that's a feminine 
trait." This upset me very much. While A. Osip. was present, 
he asked me to come to the theater with them. I said: ''I'm 
not going to the theater with you, since I've never been there 

302 
Polina Suslova's Diary 
with you before; you can ascribe this whim to the reason 
which you pointed out to me earlier." "Are you agreeing?" 
he said. "What do I care? I am neither agreeing nor dis­
agreeing with anything, but you with your subtle reasoning 
will of course find it necessary to think so." 
Yesterday I visited with Piotr Ivanovich. He was extraordi­
narily kind to me. 
6 November 
F[yodor] සf(ikhailovich] was here. The three of us, he, A. 0., 
and I, talked for a long time. I said that I was going to be­
come a holy woman, that I would walk through the Kremlin 
gardens in Moscow in my bare feet, telling people that I was 
having conversations with angels, etc. I talked a lot. And 
this 0., who believes that oil flowed from the icon of the 
Holy Virgin and who won't cat meat on Wednesdays, said in 
the end: "That's exactly what Filipp Dcmidov said, but he 
later admitted that he had been talking through his hat." 
This struck me. The idea occurred to me how quickly and 
how easily one can become a source of annoyance to these 
people. The idea occurred to me to write a story on this 
theme. 

The 
Stranger and Her 
Lover 
Polina Suslova 


T
he Moscow-Petersburg train flew 
along rapidly, new stations quickly 
appeared, as did new passengers, and 
yet Losnitsky had the feeling that the train was making only 
very slow progress. He was tired of the road, and under­
standably so, for he had been traveling for five weeks without 
ever taking a rest, by stagecoach, by steamship, and now, 
finally, by train. Losnitsky did not .vant to stop anywhere 
along the way. He raced along seeking to escape, as though 
it were a band of pursuers, the black depression which 
pursued and drove him along on his journey. He had 
planned on staying in Moscow for a week, but he was over­
come by a terrible heartache as he saw his native city, those 
streets and houses which he had frequented years ago, when 
he had been a free and passionate youth, full of bold plans 
and expectations. He took a cab straight to his hotel, which 
he did not leave until the very hour when he could catch the 
first train for Petersburg. As he was driven from one end of 
town to the other, he looked through the window of his 
carriage morosely and yet timidly, while his heart ached 
sorely and feelings of doubt and discontent filled his soul. 
Now there remained only a few more stations to Peters­
burg. Losnitsky turned away from his fellow travelers, who 
were discussing the convenience of railway travel, and looked 
out the window. Various thoughts were rapidly going 
through his mind, and there was one that came back re-
305 

306 
Polina Suslova 
peatcdly: "How is she going to receive me? Docs she still love 
me? And what if she no longer loves me?" They had not seen 
each other for scYcn months. Many a change might have 
taken place in her during those seven months, what with her 
imagination, and new fares, new impressions. Could one 
count on the comtanry of the love of a twenty-two-year-old 
woman, passionate and energetic as she was? \<Vhat if she 
had fallen in Joyc with another man? \Vhat then? Why, she 
would follow the other man and go away somewhere; she 
could gu, too, for she was free. But who was he? \Vhat did he 
ha\"c to capture her heart? She doesn't yield it easily. He 
would ha,·c to he \"cry bright, bold, young . . .  And how she 
could love! And once she loved, she would never waver for a 
moment . . .  
But there was the last station; the end of the journey was 
ncar; there was Petersburg. His heart was pounding, slow 
and hard. "A few more hours, and I shall embrace her. Right 
now, at this moment, I couldn't sec her, it is early, and, bc­
ුidcs. I need ෕omc rest . . .  " He arrived at the hotel, placed his 
suitl ase and traveling bag in the middle of the room, and 
flung hiූ topcoat and hat on the sofa. Losnitsky paced his 
rom with rapid steps. "I ought to get some rest, I absolutely 
should, l"\"c got a headache, my nerves arc in bad shape." Los­
nitsky lay down on the sofa, but he could not sleep; his mind 
wandered. "\\'hat's that noise in the corridor? \Vhcre docs 
that squeak}· female voice come from, that slamming of 
doors? How early they get up! And why? \Vho arc my neigh­
bors? The sounds of a conversation, the crying of a child, 
and the clatter of tea things come from their room. Should 
I ha\"c some tea? :1\'o, better wait, I don't want any now . . .  
She has probably changed. One can sec from her letters that 
she has become more serious. That last letter was strange. 
She must have been under the influence of some special 
impression. She writes that she had been thinking of the 
past and had been depressed . . .  Depressed about what? 
About there having been none, or about what had been? . . .  
Again people running down the corridor and the slamming 
of doors. :\lust be that somebody is leaving. But how un-

The Stranger and Her Lover 
307 
pleasant, how noisy it is in a hotel. And how noisy it is in the 
streets here. When I used to live in Moscow, on Nikitskaia 
Street, it was almost the same thing, yet at the same time, 
somehow, one did not notice it. One would get absorbed in 
one's books, and everything would disappear before one's 
eyes, with the mind alone working. And what thoughts I 
had then! \Vhat boldness! '"'hat ardor! Now it is no longer 
the same thing . . .  And yet, that was not very long ago." 
Losnitsky tried to focus his attention upon his neighbors, 
who were now producing twice as much clatter with their 
tea things, but in vain-his mood was becoming more 
troubled and depressed than before. He gave free rein to the 
stream of his thoughts. That familiar depression had seized 
him with greater force. Losnitsky did not try to dispel it, 
either; on the contrary, in a certain irritable way, and with 
a kind of morbid pleasure, he was intoxicated by it. A feeling 
of regret about the past, a fear of losing that which was still 
left him, an awareness of a certain debility gripped his soul. 
Time went by; it struck twelve. Losnitsky was still lying 
on his sofa, staring at the ceiling. Another hour went by. 
Losnitsky finally got up and began to get dressed. His 
thoughts were now concentrated on a single subject; the 
knowledge that the things which until now he had dreamed 
about so often were soon going to become reality caused his 
former impatience and restlessness to return. It was about 
two o'clock when Losnitsky found himself standing at the 
entrance of a rather small house in one of the remote parts 
of the city, ringing the bell impatiently. An old maidservant 
opened the door and measured him with a suspicious and 
displeased glance. 
"Is Anna Pavlovna at home?" Losnitsky asked her. 
"Yes, she is," she answered laconically and conducted him 
through a small antechamber into an empty drawing room. 
Losnitsky took a seat in an armchair by a round table and 
anxiously looked at the closed door leading into the interior 
rooms. His anxiety was rising with every moment. But this 
was not the excitement of a youth in whom the transition 
from hope to doubt will find such vivid expression, whose 

308 
Polina Suslova 
sufferings are so lively as to evoke sympathy; there was some­
thing strange about the excitement of a man tried by toil and 
suffering; in him, even an expression of joy would be some­
how morbid, while doubt and sorrow, instead of giving rise 
to tempestuous grief would find their expression in sup-. 
pressed and gloomy suffering. 
Some ten minutes passed while Losnitsky sat there in com­
plete silence. Those ten minutes seemed terribly long to him, 
beads of cold perspiration stood out on his forehead, his 
face assumed that somber, tense expression so unpleasant to 
look at. 
But then the rustle of a woman's dress was heard in the 
next room, and the sound of steps; the door was quickly 
opened, and a young, beautiful woman entered. Her face 
was very pale. Anxiety and mental suffering were written on 
it, and there was a touch of embarrassment and shyness about 
her every move, but unconquerable strength and passion 
were also apparent in her gentle and kind features. A deep, 
though not always ,-isible impression of the fateful fanaticism 
which distinguishes the faces of madonnas and Christian 
martyrs lay upon that face. For a moment all doubts and 
suppositions that were in Losnitsky's mind were scattered 
by a feeling of joy at seeing her. 
He stepped forward to meet her and extended his hands 
to her. Carried away by a feeling of gratitude and joy, she 
made a move to give him hers, but then drew them back and 
covered her face with them. 
"Anna, what is the matter with you?" he exclaimed, 
startled by this move. 
"\\'hy have you come?" she said, with anguish. 
"Why?! \\'hat are you saying?" 
He was all eyes as he looked at her, seeking to make out 
the meaning of her words, while a realization of that meaning 
was already affecting his heart with insufferable pain. She 
took his hand and led him to the sofa, on which they sat 
down next to each other. For a while they remained silent. 
"Didn't you receive my letter, the one in which I wrote 

The Stranger and Her Lover 
309 
you that you shouldn't come?" she began, without looking 
at him, but holding his hand firmly. 
"I shouldn't come? . . .  Why?" 
"Because it is too late," she uttered, abruptly. 
"Too latel" Losnitsky repeated mechanically, as every­
thing went dark before his eyes. He did not say a word for 
some time. 
"Anna," he began, after a long and heavy silence, "I must 
know everything, tell me everything, if you don't want to 
kill me." 
"Yes, yes, you arc right," she said, struck by his grief and 
by a certain inner bewilderment; "you and I must talk every­
thing over, and as soon as possible, but not here, because my 
aunt may come in at any moment. Shall we go to your place, 
where arc you staying?" 
And, without waiting for his reply, she left the room and 
returned a few minutes later, wearing her hat and mantilla. 
They left the house. The carriage which had brought Losnit­
sky was waiting at the entrance. They got in and drove away. 
It was a rather long way, along the main thoroughfares. 
Losnitsky and Anna remained silent the whole time. The 
young woman sat motionless, looking out of the window and 
without once releasing his hand. Her face was pale, yet calm 
and serious. Leaning back in the corner of the carriage, 
Losnitsky sat there looking crushed, but from time to time 
he quivered and pressed Anna's hand convulsively. Half an 
hour passed in this fashion. Finally they arrived. Losnitsky 
stepped from the carriage, offered his arm to his companion, 
and escorted her into the hotel. A servant whom they met in 
the corridor started to grin at the sight of the pretty young 
woman, but when he saw their faces, quickly turned away 
and slipped into his corner. Losnitsky and Anna entered the 
hotel room. Anna wanted to say something, but Losnitsky 
interrupted her. 
"I have lost youl" he exclaimed and, falling to her feet, 
burst into tears. 
The young woman comforted him gently and sadly, but 

310 
Polina Suslova 
for a long time his painful sobs shattered her soft words, 
breaking the hearts of both. 
"\Veil, now tell me," he said, having overcome the first fits 
of grief, as he sat next to her on the sofa and looked at her 
sad and severe face with an expression of infinite, almost 
fatherly tenderness. 
"There's nothing to tell," she said quietly; "I love another 
man, that's all.'" He broke into convulsive laughter. 
"And I, fool that I am, imagine, my dear, I was in such a 
hurry, thinking that I would spend the Christmas holidays 
with you, that I would have a good time here-that's right. 
But that"s Fate for you, isn't it." Again he began to laugh, but 
a moment later his sense of grief returned to him with full 
force. Losnitsky sighed and released Anna's hand. 
"Has it been long-?"" he asked after a brief silence. 
"Just recently . . .  unexpectedly, we have known each 
other ever since I arrived here, but I did not think . . .  I was 
still waiting for you," she said quickly, turning toward him, 
and an expression of melancholy irony Oashcd across her 
face. "It is only since he told me that he loved me that I lost 
my head.'" 
"\\'ho is he? Is he the one you've been telling me about in 
your letters?"' 
"My singing teacher." 
"That Italian?" 
"\' es." 
"\\'ell, what about him-is he young, brilliant, hand­
some?" 
"\Yhy must you ask these questions?" said the young 
woman, as her checks Oushcd crimson. 
"\\'hy, indeed," he said with a smile. A few moments 
passed in silence. Losnitsky looked at Anna with a kind of 
naive, almost childlike curiosity, trying to detect any marks 
of the past in her. She was still the same, even her hair and 
her dress were the same. The only new thing he noticed was a 
ring she was wearing, and his attention turned to it involun­
tarily. "His gift to her," Losnitsky thought, and, without 

The Stranger and Her Lover 
31 1 
asking a question, merely gave her a look. She understood 
what he was thinking, and blushed. 
"Do you love him very much, Anna?" he asked. 
"Yes," she said pensively. 
"I knew it, it couldn't have been otherwise, I was just ask­
ing . . .  Have you given yourself to him, Anna? Does he see 
you every day?" 
The young woman quickly raised her head. Red spots 
broke out on her cheeks, her eyes flashed under a frown, her 
whole figure changed, suddenly and sharply, transformed by 
anger. 
"Not a word more," she whispered abruptly. 
"Anna," he said fervently, clutching her hand, "you cannot 
suspect me of a vile thought, for I have loved you with a 
pure and infinite love; you know that, besides my passion for 
you, I also cherish you as a dear friend, as a daughter, and 
that your happiness is foremost in my mind." 
He was sincere when he said this; she knew it and pressed 
his hand warmly. 
"You are happy, aren't you, Anna?" 
She did not answer, as though she had not heard his ques­
tion, but the muscles of her face twitched slightly. 
"Can it be that you are not? Oh, Anna, can that be pos­
sible? Tell me, for heaven's sake, I must know." 
"I don't know," she said, barely able to suppress her agita­
tion; "it seems to me that he does not love me very much." 
"He does not love you!" Losnitsky exclaimed indignantly. 
"He does not love you, yet he has been seeking your love!" 
He clutched his head in desperation and began to run up 
and down the room. 
"Listen, Anna," he said, almost beside himself with excite­
ment, "why, aren't you as free as ever, even with him; you 
don't love him as though you were his slave, do you? No, 
that's impossible, I shouldn't be asking that. And how could 
you become so hopelessly infatuated? He must be a very 
good talker. Is he proud and bold?" 
Anna gave a strange smile. 

312 
Polina Suslova 
"He is very young," she said, "he is not fancy in his speech. 
\-\'hen I met him for the first time, I said to myself that this 
man could not tell a lie, and this is true." 
"What is he doing here?" 
"He is still a student, and later he will go abroad." 
"And you will go with him? Oh, of course, you'll follow 
him anywhere, to the end of the world." 
'Til join my uncle in the country," said Anna, bursting 
into tears. 
"Oh, Anna, why are you so unhappy!" 
They sat together for some time after that, talking about 
irrelevant matters. Anna told him about life in Petersburg, 
about the people she had met, asked him about former 
friends, and listened with great interest, although he did not 
go into any details. Her own opinions were somewhat harsh, 
for she was no model of moderation either in praise or in 
censure. 
"You are still the same," said Losnitsky, listening to her. 
"You will have a hard time living with people, you get car­
ried away too easily, you are too trustful. You will have to 
suffer a lot, Anna!" 
"Let it be,'" she said; "let me be wrong again and again, I 
still won't stop having faith in people. There must be good 
and kind people somewhere." 
"They are all kind, Anna! Have you ever seen any evil 
people? But what help is all that kindness?" 
Anna raised her head and looked at him with astonished, 
almost frightened eyes. Then she fell to thinking and re­
mained silent the rest of the time. 
\\'hen she had left and Losnitsky was alone again, he flung 
himself on the sofa and lay there all evening, as if he were 
dead. His consciousness, having wandered about that infinite 
empty space which his future presented to him, finally lost 
itself. Black night spread out before his eyes and took posses­
sion of everything. Losnitsky was not trying to fight oblivion; 
on the contrary, he wanted it to last as long as possible, so 
that dawn would not creep up on him and strike him with 
the sight of that desert. 

The Stranger and Her Lover 
313 
On the following day Losnitsky stayed home all day, ex­
pecting Anna, who had promised to come in the morning, 
but failed to come. The next morning he received a note 
from her, in which she invited him to her house, telling him 
that she was slightly ill. Losnitsky immediately went to see 
her. Anna received him in her room. The young woman 
looked a little pale and perturbed, but appeared to be in 
good health otherwise. \Vhen Losnitsky inquired about her 
health, she gave him a casual answer and quickly changed 
the subject. But Losnitsky was in no mood to speak of irrele­
vant matters and even seemed irritated. 
"Better tell me about yourself," he said, "we won't be 
together for long." 
"\Vhy, are you leaving already?" 
"\Vhat am I to do here? I came here only for your sake." 
The young woman could not suppress a sigh. 
"You will be writing me, Anna, just as before, won't you? 
\Ve are still friends, aren't we?" 
"Oh, yes," she said, stretching out her hand to him. "\Vhy 
are you so gloomy?" she asked; "are you angry with me? I 
can't help it, can I?" 
"I know, I know everything, but that is not the point. I 
hurt, Anna; it isn't easy for me to get rid of a feeling. I am 
no longer a young man, at my age one does not play with 
one's affections. You have meant a lot to me. Your love de­
scended upon me like a gift from God, against all hope and 
expectation, when I was weary and desperate. This young 
life at my side promised me so much and has already given 
me so much. It has resurrected my faith and what remained 
of my former strength. 
"You've really put it to good use," thought Anna, but she 
said nothing. 
He continued: 
"I had nothing left from my earlier, tempestuous life, and 
in you I found everything. I saw your deep devotion and 
thought that I was not going to outlive it. I believed in it, 
devoutly, unalterably, and never thought that half a year of 
separation might destroy everything . . .  However, it is my 

314 
Polina Suslova 
own fault," he continued after a moment's rcOection, "I got 
<·arricd away too much, I forgot myself, now i t  is all dear 
to me: )·ou never loved me. Don't give me that severe look, 
Anna, I'm tell i ng )OU the tru th. I saw your sufferings, your 
tramport.s., but it wasn't I whom you loved, but someone else 
within me. I told you even t hen that I was not worthy of 
)'OU. The time had <·omc for you to love, there was nobody 
around, I happened to be available, and you believed that 
you h;HI found wha t you needed. I w<1s unable to grasp this 
in time, I W<t s too blinded, too happy . . .  \Veil, then," he 
rontinucd, <t fter a few momcms of thought <tnd as though 
t<ēlking to himself, "I am still <thc;td; I've had a year of hap­
pines!>, and what happiness!" 
"I mmt ask you for !;Omcthing, Anna," he continued, after 
th inking for a long while; "you sec, my dear, my life is fin­
ished ; I h;t\·cn't lived it well. I never could manage myself, 
bm now it i' too late for theĎ rcOections, it's no good, there 
is noth ing clď for me to CXJlC<Đt. You know, Anna, you are 
the only perwn I 've got in the whole world. I would like to 
gin· you wha t  is left of my l i fe. Listen, J>erhaps some day I 
m;•y he of some service to you, one never knows what can 
hapJ>en. You arc only j ust l>eginning your life. Not when 
you arc happy, hut when doubt and sorrow come your way, 
when there is no one else do!;C to you, will you <·omc to me, 
;1!> to a friend, as to a brother? . .  .'' 
"Yes, res," !ktid the đ·otmg woman, with an animation 
wh ich mggcsted that she rea lly considered him her friend, 
and perhaps her on I) friend. Losnitsky was moved by this. For 
a long time he looked at this bea uti ful woman, grief-stricken, 
yet at the same time full of a certa in fa ith in the future and 
in all that she felt was beautiful and j ust. A deep sadness took 
posscs.Ēion of his heart. 
"There is something wrong with )OU," he said after a long 
silence; "you arc gric,·ing or wondering at something." 
"It's noth i ng;· she said softly, wi thout looking at him. 
He ga\·e her an iment look. 
"Did you see him yesterday?" 
"l'o." 

"Why not?" 
The Stranger and Her Lover 
3I5 
She gave no answer, struggling with her agitation. 
"He isn't here . . .  He left," she finally said, in desperation, 
and the tears gushed from her eyes. 
"What! He left! Without saying good-bye?" 
Anna quickly raised her head at this exclamation, and the 
tears stopped in her eyes. She gave Losnitsky a calm and cool 
look. 
"Why should you cry, then?" Losnitsky said drily, offended 
by her proud gesture. "Surely he will return.'' 
"Oh, naturally," she said with fervor, "Only I cannot 
understand what business he has Lo take care of. He was in 
such a hurry, he wrote me barely a few words, which make 
no sense to me." 
"A man may ha\'c all kinds of business." 
Losnitsky got up and began pacing up and down the room. 
Apparently he felt troubled. 
"It looks strange to me, Anna," he said, finally, stopping 
in front of her, "very strange. In such a short time, as you 
say . . .  And there, suddenly, he has left, for an unknown 
dcstina Lion and period of time." 
"He is very young," she said, "and besides he docs not 
know how much I love him.'' 
Losnitsky sighed and again started walking up and down 
the room. 
"Good-bye, Anna!" he said suddenly, stopping before her. 
"\\Thy, arc you leaving already?" 
"Yes, it's time for me to go . . .  I've got some business to 
take care or; I m liSt write a few letters." 
"\Veil, good-bye. \\'ill you come tomorrow?" 
"Yes.'' 
They parted. Losnitsky returned to his hotel. His room 
seemed insufferably boring and repulsive to him. Unable to 
get down to work, or lo concentrate on any thought, he just 
kept pacing up and down his room, then took his hat, went 
out and roamed the streets of the city quite aimlessly, with­
out stopping or looking at anything. In the evening he re­
turned, tired and downcast, lay down on his sofa and stayed 

316 
Polina Suslova 
that way all evening, staring at the ceiling and giving a deep 
sigh now and then. 
On the following day Losnitsky did not want to go to 
Anna, but then could not restrain himself and paid her a 
visit in the afternoon. He found her at home and alone. She 
seemed sadder than usual but was trying to appear calm. 
Losnitsky observed her and began to feel sorry for her. It was 
the first time that he experienced this feeling toward her, and 
it annoyed him. In order to divert Anna somehow, Losnitsky 
suggested that they go to the opera. She immediately agreed. 
The music left a deep impression on Anna. The young 
woman became animated and reminded Losnitsky of herself 
as he had known her before. And once again he felt himself 
defeated and worshiped her. 
Several days went by. 
One morning Losnitsky had just awakened and was still 
lying in bed, when somebody knocked on his door. 
"\Vho is there?" he shouted, without getting up. 
"It is I," a soft voice answered. 
Losnitsky's heart stood still. 
"Anna! "  he exclaimed, refusing to believe his own cars. 
"Yes . . .  open up quickly." 
Losnitsky quickly jumped out of bed, dressed hurriedly, 
and opened the door. Anna entered. She removed her veil, 
and Losnitsky shuddered at the sight of her face. It was 
deathly pale and sc,·crc, the lips pressed together, the eyes 
looking straight ahead, but with an expression of horror and 
madness. 
"\\'hat is the matter with you, Anna?" Losnitsky ex­
claimed. 
"Nothing," she answered slowly, in a slightly breaking 
voice. "I must speak to you; you must come to my place, 
howe,·cr, for I cannot stay here. Good-bye. Come then." 
"I'll come, I'll come." 
She turned around and left the room. Her sudden ap­
pearance left Losnitsky thunderstruck. For some time he 
stood there, rooted to the spot, racking his brains in an effort 
to explain it all; then he began to dress hurriedly. His hands 

The Stranger and Her Lover 
317 
anJ feet were trembling and his heart was pounding hard, 
when he stepped from his cab in front of the house where 
Anna lived. He had a foreboding of evil, but everything was 
peaceful and quiet in the house as before. Hහ did not have 
to wait long for Anna. She entered fully dtessed, though it 
was still very early, and seemed calm, even cheerful. 
"I did not expect you to come so soon," she began. 
"I rushed here because, frankly, you frightened me. I am 
glad that I find you so calm . . .  However, who can figure you 
out," he added; "you arc always like that." 
"I've just had my breakfast," she said, feeling that her 
composure was beginning to desert her, and attempting to 
retain it. "But would you like me to get some tea for you?" 
"No, thank you, don't bother." 
"As you wish." 
She got up and began to pace up and down the room. The 
musdcs of her face were beginning to twitch, and a deep 
blush appeared upon her checks. 
"I want to talk to you," she said, stopping in front of him 
and dropping her eyes; her eyebrows moved and her face 
began to twitch more perceptibly and frequently. She turned 
around and again began to pace up and down. Little by little 
she regained her composure, stepped up to him once more, 
and sat down facing him. 
"A terrible thing has happened to me," she began slowly, 
almost solemnly . . .  "I want you to explain to me what has 
happened. I am going to tell you everything. You know me, 
I want you to be my judge. You remember when we first met 
in that remote corner of our country, where you were 
stranded against your will and where I was perishing with 
an unloved husband, among people I could not stand. Our 
situation, our thoughts drew us together, each of us helped 
the other to become aware of himself, and, having come to 
ourselves, we were frightened by the condition we were in 
and flew into each other's embrace, for fear of being lost 
again. But it wasn't just despair that inspired me when I 
surrendered to you, and not in vain you spoke of your re­
generation. I thought that I would find in it salvation, a 

3 1 8  
Polina Suslova 
goal, a ha,·en, and found nothing but shame and sorrow . . .  
" 
Here she stopped, unable to continue, overwhelmed by a 
flood of melancholy memories, and buried her face in her 
hands. The cruel biuerness of her words hun Losnilsky 
deeply. He remained silent and only gazed at her intently. 
She continued : 
"The conditions under which our relationshi p developed 
owing to the circumstances were unbearable to me because 
of their ambiguity, yet I could not renounce you either. 
I 111·as hoping for somethi11g all the time: hut when, with 
my heart omraged and my mind deeply troubled, my very 
health "'"a.s beginning to fail, I decided to leave. I thought 
that a new life, new faces, would dispel my anguish, but 
I fomKI evel")·thing here <.JUite different from what J had 
expected it to be. I w;•s feeling lonely, when I met him. This 
lively face was so new to me, and so full of interest, after all 
the conventional ġstures and commonplaces I had received 
from t he people whom I had met unt i l  then. He did not 
strike me either with his imelliĢnce or with this erudition, 
yet everything he did and ģid was his own: in him I found 
e\·erything that I h;ad not found before in others: passion, 
boldness, simplici ty. He came to see me freq uemly, and 
realizing that I appreciated his company, he came more and 
more often. We read together, took. walks, attended the 
theater. I felt god with him, free a nd at ease. \>\'hen he began 
to talk about love, I was very much surprised and delighted, 
t hen, surprised and frightened about my being del ighted. 
Then I sa w that I "'·ould have either to reciprocate his love 
or immediately pan ways with him. I did not have the 
strength to do the latter . . .  J did not demand any assurance 
or proof of his love, for every word, every gest ure of his told 
me of a happiness without a ny mixture of ;mxiety or doubt. 
I was not expecting a nything more. All I needed was that 
his love be si ncere. 
Here she stopped. Memories of the past o\·erwhelmed her. 
She forgot about her surroundings, about what she had been 
saying. Losni tsk.y was obscn·ing her closely. 
"Well, and then?" he said, finally. 

The Stranger mul Her Lover 
319 
She started, and her cheeks flushed. 
"He is getting married," [she said) firmly, looking Losnit-
sky straight in the eye. 
"Who told you?" 
"I know for sure." 
nm Losnitsky was not surprised by this bit of news. On 
the contrary, he received it with perfect cairn, as though he 
had actually cxpc< ted i l and was glad alxnu such a di·noue­
ment. 
"But who is going to pay for my suffering and [one illegible 
word) for all my sleepless nights?"' 
Losnitsky tried to show her how mudt futility and \"anity 
there was in such a demand. His arguments had an effect on 
Anna, and her pride was aroused.J 
On the following day Losnitsky found her perfectly calm. 
She mel him with a book in her hand. She had been reading. 
Losnitsky was somehow disappointed this time. His reason­
ing was profound and resolute, yet at the same time in­
definite. Neither he nor Anna touched upon things that were 
ncar their hearts. Though they were hoth sad, it was as 
though the painful sufferings of yesterday had never been. 
However, this was lllll really so. Unfortunately, Anna did not 
belong to that happy group of people upon whose hearts joy 
as well as sorrow lca\·es a deep imprcsරion yet also passes 
without a trace. No, orH·e a thing had emercd her heart, it 
leh an indelible mark. So it was also this time: a black 
thought had descended upon her heart, and was burning it 
slowly, but surely. 
Six months had passed. In a lX>or French village not far 
from some .
. . 2 in a bright, dean room of a small house, 
buried in greenery and flowers, a young woman was lying on 
a sofa. Looking at that woman's face, illuminated by the un­
steady glow of the setting sun, or judging by her position, it 
was difficuiL to tell whether she was asleep or dead or just 
1. The following sentence is crossed out in the original text: "That 
same e\'cning she wrote to the young man, whom she had met by accident 
the day before, returning him the ring from her hand." 
2. Corrected from "A small town in southern Germany." 

ʇ20 
Polina Suslova 
lost in thought. Her eyelashes were dosed, her arms were 
finnly crossed upon her breast, her black. hair covered her 
pi llow in long tangled strands. Her face bore a strange ex­
pression: it was an expression of that calm which is acqu ired 
at the price of long suffering: there was something infinite 
about it-.,.,·as it a resigned acceptance of her fate, or a 
certitude of a near future wished for [so in the original], or 
ultimate peace? The young .,.,·oman made a move ƹnd opened 
her eyes: she cast a quiet glanrc about the room and dosed 
her eyes again with an ex pression of pain and anguish. There 
was a ligh t noise behind the door, and a tall, pale, lean man 
entered the room, stopping at the door: she raised herself 
slightly, a1Kl, her elbo.,.,·s resting on the head of the bed, ga\"c 
him a teiKler, pensive look. 
"Ha\·e you had a good rest?'' he asked. 
"Yes," she answered mechanically, with that same pensi\"c 
cx preƺion, looking through the open balcony door into the 
garden, where a ligh t breeze rocked beautiful garlands of 
vines het.,.,·ecn the oli\·c trees and spread the fragrance of a 
ƻuthern spring, pouring forth swectnes.o; and bliss, lulling 
t he heiirt to sleep, making it forget temporari ly the evil and 
the sorrow of life. Losni t.o;k.y a pproached Anna and sat down 
on ;t chair ncar her sofa. And while she was following the 
thought about what curse it might be that pre\"cnts men 
from taking advantage of .all the gi fts of this Earth, he was 
looking at her bea utiful face and thinking of something 
cl!ie. Losnitsky did not take his eyes off that face, and li ttle 
by little another feeling, a feeling of secret hope and joy, 
sweet to the poi nt of being painful, a feeling which he didn't 
dare admit to himself, agita ted his soul. \Vhilc he was per­
suading her to t;tk.e this trip and while he accompanied her 
on it, he had thought only of soothing and di\"crting her. 
But now another thought appeared which, against his will, 
took. precedence O\"er all cnhcrs. This thought was: she is 
here, with me, now it is up to me to make her return to me. 
"What arc you thinking of?" he asked her, just to rid him­
sel f  of that annoying thought. 

The Stranger and Her Lover 
321 
"Thinking of what?" she repeated mechanically, still look­
ing at the balcony door, and answered, after remaining lost 
in thought briefly: "I was remembering the first time I wen t  
t o  Petersburg, the hopes I had then, and what has come of 
them. I was comparing the feelings with which I arri ,·ed i n  
Petersburg with the feelings with which I left there . . .  Oh, 
how hard it was for me to leave Petersburg, how hard !  I feel 
as though the b'Tavcs of my loved ones were there. 
"Why must you have these though ts?" Losnitsky began 
with fervor; "you have your youth ahead of you, and the 
realization of your cherished idea ; this is no trifle." 
She made a move with her head, ga\'c him no answer, and 
again fixed an intent gaze at the balcony door. 
"The realization of your cherished idea l" This thought 
vaguely flashed through Anna's head, touching all the strings 
of her sensitive being, causing a strange rno\'cmcnt within 
it; but this movemen t grad ually died down, leading her to a 
clearer, con.scious thought :  "And so, I am free once morel 
There is no longer any slavish ;mxiety of expectation and 
fear, there is nothi ng to be £cued, there is nothing to lose. 
My dream of happi ness, which is no more than the gibberish 
of idle fantasy, the wrcuhcd refuge of cowards and faint­
hearted men, has v;mished, and reality, naked reality, stands 
there alone, arid, hungry. Your future is open. ChooƼ your 
own way." 
For a long while Anna remained under the infl uence of 
these thoughts, without paying any attention to Losnitsky, 
as though she didn't notice that he was present. 
A feeling of vexation flared up in him. U nable to control 
himself, he quickly got up and left the room. 
"Where arc you going?" asked Anna, raising her head 
from the pillow. 
"Me? . . .  " he said, trying to conceal the emotions which 
were troubling him, "I thought that, perhaps, I was bother­
ing you. Perhaps you would rather be alone." 
"No, I feel better with you," she said simply, and without 
noticing what was going on inside him. 

322 
Polina Suslova 
At these words, he quickly turned around, but then sud­
denly stopped and slowly walked to a chair which was stand­
ing rather far from her. She asked him to come and sit closer 
to her. Anna began to talk, saying what an egoist she had 
been until that time, how during their four months of travel­
ing together she had been preoccupied with herself alone, 
and how she had actually failed to notice, so it might have 
seemed, his concern for her. She hastened to assure him that 
she knew and appreciated all that he had done for her, and 
that he had done much more for her than he might think. 
She said that their departure and the presence of a close 
friend, who had given her encouragement with his invigorat­
ing words, which had always held sway over her, had saved 
her from a terrible desperation. She added that she had 
wanted to tell him this for a long time, but that, somehow, 
she could not make herself say it. 
"I didn't dare say this to you," she said, "because earlier I 
was often unfair to yon. Once, before our departure from 
Petersburg, I told you that your love had brought me nothing 
but suffering. This was said unfairly. I was happy!" she said, 
with melancholy emotion. 
These warm words, the very ring of emotion in her voice 
which, while remaining soft, would occasionally rise and 
sound solemn and prophetic, while she lay there with her 
arms crossed on her breast and with her eyelids closed, and 
then fall off again, expressing a deep and resolute submission 
to that which could not be changed, filled his heart with 
delight and adoration. She had long since stopped talking 
and was still lying there in the same attitude with her eyes 
closed, but he was still looking at her face, which was ani­
mated by her feeling of kindness. He meanwhile continued 
to be under the influence of emotions aroused in him by her 
words and did not have the strength either to express them 
or to rid himself of them. 
"You know how to say a kind word, Anna," he said finally. 
Anna said nothing and fell back into her earlier pensive 
mood, while he was thinking of her alone. He was inter-

The Stranger and Her Lover 
323 
preting her very silence, her pensiveness, in his own favor, as 
an expression of something which she had failed to say in 
words. She made a move with her head, turning it toward the 
light. He jumped from his chair and lurched forward, but 
then suddenly stopped, embarrassed and undecided. 
"What is the matter with you?" she asked calmly, looking 
at the ceiling. 
"I wanted to move the table,3 it isn't in the right place," 
he muttered. 
"So go ahead and move it." 
"No, it isn't necessary," he said a moment later, returning 
to his former place. 
She said nothing. 
"You don't know what just happened to me," he began a 
minute later, with a ring of excitement in his voice. 
"What?" she asked anxiously, raising her head and fixing 
him with frightened eyes. 
"You won't be angry?" 
"What is it?" 
"I just wanted to come and kiss your foot, but I stumbled 
over this rug, and thought better of it." 
A blush of modesty appeared on Anna's noble, chaste 
brow, giving her face a purely maidenly expression. 
"Why that?" she uttered in a leading voice and instinctively 
covered the end of her narrow shoe with the hem of her gay­
colored frock. 
"You must forgive me, Anna," said the embarrassed 
Losnitsky. 
"Oh, yes! just don't speak about it anymore." 
But Losnitsky did not find such generosity overly flatter­
ing to himself. He quickly started a conversation, of the most 
trivial variety, but it did not go very well; Losnitsky's glances 
were fixed on Anna with great persistence and passion, and 
he kept forgetting what he had been talking about. Anna 
noticed this and it made her feel uneasy. Anna got up from 
3. First written "to close the window" as in the diary entry, then 
changed to "adjust the lamp" and finally to "move the table." 

324 
Polina Suslova 
her bed, stepped to her writing desk, quickly rang and asked 
the servant to light a lamp, then sat down by the open 
window.4 
"\\7ill you be leaving soon?" she asked him. 
"Why?" 
"Just so .
. . I am sleepy." 
"So early" 
"Yes, I feel tired for some reason." 
Losnitsky approached her in silence, kissed both of her 
hands, and walked out resolutely.5 Anna locked the door 
behind him and, without getting undressed, flung herself on 
her bed. She lay there for a long time, involuntarily giving 
thought to her situation, and troubled by certain unpleasant 
feelings. She finally fell asleep with them, without undress­
ing, or even blowing out the lamp. 
On the following day Anna got up very late. Losnitsky 
waited for her a long time in the adjoining room which 
divided their two rooms and served as a living room and 
dining room. Breakfast had been on the table for a long 
time, but Losnitsky did not even think of touching it. He 
kept walking up and down in the room, stopping from time 
to time to listen for any stir coming from Anna's room or 
simply to look out of the window. Finally Anna appeared. 
She was calm, as always, and majestic in a melancholy way. 
They sat down to breakfast, but he thought he noticed in 
her attitude something particularly proud and derisive. He 
met her with a certain embarrassment. They sat down to 
breakfast. All morning a certain awkwardness showed itself 
in Losnitsky's behavior toward Anna. Somehow he could not 
settle down, but Anna's simplicity and sincerity and her kind 
4. The following appears in the margins: "meanwhile night had fal­
len and cmend everything with impenetrable blackness, but the l ight 
of the moon was stealing in through the h igh windows, cutting through 
the darkness with its bright rays and in some strange and fantastic 
fashion mingling with it, filling it with enchantment and mystery." 
5. The first \·ersion, crossed out, went this way: "I feel tired for 
some reason"; this was followed by: "But he did not make a move until 
se\·eral minutes later, when she reminded him that he should leave. 
'I don't feel like leaving you,' he said with a sigh, hut got up, kissed 
her good-bye on both hands . . .  " 

The Stranger and Her Lover 
325 
and trustful words put him back on the right track; and 
Losnitsky, though not without some sadness, yet with noble 
resolution, extended his hand to her. 
"Anna," he said, "yesterday I was stupid and base, I am 
guilty before you, will you forgive me?" And Anna gladly 
accepted this expression of remorse and promised to forget 
what had happened last night, realizing how difficult it was. 
He assured her that he had left on this trip with her without 
any ulterior motive, even though he had had certain in­
definite hopes; but when he had suddenly found himself 
alone with her, and in a totally strange place, among un­
known people . . .  his mind had suddenly gone blank. He 
promised that in the future he would be her friend, her pro­
tector, whatever she wanted him to be, and this in spite of 
the fact that her passion for another man and the new re­
lationship which had developed between them as a result of 
the latter, had made her twice as attractive as before. 
Anna believed his promise, exactly as he believed it him­
self, and boldly placed her hopes in the future. They spent 
the whole day together, taking walks and talking. Losnitsky 
embarked upon various abstract reflections. He let himself 
be carried away by this mood, particularly since it appeared 
to amuse Anna; he had the habit of forgetting himself in 
such reasoning. But this happy mood did not last long, no 
more than a single day, and it would be followed by bore­
dom, vexation, and melancholy, which would alternately 
take possession of him. 
Little by little Anna was regaining her peace of mind, as 
the corrosive, destructive torments of her heart turned to 
quiet melancholy, as she gradually returned to her former 
pursuits and habits. Her favorite books again appeared on 
her table and her favorite melodies, in her own voice, began 
to be heard in their quiet abode, expressing one and the 
same irremediable grief in different variations. Meanwhile 
he turned somber, irritable, or would not leave his room for 
entire days. Often, when he sat motionless in a corner or 
paced up and down the room in silence for hours, the young 
woman would steal a glance at him from behind her book, 

326 
Polina Suslova 
and her heart would be wrung with apprehension. She 
realized that all his love, all his efforts and cares were remain­
ing unrewarded, and it was beginning to weigh on her mind. 
Once, when he was sitting in his room, his elbows propped 
on the table and his head bent, a tired and sad expression on 
his face, Anna walked by several times and looked at him 
through the open door. He took no notice of her, or pre­
tended that he had not noticed her. Suddenly she entered his 
room and went down on her knees, so she could look him 
straight in the face. 
"Forgive me," she said, taking his hands and fixing him 
with a sad gaze which penetrated into his very soul. He 
looked at her with feigned absentmindedness and smiled. 
"Forgive me," she repeated, continuing to look at him 
with that same deep, gemle and loving, sadly pleading 
glance, through which she wanted, so it would seem, to pour 
forth all her soul. "I know this glance," said Losnitsky, deeply 
moved, and gently stroking her hair; "it is a long time since 
I met it last." 
"\\'hy are you so somber? \Vhy won't you he cheerful?" she 
said pensively, groping for the right expression. 
"Come now, what are you saying? \Vhy am I not cheerful? 
.Just because." 
"You don't want to talk to me! You are angry with me." 
"\\'hat nonsense!" said Losnitsky and sighed involuntarily. 
"I am bored," he began, seriously and sadly; "everything 
around here is foreign, everything is hateful. I took the trip 
to di\'ert you, to calm you down, to entertain you, to give 
your mind something to work on, and here we are, traveling 
for four months already, and you are still sad, and, it seems, 
this is all you want to do." 
"Don't you know me? I've always been that way." 
"You were that way, that's right, but now that you are free 
to go where you want, do what you want-tell me, what is 
it you need?" 
"\\'hat? I have lost C\"erything. I have nothing. My youth 
has passed without joy. I have exhausted myself in a day·to­
day struggle with people and with circumstances. My 

The Stranger and Her Lover 
327 
strength has failed me, and people have branded me with 
mockery and contempt; my family has turned away from 
me. Where shall I go? \'\'ho needs me? What shall I do?" 
"Can't you create a field of activity for yourself, and make 
people love and respect you? No, this is not it. There is an­
other, more substantial reason, something that outrages me 
and that I cannot explain to myself. You might as well tell 
me that you love . . .  " And he gave her an intent look. 
Anna's pale checks flushed momentarily, but turned even 
paler a minute later. 
"You are not saying anything . . .  You do not want to refute 
what I just said! . . .  
" 
Anna had in fact remained silent. 
She sat there, lost in thought, either engrossed by dreams 
of the future, or reminiscing about the past; anyway, her 
thoughts were far, very far away. 
"You love, so you still have hope." 
"I have nothing to hope," she said. 
"This is what reason tells you, but the heart has its own 
logic." He expected an objection on her part, but it did not 
follow; 011 the contrary, Anna got up and left. She went to 
her room and closed the door behind her. 
Several days passed. It was a clear and quiet evening. 
Losnitsky aud Anna were walking along a road through the 
fields, not far from their house. They were taking a walk. 
Anna was in a calm, contemplative mood; she remained 
silent all the way. Losnitsky also appeared to be lost in 
thought, but from time to time he looked at Anna's face, that 
wonderful face which was the image of her soul, mirrowing 
every one of its movements. At this moment, Anna had 
wholly surrendered to the impact of the scene that sur­
rounded her. Before her there stood the town, its dark gray, 
rather dirty coloring sharply outlined against a bright sky; 
the pointed domes of its churches extended high into the air 
and vanished imperceptibly in the shimmering expanses of 
space. Between them there was a huge building, half in 
ruins. It towered above all that stood around it, like the 
rapacious body of a beheaded giant, presenting its grandiose 

328 
Polina Suslova 
dynamic form to the wonderment of centuries. A leafy 
growth adorned its top and covered its disfigured limbs, 
reaching far out with its supple, creeping branches and try­
ing to lock it [the building] into a delicate embrace. On the 
other side there stood out high, elegant in their snow caps, 
tinted by the delicately colored rays of the sun, the Ccvennes. 
The pure, transparent air of the south, embracing everything 
around with trustful love, made their outlines appear in 
sharp relief; it would not hide, in a mysterious mist, from 
the enamored glances of men eYen the most remote objects. 
Fatigued by the enjoyment of this sight, Anna stopped. 
She sat down on the ground at the edge of a hillock sharply 
cut in half by the road, and her whole soul flowed into her 
eyes . . .  Her heart was filled with a marvelous calm. 
"\Vhat are you thinking about?" Losnitsky, who was stand­
ing next to her, asked her suddenly. 
"Oh, nothing." 
"ළfeanwhile, I can't stop looking at you. Sometimes your 
face is strange, when you get lost in thought; this time, too, 
it changed so rapidly and so sharply . . .  What a pity that you 
can't see your face at these moments! You haven't any idea 
what it is like. It is so beautiful! I now recall people's talk­
ing about your beauty. But what they say about your beauty 
is nothing compared to what I alone know." 
"Please, don't speak about my face," Anna interrupted 
him. 
"I knew that you would get angry, and I still said it." 
"\\'ell, enough, let us go," said Anna, getting up. 
"It would seem that you even dislike my admiring you; I 
understand you," said Losnitsky, with bitterness. 
"\\'hat an idea, yet, stop it!" 
"Very well. Let's go. But where shall we go?" 
"\\'here\"er you want," said Anna, and Losnitsky detected 
a familiar ring in her voice: it was one of sadness, or of 
apathy, or both. Forgetting about himself, he took Anna's 
hand with particular tenderness and escorted the young 
woman home. She followed him almost mechanically, but the 
movement of his heart did not go unnoticed by her, and 

The Stranger and Her Lover 
329 
Anna's heart, in turn, was filled with a melancholy tender­
ness. Memories of her first love, memories of her youth 
passed through her mind, changing to a quiet, tender melan­
choly. "Where has all this disappeared?" she thought. And, 
instead of any answer, another question came to her mind: 
"Could it really be true that all is finished?" And then, a 
whole series of further questions followed. 
In the meantime they had reached home. Perhaps for the 
first time, Anna found it pleasant and comforting to be in 
her room, where owing to his care everything was arranged 
and adjusted to her taste and her habits. She sat down in her 
wide, low armchair, and he took a seat near her. She was be­
ginning to feel free and comfortable; she turned cheerful; a 
stream of witty jokes, laughLer, and com·C'rsation flowed from 
her lips, but soon she fell ෡>ilent again. Losnitsky tried to sup­
port her cheerful mood. \Vhether it was with this in mind, or 
simply because he got carried away by this unexpected surge 
of mutual good cheer, he started telling her various anec­
dotes and stories from his own life. These tales might have 
been, perhaps, of some interest to other people, but Anna 
saw little wit, and even less refinement, about them. She 
listened seriously and in silence, but when he narrated ad­
ventures which occurred during Anna's last absence involv­
ing a certain gay lady of the city of B. and various escapades 
of that frivolous woman, and of a man no less frivolous in his 
attitude toward her, all told in a casual, cynical tone, Anna 
could not stand it any longer and asked him not to continue 
his narrati,·e. She was struck by his tone of bravado, a tone 
which a certain type of men like to display, but which she 
had not expected from him. 
Anna knew Losnitsky very little; in their earlier relations 
there had been so much that was serious and desperately 
bitter that the everyday aspect of his character, which is so 
very important in an intimate relationship, had gone un­
noticed. 
"I find your displeasure strange," said Losnitsky; "how­
ever, this is one of your perfectly feminine traits. Relations 
between men and women, such as I have just been telling 

330 
Polina Suslova 
you about, are most natural and excusable; they arc even 
necessary. !\ot only do they not interfere with a true and 
exalted love for another woman, but they actually enhance 
and support it. Unfortunately, no woman is capable of 
understanding this . . . " 
Anna was more and more astonished: "I did not expect 
this, I absolutely did not expect this," she said. And, straight­
ening her slender, majestic figure, she began to pace up and 
down the room. 
"This m:Ly seem sordid to you," said Losnitsky, "but, be­
lieve me, my heart is capable of loving and understanding 
beauty." 
Anna, quite naturally, answered nothing to this. 
Seeing such a reaction on her part, Losn i tsk y began to 
take his leave, and though it was quite early, Anna made no 
effort to stop him. 
\\'ithin a short period of time Anna could not help dis­
covering a number of traits in Losnitsky's opinions and 
views which she disliked a great deal. Their way of life, iso­
lated and monotonous as it was, and lacking in any major 
interests which would allow a man to reveal his full person­
ality, made the petty sides of his character appear even more 
strongly, leading to unpleasant clashes caused by the latter. 
Anna would stand up harshly against anything that she con­
sidered a fault or a weakness, and no qualities of the intellect 
or of the heart could make her forget these things. She re­
a(·tcd to them with ever so much more hostility, since this 
man had at one time appeared to her a paragon of perfection. 
In her severe judgments, Losnitsky saw merely attacks, 
nagging, directed against a man whom she had suddenly 
stopped loving, attempts to motivate somehow her un­
provoked cooling toward him. It is clear that, their mood 
being such, their life together went extremely badly. Even 
those brotherly, trustful feelings, on which they had been 
able to count as friends, now disappeared. Their relations 
turned more than cold and strained. They were unbearably 
hard on both of them. Losnitsky saw how difficult and how 
dangerous his position was; he saw that by staying with her 

The Stranger and Her Lover 
331 
he might risk losing his last asset, her respect, and he could 
not make up his mind to do anything at all . . .  Meanwhile, 
the life which they were leading, the absence of any work to 
do, or of a circle of friends, under conditions of mutual dis­
cord, all this was becoming unbearable to him. He suggested 
to Anna that they return to Russia together, without giving 
any thought to the question whether this would be good for 
her. Anna agreed, without making any objection, without 
giving the matter any thought, without even asking when 
and how. It seemed as though she did not care where she 
was living, or with whom; she cared little for her reputation, 
since there was nobody and nothing for whose sake she might 
have valued it. But Losnitsky did not hurry her to leave. He 
was waiting for something. 
Meanwhile, there had been a change in Anna for some 
time. A strange, fe,·erish excitement would seize her whole 
being from time to time. She avoided all company, went 
away to remote, lonely places on her daily walks, and there, 
walking back and forth among the hills, seemed to be 
pondering something. Or, she would take up her hooks and 
spent day ami night over them, prepare thick notebooks and 
write or make notes in them very hurriedly. Hut then she 
quickly abandoned the books too, as though she had not 
found in them what she was looking for, and from here on 
she read nothing at all, falling into a sort of moral torpor. 
The color which had recently appeared in her face, disap­
peared again, her transparent skin turned a deep yellow, and 
rings appeared under her eyes, making her large eyes look 
!\'en larger and more expressive. 
Quietly and majestically, the young woman roamed about 
.he hills nearby, watched pensively every evening how a 
>right, triumphant day would burn down, met each new 
lay without joy, and kept thinking, thinking all the time . . .  
)r, she would sit on the bank of a small river and gaze at its 
mall, monotonous waves. Lazily and drowsily they rolled 
1efore her eyes, driven from above by some invisible power, 
.t times dashing against the bank, leaping back quickly, 
olliding, turning, dividing into small ripples, then return-

332 
Polina Suslova 
ing to the former shap, and continuing to run with their 
former abandon, without ever hurrying or stopping any­
where, with a steady constancy, yielding their place to other 
waves that were following them. Watching one and the same 
sight all the time did not seem to bore Anna but, on the con­
trary, she observed the regular change from night to day, and 
from day to night, from life to death, with sympathy, finding 
in these sights something that was a part of human life also. 
She lost her former interest in books: they solved nothing 
but merely obscured and complicated the countless questions 
which were forming in her mind. 
Losnitsky w;.tched her with apprehension, begged her to 
consult a physician, to get some treatment, but she stub­
bornly refused. Losnitsky did not know what to do, whether 
they should stay there or travel somewhere else. However, an 
event which took place soon solved his dilemma. 
One day Anna went for a walk early in the morning, as 
usual, and failed to return all day. Losnitsky was not worried 
at first, since it was not the first time she had been gone for 
such a long time, but when night fell and it got dark and she 
still had not returned, his heart quivered fearfully, and he 
rushed from the house in the direction where Anna would 
most often take her walks. He knocked at the doors of cot­
tages, stopped passersby, asking people, with growing ap­
prehension, if they had not seen such-and-such a lady. The 
more or less unsatisfactory answers which the peasants gave 
him merely enhanced his confusion and his fear. They had 
seen the young woman in the morning, by the river, others 
had seen her three days ago; she had asked for some water 
to drink and had asked where she could cross the river, and 
how deep it was. 
Utterly exhausted from anxiety, Losnitsky decided to go 
home, thinking that he would perhaps find her there. Every­
body was sound asleep when he got back to town. The lights 
were all out. Losnitsky had to knock hard to get into his own 
flat. 'When he asked if Anna was in, the old servant gave him 
a puzzled look. One could see that he either did now know, 
or that he had forgotten about the absence of the young 

The Stranger and Her Lover 
333 
woman. A feeling of outrage flared up in Losnitsky's heart, 
but it died down fast and changed to helpless anguish and 
gloomy dejection. Re went through the empty rooms in 
silence, and sat down by the window, not knowing what to 
do, or what decision to make. A foreboding of evil took pos­
session of him at this point. He just kept sitting there, lean­
ing his head on his h:1 d and expecting something to happen, 
until he fell into a heavy, troubled sleep which made him 
forget everything, even his grief. 
\Vhen he woke up, the sun was high in the sky, covering 
the town with its rich sparkle, giving everything a joyous 
appearance. Everybody was busy with their daily activities. 
People were working, buying, selling, and talking, talking 
especially about the young woman whose body had been 
found in the river a short time earlier. It was assumed that 
she had fallen into the water as she was crossing the river 
using a narrow footbridge, since the body was found not far 
from the bridge, and in the very middle of the stream, where 
it flowed faster. She must have become dizzy when looking 
into the rapidly flowing waters, though the Lord, who sees 
the intentions as well as the deeds of men, knows better. But 
we, on our part, shall neither reject nor affirm such 
supposition. 


Selected Letters 


I. DOSTOEVSKY TO V. D. KONST ANT 
Paris, 1 September (new calendar) [ 1863] 
[ . . .  ] Varvara Dmitrievna, during those four days I took a 
close look at the gamblers there. There were several hundred 
people playing there and, believe me, I saw only two who 
knew how to play the game. Everybody loses his last penny, 
because none of them know how to play. There was a French­
woman there, and a British lord-those two knew how to 
play, nor did they lose, but on the contrary, it was the bank 
that was almost ready to crack. Please do not think that I am 
bragging for joy that I did not lose when I say that I know 
the secret how not to lose, but to win. It is true that I know 
this secret; it is yery silly and simple, and amounts to keeping 
control over oneself at any given moment, regardless of the 
phase of the game, and to never getting excited. This is all 
there is to it, and it is simply impossible to lose that way, 
and most probably you'll win. But this is not what matters, 
but rather, whether a man who has mastered this secret is 
abled to take advantage of it. You may be a Solomon and 
possess iron will power, and still lose your patience. Even our 
philosopher Strakhov1 would lose his patience. And there-
I. Nikolay Nikolaevich Strakhov (1828-96), collaborator on Dostoev­
sky"s Time and Epoch. Antagonist of Chernyshevsky, Pisarev, and 
Russian radical materialists. Confidant of Dostoevsky and Tolstoy. 
337 

338 
Selected Letters 
fore, blessed arc those who won't gamble but view a roulette 
table with loathing and consider playing the game the great­
est stupidity. But on to business. By dear Varvara Dmitrievna, 
I won 5,00 francs, i.e., I originally won 10,400 francs, 
brought them home, and locked them in my traveling bag, 
having decided to leave \Vieshaden the following day, with­
out ever going back to the Glsino. But I broke down and lost 
half of what I had won. Thus, I was left with only 5,000 
francs. I decided to keep a pan of my winnings, just in case, 
and to send another pan to Petersburg, as follows: a part to 
my brother, so he would save the money for me when I get 
hack, and a part to you, so you could hand it, or send it, to 
Maria Dmi tricvna. 
2. DOSTOEVSKY TO V. D. KONSTANT 
Raden-Raden, 8 September 1863 
:\fy dear friend and sister, Varvara Dmitricvna, I am writ­
ing you only a few lines, to inform you and ask you for a 
(a\·or. I am leaving today, in an hour, or maybe even sooner, 
and therefore I haven't a moment's time. The whole thing is 
that here in Baden I just lost everything I had on me at 
roulette, everything to the last penny. I lost over 3,000 francs. 
I've got only 250 francs left in my pocket right now. I had 
left Paris with the intention of going to Rome. I cannot go 
to Rome on the money I have now, and therefore I shall stop 
over at the junction in Turin to wait for some money to 
arri,·e from Petersburg. I am writing my brother, asking him 
to send me some, but since that won't he enough, I have 
written to :\faria Dmitricvna, asking her to send me 100 
rubles of the money which I had sellt her. Just 1 00 rubles, no 
more. \\'hy, she is so very, very kind, she might want to send 
me everything that I sent her from Paris. 
[ . . .  ] 

[ . . .  ] 
Selected Letters 
339 
3. DOSTOEVSKY TO 
M. M. DOSTOEVSKY2 
Turin, 8j20 September 1863 
I will tell you orally about the details of my trip in general. 
There were adventures galore, but still it was awfully boring, 
in spite of A.P.3 In a situation like this, one can even be too 
happy, because one is separated from all those whom one 
loves and of whom one thinks so often with nostalgia. To 
seck happiness after having abandoned everything, even 
that [occupation] in which one could have been some usc, is 
egotistic, and this thought is now poisoning my happiness (if 
indeed this is happiness). 
You write: how could one lose everything to the last penny, 
while traveling with the one whom one loves? My dear 
Misha: in Wicsbadcn I came up with a system of play, ap­
plied it in practice, and immediately won 10,000 francs. The 
following morning I abandoned my system, having got ex­
cited, and immediately lost. In the evening I returned to my 
system, applying it rigorously, and without any trouble again 
won 3,000 francs. Now tell me: after such events, how was I 
not to allow myself to be carried away, how was I not to 
believe that so long as I was following my system, luck was in 
my hands? And I do need money, for myself, for you, for my 
wife, to write my novel. Here, people win tens of thousands 
with ease. Yes, I went there with the idea to save all of you, 
and to get out of my difficulties myself. And then there's that 
faith in my system. And moreover, having arrived in Baden­
Baden, I walked up to the roulette table and won 600 francs 
within a quarter of an hour. That whetted my appetite. Sud­
denly I started losing, was no longer able to hold myself 
back, and lost everything to the last penny. After I sent you 
2. Dostoevsky's brother Michael, who collaborated with him in editing 
and publishing Time and Epoch. 
3. Initials for Polina Suslova. 

340 
Selected Letters 
that letter from Baden, I took my last money and went 
gambling; having started with 4 napoleons d'or, I won 35 
napoleons in half an hour. I let myself be carried away by 
this unusual luck., took a chance on those 35, and lost all 35. 
After paying our landlady, we were left with 6 napoleons 
d'or for the road. In Geneva I pawned my watch. 
[ . . .  ] 
4. DOSTOEVSKY TO N. N. STRAKHOV 
Rome, 18/30 September [1863] 
[ . . .  ] 
Right now I ha,·e nothing ready. But there has occurred 
to me a rather promising (in my own judgment) plan for a 
story. For the most part I've got it down on scraps of paper. 
1 actu ally tried to start writing it, but it's impossible here. 
It is hot, and (2), one has come to a place like Rome for a 
week; can one really write during that one week., having 
Rome before one's e)'es1 Besides, I get very tired from walk­
ing around. The subject of the story is the following: a type 
of Russian abroad. Note this: last summer there was, in our 
journals, a great deal of talk about Russians abroad. All of 
that is reflected in my story. And in general, it will reflect (as 
far ;1s this is possible, of course) the present moment of our 
inner life. I am writing of a character with a spontaneous 
nature, yet a man who is developed in many ways, though 
unfinished in e,·ery respect, one who has lost his faith, yet 
docsrr't dare not to believe, who rebels against authority, yet 
is afraid of it. He soothes himself by asserting that he has 
nothing to do in Russia, and hence criticizes se\'erely those 
people who call upon our expatriates to come back to Russia. 
But I couldn't possibly tell you all of it. This is a living char­
acter (it is as if I saw him standing before me) and he will 
be worth reading when finished. But the main thing about 
it is that all his vital juices, strength, aggressiveness, bold-

Selected Letters 
341 
ness, all go into roulette. He is a gambler, and not a plain 
gambler, just as Pushkin's covetous knight4 is not a plain 
miser. (I do not say this to compare myself to Pushkin. I 
mention it only for the sake of clarity.) After his own fashion, 
he is a poet, but the thing is that he is himself ashamed of 
this poetry, for he very deeply feels its baseness, even though 
the element of risk involved [in gambling] ennobles him in 
his own eyes. The whole story is a story about how he goes 
into his third year of playing roulette at various gambling 
houses. 
If The House of the Dead drew the public's attention as a 
depiction of convicts, whom no one before The House of the 
Dead5 had described graphically, this story will certainly 
draw attention as a graphic and most detailed depiction of 
roulette. In addition to the fact that such articles are read in 
Russia with extraordinary interest, gambling at the various 
watering places has a certain (and perhaps not so unim­
portant a) role particularly in regards to Russians abroad. 
5. DOSTOEVSKY TO N. P. SUSLOVA 
Petersburg, 19 April 1865 
My dear and esteemed Nadezhda Prokofievna, 
I am attaching to this letter to you, a letter of mine ad­
dressed to Apollinaria, or more exactly, a copy of my letter 
to Apollinaria, which I have addressed to her in Montpellier 
by the same mail. Since you write me that she may be joining 
you in Zurich very soon, it may well happen that the letter 
I sent to Montpellier will arrive when she is no longer there. 
And since I feel it to be absolutely necessary for me that she 
get this letter of mine, I am asking you to hand her this copy 
when you see her. I am also asking you to read the letter 
yourself. In it, you will find a clear answer to all the questions 
4. One of Push kin's little tragedies, "The Covetous Knight" (1 836). 
5. Dostoevsky's account of his experience in Siberia, published in 1 860. 

342 
Selected Letters 
which )'OU ask me in your letter, i.e., "whether I like to feast 
on the sufferings and tears of others, etc." And also an ex­
planation regarding cynicism and filth. 
I would like to add, expressly for you, that this is, so it 
would seem, not the first year of our acquaintanceship, that 
I have come to see you, to find relief for my soul, at every 
trying juncture, and that of late )'OU have been the only one 
I have seen e.,·ery time my heart has been just too heavy. You 
ha.,·e seen me in my most sincere moments, and therefore you 
can judge for yourself: do I like to feast on the sufferings o£ 
others, am I crude (inside), am I cruel? 
Apollinaria is a great egotist. Her egotism and self-esteem 
are colossal. She demands everything of people, perfection in 
every respect, she won't forgive a single imperfection in def­
erence to a person's other, good traits, whereas she herself 
refuses to show people even the slightest consideration. To 
this day she keeps reproaching me, saying that I was unworthy 
of her loYe, complaining to me, and upbraiding me inces­
santly, but then she herself, in Paris in 1 863, welcomed me 
with this phrase: "You've arrived a little late," i.e., she had 
fallen in lm·e with another man, while only two weeks earlier 
she had been writing me ardent letters, saying that she loved 
me. I am not reproaching her for having fallen in love with 
another man, but for those four lines whi.ch she sent to my 
hotel, with that rude phrase: "You've arrived a little late." 
I could write a great deal about Rome, about our life to­
gether in Turin, in Xaples, but why should I? To what pur­
pose? Besides I have told you a lot in our conversations. 
I love her still, I love her ,·ery much, but by now I wish I 
did not love her. She is not worthy of such love. 
I feel sorry for her, because I can foresee that she will 
always be unhappy. l'\owhere will she find either friend or 
happiness. \\rlwever demands everything from others, while 
not feeling any obligation on his part, will never find 
happiness. 
It may be that my letter to her, about which she complains, 
is written in an irritable tone. But it is not rude. \Vhat she 
considers to be rude about it is the fact that I dared to con-

Selected Letters 
343 
tradict her, that I dared to speak out about my hurt. She has 
always treated me with disdain. She took offense at my 
desire, finally, to speak up, to complain, to contradict her. 
She refuses to admit the notion of equality in our relations. 
There is no human feeling whatsoever in her attitude toward 
me. Why, doesn't she know that I still love her? \Vhy then is 
she tormenting me? Don't love, but then don't torment a 
man, either. Also, a lot in that letter was said facetiously. 
Things that were said facetiously she, in her anger, takes for 
serious, and then they may sound rude. 
But enough of this. Don't you, at least, blame me. I have 
high regard for you; you arc a rare human being among all 
whom I have met in my life, and I do not want to lose your 
affection. I have high regard for your opinion of me, and for 
your remembrance of me. I am writing you with such frank­
ness about these things, because, as you well know, I do not 
solicit anything from you, nor do I hope to obtain anything 
from you, so that you cannot ascribe my words either to 
flattery or to my trying to ingratiate myself with you, but will 
simply take them for a sincere expression of my soul. 
Your sister writes that you will stay in Zurich for a long 
time. Listen (if you can and if you want): wherever you arc, 
drop me at least an occasional line about yourself, let me 
know. I am not asking you to exert yourself, or to write often. 
I would only like you to remember me occasionally. It will 
always be most interesting for me to hear about you. 
Let me once again repeat my perennial advice and good 
wishes to you: Don't get bottled up in your isolation, 
abandon yourself to nature, abandon yourself to the outside 
world and to things external, just a little bit. External, real 
life develops human nature to an extraordinary extent, ser­
ving as material for it. Don't laugh too much about me, 
though. 
My situation is horrifying. How I am going to settle it, I 
don't know. You will learn a thing or two from my letter to 
Apollinaria. My address continues to be the same. If you 
write me soon, I shall answer you and get myself a more 
permanent address, which you could use permanently. 

344 
Selected Letters 
Au revoir, some day? Good-bye. Be happy all your life. 
Let me press your hand heartily. I would like very much to 
see you some day. vVhat are we going to be like then? I shall 
always remember you very well. 
All yours, 
F. Dostoevsky 
P.S. You are now in the spring of life, you have youth, your 
life just begins-what happiness! Don't lose your life, take 
good care of your soul, believe in truth. But keep looking 
for it intently all your life, or else it is awfully easy to go 
astray. But you have a heart, you won't go astray. But I am 
finishing out my life, I feel that. It doesn't matter-you are 
dear to me, as you stand for what's young, and new, besides 
that I love you as one would love one's favorite sister. 
6. DOSTOEVSKY TO I. S. TURGENEV 
Wiesbaden, 3 15 August [1865] 
඼ry dearest and most esteemed Ivan Sergeyevich, when I 
met you in Petersburg a month ago, I was selling my works 
for whatever price I could get, since I was about to be put in 
debtor's prison for those journal debts which I foolishly 
allowed to be transferred to my personal account. Stellovsky 
bought my works (the right to publish them in book form) 
for three thousand, part of it in promissory notes. I used 
these three thousand to satisfy my creditors, just barely and 
for the time being, giving the rest to various parties to whom 
I was obligated, and then went abroad, in order to restore 
my health even to the smallest extent and to write something. 
Of those three thousand, I left myself no more than 175 
silver rubles for my trip abroad, this being all I could afford. 
But two years ago, in "Wiesbaden, I had won nearly 12,000 
francs in an hour's time. Even though I had not thought of 
mending my finances by gambling, I did feel like winning 
1,000 francs or so, enough to cover my living expenses for 
these three months. Now it is my fifth day in \Viesbaden, and 

Selected Letters 
345 
I have lost everything, to the last penny, even my watch, and 
I also owe some money at my hotel. 
I feel very bad, and ashamed, having to bother you with 
my personal affairs. But there is absolutely nobody here to 
whom I could turn at the present moment, and besides, you 
are much more clever than the others, as a result of which I 
find it incomparably easier to turn to you. Here is the situa­
tion: I am addressing you man to man, asking you to lend 
me 100 (one hundred) thalers. I am also expecting some 
money from Russia, from one of the journals (the Reading 
Library), from which I was promised a small amount of 
money at my departure, and from a certain gentleman who 
is obliged to help me. It stands to reason that I might not be 
able to return the money to you for three weeks. However, 
perhaps I will return it even earlier. At any rate, one month. 
I feel rotten (I had thought it would be even worse) and, 
what's more, ashamed to have to bother you; but what can a 
drowning man do? 
My address: 
Wiesbaden, Hotel Victoria, a M. Theodor Dostoiewsky. 
Now what if you are not in Baden-Baden? 
All yours, 
F. Dostoevsky 
7. DOSTOEVSKY TO SUSLOVA 
[Wiesbaden] Tuesday, [221 10 A ugust 1865] 
Dear Polia, to begin with, I can't understand how you 
made it there. Added to my very nasty anxiety about myself, 
there is now my anxiety about you. 
\Veil, what if you hadn't enough money in Cologne even 
for a third class ticket? So you are now in Cologne, all by 
yourself, and don't know what to do! That's terrible. In 
Cologne, the hotel, cab fare, living expenses on the road­
even i£ you had enough money for your railway fare, you 
still must have been hungry. All of this keeps going around 
in my head and takes away my peace of mind. 

346 
Selected Letters 
It is Tuesday already, two o'clock in the afternoon, and 
no word from H[erze]n though it is about time. At any rate, 
I shall wait until the morning of the day after tomorrow; by 
then I will have lost my last hope. At any rate, one thing is 
clear to me: if there isn't any word from H[erze]n, this will 
mean that he is not in Geneva, i.e., he may have gone away 
somewhere. I will come to this conclusion for sure, because 
I am on very good terms with H[erze]n, so it would be quite 
impossible for him not to give me an answer one way or 
another, even if he did not want to, or could not send me 
any money. He is very civil, and he and I are on friendly 
terms. And consequently, if there isn't any word at all, he 
is not in Geneva at this moment . 
. Meanwhile, my condition has deteriorated to an unbe­
lievable extent. As soon as you left, early in the morning of 
the following day, I was told at the hotel that their staff had 
instructions not to serve me either dinner or tea or coffee. I 
went to clear this up, and the fat German who owns the hotel 
declared that I did not "deserve" dinner, and that he was 
going to send me only tea. And so I haven't had any dinner 
since yesterday and live on tea only. The tea they serve is also 
veil' bad, made without a samovar. They won't clean my 
clothes or polish my shoes, they won't come when I call, and 
all the servants treat me with an inexpressible, and most 
German contempt. There is no greater crime in the eyes of a 
German than to have no money, or not to pay one's bills on 
time. The whole thing would be funny, but it is nevertheless 
most inconvenient, too. And therefore, if H[erze]n does not 
send me any money, I anticipate great unpleasantness here, 
namely, they may seize my things and throw me out, or some­
thing worse yet. An abominable situation. 
If you have arrived in Paris and could manage to get any­
thing at all from your friends and acquaintances, send me a 
maximum of 150 gulden, and a minimum of whatever you 
want. If you could make it 150 gulden, I could settle with 
these pigs and move to a different hotel to wait for the money 
to arrive. For it is quite impossible that I will not receive it 
very soon, and at any rate I shall return it to you long before 
you leave France. First, from Petersburg (from the Reading 

Selected Letters 
347 
Library), they will definitely send [some money] in 10 days 
or so, at the very latest, addressed to your sister in Zurich, 
second, even if H--n should not be in Geneva; in any 
case, if he has left Geneva for a longer period of time, they 
will forward any letters addressed to him in Geneva, and if 
he is gone for a short time only, he will of course answer 
immediately, as soon as he comes back, so, consequently, I 
will have an answer from him soon in any case. In short, if 
you can do anything for me, without inconveniencing your­
self too much, do it. My address here is the same, Viesbaden 
[sic], Hotel Victoria. 
Au revoir, my dear, I can't believe that I did not see you 
before your departure. As for myself, I don't even want to 
think of it; I sit here reading all the time, so as not to give 
myself an appetite by moving about. I embrace you heartily. 
For God's sake, don't show my letler to anybody, or tell 
anybody. It's a nasty business. All yours, F. D. 
Describe your trip in detail for me, if there was any un­
pleasantness. Regards to your sister. 
But if Herzen sends me [money] before your letter arrives, 
then, in any case, I shall make arrangements, before leaving 
Wiesbaden, that your letter be forwarded to me in Paris, 
because that's where I am immediately heading. 
8. DOSTOEVSKY TO SUSLOVA 
[Wiesbaden] Thw·sday, 24/12 August [1865] 
I keep bombarding you with letters (and all "postage 
Jue"). Has my letter of the day before yesterday (Tuesday) 
·eached you? Have you arrived in Paris safely? I am still 
1oping to get word from you today. 
My situation is vile to the point of ne plus ultra, one can't 
ලo any further. ·what will follow from here on must be an­
>ther streak of misfortunes and dirty tricks of which I have 
10 conception as yet. I have received nothing from Herzen 
;o far, no answer or response. Today is exactly a week since 
: wrote him. Today, too, is the deadline for my money to 

348 
Selected Letters 
arrive, as I told the owner of my hotel on Monday. What's 
going to happen-! don't know. It is only one o'clock in the 
morning right now. 
It couldn't be that Herz. does not want to answer! Could 
it really be that he does not want to answer? That couldn't 
he. "1hy? Our relations are of the most excellent, as even you 
have witnessed. Could it he that somebody has denounced 
me to him behind my back? But even in that case (rather, 
C\'en more so) it would he impossible for him to answer 
nothing to my letter. And therefore I am still convinced, at 
this point, that either my letter to him got lost (of which 
there is little likelihood), or that my luck was bad enough 
to find him absent from Geneva at this time. The latter is the 
most probable. In that case, here's the situation: (1) He is 
gone for a short time only, and in that case I can still hope 
to receive an answer from him one of these days (as soon as 
he is back); or, (2) he is gone for a long period of time, and 
in that case my letter will most probably he forwarded to 
him, wherever he might be, because he must certainly have 
made arrangements to have letters addressed to him for­
warded to his new address. And consequently, in that case, 
too, I can hope to get a reply from him. 
I will keep hoping for a reply all week, until Sunday­
nothing but hope, of course. Meanwhile my situation is such 
that hope alone just won't do. 
But all this is nothing, if compared to my anguish. I am 
tormented by my inactivity, by the indefiniteness of a situa­
tion where I have to wait without a firm hope, the loss of 
time, and this accursed lViesbaden, which makes me so sick 
I can't even look at it. Meanwhile you are in Paris and I am 
not going to see you! Herz. also torments me. If he got my 
letter and does not want to answer-what humiliation, and 
what behavior! Have I really earned this, and how? By my 
irregularities? I admit that I have been guilty of irregularity, 
but what bourgeois morality! Then answer me at least, or 
don't I "deserve" help (as I don't "deserve" dinner with the 
owner of my hotel)? But it just could not be that he wouldn't 
answer; it must be that he is away from Geneva. 
I asked you to help me out by borrowing some money for 

Selected Letters 
349 
rr,e from somebody. I am almost without hope, Polia. But if 
you can, do it for me! You must agree that it is hard to find 
a situation which is more troublesome and more difficult 
than the one I am in right now. 
This will be my last letter until I get sc,ne kind of news 
from you. I keep imagining that my letters either won't be 
delivered promptly or may be lost altogether at the Hotel 
Fleurus, when you are not there yourself. I am sending them 
without postage, because I haven't got a kopeck. I continue 
to go without dinner, subsisting on my morning and evening 
tea for the third day now, and strangely enough, I am not 
very hungry at all. What's bad is that they keep me down by 
sometimes refusing me a candle in the evening, if even the 
tiniest candle end is left from the preceding day. However, I 
leave the hotel at three o'clock every day, returning at six, 
so as not to let them know that I am not having any dinner 
at all. Tricks worthy of a Khlestakov!6 
It is true, there is one remote hope: In a week, or in ten 
days at the latest, there will be something coming from 
Russia (via Zurich). But I cannot survive without help until 
that time. 
I don't want to believe it, though, that I won't be in Paris 
before your departure. It just couldn't be. But inactivity 
makes one's imagination run high. And when it comes to 
inactivity, I've really got it. 
Good-bye, my dear. If nothing particularly new happens, 
I won't write you anymore. Au revoir. All yours, Dos. 
P.S. I embrace you once more, very heartily. Has Nad. 
Prok.' arrived, and when? Give her my regards. 
4 o'clock. 
My dear Polia, I have just received an answer from 
Herzen. He had been to the mountains, and that's why his 
letter came late. He sends me no money, saying that my 
letter caught him at a moment of extreme impecuniousness, 
that he couldn't give me 400 florins, but might have 100 or 
150 gulden; if I could manage on that little, he could send 
6. The main character in Gogol's The Inspector General. 
7. Polina's sister. 

350 
Selected Letters 
me that amount. Then he asks me not to be angry, etc. 
Strange thing, though: ·why, then, didn't he at least send 
150 gulden, if he says himself that he could send this much? 
If he had just sent 150 and told me that this was all he 
could afford. That's how things arc done. But it is obviously 
this: either he is in a tight spot himself, i.e., he hasn't got it, 
or he just won't part with his money. Yet he could have no 
doubt about my returning the money: why, he's got my 
letter. I am no outcast of society, am I? Must be that he is in 
a tight spot himself. 
To send him another letter, begging him for help, is in my 
opinion impossible! \\'hat, then, am I to do now? Polia, my 
dear, help me out of this, sa\'e me! Get me 150 gulden some­
where, that's all I need. In 10 days, [some money] will surely 
come from Voskoboinikov,s addressed to your sister in 
Zurich (and maybe it will come even earlier). Though it 
won't be much, it will still be more than 1 50 gulden, and I 
shall return them to you. I don't want to place you into a 
bad situation. I could not. Talk it over with your sister. In 
any case, answer me as soon as you can. 
All yours, 
F. Dostoevsky 
Now I definitely don't know what is going to happen to me. 
9. DOSTOEVSKY TO 
A. V. KOR VIN-KRUKOVSKAJAD 
Moscow, 17 june 1866 
Esteemed Anna Vasilievna, 
Don't be angry with me for not having answered you for 
so long-all this time I have been undecided about the 
8. Xikolay Xikolaevich \'oskoboinikov, journalist and engineer. Con­
tributor and later on editorial staff of Katkov's the Russian Herald. 
9. Anna \'asilievna Korvin-Krukovskaia (1 847-87), revolutionary and 
novelist. Took part in the Paris commune. Dostoevsky published two of 
her stories in Epoch and paid court to her for about three months and 
proposed to her, a proposal she rejected. 

Selected Letters 
351 
future and did not know myself what I would be doing in 
the summer. If I did not respond to your letter immediately, 
it was because I thought that 1 would be seeing you soon in 
person, on my way abroad. But now, though I have received 
permission to go, things have turned out so that I no longer 
can go, at least not at present. I must first complete a bit of 
business in Moscow. In short, I was unable to write you any­
thing definitive or precise, which is why I did not reply to 
your letter. I have been in Moscow only for four days or so, 
md I have absolutely no idea as to when I will be free. The 
main thing is that, in addition to having to complete my 
novel (of which l am sick and tired), I ha\"C so much work 
that I simply can't sec how I shall take care of all my busi­
ness. And this is important business, as my future depends 
on it. Imagine what happened to me, among other things (a 
most amusing and very characteristic case). Last year I was in 
melt financial straits that I was forced to sell the publication 
rights on all my previously written works at once, to a 
speculator, a LCrtain Stcllovsky, who is a pretty had man and 
understands nothing of the publishing business. But there 
was a clause in our contract, according to which I promised 
to write a novel of no less than 192 pages for his edition, and 
if I did not deliver it by I November 1866 (the final dead­
line), then he, Stellovsky, acquired the right to publish 
gratis, and at his own discretion, over a period of nine years, 
඾verything that I might have written, without reimbursing 
me in any way. In short, this clause of the contract is exactly 
like those clauses of Petersburg leases where the landlord 
demands that if fire should break out in his house, the tenant 
is to cover all losses caused by that fire, and, if necessary, re­
build the whole house. Everybody signs these leases, even 
though people laugh as they do it, and so I signed my con­
tract, too. The first of November is in four months. I thought 
that I could pay off Stellovsky in money, by offering to pay 
a forfeit, but he does not want it. I asked him to grant me a 
three-month extension-he turned me down and told me 
outright: since he was convinced that by now I simply did not 
have the time to write a 192-page novel, especially since I 

352 
Selected Letters 
had written only half of my novel for the Russian Herald,1° 
it was much to his advantage not to agree to any extension or 
forfeit, because then everything that I might write hereafter 
would be his. I want to do an unheard-of and eccentric thing: 
write 48011 pages in 4 months, working on two novels simul­
taneously and writing one of them in the morning and the 
other at night, and finish both on time. You know what, my 
dear Anna Vasilievna, I still relish such eccentric and 
extraordinary things, I actually do. I am just not fit to be 
counted among people of solid habits. Forgive me: I've been 
bragging! But then, what else is left for me but to brag, all 
the rest being anything but attractive. But what kind of 
literature is this, after all this? I am convinced that not a 
single one of our writers, past or still living, has ever worked 
under such conditions as those I write under all the time. 
Turgenev would die at the very thought of. But if you knew 
to what extent it depresses you to spoil an idea which was 
born within you, which used to awaken your enthusiasm, 
which you know yourself to be a good one-and to be forced 
to spoil it, and consciously at that! 
You want to come to Pavlovsk. \Vrite me when exactly 
this will be. I would like very, very much to visit you at 
Polibino. But could I work there the way I must? That's a 
question as far as I am concerned. Besides, it would be im­
polite on my part to come there and then work all day long. 
\Vrite me about everything. Please do not forget me. My 
greetings to all your family. Au revoir. 
Your sincerely devoted 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
If you answer me immediately, here is my address: Mos­
cow, c/o Aleksandr Pavlovich Ivanov, Konstantinovsky Sur­
veying Institute, Staraia Basmannaia Street, by St. Nikita the 
:\lartyr's, for Fyodor Mikh. Dostoevsky. 
10. An important journal of a conser\"ati\"e cast edited by Mikhail 
Эikiforo\"ich Katov (1818-89). Dostoe\"sky published most of his major 
no\·els in this journal. Here he refers to Crime and Punislrment. 
I I .  Dostoenky gi\"es his numbers in printer's "signatures" of sixteen 
pages, which I ha\"e con\"erted into regular book pages.-Translator 

Selected Letters 
353 
Forgive the untidy corrections in my letter and don't inter­
pret them as a mark of negligence. 
10. DOSTOEVSKY TO SUSLOVA 
Dresden, 23 April/5 May 1867 
My dear, your letter was delivered to me at Bazunov's very 
late, just before I left Russia, and since I was in an awful 
hurry, I did not manage to answer you. I left Petersburg on 
Good Friday (14 April, I think), traveled rather slowly, with 
stops, and therefore only now have I finally got around to 
having a chat with you. 
So, my dear, you know nothing about me, at least you 
knew nothing when you mailed your letter to me. I got 
married in February of this year. I was obligated by contract 
to deliver to Stellovsky by I November of last year a new 
novel of no less than 160 pages of ordinary print, if not, I 
would have been subject to a terrible forfeit. Meanwhile I 
was writing my novel for the Russian Herald, 1 had written 
384 pages, and had another 192 to go. And there were still 
those 160 pages for Stellovsky. It was 4 October, and 1 had 
not even started. Miliukov12 suggested that I hire a stenog­
rapher to whom I could dictate the novel, which would 
allow me to work four times as fast. Olkhin, a professor of 
stenography, sent me his best student, who agreed to work 
for me. \Ve started to work on that very day, 4 October. My 
stenographer, Anna Grigorievna Snitkina, was a young and 
rather attractive young girl of 20, of a good family, graduated 
from secondary school with honors, and of extraordinarily 
kind and serene disposition. Our work progressed excellently. 
On 28 November, my novel The Gambler (it has appeared 
in print by now) was ready, having taken 24 days. As the 
novel was reaching its conclusion I noticed that my stenog­
rapher was sincerely in love with me, even though she never 
12. Aleksandr Petrovich Miliukov (181 7-97), writer, historian of lit­
erature, and close friend of Dostoevsky. He has left reminiscences of 
Dostoevsky. 

354 
Selected Letters 
said a word about it, while I was getting to like her better 
all the time. Inasmuch as I have found my life to be terribly 
boring and depressing ever since my brother's death, I asked 
her to marry me. She accepted, and here we are, married. 
The difference in our ages is awful (20 and 44), but I am 
more and more convi nced that she will be happy. She has 
heart, and she can love. Now about my situation in general. 
You arc familiar, in part, with the fact that after my brother's 
death I completely ruined my health messing about with the 
journal, but finally abandoned it, my strength sapped by a 
hnilc struggle with the indifference of the public, etc., etc. 
;'\loreO\'cr, those 3,000 [rubles] (which I received when I sold 
that work of mine to Stcllovsky) I spent on a journal which 
did not belong to me, on my brother's family, and on satis­
fying his crcdi wrs, without hope of ever getting that money 
back. It ended up by my getting deeper in debt on account 
of the journal, which, together with my brother's unpaid 
debts, for which I had to assume responsibility, amounted 
to o\·cr 1 5,000 [rubles J of extra indebtedness. Such was the 
condition of my affairs when I went abroad in 1865, with a 
capital of 40 napoleons d'or in all at my departme. While 
abroad, I decided that I could return these 1 5,000 only if I 
set my hopes entirely on myself. Besides, with the death of 
my brother, who meant everything to me, life became very 
miserable for me. I was still hoping to find a heart that would 
respond to mine, but failed in this effort. Then I threw 
myself completely into my work and began to write a novel. 
Katkov paid me more than anyone else, and so I gave it to 
Katkov. But 592 pages of that novel, plus 160 pages for 
Stcllovsky overtaxed my strength, though I completed both. 
My epilepsy has grown monstrously worse, but on the other 
hand I managed to divert myself and, besides, saved myself 
from prison. My novel 
(along with its second edition) 
brought me nearly 14,000, on which I lived and, besides, 
repaid 12 of the fifteen thousand which 1 owed. Now 1 still 
owe 3,000 in a ll . But these three thousand are the most 
wicked. The more money you return, the more impatient 

Selected Letters 
355 
and more stupid your creditors get. You must not that if I 
had not assumed responsibility for those debts, the creditors 
would not have got a kopeck. And they know it themselves, 
why, they were asking me a favor when they begged me to 
transfer those debts to my account, promising, as they did, 
not to bother me. The return of 12,000 merely awakened 
the covetousness of those who had not yet received payment 
on the notes they were holding. Now I won't have any money 
before next year, and that only if I complete the new work, 
on which I am working at present. But how can I complete 
it, with all these people giving me no peace? This is why I 
(and my wife) went abroad. Besides, I expect some relief 
from my epilepsy abroad; in Petersburg of late, it became 
almost impossible for me to work. 
I can no longer sit up at night, I have a fit immediately. 
And this is why I want to improve my health here and finish 
my work. I took an advance from Katkov. They were glad 
to let me have it. They pay extremely well. I told Katkov 
from the very beginning that I was a Slavophi]ela and that I 
disagreed with some of his opinions. This made for better 
relations between us, facilitating them greatly. As a private 
person, though, he is the most decent man on earth. I did 
not know him at all before. His boundless self-esteem does 
him a great deal of hann. But who hasn-'t got boundless 
self-esteem? 
During the last days of my stay in Petersburg I met 
Brylkina (Globina),14 and visited with her. \Ve spoke a great 
deal about you. She loves you. She told me that she was very 
sad that I was happy with another woman. I shall be in 
correspondence with her. I like her. 
Your letter left a melancholy impression on me. You write 
that you are very sad. I am not familiar with your life during 
13. Slavophilism was a movement which believed in the sanctity of 
purely Russian roots and was inimical to Western influences, especially 
to those instituted by Peter the Great. The important theorists of these 
views were Alexey Stepanovich Khomyakov (1804-60) and the brothers 
Kireyenky, Ivan (1806-56) and Peter (I 80s-56). 
14. Apparently a friend of Polina and her sister. 

356 
Selected Letters 
this past year, or what has been in your heart, but judging 
by everything that I know about you, it must be difficult for 
you to be happy. 
Oh, my dear, I am not inviting you to any cheap routine 
happiness. I respect you (and have always respected you) 
for your exactingness, but don't I know that your heart 
cannot help demanding to live, while you take people to be 
either shining [examples], or outright scoundrels and vulgar 
nonentities. I am judging by the facts. Make your own con­
clusions. 
Au revoir, my good friend forever! I am afraid that this 
letter may not rcad1 you in Moscow. You can be sure at any 
rate that I will be here in Dresden until 8 May, our calendar 
(that's minim um, maybe I shall stay even longer), and there­
fore, if you want to answer me, then answer immediately 
after receiving this letter. Allcmagne (Saxe), Dresden, Dos­
toicwsky postc rcstantc. I shall be sending you my further 
addresses. Good-bye, my dear, I press and kiss your hand. 
Yours, 
F. Dostoevsky 
I I . DOSTOEVSKY TO A. G. DOSTOEVSKY 
Homburg, Sunday, 19 May [1867] 
10 o'clock in the morning 
How arc you, my dear, my beloved angel? I am writing 
you a few, daily lines. First of all, about business: 
I had a most wretched day yesterday. I lost too significant 
an amount (relatively speaking). \Vhat is there to do: with 
my nerves, my angel, I shouldn't be gambling. I played some 
ten hours, and wound up with a loss. During the day, there 
were times when it was very bad, and a few times I won, too, 
when luck turned my way-I'll tell you everything when I 
get back. Now, as to what is left me (very little, just a 
pittance), I want to give it a last try today. Everything de­
pends on today, i.e., whether I leave tomorrow to join you, 

Selected Letters 
357 
or stay longer. In any case I'll let you know tomorrow. I 
would not like to pawn my watch. It's really a tight spot I'm 
in. \\'hat will be, will be. I'll give it a last try. You see: my 
efforts arc successful every time, so long as I retain my sang­
froid and calculatingly follow my system. But the moment I 
start winning, I immediately begin to take chances. I can't 
control myself. Let's see then what today's last test will show. 
The sooner the better. 
My angel, yesterday I went to the post office to mail my 
second letter to you, and the postmaster handed me the 
letter from you. Thank you, my dearest. I read it right there 
at the post office, and how I liked it to be written in pencil 
(my stenographer). It reminded me of all those things in the 
past. Don't be sad, my dear, don't be sad, my angel! You 
mm·cd me almost to tears, as you described your day to me. 
\Vhat a queer situation we arc in! \Vould it enter the head of 
any of our family in Petersburg that we arc separated from 
one another at this moment, and to what end! A queer situa­
tion, most definitely. Oh, if only this would all come to an 
end, and if there only were some kind of a decision. \Vould 
you believe it, my angel, that I am beginning to feel terribly 
bored here, i.e., the game as such is boring me? That is, it 
isn't exactly that it bores me to play, but my nerves are 
terribly tired, I have become more impatient, I am trying to 
get results quicker, I hurry myself, I take chances, and that's 
why I have been losing. 
My health, in spite of it all, is very good. My nerves are 
upset and I get tired (while sitting in one place, too), but 
nevertheless I am actually in very good condition. It is an 
excited condition, full of anxiety-but my nature sometimes 
demands it. What a delightful day it was yesterday. I did take 
a short walk in the park. One dtust admit that this i඿ a 
charming locality. The park is magnificent, also the casino, 
the music is marvellous, better than in Dresden. It would be 
a fine place to live for a while, but for that accursed roulette. 
Good-bye, my angel, my gentle, my dear, my kind angel, 
do love me. Right now I am thinking to myself that, if I could 
see you for just one minute, there would be so many things 

358 
Selected Letters 
we would discuss together; I have accumulated so many new 
impressions. You couldn't write it all in a letter, and I have 
told you before, quite often, that I don't know how to write 
letters, that I have no capacity for letter-writing, but now 
as I ha,·e put down these few short words to you, I feel a little 
better. In Christ's name, watch your health, try to distract 
yourself in any possible way. Remember my pleas: If any­
thing at all should happen, immediately send for the doctor, 
and let me know. Good-bye now, my joy. I kiss you a thou­
sand times. Remember me. \\!ish me luck, today will decide 
everything. I wish it would be soon, but don't become upset, 
and don't worry too much. I embrace you, 
All and always yours, 
Your husband Fyod Dostoev 
P.S. I am not giving any details about how much I won, 
and how much I lost. I'll tell you everything when we see 
each other again. In short, it's bad as of right now. 
[ . . .  ] 
12. DOSTOEVSKY TO A. G. DOSTOEVSKY 
Homburg, Monday 20 May [1867] 
10 o'clock in the morning 
And yesterday was definitely a nasty and miserable day. 
The main thing is that all this is silly, stupid, and base. And 
still I can't tear myself away from this idea of mine, i.e., 
leave everything as it is, and join you. And besides, it is, at 
this point, impossible, too, at this moment, that is. Let's see 
what tomorrow will bring. \Vould you believe it: Yesterday 
I lost everything, to the last kopeck, to the last gulden, and 
so I had already decided to write you right away, so that you 
could send me some money for my train fare. But then 1 
remembered about my watch and went to a watchmaker's to 
sell or pawn it. This is terribly common here, this being a 
gambling town. There are whole shops of gold and silver 
things whose whole business consists of this. Imagine how 

Selected Letters 
359 
mean these Germans are: he bought my watch, with the 
chain (it cost me 125 rubles, at least), and gave me only 65 
gulen, i.e., 43 tl1alers, i.e., almost 2y2 times less. But I sold 
it to him with the condition that he would give me a week's 
time to redeem it, and that if I should return within week, 
he would return it to me, charging interest, of course. And 
imagine, with that money I did recover my losses and today 
I sha11 presently go and redeem my watch. I sha11 he left with 
1 60 gulden after that. I won them hack yesterday by restrain­
ing myself and by simply not a1lowing myself to get carried 
away. This gives me some hope. But I'm afraid, I'm 
very much afraid. Today will surely tell me something. 
In short, tomorrow 1'11 let you know for sure, one way or 
the other. 
And so, will you ever forgive me all this? Oh, Ania! Let us 
suffer through this period and perhaps it will be better later 
on. Don't be too anxious about me, don't worry. The main 
thing for you is not to worry, and to be healthy: why, I'll be 
back very soon in any case. And after that we wi11 be together 
forever. This momentary separation may even help toward 
our greater happiness. It has made me aware of many, many 
things. 'Vrite me more details about yourself, don't leave out 
anything. If you don't feel we11, don't conceal it, but write 
me about it. I am in perfectly good health here. Yesterday 
the weather was marvellous; today it does not look very bad 
either. Yesterday was a Sunday, and all these Homburg Ger­
mans, with their wives, came to the casino after dinner. 
Usua1ly on weekdays it is mostly foreigners playing, and 
there is no crush. But here now [on Sunday], it's quite a 
crush, the air is stuffy, it's crowded, people get rude. Oh, how 
mean these Germans are. Good-bye, Ania, good-bye, my joy, 
be cheerful and happy. Do love me. Until tomorrow. I em­
brace you, heartily, very heartily. I lo,·e you boundlessly. 
All yours, to the last drop, 
F. Dostoevsky 
I shall write you tomorrow for sure. 
P.S. For God's sake, Ania, don't send me any letters here. 

360 
Selected Letters 
Nothing can be so very important [to write about], par­
ticularly from Moscow. Let it wait. Besides, I may be leaving 
here any day now, and so might miss the letter. 
[ . . .  ] 
13. DOSTOEVSKY TO A. G. DOSTOEVSKY 
Homburg, Wednesday, 22 May [18]67 
10 o'clock in the morning 
Forgive me, my angel, for going into some details concern­
ing my enterprise, concerning this game, so it will be clear to 
you what this is all about. Already some twenty times or so I 
have gone to the gaming tables and had the experience that 
if I play with sangfroid, calmly, and calculatingly, there is 
absolutely no chanct• of losing! I swear it to you, there is no 
such chance! There's blind chance, while I haYe a calculation 
on my side, consequently, the odds faYor me. But what has 
usually happened? I haYe usually started play with forty 
gulden, took them from my pocket, sat down, and placed 
them, one or two gulden at a time. In a quarter of an hour, 
I have usually (always) won double. That would be the time 
to stop and go away, at least until the evening, so as to give 
my excited nerves a chance to calm down (besides, I have 
made the obserYation-most certainly correct-that I can be 
calm and composed for no longe1· than half an hour at a 
time, when I am gambling). But I would walk away just to 
smoke a cigarette, and then return to the gaming table im­
mediately. Why did I do that, knowing almost for certain 
that I would not contain myself, i.e., go on to lose? That's 
because every day, upon getting up in the morning, I told 
myself that this would be my last day in Homburg, that I 
would be leaving the next day, so that, consequently, I could 
not play a waiting game at roulette. I tried hurriedly, with 
all my strength, to win as much as possible, right, away, that 
very day (for I was to leave on the following day) lost my 

Selected Letters 
361 
sangfroid, my nerves got excited, I started taking chances, I 
got angry. proceeded to place my bets without any calcula­
tion, having lost the thread of it, and eventually lost (be­
cause anybody who plays without calculating, helter-skelter, 
is a madman). My whole mistake was to have parted with 
you, rather than taking you with me. Yes, yes, this is so. And 
here we arc, I am yearning to sec you, and you, nearly dying 
without me. My angel, I repeat, I am not reproaching you 
for that, and I love you even more for your yearning to see 
me. But judge for yourself, my dear, what happened to me 
yesterday, for instance: Having sent you the letters asking 
you to send me some money, I went to the gambling casino. 
I had altogether twenty gulden left in my pocket Uust in 
case), and I took a chance on ten gulden. I used almost super­
natural efforts to remain calm and calculating fm· a whole 
hour, and wound up winning 300 gulden. I was so overjoyed, 
and had such a terrible, almost mad desire to finish off 
everything right there, that very day, to win perhaps twice 
that amount and then leave immediately, that I threw myself 
at the roulette table, without having given myself a chance 
to rest up and collect myself, took to betting gold pieces, and 
lost eve1-ything, everything, to the last kopeck, i.e., all I had 
left were two gulden for tobacco. Ania, my dear, my joy! 
You must understand that I have debts to pay, that I'll be 
called a scoundrel unless I pay them. You must understand 
that I will have to write Katkov, and stay in Dresden. I had 
to win. A b.wlutely! I am not playing for my amusement. 
\Vhy, this was my only way out-and there, everything is 
lost on account of my miscalculation. I am not reproaching 
you, but cursing myself: why didn't I take you with me? 
Playing at a slow place, every day, there isn't a chance not to 
win, that's true, quite true, I have tried it out twenty times, 
and here now, knowing this for sure, I am leaving Homburg 
with a loss. I also know that if I could give myself only four 
more days, I would surely win back everything. But, needless 
to say, I shall not play anymore! 
[ .
. . ] 

362 
Selected Letters 
14, DOSTOEVSKY TO A. G. DOSTOEVSKY 
Homburg, 24 May 1867 
Ania dear, my dearest, my wife, forgive me, don't call me a 
scoundrel! I am guilty of a criminal act, I lost everything 
that you sent me, everything, everything to the last krcutzer, 
I received it yesterday, and lost it yesterday. Ania, how am I 
going to face you now, what arc you going to say about me 
after this! One and 011/y one thing horrifies me: what will 
)'Oil say, what arc you going to think of me? It is your judg­
ment alone that I fear! Can you, will you respect me now! 
And what is love, even, without respect! \Vhy, this has shaken 
the very foundation of our marriage. Oh, my dear, don't 
condemn me altogether! I hate gambling, not only now, but 
C\'Cn yesterday, the day before yesterday, even then I was 
cursing it. I laving received the money yesterday, and having 
cashed the note, I went there with the idea of winning back 
at least a little something, to increase our funds by even the 
tiniest little bit. I so firmly believed in winning in a small 
way. In the beginning I lost a little, but as I started losing, 
the desire came to win it back, and then, as I lost even more, 
I nevertheless went on playing, in order to get back at least 
the money needed for my train fare-and lost it all. Ania, I 
am not imploring you to take pity on me, better, be dis­
passionate, though I am terribly afraid of your judgment. 
I am not afraid for myself. On the contrary, now, now after 
this lesson, I ha\'C suddenly become quite calm about my 
future. From now on it will be work and toil, work and toil, 
and I shall pro,·c yet that I am capable of accomplishing! I 
do not know what the next development will be like, but for 
the time being, Katkov won't turn me down. And everything 
thereafter will, I think, depend on the quality of my work. 
If it is good, there will be money, too. Oh, if only the matter 
rested with me alone, I wouldn't even be giving it much 
thought, I would laugh it off, and leave. But how could you 
fail to express your judgment of my action-and this is what 
embarrasses and torments me. Ania, I am worried about 

Selected Letters 
363 
losing your love. With our circumstances being bad as they 
are, I spent over 1,000 francs, that is nearly 350 rubles, on 
this trip to Homburg and my gambling losses! 
But I did not spend the money because I was flighty, or 
greedy, it wasn't for myself, oh no! I had other aims! But 
what's the use of trying to justify oneself now. Now I must 
hurry back to you. Send me as soon as possible, this very 
moment, some money for my train fare-even if it is the last 
you've got. I can't stay here anymore, I do not want to keep 
sitting here. Back to you, back to you as soon as possible, to 
embrace you. \Vhy, you will embrace me, you will give me a 
kiss, won't you? Oh, if it hadn't been for that nasty, cold, and 
damp weather, at least I would have moved to Frankfort 
yesterday! And nothing would have happened, I would not 
have played! But the weather was such that, with my teeth, 
and with my cough, there wasn't a chance to make a move, 
traveling the whole night in a light overcoat. It was simply 
impossible, it would have meant risking an illness. But now 
I shan't stop even for that. Immediately after receiving this 
letter send me 10 imperials (i.e., exactly the same as that 
note to Robert Thode, and here I actually don't need to have 
it in imperials, but it may he simply an A nveisung [sic]P; 
just as last time). Ten imperials, i.e., a little over 90 guldens, 
යo that I can pay my bills and my train fare. It is Friday now, 
l'll get it on Sunday, and on that same day I will be in 
Frankfort, where I will take a Schnellzug, so that I will be 
with you on Monday. 
My angel, don't think that perhaps I might lose this 
noney, too. Please, don't offend me to such great extent! 
Don't have so low an opinion of me. I am human, too, you 
mow! There is something human in me, after all, you know. 
Don't get the idea, somehow, of traveling here yourself to 
neet me because you don't trust me. Such lack of trust in 
ny coming would kill me. I give you my word of honor that 
shall leave immediately, regardless of whatever may be, 
!ven rain or cold. I embrace and kiss you. I wonder what 
15. "Anweisung," check or bill of exchange. 

364 
Selected Letters 
you may think of me now. Oh, if I only could see you at the 
moment when you read this letter! 
Yours, 
F. D. 
P.S. My angel, don't worry about me! I repeat, if I were 
all by myself, I'd just laugh and forget about it. You, your 
judgment, that's the one thing that is torturing mel That's 
what pains me, and nothing else. Meanwhile I have tortured 
you to death! Au revoir. 
Oh, if only I could be with you sooner, if only we could be 
together, we would come up with something for sure, 
wouldn't we? 
1 5. SUSLOVA TO DOSTOEVSKY 
rough copy of a letter 
You [arc angryp6 ask me not to write you that I am 
ashamed of my love for you . .l\'ot only will I not write this, 
I can [even] assure you that I have nc,·cr written such thing, 
or thought of writing it, [because] I was never ashamed of my 
love for you: it was beautiful even grandiose. I might have 
written you that I blushed on account of our earlier rela­
tions. But there can be nothing new to you in this, for I have 
never concealed them, and how many times I wanted to 
break them ofi before I left abroad. 
[I admit that it is useless to talk about this, but you already 
I have nothing against the fact that you may have considered 
them proper]. 
It is clear to me now that you could never understand this: 
they were proper from your point of view [as]. You behaved 
like a serious, busy man, [who] understood his obligations 
after his own fashion] but would not miss his pleasures either, 
on the contrary, perhaps even found it necessary to have 
some pleasure, [because] on the grounds that some great 
16. Brackets in this letter stand for words or phrases crossed out uy 
Suslova. 

Selected Letters 
365 
doctor or philosopher once said that it was necessary to get 
drunk once every month. 
[You must not get angry if I sometimes], that it is useless to 
talk about this, [I] it is true that I express myself with some 
facility, but also true that I don't adhere to fonn and cere­
mony too much. 
16. SUSLOVA TO DOSTOEVSKY 
Versailles, 1864, Monday [early June] 
A few days ago I received your letter of 2 June, and I 
hasten to reply to it. I can see that you are quite at your wit's 
end: I wrote you from Versailles and sent you my address, 
yet you arc wondering how to address your letter to me: to 
Paris or to Versailles. 
I shall be going to Spa in exactly two weeks. Today I settled 
things with the doctor once and for all. You may come and 
see me in Spa, it is very near to Aix-la-Chapellc, consequently 
en route for you. I did not want to sec you in Spa,-l'll prob­
ably be having a had fit of melancholy there, but otherwise 
the chances are that we won't sec each other for a long time, 
since you don't intend to stay in Paris very long, and I am 
not going back to Russia very soon. I don't know how long 
I shall stay at Spa; I intended to go there for three weeks, but 
now it turns out that it may be more, or less, meaning that 
I'd be going to a different watering place after Spa. If the 
cure is successful, I'll spend the winter in Paris, if not, I'll 
go to Spain, Valencia, or the Island of Madeira. 
'\That sort of a scandalous story are you writing? "re are 
going to read it. Ev. Tur has been getting the Epoch on 
occasion. But I don't like you to write cynical things. Some­
how, it is not in keeping with you; at least not as I imagined 
you to be earlier. 
1 am wondering why you no longer like my character [you 
write this in your last letter]. I can recall how you used 
actually to indulge in panegyrics about my character, 

366 
Selected Letters 
panegyrics that made me blush, and sometimes made me 
angry: I was right. But this was so long ago that you did not 
know my character then, seeing only its good sides and not 
suspecting that it might take a turn to the worse. 
You sing the praises of Spa in vain; it must be quite nasty 
there. I hate the country there for its smell of coal. You 
console me by telling me that the Viskovatovs are in Brussels, 
but they left for Petersburg a long time ago. 
Good-bye. I'd like to take a look at you, see what you are 
like after a year and find out what you people back there are 
thinking these days. You once wrote me and tried to persuade 
me to return to Petersburg, because there was so much good 
there now, such a wonderful change in people's opinions, 
etc. I see quite different results, or my taste is different from 
yours. It goes without saying that my return to Russia has 
nothing at all to do with whether people back there think 
well or not-this is not the point. 
I thank you for your care about my health, and for your 
advice to take care of it. This advice is having so much effect 
that you could blame me for excessive care of myself, rather 
than for neglect and causing my own illness. These accusa­
tions are entirely groundless, and I can explain them only 
by your politeness. 


