
OXFORD WORLD'S CLASSICS 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
FYODOR MIKHAILOVICH DOSTOEVSKY was born in Moscow in 
I82I, the second in a family of seven children. His mother died of 
consumption in I837 and his father, a generally disliked army phys­
ician, died in suspicious circumstances on his estate two years later. 
In I 844 he left the College of Military Engineering in St Petersburg 
and devoted himself to writing. Poor Folk (I846) met with great 
success from the literary critics of the day. In I849 he was 
imprisoned and sentenced to death on account of his involvement 
with a group of utopian socialists, the Petrashevsky circle. The sen­
tence was commuted at the last moment to penal servitude and 
exile, but the experience radically altered his political and personal 
ideology and led directly to Memoirs from the House of the Dead 
(I 86 I -2 ). In I 857, whilst still in exile, he married his first wife, 
Maria Dmitrievna Isaeva, returning to St Petersburg in I859· In the 
early I86os he founded two new literary journals, Vremya and 
Epokha, and proved himself to be a brilliant journalist. He travelled 
in Europe, which served to strengthen his anti-European sentiment. 
During this period abroad he had an affair with Polina Suslova, the 
model for many of his literary heroines, including Polina in The 
Gambler. Central to their relationship was their mutual passion for 
gambling-an obsession which brought financial chaos to his 
affairs. Both his wife and his much-loved brother, Mikhail, died in 
I864, the same year in which Notes from the Underground was pub­
lished; Crime and Punishment and The Gambler followed in I 866, and 
in I867 he married his stenographer, Anna Snitkina, who managed 
to bring an element of stability into his frenetic life. His other major 
novels, The Idiot (I 868), Devils (I 87 I), An Accidental Family (I 87 s), 
and The Brothers Karamazov (I88o), met with varying degrees of 
success. In I88o he was hailed as a saint, prophet, and genius by the 
audience to whom he delivered an address at the unveiling of the 
Pushkin memorial. He died six months later in I88r; at the funeral 
thirty thousand people accompanied his coffin and his death was 
mourned throughout Russia. 
RICHARD PEACE is Emeritus Professor of Russian at Bristol 
University. His publications include Dostoyevsky: An Examination 
of the Major Novels (I992), and Dostoevsky's 'Notes from the 
Underground' (1993). 

OXFORD WORLD'S CLASSICS 
For over 100 years Oxford World's Classics have brought 
readers closer to the world's great literature. Now with over 700 
titles-from the 4,ooo-year-old myths of Mesopotamia to the 
twentieth century's greatest novels-the series makes available 
lesser-known as well as celebrated writing. 
The pocket-sized hardbacks of the ear(y years contained 
introductions kY Virginia Woolf, T. S. Eliot, Graham Greene, 
and other literary figures which enriched the e:xperience of reading. 
Today the series is recognized for its fine scholarship and 
reliabili7y in texts that span world literature, drama and poetry, 
religion, philosophy and politics. Each edition includes perceptive 
commentary and essential background information to meet the 
changing needs of readers. 

OXFORD WORLD'S CLASSICS 
FYODOR DOSTOEVSKY 
Crime and Punishment 
Translated by 
JESSIE COULSON 
With an Introduction and Notes by 
RICHARD PEACE 
OXFORD 
UNIVERSITY PRESS 

OXFORD 
UNIVERSITY PRESS 
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford OX2 6DP 
Oxford Uni,crsity Press is a dcpartmenr of the L"niYcrsity ofOxfi>rd. 
It furthers the University's objective of excellence in research, scholarship, 
and education by publishing world,\ ide in 
Oxford New York 
Athens Auckland Bangkok Bogod Buenos Aires Calcutta 
Cape Town Chcnnai Dar cs Salaam Delhi Florence Hong Kong Istanbul 
Karachi Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne :\1exico City 2\1umbai 
Nairobi Paris Sao Paulo Singapore Taipei Tokyo Toronto Warsa\\· 
with associated companies in Berlin lbadan 
Oxfi>rd is a registered trade mark of Oxford UniYcrsity Press 
in the CK and in certain other countries 
Published in the United States 
bº Oxford L'ni,·ersity Press Inc., New York 
Translation© Jessie Coulson 1953, 1981 
Introduction, Notes© Richard Peace 1995 
The moral rights of the author have been asserted 
Database right Oxford University Press (maker) 
First published as a World's Classics paperback 1980 
Reissued as an Oxford World's Classics paperback 1998 
:\II rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval svstem, or transmitted, in anv form or bv anv means, 
without the prior Permission in writing of oxford Uni\'erÄity 
.
Pres:;, 
or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms agreed with the appropriate 
reprographics rights organizations. Enquiries concerning reproduction 
outside rhe scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department, 
Oxford Uniwrsity Press., at the address abow 
You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover 
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
Data a''ailable 
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 
Data available 
ISBN 0-19-283383-9 
579 1086 
Printed in Great Britain by 
Cox & W»man Ltd. 
Reading, Berkshire 

CONTENTS 
Introduction 
Select Bibliography 
A Chronology of Fyodor Dostoevsky 
Map of St Petersburg 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
vii 
XXIV 
XXV 
XXVlll-XXlX 
PART I 
1 
PART II 
84 
PART III 
188 
PART IV 
269 
PART V 
345 
PART VI 
420 
EPILOGUE 
5 1 2 
The Characters of Crime and Punishment 
529 
Explanatory Notes 
53 I 


INTRODUCTION 
Crime and Punishment was written in circumstances of acute 
psychological pressure. Dostoevsky had not long returned 
from Siberia, and was intent on establishing a literary career 
disrupted by ten years of penal servitude and exile. The two 
literary journals he had started with his brother Mikhail had 
been closed down. His wife had died and shortly afterwards 
his brother, to whom he was very close, had also died. He felt 
morally obliged to support his feckless stepson as well as the 
family of his own brother. Yet he was desperately short of 
money. He turned to a rogue publisher, Stellovsky, and con­
cluded an iniquitous contract, which unless he delivered a 
further manuscript on time would deprive him of his author's 
rights for nine years. He fled abroad to escape his creditors 
. and to join his young mistress, Apollinaria Suslova, but 
abroad fresh trouble awaited him: she had fallen in love with 
another, and the tortured, self-lacerating relationship that 
now developed between her and Dostoevsky could well have 
been taken from one of his novels. He sought consolation in 
gaming at Wiesbaden but lost what little he had left of the 
money he had received from Stellovsky as well as a loan from 
Turgenev. He skulked in a hotel room for which he could not 
afford to pay and tried to subsist on tea. 
It was in these circumstances that he conceived the idea for 
a novel about a student living in abject poverty, immured in 
a cramped, dingy room, hiding away from the psychological 
pressure of family and friends, and seeking to redeem his 
fortunes at a stroke by the murder of an old pawnbroker. Yet 
the novel, which in similar fashion Dostoevsky hoped would 
restore his own fortunes, was to be more complex than this 
bare outline. In offering the novel to the publisher Katkov 
in return for an immediate advance, he linked his plot to 
ideological motives which cast light on contemporary Russian 
society: 
It is a psychological account of a crime. The action is contemporary, 
in the present year A young man, an expelled university student, 
petit bourgeois in origin, and living in extreme poverty, who through 
the superficiality of his thought and the instability of his ideas has 

viii 
INT RODU CTION 
surrendered himself to certain strange and half-baked notions 
which are in the air, has decided to extricate himself at one stroke 
from his terrible position. 
Dostoevsky could not afford to 'extricate himself ' from the 
terrible position he was in with Stellovsky. He needed money 
immediately. The advance from Katkov arrived late, but in 
the meantime he had received money from a friend in Co­
penhagen, which he supplemented by borrowing from a 
Russian priest in Wiesbaden. The letter to Katkov suggests 
many of the fundamental features of the novel itself: the 
emphasis on psychology, the contemporary actuality of the 
setting, and even the unresolved nature of Raskolnikov's 
motivation-is the crime committed merely for material 
gain, or because of 'notions that are in the air'? 
What makes Crime and Punishment a modern novel is pre­
cisely its unrelenting focus on the psychology of the central 
character. Dostoevsky had first planned the work as a con­
fession, but the third-person narrative which he later substi­
tuted bears all the inward-looking quality of a first-person 
narrative, in which other characters, although conceived 
in their own right, take on the almost spectral quality of 
figures working within the imagination of the central charac­
ter. The psychological battle with Porfiry is a case in point. 
The examining magistrate appears to have intuitive, prior 
knowledge about the murderer, in whom he recognizes great 
qualities, so that his struggle to save him by bringing him 
to repentance suggests Porfiry in the role of objectified 
conscience. 
Psychology in the novel 'cuts both ways'. Raskolnikov uses 
psychological cunning in his attempt to put Porfiry off the 
scent. The latter, on the other hand, uses similar tricks in 
his apparently friendly and light-hearted interrogation of 
Raskolnikov. Psychologists from Freud to R. D. Laing have 
shown great interest in Dostoevsky's work. A character in his 
novel The Idiot claims that the law of self-destruction has as 
much force in human affairs as the law of self-preservation­
an idea that appears to anticipate Freud's theory of the death­
wish. In Crime and Punishment Raskolnikov feels the full force 
of the 'law of self-preservation': 
'Where was it,' Raskolnikov thought . . 'where was it that I read of 
how a condemned man, just before he died, said, or thought, that if 

INTRODU CTION 
IX 
he had to live on some high crag, on a ledge so small that there was 
no more than room for his two feet, with all about him the abyss, the 
ocean, eternal night, eternal solitude, eternal storm, and there he 
must remain, on a hand's-breadth of ground, all his life, a thousand 
years, through all eternity-it would be better to live so, than die 
within the hour? Only to live, to live! No matter how-only to 
live! .
.
 
How true! Lord, how true!' (152) 
Yet the 'law of self-destruction' has as much force as the 'law 
of self-preservation'. Raskolnikov seems compelled by some 
inner drive constantly to betray himself. He blurts out a mock 
confession to the police clerk Zametov-a confession which 
he passes off as a bitter joke, but which is in fact the truth. He 
goes back to the scene of the crime, rings the bell compul­
sively, and asks about the blood. By actions such as these he 
appears to court disaster-to be going out of his way to attract 
suspicion to himself. 
The novel also anticipates Freudian theory on memory 
ar.d the working of the subconscious. Towards the end of 
Crime and Punishment Raskolnikov is on his way to see his evil 
genius, Svidrigaylov, but he wanders from the direct route 
and suddenly, to his surprise, catches sight of Svidrigaylov 
sitting in an inn. Raskolnikov thinks this chance encounter is 
a pure fluke. Svidrigaylov, however, taunts him by calling it a 
'miracle', which he then explains. He had given Raskolnikov 
precise and detailed instructions to meet him at this very 
place, but he must have suppressed them from his conscious 
memory and come along 'automatically', as Svidrigaylov puts 
it (447-8). 
The psychological condition of masochism is also formu­
lated by Dostoevsky in The Idiot, where one of the characters 
claims that there is a point beyond which self-abasement 
ceases to be a pain and becomes a pleasure. In Crime and 
Punishment the scene in which Sonya's reprobate father, 
Marmeladov, having spent all his money on drink, returns 
home to meet the onslaughts of his wife illustrates this well 
enough: 
'Where is the money, then?' she cried. 'Oh God, he can't have 
drunk it all! There were twelve silver roubles left in my box! . . ' 
Then, beside herself, she clutched his hair with a sudden swift 
movement and dragged him into the room. Marmeladov himself 
helped, shuffling meekly on his knees after her. 

X 
INTRODUCTION 
'This is sweet satisfaction to me! This gives me not pain but plea­
ea-, sure, my-y-y dear sir!' he exclaimed, while he was shaken by the 
hair and once even had his forehead bumped on the floor (23-4) 
Its counterpart, sadism, is also clearly seen in the novel, par­
ticularly in the attitude of the crowd to the beating to death 
of the old mare-a dream obviously related to Raskolnikov's 
murder of the old woman. Both these psychological poles are 
present in Raskolnikov himself. They are reflected in the 
antinomies of his theory, a 'louse' or 'Napoleon'; and they 
permeate his behaviour: the cruel act and the thrill of self­
incrimination; the ruthless self-assertion and the urge to­
wards philanthropy (his very name suggests division: raskol 
means 'split', 'schism'). It is his friend, Razumikhin, who 
points to Raskolnikov's divided nature: 'Really, it is as if he 
had two separate personalities, each dominating him alter­
nately' (206). 
On 
the 
other 
hand, 
the 
contemporaneity, 
which 
Dostoevsky also stresses in his letter to Katkov, suggests quite 
a different type of novel-one concerned with actuality and 
realism. The contemporary setting is the post-reform Russia 
of 1865. The major reform, the emancipation of the serfs, 
had occurred four years before, and was to have profound 
effects on the whole of Russian society. It reduced the wealth 
and status of the landowners without satsifying the basic 
needs of the peasants, yet it was seen as the first major step 
towards the introduction of a Western-style, free-enterprise 
economy. Dostoevsky's journeys to the West in 1862 and 
1865 had left him very sceptical about the benefits of Western 
capitalism. Like many Russians, then and now, he tended 
to equate 'freedom' with 'licence', seeing a correlation 
between untrammelled liberty and crime. There is much 
discussion of crime as a contemporary phenomenon in the 
novel. Razumikhin refers to the case of intellectuals con­
victed of forging bank notes, who justified themselves in the 
spirit of the times: 'Everyone else gets rich by various means, 
and we wanted to get rich too, as quickly as we could' (145). 
Significantly, Razumikhin relates this to the great social 
changes ushered in by the emancipation of the serfs: 'When 
the great hour struck, they revealed who they were.' Other 
reforms followed, including major revision of the legal system 
( 1863-4). The most polemically charged portrait in the 

INT RODU CTION 
XI 
novel is that of a new lawyer, Luzhin, who is also a would-be 
entrepreneur. 
Part of the licence that was abroad could be seen in the 
greater incidence of drunkenness, which had stemmed from 
the control of the sale of alcohol in 1863 and by 1865 had 
led to a proliferation of establishments selling hard drink. 
Marmeladov is the chief character exemplifYing this con­
temporary vice, yet his is not an isolated example. With 
Raskolnikov we enter cheap vodka dens and meet their clien­
tele, but there are also drunkards on the streets, and drink 
appears to be a potent factor in the sadistic beating to death 
of the old mare in Raskolnikov' s dream. A further example of 
'licence' is also linked to the abuse of alcohol. It is because of 
her father's drunkenness that Sonya has to become a prosti­
tute to support him and the family. Duklida, who accosts 
Raskolnikov from her basement, manages to beg fifteen co­
pecks from him for drink. The girl who is trying to escape the 
clutches of the roue has already been given a great deal to 
drink. The woman who tries to drown herself is recognized by 
a woman in the crowd as 'our Mrosinyushka', and the only 
explanation the woman offers for Mrosinyushka's behaviour 
is that 'She's drunk herself to ruination' (164). 
Yet if drunkenness is such a problem, why should 
Dostoevsky give his principle drunkard the comic name of 
Marmeladov? The answer may be found in an earlier strand 
of Dostoevsky's writing. The famous apocryphal remark 'We 
have all come from underneath Gogol's Greatcoat' is attrib­
uted to Dostoevsky, but the 'we' refers to the so-called 'Natu­
ral School' of the 184os-a group of writers identified 
principally by their depiction of low-life urban themes. The 
epithet 'Natural' is, nevertheless, misleading: their approach 
to urban poverty, as the apocryphal remark in itself suggests, 
was influenced by Gogol and, in a manner typical of his style, 
contained pathetic as well as bizarre and humorous elements. 
Dostoevsky's overnight acclaim in 1845 was based on just 
such a work: his first novel, Poor Folk. 
The portrait of Marmeladov, with its mixture of the comic, 
the pathetic, and the grotesque, looks back to Dostoevsky's 
early writing. As a figure he antedates the conception of the 
novel proper; for when Dostoevsky's second journal, Epokha, 
was closed down he had already drafted the theme of a story 
on the contemporary problem of drunkenness, which was to 

xii 
INTRODU CTION 
have borne the title The Drunkards. Marmeladov is the chief 
figure in a whole substratum of 'Natural School' writing that 
is clearly present in the novel. The beggars, prostitutes, mu­
sicians of the thronging streets, the scenes set in low taverns 
and tenement houses present us with a panorama of the 
'lower depths' of St Petersburg life. Yet this base 'reality' is 
perceived, at least by suggestion, through the delirious eyes 
of Raskolnikov; it is not naturalism in its normal sense, but 
carries on that tradition established by Pushkin and Gogol of 
depicting St Petersburg as 'the most fantastic city'. 
Because of this subjective treatment, the grim outer world 
seems almost part of Raskolnikov's inner world, and is some­
how linked to his crime. His victim-the money-lender, 
Alena-exploits this poverty; her death could serve a double 
purpose: the elimination of an evil and the use of her money 
to save her victims; for Raskolnikov's act is conceived as a 
double crime-murder followed by robbery. The clear for­
_mulation of this motive, however, belongs to another student, 
whom Raskolnikov overhears in a tavern: 'One death and a 
hundred lives in exchange-why it's simple arithmetic'(62). 
This is the altruistic justification for the double crime of 
murder plus robbery, but Dostoevsky's letter to Katkov ad­
vanced a purely personal motive: to lift Raskolnikov himself 
out of poverty. If this non-altruistic motive were entirely 
straightforward, robbery alone would suffice; but it also tran­
spires that there is a personal reason for the murder too. 
Raskolnikov not only needs to lift himself out of poverty, he 
yearns to raise himself above the crowd. 
The letter to Katkov itself hinted at ambivalence. This was 
to be a crime committed both for pragmatic and for ideologi­
cal reasons (personal gain and 'notions in the air'), yet once 
translated into the novel this dichotomy takes on further 
ambivalence. There is here a process fundamental to 
Dostoevsky's art, a process that mirrors that of life itself: the 
embryo of a conceived idea develops through self-division, 
and further division into symbiotic but antithetical cells. Thus 
the ideological motive develops further into the article on 
crime written by Raskolnikov himself. Typically, the reader is 
not presented with the straight lines of an argument logically 
pursued. The article is merely referred to and discussed-a 
technique which allows the ambiguity of its central ideas to be 
opened up and developed. 

INTRODUCTION 
Xlll 
The principal argument concerns the right of the excep­
tional individual to 'step over', to commit crimes with im­
punity (in Russian the verb to 'step over' -perestupit' is 
semantically linked to 'crime' -prestuplenie). This is the so­
called 'Napoleonic' motive, and such 'half-baked notions' 
were in the air; Napoleon III had attempted to justify the 
actions of his uncle (Napoleon I) in a book, which appeared 
in Russian translation as Dostoevsky was working on his novel, 
The History of Julius Caesar. The author, like Raskolnikov in his 
article, divided humanity into 'ordinary' people and 'heroes', 
and defended the right of the 'heroes' to commit acts which 
'ordinary' people would regard as crimes. 
The embryo of the 'Napoleonic' idea is to be found in 
Raskolnikov's self-doubts on the very first page of the novel: 
'To think that I can contemplate such a terrible act and yet be afraid 
of such trifles . A man holds the fate of the world in his two hands 
. and yet, simply because he is afraid, he just lets things drift-that is 
a Ğr.uism . I wonder what men are most afraid of . .  Any new 
departure and especially a new word-that is what they fear most of 
all.' ( 1-2) 
Raskolnikov will need an act of the will to overcome this 
fear, if he is to become 'a man who holds the fate of the world 
in his two hands'. Yet here again is a contradiction, which 
seems at odds with the premisses of his own article; for, 
according to this, exceptional men are a consequence of 
other fashionable notions that are 'in the air' -they are the 
product of the Darwinian evolutionary process: 
'The great mass of men, the common stuff of humanity, exist on 
earth in order that at last, by some endeavour, some process that 
remains as yet mysterious, some happy conjunction of race and 
breeding, there should struggle into life a being, one in a thousand, 
capable, in however small a degree, of standing on his own feet . . A 
definite law there must be, and is; it cannot be a matter of chance ' 
(252-3) 
Raskolnikov is trapped between the promptings of his own 
will, his own 'endeavour' to 'struggle into life', and the inevi­
tability of external laws. To this extent he is a tragic figure, 
almost in a Greek mould. In the act of asserting his supreme 
will he is constantly dogged by a sense of fate. The final 
decision to commit the murder is made when he learns by 

XIV 
INTRODU CTION 
chance of Lizaveta's proposed absence from her sister's 
apartment, and he feels: 'It was almost as though fate had laid 
an ambush for him' (58). The sense is reinforced by another 
overheard conversation between a student and an officer who 
are discussing the possibility of the very crime which he him­
self intends to commit. Again he feels this is fate: 'This casual 
public-house conversation had an extraordinary influence on 
the subsequent development of the matter, as if indeed there 
were something fateful and preordained about it' (63). 
The feeling of inevitablity intensifies on the eve of the 
crime itself: 
His reactions during this last day, which had come upon him so 
unexpectedly and settled everything at one stroke, were almost 
completely mechanical, as though someone had taken his hand and 
pulled him along irresistibly, blindly, with supernatural strength and 
without objection. It was as if a part of his clothing had been caught 
in the wheel of a machine and he was being dragged into it (67-8) 
·The. image does not augur well for Raskolnikov-he is caught 
up in the process of his own destruction. Mter the murder his 
fear returns, and he is finally driven to the act of self-immo­
lation-his confession to Sonya. Here too he is dogged by a 
sense of inevitability. On his way to see her he feels exactly as 
he did on his way to murder Alena: 'the tormenting con­
sciousness of his helplessness before the inevitable almost 
crushed him' (389). 
The all-knowing Porfiry points to the interconnection of 
theory, will, and fate in Raskolnikov's crime, and in so doing 
appears to contradict Raskolnikov's own self-image of a man 
clinging at all costs to a precipice: 
'There are bookish dreams here and a heart troubled by theories; 
there is resolution evident here, for the first step, but resolution of 
a special kind-a resolve like that of a man falling from a precipice 
or flinging himself off a tower; this is the work of a man carried 
along into crime, as it were, by some outside force ' (437) 
The 'heart troubled by theories' might have succumbed 
to Napoleonism, but there is in effect a whole background 
of 'half-baked' notions in the air, stemming directly 
from an English tradition. The influence of Darwinism on 
Raskolnikov's article has been noted, but the general intellec­
tual climate of Russia at the time was influenced by ideas 

INTRODU CTION 
XV 
which have enjoyed a surprising resurgence in Britain itself 
(not to mention Russia) in the late twentieth century: the 
economic theories of English Utilitarianism. Lebezyatnikov, 
their chief proponent in the novel, proclaims: 'Everything 
that is useful to humanity is honourable. I understand only 
one word, useful!' (355). The moral implications of such 
ideas are introduced early in the novel through the mouth 
of Marmeladov: 'But recently Mr Lebezyatnikov, who is a 
follower of the latest ideas, was explaining that in this age the 
sentiment of compassion is actually prohibited by science, 
and that is how they order things in England, where they have 
political economy' (ll-12). 
The reference to 'political economy' is an oblique allusion 
to the foremost of the English Utilitarians, John Stuart Mill. 
His magnum opus, Principles of Political Economy, which restated 
the economic theories of Adam Smith, Ricardo, and Malthus, 
had been commented on 
and translated by N. 
G . 
. Chernyshevsky, the foremost radical of post-reform Russia, 
who had also taken over Mill's precept of 'enlightened self­
interest'. Nevertheless, this ideological corner-stone of laissez­
Jaire capitalism had undergone a strange transformation in 
Russia, where it turned itself into the 'socialist' doctrine of 
'rational egoism'. By charging reason with full control of the 
ego, Chernyshevsky ended up with a doctrine of social altru­
ism in which the commune, rather than the individual, was 
proposed as the foundation of a new society. Dostoevsky, on 
the other hand, whose earlier visit to London had left him 
profoundly disillusioned with the English view of progress, 
knew the consequences of a philosophy of 'self-interest'; and 
by redirecting them back to their true base in his bourgeois 
figure, Luzhin, he manages to discredit the 'half-baked' theo­
ries of Chernyshevsky, as propounded by his epigone, 
Lebezyatnikov, while at the same time pointing to their at­
tractiveness for the entrepreneurs of post-reform Russia. 
Luzhin appears to reject Christian morality in the name of 
the new doctrine of 'self-interest': 
'No, sir! If for example, in earlier times it was said to me: "Love your 
neighbour" and I acted upon it, what was the result? . .  The result 
was that I divided my cloak with my neighbour and we were both left 
half-naked, for according to the Russian proverb: "If you run after 
two hares, you will catch neither " Science, however, says: love your-

XVI 
INT RODU CTION 
self first of all, for everything in the world is based on personal 
interest If you love yourself alone, you will conduct your affairs 
properly, and your cloak will remain whole.' (142) 
Thus before the church leaders of the late twentieth century, 
Dostoevsky, through the polemical figure of Luzhin, had 
already pointed out that the philosophical values of the 'me 
generation' were the very antithesis of the teachings of 
Christ. 
Luzhin then proceeds to give his own version of 'trickle 
down': 
'Economic truth adds that the more private enterprises are estab­
lished and the more, so to say, whole cloaks there are in a society, 
the firmer will be its foundations and the more will be undertaken 
for the common good That is to say that by the very act of devoting 
my gains solely and exclusively to myself, I am at the same time 
benefiting the whole community, and ensuring that my neighbour 
rĝceives something better than half a torn cloak, and that not 
by' private, isolated bounty, but as a consequence of the general 
economic advancement.' (142-3) 
Another preoccupation of the late twentieth century, the 
relationship between self-interest and criminality, is point­
edly made by Raskolnikov, who, in a sudden challenge to the 
fashionable ideas propounded by Luzhin, reveals them as a 
possible ideological underpinning for a crime similar to his 
own: 
'What are you making so much fuss about?' broke in Raskolnikov 
unexpectedly 'It has worked out in accordance with your own 
theory.' 
'How do you mean, in accordance with my theory?' 
'Carry to its logical conclusion what you were preaching just now, 
and it emerges that you can cut people's throats . . ' (145) 
Dostoevsky with his gift for exploiting ambiguity has shown 
what are both the right-wing and the left-wing implications of 
'rational egoism'. Indeed, the followers of Chernyshevsky 
would later throw themselves into criminal acts in the grow­
ing terrorist tide of the revolutionary struggle. These political 
overtones are present in Raskolnikov' s article, both in his 
reference to the building of the 'New Jerusalem' and in his 
arguments on exceptional people: 

INTRODUCTION 
xvii 
'The second group are all law-breakers and transgressors, or are 
inclined that way, in the measure of their capacities. The aims of 
these people are, of course, relative and very diverse; for the most 
part they require, in widely different contexts, the destruction of 
what exists in the name of better things. But if it is necessary for one 
of them, for the fulfilment of his ideas, to march over corpses, or 
wade through blood, then in my opinion he may in all conscience 
authorize himself to wade through blood-in proportion, however, 
to his idea and the degree of its importance-mark that ' ( 2 50) 
In the following year (1866) Dostoevsky saw his fears real­
ized in the first attempt on the life of Tsar Alexander II by the 
student revolutionary Karakozov; for the terms of the eman­
cipation were such that they had engendered disillusionment 
and anger not only among the peasants but also among their 
intellectual supporters. The traditional weapon of peasant 
unrest was the axe, and it is precisely this instrument which 
Raskolnikov has chosen for his murder, despite its many 
di.$ftdvantages: the chance nature of its procurement, the 
difficulty of concealing it on the person, and the crude and 
gory nature of its action. If the choice of this weapon is 
designed to put investigators off the scent, it fails to confuse 
Porfiry, who pointedly dismisses the culpability of the peasant 
painters and, in turn, uses the 'axe' as a double-edged meta­
phor in his psychological campaign against Raskolnikov. 
Nevertheless, the choice of the traditional weapon of the 
peasant has clear political overtones, and when Raskolnikov 
is confronted with real peasant criminals in Siberia, they show 
their disapproval: '"You are a gentleman!" they said. "You 
shouldn't have gone to work with an axe; it's not at all the 
thing for a gentleman'" (522). 
A further ambiguity in Raskolnikov's article is the sugges­
tion that the commission of crime is always accompanied by 
illness. This in itself would appear to undermine the status of 
the exceptional man empowered by the theory to commit 
such acts. Indeed, in spite of Raskolnikov's assertion of the 
right of the exceptional man to 'step over', his own case 
seems to illustrate it as a stepping over into illness and de­
lirium. Doctor Zosimov gives his professional opinion on 
such matters: 
' "That is a very well-known phenomenon . . Sometimes actions are 
performed very skilfully, most cleverly, but the aims of the actions, 

XVlll 
INTRODUCTION 
and their origin, are confused, and depend on various morbid 
influences. It is like a dream."' (2 17) 
Crime, 
illness, 
and 
dream 
all 
seem 
interconnected. 
Raskolnikov's nightmare of the beating to death of the old 
mare, which is clearly related to his own crime, is introduced 
as 'a sick man's dream' (5 1). Before he commits the murder 
he experiences the reassuring dream of the oasis, yet, once 
committed, the murder is recreated in nightmare form in his 
dream of the beating of his landlady, with its clear reference 
back to the beating of the old mare ('He undressed and lay 
down, shuddering like an overdriven horse' ( 109)). The final 
dream in Siberia about nihilism infecting the minds of men 
like a disease is presented as a moment of enlightenment, but 
once more dream and illness are linked. 
With Svidrigaylov's entrance into the novel the argument 
goes further-illness makes possible the contact with another 
world. Svidrigaylov rejects conventional wisdom which ar­
gues: 'You are sick, and so what you think you see is nothing 
more than the unreal dream of your feverish mind' (277). 
Svidrigaylov contends that as illness increases so do contacts 
with the other world, until 'at the moment of a man's 
death he enters fully into that world' (277). Yet the appari­
tions from the other world that appear to Svidrigaylov are 
the ghosts of his victims (his wife and his servant); they are 
perhaps mere manifestations of conscience, and as such 
suggest the 'unreal dreams' of Raskolnikov's own 'feverish 
mind'. 
Raskolnikov's coffin-like room; the lack of air in a fantastic 
city reduced to an area that can be measured in the hero's 
footsteps; the many coincidences and the interweaving of 
relationships, in which Raskolnikov is always at the centre­
all this creates a claustrophobic intensity suggesting a world 
that verges on the solipsistic. Alena and Lizaveta are not only 
characters in their own right, but embodiments of the polar 
choices confronting Raskolnikov himself: on the one hand 
ruthless self-interest, on the other selfless humility. They are 
reflections of the two antithetical types of humanity posed in 
Raskolnikov's article-the tyrant as hero, and the ordinary 
person as victim. Yet these very same antinomies in the article 
are merely the intellectual projection of a dichotomy lying 
deep within the personality of its author. 

INTRODU CTION 
XIX 
In conceiving his act of self-assertion Raskolnikov virtually 
ignores Lizaveta; yet the chance knowledge that she will be 
absent from the common apartment shared with Alena is the 
sudden, determining factor confirming his resolution to 'step 
over' and reveal his Napoleonic potential. Nevertheless, the 
allegory of the novel shows that Raskolnikov's act of self­
definition cannot involve one side of his divided personality 
to the exclusion of the other. The planned murder of Alena 
inevitably brings in its train the unforeseen murder of 
Lizaveta. This deb;kle does not eliminate but rather intensi­
fies the contrary pull of the two sides of his character. The 
polarity is now embodied in Svidrigaylov and Sonya who, like 
Alena and Lizaveta before them, also share a common 
dwelling. Moreover, both first encounter Raskolnikov after 
the symbolic act of crossing a threshold: an echo of 
Raskolnikov' s own emblematic desire to 'step over'. 
Sonya is quite specifically linked to Lizaveta. The two 
women have exchanged crosses, and the bible from which 
Sonya reads the symbolic story of the raising of Lazarus was 
given her by Lizaveta (it is this bible which Raskolnikov keeps 
under his pillow in Siberia). The identification of Sonya with 
Lizaveta is in Raskolnikov's mind before his disturbing dream 
of re-enacting the murder of Alena-an Alena who refuses to 
die-and it is at this point that Svidrigaylov enters the novel, 
giving Raskolnikov the strange feeling that his dream is still 
continuing. As a character Svidrigaylov is the embodiment of 
the very values Raskolnikov had sought to appropriate 
through Alena's murder. 
If murder is the emblematic act of 'Napoleonic' self­
assertion, confession marks the contrary pole of 'louse-like' 
self-abasement. The first is directed towards Alena, the sec­
ond towards Lizaveta; for it is specifically her murder which 
Raskolnikov feels the need to confess to Sonya. The parallel 
between these two emblematic acts is quite clear to 
Raskolnikov himself: 'This moment felt to him terribly like 
that other, when he had stood behind the old woman, after 
he had freed the axe from its loop, and felt that "there was 
not a moment to lose"' (392). At the allegorical level this 
parallel is further strengthened; for just as he could not 
commit his act of assertion without involving the other pole 
represented by Lizaveta, so now he cannot confess to Sonya 
alone. Svidrigaylov is an eavesdropper, prepared to use 

XX 
INT RODU CTION 
Raskolnikov' s admission of weakness for his own ruthless 
ends. Raskolnikov is still caught between the contrary drives 
of his own inner conflict, and it is only on the death of 
Svidrigaylov that the Lizaveta/Sonya side comes more fully to 
the fore and he is able to make a deposition to the police. Yet 
even so the conflict is not fully resolved. As a convict in 
Siberia he is unable to acknowledge the murder of Alena as a 
crime, and although in the Epilogue Raskolnikov wonders 
whether Sonya's beliefs could 'become his beliefs now? Her 
feelings, her aspirations, at least' (527), the final paragraph 
warns us that his 'gradual renewal' his 'gradual regeneration' 
is in fact the beginning of a new story. 
Such 'open-endedness' is typical of Dostoevsky's artistic 
procedures, and the fluidity which this suggests permeates 
the whole of the novel. Ideas in Dostoevsky always have a life 
of their own. Although characters such as Svidrigaylov and 
Sonya can be seen as allegorical opposites, yet even as ideo­
lpgical markers they are by no means the fixed, static figures 
of true allegory. The ideas which they embody are subject to 
the same process of inner division that characterizes the 
central figure himself. Each extreme contains within it a 
contrary direction, its own inherent self-criticism and destruc­
tion. Thus Svidrigaylov, the embodiment of the self-willed 
man and untroubled perpetrator of evil, reveals a vulnerable 
side in his love for Dunya-'I also am capable of being at­
tracted and falling in love (which after all is not a matter that 
depends on our will)' (26g). It is unrequited love which 
appears to lead him to suicide, and before his death he 
performs acts of unsolicited benefaction. The riddle he poses 
on first meeting Raskolnikov: 'The whole question is: am I a 
monster or am I myself a victim?' (26g) is one that cannot 
ultimately be solved. 
Nor is the goodness and Christian humility of Sonya all that 
it might appear. Irrespective of the fact that her virtue is 
'subverted' through her activities as a prostitute, her philos­
ophy of 'non-resistance to evil' can lead to greater harm, as 
Raskolnikov is only too pleased to prove to her, after the false 
accusation of Luzhin. He poses her dilemma in terms of a 
stark choice: 'either that Luzhin should live and go on doing 
evil, or that Katerina Ivanovna should die' (391)-a formu­
lation equally relevant to his own position and his arguments 
justifying the elimination of Alena. 

INTRODUCTION 
XXI 
It is typical of Dostoevsky's novelistic procedures that his 
characters, while remaining true to their essential being, 
are nevertheless pushed by the relentless logic of ideas to a 
point where they reveal their own shadowy anti-selves. This 
is true even of the minor characters: the wheedling self­
abasement of Marmeladov can also be read as a covert form 
of self-assertion and aggression; while the polemically pre­
sented Lebezyatnikov, with his fashionable, nihilistic Utili­
tarianism, turns out to be the true defender of Sonya from 
the persecution of Luzhin. 
Dostoevsky's ruthless logic probes at his material to reveal 
the potential duality lurking within every character and be­
hind every 'fixed' idea. Most disturbing of all is the extension 
of this process to include the consciousness of the reader. 
The bounds between objectivity and subjectivity, which 
Dostoevsky breeches by placing the solipsistic consciousness 
of his hero at the very centre of the novel, are, by this very 
-fact, also fractured for the reader, who increasingly is obliged 
to sře the world through Raskolnikov's eyes. A bond is forged 
between reader and hero which is so strong that willy-nilly, as 
readers, we ourselves identifY with Raskolnikov; are alarmed 
when his rashness seems about to betray him; relieved when 
the danger has passed. Yet if we step out of this subjective 
involvement and try to view Raskolnikov objectively, it must 
be said that he is a figure little deserving of sympathy. He is a 
sullen, unsociable young man who with cold rationality has 
planned a particularly vile and cowardly murder: in hor­
rifYing, gory brutality he has hacked down a defenceless old 
woman, and then in similar fashion has been obliged to kill 
her meek sister. Moreover, to the very end his rational self 
shows no remorse for the death of Alena, even though his 
dreams appear to tell a different story. 
The ambivalence of Raskolnikov's personality and behav­
iour intrigues and ensnares the reader's susceptibilities: like 
Svidrigaylov, Raskolnikov is both 'monster' and 'victim'. His 
act of self-determination is framed by two parallel moments 
which throw this paradox into sharp relief. On the very 
threshold of the crime, murderer and victim wait like mirror 
images: 'Someone was standing silently just inside the door 
listening, just as he was doing outside it, holding her breath 
and probably also with her ear to the door' (71). Mter the 
murder he is surprised by an unexpected caller and is 

xxn 
I NTRODUCTION 
trapped: 'The unknown visitor was also at the door. They 
were standing now, opposite one another, as he and the old 
woman had stood with the door dividing them, when he had 
listened there a short time ago' (78-9). By this grimly ironic 
twist Dostoevsky indicates that from now on the roles of 
monster and victim have been reversed. We may see here 
perepetia, a turning point for the whole novel. The caller, 
Koch, rings the bell (just as Raskolnikov had done earlier) 
and is joined by a second caller, a student who, ominously, is 
studying to become an examining magistrate. 
Raskolnikov manages to escape from entrapment by a 
mixture of good fortune and an animal instinct for self­
preservation, but from now on this basic situation will be 
repeated time and time again throughout the novel: he will 
be cornered, will feel trapped, but always he will just manage 
to escape. Yet the trauma of this original reversal of positions 
will always haunt him. The nightmarish terror of the bell­
riJ1ging is such that he will be driven back to the apartment to 
repeat the full horror of it, and further incriminate himself 
by enquiring about the blood. 
From this point of perepetia Raskolnikov almost ceases to be 
the butcher, to become instead the hunted animal. It is with 
this predicament that the reader can so readily empathize, 
can catch in breath at each beat of Raskolnikov's pounding 
heart. Yet a disturbing question still remains: do not we, the 
readers, also empathize with that other side of Raskolnikov; 
are we not also pushed by Dostoevskian logic to acknowledge 
our own shadowy anti-selves? 
Truth itself has its shadowy other side in the novel: 'un­
truth is valuable because it leads to truth' ( 129). This view is 
expressed more than once by Razumikhin-the figure of 
common sense and a norm against whom Raskolnikov must 
be set (razum means 'reason'). Thus Razumikhin argues: 'By 
pursuing falsehood you will arrive at the truth! The fact that 
I am in error shows that I am human. You will not attain one 
single truth until you have produced at least fourteen false 
theories, and perhaps a hundred and fourteen' (193). These 
words go to the heart of the novel: Raskolnikov is the inventor 
of at least one false theory, but through his very error he is at 
least human. As a convict in Siberia he looks out over the 
boundary of the river and ponders on his crime. Although 
he cannot acknowledge his theory to be wrong, he admits the 

INTRODU CTION 
XXlll 
inadequacy of his own behaviour: he had not succeeded, he 
had confessed; unlike Svidrigaylov, he had not chosen the 
path of suicide: 
He tortured himself with these questions, unable to realize that 
perhaps even while he stood by the river he already felt in his heart 
that there was something profoundly false in himself and in his 
beliefs He did not understand that that feeling might have been the 
herald of a coming crisis in his life, of his coming resurrection, of a 
future new outlook on life. (52 1 )  
Error, the mark of Raskolnikov's humanity, contains a pledge 
of resurrection. Its time has not yet come, but eventually 
untruth will lead him to the truth: 'Life had taken the place 
of logic and something quite different must be worked out in 
his mind' (527). 

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY 
CATTEAU, J., Dostoyevsky and the Process of Literary Creation, trans. by 
Audrey Littlewood (Cambridge, 1989). 
C oNRADI, P., Fyodor Dostoevsky (Basingstoke, 1988). 
FANGER, D., Dostoevsky and Romantic Realism: A Study of Dostoevsky in 
Relation to Balzac, Dickens, and Gogol (Cambridge, Mass., 1967). 
FRANK, J., Dostoevsky: The Seeds of Revolt I82I-IB49 (Princeton and 
London, 1976). 
--Dostoevsky: The Years of Ordeal IBso-1859 
(Princeton 
and 
London, 1983). 
--Dostoevsky: The Stir of Liberation I86o-1865 (Princeton and 
London, 1986). 
--Dostoevsky: 
The Miraculous Years I86s-187I (Princeton 
and 
London, 1986). 
jAcKSON, R. L. (ed.), Twentieth Century Interpretations of 'Crime and 
Punishment': A Collection of Critica'l Essays (Englewood Cliffs, Nj, 
1974)· 
jONES, M., Dostoyevsky: The Novel of Discord (London, 1976). 
joNES, M. V., and TERRY, G. M., New Essqys on Dostoevsky (Cam-
bridge, 1983). 
KJETSAA, G., Fyodor Dostoyevsky: A Writer's Lifo (London, rg88). 
LEATHERBARROW, W.J., Fedor Dostoevsky (Boston, Mass., rg8r). 
MocHULSKY, K., Dostoevsky: His Life and Work, trans. by Michael 
Minihan (Princeton, 1967). 
NuTTALL, A. D., 'Crime and Punishment': Murder as Philosophic Experi­
ment (Falmer, 1978). 
PEACE, R., Dostoyevsky: An Examination of the Major Novels (repr. 
Bristol, 1992). 
WASIOLEK, E., Dostoevsky: The Major Fiction (Cambridge, Mass., 
1964). 

A CHRONOLOGY OF 
FYODOR DOSTOEVSKY 
Italicized items are works by Dostoevsky listed by year of first publi­
cation Dates are Old Style, which means that they lag behind those 
used in nineteenth-century Western Europe by twelve days. 
1839 
1842 
1843 
1844 
1846 
Fyodor Mikhailovich Dostoevsky is born in Moscow, the 
son of an army doctor (30 October) 
His mother dies. 
Enters the Chief Engineering Academy in St Petersburg 
as an army cadet. 
His father dies, possibly murdered by his serfs 
Is promoted Second Lieutenant 
Translates Balzac's Euginie Grandet 
Resigns his army commission 
Polf Folk 
The Double 
Netochka Nezvanova 
Is led out for execution in the Semenovsky Square in St 
Petersburg (22 December) ; his sentence is commuted at 
the last moment to penal servitude, to be followed by 
army service and exile, in Siberia. 
Serves four years at the prison at Omsk in western Siberia. 
Is released from prison (March) ,  but is immediately 
posted as a private soldier to an infantry battalion 
stationed at Semipalatinsk, in western Siberia 
Is promoted Corporal 
Death of Nicholas I; accession of Alexander II. 
Is promoted Ensign. 
Marries Maria Dmitrievna Isaeva (6 February) . 
Resigns his army commission with the rank of Second 
Lieutenant (March) , and receives permission to return to 
European Russia. 
Resides in Tver (August-December) . 
Moves to St Petersburg (December) . 

xxvi 
A 
CHRONOLOGY OF FYODOR DOSTOEVSKY 
Uncle's Dream 
Stepanchikovo Village 
Begins publication of a new literary monthly, Vremya, 
founded by himself and his brother Mikhail (January) . 
The Emancipation of the Serfs 
The Insulted and the Injured 
A Series of Essays on Literature 
Memoirs from the House of the Dead 
His first visit to Western Europe, including England and 
France 
Winter Notes on Summer Impressions 
Vremya is closed by the authorities for political reasons. 
Launches a second journal, Epokha (March) .  
His first wife dies ( 15 April) 
His brother Mikhail dies ( 10 July) 
Notes from the Underground 
Epokha collapses for financial reasons (June) .  
1866 
Attempted assassination of Alexander II by Dmitry 
Karakozov (April) 
Crime and Punishment 
The Gambler 
1867 
Marries Anna Grigorevna Snitkina, his stenographer, as 
his second wife ( 15 February) . 
Dostoevsky and his bride leave for Western Europe 
(April) . 
1867-7 1 The Dostoevskys reside abroad, chiefly in Dresden, but 
also in Geneva, Vevey, Florence, and elsewhere 
1868 
The Idiot 
1870 
The Eternal Husband 
187 1  
The Dostoevskys return to St Petersburg Birth of their 
first son, Fyodor ( 16july) 
1871-2 
Devils (also called The Possessed) 
1873-4 
Edits the weekly journal Grazhdanin (The Citizen) 
1873-81 Diary of a Writer 
1875 
AnAccidentalFamily (also called A Raw Youth) 
1878 
Death of Dostoevsky's beloved three-year-old son Alesha 
( 16 May) 

A 
CHRONOLOGY OF FYODOR DOSTOEVSKY 
XXVII 
1 87g-8o The Brothers Karamazov 
t88o 
His speech at lavish celebrations held in Moscow in 
honour of Pushkin is received with frenetic enthusiasm 
on 8 June, and marks the peak point attained by his 
reputation during his lifetime. 
188 1  
Dostoevsky dies i n  S t  Petersburg ( 2 8  January) . 
Alexander II is assassinated ( 1 March) . 




CRIME AND 
PUNISHMENT 


PART ONE 
C H A P T E R  I 
TowARDS the end of a sultry afternoon early in July a young 
man came out of his little room in Stolyarny Lane and turned 
slowly and somewhat irresolutely in the direction of Kamenny 
Bridge. 
He had been lucky enough to escape an encounter with his 
landlady on the stairs. His little room, more like a cupboard 
than a place to live in, was tucked away under the roof of 
the high ;five-storied building. The landlady, who let him the 
:room and provided him with dinners and service, occupied a 
flat on the floor below, and every time he went out he was 
forced to pass the door of her kitchen, which nearly always 
stood wide open. He went past each time with an uneasy, 
almost frightened, feeling that made him frown with shame. 
He was heavily in debt to his landlady and shrank from meeting 
her. 
It was not that he was a cowed or naturally timorous person, 
far from it; but he had been for some time in an almost morbid 
state of irritability and tension. He had cut himself off from 
everybody and withdrawn so completely into himself that he 
now shrank from every kind of contact. He was crushingly poor, 
but he no longer felt the oppression of his poverty. For some 
time he had ceased to concern himself with everyday affairs. 
He was not really afraid of any landlady, whatever plots he 
might think she was hatching against him, but to have to stop 
on the stairs and listen to all her chatter about trivialities in 
which he refused to take any interest, all her complaints, 
threats, and insistent demands for payment, and then to have 
to extricate himself, lying and making excuses-no, better to 
creep downstairs as softly as a cat and slip out unnoticed. 
This time, however, he reached the street feeling astonished 
at the intensity of his fear of his landlady. 
'To think that I can contemplate such a terrible act and yet 
be afraid of such trifles,' he thought, and he smiled strangely. 
'Hm . . .  yes . . .  a man holds the fate of the world in his two 
hands, and yet, simply because he is afraid, he just lets things 

2 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
drift-that is a truism . . .  I wonder what men are most afraid 
of . . .  Any new departure, and especially a new word-that 
is what they fear most of all . . .  But I am talking too much. 
That's why I don't act, because I am always talking. Or 
perhaps I talk so much just because I can't act. I have got into 
a habit of babbling to myself during this last month, while I 
have been lying in a corner for days on end, thinking . . .  
fantastic nonsense. And why have I come out now? Can I 
really be capable of that? Am I really serious? No, of course 
I'm not serious. So I am just amusing myself with fancies, 
-children's games ? Yes, perhaps I am only playing a game.' 
The heat in the streets was stifling. The stuffiness, the 
jostling crowds, the bricks and mortar, scaffolding and dust 
everywhere, and that peculiar summer stench so familiar to 
everyone who cannot get away from St. Petersburg into the 
country, all combined to aggravate the disturbance of the 
young man's nerves. The intolerable reek from the public 
houses, so numerous in that part of the city, and the sight of 
the drunken men encountered at every turn, even though this 
was not a holiday, completed the mournfully repellent picture. 
An expression of the deepest loathing passed across the young 
man's delicate features. (He was, by the way, a strikingly 
handsome young man, with fine dark eyes, brown hair, and a 
slender well-knit figure, taller than the average.) Soon, how­
ever, he relapsed again into profound thought, or rather into a 
sort of abstraction, and continued on his way in complete and 
wilful unconsciousness of his surroundings. Once or twice he 
muttered something to himself in a manner that, as he had just 
confessed, had grown habitual with him. He himself realized 
that at times his thoughts were confused and that he was very 
weak ; he had eaten practically nothing for two days. 
He was so wretchedly dressed that anybody else, however 
used to them, might have hesitated to go out in daylight in 
such rags. It is true that it would have been difficult to attract 
attention by one's dress in this part of central St. Petersburg. 
In these streets and alleys near the Haymarket, with their 
numerous houses of ill fame and their swarming population of 
artisans and labourers, such queer figures sometimes appeared 
on the scene that even the oddest of them could hardly arouse 
any surprise. Besides, the young man's heart was so full of 
bitter scorn that, in spite of his often very youthful sensitiveness, 
wearing his rags in the street caused him no embarrassment. 

C R IME AND PUNISHMENT 
3 
It would have been different had he come across any of his 
acquaintances or former friends, whom he wished in any case 
to avoid . . . All the same, when a drunken man, who was 
being carted off somewhere in an enormous dray drawn by an 
equally enormous cart-horse, suddenly yelled as he went by 
'Hi, you in the German hat !' and went on pointing at him 
and bawling at the top of his voice, the young man stopped 
dead and clutched feverishly at his hat. It was a high, round hat, 
which had come from Zimmermann's famous hat-shop, but 
was now all rubbed and rusty with age, stained and full of 
slits ; what remained of its battered brim was cocked up 
grotesquely at one side. But it was not shame but an entirely 
different emotion, more like terror, that had seized him. 
'I knew it !' he muttered in confusion. 'I foresaw something 
like this, but this is worse than anything I thought of. A piece 
of stupidity like this, an insignificant trifle, might wreck the 
whole affair. Yes, the hat is too noticeable. It is ridiculous, 
and that means that it attracts attention. I must get a cap, any 
sort of old cap, to go with my rags, not this monstrosity. Nobody 
wears this sort of thing. It would be noticed a mile off, and 
remembered . . .  that 's the point : it would be remembered 
afterwards, and it would be evidence . . .  I must be as incon­
spicuous as possible . . .  Trifles are important ! . . .  Trifles like 
this can bring disaster.' 
He had not far to go ; he even knew how many paces it was 
from his own door-exactly seven hundred and thirty. He had 
counted them once, when he had first begun to give his 
imagination free rein. At that time he did not believe in the 
reality of his imaginings, and their audacity, which both re­
pelled and fascinated him at the same time, was merely irritat­
ing. Now, a month later, he saw them in a different light, and 
had somehow grown used to regarding the 'ugly' dream as a 
real project, although he still did not trust himself to carry it 
out, and reproached himself for his own weakness and lack of 
resolution. He was now engaged in rehearsing his project, and 
his agitation increased with every step he took. 
With a fainting heart and shuddering nerves he approached 
an enormous building which fronted the canal on one side, and 
Sadovaya Street on the other. The building was split up into 
small tenements, which housed all kinds of tradespeople-tailors, 
locksmiths, cooks, various German craftsmen, prostitutes, 
clerks, and so on. People were hurrying in and out of its two 

4 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
gates and across its two courtyards. The building had three 
or four porters, and the young man thought himself lucky not 
to meet any of them as he slipped from the gate to the first 
staircase on the right. It was narrow and dark, but he already 
knew that, and the circumstance pleased him; in such ob­
scurity there was no danger from prying eyes. 'If I feel so 
afraid at this moment, what would it be like if I had really 
brought myself to the point of doing the thing itself?' he thought 
involuntarily, as he came up to the fourth floor. Here his way 
was blocked by two porters, old soldiers, who were removing 
furniture from one of the flats. He knew that a German clerk 
lived here with his family. 'The German must be removing, 
and that means that the old woman's will be the only flat 
occupied on the fourth floor on this staircase, at any rate for 
some time. That 's fine . . .  in case I . .  .' he thought, as he 
rang the old woman's bell. The bell tinkled feebly, as though 
it were made of tin, not copper. 
Small flats in that kind of 
house nearly all have such bells, but he had forgotten what it 
sounded like and its peculiar tinkle seemed to startle him, as if 
it brought back something to his memory with great clearness 
. . .  He shuddered ; evidently his nerves were too weak this time. 
After a short interval the door opened the merest crack, and a 
woman peered suspiciously out at her visitor ; only her glitter­
ing little eyes were visible in the gloom. She seemed reassured, 
however, when she saw that there were several people on the 
landing, and opened the door wider. The young man stepped 
across the threshold into a dark hall divided by a partition 
from the tiny kitchen. The old woman stood silently before 
him, looking at him with a question in her eyes. She was a 
tiny dried-up scrap of a creature, about sixty years old, with 
sharp, malicious little eyes and a small sharp nose. She was 
bare-headed and her fair hair, just beginning to go grey, was 
thick with grease. A strip of flannel was twisted round her long 
thin neck, which was wrinkled and yellow like a hen's legs, and 
in spite of the heat a short jacket of worn fur, yellow with age, 
hung from her shoulders. She coughed and groaned continually. 
The young man must have been looking at her rather oddly, 
for distrust flashed into her eyes again. 
Reminding himself that he must be as polite as possible, the 
young man made a hurried half-bow and muttered : 'Raskol­
nikov, a student. I was here a month ago.' 
'I remember you were, my friend, I remember very well,' 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
5 
the old woman answered drily, still without taking her eyes 
from his face. 
'Well . . .  I've come again on the same business,' continued 
Raskolnikov, rather disconcerted by her suspicion. 'Perhaps, 
though,' he thought uneasily, 'she was always like this, only 
I didn't notice it before.' 
The old woman remained silent, apparently still doubtful, 
and then stood aside and pointed to a door, saying, as she let 
her visitor pass : 'Go in, my friend.' 
The little room the young man entered, with its faded wall­
paper, geraniums, and muslin window-curtains, was bright 
with the rays of the setting sun. The unexpected thought 
crossed his mind : 'The sun will be shining then, too, just as it 
does now !' He glanced rapidly round the room, trying to fix 
its appearance as firmly in his mind as possible. There was 
nothing special about it. The old furniture, all of painted yellow 
wood, consisted of a sofa with a high curved wooden back, an 
oval table in front of it, a toilet-table with a small mirror 
between the windows, some chairs against the wall, and two or 
three cheap pictures in yellow frames, representing German 
young ladies with birds in their hands : that was all. In a corner 
a lamp was burning before a small icon. Everything was very 
clean ; both furniture and floor were highly polished, and 
everything shone. 'Lizaveta's work,' thought the young man. 
There was not a speck of dust anywhere in the flat. 'How do 
nasty old widows contrive to have everything so clean?' he 
continued to himself, with his curious glance fixed on the print 
curtain hanging over the door into another tiny room. In this 
stood the old woman's bed and chest of drawers, and he had 
never contrived to see into it. The flat contained only these 
two rooms. 
'What can I do for you?' inquired the old woman in a forbid­
ding tone. She had followed him in and planted herself squarely 
in front of him, and was looking him in the face as before. 
'I have brought something to pawn. Here,' and he drew 
from his pocket an old flat silver watch, with a globe engraved 
on the back and a steel guard. 
'But it is time you redeemed your other pledge. The month 
was up two days ago.' 
'I will pay you another month's interest. Please be patient.' 
'I shall please myself, my friend, whether I am patient or sell 
your property now.' 

6 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'How much for the watch, Alena I vanovna ?' 
'It is not really worth anything ; you bring me nothing but 
trash, my friend. Last time I lent you two roubles on a ring 
you could buy from a jeweller for a rouble and a hal£' 
'Let me have four roubles. I will redeem it; it was my 
father's. I am expecting some money soon.' 
'A rouble and a half, interest in advance. Take it or leave it.' 
'One and a half roubles !' exclaimed the young man. 
'Just as you like.' And the old woman held out the watch 
to him. The young man took it, so angry that he was on the 
point ofleaving at once; but he changed his mind, remembering 
that he had nowhere else to turn, and that he had had another 
object in coming. 
'All right,' he said roughly. 
The old woman felt in her pocket for her keys and went into 
the other room, behind the curtain. The young man, left alone, 
strained his ears and followed her movements in imagination. 
He could hear her opening the chest of drawers. 'That will be 
the top drawer,' he fancied. 'I know she keeps the keys in her 
right-hand pocket . . . They are all in one bunch, on a steel 
ring . . .  There is one with toothed wards, three times as big 
as the others ; that can't belong to the drawer, of course. There 
must be something else, a chest or a trunk . . .  I wonder if there 
is. Those big wooden trunks always have that kind of key .
.
•
 
All the same, how sickening all this is ! . . .  
' 
The old woman returned. 
'Now, my friend, ten copecks per rouble per month makes 
fifteen copecks from you for a rouble and a half for one month, 
in advance. Then there are twenty copecks due for the two 
roubles I lent you before at the same rate. Thirty-five alto­
gether. That makes one rouble fifteen copecks for the watch. 
Here you are.' 
'What? So now it 's one rouble fifteen co pecks?' 
'Quite correct.' 
The young man did not argue but took the money. He was in 
no hurry to leave and stood there looking at the old woman 
as if he wanted to say or do something more, but did not know 
exactly what. 
'Perhaps, Alena Ivanovna, I will bring you something else 
in a day or two . . .  It's silver . . .  valuable . . .  a cigarette-case 
. . .  I have to get it back from a friend . . .  ' He faltered and 
stopped. 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
7 
'Time enough to talk about it then, my friend.' 
'Good night . . . .  You always seem to be alone in the place ; 
isn't your sister here?' he asked as carelessly as he could, as he 
went into the hall. 
'And what do you want with her, my friend?' 
'Nothing in particular. I only asked. But you . . .  Good-bye, 
Alena I vanovna.' 
Raskolnikov went out in great confusion. The confusion 
grew and grew, and on his way downstairs he stopped more 
than once as if suddenly struck by something or other. When 
at last he reached the street, he broke out : 
'Oh God, how repulsive ! Can I possibly, can I possibly . . .  
no, that 's nonsense, it 's ridiculous !' he broke off decisively. 
'How could such a horrible idea enter my mind? What vileness 
my heart seems capable of! The point is, that it is vile, filthy, 
horrible, horrible !  . . .  And for a whole month I have . .  .' 
But words and exclamations were not a sufficient outlet for 
his agitation. The feeling of infinite loathing that had begun 
to burden and torment him while he was on his way to the old 
woman's had now reached such a pitch that he did not know 
what to do with himself in his anguish. He walked along the 
pavement like a drunken man, not seeing the passers by and 
sometimes bumping into them. He had left that street behind 
before he succeeded in collecting his wits. He looked round and 
saw that he was standing outside a public house, whose en­
trance led down several steps from the street into a basement. 
Two tipsy men were at that moment emerging, supporting 
each other and swearing as they staggered up into the street. 
Raskolnikov hesitated only for a moment and then went down 
the steps. He had never set foot in such a place before, but now 
his head was swimming and his throat was parched. He felt 
a need for cold beer, especially as he now attributed his sudden 
weakness to having had nothing to eat. He sat down in a dark 
and dirty corner behind a small sticky table, ordered his beer, 
and drank the first glass thirstily. He began to feel better at 
once, and his thoughts grew clearer. 'This is all nonsense,' he 
said to himself hopefully, 'and there was no need to get so 
agitated. It was simply physical weakness. One glass of beer 
and a rusk and my mind grows keen, my thoughts clear, my 
resolution firm. Bah, how paltry it all is !' But in spite of the 
scorn with which he spat out these words, his outlook had 
grown cheerful, as if he had been suddenly freed from a 

8 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
terrible burden, and he cast friendly glances at the other people 
in the room. Even at this moment he dimly perceived, how­
ever, that there was something morbid in his sudden recovery 
of spirits. 
Few people now remained in the place. Besides the two 
tipsy men he had met on the stairs, a party of four or five men 
and a woman, with an accordion, had also gone out. After 
they left the place seemed quiet and empty. There remained a 
man who looked like a small tradesman, drunk, but not very, 
sitting over his beer; his companion, a huge fat man with a 
grey beard, wearing a long Siberian tunic, was very drunk 
and sat dozing on a bench. Every now and then, half waking 
up, he would suddenly begin to snap his fingers, throw his arms 
wide and jerk the top part of his body about, without getting 
up from his bench. Meanwhile he would drone out the half­
forgotten words of some rubbishy song, something like : 
For a whole year I loved my wife, 
For a who-o-ole yea-ear I lo-o-oved my wife .
.
•
 
or : 
As I was walking down the street 
My old lost love I chanced to meet .
.
•
 
But there was nobody to share his jollity. His friend watched 
all these outbursts silently and with a hostile and suspicious 
expression. 
There was one other man, who looked like a retired Govern­
ment clerk, sitting apart with his bottle of vodka, taking a 
drink from time to time, and gazing round. He, too, seemed to 
be in rather a disturbed state of mind. 
C H A P T E R  I I  
RASKOLNIKOV was not used to crowds and, as we have said, 
had lately avoided all social contacts, but now he suddenly 
felt drawn to people. Something as it were new had been 
accomplished in his soul, and with it had come a thirst for 
society. He was so weary after a whole month of concentrated 
misery and gloomy agitation that he longed to breathe, if only 
for a moment, the air of some other world, and so, in spite of 
the filthy surroundings, he took pleasure in this visit to the 
public house. 
The master of the establishment was in another room, but 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
9 
he often came into the main room by way of a flight of steps, 
so that the first parts of him to appear were his smart well­
greased boots with their wide red tops. He wore a long Russian 
tunic, a black satin waistcoat horribly smeared with grease, 
and no neck-cloth ; his face looked as if it had been smeared 
all over with grease, like an iron lock. There was a lad of about 
fourteen behind the bar and another, younger, who waited 
on the customers. On the bar were sliced cucumbers, rusks of 
black bread, and fish cut into small pieces, all very evil­
smelling. The atmosphere was unbearably stuffy and so satu­
rated with alcohol that it almost seemed that five minutes in 
it would be enough to make one drunk. 
It sometimes happens that we find ourselves interested from 
the first glance in complete strangers, even before we have 
spoken to them. The customer who was sitting apart, and 
who looked like a retired clerk, made just such an impression 
on Raskolnikov. Later the young man more than once recalled 
this first impression and put it down to a prophetic insight. 
He kept his eyes fixed on the man, partly because the stranger 
gazed at him equally steadily and plainly wished to enter into 
conversation with him. The others present, including the land­
lord, he regarded with the boredom of long habit and with 
a shade of lofty disdain, as if he considered them too much his 
inferiors in rank and education to speak to. He was a man of 
over fifty, of middle height and corpulent build, with grizzled 
hair and a large bald patch. His face was bloated with con­
tinual drinking and his complexion was yellow, even greenish. 
From between his swollen eyelids his little reddish slits of eyes 
glittered with animation. But there was something very strange 
about him; his eyes had an almost rapturous shine, they seemed 
to hold both intelligence and good sense, but gleams of some­
thing like madness showed in them as well. His old black frock­
coat was terribly frayed and had lost all but one button, but 
this, with evident regard for the proprieties, he kept carefully 
fastened. A crumpled, stained, and dirty shirt-front protruded 
from under his nankeen waistcoat. The thick grey stubble on 
his cheeks and chin, once clean-shaven in civil-service style, 
revealed that it was some time since they had known a razor. 
His bearing, too, was solidly official. But he seemed disturbed, 
his hair was ruffled, and from time to time, propping his ragged 
elbows on the stained and sticky table, he leaned his head 
on his hands in utter dejection. At length he looked straight 

I O  
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
at Raskolnikov and addressed him in a loud and decided 
tone : 
'My dear sir, will you allow me to address some words of 
seemly conversation to you ? For, although you bear no out­
ward evidence of distinction, my experience discerns in you a 
man of education and one unaccustomed to potations. I have 
always held education, coupled with sincerity of feeling, in the 
highest respect, and indeed I am myself a Titular Councillor. 
Marmeladov is my name, sir, Titular Councillor. May I take 
the liberty of asking if you are in the Service?' 
'No, I am studying . .  .' replied the young man, surprised 
partly at being so directly addressed and partly by the other's 
peculiarly florid manner of speech. In spite of his recent 
momentary wish for contact, of whatever kind, with other 
people, no sooner was a word actually spoken to him than he 
experienced the old unpleasant feeling of exasperated dislike 
for any person who violated, or even seemed desirous of dis­
turbing, his privacy. 
'A student, then, or a former student,' cried the clerk ; 'I 
thought so ! Experience, my dear sir, experience !' and he laid 
his finger to his forehead in self-congratulation. 'You have been 
a student, or you have moved in academic circles ! But permit 
me . .  .' He rose, wavering a little, took his bottle and glass and 
sat down close to the young man and a little to one side. 
Although he was drunk, he spoke glibly and fluently, only 
occasionally hesitating and losing the thread. The avidity with 
which he seized upon Raskolnikov was such that it almost 
seemed as though he too had spoken to nobody for a month. 
'My dear sir,' he began almost portentously, 'it is a true 
saying that poverty is no crime. And even less, as I well know, 
is drunkenness a virtue. But beggary, my dear sir, beggary is 
a vice. In poverty, the inborn honourable sentiments may 
still be preserved, but never in beggary-not by anybody. In 
beggary, a man is not driven forth from human society with a 
cudgel, but, to make his condition more humiliating, is swept 
away with a broom-and with justice, for as a beggar I am 
the first to humiliate myself; hence the public house. My dear 
sir, a month ago Mr. Lebezyatnikov gave my wife a terrible 
beating, and my wife, you must understand, is not at all the 
same thing as myself. May I be allowed to ask you, even though 
it has the appearance of simple curiosity, whether you have 
ever passed the night on a hay barge on the Neva?' 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
I I 
'No, as it happens, I haven't,' answered Raskolnikov. 'Why 
do you ask?' 
'Well, sir, I come from spending five nights there . .  .' 
He filled his glass, drank it off, and sat deep in thought. 
There were, in fact, wisps of hay clinging to his clothing and 
even in his hair. It was easy to believe that he had neither 
undressed nor washed for five days. His greasy red hands were 
particularly dirty, with black-rimmed nails. 
His talk seemed to have attracted general, though languid, 
interest. The lads behind the bar began to snigger. The land­
lord seemed to have come down from the upper room on 
purpose to listen to the 'comic turn', and sat in dignified 
aloofness, yawning lazily. It was plain that Marmeladov was 
well known in this place. Even his florid way of speaking 
appeared to derive from his constant habit of talking to stran­
gers of all kinds in public houses. This habit becomes a necessity 
to some drunkards, especially if they are harshly used and 
domineered over at home. Then in the company of other 
drinkers they strive to justify themselves and even, if they can, 
to inspire respect. 
'A regular comic !' said the host loudly. 'Why don't you do 
some work? If you are in the civil service, why don't you 
perform your duties?' 
'Why don't I perform my duties, my dear sir?' retorted 
Marmeladov, addressing himself exclusively to Raskolnikov, 
as if it were he who had pj.lt the question, '-why don't I 
perform my duties ? Does not my heart bleed because I am an 
abject and useless creature? Did I not suffer when, a month 
ago, Mr. Lebezyatnikov beat my wife with his own hands 
while I lay fuddled with drink? Allow me to ask, young man, 
if you have known what it is to 
. . .  hm .
. . well, to plead 
without hope for a loan?' 
'Yes, I have . . . but what do you mean by "without 
hope" ?' 
'I mean utterly without hope, sir, knowing beforehand that 
nothing will come of it. For instance, you know quite definitely, 
beforehand, that this person, this most right-minded and useful 
citizen, will not in any circumstances give you the money. 
And why, indeed, I ask, should he give me it, when he knows 
that I shall not repay it? Out of compassion? But recently 
Mr. Lebezyatnikov, who is a follower of the latest ideas, was 
explaining that in this age the sentiment of compassion is 

12 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
actually prohibited by science, and that that is how they order 
things in England, where they have political economy: Why, 
then, I ask, should he give you it? Nevertheless, knowing in 
advance that he will give you nothing, you turn your steps 
towards him and . . .  
' 
'But then why go?' put in Raskolnikov. 
'But if you have nobody else, no other place, to turn to ! 
Every man must needs have somewhere to turn to. For there 
comes a time when it is absolutely essential to turn somewhere. 
The first time my only daughter went on the streets I too went 
. . .  (for my daughter is a street-walker, sir),' he added paren­
thetically, regarding the young man somewhat uneasily. 'It is 
nothing, my dear sir, it doesn't matter,' he hastily, but with 
apparent tranquillity, declared, when the two lads at the bar 
burst out laughing and even the host himself smiled. 'It matters 
nothing, sir. This wagging of heads does not discountenance 
me, for all these things are already known to everybody and 
all secrets are revealed ; and I bear myself in this matter with 
humility, not with scorn. Suffer them, suffer them ! "Behold 
the man !" Allow me to ask, young man, can you . . .  ? Or no, 
let me express it with greater force and exactness : not can you, 
but dare you, looking upon me at this moment, say with 
conviction that I am not a swine?' 
The young man made no answer. 
'Well, sir,' continued the orator sedately and with even 
greater dignity waiting for the sniggering to die down again, 
'well sir, grant that I am a swine, but she is a lady ! I have the 
form of a beast, but Katerina I vanovna, the partner of my life, 
is an educated person and by birth the daughter of a staff 
officer. Grant that I am an infamous wretch, but she is a 
creature of lofty mind, filled with sentiments ennobled by 
education. And yet . . .  oh, if only she showed some sympathy 
for me ! My dear sir, my dear sir, it is necessary for every man 
to have one place, if only one, where he can find sympathy. 
But Katerina Ivanovna, although she is a great-souled lady, is 
unjust . . .  And although I fully understand that when she pulls 
me by the hair it is only out of compassion (for, I repeat with­
out embarrassment, she does pull me by the hair, young man),' 
he affirmed with enhanced dignity, when he heard the sniggers 
break out again, 'but, oh God, if she would only, just once . . .  
But no, no ! it is all in vain, it is useless to talk ! Useless to talk ! 
. . . for, more than once before, my wish has been granted, 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
1 3 
and more than once she has taken pity on me, but . . .  but­
such is my character, I am a beast by nature !' 
'I should think so !' yawned the landlord. 
Marmeladov emphatically banged his fist on the table. 
'Yes, such is my character ! Do you know, do you know, sir, 
that I have drunk her very stockings? Not her shoes, for that 
might have some small resemblance to a natural action, but her 
stockings, I have drunk even her stockings, sir ! And I have 
drunk her mohair shawl as well, and it was her own, a gift 
made to her in the old days, not mine ; and the room where we 
live is cold, and this winter she caught a chill and began to 
cough and even to spit blood. We have three small children 
and Katerina Ivanovna is working from morning till night, 
scrubbing and washing and bathing the children, for she has 
been accustomed to cleanliness from a child ; but her chest is 
weak and she has a consumptive tendency, and I feel it. Could 
I fail to feel it? The more I drink, the more deeply I feel it. 
That indeed is why I drink, to find compassion and feeling in 
drink . . .  I drink because I wish to multiply my sufferings !' 
And in apparent despair he laid his head on the table. 
'Young man,' he continued, raising himself again, 'I read 
a certain affliction in your features. I saw it as soon as you 
entered, and for that reason I addressed myself to you. For 
when I confide the story of my life to you, it is not in order to 
expose my shame to these idlers here, who know it already, but 
because I seek the company of a man offeeling and education. 
You must know that my wife was educated in a provincial 
Imperial Academy for the daughters of gentlemen ; on leaving 
she performed a shawl dance before the Governor and other 
distinguished persons, for which she was presented with a gold 
medal and a certificate of merit. The medal . . .  well, the medal 
was sold long ago . . . hm, but she has the certificate in her 
trunk to this day, and she was displaying it to our landlady 
quite recently. Although there is the most unremitting hostility 
between the landlady and herself, she needed somebody to 
show off to a little, and to tell of the vanished happy days. 
And I do not judge her, I do not judge her, for these things are 
cherished in her memory, and everything besides is gone with 
the wind ! Yes, yes, she is a lady of passionate, proud, and inflex­
ible character. She washes the floor with her own hands, she 
eats the bread of affliction, but she will not brook disrespect. 
For that reason she refused to tolerate Mr. Lebezyatnikov's 

14 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
incivility, and when Mr. Lebezyatnikov beat her for it and 
she took to her bed, it was not so much from her physical 
injuries as from wounded feelings. She was a widow when I 
married her, with three children-small, smaller, and smallest. 
She married her first husband, an infantry officer, for love, 
and she ran away from home with him. She loved him im­
moderately, but he fell into gambling habits, was brought into 
court, and died of it. He began to beat her towards the end, , 
and although, as I know for a fact, from written evidence, she 
repaid him in kind, yet she remembers him to this day with 
tears, and uses him to reproach me with-and I am glad, I am 
glad, for even if it is only her imagination, she thinks of herself 
as having been happy once . . . And she was left with three 
young children in a wild and remote part of the provinces, 
where I happened to be at the time. She was left in such hopeless 
destitution that, with all my wide and varied experience, I 
lack words to describe it. All her family had renounced her. 
Besides, she was proud, proud to excess . . .  And it was then, 
my dear sir, then that I, who was myself a widower with a 
fourteen-year-old daughter, offered her my hand, for I could 
not bear to see such suffering. And from the fact that she, an 
educated and well-bred person bearing a well-known name, 
consented to marry me, you may judge the extent of her 
affliction. But she did marry me ! Weeping and sobbing and 
wringing her hands, she married me ! For she had nobody to 
turn to ! Do you understand, young man, do you understand 
what it means to have nowhere left to turn to ? No, you do not 
understand that yet . . . And for a whole year I religiously 
fulfilled my sacred obligations and never touched this' (he 
poked at the bottle with his finger), 'for I am not without 
feeling. But I could not please her, even by that; and then I 
lost my situation, not through any fault of mine but through 
reorganization in the Service, and then I did touch it ! . . .  It 
must be a year and a half since, after all our wanderings and 
numerous disasters, we finally found ourselves in this magni­
ficent capital city, adorned with so many monuments. And 
here I found a situation . . .  Found it, and lost it again. Do 
you understand, sir? Here it was by my own fault that I lost it, 
for my characteristic failing had reasserted itself . . .  Now we 
are living in a corner at Amalia Fedorovna Lippewechsel's, 
though what we live on and how we pay the rent I do not 
know. There are many other people living there besides 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
ourselves . . .  It is an absolute bear-garden, sir, most disgraceful 
. . .  hm . . .  yes . . .  And meanwhile my little daughter by my 
first wife has grown up, and what she has borne, poor child, 
from her stepmother while she was growing up I will not speak 
of. For although Katerina Ivanovna is full of generous senti­
ments, she is a hasty, irritable, and sharp-tongued lady . . .  Yes, 
sir. Well, it does no good to talk of that ! Sonya, as you may 
well imagine, has had no education. About four years ago I 
tried to study geography and the history of the world with her, 
but as my own knowledge was limited and we had no suitable 
textbooks, while the few poor books we did possess . . .  hm . . .  
well, we no longer have even them now, and so that was the 
end of our studies. We stopped at Cyrus the PersianȚ Later, 
after she grew up, she read a few novels, and not long since, 
through the kindness of Mr. Lebezyatnikov she read with great 
interest a little book, Lewes's P!rysiologl-perhaps you know it, 
sir?-, and even read parts of it aloud to us ; and that is the 
sum total of her education. And now, my very dear sir, I wish 
to put to you a confidential question on my own account : do 
you think that a poor but honourable girl can earn much by 
honest labour? . . .  She cannot earn fifteen copecks a day, sir, 
if she is honest and without special talents, even though her 
hands are never still for a moment. And even so, State Coun­
cillor Ivan lvanovich Klopstock-perhaps you may have 
heard ofhim?-not only has not paid her to this day for making 
half a dozen fine linen shirts, but even shouted at her and drove 
her from the house, stamping and calling her abusive names, 
on the pretext that the collars were the wrong size and set in 
crooked. And here were the children hungry . . . .  And here was 
Katerina lvanovna walking up and down the room, wringing 
her hands, with a red flush in her cheeks, as there always is in 
her disease : "Here you are," she says, "living with us, eating 
and drinking and keeping warm, you lazy good-for-nothing"­
though what is there to eat and drink when even the little 
ones haven't seen a crust for three days ? . . .  At the time I was 
lying . . .  well, why make any bones about it? . . .  I was tipsy, 
and I heard my Sonya saying (she is meek and her voice is so 
soft and gentle . . .  she is fair, and her little face is always thin 
and pale)-saying: "Oh, Katerina lvanovna, must I really 
come to that?" I must tell you that Darya Franzovna, a woman 
well known to the police, had tried two or three times to 
approach her through the landlady, with evil intentions. "Why 

16 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
not?" answered Katerina I vanovna mockingly ; "what is there 
to preserve so carefully? What a treasure !" But don't blame her, 
don't blame her, my dear sir, don't blame her ! It was said in 
distraction, when she was ill and wrought up, and the children 
were crying with hunger, and besides it was said more to hurt 
her feelings than with any exact intention . . .  For Katerina 
Ivanovna's disposition is like that, and if the children cry, even 
if it is with hunger, she lashes out at them at once. And towards 
six o'clock I saw my little Sonya get up and put on her kerchief 
and her pelisse and go out, and at some time after eight she 
came back. She came in and went straight to Katerina I vanovna 
and laid thirty silver roubles on the table in front of her without 
a word. She looked at her, but she did not utter a single word, 
only took our big green woollen shawl (we have one which 
serves for all of us), wrapped it round her head and face and 
lay down on the bed, with her face to the wall, and her little 
shoulders and her whole body were trembling . . .  And I was 
still lying there, in the same state . . .  And then, young man, 
then I saw Katerina Ivanovna, also without a word, go to my 
little Sonya's bed-side, and she stayed there on her knees all the 
evening, kissing her feet, and would not get up, and then they 
both fell asleep with their arms round one another . . .  both of 
them . . .  both of them . . .  yes, sir, and I . . .  lay there tipsy.' 
Marmeladov was silent, as though his voice failed him. 
Then he hastily filled his glass, drank it, and cleared his throat. 
'From that time, sir,' he continued after a short silence, 
'from that time, because of one unfortunate happening and 
because of information laid by persons of ill will (among whom 
Darya Franzovna was the most prominent, apparently be­
cause she thought she had not been treated with proper con­
sideration), from that time my daughter, Sonya Semenovna, 
has had to carry a prostitute's yellow card, and for that reason 
could not go on living with us. For the landlady, Amalia 
Fedorovna, would not allow it (although, before, she herself 
had abetted Darya Franzovna), and besides, Mr. Lebezyat­
nikov . . .  hm . . .  Indeed, it was on Sonya's account that there 
was all that trouble between him and Katerina Ivanovna. 
At first he had tried to win my little Sonya's favours himself, 
and then suddenly he got up on his high horse : "What?" says 
he, "am I, a man of culture, to live in the same flat with a 
creature of that kind?" Katerina I vanovna would not allow 
this and intervened 
.
•
•
 and it developed into . . . And now 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
I 7 
when Sonya comes to see us it is usually after dark ; she com­
forts Katerina I vanovna and brings what money she can . . .  
She is living now in the flat of Kapernaumov, the tailor ; she 
rents a room from them. Kapernaumov is lame and has an 
impediment in his speech, and all his many children have the 
same impediment. So has his wife . . .  They all live in one room, 
but Sonya's is partitioned off . . .  Hm . . .  yes . . .  They are very 
poor people, and they all stammer . . .  yes . . .  Well, then I got 
up in the morning, sir, and put on my rags ; I raised my hands 
to heaven and went to His Excellency Ivan Afanasyevich. Do 
you know His Excellency I van Afanasyevich? No? Then you do 
not know one of God's saints. He is-wax . . .  wax before the 
face of the Lord ; melting as wax ! . . .  There were even tears in 
his eyes, when he had kindly listened to all my story. "Well, 
Marmeladov," he said, "you disappointed my expectations once 
before . . . I will take you once more on my own personal 
responsibility," that 's what he said ; "remember that," says he, 
"and now go !" I kissed the dust at his feet-in thought, for he 
would not have allowed it in fact, being a high official, an 
enlightened man, and a believer in advanced political ideas ; 
I returned home and when I announced that I was again a 
member of the Service, and should receive a salary, what 
excitement there was ! . . .  
' 
Marmeladov stopped again in violent agitation. At this 
moment a whole party of merry-makers, who had already had 
too much to drink, came in and from near the door came the 
sound of a barrel-organ and the cracked childish voice of a 
seven-year-old singing The Little Hutb There was a lot of noise. 
The landlord and his assistants were busy with the new­
comers. Marmeladov resumed his story without paying any 
attention to them. He was apparently very much 'under the 
influence', but the drunker he got, the more voluble he became. 
The recollection of his recent successful application for re­
instatement had restored his spirits and the reflection of his 
satisfaction shone in his face. Raskolnikov was listening atten­
tively. 
'This, sir, happened five weeks ago. Yes . . . As soon as they, 
Katerina Ivanovna and my little Sonya, heard of it, Lord ! 
it was like being transported to Heaven. Before, it was nothing 
but abuse : lie there like a pig ! But now, they walked on tiptoe, 
hushed the children: "Semen Zakharovich has been working 
and is tired ; now he is resting. Sh !" They brought me coffee 

18 
C RIME AND PUNISHMENT 
with scalded cream in it, before I went to work. We began to 
have real cream, think of that ! And how they scraped together 
the money for a decent outfit, eleven and a half roubles, I 
can't imagine. Boots, calico shirt-fronts, the most magnificent 
uniform, all got up in capital style, for eleven roubles and a half. 
I came home from work the first day and found that Katerina 
Ivanovna had made a two-course dinner,-soup and salt beef 
with horse-radish-a thing we had never even dreamed of 
before. She didn't possess any dresses, not one, sir, yet she 
looked as if she were dressed for a party, and it wasn't as if she 
had had anything to do it with, but she had managed it out of 
nothing : she had done her hair, found a clean collar of some 
sort, and cuffs, and she looked quite a different person, alto­
gether younger and prettier. My little Sonya, my darling, 
had only helped with money, "but," she said, "for the time being 
it is better for me not to come and see you too often myself. 
Perhaps after dark, so that nobody will see me." Do you hear 
that, do you hear it? Mter dinner I took a nap, and what do 
you think? Katerina I vanovna had broken off completely with 
our landlady, Amalia Fedorovna, a week before, they had had 
a terrible quarrel, and yet now she invited her in for coffee. 
They sat whispering together for two hours. "Semen Zakharo­
vich is in the Service now," says she, "and drawing a salary. 
He went to see His Excellency, and His Excellency himself 
came out to him, told all the others to wait, took Semen 
Zakharovich by the hand, and led him past them all into his 
study." Do you hear that, do you hear? "Of course, Semen 
Zakharovich," he said, "remembering your services, and al­
though you are given to that irresponsible weakness, yet since 
you now give me your promise, and especially since things 
have gone badly here without you" (listen, listen !), "I put my 
trust now," he said, "in your honourable word." And I tell you, 
she had just that moment made it up, not out of flightiness or 
for the sake of boasting. No, sir, I swear she believed it all 
herself; it was all her own imagination, but she gloried in it. 
And I do not condemn her; no, I do not condemn her for that . 
. . . Six days ago, when I took home my first salary, twenty­
three roubles and forty copecks, she called me her poppet: 
"What a poppet you are !" she said. This was in private, you 
understand. Well, I suppose I'm not remarkable for beauty, 
and I'm a poor sort of a husband. But she pinched my cheek : 
"What a poppet you are !" she said.' 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
19 
Marmeladov stopped and tried to smile, but his chin began 
to quiver. He controlled himself, however. This tavern, his 
look of debauchery, the five nights spent in a hay-barge, the 
bottle, combined with his painful affection for his wife and 
family, bewildered his hearer. Raskolnikov was listening with 
close attention, yet with a feeling of discomfort. He felt vexed 
that he had come here. 
'Oh, dear sir, dear sir !' exclaimed Marmeladov, recovering 
himself, 'oh, dear sir, perhaps all this seems ludicrous to you, 
as it does to these others, perhaps I am only worrying you with 
all these stupid and pitiful details of my domestic life, but it is 
not ludicrous to me ! For I am capable of feeling it all . . .  
I spent the remainder of that heavenly afternoon, and all the 
evening, in fleeting dreams, of how I would reconstruct our 
life, get clothes for the children, give her tranquillity and 
restore my only daughter from dishonour to the bosom of her 
family . . .  And many, many things besides. It was pardonable, 
sir. Well, my dear sir' (here Marmeladov gave a sort of shudder, 
raised his head, and gazed steadily at his hearer), 'well, sir, 
the very next day after all this dreaming (that is, exactly five 
days ago), in the evening, by a cunning trick, I stole the key 
of her box from Katerina Ivanovna and took out all that was 
left of the money I had brought her, how much I don't 
remember exactly, and now look at meț all of you ! This is my 
fifth day away from home, and they are looking for me there, 
my employment is gone, and my uniform is in a pot-house 
near the Egyptian Bridge, where I exchanged it for these 
clothes . . . all is over ! ' 
Marmeladov struck his forehead with his fist, clenched his 
teeth, closed his eyes and leant his elbow heavily on the table. 
But after a minute his face changed suddenly, and he looked 
at Raskolnikov with an assumption of slyness and artificial 
bravado, laughed, and went on : 'I went to see Sonya this 
morning and asked her for money to get something for my 
thick head. He-he-he !' 
'She didn't give it you, did she?' shouted one of the new­
comers, and roared with laughter. 
'This very bottle, sir, was bought with her money,' an­
nounced Marmeladov, still addressing himself exclusively to 
Raskolnikov. 'Thirty copecks she gave me with her own hands, 
her last, all she had, as I saw for myself . . .  She said nothing, 
she only looked at me in silence . .. A look like that does not 

20 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
belong to this world, but there . . . where they grieve over 
mankind, they weep for them, but they do not reproach them, 
they do not reproach ! . . .  but it hurts more, when there are 
no reproaches ! . . .  Thirty copecks, yes, sir. And surely she 
needs them herself now, eh? What do you think, my dear sir? 
Now she must take care to be always neat and clean. And that 
neatness, that special cleanness, costs money, you understand. 
Do you understand ? Then she must buy rouge as well, it 's 
absolutely essential ; starched petticoats, coquettish little boots 
to set off her little foot when she has to step across a puddle. 
Do you understand, do you understand, sir, what that smart­
ness means ? Well, sir, and I, her own father, took those thirty 
copecks of hers for drink ! And I am drinking it, sir ! I have 
already drunk it all ! . . .  Now, who could be sorry for a wretch 
like me, eh? Are you sorry for me now, sir, or not? Tell me, 
sir, are you sorry or aren't you? He-he-he-he !' 
He tried to pour himself another drink, but there was no 
more. The bottle was empty. 
'Why should anyone be sorry for you?' cried the landlord, 
who happened to be near them again. 
There was an outburst of laughter, and some cursing. It 
came partly from those who had been listening, and the others, 
who had not listened, laughed and cursed at the mere sight of 
the dismissed clerk. 
'Sorry ! Why be sorry for me?' exclaimed Marmeladov, 
positively inspired, as if he had been waiting for just those 
words, and rising to his feet with outstretched arms, 'Why be 
sorry, you say? No, there is no need to be sorry for me ! I ought 
to be crucified, crucified, not pitied ! Crucify, oh judge, 
crucify me, but pity your victim ! Then I will come to you to be 
crucified, for I thirst for affliction and weeping, not for merri­
ment ! . . .  Do you think, you who sold it, that this bottle of 
yours has been sweet to me? Affliction, I sought affliction at 
the bottom of it, tears and affliction, and I found them, I 
tasted them. But He will pity us, He who pitied all men and 
understood all men and all things, He alone is the judge. In 
that day He shall come and ask : "Where is the daughter who 
gave herself for a harsh and consumptive stepmother and the 
little children of another? Where is the daughter who showed 
compassion to that filthy drunkard, her earthly father, and 
did not shrink from his beastliness ?" And He will say: "Come 
unto Me ! I have already forgiven thee . . . I have forgiven 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
2 I 
thee . . .  Thy sins, which are many, are forgiven, for thou didst 
love much . . .  " And He will forgive my Sonya, He will forgive 
her; I know that He will forgive . . .  When I was with her, a 
short time ago, I felt it in my heart . . .  And He shall judge all 
men, and forgive them, the good and the evil, the wise and the 
humble . . .  And when He has done with all men, then shall he 
summon us also : "Come forth," He will say "ye also, ye drunk­
ards, ye weaklings, ye infamous, come forth ]" And we shall 
come forth without shame and stand before Him. And He 
will say : "Y e are swine ! ye are made in the image of the beast 
and bear his mark; yet come ye also unto Me !" And the wise 
and learned shall say : "Lord, why dost Thou receive these?" 
And He shall say : "I receive them, oh ye wise men, I receive 
them, oh ye learned ones, inasmuch as not one of these has 
deemed himself worthy . . .  " And He will stretch out His arms 
to us, and we shall fall at His feet and weep, and we shall 
understand all things. Then we shall understand . . . and all 
shall understand . . .  and Katerina I vanovna, she shall under­
stand also . . .  Lord, Thy kingdom come !' 
And he sank back on the bench, weak and exhausted, not 
looking at anyone, as though he were plunged in thought and 
had forgotten his surroundings. His words had made some 
impression ; silence reigned for a short time, and then laughter 
and curses broke out again. 
'There spoke the great intellect !' 
'A lot of rubbish !' 
'There 's a civil servant for you !'-and so on, and so on. 
'Let us go, sir,' said Marmeladov suddenly raising his head 
and turning to Raskolnikov, 'take me home . . .  Kozel's house, 
at the back. It is time I went . . .  to Katerina Ivanovna.' 
Raskolnikov had long wished to leave, and had already made 
up his mind to help him. Marmeladov proved to be much 
more affected in his legs than in his speech, and leaned heavily 
on the young man. They had some two or three hundred 
yards to go. The drunkard's agitation and apprehension grew 
steadily greater as they neared the house. 
'I am not afraid of Katerina Ivanovna now,' he muttered 
anxiously, 'nor of her pulling me by the hair. What does my 
hair matter?-my hair is nothing ! That is what I say. It will 
be better, indeed, if she does pull my hair, I am not afraid of 
that .
. . I . . .  it is her eyes I am afraid of . . .  yes . . .  her eyes. 
I am afraid of the red patches on her cheeks, . . .  and her 

22 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
breathing. Have you seen how people with her disease breathe 
. . .  when they are upset? I am afraid of the children's crying, 
too . . .  Because, unless Sonya has given them food, then . . .  
I don't know what, I don't know ! But I am not afraid of 
blows . . .  You must know, sir, that such blows not only do not 
distress me, but they give me pleasure . . .  For I cannot do 
without them. It is better to have them. Let her beat me, it will 
relieve her feelings . . .  it is better so . . .  But here is the house, 
the house of Kozel the locksmith, the German, the rich man 
. . .  Take me in !' 
They entered from the yard and went up to the fourth floor. 
The higher they went, the darker grew the staircase. It was 
nearly eleven o'clock, and although it is never really night in 
St. Petersburg at that season, it was very dark at the top of the 
stairs. 
The grimy little door at the head of the stairs stood open. 
A candle-end lighted up a poverty-stricken room about ten 
paces long; all of it could be seen from the landing. It was 
disordered and untidily strewn with various tattered children's 
garments. A torn sheet was stretched across the corner at the 
back of the room. The bed was probably behind it. There was 
nothing in the room but two chairs and a sofa covered with 
ragged oilcloth, with an old deal kitchen table, unpainted and 
uncovered, standing before it. On the edge of the table stood 
the stump of a tallow candle in an iron candlestick. It appeared 
that Marmeladov had a room, not only a corner of one, but 
the room was no more than a passage. At the farther end the 
door leading to the other rooms, or rabbit-hutches, into which 
Amalia Lippewechsel's flat was divided, stood ajar. From 
beyond it came a great deal of noisy talk and laughter. People 
seemed to be playing cards and drinking tea. Occasionally the 
most indecorous words came flying out of the door. 
Raskolnikov knew Katerina Ivanovna at once. She was 
terribly wasted, a fairly tall, slender, shapely woman with still 
beautiful dark-brown hair and cheeks flushed with hectic red. 
She was walking up and down the little room with her hands 
pressed to her breast. Her lips looked parched and her breath­
ing was harsh and uneven. Her eyes had a feverish glitter, but 
their gaze was hard and fixed. The consumptive and agitated 
creature was a painful spectacle, with the last light of the 
guttering candle flickering on her face. She appeared to 
Raskolnikov to be about thirty years old, and she and Marme-

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
23 
ladov were certainly ill-matched . . .  She did not hear or notice 
them as they entered ; she seemed to be in a sort of stupor, deaf 
and blind to everything. The room was stuffy, but she had not 
opened the window ; a foul smell came from the stairs, but the 
door to the landing was not shut; clouds of tobacco-smoke 
blew in from the other rooms through the half-open door, and 
she coughed but did not close it. The smallest child, a little 
girl of about six, was asleep on the floor, sitting hunched up 
with her head resting against the sofa. A boy about a year older 
stood crying and shaking in a corner; he had evidently just 
had a whipping. The eldest child was standing by her brother 
with her arm, as thin as a matchstick, about his neck. She was 
a tall and painfully thin little girl about nine years old, and 
her only garment was a worn and tattered chemise ; round her 
bare shoulders was thrown an old woollen pelisse which might 
have fitted her two years earlier but now came down only to 
her knees. She was whispering to the boy to soothe him and 
doing her best to prevent a fresh outburst of sobs, while her 
enormous, frightened dark eyes, which looked still larger in her 
pinched and terrified little face, followed her mother's move­
ments. Marmeladov did not go right into the room, but gave 
Raskolnikov a push which sent him forward, and himself fell 
on his knees at the door. At the sight of the stranger the dis­
tracted woman paused for a moment before him, evidently 
pulling herself together and wondering why he had come, 
but then it seemed to occur to her that he must be going to 
one of the other rooms, to which theirs served as a passage. 
Having come to this conclusion she paid him no further 
attention, but turned towards the entrance to shut the door, 
and suddenly cried out at the sight of her husband on his knees 
on the threshold. 
'Ah !' she shrieked in a frenzy, 'so you've come back ! Gaol­
bird ! Monster ! . . .  Where 's the money? What have you got 
in your pockets?-show me ! But those aren't your clothes ! 
Where are yours ? Where 's the money? Say something ! . . .  
' 
And she threw herself forward and began to ransack his 
pockets. Marmeladov at once raised his arms, in a humble and 
submissive gesture, to make the search easier. There was not a 
single copeck. 
'Where is the money, then?' she cried. 'Oh God, he can't 
have drunk it all ! There were twelve silver roubles left in my 
box ! . .  .' Then, beside herself, she clutched his hair with a 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
sudden swift movement and dragged him into the room. 
Marmeladov himself helped, shuffling meekly on his knees 
after her. 
'This is a sweet satisfaction to me ! This gives me not pain 
but plea-ea-sure, my-y-y dear sir !' he exclaimed, while he was 
shaken by the hair and once even had his forehead bumped 
on the floor. The child asleep on the floor woke up and began 
to cry. The boy in the corner could bear it no longer, but in a 
paroxysm of terror flung himself crying and shivering into his 
sister's arms. She was trembling like a leaf. 
'You've drunk it all, drunk all of it!' wailed the poor woman 
in despair, 'and those clothes aren't yours ! Hungry, they are 
hungry !' (she pointed to the children and wrung her hands) . 
'Oh, accursed, wretched life ! And you, aren't you ashamed,' 
she turned suddenly on Raskolnikov, 'coming here from the 
public house? Have you been drinking with him? Get out !' 
The young man left hurriedly without a word. Meanwhile 
the inner door had been pushed wide open and impudent 
laughing faces, adorned with pipes or cigarettes, or topped 
with skull-caps, were peering out inquisitively. There were 
figures in dressing-gowns left quite unfastened, others so 
scantily dressed as to be indecent ; some of them held cards in 
their hands. They laughed with special glee when Marmela­
dov, dragged about by the hair, cried out that he enjoyed it. 
Some of them even began crowding into the room. Finally 
there came an ominous piercing yell from Amalia Lippewechsel 
herself, who came pushing to the front to restore order in her 
own fashion and to frighten the poor woman by ordering her 
for the hundredth time, with a string of oaths, to quit the flat 
the very next day. As he went out, Raskolnikov, thrusting his 
hand into his pocket and scraping together the coppers re­
maining from the rouble he had changed in the tavern, 
managed to put them unobserved on the window-sill. After­
wards, on his way downstairs, he repented of his action and 
almost turned back. 
'What a stupid thing to do,' he thought, 'since after all they 
have Sonya and I need it myself.' But reflecting that it was no 
longer possible to take back the money and that in any case 
he would not have done so, he shrugged his shoulders and 
turned homewards. 'Besides, of course Sonya needs rouge,' he 
went on with a sarcastic laugh, as he walked along, 'and such 
smartness costs money • 
. . Hm ! And perhaps Sonya will be 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
25 
empty-handed herself to-day, for there is always that risk, when 
one is hunting . . .  or prospecting for gold . . .  and that means 
they would all be in a bad way tomorrow, without that money 
of mine . . . Poor Sonya ! What a little gold-mine they've 
managed to get hold of there !-and profit from ! Oh yes, they 
draw their profits from it ! And they've got used to it. They 
wept at first, but now they are used to it. Men are scoundrels ; 
they can get used to anything !' 
He pondered. 
'Well, and if I am wrong,' he burst out suddenly, 'if men 
are not really scoundrels, men in general, the whole human 
race, I mean,-then all the rest is just prejudice, imaginary 
fears, and there are no real barriers, and that is as it should be !' 
C H A P T E R  I I I  
THE next day Raskolnikov awoke late from an uneasy and 
unrefreshing sleep. He woke feeling bilious, peevish, and 
irritable, and gazed round his little room with loathing. It was 
a tiny little cubby-hole of a place, no more than six paces long, 
and so low that anybody of even a little more than average 
height felt uncomfortable in it, fearful that at any moment he 
might bump his head against the ceiling. The yellowish dusty 
wall-paper peeling off the walls gave it a wretchedly shabby 
appearance, and the furniture was in keeping ; there were 
three rickety old chairs and a stained deal table in a corner, 
holding a few books and papers so covered with dust that it 
was plain that they had not been touched for a long time ; and 
lastly there was a large and clumsy sofa, taking up almost the 
whole of one wall and half the width of the room, and with a 
print cover now old and worn into holes. This served Raskol­
nikov as a bed. He often slept on it just as he was, without 
undressing, without sheets, covered with his old worn-out 
student's overcoat, his head resting on a little cushion with his 
whole stock of linen, clean and dirty, bundled together under 
it for a bolster. Before this sofa stood a small table. 
A more slovenly and degraded manner of life could hardly 
have been imagined, but it suited Raskolnikov's present mood. 
He had resolutely withdrawn from all human contacts, like a 
tortoise retreating into its shell, until the sight even of the face 
of the servant-girl who was supposed to look after him, and who 
looked in on him from time to time, made him shudder with 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
revulsion. Such behaviour is found among monomaniacs when 
they have concentrated all their energies on one point. His 
landlady had stopped supplying him with food two weeks 
earlier and it had not yet occurred to him to go down and have 
things out with her, although he had been left without dinner. 
The cook, Nastasya, the landlady's only servant, was inclined 
to welcome the lodger's mood and had quite stopped cleaning 
and tidying his room, though she might pick up a broom once 
a week or so. It was she who had waked him now. 
'Get up !-why are you still asleep?' she exclaimed, standing 
over him; 'it's past nine o'clock. I've brought you some tea ; 
wouldn't you like some? You'll be wasting away !' 
Raskolnikov opened his eyes with a start and recognized 
Nastasya. 
'Did the landlady send up the tea?' he asked, slowly and 
painfully raising himself on the sofa. 
'Likely, isn't it?' 
She put down before him her own cracked teapot with some 
tea still remaining in it, and laid beside it two yellowed pieces 
of sugar. 
'Here, Nastasya, take this, please,' he said, groping in his 
pocket (he had slept in his clothes) and taking out a small 
handful of coppers, 'and go and buy me a loaf. And go to the 
provision-shop and get me a bit of sausage, the cheapest kind.' 
'I'll bring you the loaf this minute, but instead of the sausage 
wouldn't you like some cabbage soup? It 's good soup, yester­
day's. I saved it for you yesterday, but you came in too late. 
It's good soup.' 
When the cabbage soup had been brought and Raskolnikov 
had begun to eat it, Nastasya sat down beside him on the sofa 
and began to chatter. She was a peasant, not a townswoman, 
and very talkative. 
'That Praskovya Pavlovna's going to go to the police about 
you,' she said. 
He scowled. 
'To the police? What does she want?' 
'You won't pay her her money, and you won't get out. It 's 
plain enough what she wants.' 
'The devil ! It only needed that !' he muttered, grinding his 
teeth. 'No ! Just now that's . . .  not convenient for me . . .  She's 
a fool,' he added aloud. 'I'll go and talk to her tomorrow.' 
'Of course she's a fool, and so am I, and you're very clever-

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
27 
but in that case, why do you lie here like an old sack, with 
nothing to show for your cleverness? You say you used to go 
and teach children ; why do you do nothing now?' 
'I am doing . . .  ' began Raskolnikov grimly and reluctantly. 
'What?' 
'Work . . .  
' 
'What sort of work?' 
'Thinking,' he replied seriously, after a moment's pause. 
Nastasya fairly shook with laughter. She laughed easily and 
often, and when anything amused her, her whole body shook 
and quivered with noiseless mirth until she almost choked. 
'Well, and have you thought up how to get a lot of money?' 
she inquired when at last she was able to speak. 
'I can't teach children when I have no boots. Besides, I 
despise the whole business.' 
'It 's no good quarrelling with your bread and butter.' 
'Teaching children is very badly paid. What can you do 
with a few copecks ?' he went on reluctantly, as if in answer to 
his own thoughts. 
'I suppose you want a fortune straight off?' 
He looked at her strangely and paused for a moment. 
'Yes, I do,' he answered firmly. 
'Well, you'd better go slow, or you'll frighten me; in fact 
I'm frightened already. Am I to go for the loaf or not?' 
'If you like.' 
'Oh, I forgot ! A letter came for you yesterday while you 
were out.' 
'A letter? For me? Who from? 
'I don't know. I gave the postman three copecks. Will you 
pay me back?' 
'Well, bring it here then, for God's sake !' cried Raskolnikov 
in great excitement. 'Good heavens !' 
A minute later the letter appeared. As he thought, it was 
from his mother in the province of --. He turned pale as he 
took it. It was a long time since he had received a letter, but 
it was something else that suddenly oppressed his spirit. 
'Nastasya, please go away; here are your three copecks, only 
please go quickly ! ' 
The letter trembled in his hands ; he did not wish to open 
it in her presence, he wanted to be alone with it. When N astasya 
went out, he lifted it quickly to his lips and kissed it, then for 
a long time he sat studying the small sloping writing on the 

28 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
envelope, the dear familiar handwriting of the mother who had 
long ago taught him to read and write. He hesitated, almost 
as though he were afraid of something. At last he opened the 
thick heavy packet ; the letter was a long one, two large sheets 
of paper covered with small close writing. 
'My dear Rodya,' wrote his mother, 
'It is now more than two months since I last talked to you by 
letter, and I am very distressed about this, so much so that 
sometimes I cannot sleep at night for thinking of it. But I am 
sure you will forgive my silence ; it has not been my own choice. 
You know how much I love you ; you are all we have, Dunya 
and I, you are everything to us, our only hope and trust. How 
deeply it grieved me to learn that you had left the university 
several months ago because you could not afford to keep 
yourself there, and that your teaching and other sources of 
income had come to an end. What could I do to help you with 
my hundred and twenty roubles of pension? The fifteen 
roubles I sent you four months ago I borrowed, as you know, 
on the security of my pension from one of the merchants here, 
Vassily I vanovich Vakhrushin. He is a good, kind man, and 
used to be a friend of your father's. But as I had made over to 
him the right to draw my pension I had to wait until the debt 
was paid off; that has only just been done, so I haven't been 
able to send you anything all this time. But now, thank God, 
I think I shall be able to send you a little more. Indeed, we 
can now congratulate ourselves that our fortunes in general 
have taken a turn for the better, and I hasten to tell you about 
it. 
'To begin with, dear Rodya, you will hardly guess-your 
sister has been with me for the last six weeks, and we shall 
never have to part again in future. Thank God, her torments 
are over. I must tell you everything from the beginning, so that 
you shall know how it all happened, and all the things we have 
been keeping from you till now. Two months ago, when you 
wrote that you had heard from somebody that Dunya had a 
great deal of unkindness and rudeness to put up with at the 
Svidrigaylovs', and asked me for full particulars, what answer 
could I give you? If l had told you the whole truth, you would 
perhaps have thrown everything up and come home to us, 
even if you had had to walk all the way, for I know your 
character and your feelings, and you would not have allowed 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
29 
your sister to be insulted. I was desperate myself, but what 
could I do? And even I didn't know the whole truth then. The 
chief difficulty was that when Dunechka went to them as 
governess last year, she drew a whole hundred roubles in 
advance, to be repaid monthly out ofher salary, and that meant 
that she could not leave until the debt was settled. She took 
this money (I can tell you all this now, dearest Rodya) 
principally so that she could send you the sixty roubles you 
needed so badly just then, which you had from us last year. We 
deceived you at the time, writing to you that it was money that 
Dunechka had saved before, but that was not true, and now 
I am telling you the whole truth because everything has 
suddenly changed for the better, by God's will, and because 
I want you to know how much Dunya loves you, and what a 
priceless treasure her heart is. Mr. Svidrigaylov really behaved 
very rudely to her at first, and made sarca3tic and discourteous 
remarks to her at table . . .  But I don't want to go into all the 
unpleasant details, I want to spare you unnecessary distress 
and it is all over now. In short, although Marfa Petrovna, 
Mr. Svidrigaylov's wife, and the rest of the household, treated 
her kindly and generously, things were very difficult for 
Dunechka, especially when Mr. Svidrigaylov, who had ac­
quired the habit in his old regimental days, was under the 
influence of Bacchus. 
'But worse was to come. Can you believe that he had long 
since conceived an extravagant passion for Dunya and that 
all his rudeness and contempt was simply assumed to hide it? 
Perhaps he was ashamed and frightened when he found him­
self, well on in years and the father of a family, cherishing 
such irresponsible hopes, and for that reason felt involuntary 
hostility to Dunya. Or perhaps he simply wanted to hide the 
true state of affairs from other people by behaving rudely and 
jeering at her. But at last he lost all control, and had the 
effrontery to make dishonest proposals quite openly to Dunya, 
promising her all sorts of things in return. He was even pre­
pared to throw up everything and run away with her to some 
other estate, or perhaps abroad. You may imagine how Dunya 
suffered ! It was impossible to leave her position at once, not 
only because of her debt, but also out of consideration for 
Marfa Petrovna, whose suspicions might have been aroused, 
which would have bred discord in the family. Besides Dunya 
herself could not have avoided disgrace and scandal. So there 

30 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
were several different reasons why she could not bring herself 
to escape from that horrible house until six weeks ago. Of 
course you know Dunya, with her wise head and her resolute 
character. Dunechka is capable of bearing a great deal, and 
even in the worst straits would still retain the nobility and 
firmness of her character. Even to me she didn't tell everyɕ 
thing, for fear of upsetting me, although we often wrote to 
one another. 
'The denouement came unexpectedly. Marfa Petrovna hapɖ 
pened to overhear her husband pleading with Dunechka in 
the garden and, completely misunderstanding everything, 
accused her of being the cause of the whole thing. There was 
a dreadful scene there in the garden ; Marfa Petrovna even 
struck Dunya, and wouldn't listen to a word from her, but 
went on raving at her for a whole hour. Finally, she ordered 
Dunya to be sent back to me at once in a common peasant's 
cart, into which all her things were thrown pell-mell, without 
packing or anything. It began to pour with rain and Dunya, 
insulted and humiliated, had to travel the whole seventeen 
versts with a peasant in an open cart. 
'Now think, what could I possibly have said in answer to 
your letter of two months ago, what could I have written about? 
I felt desperate ; I dared not tell you the truth, because that 
would only have made you unhappy, anxious, and angry, and 
what could you have done, except perhaps ruin your own life? 
-and besides Dunya would not let me ; yet I could not fill a 
letter with trifles and everyday affairs when my heart was so 
heavy. The whole town talked of the scandal for weeks, and 
things got to such a pitch that Dunya and I could not go to 
church because of the contemptuous looks we got, and the 
whispering, and even remarks made aloud in our presence. 
None of our acquaintances would have anything to do with us, 
they even cut us in the street, and I learned for a fact that some 
shop assistants and junior clerks planned to insult us in the 
basest manner by smearing the gates of the house with tar, so 
that the landlord began to press us to leave the flat. The Gause 
of all this was Marfa Petrovna, who had managed to carry her 
accusations and her attacks on Dunya's good name into every 
house in the town. She knows everybody here, and she spent 
all that month running about the town. As she is rather garru­
lous and likes to talk about her domestic affairs and complain 
about her husband to all and sundry, she soon spread the story 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
3 1 
all over the district as well as in the town itself. It made me ill, 
but Dunya is made of sterner stuff; I wish you could have seen 
how well she bore it all, and comforted and sustained me at the 
same time. She is an angel. 
'Mercifully, our sufferings were quickly brought to an end ; 
Mr. Svidrigaylov had a change of heart and repented. He was 
apparently seized with pity for Dunya, for he gave Marfa 
Petrovna full documentary proof of her innocence, in the form 
of a letter which Dunya had found herself obliged to write and 
give to him, declining the private explanations and secret inter­
views he was trying to insist on. This letter, which remained 
in his possession after Dunya's departure, fervently and in­
dignantly reproached him with the unworthiness of his conduct 
towards Marfa Petrovna and reminded him that he was a 
husband and father, and that it was base of him to torment 
and make miserable a defenceless girl who was unhappy enough 
already. In a word, dear Rodya, it was so noble and touching 
a letter that I sobbed as I read it, and even now I cannot read 
it without tears. Besides this, there now came out at last the 
evidence of the servants, who, as is always the case, had seen 
and known a good deal more than Mr. Svidrigaylov supposed, 
and who also exonerated Dunya. 
'Marfa Petrovna was thunder-struck and "completely over­
whelmed", as she herself confessed to us. She was, however, 
fully convinced of Dunya's innocence, and the very next day, 
Sunday, she went straight to the cathedral and on her knees 
prayed with tears to Our Lady to give her strength to bear this 
new trial and perform her duty. Then she came straight to us 
from the cathedral and told us everything, and, full of remorse 
and weeping bitterly, embraced Dunya and begged her for­
giveness. The same morning, without losing any time, she 
went straight from us to every house in the town and every­
where, in the most flattering terms, proclaimed with tears 
Dunya's innocence and the nobility of her feelings and conduct. 
What is more, she showed everybody Dunya's letter to Mr. 
Svidrigaylov, read it aloud, and even allowed people to copy it 
(which seems to me to be going too far) . She spent several days 
in going the rounds in this way, and some people began to 
complain that preference had been shown to others, and so 
turns were arranged, so that people were already waiting for 
her in each house, and everybody knew that on such-and-such 
a day she would be in such-and-such a place to read the letter. 

32 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
To every reading people came who had already heard it both 
in their own homes and in other people's as well. It is my 
opinion that a great deal, a very great deal, of all this was 
unnecessary, but Marfa Petrovna is like that. At all events she 
fully re-established Dunechka's reputation, and such indelible 
shame for his ignoble conduct has come to her husband as the 
principal offender that I am sorry even for him; his folly has 
been too severely punished. Dunya was invited to give lessons 
in various houses, but she refused. The general attitude towards 
her has suddenly changed to one of marked respect. 
'All this helped considerably to make possible the event 
which, I may venture to say, has completely changed our 
destiny. You must know, dear Rodya, that a suitor has pre­
sented himself for Dunya, and that she has found it possible 
to accept him. Now I want to take this first opportunity of 
telling you all about it. And although matters have been 
arranged without consulting you, you will not nurse any 
grievance against either your sister or me, for you will see, 
when I have told you about it, that it would have been 
impossible to postpone the decision and wait until we had had 
an answer from you. Besides, you could not have formed an 
accurate judgement without being here. This is how it hap­
pened : Peter Petrovich Luzhin, who has already attained the 
rank of Civil Councillor, is a distant connexion of Marfa 
Petrovna's, who has done a great deal to assist him in this. 
It all began with his expressing through her a wish to meet us ; 
he was received in a fitting manner and took coffee with us, 
and the very next day sent us a letter in which he expressed his 
proposal very civilly and asked for a speedy decision. He is a 
practical man and very busy, and he had to go to St. Peters­
burg in a hurry, so every minute counted. Of course, we were 
taken aback at first ; it all happened too quickly and unex­
pectedly. We spent the whole day weighing and considering 
the question. He is a dependable person, in a secure position, 
and already has some capital of his own; he has two different 
situations. It is true that he is forty-five years old, but his 
appearance is quite pleasant and may still be attractive to 
women ; altogether, he is a solid and worthy man, if rather 
overbearing and harsh in manner. But this, perhaps, is only 
one's first impression. 
'I warn you, dear Rodya, not to judge him too rashly and 
hastily, as you are inclined to do, if, when you meet him in 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
33 
St. Petersburg (as you will very shortly), there seems to you at 
first glance to be something lacking in him. I say this just in 
case, although I am certain that he will make a favourable 
impression on you. Besides, if you want to know a person 
thoroughly, you must go slowly and carefully, so as to avoid 
mistakes and prejudices, which are always difficult to correct 
or eradicate afterwards. And Peter Petrovich is, at heart, in 
many ways a man to be respected. On his first visit he explained 
to us that he was a man of settled opinions, but in many things 
shared, as he put it, "the convictions of the younger generation" 
and was an enemy of all prejudice. He said a great many other 
things, for he is a little vain and likes to have an audience, but 
that is a small fault. Of course, I didn't understand much of it, 
but Dunya explained to me that, although not very highly 
educated, he is intelligent and seems good and kind. You know 
your sister's character, Rodya. She is steadfast, sensible, patient, 
generous, even if she is impetuous too, as I have good cause to 
know. Of course, there is no particular love either on her side 
or on his, but Dunya, besides being a sensible girl, is a noble 
creature too, like an angel, and would make it her duty to 
ensure her husband's happiness if he, for his part, concerned 
himself with hers. On this score we have little cause for doubt, 
although, I confess, the thing has been done rather quickly. 
Besides, he is a very prudent man, and will certainly see for 
himself that the happier Dunya is, married to him, the more 
certain his own married life is to be happy. As for some dis­
similarities in temperament, some confirmed old habits, even 
some incompatibility in opinion that may exist (and that can­
not be avoided even in the happiest unions), Dunechka has 
told me that she can rely on herself, and that there is no reason 
for uneasiness on that account, since she can put up with a 
good deal provided that their further relationship is on an 
honest and honourable footing. For instance, he seemed to me 
at first rather brusque, but that may be-it must be-only 
because he is outspoken ; he is certainly that. On his second 
visit, for example, after he had been accepted, he told us in 
the course of conversation that even before he knew Dunya he 
had intended to take as his wife an honest girl without a dowry, 
who must have known poverty, because, as he explained, a 
husband ought not to be under any sort of obligation to his 
wife, and it was much better if she looked upon him as her 
benefactor. I must add that he expressed himself rather less 

34 
C RIME AND PUNISHMENT 
crudely and harshly than this, because I have forgotten his 
actual words and remember only the sense of them ; and 
besides, he really did not intend to say them at all, but evi­
dently let them slip in the heat of the conversation, and after­
wards he tried to correct himself and tone down what he had 
said ; all the same it seemed just a little crude to me, and I 
told Dunya so afterwards. But Dunya was quite angry and 
answered rather sharply that "words are not deeds", and of 
course that is true. 
'The night before she came to her decision, Dunya did not 
sleep at all, but when she thought I was asleep got out of bed 
and walked about the room all night ; finally she knelt down 
before the icon and prayed fervently; and in the morning she 
told me that she had decided. 
'I have already mentioned that Peter Petrovich is now on his 
way to St. Petersburg. He has important business to do, and he 
hopes to open a law office there. He has been engaged for some 
time in the conduct of various actions and lawsuits and only 
recently he won an important case in the Senate. Now he has 
important business to deal with in the Senate, so it is essential 
for him to go to St. Petersburg. So, dear Rodya, he will be 
able to be very helpful to you in every way, and Dunya and I 
expect that from this very day you can make a definite start 
on your future career and see your destiny taking clear shape. 
Oh, if only our expectations are realized ! It would be such a 
blessing that we could only ascribe it to the direct intervention 
of Providence. Dunya dreams of nothing else. We have even 
ventured to say a few words on the subject to Peter Petrovich. 
His answer was expressed cautiously; he said that a secretary 
was certainly necessary to him and that it was obviously better 
to pay a salary to a relative than to a stranger, provided he is 
capable of fulfilling his duties (as if you could possibly not be 
capable !), but he expressed some doubt whether your uni­
versity studies would leave you time for his office. That was the 
end of the matter for the moment, but now Dunya can think of 
nothing else. She has been in a fever of excitement for several 
days and has thought up a complete plan for you to become 
Peter Petrovich's colleague and even partner in his law business, 
especially as you are studying in the Faculty of Law yourself. 
I fully agree with her, Rodya, and share all her plans and hopes, 
which I think very likely to be fulfilled ; and in spite of Peter 
Petrovich's easily explainable evasiveness (after all, he doesn't 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
35 
know you yet), Dunya is firmly convinced that she will accom­
plish it all by her good influence over her future husband. 
Of course, we have taken care not to say anything to Peter 
Petrovich about these more distant dreams of ours, especially 
about your being his partner. He is a very sober-minded man, 
and what would seem to him to be the wildest day-dreams 
might get a cold reception from him. Equally, neither Dunya 
nor I have breathed a word to him of our profound hope that 
he will help us to assist you with money while you remain at 
the University, because, in the first place, it will come of itself 
later on, and he himself will probably make the offer without 
being urged (would he be likely to refuse Dunya such a thing?), 
the more readily as you may become his right-hand man in the 
office and receive the help not as a benefaction but as well­
earned salary. That is how Dunya wants it to be, and I agree 
with her. In the second place, we have not spoken of it because 
we particularly want you to meet as equals when, very soon 
now, you make his acquaintance. When Dunya talked en­
thusiastically to him about you, he replied that he found it 
necessary to make a close personal study of any person in 
order to form an opinion of him, and that he would rely on 
his own judgement when he came to know you. 
'Do you know, my dearest Rodya, I think (without the 
slightest reference to Peter Petrovich or to anything but my 
own personal whims, those perhaps of a silly old woman)­
! think that I should perhaps do better to go on, after their 
marriage, living by myself, as I do now, rather than with 
them. I am quite sure that he will have the delicacy and con­
sideration to invite me to live with them, and not to part again 
from my daughter, and if he has not already done so, it is 
because it is taken for granted ; but I shall refuse. More than 
once in my life I have noticed that husbands have no great 
liking for their mothers-in-law, and I not only don't want to 
be in the slightest degree a burden to anybody, but I also want 
to be completely free myself, so long as I have a crust of bread, 
and two such children as you and Dunechka. If possible, I shall 
settle somewhere near both of you. 
'For you must know, Rodya, that I have saved the best news 
till the end ; it is that we shall perhaps all three be together 
again in a very short time, my dear, and be able to embrace 
one another again after nearly three years of separation. It has 
been difinitely decided that Dunya and I are to move to St. 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
Petersburg. I don't know exactly when, but very, very soon in 
any case, perhaps even next week. It all depends on Peter 
Petrovich's arrangements, and as soon as he has had time to 
look round in St. Petersburg he will let us know. For various 
reasons he wants the wedding to take place very soon, even 
before the next fast, if possible, and if the time is too short, 
then immediately after the Assumption. Oh, what happiness 
it will be to press you to my heart ! Dunya is full of joy at the 
thought of seeing you again and once she said, in jest, that she 
would have married Peter Petrovich if only for that. She is an 
angel ! She is not writing to you now, but she told me to tell 
you that she has a lot to say to you, so much that she won't 
put a finger to her pen at the moment, because writing a few 
lines doesn't get anything said and only upsets one. She told me 
to send you her love and any number of kisses. 
'Although we are perhaps to see each other face to face so 
soon, all the same I will send you some money in a few days, 
as much as I can. Now that everybody knows that Dunya is 
going to marry Peter Petrovich my credit has suddenly im­
proved, and I am quite sure that Afanasy I vanovich will 
advance me up to seventy-five roubles on the security of my 
pension, so that I shall be able to send you perhaps twenty-five 
or even thirty. I should send more except that I am afraid of 
our travelling expenses; although Peter Petrovich has been 
good enough to take on himself part of the cost of our journey 
to the capital, offering to make himself responsible for the 
conveyance of the big trunk and our other luggage, through 
the good offices of some acquaintances of his up there, all the 
same we have to think of our arrival in St. Petersburg, where 
we couldn't turn up without a farthing, even for the first day 
or two. However, Dunya and I have already gone into all the 
details, and we find that the actual journey will not be very 
expensive. It is only ninety versts from here to the railway, 
and we have already made arrangements with a peasant we 
know, who is a carrier ; then we shall be quite happy travelling 
on from there third class. So perhaps it will be not twenty-five; 
but more likely thirty roubles that I shall contrive to send you. 
And now, my darling Rodya, until our speedy reunion, 
all my love and a mother's blessing. You must love your sister 
Dunya, Rodya, love her as she loves you-and her love for you 
is boundless ; she loves you more than hersel£ She is an angel, 
Rodya, and you-you are everything to us ; all our hope and 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
37 
trust is in you. If only you are happy, we shall be happy too. 
Do you pray to God; Rodya, as you used to do, and do you 
believe in the mercy of our Creator and Redeemer? I am afraid, 
in my heart, that you too may have been affected by the 
fashionable modern unbelief. If that is so, I will pray for you. 
Remember, my dear, how, when you were a child and your 
father was still alive, you lisped your prayers at my knee, and 
remember how happy we all were then ! Good-bye-or rather, 
au revoir. I send you all my love, and many, many kisses. 
Your devoted mother, 
Pullɗheria Raskolnikova.' 
Almost all the time that Raskolnikov was reading this letter 
his face was wet with tears, but when he came to the end it was 
pale and convulsively distorted and a bitter angry smile played 
over his lips. He put his head down on his thin, crumpled 
pillow and lay there for a long time, thinking. His heart was 
beating fiercely and his thoughts were wildly agitated. At last 
it began to seem close and stuffy in the shabby little room, so 
like a box or a cupboard. His eyes and his thoughts both craved 
more space. He seized his hat and went out, this time without 
fearing to meet anybody on the stairs ; he had forgotten all 
about that. He turned his steps in the direction of Vasilyevsky 
Island, along the Voznesensky Prospect, hurrying as though he 
had business there, but, as usual, he walked without noticing 
where he was going, whispering and sometimes even talking 
aloud to himself, to the surprise of the passers-by. Many of 
them supposed him to be drunk. 
C H A P T E R  I V  
H x s  mother's letter had tortured him. O n  the most important, 
the fundamental, point, he had not a moment's doubt, even 
while he was reading the letter. The most essential question 
was decided in his mind, and decided with finality. 'This 
marriage shall never take place while I live, and Mr. Luzhin 
may go to the devil !' 
'Because the thing is obvious,' he muttered to himself, smiling 
with malicious enjoyment at the anticipated triumph of his 
decision. 'No, mama, no, Dunya, you cannot deceive me ! . . .  
And yet they make excuses for not asking my advice and for 
coming to their decision without me. Of course !  they think 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
it's impossible to break it off now, but we shall see whether it is 
impossible or not. And what marvellously flimsy excuses they 
find : "Peter Petrovich is such a busy man," say they, "so busy 
that he can't even get married except post-haste; everything 
must be done at express speed." No, Dunechka, I see it all, and 
I know what it is you have such a lot to say about to me ; I 
know, too, what you were thinking of, while you paced the 
room all night, and what you prayed for, kneeling before 
the icon of Our Lady of Kazan in mama's room. The way 
to Golgotha is hard. Hm . . .  So it's all decided and settled ; 
you, Avdotya Romanovna, are graciously pleased to marry a 
practical, a rational man, who has some capital of his own 
(already has some capital, that makes it sound solider and more 
imposing), a man who has two situations and shares the con­
victions of the younger generation (as mama says) and who 
seems good and kind, as Dunechka herself remarks. That seems 
is magnificent !-and Dunechka is going to marry that seems! 
. . . Magnificent, magnificent ! 
'I wonder, though, why mama wrote that to me about the 
"younger generation." Simply because it is characteristic of the 
man, or with the ulterior object of influencing me in Mr. 
Luzhin's favour? What diplomacy ! I should like one thing 
made clear, though ; how open were they with each other, that 
day and that night, and later? Were their real thoughts put 
into actual words, or did each of them tacitly understand that 
the same thing was in the hearts and minds of both of them, 
so that there was no need to name it aloud or to waste words 
in discussing it? Probably that was it, at least partly ; but you 
can tell from the letter that when mama found him crude, just 
a little, she was nai:ve enough to go to Dunya with her ob­
servations. She, of course, was angry and "answered rather 
sharply." Naturally ! it would have irritated anybody, when 
the thing was understood, without nai:ve questions, and when 
it had been settled that there was no need to put anything into 
words. And why does she write to me : "Love Dunya, Rodya ; 
she loves you more than she loves herself" ? ;  isn't it because 
her conscience torments her with remorse at having consented 
to sacrifice her daughter for the sake of her son? "You are 
everything to us, our only hope and trust." Oh, mama ! . .  .' 
Resentment welled up in him, more and more bitter, and if he 
had chanced to meet Mr. Luzhin at that moment, he would 
have felt like murdering him. 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
39 
'Hrn, it is true,' he continued, trying to follow the whirlwind 
of thoughts spinning in his brain, 'it is true that one must "go 
slowly and carefully" with a man if one wants to study him 
thoroughly ; but Mr. Luzhin is transparent. The main thing 
is that he 's "a practical man and seems good and kind" : is it a 
small thing that he has undertaken responsibility for the luggage, 
and will himself see that the big trunk is safely conveyed here? Of 
course he 's good and kind ! Meanwhile, the two of them, the bride 
and her mother, bespeak a peasant's cart covered with matting 
(I've travelled in it myself) ! It 's nothing, it's only ninety versts ; 
"then we shall be quite happy travelling third class" another 
thousand versts. And very sensible too ; one must cut one's coat 
according to one's cloth ; but you, Mr. Luzhin, what do you 
think of it? After all, she is your bride . . .  And how could you 
avoid knowing that her mother must borrow money on her pen­
sion for the journey? Of course, here you have a common com­
mercial transaction, an undertaking for mutual profit, with 
equal shares, and that means expenses shared equally too ; bread 
and salt in common, but supply your own tobacco, as the proverb 
says. And the practical man has indulged in a little sharp practice 
here ; the luggage costs less than their journey and perhaps he 
will even get it brought for nothing. Why don't they see what all 
this means, or are they turning a blind eye on purpose? And they 
are content, content ! When one thinks that this is only the 
blossom, and the real fruit is yet to come ! What is significant 
here is not the meanness, not the stinginess, but the tone of 
everything. It foreshadows the tone of their relationship after 
the marriage . . .  yes, and marna, what is she so pleased about? 
What is she going to appear in St. Petersburg with? Three 
silver roubles, or "a couple of rouble-bills", as that . . .  old 
woman . . .  called them . . .  Hrn . . .  What does she hope to 
live on in St. Petersburg afterwards? She has surely had some 
cause already to surmise that it will be impossible for her and 
Dunya to live together after the wedding, even at first? The 
dear man has evidently let it slip, quite by chance of course, 
and made himself very clear, although marna waves any such 
idea away with both hands : "!," she says, "shall refuse." 
What is she thinking of, what can she rely on? On her hundred 
and twenty roubles of pension, less deductions for the debt to 
Manasy Ivanovich? She ruins her old eyes knitting winter 
shawls and embroidering cuffs, and I know that all of it 
doesn't add more than twenty roubles a year to her hundred 

40 
C RIME AND PUNISHMENT 
and twenty. That means that in spite of everything she still 
relies on Mr. Luzhin's generosity of spirit. "He will invite me 
himself to live with them," says she, "he will urge me to." 
Yes, that 's likely ! These Schilleresque beautiful souls are 
always the same ; up to the very last moment they see people 
through rose-coloured spectacles ; up to the very last moment 
they hope for good and not evil ; and even if they have some 
misgivings that there is a reverse side to the medal, they refuse 
to admit them even to themselves ; they shrink from the very 
notion ; they wave the truth away with both hands until the 
very moment when the over-idealized person appears in his 
true colours and cocks a snook at them. 
'I wonder if Mr. Luzhin has any decorations ; I'm willing to 
bet he has an order of St. Anna* for his button-hole and wears 
it at contractors' and merchants' dinners. Perhaps he'll even 
wear it at his wedding. However, he can go to the devil ! . . .  
'Well, but let mama take that line-she can't help it, bless 
her, it's the way she's made-but Dunya? Dunechka, my 
dear, I know you ! You were nineteen when last we saw each 
other ; and I already understood your nature. Mama writes 
that "Dunechka is capable of bearing a great deal". I know 
that. I knew it two and a half years ago, and I have kept 
thinking of it during that two and a half years, of the fact that 
"Dunechka is capable of bearing a great deal". And now she 
and mama together have conceived the idea that she can bear 
even Mr. Luzhin's expounding his theory that wives ought to 
be rescued from beggary and loaded with benefactions by their 
husbands, and expounding it almost the first time he saw them. 
Even if we assume that "he only let it slip" (although he is a 
rational man and that means that perhaps the slip was inten­
tional, so as to make his position clear from the outset)-but 
Dunya, what of Dunya? Surely she must see what the man is ; 
and to live with him ! She would certainly eat only black bread 
and drink only water rather than sell her soul, and she would 
not surrender her moral freedom in return for comfort ; she 
wouldn't surrender it for all Schleswig-Holstein; let alone for 
Mr. Luzhin ! No, Dunya, as I knew her, was not like that and 
. . .  of course, she hasn't changed now ! . . .  
'Oh, it's all quite clear ! The Svidrigaylovs are not easy. It 
is not easy to spend one's life trailing round the provinces as a 
governess at two hundred roubles, but all the same I know she 
would sooner go to the plantations as a negro slave, or live 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
like a Latvian serf in some Baltic German household, than 
degrade her spirit and her moral feelings by a union with a man 
whom she does not respect and with whom she has nothing in 
common-for ever, just for her own personal advantage. And, 
even if Mr. Luzhin were made of the purest gold, if he were 
nothing but one large diamond, even then she would never 
consent to become his legal concubine. Then why does she 
consent now? What is the reason? What is the key to the 
riddle? It is quite clear ; for herself, for her own comfort, even to 
save herself from death, she would not sell herself, but for 
another she would ! For a dear one, for someone she adores, 
she would ! That is the key to the riddle : for her brother, for 
her mother, she would !-she would sell everything ! Ah, in 
such circumstances we throw our moral feelings into the bargain 
as well ; we carry our freedom, our peace of mind, even our con­
sciences,,everything, everything,;to the Flea Market. Let our lives 
go, if only these beloved creatures of ours are happy ! Nay more, 
we invent casuistical arguments for ourselves, we take a lesson 
from the Jesuits, and, for a time, contrive to allay our own 
doubts and convince ourselves that what we are doing is 
necessary, absolutely necessary, in a good cause. That is the 
way we are made ; it is all as clear as daylight. It is clear that 
nobody but Rodion Romanovich Raskolnikov is in question 
here, he occupies all the foreground. Well, his happiness may 
be secured, he may be kept at the University, made a partner 
in the office, his future provided for ; perhaps later on he may 
be rich, respected, honoured, he may even die famous ! And my 
mother? But this is a question of Rodya, precious Rodya, the 
first-born ! Why hesitate to sacrifice even such a daughter for 
the sake of such a first-born? Oh loving hearts, without any 
notion of justice ! Why, perhaps we would not refuse even 
Sonechka's fate. Sonechka, Sonechka Marmeladova, Sonechka 
the eternal, while the world lasts ! But this sacrifice, have you 
plumbed the full depths of this sacrifice? Really? Is your 
strength great enough? Will it really bring such great benefits? 
Is it really sensible and wise? Do you know, Dunechka, that 
Sonechka's fate is no whit worse than yours with Mr. Luzhin? 
"There can be no particular love here," writes mama. But 
what if, besides there being no particular love or respect, there 
is already abhorrence, scorn, loathing, what then? Then it 
follows, once more, that "one must preserve one's cleanness 
and purity". It is so, isn't it? Do you understand, do you 

42 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
understand, what that cleanness means? Do you understand 
that a Mrs. Luzhin's cleanness is exactly the same thing as 
Sonechka's, or perhaps even worse, fouler, more despicable, 
because you, Dunechka, can after all reckon on comforts into 
the bargain, and with the other it is a question simply of dy­
ing of hunger. "That purity and cleanness costs dear, dear, 
Dunechka !" Well, and what if your strength is not equal to 
it, and you repent? How much grief, how many laments, 
how many curses, how many tears hidden from all the world, 
hidden because you, after all, are not Marfa Petrovna ! And 
what of your mother then? She is uneasy and worried even now ; 
what then, when everything is clearly revealed? And what of 
me? . . .  How indeed have they been thinking of me? I will not 
have your sacrifice, Dunechka, I will not have it, mama ! It 
shall not be, while I live, it shall not, it shall not ! I will not 
accept it !' 
Suddenly he recollected himself, and stopped. 'It shall not 
be? What are you going to do to prevent it? Will you forbid 
it? But what right have you to do so? What can you offer that 
will give you the right? To consecrate your destiny, your whole 
future, to them, when you have finished your studies and obtained a 
situation? We've heard all that before, and it's all right for the 
future; but what about now? Something must certainly be 
done now, do you understand that? And what are you doing 
now? You are fleecing them. And they get the money for you 
on the security of a hundred-rouble pension or as an advance 
from the Svidrigaylovs. And how will you protect them from 
the Svidrigaylovs or from Afanasy lvanovich Vakhrushin, you 
future millionaire, disposing of their fates as though you were 
Zeus himself? Do you need ten years? In that ten years your 
mother will have time to go blind with knitting, and perhaps 
with tears ; she will waste away with fasting ; and your sister? 
Well, think what would become of her after those ten years, or 
during them. Have you thought?' 
Thus he teased and tormented himself with his problems, 
and even found a kind of pleasure in doing so. The problems 
were not new, however ; they did not confront him unexpect­
edly, but were an old and painful story. It was a long time since 
they had begun to lacerate his feelings. Long, long ago his 
present anguish had first stirred within him, and it had grown 
and accumulated until of late it had come to a head and con­
centrated itself into the form of a wild, fantastic and terrible 

C RIME AND P UNISHMENT 
43 
question, that tortured his emotions and his reason with its 
irresistible demands to be answered. Now his mother's letter 
had struck him like a thunderbolt. It was clear that now the 
time had come, not to languish in passive suffering, arguing 
that his problems were insoluble, but to act, to act at once and 
with speed. He must decide on something or other, come what 
might, or . . .  
'Or renounce life altogether !' he exclaimed suddenly, as if 
inspired, 'submit obediently, once for all, to destiny, as it is, 
and stifle everything within oneself, renouncing every right to 
act, to live, or to love !' 
Suddenly Marmeladov's question of the previous day came 
back to him : 'Do you understand, my dear sir, do you under­
stand what it means to have nowhere left to turn to? for 
every man must needs have somewhere to turn to . .  .' 
Suddenly he gave a shudder; another thought, also from 
yesterday, had come into his head again. But the shudder was 
not because the thought had returned. Indeed, he had known, 
he had foreseen, that it would return, and he had been expecting 
it ; but this thought was not quite tl;le same as yesterday's. 
The difference was that a month earlier, and even yesterday, 
it had been no more than a bad dream, but now . . .  it was 
revealed as no dream, but in a new, unfamiliar, and terrible 
form; and he had suddenly become conscious of this fact 
. . . His head throbbed and things went dark before his 
eyes. 
He glanced hastily round, looking for something. He needed 
to sit down, and he was looking for a bench. He was walking 
along Konnogvardeysky Boulevard, and he could see a bench 
about a hundred yards away, in front. He began to walk as 
quickly as he could, but on the way a small incident absorbed 
all his attention for a few minutes. 
As he looked at the bench he saw a woman walking some 
twenty paces in front of him, but at first he paid her no more 
attention than he had given before to all the other objects 
which had passed before his eyes. He had grown used, for 
example, to arriving at home, as he often did, without having 
any idea of how he had come there. But there was something 
so strange and striking, even at the first glance, about this 
woman walking along, that little by little his attention became 
fixed on her, at first unwillingly and almost with some vexa­
tion, and then with more and more concentration. Suddenly 

44 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
he felt a desire to know just what it was that was strange about 
her. To begin with, she seemed to be very young, no more 
than a girl, and she was walking through the blazing heat 
bare-headed and without gloves or parasol, waving her arms 
about queerly. Her dress was of a thin silken material, but it 
also looked rather odd ; it was not properly fastened, and near 
the waist at the back, at the top of the skirt, there was a tear, 
and a great piece of material was hanging loose. A shawl had 
been flung round her bare neck and hung crooked and lop­
sided. To crown everything, the girl's gait was unsteady and she 
stumbled and even staggered from side to side. The encounter 
had by now fully engaged Raskolnikov's attention. He came 
up with her close to the bench ; she went up to it and let herself 
fall into a corner of it, resting her head against the back and 
closing her eyes as if overcome with weariness. Looking closely 
at her, Raskolnikov realized at once that she was quite drunk. 
It was a strange, sad sight ; he even thought he must be mis­
taken. Before him he saw the small face of a very young girl, 
of sixteen, or perhaps only fifteen or so, small, pretty, fair­
haired ; but the face looked swollen and inflamed. The girl 
seemed to have little understanding of her surroundings ; she 
crossed one leg over the other, displaying more of it than was 
seemly, and to all appearances hardly realized that she was 
in the street. 
Raskolnikov did not sit down, but stood irresolutely in front 
of her, not wanting to go away. This boulevard is always rather 
deserted, but now at one o'clock, and in such heat, it was al­
most empty. Fifteen paces away, however, a gentleman had 
stopped at the edge of the boulevard, a little to one side, and 
it was plain that he was desirous of approaching the girl for 
some purpose. He too had probably seen her from a distance 
and followed her, but Raskolnikov's presence hampered him. 
He cast bad-tempered glances at him, yet tried not to be 
observed doing so, and impatiently awaited his opportunity 
when the vexatious intrusion of this ragamuffin should cease. 
He was a man of about thirty, thick-set and plump, with a 
pink-and-white complexion and red lips ; he wore a small 
moustache and was foppishly dressed. Raskolnikov grew 
furiously angry and was seized with a desire to make himself 
offensive to the fat dandy. He left the girl for a moment and 
went up to the gentleman. 
'Hey, you Svidrigaylov, what do you want here?' he 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
45 
exclaimed, clenching his fists and grinning with lips that foamed 
with rage. 
'What does this mean?' asked the gentleman sternly, frown-
ing with haughty astonishment. 
'Clear off! That 's what it means.' 
'How dare you, canaille?' 
He flourished his cane. Raskolnikov threw himself upon him 
with both fists, without stopping to consider that the stout 
gentleman was capable of dealing with two of him. But at that 
moment he was firmly seized from behind ; a policeman stood 
between them. 
'That 's enough, gentlemen ! No brawling in the public streets, 
if you please ! What do you want? Who are you?' he turned 
to Raskolnikov, sternly surveying his rags. 
Raskolnikov looked at him attentively. He had a manly, 
soldier's face, with grey moustache and whiskers and a sensible 
expression. 
'What do I want? I want you !' he exclaimed, seizing his 
arm. 'I am a former student, Raskolnikov . . .  You may as well 
know, too,' he added turning to the gentleman. 'But come 
along here, I have something to show you.' 
And he pulled the policeman by the arm towards the bench. 
'There, look, she 's quite drunk; she has just come along the 
boulevard ; Heaven knows who she is, but she can hardly be 
a professional. More likely somebody made her drunk and 
abused her . . .  do you understand me? . . .  for the first time . . .  
and then turned her out into the street like this. Look, her 
dress is torn ; look how it is put on; clearly she didn't dress 
herself, she was dressed by somebody else, and dressed by 
unskilful hands, masculine hands. That is plain. And now look 
over here ; that overdressed scoundrel that I was trying to fight 
is a stranger to me, this is the first time I have seen him, but he 
saw her as well, just now, this drunken girl, in no condition to 
take care of herself, and now he is aching to come and get hold 
of her-since she is in such a state-and take her off some­
where. It really is so ; believe me, I am not mistaken. I saw him 
watching her and following her, but I was in his way, and now 
he is simply waiting for me to go. Look, now he's moved a bit 
farther away, and stopped as if he wanted to roll a cigarette . . .  
How are we to keep her out of his hands ? How can we get her 
home ?-try to think !' 
The policeman had understood at once, and now he was 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
considering. The stout gentleman's position was, of course, 
clear ; there remained the girl. He stooped down to look at her 
more closely, and sincere compassion showed in his face. 
'Ah, it 's a great pity !' he said, shaking his head, 'she 's no 
more than a child. She 's been led astray, that 's right enough. 
Listen, miss,' he went on to her, 'where do you live?' The girl 
opened her tired, bleary eyes, looked dully at her questioners, 
and waved them away with her hand. 
'Listen,' said Raskolnikov, rummaging in his pocket and 
taking out twenty copecks that he found there, 'look, take a 
cab and tell him to drive to her address. Only we must get to 
know the address.' 
'Young lady, young lady !' began the policeman again, 
accepting the money, 'I'll get a cab for you right away, and 
I'll take you home mysel£ But where to, eh? Where do you 
live?' 
'Pshaw ! . . .  pestering me . .  .' muttered the girl with another 
wave of the hand. 
'Dear, dear, it's a bad business ! Oh, how shameful this is, 
young lady, what a disgrace !' He began to shake his head with 
a mixture ofpity and indignation. 'You know, this is a bit of a 
problem,' he added, turning to Raskolnikov and again envelop­
ing him from head to foot with a quick glance. Probably he 
seemed more than a little strange too, giving away money and 
wearing such rags. 
'Was she far from here when you found her?' asked the 
policeman. 
'I tell you she was reeling along the boulevard just here, 
in front of me. When she came to the bench she just slumped 
down on it.' 
'Oh, what shameful things there are in the world now, sir ! 
Such a simple young thing, and drunk already ! She 's been 
betrayed, that's what it is ; look how her dress is torn . . .  What 
wickedness there is nowadays ! . . . Maybe she belongs to 
decent people, poor ones, perhaps . . .  Lots of things like this 
happen nowadays. She looks as if she had been quite nicely 
brought up, almost like a real young lady,' and he stooped over 
her again. 
Perhaps he had daughters like her himself, who were 'nicely 
brought up, like young ladies', had good manners and copied 
all the new fashions. 
'The main thing,' said Raskolnikov anxiously, 'is to keep 

C RIME AND PUNISHMENT 
47 
her out of that scoundrel's hands. He would only dishonour 
her again. It 's quite plain what he wants ; look, he's not going 
away, the wretch.' 
Raskolnikov spoke loudly and pointed straight at him. The 
man heard him and seemed on the point of losing his temper 
again, but thought better of it and contented himself with a 
scornful glance. Then he slowly moved away another ten paces, 
and stopped again. 
'Well, that can be managed, sir,' answered the police 
officer, but with some hesitancy. 'If she would only tell us where 
to take her-otherwise . . .  Young lady, young lady !' and he 
stooped down again. 
Suddenly the girl opened her eyes wide, with an attentive 
expression, as though she had just grasped something. She got 
up from the bench and started back in the direction she had 
come from. 'Pah ! They have no shame, they keep on pestering 
me,' she said, with another wave of her hand. She walked 
quickly, staggering as she had before. Keeping his eyes fixed 
on her, the dandified gentleman followed, but along the other 
pavement. 
'Be easy, I will not let him !' said the policeman resolutely, 
turning to follow them. 
'Eh, what wickedness there is nowadays !' he repeated aloud, 
with a sigh. 
At this moment an instantaneous revulsion of feeling seemed 
as it were to sting Raskolnikov. 
'No, listen !' he cried after the moustached policeman. 
He turned round. 
'Stop ! What is it to you ? Drop it ! Let him amuse himself!' 
(he pointed at the gentleman) .  'What business is it of yours?' 
The policeman stared uncomprehendingly. Raskolnikov 
laughed. 
'Eh !' said the officer, and with a gesture of his hand followed 
the girl and the man, evidently taking Raskolnikov for a 
lunatic or worse. 
'He's gone off with my twenty copecks,' said Raskolnikov 
bitterly, when he was alone. 'Now he can take something from 
the other as well, and let the girl go with him, and that will be 
the end of it . . .  Why did I take it on myself to interfere? Was 
it for me to try to help ? Have I any right to help ? Let them eat 
one another alive-what is it to me? And how dared I give 
away those twenty copecks? Were they mine to give?' 

48 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
In spite of these strange words, he felt depressed. He sat 
down on the now empty bench. His thoughts were discon­
nected, and indeed, he felt too weary at that moment to think 
at all, on whatever subject. He would have liked to forget 
himself, to forget everything in sleep, and then to wake up 
and make a fresh start. 
'Poor girl !' he said, looking at the empty corner of the bench 
. . .  'When she comes to herself, there will be tears, and then her 
mother will get to know . . .  First she will get a thrashing, then 
she will be beaten with a whip, painfully and shamefully, and 
perhaps she will even be driven out . . .  And even if she isn't, 
the Darya Franzovnas will get wind of her, and she will be 
hunted this way and that . . .  Then will come the hospital 
(that's always the way with these girls when they live with 
very respectable mothers and have to take their fun on the sly), 
well, and then . . .  and then the hospital again . . .  vodka . . .  
dram-shops . . .  the hospital once more . . .  a wreck in two or 
three years, her life finished at no more than eighteen or 
nineteen years old . . .  Haven't I seen others like her? And 
what became of them? That 's what became of them . . .  Pah ! 
Let it go ! They say it must be so. Such and such a percentage* 
they say, must go every year . . .  somewhere or other . . .  to the 
devil, I suppose, so that the rest may be left in peace and quiet. 
A percentage ! They have some capital words : they are so 
soothing and scientific. Once you've said "a percentage" there 
is no need to worry any more. If you used a different word, 
why then perhaps . . .  it might be disturbing . . .  And what if 
Dunechka is included in the percentage? . . . If not in one, 
then in another? . . .  ' 
'But where am I going?' he thought suddenly. 'It's strange. 
I must have come for some reason. I came as soon as I had read 
that letter . . . I was going to Vasilyevsky Island, to Razu­
mikhin's, . . .  I remember now. But why? How did the idea of 
going to see Razumikhin come to enter my head just at this 
moment? It 's very odd !' 
He wondered at himself. Razumikhin was one of his old 
university friends. It should be noted that Raskolnikov had 
had scarcely any friends at the university. He held himself 
aloof, never went to see anyone and did not welcome visitors. 
Very soon, however, he found himself left severely alone. He 
took no part in the usual assemblies, discussions, or amusements. 
He worked strenuously, not sparing himself, and for this he was 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
49 
respected, but he was not liked. He was very poor and super­
ciliously proud and reserved. It seemed to some of his fellow 
students that he looked down on them all as children, as if he 
had outdistanced them in knowledge, development, and ideas, 
and that he considered their interests and convictions beneath 
him. 
With Razumikhin, though, he did make friends, or rather, 
he did not exactly make friends, but he was more open and 
communicative with him than with others. With Razumikhin, 
indeed, it was impossible to be otherwise. He was an unusually 
lively and talkative fellow, so goodhearted as to seem almost 
simple. But the simplicity concealed both depth and consider­
able merit. The best of his fellow students understood this and 
they all loved him. He was far from stupid, although he was 
sometimes really rather naive. In appearance he was striking, 
tall and thin, with black hair, and always badly shaved. He 
was subject to violent fits of rage, and had a reputation for great 
physical strength. On one occasion, out at night with a band 
of boon companions, he felled with one blow an enormous 
policeman well over six feet tall. He could indulge in endless 
drinking bouts, or refrain from drinking altogether ; sometimes 
the pranks he played were carried much too far, but he was 
also capable of being completely serious. Razumikhin was 
remarkable also in that failure never disconcerted him and 
adverse circumstances seemed powerless to subdue him. He 
could have lived on a roof and suffered the severest extremes of 
hunger and cold. He was very poor, with absolutely no other 
resources than the money he obtained by doing all sorts of odd 
jobs. He knew a thousand and one ways of earning money. 
Once he went a whole winter without any heat at all in his 
room, affirming that he preferred it, because one sleeps better 
in the cold. At the present moment he also had been obliged 
to leave the university, but only for a short time, and he was 
straining every nerve to improve his circumstances in order to 
continue his studies. Raskolnikov had not been to see him for 
the past four months, and he did not even know Raskolnikov's 
address. Two months or so previously, they had on one occasion 
nearly come face to face in the street, but Raskolnikov turned 
aside and crossed to the other side to avoid being seen, and 
Razumikhin, although he had in fact seen him, walked past, 
not wanting to worry his friend. 

so 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
C H A P T E R  V 
'YEs, I did think not so long ago of going to Razumikhin again 
to ask him to get me some work, lessons or something,' . . .  
Raskolnikov began to remember, 'but how can he help me 
now? Suppose he gets me some lessons, suppose he shares his 
last copeck with me, if he has such a thing, so that I can buy 
boots and make my clothes decent enough to go out in to give 
the lessons . . . hm. What then? What can I do with a few 
coppers? They will hardly meet my needs now. Really, it is 
almost comic that I was on my way to see Razumikhin . . .  
' 
The question of why he had been going to see Razumikhin 
troubled him more than he himself recognized ; he looked 
uneasily for some sinister meaning in this, it would seem, quite 
natural step. 
'Why, did I really think I could settle everything with no 
more than some help from Razumikhin ; did I think I had 
found a way out of all my difficulties ?' he asked himself in some 
astonishment. 
He went on thinking and rubbing his forehead and then, 
after a long time, unexpectedly and almost of its own accord, 
an extremely strange idea came into his head. 
'Hm . . .  I will go,' he said suddenly and composedly, as if 
he had reached a definite decision. 'I will go to see Razu­
mikhin, of course . . .  but-not now. I will go to him the 
day after, when that is over and done with and everything is 
different . . . ' 
Then he realized what he had said. 
'After?' he cried, jumping up from the bench ; 'but is it going 
to happen? Can it really be going to happen?' 
He left the bench almost running ; he had meant to turn 
back, but now the idea of going home seemed suddenly un­
bearable : it was there, in that dreadful little cupboard of a 
place that the thought of it had been maturing in his mind for 
more than a month. He walked on, without heeding where he 
went. 
His nervous shudderings seemed to have turned into a fever ; 
he even felt chilly; in that terrible heat he was cold. Driven 
by an inner compulsion, he tried to make himself be interested 
in everything and everybody he met, but with little success. 
He kept relapsing into abstraction, and when he again raised 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
5 1 
his head with a start and looked around, he could remember 
neither what he had just been thinking of nor which way he 
had come. In this fashion he walked right across Vasilyevsky 
Island, came out on the Little Neva, crossed the bridge, and 
turned on to the Islands. At first the greenery and freshness 
pleased his tired eyes, accustomed to the dust and lime of the 
town, and its tall buildings crowding oppressively together. 
Here there was no stuffiness, no evil smells, no public houses. 
But these pleasant new sensations soon gave place to painful 
and irritating ones. Occasionally he would stop before some 
picturesque dacha in its green setting, look through the fence 
and see in the distance gaily-dressed ladies on balconies or 
terraces, and children running about the gardens. He took a 
particular interest in the flowers and looked at them longest 
of all. Splendid carriages, and ladies and gentlemen on horse­
back, passed him, and he gazed after them with curious eyes 
and forgot them before they were out of sight. Once he stopped 
and counted his money; he found that he had about thirty 
copecks. 'Twenty to the policeman, three to Nastasya for the 
letter-that means I gave forty-seven or fifty to the Mar­
meladovs yesterday,' he calculated, but soon he forgot even 
why he had taken his money out of his pocket. He thought of it 
again as he passed a sort of tavern or eating-house, and realized 
that he was hungry. He went in, drank a glass of vodka and 
bought a pasty, which he finished eating as he walked along. 
It was a very long time since he had tasted vodka, and although 
he had drunk only one glass it began to affect him almost at 
once. His legs seemed suddenly heavy and he began to feel 
very sleepy. He turned homewards, but by the time he reached 
Petrovsky Island he was too exhausted to go on, and he turned 
aside from the road into some bushes, let himself fall to the 
ground, and was asleep at once. 
A sick man's dreams are often extraordinarily distinct and 
vivid and extremely life-like. A scene may be composed of the 
most unnatural and incongruous elements, but the setting and 
presentation are so plausible, the details so subtle, so unex­
pected, so artistically in harmony with the whole picture, that 
the dreamer could not invent them for himself in his waking 
state, even if he were an artist like Pushkin or Turgenev. Such 
morbid drealllS always make a strong impression on the 
dreamer's already disturbed and excited nerves, and are 
remembered for a long time. 

52 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
Raskolnikov dreamed a terrible dream. He dreamt that he 
was a child again, back in the little town they used to live in. 
He was a boy of seven, walking one holiday with his father 
outside the town. The afternoon was grey and sultry, the place 
just as he remembered it, except that the dream was more vivid 
than his recollection. He saw the little town as clearly as though 
he held it in his hand ; there was not a single tree anywhere, 
except for a little wood very far away, dark against the horizon. 
A few paces beyond the last gardens of the town stood a large 
tavern, which always made an unpleasant impression on him, 
even frightened him, whenever he and his father passed it on 
their walks. There was always such a crowd there, so much 
shouting, laughter, and cursing, such hoarse bawling of songs, 
such frequent brawls, and so many people lounging about 
outside, drunk, with horrible distorted faces. If ever they met 
any of these, he would press close to his father, shivering. The 
unmade road winding past the tavern was always dusty, and 
the dust just here was always black. Some three hundred yards 
farther on it curved to the right round the cemetery. In the 
cemetery was a stone church with a green cupola, where he 
came once or twice a year with his father and mother to a 
requiem in memory of the dead grandmother whom he had 
never seen. On these occasions they always took with them, 
wrapped in a napkin, a white dish of rice boiled with sugar and 
raisins, with a cross of raisins on the top. He loved this church 
with its ancient icons, most of them without frames, and the 
old priest with his trembling head. Near his grandmother's 
grave, which was marked by a stone, was the little grave of his 
younger brother, who had died at six months old and whom 
he could not remember. He had been told about his little 
brother and every time they visited the cemetery he devoutly 
and reverently crossed himself before the little grave and 
bowed down and kissed it. 
Now he dreamt that he and his father were passing the 
tavern on their way to the cemetery; he was holding his 
father's hand and looking fearfully over his shoulder at the 
tavern. There seemed to be some special festivity going on, 
which attracted his attention ;  there was a crowd of townsfolk 
and peasants and all kinds of rabble, all in their best clothes, 
and all drunk and bawling out songs. Near the entrance stood 
a cart, not an ordinary peasant's cart, but one of the huge 
drays drawn by great cart-horses, which are used for carrying 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
53 
bales of goods or barrels of liquor. He always loved to watch 
those massive dray-horses with their long manes and thick 
legs, plodding along at a steady pace and effortlessly pulling 
mountainous loads behind them, almost as if they found it 
easier than drawing an empty cart. The strange thing about 
this one was that a peasant's small, lean, decrepit old dun­
coloured horse was harnessed to it, one such as he had often 
seen straining under a high-piled load of hay or firewood, 
especially when the cart was stuck in a rut or in the mire, while 
the peasant lashed it mercilessly with his whip, sometimes even 
beating it about the head and eyes. He would be so sorry, so 
sorry for the poor horse that he almost cried, and mama always 
used to take him away from the window. 
Suddenly there was a din of shouting and singing, and the 
strumming of balalaikas, as a number of peasants, big men in 
red and blue shirts, with their coats slung over their shoulders, 
came out of the tavern roaring drunk. 'Get in, everybody get 
in !' shouted one, a young man with a thick neck and fleshy 
face as red as a beetroot, 'I'll take the lot of you. Get in !' There 
was a burst of laughter and shouting. 
'What, with that broken-down old nag?' 
'You must be out of your wits, Mikolka, to put that little old 
mare to that cart !' 
'The poor old beast must be twenty years old if she 's a day, 
lads !' 
'Get in ! I'll take all of you,' shouted Mikolka again, jumping 
in first himself. He gathered up the reins and stood upright 
at the front of the cart. 'Matvey has taken the bay,' he shouted 
from the cart, 'and as for this old mare, lads, she 's just breaking 
my heart. It can kill her for aught I care; she 's only eating her 
head off. Get in, I tell you ! I'll make her gallop ! She'll gallop, 
all right !' and he took up the whip, enjoying the thought of 
beating the old nag. 
'Well, get in, then !' laughed the crowd. 'You heard him say 
he'd get a gallop out of her ! She can't have galloped for ten 
years, I dare say.' 
'She 's going to now !' 
'Come on, lads, all bring your whips. No being sorry for her !' 
'That's it; let her have it !' 
They all clambered into Mikolka's wagon, with witticisms 
md roars of laughter. There were six of them, and there was 
;till room for more. They took up with them a fat red-faced 

54 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
peasant-woman in red cotton, with a head-dress trimmed with 
beads, and clogs on her feet. She was cracking nuts and laugh­
ing. The crowd round about was laughing too, and indeed, 
who could help laughing at the idea that such a sorry beast was 
going to pull such a load, and at a gallop? Two of the lads in 
the cart picked up their whips to help Mikolka. There was a 
roar of "Gee up !" and the wretched old nag tugged with all 
her might, but far from galloping she could barely stir at all, 
but simply scraped with her feet, grunting and flinching under 
the blows showering on her like hail from the three whips. 
The laughter in the cart and among the crowd redoubled, but 
Mikolka lost his temper and began raining blows on the little 
mare in a passion of anger, as if he really expected her to gallop. 
'Let me come as well, lads,' shouted a fellow from the crowd, 
attracted by the sport. 
'Get in, everybody get in,' yelled Mikolka, 'she'll pull you 
all. I'll give it her !' and he lashed away, so furious that he 
hardly knew what he was doing. 
'Papa, papa,' cried the child, 'look what they are doing, 
papa ! They are beating the poor horse !' 
'Come away,' said his father. 'They are drunk and playing 
the fool, the brutes. Come away; don't look !' and he tried to 
draw the boy away. But he tore himself from his father's grasp 
and ran heedlessly towards the horse. The poor creature was 
in a sad state. She was panting and kept stopping and then 
beginning to tug again, almost ready to drop. 
'Beat her to death !' howled Mikolka, 'that's what it's come 
to. I'll give it her !' 
'You're more like ?- brute beast than a proper Christian !' 
called an old man in the crowd. 
'The very idea of such a horse pulling a load like that !' added 
another. 
'You'll founder the poor old thing,' shouted a third. 
'You keep out of this ! She's mine, isn't she? I can do what 
I like with my own. Get in, some more of you ! Everybody get 
in ! She 's damn well going to gallop ! . . .  
' 
Suddenly there was a great explosion of laughter that 
drowned everything else : the old mare had rebelled against 
the hail of blows and was lashing out feebly with her hoofs. 
Even the old man could not help laughing. Indeed, it was 
ludicrous that such a decrepit old mare should still have a kick 
left in her. 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
55 
Two men in the crowd got whips, ran to the horse, one on 
each side, and began to lash at her ribs. 
'Hit her on the nose and across the eyes, beat her across the 
eyes !' yelled Mikolka. 
'Let's have a song, lads !' someone called from the wagon, 
and the others joined in. Somebody struck up a coarse song, a 
tambourine rattled, somebody else whistled the chorus. The 
fat young woman went on cracking nuts and giggling. 
. . . The boy ran towards the horse, then round in front, 
and saw them lashing her across the eyes, and actually striking 
her very eyeballs. He was weeping. His heart seemed to rise 
into his throat, and tears rained from his eyes. One of the whips 
stung his face, but he did not feel it; he was wringing his hands 
and crying aloud. He ran to a grey-haired, grey-bearded old 
man, who was shaking his head in reproof. A peasant-woman 
took him by the hand and tried to lead him away, but he tore 
himself loose and ran back to the mare. She was almost at her 
last gasp, but she began kicking again. 
'The devil fly away with you !' shrieked Mikolka in a fury. 
He flung away his whip, stooped down and dragged up from 
the floor of the cart a long thick wooden shaft, grasped one end 
with both hands, and swung it with an effort over the wretched 
animal. 
Cries arose : 'He'll crush her !' 'He'll kill her !' 
'She 's my property,' yelled Mikolka, and with a mighty 
swing let the shaft fall. There was a heavy thud. 
'Lash her, lash her ! Why are you stopping?' shouted voices 
in the crowd. 
Mikolka flourished the heavy bar again and brought it down 
with another great swing on the back of the wretched creature. 
Her back legs gave way under her, but she staggered up, tug­
ging and jerking one way and the other to get away; six whips 
rained blows on her from every side, and the shaft rose and 
fell a third time, and then a fourth, with a rhythmical swing. 
Mikolka was frenzied with rage at not having killed her with 
one blow. 
'She 's tough !' yelled one of the crowd. 
'This time she'll go down, for certain, lads. She 's finished,' 
shouted another. 
'Take an axe to her ! Finish her off at one go !' cried a third. 
'Oh, may you be bitten to death by mosquitoes !' shrieked 
Mikolka furiously, dropping the shaft and stooping down again 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
to drag out an iron crowbar. 'Look out!' he yelled, and crashed 
it down with all his strength on the poor old mare. The blow 
was a crushing one; the mare staggered, sank down, and then 
made another effort to get up, but the crowbar struck another 
swinging blow on her back, and she fell as if her legs had been 
cut from under her. 
'Finish her !' shouted Mikolka, and jumped down, quite 
beside himself, from the cart. A few of the young men, as 
drunk and red in the face as he, snatched up whatever came to 
hand-whips, sticks, the shaft-and ran to the dying mare. 
Mikolka stationed himself at the side and belaboured her back 
at random with the crowbar. The wretched animal stretched 
out her muzzle, drew a deep, labouring breath, and died. 
The crowd was still shouting. 
'He 's done for her !' 
'All the same, she didn't gallop !' 
'My own property !' cried Mikolka, who, with bloodshot eyes, 
was standing with the crowbar in his hands and looking sorry 
that there was no longer anything to beat. 
Many voices in the crowd were now calling, 'Shame ! You're 
no better than a heathen !' 
The poor little boy was quite beside himself. He pushed his 
way, shrieking, through the crowd to the mare, put his arms 
round the dead muzzle dabbled with blood and kissed the 
poor eyes and mouth . . . Then he sprang up and rushed 
furiously at Mikolka with his fists clenched. At that moment 
his father, who had been looking for him for a long time, 
caught him up and carried him out of the crowd. 
'Come along, come along !' he said. 'Let us go home.' 
'Papa, why did they . . .  kill . . .  the poor horse?' the boy 
sobbed, catching his breath. The words forced themselves out 
of his choking throat in a scream. 
'They are drunk, they are playing the fool. It is none of our 
business. Let us go.' He put his arm round his father, but his 
breast was convulsed with sobs. He struggled for breath, tried 
to cry out, and awoke. 
He woke panting and sweating, his hair damp with per­
spiration, and sprang up in alarm. 
'Thank God, it was only a dream,' he said, sitting down 
under a tree and drawing long breaths. 'But why did I dream 
it? Can I be starting some sort of fever? It was such a horrible 
dream.' 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
57 
His whole body felt bruised, and his mind dark and confused. 
He put his elbows on his knees and propped his head in his hands. 
'God !' he exclaimed, 'is it possible, is it possible, that I really 
shall take an axe and strike her on the head, smash open her 
skull . . .  that my feet will slip in warm, sticky blood, and that 
I shall break the lock, and steal, and tremble, and hide, all 
covered in blood . . .  with the axe . . .  ? God, is it possible?' 
He was shaking like a leaf. 
'But why am I saying this?' he went on, leaning back again 
as if amazed at himself. 'I must have realized that I should 
never carry it out, so why have I gone on tormenting myself 
until now? Yesterday again, yesterday, when I went for that 
. . .  rehearsal, I must certainly have been quite sure yesterday 
that I should never do it . . .  Then why am ·I talking about it 
now? Why do I still go on harbouring doubts? Yesterday, as I 
came downstairs, didn't I tell myself that it was vile, disgusting, 
base, base . . .  didn't I turn sick at the very thought of it, when 
I was not dreaming, and run away in terror . . .  ?' 
'No, I shall not do it, I will not do it ! Grant that there is 
no element of doubt in all those calculations of mine, grant that 
all the conclusions I have come to during the past month are as 
clear as daylight, as straightforward as arithmetic, all the same 
I shall never summon up enough resolution to do it. Of course 
I shall not carry it out, I shall not ! . . .  Then why, why, am I 
still . . .  ? 
He stood up, looked round as if wondering how he came to 
be there, and walked away to the Tuchkov Bridge. He was 
pale, his eyes glittered, exhaustion filled every limb, but he had 
suddenly begun to breathe more easily. He felt that he had 
thrown off the terrible burden that had weighed him down for 
so long, and his heart was light and tranquil. 'Lord !' he prayed, 
'show me the way, that I may renounce this accursed . . .  
fantasy of mine !' 
As he crossed the bridge he gazed with quiet tranquillity at 
the river Neva and the clear red sunset. Although he was so 
weak, he was not conscious even of being tired. It was as though 
the sore that had festered in his heart for a month had burst at 
last. Freedom ! He was free now from the evil spells, from the 
sorcery and fascination, from the temptation. 
When, later, he recalled this time and everything that 
happened in these few days, minute by minute, point by point, 
feature by feature, he was always struck with superstitious awe 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
by one circumstance, which, though not really very out of the 
ordinary, seemed to him afterwards to have determined his 
fate. He could never understand or explain to himself why, 
tired and harassed though he was, he went out of his way to 
cross the Haymarket instead of returning home by the quickest 
and most direct route. The detour was not a great deal farther, 
but it was obviously quite unnecessary. Scores of times before, 
of course, he had gone home without being able to remember 
which streets he had passed through. But why, he used to ask 
himself, did such an important and fateful encounter for him 
take place in the Haymarket (through which he had no reason 
to go) just at this time, just at this moment of his life, when his 
mood and the circumstances were exactly those in which the 
meeting could have so fateful and decisive an influence on his 
destiny? It was almost as if fate had laid an ambush for him. 
It was about nine o'clock when he crossed the market-place. 
All the dealers were locking up their shops and booths or 
putting away the wares from their stalls and trays, and going 
home, and so were the shoppers. Numbers of dealers and 
rag-and-bone men of every kind thronged in the basement 
cook-shops, the dirty and stinking courtyards of the houses, 
and especially the public houses in the market-square. Raskol­
nikov preferred these places and all the neighbouring back­
streets and alleys when he went wandering aimlessly about. 
Here his rags drew no supercilious glances, and he could look 
as disreputable as he liked without scandalizing anybody. At the 
corner of Konny Street a dealer in thread, tapes, cotton hand­
kerchiefs, and similar things displayed his wares on two trestle 
tables. He and his wife, who was a countrywoman, were also 
preparing to go home, but had lingered to talk to an acquain­
tance. This was Lizaveta Ivanovna, known to everybody simply 
as Lizaveta, the younger sister of that same old woman, Alena 
Ivanovna, the moneylender, whom Raskolnikov had gone to 
see the day before, to pawn his watch and conduct his rehearsal. 
He had known all about Lizaveta for a long time, and she 
knew him slightly. She was tall and clumsily made, timid, 
submissive, and almost feeble-minded ; she was about thirty­
five years old and unmarried, and she was an absolute slave to 
her sister, working for her day and night, trembling before her 
and even submitting to blows from her. Now she was standing 
irresolutely with the dealer and his wife, holding a bundle and 
listening to them attentively. They were heatedly explaining 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
59 
something to her. When Raskolnikov caught sight of her he was 
filled with a strange feeling of utter astonishment, although 
there was nothing surprising about such a meeting. 
'You ought to decide for yourself, Lizaveta Ivanovna,' said 
the man. 'Come tomorrow, some time before seven. They will 
be here too.' 
'Tomorrow?' drawled Lizaveta doubtfully, as if she could 
not make up her mind. 
'Eh, that Alena I vanovna has got you really scared,' babbled 
the dealer's brisk little wife. 'To look at you, anyone might 
think you were a little child. And she 's not even your real 
sister, only a half-sister, and look how she's got you under her 
thumb !' 
'This time, don't say anything to Alena Ivanovna about it,' 
broke in her husband ; 'that 's my advice; you come without 
asking her. It's a paying proposition ; afterwards even your 
sister might have to own that.' 
'Shall I ?' 
'You come tomorrow, after six. Some of them will be here; 
you can decide for yourself.' 
'And we'll have a drop of tea,' added his wife. 
'All right, I'll come,' said Lizaveta, still rather doubtful, and 
moved slowly away. 
Raskolnikov had already passed on and heard no more. He 
had gone past them unnoticed, walking quietly and trying 
not to lose a word. His first astonishment changed gradually 
into something like terror and a cold shiver ran up his spine. 
He had learnt, suddenly and quite unexpectedly, that at seven 
o'clock the next day Lizaveta, the old woman's sister and only 
companion, would be out, and that meant that at seven o'clock 
in the evening the old woman would be at home alone. 
It was only a few steps farther to his lodging. He went in 
like a man condemned to death. He did not reason about 
anything, he was quite incapable of reasoning, but he felt with 
his whole being that his mind and will were no longer free, 
and that everything was settled, quite finally. 
It was clear that even if he waited years for a favourable 
opportunity to execute his design, it would be impossible to 
count on so likely a chance of success as had suddenly presented 
itself at this moment. In any case, he could hardly expect to 
learn the day before, with greater exactness or less risk, without 
any dangerous questioning or investigation on his part, that 

60 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
on the next day at a certain time the old woman on whom the 
attempt was to be made would be at home alone, quite alone. 
C HA P T E R  V I  
LATER Raskolnikov learnt, by some chance, why the dealer 
and his wife had asked Lizaveta to come and see them. It was 
a perfectly usual transaction, with nothing out of the ordinary 
about it. An impoverished family, lately come to St. Petersburg, 
wished to dispose of some articles of women's clothing and 
similar things. It would not have paid them to sell in the 
market and so they were looking for a dealer. Lizaveta under­
took such transactions, selling on commission, and going round 
arranging business deals, and she had a large clientele because 
she was honest and never haggled, but named her price and 
stuck to it. She did not talk much and, as we have said, was 
timid and meek . . .  
Raskolnikov had recently become superstitious. Traces of 
this superstition remained in him long afterwards, almost 
ineradicable. And in after years he was always inclined to see 
something strange and mysterious in all the happenings of this 
time, as if special coincidences and influences were at work. 
As long before as the previous winter a fellow student, 
Pokorev, who was leaving for Kharkov, had mentioned Alena 
I vanovna's address to him in conversation, in case he ever 
needed to pawn anything. For a long time he did not go near 
her, since he had his lessons and was managing to get along 
somehow, but six weeks earlier he had remembered the address. 
He had two things suitable for pawning : his father's old silver 
watch and a gold ring set with three little red stones, given to 
him as a keepsake by his sister when they parted. He decided 
to take the ring, and sought out the old woman ; at first sight, 
before he knew anything about her, he felt an irresistible dislike 
of her. He took her two rouble notes and on his way home 
stopped at a miserable little tavern and asked for tea. He sat 
down, deep in thought; a strange idea seemed to be pecking 
away in his head, like a chicken emerging from the shell, and 
all his attention was fixed on it. 
At another table near by, a student, who was unknown to 
him and whom he did not remember ever seeing, was sitting 
with a young officer. They had been playing billiards and were 
drinking tea. Suddenly he heard the student talking about the 

C RIME AND P UNISHMENT 
6r 
moneylender Alena I vanovna, giving the officer her address. 
This struck Raskolnikov as rather odd : he had just left her, 
and here they were talking about her. Of course, it was the 
mere5t chance, but exactly when he was finding it impossible 
to rid himself of an extraordinary impression, here was some­
body reinforcing it, for the student was beginning to tell his 
friend some details about this Alena Ivanovna. 
'She's quite famous,' he said ; 'she always has money to lay 
out. She 's as rich as a Jew, she can put her hands on · five 
thousand roubles at once, and yet she doesn't turn up her 
nose at the interest on a rouble. A lot of our fellows have been 
to her. But she 's an old bitch . . .  
' 
And he began to recount how spiteful and cranky she was, 
and how, if payment was only one day overdue, the pledge 
would be lost. She would lend only a quarter as much as things 
were worth, she would demand five or even seven per cent. a 
month, and so on. The student's tongue had run away with 
him, and, among other things, he informed his hearer that the 
old woman had a sister, Lizaveta, whom the vicious little 
thing was always beating and whom she kept in complete 
subjection and treated as if she were a child, although Lizaveta 
stood at least five foot ten . . .  
'She's another extraordinary creature, you know !' cried the 
student, and burst out laughing. 
They began to talk about Lizaveta. The student seemed 
greatly to enjoy this and kept on laughing, and the officer 
listened with great interest and asked the student to send this 
Lizaveta to do his mending. Raskolnikov also learned all about 
her, not missing one word. Lizaveta was the old woman's 
younger step-sister (they had different mothers) and was about 
thirty-five. She worked for her sister day in and day out, did 
all the cooking and washing in the house, and in addition took 
in sewing and even went out scrubbing floors, and everything 
she earned she handed over to her sister. She dared not accept 
any orders or undertake any work without the old woman's 
permission. As Lizaveta knew, the old woman had already 
made her will, leaving to the younger sister only furniture and 
other chattels, while all the money went to a monastery in 
N-- Province for masses for the eternal repose of her soul. 
Lizaveta was a woman of the working-class, not educated, 
and unmarried; she was remarkably tall and extremely 
ungainly, with big, long, splay feet, shod with down-at-heel 

62 
C RIME AND P UNISHMENT 
goat-skin shoes, and she always kept herself very clean. But 
what the student found the most surprising and amusing was 
that Lizaveta was pregnant . . .  
'But I thought you said she was monstrously ugly,' remarked 
the officer. 
'Well, she 's very dark-skinned, and looks like a guardsman 
in disguise, but, you know, she 's no monster. She has a nice 
kind face and eyes-she 's even very attractive. The proof is, 
a lot of people like her. She is so quiet and gentle and mild, 
and will consent to anything. And she 's really got a very nice 
smile.' 
'You like her yourself, don't you?' laughed the officer. 
'Because she 's an oddity. But I'll tell you what : I swear 
I could kill that damned old woman and rob her, without a 
single twinge of conscience,' exclaimed the student hotly. 
The officer laughed again, but Raskolnikov found this so 
strange that he shuddered. 
'Let me ask you a serious question,' went on the student, even 
more heatedly. 'I was joking just now, of course, but look here : 
on the one hand you have a stupid, silly, utterly unimportant, 
vicious, sickly old woman, no good to anybody, but in fact 
quite the opposite, who doesn't know herself why she goes on 
living, and will probably die tomorrow without any assistance. 
Do you understand what I am saying?' 
'Oh, I follow you,' answered the officer, earnestly studying 
his companion's vehemence. 
'Listen, then. On the other hand you have new, young forces 
running to waste for want of backing, and there are thousands 
of them, all over the place. A hundred, a thousand, good 
actions and promising beginnings might be forwarded and 
directed aright by the money that old woman destines for a 
monastery; hundreds, perhaps thousands, of existences might 
be set on the right path, scores of families saved from beggary, 
from decay, from ruin and corruption, from the lock hospitals 
-and all with her money ! Kill her, take her money, on condi­
tion that you dedicate yourself with its help to the service of 
humanity and the common good : don't you think that thou­
sands of good deeds will wipe out one little, insignificant 
transgression? For one life taken, thousands saved from corrup­
tion and decay ! One death, and a hundred lives in exchange­
why, it 's simple arithmetic ! What is the life of that stupid, 
spiteful, consumptive old woman weighed against the common 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
63 
good ? No more than the life of a louse or a cockroach­
less, indeed, because she is actively harmful. She battens on 
other people's lives, she is evil ; not long since she bit Lizaveta's 
finger, out of sheer malice, and it almost had to be amputated !' 
'She doesn't deserve to live, certainly,' remarked the officer, 
'but there you are, that's nature.' 
'But don't you see, man, nature must be guided and cor­
rected, or else we should all be swamped with prejudices. 
Otherwise there could never be one great man. They talk of 
"duty, conscience"-I've got nothing to say against duty and 
conscience-but what are we to understand by them? Stop, I 
will put another question to you. Listen !' 
'No, you stop ; I will ask you a question. Listen !' 
'Well?' 
'Here you've been holding forth and making a regular 
speech, but tell me this : would you kill the old woman with 
your own hands, or not?' 
'Of course not ! For the sake of justice, I . . .  This is not a 
question of me at all !' 
'Well, if you ask me, so long as you won't, justice doesn't 
come into it. Let's have another game !' 
Raskolnikov was deeply disturbed. No doubt there was 
nothing in all this but the most usual and ordinary youthful 
talk and ideas, such as he had heard often enough in other 
forms and about other subjects. But why must he listen at this 
particular moment to that particular talk and those particular 
ideas when there had just been born in his own brain exactly 
the same ideas? And why, at the very moment when he was 
carrying away from the old woman's flat the germ of his idea, 
should he chance upon a conversation about that same old 
woman? . . .  This always seemed to him a strange coincidence. 
This casual public-house conversation had an extraordinary 
influence on the subsequent development of the matter, as 
if there were indeed something fateful and fore-ordained 
about it. 
When he returned home from the Haymarket he threw 
himself on the sofa and sat there without moving for an hour. 
It grew dark, and he had no candles, not that it would have 
entered his head to light one if he had. Afterwards he was 
never able to remember whether he had been thinking of 
anything definite during that hour. At length he felt his recent 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
chills and fever return, and realized with pleasure that he 
could lie down where he was. Soon a heavy leaden sleep 
weighed him down. 
He slept unusually long and dreamlessly. Nastasya, coming 
into his room next morning at ten o'clock, could hardly shake 
him awake. She had brought him some tea and bread. The 
tea was once again what remained in her own teapot. 
'Goodness, he 's still asleep !' she exclaimed indignantly, 
'he 's always asleep !' 
He raised himself with an effort. His head ached; he stood 
up, took a few steps, and fell back on the sofa again. 
'Are you going to sleep again?' exclaimed Nastasya. 'Are 
you ill, or what?' 
He did not answer. 
'Do you want any tea?' 
'Afterwards,' he said with an effort, closing his eyes again 
and turning to the wall. Nastasya stood over him. 
'Perhaps he really is ill,' she said, turned on her heel and 
went out. 
She came back at two o'clock with some soup. He was lying 
there as before. The tea was untouched. Nastasya was quite 
offended and began to shake him roughly. 
'Whyever do you still go on sleeping?' she exclaimed, 
looking at him with positive dislike. He sat up and remained 
gazing at the floor without a word to her. 
'Are you ill or aren't you?' asked Nastasya, and again 
received no answer. 
'You want to go out for a bit,' she said, after a short silence, 
'and get a bit of a blow. Are you going to have anything to eat, 
eh?' 
'Later,' he said feebly. 'Clear out !' He waved her away. 
She stood there a little longer, looking at him pityingly, and 
then went out. 
After a few minutes he raised his eyes and stared at the tea 
and soup. Then he took up some bread and a spoon and began 
to eat. 
He ate a little-two or three spoonfuls-but without appetite, 
and quite mechanically. His head no longer ached so much. 
When he had eaten, he stretched out once more on the sofa, 
but he could not go to sleep again and lay without stirring, 
face downwards, with his head buried in the pillow. He lost 
himself in a maze of waking dreams, and very strange ones 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
they were; in the one that recurred most often he was in Africa, 
in Egypt, at some oasis. A caravan was resting, the camels 
lying peacefully and the men eating their evening meal ; all 
around, the palms stood in a great circle. He was drinking 
the water from a stream which flowed babbling beside him, 
clear and cool, running marvellously bright and blue over the 
coloured stones and the clean sand with its gleams of gold . . .  
All at once he distinctly heard a clock strike. He roused himself 
with a start, raised his head and looked at the window, trying 
to estimate the time, and then, suddenly wide awake, sprang 
up as if he had been catapulted from the sofa. He crept to the 
door on tiptoe, quietly eased it open, and stood listening for 
sounds from the staircase. His heart was beating wildly. But 
the staircase was quiet, as though everyone were asleep . . . It 
seemed to him incredibly strange that he could have gone on 
sleeping in such utter forgetfulness ever since the previous 
night, without having made the least preparation . . .  And it 
might have been six o'clock that struck just now . . .  An 
extraordinarily confused and feverish bustle had now replaced 
his sleepy torpor. He had not many preparations to make. He 
was straining every nerve to take everything into consideration 
and let nothing slip his memory, and his heart thumped so 
heavily that he could scarcely breathe. First of all he must 
make a loop and sew it into his overcoat, the work of a moment. 
He groped under his pillow and drew out from among the 
linen stuffed under it an old unwashed shirt that was falling to 
pieces. From among its tatters he ripped out a strip about an 
inch and a half wide and twelve long. He folded this strip in 
two, took off his only outer garment, a loose summer overcoat 
of thick stout cotton material, and sewed the two ends of the 
strip together to the inside, under the left armhole. His hands 
shook as he sewed, but he controlled them, and when he put 
the coat on again nothing showed from outside. He had got 
the needle and thread ready long before, and had kept them 
on the little table, pinned into a piece of paper. As for the loop, 
that was an ingenious device of his own; it was meant to hold 
the axe. He could hardly carry an axe in his hands through 
the streets. And even if he had hidden it under his coat, he 
would still have had to support it with his hand, which would 
be noticeable. But now he need only lay the axe-head in the 
loop and it would hang peacefully under his arm all the way. 
With his hand in his pocket he could support the end of the 

66 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
shaft so that it would not swing; and as the coat was very wide 
and hung like a sack, nobody could possibly notice that he 
was holding something through the pocket. He had thought 
of this loop at least two weeks before. 
Having finished this task, he thrust his fingers into the narrow 
crevice between the bottom of his 'Turkish' divan and the 
floor, groping under the left-hand corner for the pledge he had 
prepared and hidden there. It was not really a pledge at all, 
however, but simply a piece of smoothly-planed board, about 
the size and thickness of a silver cigarette-case. He had found it 
by chance, on one of his walks, in a yard where there was some 
sort of workshop in an out-building. On the same occasion he 
picked up in the street, a little later, a smooth thin iron plate, 
rather smaller than the wood, apparently broken off something. 
Laying the two together, he had tied them securely with thread 
and then wrapped them neatly and carefully in clean white 
paper and made them into a parcel with thin string tied in a 
complicated knot that would need a great deal of skill to undo. 
This was done in order to distract the old woman's attention 
for a time while she dealt with the knot, and thus enable 
him to choose his moment. The iron plate had been added 
to increase the weight, so that she should not immediately 
recognize that the 'pledge' was made of wood. He had hid­
den the whole thing under the sofa until he needed it. He 
had just got it out when he heard someone shouting in the 
courtyard. 
'It went six ages ago.' 
'Ages ago ! Oh God !' 
He flung himself towards the door, listened, seized his hat, 
and crept as stealthily as a cat down his thirteen stairs. The 
most important step still lay before him-stealing an axe from 
the kitchen. He had long since come to the conclusion that 
he needed an axe to accomplish his purpose. He did possess a 
folding garden-knife, but he could not rely on a knife, or on his 
own strength in wielding it, and therefore finally settled on an 
axe. One noticeable peculiarity characterized all the final 
decisions he arrived at in this affair: the more settled they were, 
the more hideous and absurd they appeared in his eyes. In 
spite of his agonizing internal struggles he could never through­
out the whole time believe for one instant in the practic­
ability of his schemes. 
If it had somehow come about that the whole project had 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
67 
been analysed and finally decided down to the last detail, and 
no further doubts remained, he would very likely have re­
nounced the whole idea for its absurdity, enormity, and im­
possibility. But there were in fact innumerable doubts and 
unsettled details. As for where he would obtain the axe, this 
trifle did not disturb him in the slightest, for nothing could be 
easier. The fact was that Nastasya was often out of the house, 
especially in the evening; she was always calling on the neigh­
bours or running out to the shops, and the door was always 
left wide open; this was the landlady's only quarrel with her. 
Thus it would only be necessary to slip quietly into the kitchen, 
when the time came, take the axe, and then an hour later (when 
it was all over), put it back again. One doubt still remained, 
however : suppose he came back after an hour to return the 
axe, and found Nastasya back at home? It would, of course, 
be necessary to go straight past and wait until she went out 
again, but what if meanwhile she remembered the axe and 
looked for it, and raised an outcry? That would create sus­
picion, or at least give grounds for it. 
But all these were trifles, about which he had not even 
begun to think, and there }Vas no time for them now. He had 
thought about the main point, but he had put the details aside 
until he had convinced himself. This last, however, appeared 
definitely unrealizable. So at least it seemed to him. He could 
not, for example, picture himself ceasing at a given moment to 
think about it, getting up and-simply going there . . .  Even his 
recent rehearsal (that is, his visit for a final survey of the scene) 
had been no more than a test, and far from a serious one, as 
though he had said to himself: 'Very well, let us go and try 
whether it's just an idle fancy !'-and then immediately failed 
in the test, spat, and run away, exasperated with himself. And 
yet it would seem that his analysis, in the sense of a moral 
solution of the question, was concluded ; his casuistry had the 
cutting edge of a razor, and he could no longer find any 
conscious objections in his own mind. But in the last resort he 
simply did not believe himself and obstinately, slavishly groped 
for objections on all sides, as if he were driven by some com­
pulsion. His reactions during this last day, which had come 
upon him so unexpectedly and settled everything at one stroke, 
were almost completely mechanical, as though someone had 
taken his hand and pulled him along irresistibly, blindly, with 
supernatural strength and without objection. It was as if a part 

68 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
of his clothing had been caught in the wheel of a machine and 
he was being dragged into it. 
The first question he had been concerned with-a long time 
ago now-was why most crimes were so easily discovered and 
solved, and why nearly every criminal left so clear a trail. He 
arrived by degrees at a variety of curious conclusions, and, in 
his opinion, the chief cause lay not so much in the material 
impossibility of concealing the crime as in the criminal himself; 
nearly every criminal, at the moment of the crime, was subject 
to a collapse of will-power and reason, exchanging them for an 
extraordinarily childish heedlessness, and that just at the 
moment when judgement and caution were most indispensable. 
He was convinced that this eclipse of reason and failure of 
will attacked a man like an illness, developed gradually and 
reached their height shortly before the commission of the crime, 
continuing unchanged at the moment of commission and for 
some time, varying with the individual, afterwards ; their 
subsequent course was that of any other disease. The further 
question whether the disease engenders the crime, or whether 
the nature of crime somehow results in its always being accom­
panied by some manifestation of djsease, he did not feel com-
petent to answer. 
· 
Having arrived at this conclusion, he decided that he per­
sonally would not be subject to any such morbid subversion, 
that his judgement and will would remain steadfast throughout 
the fulfilment of his plans, for the simple reason that what he 
contemplated was 'no crime' . . .  We omit the course of reason­
ing by which he arrived at this latter verdict, since we have 
already run too far ahead . . .  We shall add only that the 
practical, material difficulties played only a very secondary 
role in his thinking. 'It will suffice to concentrate my will and 
my judgement on them, and they will all be overcome, when 
the time comes, when I have to come to grips with all the 
details of the affair, down to the most minute . . .  ' But he made 
no progress towards action. He continued to have less and less 
faith in his final decisions, and when the hour struck, every­
thing seemed to go awry, in a haphazard and almost completely 
unexpected way. 
One small circumstance nonplussed him even before he 
reached the foot of the stairs. As he drew level with his land­
lady's kitchen door, which stood open as usual, he peered 
carefully round it to make sure beforehand that the landlady 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
6g 
herself was not there in Nastasya's absence, and if she was not, 
that her door was firmly closed so that she would not happen 
to look out and see him when he went in for the axe. But what 
was his consternation at seeing that Nastasya was at home in 
her kitchen on this occasion, and busy taking linen from a 
basket and hanging it on a line. When she caught sight of him 
she ceased her occupation and turned towards him, watching 
him as he went past. He turned his eyes away and walked on 
as if he had not noticed her. But it was all over : he had no 
axe ! It was a terrible blow. 
'Where did I get the idea,' he thought, going out through 
the gate, 'where did I get the idea that she was certain to be 
out now? Why, why, why, was I so convinced of it?' He felt 
crushed, even humiliated, and ready to laugh spitefully at him­
self . . .  He was seething with dull, brutal rage. 
He had stopped uncertainly in the gateway. To go out now 
and walk about the streets for form's sake, and to return to his 
room, were both equally repugnant to him. '"\Vhat an oppor­
tunity is lost for ever !' he muttered, standing aimlessly in the 
gateway, just opposite the porter's dark little room, which also 
stood open. Suddenly he started. Inside the little room, not 
two paces away, under a bench on the right-hand side, some­
thing shining caught his eye . . .  He looked all round-nobody ! 
On tiptoe he approached the porter's lodge, went down the two 
steps, and called the porter in a feeble voice. 'Yes, he 's out ! 
but he must be somewhere near, in the courtyard, since the 
door is open.' He threw himself headlong on the axe (it was an 
axe), drew it out from where it lay between two logs under the 
bench, hung it in the loop on the spot, thrust both hands into 
his pockets and went out. He had not been seen. 'It was not my 
planning, but the devil, that accomplished that !' he thought, 
and laughed strangely, extraordinarily heartened by this stroke 
of luck. 
He walked quietly and sedately, without hurrying, so as not 
to arouse suspicion. He paid little attention to the passers-by, 
and carefully avoided looking at their faces, trying to be un­
noticed himself. Suddenly he remembered his hat. 'My God ! 
I had the money two days ago, and hadn't the sense to spend 
it on a cap !' and he cursed himself from the bottom of his 
heart. 
Glancing casually into a shop, he saw from the clock that 
hung on the wall that it was already ten minutes past seven. 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
He would have to hurry; he wanted to go round about, so as to 
approach the house from the other side. 
Earlier, when he had tried to imagine what all this would be 
like, he had thought he would be very frightened. But he was 
not; indeed he was not frightened at all. His mind was even 
occupied, though not for long together, with irrelevant thoughts. 
Passing the Yusupov Gardens, he began to consider the con­
struction of tall fountains in all the squares, and how they 
would freshen the air. Following this train of thought he came 
to the conclusion that if the Summer Gardens could be ex­
tended right across the Champ de Mars and joined to those of the 
Mikhaylovsky Palace, it would add greatly to the beauty and 
amenities of the city. Then he suddenly began to wonder why, 
in big towns, people chose of their own free will to live where 
there were neither parks nor gardens, but only filth and 
squalor and evil smells. This reminded him of his own walks 
in the neighbourhood of the Haymarket, and brought him 
back to himself. 'What rubbish !' he thought. 'It would be 
better not to think at all ! ' 
'So it is true that men going to execution are passionately 
interested in any object they chance to see on the way.' The 
thought passed through his mind as briefly as a flash of 
lightning, for he suppressed it at once . . .  But he had arrived ; 
here was the house and the gate. Somewhere a clock struck 
once. 'What, can it possibly be half-past seven? Surely not ; 
time is really flying !' 
Luck was again with him as he turned in at the gate. At that 
very moment, as if by design, a huge load of hay also turned in, 
just in front of him, and completely screened him while he was 
passing through the archway. As soon as it had cleared the 
gateway and was in the courtyard, he slipped past it to the 
right. On the other side of the cart he could hear several voices 
shouting and quarrelling, but nobody noticed him and nobody 
passed him. Many of the windows opening on to the great 
courtyard stood open, but he could not find the strength to 
raise his head. The old woman's staircase was near, imme­
diately to the right of the gate. Already he was on the stairs. 
Drawing a deep breath and pressing his hand above his 
wildly beating heart, he once more felt for the axe and settled 
it in its loop, then began to mount the stairs carefully and quietly, 
listening at every step. But the staircase was empty at this 
hour; all the doors were closed and nobody was to be seen. 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
On the second floor, it is true, the door of an empty flat was 
open, and painters were at work inside, but they did not even 
look up. He stopped for a moment, considering, and then went 
on. 'Of course, it would be better if they were not there, but •
.
.
 
there are two floors above them.' 
But here was the fourth floor, here was the door, here was 
the empty flat opposite. On the third floor the flat immediately 
below the old woman's also showed every sign of being empty : 
the visiting-card tacked to the door had been removed-they 
had left . . .  He was out of breath. For a moment the thought 
stirred in his mind : 'There is still time to go away.' But he 
ignored it and began to listen at the old woman's door-dead 
silence ! Then once more he listened down the stairs, long and 
attentively . . .  Then he looked round for the last time, crept 
close to the door, straightened his clothes, and once again tried 
the axe in its loop. 'I wonder if I look too pale,' he thought, 
<and too agitated. She is mistrustful . . .  Wouldn't it be better 
if I waited a little longer . . .  until my heart stops thumping 
so ? . . .  ' 
But his heart did not stop. On the contrary, its throbbing 
grew more and more violent . . .  He could stand it no longer, 
but stretched his hand slowly towards the bell, and rang it. 
Mter a few moments he rang again, louder. 
There was no answer. There was no point in going on ringing 
in vain, and he was not in the mood to do so. The old woman 
was certainly at home, but she was suspicious and she was 
alone. He knew something of her habits . . .  and he applied 
his ear to the door again. Either his hearing had grown 
strangely acute (which did not seem likely) or the sound was 
really distinctly audible, but at any rate he suddenly heard the 
careful placing of a hand on the handle of a lock and the rustle 
of clothing close to the door. Someone was standing silently 
just inside the door and listening, just as he was doing outside 
it, holding her breath and probably also with her ear to the 
door . . .  
He purposely shifted his position and audibly muttered 
something, so as not to give the impression that he was being 
furtive; then he rang a third time, but quietly and firmly, 
without betraying any impatience. When he was afterwards 
able to recall everything clearly and plainly, that minute seemed 
stamped into his memory for ever; he could not understand 
whence he had acquired so much cunning, especially as his 

C RIME AND PUNISHMENT 
mind seemed momentarily to cloud over, and he lost all con­
sciousness of his own body . . .  A moment later, he heard the 
bolt being lifted. 
C H A P T E R  V I I  
A s  before, the door opened the merest crack, and again two 
sharp and mistrustful eyes peered at him from the darkness. 
Then Raskolnikov lost his head and made what might have 
been a serious mistake. 
Apprehensive that the old woman might be alarmed at their 
being alone, and without any hope that his appearance would 
reassure her, he took hold of the door and pulled it towards 
him, so that she should not be tempted to lock herself in again. 
Although she did not pull the door shut again at this, she did 
not relinquish the handle, so that he almost pulled her out on 
the stairs. When he saw that she was standing across the door­
way in such a way that he could not pass, he advanced straight 
upon her, and she stood aside startled. She seemed to be trying 
to say something but finding it impossible, and she kept her 
eyes fixed on him. 
'Good evening, Alena I vanovna,' he began, as easily as 
possible, but his voice refused to obey him, and was broken and 
trembling, 'I have . . .  brought you . . .  something . . .  but 
hadn't we better come in here . . .  to the light? . . .  ' And with­
out waiting for an invitation, he passed her and went into the 
room. The old woman hastened after him; her tongue seemed 
to have been loosened. 
'Good Lord ! What are you doing? . . .  Who are you? What 
do you want?' 
'Excuse me, Alena I vanovna . . .  You know me . . .  Raskol­
nikov . . .  See, I have brought the pledge I promised the other 
day,' and he held it out to her. 
The old woman threw a glance at it, but then immediately 
fixed her eyes on those of her uninvited guest. She looked at 
him attentively, ill-naturedly, and mistrustfully. A minute or 
so went by; he even thought he could see a glint of derision 
in her eyes, as if she had guessed everything. He felt that he 
was losing his nerve and was frightened, so frightened that he 
thought if she went on looking at him like that, without a word, 
for even half a minute longer, he would turn tail and run away. 
'Why are you looking at me like that, as though you didn't 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
73 
recognize me?' he burst out angrily. 'Do you want it, or don't 
you? I can take it somewhere else; it makes no difference to 
me.' 
He had not intended to say this, but it seemed to come of its 
own accord. 
The old woman collected herself, and her visitor's resolute 
tone seemed to lull her mistrust. 
'Why be so hasty, my friend? . . . What is it?' she asked, 
looking at the packet. 
'A silver cigarette case; surely I told you that last time?' 
She stretched out her hand. 
'But what makes you so pale? And your hands are trembling. 
Are you ill or something?' 
'Fever,' he answered abruptly. 'You can't help being pale . . .  
when you haven't anything to eat,' he added, hardly able to 
articulate his words. His strength was failing again. But 
apparently the answer was plausible enough; the old woman 
took the packet. 
'What is it?' she asked, weighing it in her hand and once 
again fixing her eyes on Raskolnikov. 
'A thing . . .  a cigarette-case . . .  silver . . .  look at it.' 
'It doesn't feel like silver. Lord, what a knot !' Trying to undo 
the string she turned for light towards the window (all her 
windows were closed, in spite of the oppressive heat), moved 
away from him and stood with her back to him. He unbuttoned 
his coat and freed the axe from the loop, but still kept it con­
cealed, supporting it with his right hand under the garment. 
His arms seemed to have no strength in them; he felt them 
growing more and more numb and stiff with every moment. 
He was afraid of letting the axe slip and fall . . .  His head was 
whirling. 
'Why is it all wrapped up like this?' exclaimed the woman 
sharply, and turned towards him. 
There was not a moment to lose. He pulled the axe out, 
swung it up with both hands, hardly conscious of what he was 
doing, and almost mechanically, without putting any force 
behind it, let the butt-end fall on her head. His strength seemed 
to have deserted him, but as soon as the axe descended it all 
returned to him. 
The old woman was, as usual, bare-headed. Her thin fair 
hair, just turning grey, and thick with grease, was plaited into 
a rat's tail and fastened into a knot above her nape with a 

74 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
fragment of horn comb. Because she was so short the axe struck 
her full on the crown of the head. She cried out, but very feebly, 
and sank in a heap to the floor, still with enough strength left 
to raise both hands to her head. One of them still held the 
'pledge'. Then he struck her again and yet again, with all his 
strength, always with the blunt side of the axe, and always on 
the crown of the head. Blood poured out as if from an over­
turned glass and the body toppled over on its back. He stepped 
away as it fell, and then stooped to see the face : she was dead. 
Her wide-open eyes looked ready to start out of their sockets, 
her forehead was wrinkled and her whole face convulsively 
distorted. 
He laid the axe on the floor near the body and, taking care 
not to smear himself with the blood, felt in her pocket, the 
right-hand pocket, from which she had taken her keys last time. 
He was quite collected, his faculties were no longer clouded 
nor his head swimming, but his hands still shook. Later he 
remembered that he had been very painstakingly careful not 
to get bedaubed . . . He pulled out the keys ; they were all 
together, as he remembered them, on a steel ring. He hurried 
straight into the bedroom with them. It was a very small room; 
on one wall was an enormous case of icons, and another was 
occupied by the big bed, very clean, covered with a silk patch­
work quilt. The chest of drawers stood against the third wall. 
It was strange, but as soon as he began to try the keys in it, 
and heard their jingling, a convulsive shudder shook him; he 
longed suddenly to abandon the whole affair and go away. 
But this lasted only for a moment; it was too late now to 
retreat. He was even laughing at himself when another, most 
alarming, idea flashed into his mind, the idea that perhaps 
the old woman was still alive and might yet recover con­
sciousness. He left the keys and the chest and ran back to the 
body, seized the axe and brandished it over the old woman 
again, but did not bring it down. There could be no doubt 
that she was dead. Stooping down again to examine the body 
more closely, he saw clearly that the skull was shattered. He 
stretched out his hand to touch her, but drew it back again ; 
he could see plainly enough without that. By this time the 
blood had formed a pool on the floor. Then he noticed a cord 
round the old woman's neck and tugged at it, but it was too 
strong to snap, and besides, it was slippery with blood. He 
tried to draw it out from the bosom of her dress, but it seemed 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
75 
to be caught on something and would not come. Impatiently 
he raised the axe again, to sever the cord with a blow as it 
lay on the body, but he could not bring himself to do this, 
and finally, after struggling with it for two minutes, and getting 
the axe and his hands smeared with blood, he managed with 
some difficulty to cut the cord without touching the body with 
the axe; he took it off, and found, as he expected, a purse 
hanging there. There were two crosses on the cord, one of 
cypress-wood and the other of brass, as well as an enamelled 
religious medal, and beside them hung a small, soiled, chamois­
leather purse, with a steel frame and clasp. It was crammed 
full; Raskolnikov thrust it into his pocket without examining 
it and threw the crosses down on the old woman's breast; then, 
this time taking the axe with him, he hurried back into the 
bedroom. 
With dreadful urgency he seized the keys and began to 
struggle with them once more. But all his efforts failed to force 
them into the locks, not so much because his hands were 
trembling as because his energy was misdirected ; he would see, 
for example, that a key was the wrong one and would not fit, 
and yet go on thrusting at the lock with it. He pulled himself 
together and remembered that the big key with toothed wards, 
hanging with the other smaller ones, could not possibly belong 
to the chest of drawers, but must be for some trunk or other 
(as he had thought on the previous occasion), and that perhaps 
it was there that everything was hidden. He left the chest and 
looked first of all under the bed, knowing that old women 
usually keep their trunks there. He was right; there stood an 
important-looking steel-studded trunk of red leather, about 
thirty inches long, with a rounded lid. The toothed key fitted 
the lock and opened the trunk. On top, under a white sheet, 
lay a hare-skin coat with a red lining; under this were a silk 
dress, then a shawl, and then, at the bottom, what looked like 
a heap of rags. His first impulse was to wipe his bloody hands 
on the red lining of the fur coat. 'It is red, so blood will not 
show on it,' he reasoned, and then suddenly realized what he 
was doing and thought, with fear in his heart, 'Good God, 
am I going out of my mind?' 
But no sooner had he disturbed the rags than a gold watch 
slid out from under the coat. Hastily he began turning every­
thing over, and found a number of gold articles thrust in 
among the rags, bracelets, chains, earrings, pins, and so forth, 

76 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
probably pledges, some of them perhaps unredeemed. Some 
were in cases, some simply wrapped in newspaper, but neatly 
and carefully, with the paper tidily folded and the packets 
tied with tape. He began to cram them hastily into the pockets 
of his overcoat and trousers, without opening the cases or 
undoing the parcels, but he did not manage to collect very 
many . . .  
A footstep sounded in the room where the old woman lay. 
He stopped and remained motionless as the dead. But all was 
still; he must have imagined it. Then he distinctly heard a 
faint cry, or perhaps rather a feeble interrupted groaning, then 
dead silence again for a minute or two. He waited, crouching 
by the trunk, hardly daring to breathe; then he sprang up, 
seized the axe, and ran out of the room. 
There in the middle of the floor, with a big bundle in her 
arms, stood Lizaveta, as white as a sheet, gazing in frozen 
horror at her murdered sister and apparently without the 
strength to cry out. When she saw him run in, she trembled 
like a leaf and her face twitched spasmodically; she raised her 
hand as if to cover her mouth, but no scream came and she 
backed slowly away from him towards the corner, with her 
eyes on him in a fixed stare, but still without a sound, as though 
she had no breath left to cry out. He flung himself forward 
with the axe; her lips writhed pitifully, like those of a young 
child when it is just beginning to be frightened and stands 
ready to scream, with its eyes fixed on the object of its fear. 
The wretched Lizaveta was so simple, brow-beaten, and 
utterly terrified that she did not even put up her arms to 
protect her face, natural and almost inevitable as the gesture 
would have been at this moment when the axe was brandished 
immediately above it. She only raised her free left hand a little 
and slowly stretched it out towards him as though she were 
trying to push him away. The blow fell on her skull, splitting it 
open from the top of the forehead almost to the crown of the 
head, and felling her instantly. Raskolnikov, completely beside 
himself, snatched up her bundle, threw it down again, and ran 
to the entrance. 
The terror that possessed him had been growing greater and 
greater, especially after this second, unpremeditated murder. 
He wanted to get away as quickly as possible. If he had been 
in a condition to exercise a soberer judgement and see things 
more clearly, if he could only have recognized all the difficulty 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
77 
of his position and how desperate, hideous, and absurd it was, 
if he could have understood how many obstacles to surmount, 
perhaps even crimes to commit, still lay before him, before he 
could escape from the house and reach home-very probably 
he would have abandoned everything and given himself up, 
not out offear for himself so much as from horror and repulsion 
for what he had done. Repulsion, indeed, was growing in his 
heart with every moment. Not for anything in the world 
would he have returned to the trunk, or even to the room. 
But a growing distraction, that almost amounted to absent­
mindedness, had taken possession of him; at times he seemed to 
forget what he was doing, or rather to forget the important 
things and cling to trivialities. However, when he glanced into 
the kitchen and saw a pail half full of water on a bench, it gave 
him the idea of washing his hands and the axe. His hands were 
sticky with blood. He put the head of the axe in the water, 
then took a piece of soap that lay in a broken saucer on the 
window-sill, and began to wash his hands in the pail. When 
he had washed them he drew out the axe and washed the blade 
and then spent some three minutes trying to clean the part of 
the handle that was blood-stained, using soap to get the blood 
out. Mter this he wiped it with a cloth which was drying on a 
line stretched across the kitchen, and then spent a long time 
examining it carefully at the window. There were no stains left, 
but the handle was still damp. With great care he laid the axe 
in the loop under his coat. Then, as well as the dim light in the 
kitchen allowed, he examined his overcoat, trousers, and boots. 
At first glance there was nothing to give him away, except for 
some stains on his boots. He wiped them with a damp rag. He 
knew, however, that he had not been able to see very well, 
and might have failed to notice something quite conspicuous. 
He stood hesitating in the middle of the room. A dark and 
tormenting idea was beginning to rear its head, the idea that 
he was going out of his mind and that he was not capable of 
reasoning or of protecting himself. Perhaps what he was doing 
was not at all what ought to be done . . .  'My God, I must 
run, I must run !' he muttered and hurried back to the en­
trance. Here there awaited him a more extreme terror than 
any he had yet experienced. 
He stood still, staring, unable to believe his eyes; the door, 
the outer door leading to the staircase, the door at which he 
had rung a short time ago, and by which he had entered, was 

78 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
at least a hand's-breadth open; all this time it had been like 
that, neither locked nor bolted, all the time! The old woman 
had not locked it behind him, perhaps by way of precaution. 
But, good God, he had seen Lizaveta after that ! And how could 
he have failed to realize that she had come from outside, and 
could certainly not have come through the wall? 
He flung himself at the door and put up the bolt. 
'But no, that's not right either! I must go, I must go . .  .' 
He lifted the bolt clear, opened the door, and stood listening 
on the landing. 
He stood there a long time. Somewhere far below, probably 
under the gateway, two voices were raised loudly and shrilly 
in argument. 'What are they doing?' He waited patiently. At 
last the voices fell silent, as though they had been cut off; 
'they' had gone away. He was preparing to descend when 
suddenly a door on the floor below opened noisily and some­
body started down the stairs, humming a tune. 'Why are they 
making so much noise?' he wondered for a moment. He closed 
the door again behind him and waited. At last all was quiet; 
there was not a sound. He was already setting his foot on the 
stairs when once more he heard footsteps. 
When he first heard them, the steps were far away, at the 
very bottom of the staircase, but he afterwards remembered 
clearly and distinctly that from the very first sound he guessed 
that they were certainly coming here, to the fourth floor, to 
the old woman's flat. Why? Was there something special, some­
thing significant, about them? The steps were heavy, regular, 
unhurrying. Already they had reached the first floor, they 
were coming on, their sound was clearer and clearer. He could 
hear the newcomer's heavy breathing. Already the steps had 
passed the second floor . . .  They were coming here ! Suddenly 
he felt as if he had turned to stone, like a sleeper who dreams 
that he is being hotly pursued and threatened with death, 
and finds himself rooted to the spot, unable to stir a finger. 
At length, when the footsteps had begun the last flight, he 
started to life, and just managed to slip swiftly and dextrously 
back from the landing into the flat and close the door behind 
him. Then he grasped the bolt and slid it gently, without a 
sound, into its socket. Instinct had come to his aid. When he 
had done, he stayed quiet, holding his breath, close to the 
door. The unknown visitor was also at the door. They were 
standing now, opposite one another, as he and the old woman 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
79 
had stood, with the door dividing them, when he had listened 
there a short time ago. 
The visitor drew several heavy breaths. 'He must be a big 
stout man,' thought Raskolnikov, grasping the axe tightly. 
Everything seemed to be happening in a dream. The visitor 
seized the bell and rang it loudly. 
As soon as its tinny sound had died, Raskolnikov imagined 
he heard movement inside the room, and for some seconds he 
listened as seriously as though it were possible. The unknown 
rang again, waited a little longer and then suddenly began to 
tug impatiently at the door-handle with all his might. Terri­
fied, Raskolnikov watched the bolt rattling in its socket and 
waited in numb fear for it to jump clean out. This seemed likely 
to happen at any moment, so violently was the door shaken. 
He would have held the bar with his hand, except that he 
might discern it. His head was beginning to spin again. 'I am 
going to faint !' he thought, but the unknown began to speak 
and he recovered himself immediately. 
'Are they fast asleep in there, or dead, or what, confound 
them?' the visitor boomed in a resounding voice. 'Hey! Alena 
lvanovna, you old witch ! Lizaveta lvanovna, my peerless 
beauty! Open the door ! Oh, confound it all, they must be 
asleep or something!' 
Thoroughly annoyed, he tugged at the bell again with all 
his might, a dozen times in succession. He was plainly a person 
of imperious temper and familiar with the place. 
At this moment light, hurrying footsteps sounded not very 
far down the stairs. Somebody else was approaching, whom 
Raskolnikov had not heard at first. 
'Isn't anybody in?' cried the new arrival in loud and cheerful 
tones to the first visitor, who was still tugging at the bell. 'How 
are you, Koch?' 
'Judging by his voice, he must be very young,' thought 
Raskolnikov. 
'God only knows ! I've nearly broken the door down,' 
answered Koch. 'But how is it that you know me?' 
'Surely you remember? The day before yesterday, at Gam­
brinus's, I beat you three times running at billiards.' 
'0-o-oh . • •  
' 
'Aren't they here then? That's strange. In fact, it's quite 
absurd. The old woman's got nowhere to go to. And I am here 
on business.' 

8o 
C RIME AND P UNISHMENT 
'So am I, old man.' 
'Well, what are we to do? Go back, I suppose. And I 
was expecting to get some money!' exclaimed the young 
man. 
'Of course we must go back, but why make an appointment? 
The old witch fixed a time with me herself. It's a long way for 
me to come here, too. And where the devil she can have got to, 
I don't know. She sits here, day in and day out, the old witch, 
with her bad legs, and never lifts a finger, and now all at once 
she goes gallivanting off!' 
'Hadn't we better ask the porter?' 
'Ask him what?' 
'Where she 's gone and when she's coming back.' 
'Hm . . . the devil ! . . . ask him . . . But she never goes 
anywhere . .  .' and he pulled at the handle again. 'The devil! 
There's nothing for it; we must go.' 
'Stop !' exclaimed the young man. 'Look ! Do you see how 
the door resists when you pull it?' 
'Well?' 
'That means it's bolted, not locked ! Can you hear the bar 
rattling?' 
'Well?' 
'Don't you understand? That means one of them is at home. 
If everybody were out, they would have locked the door from 
outside, not bolted it from inside. But now-do you hear the 
bolt rattle? But to bolt the door from inside, somebody must 
be at home. Do you understand? They must be in, but they 
aren't opening the door.' 
'Tck! That 's quite right !' exclaimed Koch, surprised. 'Then 
what on earth are they doing?' And he shook the door again, 
in a rage. 
'Stop !' cried the young man again, 'leave the door alone ! 
There 's something very wrong here . . .  After all, you rang, and 
shook the door, and they haven't opened it; so either they've 
both fainted, or . .  .' 
'What?' 
'I'll tell you what; let's go to the porter and get him to 
rouse them.' 
'Done !' Both started downstairs. 
'Stop ! Why don't you stay here while I run down for the 
porter?' 
'Why?' 

C RIME AND P UNISHMENT 
'Well, one never knows !' 
'All right . . .  ' 
81 
'You see, I am studying to be an examining magistrate. 
There is plainly, plai-ainly something wrong here !' cried the 
young man excitedly, as he ran down the stairs. 
Koch, left alone, touched the bell again, so softly that it 
made only one tinkle; then, as though he were considering the 
matter and making tests to convince himself once more that 
the door was held only by the bolt, he began to move the 
handle, pulling it towards him and letting it go again. Then 
he stooped down, puffing, and looked through the keyhole, 
but the key was in it on the inside and consequently nothing 
could be seen. 
Raskolnikov stood clutching his axe, in a sort of delirium. 
He was even prepared to fight them when they came in. While 
they were knocking at the door and arranging what they would 
do, he was more than once tempted to put an end to it all at 
once by calling out to them from behind the door. Several times 
he felt like railing and jeering at them, while the door remained 
closed. 'If only they would be quick!' he thought. 
'What the devil? . .  . ' 
The time was passing-one minute, two minutes, and nobody 
came. Koch was getting restless. 
'Oh, the devil ! . .  .' he exclaimed impatiently, abandoning 
his watch and starting to hurry downstairs, with his boots 
clattering on the steps. The sounds died away. 
'Oh, God, what am I to do?' 
Raskolnikov took off the bolt and opened the door a little. 
Since he could hear nothing, he walked out without stopping 
to consider, closed the door behind him as well as he could, 
and went downstairs. 
He had gone down three flights when a great commotion 
broke out below him. Where could he go? There was nowhere 
to hide. He was on the point of running back to the flat. 
'Hi, stop ! You devil ! Just wait!' 
Down below someone tore out of a flat shouting and did not 
so much run as tumble down the stairs, yelling at the top of 
his voice: 
'Mitka ! Mitka ! Mitka ! Mitka ! Blast your eyes !' 
The shout rose to a shriek; its last echoes resounded from the 
courtyard; it died away. At the same instant several persons 
talking loudly and rapidly started noisily up the stairs. There 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
were three or four of them. He could distinguish the young 
man's voice. 'It's them!' 
In complete desperation he went straight towards them: let 
come what might! If they stopped him, all was lost; if they 
let him pass, all was still lost: they would remember him. 
They were already close; only one flight still lay between them 
-and suddenly, salvation! A few steps below him on the right, 
the door of an empty flat was wide open; it was the second­
floor flat in which painters had been working, but now, 
most opportunely, they had gone. Probably it was they who 
had run out so noisily a few minutes before. The floors had just 
been painted, and in the middle of the room stood a tub and 
an earthenware crock of paint with a brush in it. In a trice 
he had slipped through the open door and hidden himself 
against the wall. It was none too soon; they had already reached 
the landing. They turned up the stairs and went on to the 
fourth floor, talking loudly. He waited a little, tiptoed out and 
ran downstairs. 
There was nobody on the stairs, nobody in the gateway .. 
He walked through quickly and turned to the left along the 
street. 
He knew very well, he was terribly aware, that at this mo­
ment they were inside the flat, that they had been astonished 
to find the door unfastened when it had been closed against 
them so recently, that they had already seen the bodies and 
that no more than a minute would pass before they would 
begin to suspect, and then realize fully, that the murderer had 
only just left, and had managed to conceal himself somewhere, 
slip past them, and make his escape; perhaps they would even 
guess that he had been in the empty flat when they passed it 
on their way upstairs. All the same, he simply dared not in­
crease his pace, even though it was still nearly a hundred yards 
to the first turning. 'Hadn't I better slip into some gateway 
and wait on a staircase? No, that would be disastrous ! Oughtn't 
I to get rid of the axe? What about taking a cab? . . .  A fatal 
blunder!' 
At last he reached a side-street and, half dead, turned into 
it; now he knew that he was already half-way to safety; his 
presence here was less suspicious, and besides there were very 
many people about and he could lose himself among them like 
one grain of sand on the sea-shore. But his racking anxieties 
had taken so much out of him that he could hardly move. 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
Sweat poured out of him; his neck was quite wet. 'You've had 
a drop too much!' someone called after him as he came out 
on the canal. 
He no longer knew quite what he was doing, and the far­
ther he went the worse his condition became. Mterwards he 
remembered, however, that he had been afraid, coming to the 
canal bank, because there were fewer people about, which 
made him more conspicuous, and he nearly turned back into 
the street he had just left. Although he could hardly stand 
he took a roundabout way and arrived home from an entirely 
different direction. 
Even when he entered his own gateway he had hardly 
recovered control of himself; at least, he was already on the 
stairs before he remembered the axe. Now he had to face a 
very important task-returning it without being seen. He was 
certainly in no condition to realize that perhaps it would be 
much better if he did not restore the axe to its former place 
but threw it away, perhaps later, in some other courtyard. 
Everything, however, went without a hitch. The porter's 
door was closed but not locked, which meant that he was 
probably at home. But Raskolnikov had so completely lost his 
powers of reasoning that he went straight to the door of the 
lodge and opened it. If the porter had asked him what he 
wanted, he might quite possibly have simply handed him the 
axe. But the porter was again out and he put the axe in its 
former place under the bench; he even partly covered it with 
logs as before. Afterwards, on his way to his room, he met no 
one, not a soul; even the landlady's door was closed. He went 
in and flung himself down on the sofa just as he was. He did not 
sleep, but lay there in a stupor. If anybody had entered the 
room he would have sprung up at once with a cry. Disjointed 
scraps and fragments of ideas floated through his mind, but he 
could not seize one of them, or dwell upon any, in spite of all 
his efforts . . 
. 

PART TWO 
C H A P T E R  I 
HE lay there a long time. Occasionally he would rouse, and at 
such moments he would notice that the night was far spent, 
but it did not enter his head to get up. Finally he saw that it 
was daylight. He was lying on his back, still in a half-stunned 
condition. Terrible despairing wails rose shrilly to his ears from 
the street below; they were, however, only what he was used 
to hearing below his window between two and three o'clock 
in the morning. They were what had roused him now. 'Ah, 
the drunks are being turned out of the pubs,' he thought, 
'it must be after two;' and suddenly he leapt from the sofa in 
one bound. 'What, past two already?' He sat down again 
and it all came back to him; everything came back in one 
flash. 
In the first few moments he thought he must be going mad. 
A dreadful chill enveloped him, but this was partly the result 
of the feverishness that for many weeks had always accompanied 
his sleep. Now, however, he was seized with such a violent 
fit of shivering that his teeth chattered uncontrollably, and 
every limb shook. He opened the door and listened; the whole 
house was asleep. He looked at himself and at everything in 
the room with consternation, unable to understand how he 
could have omitted to fasten his door when he came in the 
evening before, and have thrown himself down not only 
without undressing, but even without taking off his hat; it had 
fallen off and lay on the floor near his pillow. 'If somebody had 
come in, what would they have thought? That I was drunk? 
But . . .  ' He hurried to the window. There was enough light to 
see by, and he began to examine himself from head to foot, 
and all his clothes; were there no traces? But he could not tell 
like this, and so, shivering with cold, he undressed completely 
and examined his clothes again. He scrutinized them minutely, 
down to the last thread, turning them over and over, and, 
unable to trust himself, repeated the process three times. But 
there seemed to be nothing, not a trace, except that the 
ragged fringes at the bottom of his trouser-legs were stiff and 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
85 
clotted with dried blood. He took out his big clasp-knife and 
cut off the fringes. He could find nothing more. Suddenly he 
remembered that the purse and all the things he had stolen 
from the old woman's trunk were still in his pockets. Till that 
moment it had not even occurred to him to take them out and 
hide them. He had not remembered them even while he was 
inspecting his clothes. How could that be? He hurriedly began 
to pull them out and throw them on the table. When he had 
emptied his pockets and even turned them inside out to satisfy 
himself that there was nothing left in them, he carried the 
whole heap into a corner. There, near the floor, the wall-paper 
was torn where it had come loose from the wall; hastily he 
crammed everything under the paper, into this hole; it all 
went in. 'It 's all out of sight, even the purse !' he thought 
joyfully, standing and staring stupidly at the place where the 
torn paper bulged more than ever. Suddenly he shivered with 
terror : 'My God !' he whispered in despair, 'what is the matter 
with me? Can I call that hidden? Is that the way to hide any­
thing?' 
The truth was that he had not counted on there being any 
things of that kind, he had thought only of money, and there­
fore had not prepared any place to hide things in. 'But now, 
why on earth am I so pleased now?' he thought. 'Is that the 
way to hide anything? I really must be losing my reason.' He 
sat down exhausted on the sofa, and at once an unbearably 
violent shivering shook him again. Mechanically he took up 
from where it lay on the chair beside him the old winter over­
coat he had worn as a student, which was warm even if ragged, 
covered himself with it and surrendered himself once more to 
mingled sleep and delirium. 
Not more than five minutes later he sprang up again and 
rushed back to his clothes. 'How could I fall asleep, with 
nothing done? I was right, I was right: I haven't taken out 
that loop yet. I forgot it, but how could I forget such a thing, 
a clue like that?' He tore out the loop and quickly reduced it 
to scraps, which he thrust among the linen under his pillow. 
'Torn-up pieces of linen will never by any chance arouse 
suspicion, I think; no, I think not,' he repeated, standing in 
the middle of the room and with painfully strained attention he 
began to look all round, on the floor and everywhere else, to 
see whether he had not forgotten something else. The convic­
tion that everything, even memory, even the simple power of 

86 
C RIME AND PUNISHMENT 
reflection, was deserting him, had begun to torment him unȅ 
bearably. 'What if it is beginning already? Can this really 
be the beginning of my punishment? Look, over there !-I 
thought so !' Indeed, the frayed scraps of fringe he had cut off 
his trousers lay scattered on the floor in the middle of the room 
for everyone to see. 'But what can be the matter with me?' he 
wailed again like a lost soul. 
Now a strange idea entered his head : perhaps all his clothes 
were soaked and stained with blood and he could not see it 
because his mental powers were failing and crumbling away 
. . .  his mind was clouded . . .  He remembered suddenly that 
there had been blood on the purse. 'Ha, so of course there must 
be blood on my pocket too, because when I pushed the purse 
in it was still all wet !' He turned his pocket inside out and he 
was right-there were stains on the lining. 'So I can't have 
gone completely out of my mind yet, I must still have some 
understanding and memory left, since I remembered and 
realized this for myself,' he thought triumphantly, filling his 
lungs with a deep breath of relief; 'it was only the weakness of 
fever, a momentary delirium.' He tore the lining out of his 
leftȆhand trouser-pocket. As he did this a ray of sunlight lit 
up his left boot. There on the sock, which projected from a 
hole in the boot-were there marks ? He dragged his boot off: 
'Yes, there are certainly marks; the whole toe of the sock is 
soaked with blood;' he must have stepped carelessly into that 
pool . • . 'But what am I to do with these things ? Where 
can I put the sock and the frayed trouserȇends, and the 
pocket?' 
He gathered them all into his hands and stood in the middle 
of the room. 'Shall I put them in the stove? But they nearly 
always begin by rummaging in the stove. Burn them? But 
what with? I haven't even any matches. No, the best thing is 
to go out somewhere and throw them all away. Yes, I'll throw 
them away !' he repeated, sitting down again on the sofa, 'and 
this minute, without a moment's delay ! . .  .' But instead, his 
head declined once more towards his pillow; once more a 
sudden chill congealed his blood ; once more he drew his 
greatcoat over him. For several hours, as he lay there, the 
thought kept flickering through his brain : 'I must go now, 
I mustn't put it off; I'll go somewhere and throw them all 
away, get them out of sight, but quickly, quickly !' Several 
times he tried to tear himself from his couch and get up, but 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
87 
he could not do it. Finally he was awakened by a loud knocking 
on his door. 
'Open the door ! You're not dead, are you? He 's always 
fast asleep !' cried Nastasya, beating on the door with her fist. 
'Lying there fast asleep all day like a dog ! A dog, that's what he 
is ! Open the door, can't you? It 's past ten o'clock.' 
'Perhaps he 's not at home,' said a man's voice. 
'Ah ! that 's the porter . . .  What does he want?' 
He sprang up and sat on the edge of the sofa. His heart 
thumped so heavily that it was painful. 
'Who 's fastened the door then? See, he's taken to locking 
his door now! Does he think someone 's going to run off with 
him? Open the door, my lad ; wake up !' 
'What do they want? Why is the porter :here? They must 
have found out. Shall I resist, or shall I open the door? Better 
open it ! Damnation ! . .  .' 
He half rose, stretched forward, and undid the hook. The 
room was so small that it was possible to do this without 
leaving his bed. 
He was right ; the porter was there with Nastasya. 
Nastasya looked at him rather oddly. He was gazing with 
an imploring and despairing expression at the porter, who 
silently held out a grey paper folded in two and sealed with 
wax. 
'A summons, from the office,' he said as he handed over the 
paper. 
'What office? . .  . ' 
'I mean the police want to see you ; you've to go to their 
office. Everyone knows what office.' 
'The police ! . . .  Why?' 
'How should I know? You've been summoned, so go.' He 
looked closely at him, glanced round the room, and turned 
to go out. 
'You seem really ill,' remarked N astasya, who had not taken 
her eyes off him. The porter also turned his head for a moment. 
'You've had a temperature since yesterday,' she added. 
He did not answer, but sat holding the unopened paper. 
'Don't you get up,' went on Nastasya, feeling sorry for him, 
as she saw him lowering his feet to the floor. 'You are ill, so 
don't go; there 's no hurry. What 's that in your hand ?' 
He looked down ; in his right hand he was still holding the 
fringe he had cut off, the sock, and the torn pieces of his pocket. 

88 
C RIME AND PUNISHMENT 
He had slept with them like that. Afterwards, thinking about 
it, he remembered that when he half woke in his fevered state, 
he had clutched them tightly in his fingers and so fallen asleep 
again. 
'Look, he 's collected a handful of rags and taken them to 
bed with him as if they were something precious . . . ' And 
Nastasya broke into one of her painfully violent fits oflaughter. 
He whisked everything under the greatcoat and stared fixedly 
at her. Although he was hardly capable at that moment of 
making much sense of anything, he felt he would not be treated 
like this if he were on the point of being arrested . . .  'But­
the police?' 
'Could you drink some tea? Would you like some? I'll bring 
it; there 's some left . . .  ' 
'No . . .  I'm going; I'll go now,' he muttered, struggling 
to his feet. 
'Going? But you won't even be able to get downstairs !' 
'I'm going . . .  ' 
'Oh, all right.' 
She followed the porter out. He hurried at once to the 
window to examine the sock and the scraps of frayed cloth: 
'There are marks, but they are not very conspicuous, every­
thing is so dirty and rubbed and discoloured. Nobody would 
notice anything if they didn't know beforehand. So Nastasya 
can't have seen anything from where she was, thank God !' 
Then with a shiver of alarm he opened the paper and read it; 
he had to spend a long time studying it, but at last he under­
stood. 
It was the usual summons from the local police 
headquarters to appear there that same day at half past 
nine. 
'But this is unheard of! I have never had anything to do 
with the police ! And why should it happen just to-day?' he 
thought, tormented with indecision. 'Oh, Lord, at least let it 
be over soon !' He could almost have knelt down and prayed, 
but he laughed at his own impulse; he must put his trust in 
himself, not in prayer. He began to dress hurriedly. 'If I'm 
done for, I'm done for ! It's all one . . .  I'll put the sock on !' he 
thought suddenly, 'it will get more dirt rubbed into it and all 
the stains will disappear.' But no sooner had he put it on than 
he dragged it off with horror and loathing. Then, realizing 
that he had no other, he took it and put it on again-and again 
he laughed. 'This is all conditional, all relative, all merely 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
Bg 
forms,' flashed into one corner of his mind, while his whole 
body trembled. 'I did put it on, after all. It all ended with my 
putting it on !' The laughter gave place immediately to de­
spondency. 'No, I'm not strong enough . . .  ' he thought. His 
legs were shaking. 'With fear,' he muttered to himself. He felt 
dizzy and the fever had given him a headache. 'This is a trap. 
They want to entice me into a trap and then spring it,' he 
went on to himself, as he went out on to the landing. 'The 
trouble is that I am almost delirious . . .  I might get caught in 
some stupid lie . .  ! 
On the way downstairs he remembered that he had left all 
the things behind the wallpaper, and thought that perhaps he 
was being got out of the way on purpose for a search to be 
made, and he stopped. But overwhelming despair and what 
might perhaps be called a cynical view of disaster made him 
shrug his shoulders and walk on. 
'Only let it be over quickly !' 
The heat outSide was again overpowering; not so much as 
a drop of rain had fallen all this time. Again the same dust 
and bricks and mortar, the stinking shops and public houses, 
the drunkards everywhere, the Finnish hawkers, the broken­
down old cabs. The blazing sun shone full in his eyes and made 
them ache and his head was spinning, as it might be expected 
to do when he, in his feverish state, emerged suddenly into the 
bright sunny day. 
When he came to the turning into yesterday's street, he looked 
down it, at that house, with tormented anxiety . . .  and turned 
his eyes away at once. 
'If they ask me, I shall probably tell them,' he thought as he 
drew near the office. 
The police office was not far from where he lived, about a 
quarter of a verst. It had just moved into new quarters on the 
fourth floor of a new building. He had been in the old office 
once, a long time ago. As he passed under the gateway he saw 
a staircase on the right and a peasant coming down it with a 
book in his hand : 'That must be the porter; so the office must 
be there,' and he started up, acting on his guess, since he did 
not want to ask any questions. 
'I shall go in, fall on my knees, and tell the whole story,' he 
thought as he came to the fourth floor. 
The staircase was steep and narrow and smelt of dishwater. 
All the kitchens of all the flats on all four floors opened on to 

go 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
the staircase, and as all the doors stood open almost the whole 
day, it was terribly stuffy . .  Up and down these stairs moved 
porters with books under their arms, messengers, and various 
visitors of both sexes. The door into the office also stood wide 
open. He went in and stopped in the ante-room. Several 
peasants were always standing there waiting. Here also it was 
extremely stuffy and in addition the nostrils were assailed by 
the sickly odour of new paint which had been mixed with 
rancid oil. He waited a little and then decided to move forward 
into the next room. All the rooms were very small and low­
ceilinged. A terrible impatience drove him farther and farther. 
Nobody took any notice of him. In the second room some 
clerks were sitting writing; they were perhaps a little better 
dressed than he was, but they were odd-looking figures enough. 
He went up to one of them. 
'What do you want?' 
He showed his summons. 
'You are a student?' asked the other, glancing at the notice. 
'A former student.' 
The clerk looked at him, but without any curiosity. He was a 
man with wildly tousled hair and a preoccupied look. 
'You won't find out anything from him, because he isn't 
interested in anything,' thought Raskolnikov. 
'Go in there, to the chief clerk,' said the clerk, and pointed 
to the inmost room. 
He went into this room (the fourth from the ante-room) , 
which was very small and crammed full of people, who looked 
a little neater and cleaner than those in the other room. Among 
them were two ladies. One of these, poorly dressed in mourning, 
was sitting at a table opposite the chief clerk and writing to 
his dictation. The other, a very stout, showy woman, with 
a blotchy red complexion, rather ostentatiously dressed, with a 
brooch on her bosom as big as a saucer, was standing and 
waiting. Raskolnikov put his summons under the eyes of the 
chief clerk, who glanced at it, said 'Please wait,' and went on 
with what he was doing. 
Raskolnikov breathed more freely. 
'It can't be that !' 
Little by little his resolution was returning, and he earnestly 
exhorted himself to pluck up his courage and control his 
nerves. 
'It's only about some silly formality, or perhaps some trifling 
indiscretion, and I might have given myself away completely ! 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
91 
Hm . . .  it 's a pity there 's no air here . .  .' he went on, 'it 's 
stuffy . . .  My head seems to be spinning worse than ever, and 
my thoughts with it . .  .' 
He was conscious of a terrible inner confusion. He was afraid 
of losing command of himsel£ He- tried to fix his attention, to 
think of something quite outside himself, but he could not do 
it. The chief clerk, however, interested him deeply; he wished 
he could read his face and guess what he was thinking. He saw 
a very young man of about twenty-two, with a dark and mobile 
countenance, who seemed older than his years. His dress was 
modish and elegant, his pomaded hair was brushed forward 
from a back-parting, and he wore a number of rings on his 
white well-cared-for hands and a gold chain on his waistcoat. 
He even exchanged a few words of very passable French with a 
foreigner who was present. 
'Louisa I vanovna, pray be seated,' he said in passing to the 
overdressed lady with the red face, who was still standing as if 
she dared not take it on herself to sit down, although there was 
a chair at her side. 
'Ich danke,' said she, and sat down quietly, with a rustle 
of silk. Her light-blue dress with its white lace trimming 
ballooned out round her chair and filled almost half the room. 
A wave of perfume was wafted from her. But the lady seemed 
abashed at filling the room with her skirts and her scent, and 
her uneasy smile mingled timidity and boldness. 
The lady in mourning finished her business at last and was 
getting up to go when an officer entered the room somewhat 
noisily, with a very dashing and characteristic swagger, threw 
his cockaded cap on the table and sat down in an armchair. 
The showily dressed lady jumped up instantly and swept him 
a curtsy as though she was delighted to see him, but the 
officer paid not the slightest attention to her, and she did not 
venture to sit down again in his presence. He was a lieutenant, 
the police-captain's assistant. The points of his sandy mous­
taches stood out horizontally; he had remarkably small features, 
which expressed nothing but a certain insolence. He looked 
askance and with some displeasure at Raskolnikov; his dress 
was really too disgraceful and yet his bearing, in spite of its 
humility, was not in harmony with it. Raskolnikov imprudently 
returned his gaze with such directness and steadiness that he 
took offence. 
'What do you want?' he cried, apparently astonished that 

92 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
such a ragamuffin was not struck down by the lightning that 
flashed from his eyes. 
'I was ordered . . .  by a summons . .  .' Raskolnikov managed 
to bring out. 
'It concerns the recovery of money from him, from this 
student,' put in the chief clerk hastily, tearing himself away 
from his papers. 'Here you are, sir,' and he pointed out a place 
in a notebook and then tossed it across to Raskolnikov. 'Read 
it !' 
'Money? What money?' thought Raskolnikov. ' But . . .  then 
it really can't be that!' He trembled with joy; his heart was 
suddenly, inexpressibly light. A burden had rolled from his 
shoulders. 
'At what hour, my good sir, were you instructed to come 
here?' cried the lieutenant, growing for some unknown reason 
more and more outraged. 'You were told nine o'clock and it is 
now twelve !' 
'It was handed to me only a quarter of an hour ago,' 
Raskolnikov threw over his shoulder in a loud voice. He also 
felt suddenly and unexpectedly irritated, and was even enjoy­
ing the sensation. 'And it should be enough that I came at all, 
in my state ofillness !' 
'Kindly do not shout !' 
'I am not shouting; I am speaking quite calmly. It is you 
who are shouting at me, and I am a student and will not allow 
anyone to shout at me.' 
The officer flared up so violently that for a moment he was 
unable to speak at all, but only spluttered. He leapt up from 
his seat. 
'Be good enough to ho-o-old your tongue ! Remember where 
you are ! Do not be impertinent, sir !' 
'Remember where you are yourself!' yelled Raskolnikov. 
'Not only are you shouting, you are smoking a cigarette as 
well, and that is showing disrespect to everybody here.' This 
speech gave him inexpressible pleasure. 
The chief clerk was looking at them with a smile. The fiery 
lieutenant was evidently taken aback. 
'That, sir, is no affair of yours !' he exclaimed at last in a 
voice of unnatural loudness. 'Be kind enough to make the 
declaration required of you. Show him, Alexander Grigorye­
vich. A complaint has been lodged against you ! You will not 
pay your debts ! A fine young spark you are !' 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
93 
Raskolnikov was no longer listening to him, but had seized 
avidly on the paper and was trying to find in it the answer to 
the riddle. He read it through once and then again, but he 
could not understand it. 
'What is this ?' he asked the chief clerk. 
'It is a demand for the recovery of money on a bill. Either 
you must repay it together with all arrears, penalties, etcetera, 
or you must sign an undertaking to pay at a given date, with an 
obligation not to leave the capital before repayment is made, 
nor to sell your property or conceal your assets. The creditor 
is entitled to sell your goods or institute judicial proceedings 
against you.' 
'But I . . .  don't owe anybody anything !' 
'That is not our affair. An application has been made to us 
for the recovery of one hundred and fifteen roubles on an 
overdue and legally protested note of hand given nine months 
ago to the widow of Collegiate Assessor Zarnitsyn, and assigned 
by the widow Zarnitsyna to Civil Councillor Chebarov. You 
are accordingly invited to enter your reply.' 
'But she 's my landlady !' 
'What if she is?' 
The clerk looked at him with a smile of condescending pity 
but also with a certain air of triumph, as if he were an old 
hand watching a new recruit coming under fire for the first 
time and ready to ask 'Well, how are you feeling now?' 
But what did I.O.U.'s or the recovery of debts matter to him 
now? Did they merit the slightest concern, or even attention? 
He stood there reading, listening, answering, even asking 
questions himself, but all quite mechanically. Triumphant 
satisfaction in his safety, his escape from imminent looming 
danger, filled for the time his whole being, to the exclusion 
of all forebodings, all doubts and questions, all critical analysis, 
all riddles about the future. It was a moment of full, spon­
taneous, and purely animal rejoicing. The same moment saw 
something like the outbreak of a thunderstorm in the office. 
The lieutenant, still outraged by the want of respect he had 
met with, blazing with anger and determined to soothe his 
smarting vanity, had brought all his guns to bear on the 
unhappy 'elegant lady', who had been smiling at him with 
the most complete fatuity ever since he came in. 
'And you, you so-and-so,' he shouted at the top of his voice 
(the lady in mourning had already left) . 'What happened at 

94 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
your house last night? You are bringing shame and disgrace 
on the whole street again. Fighting and drunkenness ! You are 
simply asking for quod ! You know perfectly well you've been 
told, I've warned you myself a dozen times, that you wouldn't 
get off another time ! And yet you go on and on, you -- !' 
The paper slipped from Raskolnikov's grasp and he stared 
wildly to hear the stylish lady so unceremoniously abused; 
however, he soon grasped what it was all about and began to 
find considerable amusement in the whole affair. He listened 
with great enjoyment, feeling tempted to laugh and laugh and 
laugh . . .  All his nerves were quivering with tension. 
'Ilya Petrovich,' began the clerk, but stopped at once and 
bided his time, knowing from experience that once the lieu­
tenant had taken the bit between his teeth he must be allowed 
to run his course. 
As for the elegant lady, at first she cowered before the storm 
unleashed on her head, but, strangely enough, the more 
numerous and outrageous the abuses heaped on her, the more 
amiable became her look, and the more charming the smile 
she 
turned 
on the 
thundering lieutenant. 
She 
curtsied 
incessantly and tapped the ground with her foot, waiting 
impatiently until at last she could get a word in. 
Words tumbled out of her mouth like peas rattling on a 
drum; her Russian was glib, but she had a marked German 
accent. 
'Disturbance and brawling in my house has not been, Herr 
Kapitan, and not any kind of skandal, but they are coming 
drunk, and I will tell you everything, Herr Kapitan, I am not 
being to blame . . .  Mine house is respectable, Herr Kapitan, and 
respectable behaviour, Herr Kapitan, and never, never, would I 
any skandal .
•
•
 But they are coming quite drunk and after as 
well they are calling for three bottles, and then one is lifting 
up his feets and is playing the piano with his feets and that 
is not good in a respectable house and he has the piano ganz 
broken and that is altogether not manners and I am telling 
him. And he was taking a bottle and pushing all peoples 
behind with a bottle. Then I am calling the porter and Karl 
is coming and he is taking Karl and in the eye hitting and 
Henrietta also is he in the eye hitting, and mine cheek five 
times he is hitting. And that is in a respectable house indelicate, 
Herr Kapitan, and I am screaming. And he has the window on 
the canal opened and is in the window standing and squealing 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
95 
like a little schwein, it is shameful. How is it possible to stand in 
the window and squeal into the street like a little schwein? 
Wee-wee-wee ! And Karl behind him is pulling him out of the 
window by the coat and here, it is true, Herr Kapitan, he has 
sein coat behind torn. And then he is shouting, that man muss 
him fifteen roubles to pay. And, Herr Kapitan, I myself am 
paying him sein coat five roubles. This is not a respectable 
guest, Herr Kapitan, and he is making a big skandal! He is saying 
to me, I will a big satire* over you to print, because in all the 
newspapers I will all about you write.' 
'Do you mean that he is an author?' 
'Yes, Herr Kapitan, and he is not a respectable guest, Herr 
Kapitan, when in a respectable house . .  .' 
'Now, that's enough ! I've told you again and again, I've 
told you . .  .' 
'Ilya Petrovich !' said the clerk again, significantly. The 
lieutenant hastily glanced at him ; the clerk gave a slight shake 
of the head. 
' . . .  So, my dear respectable Louisa I vanovna, this is my last 
word to you, I am telling you for the last time,' continued the 
lieutenant, 'if such a scandalous scene occurs in your respect­
able house only once more, you'll find yourself in the jug, as 
they say in the highest circles. Do you hear? . . .  So a man of 
letters, a writer, got five roubles for his coat-tails in a "respect­
able house" ! These writers are all alike !' and he threw a 
contemptuous glance at Raskolnikov. 'There was another 
scene in a public house the day before yesterday; someone 
who had dined refused to pay, and, says he, "I'll put you in a 
satire for this !" Another one, last week, grossly insulted the 
respectable wife and daughter of a State Councillor on a 
steam-ship. Not long ago one of them had to be turned out 
of a pastrycook's. That's the sort they are, authors, men of 
letters, students, public criers . . .  pshaw ! Now get out ! I shall 
keep an eye on you . . .  so take care ! Do you hear?' 
Louisa Ivanovna with hasty civility curtsied all round and 
then, still curtsying, backed towards the door. In the doorway 
she bumped into a handsome officer with a fresh open coun­
tenance and magnificent fair bushy whiskers. This was Nikodim 
Fomich, chief of police of the district. Louisa Ivanovna curt­
sied almost to the ground and skipped from the office with 
little mincing steps. 
'Thunderstorms, tornadoes, waterspouts, and hurricanes 

g6 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
again !' said Nikodim Fomich in an amiable and friendly tone 
to Ilya Petrovich. 'You've got upset again and lost your temper; 
I could hear you from the stairs.' 
'Well, look heah,' answered Ilya Petrovich, with well-bred 
negligence as he took a handful of papers over to another table 
with his picturesque swagger, 'look at this, sir; this gentleman, 
an author, I mean a student, or rather an ex-student, won't pay 
up, his note of hand is overdue, he won't give up his fiat, there 
are constant complaints about him, and he wanted to make a 
grievance of my smoking in his p-p-presence ! His own conduct 
is disgraceful, and then, sir, just look at him; there he is, a most 
attractive spectacle, sir !' 
'Poverty is no crime, my dear chap ; and besides, everybody 
knows that you are like gunpowder, always ready to explode. 
I expect you felt he had affronted you in some way,' went on 
Nikodim Fomich, turning with a friendly air to Raskolnikov, 
'and so you let fly yourself. But you were wrong; he is a 
deelightful, a no-o-oble fellow, I assure you, but gunpowder, 
gunpowder !-he flares up, goes off with a flash and a bang, 
and it 's all over ! When it comes to the point, he has a heart of 
solid gold ! His nickname in the regiment was "the Squib" . . .  ' 
'And w-w-what a regiment it was !' exclaimed Ilya Petrovich, 
mollified by being so pleasantly teased, but still a little sulky. 
Raskolnikov felt a sudden desire to say something particu­
larly amiable to all of them. 
'Excuse me, captain,' he began easily, turning to Nikodim 
Fomich, 'put yourself in my place . . .  I am ready to beg his 
pardon if I have been remiss. I am a poor student, ill, and 
crushed' (he used the word 'crushed') 'by poverty. I have 
had to give up my studies, because I cannot maintain myself, 
but I receive some money . . . I have a mother and sister in 
R-- Province . . .  They send it to me and I . . .  will pay. My 
landlady is good, but she is so annoyed with me for having lost 
my lessons and not paying the rent for three months that she 
does not even send up my dinner . . .  I don't understand all 
this about a bill of exchange ! Now she is claiming repayment 
on this I.O.U., but why should I pay, I ask you? . .  .' 
'But you know that has nothing to do with us . .  .' the clerk 
was beginning again. 
'Allow me, allow me, I quite agree with you, but allow me 
to explain,' interrupted Raskolnikov, still addressing not the 
chief clerk but Nikodim Fomich, and trying with all his might 

C RIME AND P UNISHMENT 
97 
to draw in Ilya Petrovich as well, although the latter was 
obstinately pretending to rummage through his papers and to 
have no attention to spare for such a contemptible person; 
'allow me for my part to explain that I have been living in 
her house for about three years, ever since I arrived here from 
the provinces, and formerly . . .  formerly . . .  well, why shouldn't 
I confess it? At the very beginning I gave my promise to marry 
her daughter, a verbal promise, only verbal . . .  She was a 
young girl, and I liked her . . .  although I wasn't in love with 
her . . .  in a word, it was youth . . .  and at that time my land­
lady gave me a good deal of credit, and I led a life which . . .  
I was very irresponsible . . .' 
'These intimate details are not required of you at all, my 
good sir, and there is no time for them,' Ilya Petrovich was 
breaking in, roughly and overbearingly, but Raskolnikov 
stopped him and continued hotly, although he was suddenly 
finding it difficult to speak. 
'But allow me, do allow me to tell you everything . . .  how 
things were and . . .  in my turn . . .  even though it is unneces­
sary, I quite agree with you-but a year ago this girl died of 
typhus, but I stayed on as a lodger, and when my landlady 
moved into her present flat she told me . . .  in a very friendly 
way . . . that she trusted me completely and everything . . .  
but would I like to give her a bill for a hundred and fifteen 
roubles, the total sum she reckoned I owed her? Allow me, 
sir : she told me explicitly that as soon as I gave her this paper, 
she would give me as much more credit as I wanted, and that 
never, never, for her part-these are her very words-would 
she make any use of the paper, until I paid of my own accord 
. . .  But now, when I have lost my pupils and have nothing, she 
presents it for repayment . . .  What can I say now?' 
'All these sentimental details, my good sir, do not concern 
us,' interrupted Ilya Petrovich. 'You have to enter a reply and 
undertake an obligation, and whether you were pleased to be 
in love or not, and all these tragic bits, have absolutely nothing 
to do with us.' 
'Well, you are rather . . .  harsh . .  . '  murmured Nikodim 
Fomich, sitting down at a table and beginning to sign papers. 
He seemed rather uncomfortable. 
'Please write,' said the chief clerk to Raskolnikov. 
'Write what?' he asked roughly. 
'I will dictate to you.' 

g8 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
It seemed to Raskolnikov that the chief clerk's manner to 
him had become more off-hand and contemptuous since he had 
made his confession, but strangely enough he had become 
completely indifferent to anybody's opinion of him, and this 
change had taken place all in a moment. If he had cared to 
stop and consider it, he would no doubt have wondered how, 
a few minutes ago, he could have talked to them as he did and 
even made a parade of his emotions, and wondered too where 
those emotions had come from. Now, if the room had suddenly 
been filled not with police officers but with his closest friends, 
he could not, he thought, have found a single word to say to 
them, so empty had his heart become. In his soul he was tor­
mentingly conscious of a dreary feeling of eternal loneliness 
and estrangement. It was not the abjectness of his outpourings 
of emotion in front of Ilya Petrovich, nor the lieutenant's 
triumph over him, that had produced this revulsion. What 
concern of his were now his own baseness, other people's 
ambitions, lieutenants, German woman, proceedings for the 
recovery of debts, police officers, and all the rest of it? If he 
had heard himself condemned to be burnt at this moment he 
would hardly have stirred, indeed it is doubtful if he would 
have paid the slightest attention. Something new and unex­
pected, something hitherto unknown and undreamt of, had 
taken place in him. He did not so much understand with his 
mind as feel instinctively with the full force of his emotions 
that he could never again communicate with these people in a 
great gush of feeling, as he had just now, or in any way 
whatever. Even if they had been his own brothers and sisters, 
instead of police officers, it would still have been impossible 
for him to turn to them for any reason or in any circumstances. 
He had never in his life before experienced so strange and 
desolating a feeling, and the most painful thing about it was 
that it was a feeling, an immediate sensation, and not know­
ledge or intellectual understanding. 
The chief clerk began to dictate to him the usual form of 
declaration in such cases, that is : 'I cannot pay, I undertake 
to do so at a certain date, I will not leave the city, I will not sell 
or give away any of my property,' and so on. 
'But you cannot write properly, you can hardly hold the 
pen,' the clerk remarked, looking at Raskolnikov with curiosity. 
'Are you ill?' 
'Yes . . .  my head is going round .
•
.
 Go on !' 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
99 
'That is all; sign it.' 
The clerk took the document, and busied himself with 
something else. 
Raskolnikov gave back the pen, but instead of getting up 
to go put both elbows on the table and pressed his hands to his 
head. He felt as if a nail had been driven into his temples. A 
strange idea flashed into his mind : he would get up, go over to 
Nikodim Fomich and tell him all that had happened the day 
before, down to the last detail, and then go back with them 
to his room and show them the things in the corner, under the 
wall-paper The impulse was so strong that he stood up to 
carry it out. 'Hadn't I better think it over for a minute?' passed 
through his mind. 'No, better do it without thinking, and be 
done with it.' Then he stopped, rooted to the ground : Nikodim 
Fomich was warmly discussing something with Ilya Petrovich, 
and the words reached his ears. 
'It 's quite impossible ; we shall have to let them both go. 
To begin with, everything is against it : why should they call the 
porter, if they had done it? To call attention to themselves? 
Or out of cunning? No, that would be altogether too cunning ! 
Finally, both porters and the workman saw the student 
Pestryakov at the gate when he went in; he had three friends 
with him, and he stopped at the gate to ask the porter about 
the people living in the house, still in the presence of his 
friends. Now, would he have asked about them like that if he 
had come with any such intention ?  As for Koch, he had been 
sitting in the silversmith's downstairs for half an hour before 
he went up to the old woman's, and he left him at exactly a 
quarter to eight to go upstairs. Now, consider . .  . ' 
'Excuse me, look at the contradictions in their statements. 
They assert that they knocked and that the door was fastened, 
but three minutes later, when they had the porter with them, 
it was open.' 
'That is just the point, the murderer must have been inside, 
with the bolt up, and they would certainly have found him 
there if Koch hadn't been fool enough to go for the porter 
himself. During that interval he managed to get downstairs and 
somehow give them the slip. Koch says "If I had stayed he 
would have sprung out on me with the axe and killed me too !" 
and he crosses himself with both hands. He'd like to hold 
public thanksgiving services, no doubt! Ha-ha-ha !' 
'And nobody saw the murderer?' 

100 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'How could they? The house is a regular Noah's Ark,' put in 
the chief clerk, listening from his place. 
'It's quite clear, quite clear,' repeated Nikodim Fomich 
warmly. 
'No, it 's not at all clear,' insisted Ilya Petrovich. 
Raskolnikov picked up his hat and went to the door. But 
he did not reach it . . .  
When he came round he saw that he was sitting in a chair, 
supported by some person on his right, with somebody else on 
his left holding a dirty tumbler filled with yellowish water; 
and that Nikodim Fomich was standing in front of him looking 
at him attentively. He stood up. 
'What is it? Are you ill?' askedNikodimFomichrathersharply. 
'When he was signing his name he could hardly guide the 
pen,' remarked the chief clerk, sitting down and turning back 
to his papers. 
'Have you been ill long?' cried Ilya Petrovich from his 
place, where he also was shuffling papers. He also had cer­
tainly been over to look at the patient while he was in the faint, 
but had left him as soon as he recovered consciousness. 
'Since yesterday . .  .' muttered Raskolnikov in reply. 
'Did you go out yesterday?' 
'Yes.' 
'When you were ill?' 
'Yes.' 
'At what time?' 
'Eight o'clock in the evening.' 
'Where, may I ask?' 
'Along the street.' 
'Short and plain.' 
Raskolnikov had answered sharply and jerkily. He was as 
white as a handkerchief, but he did not drop his dark, inflamed­
looking eyes before Ilya Petrovich's glance. 
'He can hardly stand, and you . .  .' began Nikodim Fomich. 
'All right !' said Ilya Petrovich in a peculiar tone. Nikodim 
Fomich seemed to want to say something more, but, glancing 
at the chief clerk, who was looking at him fixedly, he was silent. 
A sudden strange silence fell on them all. 
'Well, all right,' concluded Ilya Petrovich. 'We will not 
detain you any longer.' 
Raskolnikov went out. As he did so, he heard animated talk 
break out behind him, with Nikodim Fomich's inquiring tones 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
IOI 
rising above the rest . . .  When he reached the street he had 
quite recovered. 
'Search, search, they are going to search at once !' he re­
peated to himself, hurrying along; 'the scoundrels, they are 
suspicious !' His former fear enveloped him once again from 
head to foot. 
C H A P T E R  I I  
'WHAT if they have searched already? What if I find them in 
my room now?' 
Here was his room. Nobody; nothing; nobody had been in. 
Even Nastasya had touched nothing. But good God ! how could 
he have left all those things in the hole? 
He flung himself across the room, thrust his hand under the 
paper, and began pulling out the things and cramming them 
into his pockets. There were eight articles altogether : two 
small boxes with earrings or something of the kind in them 
(he did not examine them closely), then four small morocco 
cases, a chain wrapped in newspaper and something else, 
perhaps a decoration, also in newspaper . . .  
He distributed them among the pockets of his overcoat and 
the remaining right-hand pocket of his trousers, trying to 
make them inconspicuous. He put the purse in with them as 
well. Then he went out of the room, this time leaving the door 
wide open. 
He walked quickly and resolutely, and although he felt 
broken with fatigue, his senses were alert. He was afraid of 
pursuit, afraid that in half an hour, or a quarter, instructions 
would be issued to follow him; that meant that come what 
might he must cover up his tracks before then. He must manage 
to do it, also, while a little strength and power of reasoning 
still remained to him . . .  But where should he go? 
He had long since decided to 'throw everything into the 
canal, so that all traces will vanish and the affair be done with.' 
He had reached the decision during the night, in his delirium, 
at a time, he remembered, when he had more than once tried 
to get up and go 'quickly, quickly and get rid of it all.' But it 
was not so easy. 
He had wandered along the embankment of the Ekateri­
ninsky canal for half an hour or perhaps longer, looking at the 
ways down to the water as he came across them. But he could 

102 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
not even dream of fulfilling his purpose here : either there were 
rafts at the foot of the stairs with women washing linen on them, 
or boats were moored there, and everywhere there were 
swarms of people, and besides, he could be overlooked every­
where from the embankment and it would look suspicious for 
someone to go down on purpose to throw something into the 
water. Again, what if the cases did not sink, but floated? 
Indeed, they were sure to. Everyone would see. Even as it was 
everybody he met looked at him as if they had some business 
with him. 'Why is that, or am I just imagining it?' he thought. 
Finally it occurred to him that it might be better to go 
somewhere along the Neva. There were fewer people there 
and he would be less noticeable; besides, it would be more 
convenient there, and, most important of all, it was farther 
away. He felt surprised that he had been wandering for at least 
half an hour in anguished worry, in dangerous places, before 
he thought of this. And he had wasted that half-hour in an 
ill-judged project simply because he had come to a decision 
in his sleep or in delirium ! He was becoming extraordinarily 
absent-minded and forgetful, and he realized it. Decidedly, he 
must hurry. 
He walked along the Voznesensky Prospect towards the 
Neva, but another idea came to him on the way : 'Why in the 
Neva? Why in the water at all? Would it not be better to go 
somewhere a long way off, perhaps as far as the Islands again, 
and, in a solitary place in a wood, bury everything under a 
bush, and perhaps mark the spot?' He could find no fault with 
this idea, although he felt that he was not at this moment 
capable of judging clearly and soundly. 
He was not destined, however, to reach the Islands, either : 
emerging from the Voznesensky Prospect into a square, he 
caught sight on his left of the entrance to a courtyard entirely 
surrounded by blank walls. Immediately to the right of the 
gate stretched the long windowless side of a neighbouring 
four-storied building. To the left, parallel with this wall and 
also from close by the gate, a wooden hoarding ran in for about 
twenty paces and then bent round to the left. It was a piece 
of fenced-off waste land, strewn with various rubbish. Farther 
in, in the far depths of the yard, the corner of a low, sooty, 
stone shed, evidently part of some workshop, showed behind 
the fence. 
Apparently there was some carriage-maker's or carpenter's 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
shop here, or something of the kind; there was a good deal of 
coal-dust everywhere, nearly down to the gates. 'This would 
be a place to throw the things and get away,' he thought at 
once. Seeing nobody in the yard he stepped into the gateway, 
and immediately saw, just inside by the hoarding, a trench or 
channel such as is often constructed where there are many 
factory-hands, handicraftsmen, cab-drivers, and so on, in a 
building, and above it, on the hoarding, was written in chalk 
the usual witticism : 'Rubbitch must not be shot hear.' This was 
good, because it would not look suspicious if he went in and 
stopped. 'This is just the place to throw everything down in a 
heap and leave it!' 
He looked round once more and had already thrust his hand 
into a pocket when he saw, close against the outer wall, in a 
space between the gate and the trench not more than thirty 
inches across, a great unhewn block of stone, which must have 
weighed sixty pounds. Beyond the wall was the street, and the 
sound of passers-by hurrying along the pavement could be 
heard quite often, but he could not be seen there behind the 
gate unless someone came right in from the street. This, 
however, was quite possible and the thought prompted him to 
make haste. 
He bent over the stone, seized it firmly near the top with 
both hands, exerted all his strength, and turned it over. There 
was a small hollow under the stone and he threw into it all the 
things from his pockets. The purse went on top of the other 
things, and the little hollow did not seem too full. Then he 
seized the stone and rolled it back again; it settled into its old 
position, except that it was barely perceptibly higher. He 
scraped up a little earth and pressed it against the edges of the 
stone with his foot. No appearance of disturbance remained. 
He left the yard and turned towards the square. A violent, 
almost unbearable rejoicing filled him for a moment as it had 
done before in the police office. 'My tracks are covered ! And 
who would ever dream of searching under that stone? It may 
have been there ever since the house was built, and perhaps it 
will be there for as long again. And even if they found the 
things, who would think of me? It 's all over ; there 's no 
evidence,' and he laughed. Yes, afterwards he remembered 
that he laughed a long, nervous, shallow, noiseless laugh, and 
went on laughing all the time he was crossing the square. But 
the laughter ceased as he turned on to Konnogvardeysky 

104 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
Boulevard, where two days before he had encountered the 
young girl. Other ideas had come into his mind. He felt a 
sudden violent repugnance to passing the bench on which he 
had sat and thought after the girl left, and it seenied to him 
also that it would be terrible to meet again the moustached 
policeman to whom he had given the twenty copecks. 'Devil 
take him !' 
As he walked, he looked about him with an air of irritated 
distraction. All his thoughts were now centred round one most 
important point, whose importance he fully recognized, and he 
felt that now he had come face to face with it, for the first time, 
after these two months. 
'Oh, the devil take it all !' he thought in a sudden access of 
ungovernable irritation. 'If it 's begun, it's begun, and to the 
devil with her, and with the new life ! Oh God, how stupid it 
all is ! . . .  How much lying and cringing I did today ! How 
loathsomely I fawned on that filthy Ilya Petrovich and played 
up to him ! However, that 's rot too ! I ought to spit on all of 
them, and on my own behaviour ! It 's all wrong ! It's all 
wrong ! . . .  ' 
Suddenly he stopped, baffled and bitterly disconcerted by 
a new and entirely unexpected but extraordinarily simple 
question : 'If you really knew what you were doing, and weren't 
just blundering along, if you really had a definite and constant 
objective, how is it that you have never even looked into the 
purse, and have no idea what you gained, or for what you 
underwent all those torments and consciously performed such 
base, vile, and ignoble actions? Indeed, you only wanted to 
throw the purse into the water, together with the other things, 
without looking at them either . . .  Why is that?' 
Yes, it was true, it was all true. He had, however, known it 
before, and the problem was not new; and when he had made 
his decision in the night, to throw everything into the water, 
he had made it without hesitation or reconsideration, but as 
if it had to be, as if it could not be otherwise . . .  Yes, he knew 
it all, and he remembered everything; indeed, it was all but 
decided yesterday, in that moment when he crouched above 
the trunk, and dragged the cases out of it . . .  It was indeed 
so ! . . .  
'It's because I am very ill,' he morosely decided at last ; 
'I have been tormenting and torturing myself, and I hardly 
know what I am doing •
.
•
 Yesterday, and the day before, and 

C RIME AND PUNISHMENT 
105 
all this time, I have been tormenting myself . . .  When I am 
well . . .  I shall not torture myself like this . . .  But what if I 
never get quite well again? Oh God, how sick I am of it all ! . .  .' 
He went on walking. He longed to find some distraction, but 
he did not know what to do or how to begin. A new and irre­
sistible sensation of boundless, almost physical loathing for 
everything round him, an obstinate, hateful, malicious sensa­
tion, was growing stronger and stronger with every minute. 
He loathed everyone he met-their faces, their walk, their 
gestures. He thought that if anybody were to speak to him, 
he would spit and snarl at them like an animal . . .  
When he came out on to the embankment of the Little Neva, 
on Vasilyevsky Island near the bridge, he stopped. 'Why, he 
lives there, in that house,' he thought. 'How does it come about 
that I have somehow arrived at Raztimikhin's? It's just like the 
way it happened before . . .  I wonder, though, whether I 
really meant to come here, or simply walked along and came 
out here by chance ? It makes no difference; . . .  the day before 
yesterday . . .  I said I should come here on the day after that, 
and here I am ! As if l could possibly not come !' 
He went up to the fifth floor, where Razumikhin lived, and 
found him at home, busy writing in his little room. They had 
not seen each other for four months. Razumikhin opened the 
door; he was wearing a dressing-gown worn to tatters, and 
slippers on his bare feet, and he was unkempt, unshaven, and 
unwashed. He looked astonished. 
'What brings you here?' he exclaimed, eyeing his friend 
from head to foot ; then he stopped and whistled. 
'Are things as bad as that? And you, my dear chap, used to 
be the smartest of us all,' he added, glancing at Raskolnikov's 
rags. 'But sit down ; you must be tired.' When his visitor sank 
on to an oilcloth-covered sofa, in even worse condition than 
his own, Razumikhin realized that he was ill. 
'You are seriously ill, do you know that?' He tried to feel 
his pulse, but Raskolnikov snatched his hand away. 'Don't ! 
•
.
 .' he said. 'I have come . . .  it is like this : I haven't any pupils 
. . .  I should like . . .  however, I don't want any pupils . .  .' 
'Do you know, you are delirious,' remarked Razumikhin, 
who was watching him closely. 
'No, I'm not . .  .' Raskolnikov got up. When he came up to 
Razumikhin's room he had somehow not thought of how he 
would have to come face to face with him. Now it had taken 

106 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
him only a moment's trial to realize that he was less inclined 
than ever to enter into personal relations with anybody on the 
face of the earth. Gall welled up in him. He felt choked with 
rage at himself as soon as he crossed Razumikhin's threshold. 
'Good-bye !' he said abruptly, and made for the door. 
'Since you're here, stay a little. Don't be so freakish !' 
'Don't ! .
.
 .' repeated Raskolnikov, again snatching his 
hand away. 
'What the deuce did you come for, then? Have you gone 
clean off your head? You know, this is . . .  almost an insult. 
I won't put up with it.' 
'Well, listen : I came to you because I didn't know anyone 
else who might help me . . .  to begin . . .  because you're the 
nicest of the lot, I mean the most sensible, and can judge . . .  
But now I see that I don't want anything, do you hear, any­
thing at all . . .  I want nobody's help or pity . . .  I myself . . .  
alone . . .  Oh, that's enough ! Leave me in peace !' 
'Stop a minute, chimney-sweep ! You're quite mad ! Do as 
you like, as far as I'm concerned. Look : I haven't any pupils 
myself, and much I care; but there's a bookseller, Kheruvimov, 
in the Rag Market, and he 's as good as lessons any day. I 
wouldn't exchange him for the chance of teaching in five rich 
merchants' houses. He does a bit of publishing, and is bringing 
out some little books on the natural sciences-and how they 
sell ! The titles alone are worth I don't know what ! You've 
always maintained that I was stupid : let me tell you, my dear 
fellow, there are some people even stupider than I !  Now he's 
sneaked into the Movement;* he himself doesn't understand 
the first thing, but needless to say I urge him on. Here are 
two sheets and a bit of German text-in my opinion it is the 
silliest sort of charlatanism : the question discussed, in one 
word, is whether a woman is a human being or not, and, of 
course, it is triumphantly proved that she is. Kheruvimov is 
bringing it out as a contribution to the Woman question;* 
I am doing the translation ; he will stretch the two and a half 
sheets to about six, we shall add half a page of grandiloquent 
titles, and issue it at half a rouble. It will pass ! I get six roubles 
a sheet for the translation, that means fifteen for the whole 
thing, and I have had six roubles in advance. When we have 
finished this, we shall begin on another about whales, and 
afterwards there are some very boring pieces of gossip marked 
out in the second part of the Corifessions, and we wjll translate 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
them; someone or other has told Kheruvimov that Rousseau is 
in his way a sort of Radishchev: Of course, I don't contradict 
him ; he can go to the devil ! Well, would you like to translate 
the second sheet of Woman: Is she a Human Being? If you would, 
take the text now, and pens and paper-they are all supplied­
and take three roubles, because I had an advance on the whole 
thing, both the first and the second sheet, and that means 
three roubles are due as your share. When you have finished, 
you get three roubles more. And there 's one other thing, please 
don't think I am only trying to do you a good turn. On the 
contrary, as soon as you came in I began to see how useful 
you could be to me. To begin with, my spelling is bad, and in 
the second place, my German is sometimes very weak, so that 
I am reduced to making up most of it myself, comforting 
myself with the idea that it is probably an improvement. But 
who knows, perhaps I'm not improving it, but spoiling it . . .  
Are you going to take it or not?' 
Without a word Raskolnikov picked up the sheets of German 
text and the three roubles, and went out. Razumikhin looked 
after him in surprise. Raskolnikov had already reached the 
First Line*when he turned abruptly on his heel, climbed once 
more to Razumikhin's room, laid the papers and the money 
on the table, still without a word, and was gone. 
'You must be raving mad or something,' roared Razumi­
khin, losing his temper at last. 'What sort of game do you think 
you are playing? You baffle even me . . .  What the devil did you 
come for, anyhow?' 
'I don't want . . .  translations . .  .' muttered Raskolnikov, 
already half-way downstairs. 
'Then what the deuce do you want?' cried Razumikhin 
from above. Raskolnikov went on down in silence. 
'Hi, you ! Where do you live?' 
There was no answer. 
'Well then, be damned to you ! . .  .' 
But Raskolnikov had already reached the street. He was 
on the Nikolaevsky Bridge before he came to himself again, as 
a consequence of a very unpleasant incident. The driver of a 
carriage laid his whip heavily across his back, because he had 
almost fallen under the horses' feet, in spite of the coachman's 
repeated cries. The blow so enraged him that, leaping for the 
parapet (for some unknown reason he had been walking in the 
middle of the roadway), he ground his teeth viciously with a 

1 08 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
clicking noise. Of course, there was laughter and comment 
from the passers-by. 
'Serve him right !' 
'An unmitigated scoundrel !' 
'It 's a well-known trick;* they pretend to be drunk and get 
under the wheels on purpose; and you are responsible.' 
'That 's the way they make a living, my dear sir . .  .' Just 
then, as he stood by the parapet gazing uselessly and angrily 
after the retreating carriage and rubbing his back, he felt some 
money being thrust into his hand. He looked and saw an 
elderly woman of the merchant class, in a Russian head-dress 
and goat-skin shoes, and a young girl, who seemed to be her 
daughter, wearing a hat and carrying a green parasol. 'Take it, 
in the name of Christ !' He took the money-it was a twenty­
copeck piece-and they passed on. His dress and appearance 
might well have induced them to take him for a beggar, 
someone who picked up farthings in the streets, but for the 
gift of so much as twenty copecks he was probably indebted to 
the pity aroused by the blow from the whip. 
He clasped the money in his hand, walked a few steps, and 
turned his face towards the Neva, looking towards the Palace. 
There was not a cloud in the sky and the water, unusually for 
the Neva, looked almost blue. The dome of the cathedral, 
which is seen at its best from this point, not more than twenty 
paces towards the chapel from the centre of the bridge, shone 
through the clear air, and every detail of its ornament was 
distinct. The sting of the lash had abated, and Raskolnikov 
forgot the blow; a disquieting but vague idea occupied his whole 
mind. He stood for a long time gazing steadily into the dis­
tance; this spot was particularly familiar to him. A hundred 
times, while he was at the university, had he stopped at this 
very place, usually on his way home, to fix his eyes on the 
truly magnificent view and wonder each time at the confused 
and indescribable sensation it woke in him. An inexplicable 
chill always breathed on him from that superb panorama, for 
him a deaf and voiceless spirit filled the splendid picture . . .  
Each time he marvelled at his gloomy and mysterious impres­
sion, and then, mistrustful of himself, deferred consideration of 
the riddle to some future time. Now he was sharply reminded 
of his former questionings and perplexities, and it seemed to 
him that the recollection did not come by chance. It appeared 
to him strange and marvellous that he should have stopped in 

C RIME AND P UNISHMENT 
109 
the very same place as he used to do, as if he really imagined 
he could think the same thoughts now as then, and be inter­
ested in the same ideas and images as had interested him once 
. . .  not long ago. This was almost laughable, and yet his heart 
was constricted with pain. In some gulf far below him, almost 
out of sight beneath his feet, lay all his past, all his old ideas, 
and problems, and thoughts, and sensations, and this great 
panorama, and his own self, and everything, everything . . . 
He felt as if he had soared upwards and everything had 
vanished from his sight . . .  He made an involuntary gesture 
with his hand, and became aware of the twenty-copeck piece 
squeezed in his fist. He unclasped his hand and stared at the 
money, then flung it into the water with a sweep of his arm; 
then he turned away and walked homewards. He felt that he 
had in that moment cut himself from everybody and every­
thing, as if with a knife. 
It was evening when he reached home, so that he must 
have been walking for about six hours. How and by what route 
he went back he could never afterwards remember. He un­
dressed and lay down, shuddering like an overdriven horse, 
pulled his winter overcoat over him, and fell instantly asleep. 
It was dusk when he was startled awake by a terrible cry. 
God, what was that shriek? He had never before heard such 
a babble of unnatural noises, such howling and wailing, 
grinding of teeth, tears, blows, and curses. He could never 
even have imagined such ferocity and frenzy. He raised him­
self in a panic, and sat on his bed in a torment of fear. The 
sounds of struggling, wailing, and cursing grew louder and 
louder. Suddenly, to his utter amazement, he recognized his 
landlady's voice. She was howling, shrieking, and wailing, the 
words tumbling out of her mouth in an indistinguishable spate; 
she seemed to be imploring someone to stop, for she was being 
unmercifully beaten, out there on the stairs. Her assailant, 
hoarse with rage and fury, was also pouring out a stream of 
unrecognizable words, stuttering with haste. Raskolnikov 
began to tremble like a leaf; he knew that voice, it was the 
voice of Ilya Petrovich. Ilya Petrovich here, and beating his 
landlady ! He was kicking her, thumping her head on the 
stairs-that was clear, the noises, the howls, the blows, revealed 
it. What was it? Had the world come to an end? He could hear 
a crowd gathering on the landings and all up the stairs; there 
were voices, outcries, footsteps running up and down the stairs, 

1 10 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
raps, doors slamming. 'But what is it for ?  What is it all about? 
How could it possibly be happening?' he repeated to himself, 
seriously wondering if he had gone mad. But no, he could hear 
it too plainly for that. But then, if he were not mad, they must 
be coming here, this moment, 'because . . .  it must be all on 
account of . . .  yesterday . . .  Oh God !' He thought of fastening 
his door, but he could not raise his arm . . .  and besides it 
would be no use ! Fear crept like ice round his heart, tortured 
his nerves, numbed his spirit . . .  The uproar, which had 
probably lasted for ten minutes, died down gradually; his 
landlady groaned and lamented still; Ilya Petrovich went on 
cursing and threatening . . .  At last he too seemed quiet; no 
more was heard of him; 'Good Heavens ! Can he possibly have 
gone away?' Yes, the landlady was going too, still groaning 
and weeping . . .  that was her door slamming . . .  The crowd 
was melting away into the different flats-exclaiming, arguing, 
calling to one another in voices that now rose to a scream, now 
sank to a whisper. There must have been very many of them; 
practically everybody in the house had come running. 'But, 
good God, how can all this have really happened? And why, 
why, did he come here?' 
Raskolnikov fell back exhausted on his sofa, but he could 
not close his eyes again ; he lay there for half an hour, in the 
grip of such anguish, such an intolerable feeling of limitless 
terror, as he had never before experienced. Suddenly a bright 
light illuminated the room ; Nastasya had come in with a 
candle and a plate of soup. She looked at him and, seeing that 
he was not asleep, put the candle on the table and began to 
set out the things she had brought, bread, salt, a spoon, and the 
plate. 
'I suppose you've had nothing to eat since yesterday. You've 
been wandering about all day, and you've got a fever.' 
'Nastasya . . .  why were they beating the landlady ?' 
She stared at him. 
'Who was?' 
'Just now . . .  half an hour ago, Ilya Petrovich, the chief 
police officer's assistant, on the staircase . . .  Why was he beating 
her like that? And . . .  why did he come?' 
Nastasya studied him silently for a long time, frowning. 
He found her scrutiny very unpleasant, even frightening. 
'Nastasya, why don't you say something?' he asked at last 
hesitantly, in a weak voice. 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
I I I 
'It 's the blood,' she answered at last quietly, as if she were 
talking to herself. 
'Blood ! . . .  What blood? . . .  ' he mumbled. He had turned 
pale, and moved closer to the wall. Nastasya went on looking 
at him in silence. 
'Nobody was beating the landlady,' she said again in a 
severe, decided voice. He looked at her, hardly breathing. 
'I heard it myself. . .  I wasn't asleep . . .  I was sitting here . .  .' 
he said, even more hѪitantly. 'I listened for a long time . . .  
The assistant chief of police came . . .  Everybody came on to 
the stairs, out of all the flats . .  .' 
'Nobody came. It's your blood that makes a noise. It 's 
when it hasn't got any outlet, and it begins to get all clotted, 
and then you begin to get visions . . .  Are you going to have 
something to eat, eh?' 
He did not answer. Nastasya still stood near him, with her 
eyes fixed on him. 
'Give me a drink . . .  dear Nastasya.' 
She went downstairs and returned in a minute with water in 
a white earthenware mug; but he hardly knew what happened 
next. He only remembered swallowing a few drops of cold 
water and spilling some on his chest. Then came complete 
unconsciousness. 
C H A P T E R  I I I  
HE was not entirely unconscious throughout the whole time of 
his illness ; he lay in a fever, delirious and sometimes half­
conscious. Afterwards he could remember a good deal about 
it. At one time it seemed to him that he was surrounded by 
many people, who wanted to carry him away somewhere, and 
that they were wrangling and quarrelling over him. Then 
suddenly he was alone in the room; everybody had gone out, 
they were afraid of him, and only occasionally opened the door 
a crack to look in at him. They would threaten him, hatch out 
plots among themselves, laugh and jeer at him. He remem­
bered Nastasya's being with him often; he could also distinguish 
a man, who seemed very well known to him, but who it was he 
could not think, and he worried and even wept over this. Once it 
would seem to him that he had lain there for a month; another 
time, that it was still the same day as he fell ill. About that­
about that he had quite forgotten ; but he was conscious all 

I 12 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
the time that he had forgotten something that he ought not to 
forget, and he tortured himself, racked his brains to remember, 
groaned, fell into mad rages or into the grip of terrible, un­
bearable fear. Then he tried to drag himself up; to run, but 
somebody always restrained him by force, and he would fall 
back into helplessness and oblivion. At last he came completely 
to himself. 
This was one morning at ten o'clock. At this hour, when the 
weather was clear, the sunlight always fell in a long streak 
across the right-hand wall of his room and lit up the corner 
near the door. Near his bed stood Nastasya with somebody 
else, quite unknown to him, who was watching him with great 
curiosity. This was a bearded young man in a caftan, who 
looked like a superior workman. The landlady was peering 
round the half-open door. Raskolnikov raised himself. 
'Who is this, Nastasya?' he asked, pointing to the man. 
'Look, he's come round !' said she. 
'He's come round,' echoed the visitor. Realizing that he was 
conscious, the landlady, who had been looking round the door, 
concealed herself by closing it. She was always very shy, and 
avoided conversations and explanations. She was about forty, 
stout and heavy, and quite good-looking, with black eyes and 
hair; she had the good nature of the fat and lazy, but her 
shyness was altogether excessive. 
'Who are . . . you?' Raskolnikov went on, turning to the 
man himself. At this moment, however, the door was opened 
wide again, and Razumikhin, stooping a little because of his 
height, came in. 
'This place is no better than a ship's cabin,' he exclaimed 
as he came in ; 'I always bump my head. And they call it a 
lodging ! Well, my dear fellow, you've come round, have you? 
I've just heard it from Pashenka.' 
'He 's just this minute come to,' said Nastaѫya. 
'Just this minute come to,' assented the strange man, with a 
slight smile. 
'And who might you be, sir?' asked Razumikhin, turning 
to him. 'Allow me to present myself, Vrazumikhin, not 
Razumikhin* as I am usually called, but Vrazumikhin, a 
student and a gentleman, and this is my friend. Well, sir, and 
who are you?' 
'I am the foreman-clerk in the merchant Shelopaev's 
counting-house, sir, and I am here on business, sir.' 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
I I3 
'Be good enough to sit down here,' and Razumikhin sat 
down himself on the other side of the little table. 'I'm glad 
you've come to yourself, my dear chap,' he went on, addressing 
Raskolnikov. 'You've hardly eaten or drunk anything for 
three days. It's true they did give you tea in a spoon. I brought 
Zosimov to see you twice. Do you remember him? He exa­
mined you carefully, and said at once that it was nothing 
much-you've just been a bit queer in the head. Some sort of 
nonsensical nervous trouble, and the wrong sort of food, he 
says, not enough beer and horse-radish ; that made you ill, 
but it's nothing-it will pass, and you'll be all right again. 
He's a clever chap, Zosimov. His treatment was capital.' 
He turned to the workman again. 'Well, I don't want to 
detain you ;  would you care to explain your business? Observe, 
Rodya, this is the second time someone has been here from 
their office, only before it was not this man but somebody else, 
and I had a talk with him. Who was it who came here 
before? 
'Let's see : that would be the day before yesterday. Yes. It 
were Alexey Semenovich ; he belongs to our office, too.' 
'I suppose he is a bit more competent than you; don't you 
think so?' 
'Yes, sir; he be just that, a bit sounder, like.' 
'Admirable ! Well, go on.' 
'Well, through Afanasy Ivanovich Vakhrushin, who I don't 
doubt you've heard of, more than once, and by request from 
your mama, sir, there is money coming to you through our 
office, sir,' began the workman, addressing Raskolnikov direct. 
'In case you was to have come to yourself, sir, by now-thirty­
five roubles is what I have to hand over, sir, Semen Semenovich 
having been notified to that effect by Afanasy Ivanovich by 
request of your mama as aforesaid. Are you informed of it, sir?' 
'Yes, . . . I remember . . . Vakhrushin,' said Raskolnikov 
thoughtfully. 
'You hear : he knows the merchant Vakhrushin,' exclaimed 
Razumikhin. 'Who says he's not come to himself? By the way, 
I observe that you are also a very competent man. Well, it 
does one good to hear such wise and intelligent speeches.' 
'That 's the very man, sir, Vakhrushin, Afanasy Ivanovich, 
and by request of your mama, who in the manner aforesaid has 
already once remitted money through him, he did not refuse 
this time, sir, and notified Semen Semenovich as of that date 

I 14 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
to transfer to you thirty-five roubles, sir, in anticipation of 
better, sir.' 
'Well, "in anticipation of better" is the best thing you have 
said yet; although that about "your mama" isn't bad, either. 
Well, what is your opinion : is he or isn't he in full possession 
of his faculties, eh ?' 
'It isn't my opinion that matters but only on account of the 
receipt he would have to be, sir.' 
'He'll manage to scribble it somehow. What's that you've 
got, a receipt-book?' 
'Yes, sir, here it is, sir.' 
'Give it here. Now, Rodya, raise yourself up a little. I'll help 
you. Just sign "Raskolnikov" for him. Come, take the pen ; 
money is sweeter to us just now, brother, than honey.' 
'I don't want it,' said Raskolnikov, pushing away the pen. 
'You don't want what?' 
'I am not going to sign.' 
'What the devil?-A receipt is absolutely necessary.' 
'I don't want . . .  the money . . .  
' 
'Oh, it 's the money you don't want, is it? Now there, my 
dear fellow, you lie, as I can bear witness !-Don't worry, 
please, this is only because he . . . is wandering again. He is 
quite capable of that even when he is wide awake . . .  You are 
a man of discernment; we will guide his hand and he will sign. 
Let us set about it . . .  ' 
'Oh, I can come another time, after all, sir.' 
'No, no : why should we trouble you? You are a man of 
sense and judgement . . .  Well, Rodya, don't detain your 
visitor •
.
.
 you can see he is waiting,' and he prepared in all 
seriousness to guide Raskolnikov's hand. 
'No, don't, I'll do it myself . .  .' said he, and he took the 
pen and wrote his signature in the book. The man laid the 
money on the table and departed. 
'Bravo ! And now, my dear fellow, do you want something 
to eat?' 
'Yes, I do,' answered Raskolnikov. 
'Have you got any soup?' 
'Yesterday's,' answered Nastasya, who had been standing 
there all the time. 
'Made with potatoes and rice?' 
'Yes, potatoes and rice.' 
'I know it by heart. Sling it in, and bring tea as well.' 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
1 15 
'Very well.' 
Raskolnikov watched everything with deep astonishment 
and dull, unreasoning fear. He made up his mind to say 
nothing, but wait to see what came next. 'I don't think I'm 
delirious,' he thought; 'it seems real enough . .  . '  
Two minutes later Nastasya returned with the soup, and 
explained that the tea would not be long. With the soup 
appeared two spoons, two plates, and a complete set of condi­
ments : salt, pepper, mustard for the beef, and other things 
that had not been seen on his table, in such neat order, for a 
long time past. The tablecloth was clean. 
'It wouldn't be, a bad idea, Nastasyushka, if Praskovya 
Pavlovna were to order a couple of bottles of beer. We could 
do with them.' 
'Well, that 's cool !' grumbled Nastasya, as she went to do 
his bidding. 
Raskolnikov still watched with close attention. Meanwhile 
Razumikhin sat down beside him on the sofa, as clumsy as a 
bear, encircled his friend's head with his left arm (although he 
could quite well have raised himself) and with his right carried 
a spoonful of soup to his mouth, first blowing on it once or 
twice so that it should not be too hot. The soup was in fact only 
luke-warm. Raskolnikov eagerly swallowed a spoonful, then a 
second and a third. Mter a few more mouthfuls, Razumikhin 
stopped, explaining that he must consult Zosimov about any 
more. 
Nastasya came in, carrying two bottles of beer. 
'Would you like some tea?' 
'Yes, I should.' 
'Roll up some tea as well, Nastasya ; I think he can have 
tea without waiting for the doctor's permission. But here's 
the beer !' He moved across to his chair, drew soup and beef 
towards him and began to eat with as much appetite as though 
he had not broken his fast for three days. 
'I have been having dinner here at your place every day, 
Rodya, my dear fellow,' he muttered as clearly as a mouth 
stuffed with beef would allow, 'and Pashenka, your nice little 
landlady, has provided it; she delights to feed me. I, of course, 
do not demand it; but I don't, as a matter of fact, raise any 
objections either. But here is Nastasya with the tea. How 
quick she can be ! Nastenka, would you like some beer?' 
'Get away with you !' 

I I6 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'A drop of tea, then?' 
'I don't mind.' 
'Pour it out. Wait, I will pour it for you myself. You sit 
down.' 
He took command of the teapot and poured out a cup, 
and then another. Then he abandoned his luncheon and 
crossed again to the sofa. As before, he put his left arm round 
the sick man's head, raised him, and began to feed him tea­
spoonfuls of tea, again blowing on them fervently and inces­
santly, as if this process of blowing were the most important 
and salutary part of the treatment. Raskolnikov remained 
silent, making no protest, although he felt that he was quite 
strong enough to sit up without any outside assistance, and 
that he had sufficient command of his limbs not only to hold 
a spoon or cup but even, perhaps, to walk. But a strange, all 
but feral cunning prompted him to conceal how strong he was, 
to lie low, even to pretend, if it proved necessary, that he had 
not completely recovered his understanding, and meanwhile 
to listen and try to find out what was going on. He could not, 
however, quite master his repugnance; when he had swallowed 
a dozen spoonfuls of tea, he jerked his head free, pettishly 
pushed away the spoon, and lay back again on his pillow. 
A real pillow, filled with down and covered with a clean 
pillowcase, now lay under his head ; he noticed this as one 
more of the things he must try to understand. 
'Pashenka must send up some raspberry jam today, to make 
a drink for him,' said Razumikhin, sitting down at the table 
and applying himself again to the soup and beer. 
'And where is she supposed to get raspberries?' asked 
Nastasya, balancing her saucer on the tips of her outstretched 
fingers and drinking her tea 'through a piece of sugar'. 
'She will get them, my dear girl, from the shop. You see, 
Rodya, a great many things have been happening here that 
you don't know about. When you ran away in such a scoun­
drelly fashion and wouldn't tell me your address, I got so 
furious that I decided to seek you out and punish you. I set 
about it the very same day. I walked all over the place, and 
made inquiries everywhere. I couldn't remember your present 
address, which is not surprising, since I never knew it. About 
your last lodgings I could recollect only that they were near 
Five Corners, in Kharlamov's house-and then afterwards it 
turned out not to be Kharlamov's at all, but Buch's-what 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
I I 7 
mistaken ideas about sounds we get sometimes ! Well, I got 
very annoyed. I got annoyed, and so, next day, I thought 
I might as well try the Register of Addresses, and just imagine : 
they found you for me inside two minutes. They've got you 
down there.' 
'Me !' 
'Of course; and yet while I was there they simply couldn't 
find General J).:.obelev. Well, to cut a long story short, as soon 
as I stumbled on this place, I got to know all your affairs ; all of 
them, brother, all of them. Nastasya here knows that; I made 
the acquaintance of Nikodim Fomich, of the porter, and of 
Mr. Zametov, Alexander Grigoryevich, the chief clerk at the 
police office here, and had Ilya Petrovich pointed out to me; 
lastly I got to know Pashenka, and that was the crowning 
point; Nastasya here knows . . .  ' 
'You got round her,' murmured Nastasya, with a mis­
chievous smile. 
'You ought to put that sugar in your tea, Nastasya Niki­
forovna.' 
'Go on with you, you dog !' cried Nastasya, bursting out 
laughing. 'Besides, I'm Petrovna, not Nikiforovna,' she added 
as soon as she could for laughing. 
'We appreciate your confidence. Well, my dear chap, not to 
waste words, I wanted to get rid at one sweep of all the cob­
webs of prejudice here, to galvanize everybody, as it were, but 
Pashenka was too much for me. I didn't expect that she would 
be so . . .  sweet and charming . . .  eh, brother? What do you 
think?' 
Raskolnikov did not answer, but he kept his anxious eyes fixed 
on his friend, as they had been throughout. Not in the least dis­
concerted by his silence, Razumikhin went on, exactly as if he 
had received a reply and were expressing his agreement with it : 
'Yes, she is indeed a very nice, good creature, in all respects.' 
'Well, you are a one !' exclaimed Nastasya, who seemed to 
derive inexplicable enjoyment from this conversation. 
'It's a pity, my dear fellow, that you didn't understand how 
to deal with the situation at the very beginning. The way you 
handled her was wrong. You know, she is, shall I say, a most 
unexpected character. But we can talk of that later . . .  Only 
how on earth did things reach such a pass that she dared to stop 
sending up your dinner? And that bill of exchange? You must 
surely have been out of your mind, to sign a thing like that. 

I 18 
C RI ME AND PUNISHMENT 
And then that proposed marriage, when her daughter, 
Natalya Egorovna, was still alive . . .  I know everything ! But 
I see that I have touched a sensDtive spot-1 am an ass. You 
must forgive me. But talking of stupidity-don't you think 
Praskovya Pavlovna is not nearly as stupid as she might appear 
at first sight, eh, brother?' 
'Yes . .  .' Raskolnikov let fall, looking away, but conscious 
that the conversation had better be kept going. 
'That 's true, isn't it?' exclaimed Razumikhin, visibly pleased 
to have received an answer, 'but she's not clever either, 
is she? She's a quite, quite unexpected character. I tell you, 
my dear fellow, I have lost my head a little . . .  She must be 
forty. She admits to thirty-six, and she 's certainly not over­
stating it. However, I swear my relations with her are purely 
platonic, though more complicated than any of your algebraic 
formulas could ever be-completely incomprehensible, in fact. 
But this is all beside the point; the fact is, that when she realized 
you were no longer a student, had lost your pupils, and had 
no decent clothes, and that since her daughter's death you 
could no longer be looked on as a member of the family, she 
took fright, and when you for your part skulked in a corner, 
and would take up none of the threads of your former life, she 
decided she must get rid of you. She had nourished this 
intention a long time but she didn't want to say good-bye to 
that bill of exchange. Besides, you had assured her that your 
mama would pay it . .  .' 
'It was very wrong of me to say that . . .  My mama has barely 
enough money to keep her from having to accept charity . .  . 
and I lied so that I should be allowed to remain here and . .  . 
get my food,' said Raskolnikov loudly and distinctly. 
'Yes, that was very sensible of you. Only the snag is, that 
this Mr. Chebarov, a man of business and a Civil Councillor, 
turned up. Without him, Pashenka would have been altogether 
too bashful to do anything; but men of business are not shame­
faced, and of course his first question was : "Is there any hope 
of realizing on the bill?" Answer: "Yes, because there is a mama 
who will come to Rodenka's rescue with her pension of a 
hundred and twenty-five roubles, if it means going without 
enough to eat herself, and a sister who would sell herself into 
slavery for him." That was enough for him . . .  Now, don't get 
restless ! My dear fellow, I've ferreted out all your secrets now; 
you did right to open your heart to Pashenka, when you were 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
I 19 
practically one of the family, and what I am saying now is in 
pure affection . . .  This is what happens : the sensitive ahd 
honest man opens his heart, and the business man listens and 
takes it all in, so that he can swallow up the honest fellow. Well, 
she hands over this bill of yours in payment for something to 
this Chebarov and he makes a formal claim on it and is not 
to be put off. When I learnt all this, I would have liked to give 
him a piece of my mind, simply to relieve my feelings, but at 
that time Pashenka and I were on very harmonious terms, 
and I got the business stopped, at its source, by undertaking 
that you would pay. You understand, my dear fellow, I 
vouched for you. Chebarov was summoned and paid ten 
roubles on the nail, and we got the paper back ; I have the 
honour to present it to you;-now they rely on your word 
alone. Here it is-take it ! Now it has no force.' 
Razumikhin laid the note of hand on the table; Raskolnikov 
glanced at it and, without saying a word, turned to the wall. 
The gesture jarred even on Razumikhin. 
'I see, brother,' he went on after a moment's pause, 'that 
I have made a fool of myself again. I wanted to entertain you 
and amuse you with my chatter, but it seems I've only annoyed 
you !' 
'Was it you that I didn't recognize in my delirium?' asked 
Raskolnikov after another short silence, without turning his 
head. 
'Yes, it was, and you got very excited about it, especially 
once when I brought Zametov with me.' 
'Zametov? . . .  The chief clerk? . . .  What for?' Raskolnikov 
swung round and fixed his eyes on Razumikhin. 
'What makes you . . .  ? Why are you so alarmed? He wanted 
to get to know you ; it was his own wish, because we had talked 
so much about you . . .  Who else do you suppose I could have 
learned so much from? He's a good chap, a fine fellow . . .  in 
his own way of course. We are friends now, we see each other 
nearly every day. I've moved into this district, you know. 
Didn't you know? I've only just removed. I've been at Louisa's 
a couple of times with him, too. You remember Louisa, don't 
you-Louisa Ivanovna?' 
'Did I say anything when I was delirious?' 
'Of course you did. You were out of your mind.' 
'What did I say?' 
'Good heavens ! What did you say? What anyone says when 

1 20 
C RIME AND P UNISHMENT 
they're raving . . .  Well, my dear fellow, don't let's lose any 
more time-to business !' 
He got up and seized his cap. 
'What did I say?' 
'You're repeating yourself, you know. Are you worrying 
about some secret or other? Don't be afraid; the Countess was 
never mentioned. But you talked about some bulldog, and 
about ear-rings, and a chain, and Krestovsky Island, and some 
porter, and Nikodim Fomich, and a lot about Ilya Petrovich, 
the assistant chief of police. Besides that, you were very 
interested in your own sock, very. You were whining : "Give it 
me, that's all I want." Zametov himself looked for your socks 
everywhere, and handed you that rubbish with his own fair 
hands, washed in scent and covered with rings. Only then did 
you calm down, and you held the rubbish in your hand for days 
together; we couldn't get it away from you. It must still be 
there somewhere under your blankets. And then again you 
asked for the fringe from your trousers, and so tearfully ! We 
questioned you about it : what sort of fringe did you mean? 
But we couldn't make anything out . . .  Well, now to busi­
ness. Here are the thirty-five roubles; I am taking ten of them, 
and I'll render you an account in an hour or two. At the 
same time, I'll let Zosimov know, though he ought to have 
been here long ago anyhow ; it's twelve o'clock. And you, 
Nastenka, while I'm out you must come and inquire fre­
quently whether he wants something to drink or anything 
like that . . .  And I'll tell Pashenka myself what is wanted. 
Good-bye !' 
'He calls her Pashenka ! Sly rogue !' said Nastasya after him. 
She opened the door and listened, but soon grew tired of this 
and ran downstairs herself. She seemed very anxious to find 
out what he was saying to the landlady, and it was evident that 
she herself was quite charmed with Razumikhin. 
The door had hardly closed behind her when the sick man 
flung off the bedclothes and jumped up like one possessed. 
He had been waiting with feverish, burning impatience for 
them to go" so that as soon as they were out of the way he 
could apply himself to what he had to do. But what ?-what 
had he to do ? He seemed to have clean forgotten. 'Oh Lord, 
tell me just one thing; do they know everything or not? What 
if they know it all already and were only pretending, mocking 
me while I lay here, and what if they come in now and say that 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
1 2 1  
they have known everything for a long time, and they were 
only . . .  ? What shall I do now? I've forgotten ! I knew a 
moment ago, but now it's gone ! . . .  ' 
He stood in the middle of the room and looked round in an 
agony of indecision ;  he went to the door, opened it, and listened, 
but that was not it. Suddenly, as if he had remembered, he 
rushed to the corner where the wallpaper was torn, looked it 
over carefully, thrust his hand into the hole and rummaged 
there, but that was not it either. He went to the stove, opened 
it, and sought among the ashes; the bits of fringe from his 
trousers and the pieces of his torn pocket still lay there as he 
had thrown them ; so nobody had looked there ! Then he 
remembered the sock that Razumikhin had been talking about. 
Yes, here it was on the sofa, under the blanket, but it was so 
much more rubbed and dirty since that time that Zametov 
could certainly not have noticed anything. 
'Ah, Zametov ! . . .  the office ! . . .  Why have I been summoned 
to the office? And where is the summons ? Bah ! . . .  I am getting 
confused, that was before ! I examined the sock then, as well, 
and now . . .  now I have been ill. But why did Zametov come 
here? Why did Razumikhin bring him? . . .' he murmured 
weakly, sitting on his sofa again. 'But what is this? Am I still 
delirious, or is all this real ? It seems real enough . . . Ah, I 
remember : I must run away, run away at once ; I must, I 
absolutely must, fly. But . . .  where? And where are my clothes ? 
My boots are not here ! They've been taken away ! Someone 
has hidden them-now I understand ! Ah, here is my coat­
they overlooked that ! And here is the money on the table, 
thank God, and the I.O.U . . . .  I will take the money and go 
away, and take other lodgings, where I shall not be found ! . . .  
Yes, but the Register of Addresses? They'll find me ! Razumi­
khin will find me. It would be better to run away altogether 
. . . a long way . . . to America, and be damned to them ! I 
must take the bill as well . . .  it will come in useful there. What 
else? They think I'm ill ! They don't even know that I can 
walk, he-he-he ! . . .  I could tell by their eyes that they knew 
everything ! If only I can get downstairs ! But what if they have 
someone watching there, a police guard? What is this, tea? Ah, 
there's some beer left too, haifa bottle, and cold !' 
He seized the bottle, in which there still remained a whole 
glassful of beer, and drank it off in one gulp, as if he were 
trying to extinguish the fire in his breast. Before a minute had 

1 22 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
passed, the beer had gone to his head, and a slight and some­
how pleasurable shudder ran up his spine. He lay down and 
drew the blankets over him. His thoughts, disjointed and fever­
ish enough before, now grew more and more confused, and 
soon a light and pleasant sleep enveloped him. Enjoying his 
new comfort, he found a place for his head on the pillow, 
wrapped himself closer in the thick soft quilt that covered him 
now instead of his torn old coat, sighed softly, and sank into a 
deep, sound, and healing sleep. 
He awoke at the sound of somebody entering the room, 
opened his eyes and saw Razumikhin, who had opened the 
door and now stood on the threshold, hesitating whether to 
come in or not. Raskolnikov sat up abruptly and looked at him 
as if he were trying to recollect something. 
'Oh, you're not asleep. Well, here I am ! Nastasya, bring the 
parcel !' Razumikhin shouted down the stairs. 'You shall have 
an account at once . . .  ' 
'What time is it?' asked Raskolnikov, looking round in 
alarm. 
'You've had a capital sleep, my dear chap ; it 's evening, it 
must be six o'clock. You have slept for more than six hours . . .  ' 
'Heavens ! How could I ?  . .  .' 
'What is all this about? It's good for you. What is your 
hurry? Have you got an appointment, or something? We have 
all time before us. I've been waiting for three hours ; I looked 
in a couple of times, but you were asleep. I called on Zosimov 
twice, but he wasn't in. It doesn't matter, he will be coming . . .  
I've been out attending to my own small affairs, too. You 
know I finished moving today, with my uncle. I have an 
uncle with me now, you know . . .  Well now, to the devil 
with all that, let's get to business . . .  Give the parcel here, 
Nastenka. Now we will . . .  But how do you feel now, my dear 
fellow?' 
'I am all right; I am not ill . . .  Razumikhin, have you been 
here long?' 
'I've just told you ; I've been waiting three hours.' 
'No, but before?' 
'What do you mean, before?' 
'Since when have you been coming here?' 
'But you know I told you not long since; surely you re­
member?' 
Raskolnikov thought. Recent happenings came back to him 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
1 23 
dimly, as in a dream. He could not remember without help, 
and he looked inquiringly at Razumikhin. 
'Hm,' said his friend, 'you've forgotten. I had a sort of idea, 
just now, that you were not quite yourself yet . . .  But the sleep 
has done you good . . .  Really, you look much better. That 's 
fine ! Well, let 's get on ! You'll remember presently. Look at 
this, old man.' 
He began to undo the parcel, which obviously interestttd 
him greatly. 
'This, my dear fellow, is a matter which has been very close 
to my heart, believe me. Because we must make a man of you. 
We'll begin at the top. Do you see this cap?' he began, drawing 
out of the parcel a cap which, while it looked quite decent, 
was very ordinary and cheap. 'Won't you try it on?' 
'Afterwards-later,' said Raskolnikov, waving it irritably 
away. 
'Oh no, my dear chap, don't refuse; it will be too late 
afterwards, and I shall not sleep all night, because I had to 
guess at the size when I bought it. Just right !' he exclaimed 
triumphantly, measuring it; 'exactly the size ! What to put on 
your head, my dear chap, is the very first consideration in 
dress ; it is a kind of introduction. My friend Tolstyakov has 
to take off his lid when he goes into a public lavatory, when 
everybody else wears his hat. Everybody thinks he does this 
out of servility of spirit, but it is simply because he is ashamed 
of the bird's nest he wears on his head; he is a very shame­
faced man ! Now, Nastenka, here you have two head-coverings : 
this "Palmerston" '  (for some unknown reason he applied this 
name to Raskolnikov's battered old round hat, which he had 
taken from the corner), 'and this jeweller's piece. Put a price 
on it, Rodya ; what do you think I gave for it? Nastasyuskha?' 
he added, turning to her when he saw that he would get no 
answer. 
'Twenty copecks, I expect,' answered Nastasya. 
'Twenty copecks ! You're a fool !' he exclaimed, offended. 
'Nowadays even you would fetch more than that. Eighty 
copecks, and that only because it's second-hand ! It's true, 
there's a guarantee with it : if you wear this one out, next year 
you get another free, as true as I'm standing here ! Well, now we 
come to the United States, as we used to call them at school. 
I warn you, I am proud of the trousers !' and he spread out 
before Raskolnikov a grey pair, of light-weight wool ; 'not a 

1 24 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
hole, not a mark, and though they have been worn, they are 
quite serviceable. The waistcoat is the same, a plain one as 
fashion decrees. As for their having been worn, that really is 
all the better : it makes them softer, not so stiff . . .  You see, 
Rodya, in order to get on in the world it is enough, in my 
opinion, to observe the seasons ; if you don't ask for asparagus 
in January, you will save yourself a few roubles ; so in relation 
to the things I've bought. It is summer now, and I've bought 
summer things, because anyway autumn will demand warmer 
materials and you will have to throw these away . . .  all the 
more because by that time they will have fallen to pieces of 
themselves, either from striving after elegance or from inner 
disorganization. Well, how much do you think for these?­
Two roubles and twenty-five copecks ! And with the same 
guarantee, remember : if they wear out you get new ones next 
year for nothing ! At Fedyaev's shop they always deal on those 
terms : when once you've paid for something, it lasts the rest of 
your life, because you'll never go there again ! Well, now we 
come to the boots-what do you think of them? Of course, 
you can see they're not new, but they are good for two or 
three months, because the workmanship and materials are 
foreign : the Secretary at the English Embassy sold them last 
week; he had only worn them for six days, but he badly 
needed the money. Price, one rouble fifty copecks. Lucky, 
wasn't I ?' 
'Maybe they're the wrong size,' remarked Nastasya. 
'The wrong size ! And what is this?' and he pulled out of his 
pocket Raskolnikov's grey wrinkled boot, worn into holes and 
plastered with dried mud. 'I took a sample with me, and they 
established the right size for me from this monstrous object. 
So far, everything had gone swimmingly. But about the linen 
. . .  Here to begin with, are three shirts ; the material is coarse, 
but they have the proper fashionable fronts . . .  Well, in sum : 
eighty copecks for the cap, two roubles and twenty-five 
copecks for the rest of the clothes, total three roubles five 
copecks; one and a half roubles the boots-because they are 
really very good ones-total four roubles and fifty-five copecks, 
and five roubles for all the linen-1 got it at the wholesale 
price-grand total exactly nine roubles fifty-five copecks. Be 
good enough to accept the change, forty-five copecks in copper; 
and now, Rodya, you are completely fitted out again, because, 
in my opinion, your overcoat is not only still serviceable, but 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
1 25 
even has a certain aristocratic air; that is what it means to order 
your clothes from Scharmer ! Socks and other things of that 
sort I leave to you ; we have twenty-five roubles left, and you 
need not worry about Pashenka or the rent; I told you your 
credit was inexhaustible. Now, my dear fellow, do just change 
your linen, otherwise some infection might perhaps linger in 
your shirt . 
. .' 
'Drop it ! I don't want to !' Raskolnikov, who had listened 
with distaste to the strained playfulness of Razumikhin's 
account of his purchases, waved the suggestion away . . .  
'My dear chap, this is impossible ! What have I been wear­
ing out shoe-leather for?' insisted Razumikhin, 'Nastasya, 
don't be modest, help him ! There we are !' and in spite of 
Raskolnikov's resistance, he changed his linen for him. Ras­
kolnikov fell back on his pillow and said nothing for a minute 
or two. 
'They take so long to go away and leave me alone,' he 
thought. 'Where did the money come from for all this?' he 
asked at last, with his eyes on the wall. 
'The money? Well, I'm hanged ! It's your own money, of 
course. There was a man here from Vakhrushin's a little while 
ago ; your mama sent it; surely you haven't forgotten that 
as well?' 
'Now I remember . .  .' said Raskolnikov, after pondering 
in moody silence for a long time. Razumikhin frowned and 
looked at him uneasily. 
The door opened, and a tall heavy man came in. It seemed 
to Raskolnikov that there was something familiar about his 
appearance. 
'Zosimov ! At last !' cried Razumikhin joyfully. 
C H A P T E R  I V  
Z o siMOV was tall and stout, with a pale, puffy, clean-shaven 
face and straight flaxen hair. He wore spectacles, and there 
was a heavy gold ring on one of his fat, swollen fingers. He 
must have been about twenty-seven years old. He was dressed 
in a modish loose light overcoat and light-coloured summer 
trousers, and his clothes gave a general impression of being 
loose, fashionable, and spick and span ; his linen was irre­
proachable, and his watch-chain massive. His manner was 

1 26 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
languid, a mingling of lethargy and studied ease; his preten­
tiousness, which he strove to conceal, was nevertheless nearly 
always apparent. His acquaintances found him ponderous, 
but opined that he knew his business. 
'I've been to your place twice, my dear fellow . . .  You see, 
he 's come round !' exclaimed Razumikhin. 
'Yes, yes, I see; well, how are we now, eh?' said Zosimov, 
looking hard at his patient and sitting down on the sofa at his 
feet, where he lounged as comfortably as the circumstances 
allowed. 
'He 's still under the weather,' continued Razumikhin ; 'he 
almost cried when we changed his linen just now.' 
'That's quite understandable, and you could have put it off 
till later, if he didn't want . . .  The pulse is capital. The head still 
aching a little, eh?' 
'I'm all right; I am quite well !' said Raskolnikov obstin­
ately and irritably, raising himself with flashing eyes; but he 
fell back again on his pillow at once and turned to the wall. 
Zosimov watched him. 
'Very good . . .  everything is as it should be,' he pronounced 
in his drawling voice. 'Has he eaten anything?' 
They told him, and asked what the patient could be 
given. 
'Anything at all . . .  Soup, tea . . .  He shouldn't have mush­
rooms or cucumbers, of course, nor beef . . .  and 
. .  well, no 
need to go on talking now.' He exchanged glances with Razu­
mikhin. 'No more medicine or anything; tomorrow I will see 
. . .  perhaps today it might . . .  well, yes . . .  ' 
'Tomorrow evening I shall take him for a walk,' Razu­
mikhin decided. 'We will go to the Yusupov Gardens, and 
afterwards to the "Crystal Palace".' 
'I should not move him tomorrow, or . . .  perhaps a little . . .  
well, we shall see then.' 
'It 's a great disappointment-! am having a house-warming 
today, only two steps away; I wish he could be there. If he 
could just lie on the sofa among us ! You will be there? See 
you don't forget ;  you promised.' 
'Perhaps later, if I can. What arrangements have you 
made?' 
'Nothing much-tea, vodka, herrings, a few patties. Just a 
few old friends.' 
'Who, exactly?' 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
1 27 
'Well, they're all from round about here, and, to be accurate, 
all new acquaintances-except perhaps my old uncle, and 
even he is new; he only arrived in St. Petersburg yesterday, 
to settle some small business matters. This is the first time 
I've seen him for five years.' 
'Who is he?' 
'Oh, he 's vegetated all his life as a district postmaster . . .  
he has a small pension-he is sixty-five. He's hardly worth 
mentioning . . .  All the same I'm very fond of him. Porfiry 
Petrovich will be coming; he is the examining magistrate 
here . . .  he 's a graduate of the College of Jurisprudence. You 
must know him.' 
'Is he also some connexion of yours?' 
'A very distant one. What are you frowning about? Just 
because you got severely talked to once, aren't you going to 
come?' 
'Much I care for him !' 
'All the better. Well, then there are some students, a teacher, 
one civil servant, one musician, an officer, Zametov . .  .' 
'Please tell me what you, or he either,' Zosimov nodded at 
Raskolnikov, 'can possibly have in common with someone 
like Zametov . . .' 
'Oh, these grumblers ! You and your principles ! . . .  you are 
fixed on your principles as though they were springs ; you can't 
so much as turn round by your own volition. I think he is a 
good man-that's my principle and I don't want to know 
any more. Zametov is a wonderful man.' 
'He has an itching palm.' 
'Well, if he has, what of it? What does it matter?' exclaimed 
Razumikhin, suddenly growing unnaturally irritated ; 'was I 
commending him for looking after himself? I said that in his 
way he is a good man ! And I put it to you straight, look at it 
all ways-are there so many good people left? I am convinced 
that nobody would give more than a baked onion for my 
guts, and then only if you were thrown in into the bar-
. 
I 
' 
gam . . . .  
'That 's not enough ; I'd give two for you myself . . .  ' 
'But I'd only give one for you ! Go on, be witty! Zametov is 
still only a boy and I go very gently with him, because he 
ought to be won over, not repulsed. If once you repulse a man, 
you can't set him right, and it is still more so with a boy. 
With a boy you must go twice as carefully. Oh, you progressive 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
blockheads ! You understand nothing ! It is not the man you 
respect, but the office, and so you insult yourselves . . . And 
if you want to know, perhaps it was a common interest in one 
particular affair that brought us together.' 
'I should like to know what.' 
'Well, it's that affair of the house-painter . . .  We're going 
to get him out ! There'll be no trouble about it now. The 
thing is quite, quite clear ! We need only put on a bit more 
pressure.' 
'What painter are you talking about?' 
'What, haven't I told you about it? I must have. No, wait 
a bit, I only told you the beginning . . .  you know, about the 
murder of that old woman, the pawnbroker, some official's 
widow . . .  well, now there 's a painter involved in it . .  .' 
'Yes, I had heard about the murder before you told me, 
and I am interested in it . . .  partly, . . .  on account of something 
. . .  and I saw it in the papers . . .  But now . .  .' 
'That Lizaveta was killed too !' broke out Nastasya to Raskol­
nikov. She had remained in the room all the time, near the 
door, listening. 
'Lizaveta?' Raskolnikov's murmur was barely audible. 
'Yes, Lizaveta, you know, the dealer. She used to come 
downstairs. She once mended a shirt for you.' 
Raskolnikov turned to the wall, selected one of the white 
flowers, with little brown lines on them, on the yellowish paper, 
and began to count how many petals it had, how many serra­
tions on each petal and how many little brown lines. He felt 
his arms and legs grow numb as if they were no longer there. 
He did not stir, but looked fixedly at the flower. 
'Well, what about the painter?' Zosimov interrupted Nas­
tasya's chatter with marked displeasure. She sighed and said no 
more. 
'They've got him down as a murderer !' went on Razumikhin 
hotly. 
'Have they any evidence?' 
'The devil take evidence ! However, as far as evidence goes, 
their evidence isn't evidence at all. That is what we must 
demonstrate. It's exactly, point for point, the way they took 
those-what 's their names-Koch and Pestryakov . . .  at the 
beginning and suspected them. Pah ! How stupidly these things 
are managed ; even a quite disinterested onlooker finds it 
revolting ! . . .  It's possible that Pestryakov will be coming to 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
1 29 
my place today . . .  By the way, Rodya, you know about this ; 
it happened before your illness, just the day before you fainted 
in the office when they were talking about it . .  .' 
Zosimov looked curiously at Raskolnikov, who did not move. 
Then he remarked : 
'Do you know, Razumikhin, I shall have to have a look at 
you too : what a fussy old woman you are, though !' 
'Perhaps I am. All the same, we'll get him out of it !' ex­
claimed Razumikhin, banging the table with his fist. 'What 
is the most offensive aspect of all this? Not that what they say 
is untrue ; it is always possible to forgive untruth; untruth is 
valuable, because it leads to truth. No, what is vexatious is 
that they set up their falsehood and fall down and worship 
it ! I respect Porfiry, but . . .  For example, what led them 
astray in the very first place? The door was fastened, but 
when they came back with the porter, it was open : therefore 
Koch and Pestryakov murdered her ! That's their logic for 
you.' 
'Don't get so heated ; they were simply detained; after all, 
one can't . . .  By the way : I must have met this Koch ; didn't 
it turn out that he bought up unredeemed pledges from the 
old woman, eh ?' 
'Yes, he's a scoundrel. He buys up notes of hand as well. 
He'll do anything for a profit. But to the devil with him ! 
I'll tell you what makes me so angry. Can you understand 
this? I am angry with their routine, their antiquated, banal, 
hide-bound routine . . .  Here, in this one case, an entirely 
new avenue can be opened up. By psychological data alone 
it can be shown how one must proceed to find the right 
trail. "We," they say, "have facts !" But facts aren't every­
thing; at least half the case consists in what you do with 
the facts !' 
'And do you know what to do with the facts?' 
'Yes, and it is impossible to keep silent when you feel, when 
you know by instinct, that you could help matters, if . . .  oh ! 
. . .  Do you know the details of the case?' 
'I am waiting to hear about the painter.' 
'Yes, of course ! Well, listen to the story : on the third morn­
ing after the murder, while they were still fussing about with 
Koch and Pestryakov (although they could account for every 
step ; the evidence was overwhelming), a most unexpected fact 
came to light. A certain peasant, Dushkin, proprietor of a 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
tavern opposite that very house, appeared in the office with 
a jeweller's case with gold earrings in it, and told a long story : 
"The day before yesterday, in the evening, at approximately 
eight o'clock" (the day and the hour, notice !) "there came into 
my place a workman, a painter called Mikolay, who had been 
in before, and brought me this here little box with these gold 
earrings with little stones in them, and asked me to lend him 
two roubles on them, and when I asked him where he got them 
he said he picked them up in the street. I didn't ask him any 
more questions"-this is what Dushkin said-"but I gave 
him a note" -a rouble, that is-"because I thought if it's not 
:me it will be somebody else, and it comes to the same thing, 
he'll drink it all, and it will be better if I keep the things : safe 
bind, safe find ; and if something happens, or I hear anything, 
I can hand them in." Well, of course, that 's all a pack of 
rubbish-he lies like a trooper-because I know this Dushkin, 
and he does some pawnbroking himself, and he's a bit of a 
fence too, and he never cheated Mikolay out of a thirty-rouble 
article in order to hand it over. No, he simply lost his nerve. 
Well, now, dash it, listen. This is Dushkin speaking again : 
"This here peasant, Mikolay Dementyev, is someone I have 
known since we was kids ; he's from our Government and Dis­
trict, Zaraysk, because I come from Ryazan. Mikolay isn't 
what you'd call a drunkard, but he likes a drop, and we knew 
that he was working in that very house, painting, with Mitrey, 
and he and Mitrey come from the same place. And when he 
got the note he changed it at once, drank two glasses of vodka, 
took his change, and went, and I never saw Mitrey with him 
that time. Next day we heard that Alena Ivanovna and her 
sister Lizaveta Ivanovna had been murdered with an axe, and 
we used to know her, and I got to feeling doubtful about them 
earrings-because we knew the deceased used to lend people 
money on their things. So I went in the house to see them and 
I made inquiries, very careful, bit by bit and quiet-like, and 
first of all I asked if Mikolay was there. And Mitrey says 
Mikolay was off on a spree, he didn't come home till daylight, 
and he was drunk, but he only stayed ten minutes and then 
went off again, and Mitrey hadn't laid eyes on him since and he 
was having to finish the job by himself. And the job was on the 
same staircase as the murder, on the second floor. Well, I 
listened to all that, but I didn't say nothing to nobody, not 
then"-this is still Dushkin-"but I found out everything I 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
1 3 1  
could about the murder and went back home, but I still felt 
just as doubtful. And this morning, at eight o'clock"-that 
was on the third day, you understand-"! see Mikolay coming 
in, not so to say sober, but not very drunk, he could understand 
what anyone said to him. He sits down on the bench, and not a 
word out of him. Besides him there wasn't nobody in the house 
just then except one stranger, and another man, someone I 
knew, asleep on a bench, and my two boys. 'Have you seen 
Mitrey?' says 1-'No', says he, 'I haven't.'-'And you haven't 
been here?'-'Not since the day bȈfore yesterday', says he.­
'And where did you sleep last night?'-'On the Sands, near the 
barges.'-'And where', says I, 'did you get those earrings?'­
'! found them in the street'-but he don't say that in a likely 
sort of way, and he don't look at us.-'And you've heard, 
I suppose,' says I, 'that such and such happened that evening, 
at the very time, on that there staircase?'-'No', says he, 'I 
haven't'-and he listens with his eyes popping out of his head, 
and then he turns as white as chalk. Well, I tells him all about 
it, and then I looks and there he's took his hat and got up to go. 
Well, I tries to keep him-'Wait a bit, Mikolay,' says I, 'aren't 
you going to finish your drink?'-and I gives the lad a signal 
to hold the door shut, and comes out from behind the counter, 
but he up and out into the street, running he were, and into an 
alley, and that's the last I sees of him. Well that settled all my 
doubts ; he 's the sinner, sure enough . . .  "
' 
'I should think so ! . . . ' said Zosimov. 
'Stop, hear me out. Naturally they were off hot-foot after 
Mikolay; they detained Dushkin and searched his place, and 
the same with Mitrey ; they turned the barges inside out-and 
a couple of days later they brought in Mikolay himself; he 
was detained near the toll-gate, at an inn. He had gone in, 
taken off his silver cross and asked for a glass of vodka for it. 
They gave it to him. A few minutes later a woman went into 
the cow-shed, and saw him through a crack, in the cart-shed 
next door. He had tied his girdle to a beam and made a noose 
in it; he was standing on a block of wood and was just about 
to put his neck in the noose; the woman yelled blue murder, 
and people ran in : "So that 's it !"-"Take me,'' said he, "to 
such-and-such a police station ; I will confess everything. " 
Well, they took him with due ceremony to such-and-such a 
station, here, I mean. Then it was this, that, who? how? 
how old are you?-"twenty-two"-and so on and so forth. 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
Question : "When you were working with Mitrey, didn't you 
see anybody on the stairs at such-and-such a time?" Answer : 
"Well, of course, somebody may have gone past, but we had 
something better to do than watch them."-"And didn't you 
hear anything, any sort of noise, or something of that sort?"­
"We didn't notice anything special."-"And didn't you know, 
Mikolay, on that same day, that a certain widow had been 
robbed and murdered, with her sister, on a certain day at a 
certain time?"-"I hadn't the least idea ! I first heard of it 
from Afanasy Pavlovich, two days later, in a pub."-"Where 
did you get the earrings?" "I found them in the street."­
"Why didn't you turn up at your work next day?"-"Because 
I went off on a binge."-"Where did you go to ?" "Here and 
there."-"Why did you run away from Dushkin?"-"Because 
I was very much afraid."-"What were you afraid of?"­
"People saying I had done it."-"How could you be afraid of 
that if you knew you were quite innocent?" . . .  Believe me, or 
believe me not, Zosimov, that question was put in exactly 
those words; I know it for a fact; my information is reliable ! 
Well, I ask you !' 
'Well, all the same, there is some evidence.' 
'I'm not talking about the evidence now. I'm talking about 
the question, about the way they understand reality ! Well, 
never mind ! . . .  And so they pressed and pressed and squeezed 
and squeezed, until he confessed : "It wasn't in the street," 
says he, "but in the flat Mitrey and I were working in, that 
I found them."-"How did that happen?"-"It was like this ; 
we'd been painting all day, Mitrey and I, right up to eight 
o'clock, and we were just getting ready to leave, and Mitrey 
grabbed a brush and daubed my face with paint, full in the 
mug, and then ran away with me after him. I was running 
after him yelling blue murder, and just as I got to the bottom 
of the stairs, near the gate, I ran slap into the porter and some 
gentlemen-! don't remember how many gentlemen he had 
with him-and the porter began shouting at me, and the other 
porter shouted as well, and then the porter's wife came out 
and began shouting too. Then a gentleman came in through 
the gate, with a lady, and he cursed us as well, because me and 
Mitrey were lying right across the gateway; I'd grabbed 
Mitka's hair and got him down, and I was punching him, 
and Mitka, who was underneath, got me by the hair as well, 
and started punching me, but it was only fun, just a friendly 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
1 33 
rough-and-tumble, no hard feelings. Then Mitka got away 
and ran off up the street and I ran after him, but I couldn't 
catch him. So I went back to the flat by myself, to straighten 
up a bit. I began putting things straight, and waiting for 
Mitka in case he came back. Then in the entrance, by the door, 
up against the wall in a corner, I stepped on this box. I looked 
and saw it lying there wrapped in a bit of paper. I took off the 
paper and saw there were some little tiny hooks on the box, 
so I undid the hooks, and there were the earrings . . .  " ' 
'Behind the door, just behind the door? Did you say behind 
the door?' exclaimed Raskolnikov, raising himself slowly on his 
arms and staring with troubled, terrified eyes at Razumikhin. 
'Yes . . .  what then? What is the matter? Why do you ask?' 
Razumikhin also got up from his place. 
'Nothing,' answered Raskolnikov in a barely audible voice, 
sinking back again and once more turning his face to the wall. 
There was a short silence. 
'He must have dropped off; he's half asleep,' said Razumi­
khin at length, with a questioning look at Zosimov, who shook 
his head slightly. 
'Well, go on !' he said; 'what happened next?' 
'What next? As soon as he saw the earrings he immediately 
forgot about the flat and Mitka, seized his hat and ran to 
Dushkin and, as you know, got a rouble out of him, told him 
the lying story about finding them in the street, and went off 
on his spree. Concerning the murder he had asserted earlier : 
"I hadn't the least idea, I only heard about it two days later." 
"And why haven't you come forward before this ?"-"From 
fear."-"Why did you try to hang yourself?"-"Thinking."­
"Thinking what?"-"That they would pin it on me."-Well, 
that 's the whole story. Now, what do you think they have made 
of all that?' 
'What should I think? There is a trail there, not much of 
one, but it 's there. Facts. You wouldn't have had them let 
your painter go free?' 
'But they flatly accuse him of the murder now ! They haven't 
the slightest doubt about it . . .  ' 
'Fudge ! You're getting excited. What about the earrings? 
You must agree that if those earrings got into Nikolay's hands 
from the old woman's trunk just at that very time-you must 
agree there's got to be some explanation of how they got there. 
It's no trifle, in such circumstances.' 

1 34 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'How they got there? How they got there?' exclaimed 
Razumikhin. 'Is it possible that you, a doctor, whose first duty 
is to study mankind, and who have better opportunities for 
studying human nature than most people-is it possible that 
in all this you do not discern the nature of this Nikolay? Is it 
possible you don't see, at the very first glance, that everything 
he said at his interrogation is the sacred truth? The things came 
into his hands just exactly as he says they did. He stepped on 
the box and picked it up !' 
'The sacred truth ! But didn't he himself admit that he lied 
to begin with?' 
'Listen to me. Listen carefully : the porter, and Koch, and 
Pestryakov, and the second porter, and the first porter's wife, 
and a woman who was with her in the porter's lodge at the 
time, and Civil Councillor Kryukov, who got out of a cab at 
the moment and entered through the gate with a lady on his 
arm-all these eight or ten witnesses testify with one voice 
that Nikolay brought Dmitri to the ground, with himself on 
top, and pummelled him, and that Dmitri seized his hair and 
punched back. They were lying across the way and blocking 
the entrance; curses rained on them from all sides, but they, 
"like two small boys" (in the witnesses' own words), lay there 
one on top of the other, squealing, scuffling, and laughing, 
both of them yelling with laughter the whole time and with the 
most comical grimaces, and then chased one another out into 
the street like children. Do you hear that? Now note carefully : 
the bodies upstairs were still warm; do you hear, warm?­
that 's how they were found. If those two, or Nikolay alone, 
had committed the murder and then broken into the trunk 
and rifled it, or if they had merely had some share in the 
robbery, then ask yourself just one question : is a mood such as 
theirs, shrieks and yells of laughter, childish horseplay in the 
gateway, compatible with axes and blood, with evil cunning, 
and wariness, and with robbery? They had just done murder, 
not more than five or ten minutes before (that emerges from 
the fact that the bodies were warm), and suddenly abandoning 
the bodies and leaving the flat wide open, although they knew 
people had just been there, and leaving their spoils behind 
somewhere, they began rolling about on the ground like 
small children, laughing uproariously and attracting atten­
tion to themselves-and there are ten witnesses who all agree 
on it !' 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
135 
'It 's certainly strange; of course, it 's impossible, but . .  .' 
'No, my dear chap, not but; if the earrings found in Nikolay's 
possession on that day and at that time really constitute the 
most important factual evidence against him-it has been fully 
explained, however, by his testimony, and consequently is still 
disputed evidence-then we must take into consideration also the 
facts in his favour, especially as they are irresistible facts. But 
do you think, from the character of our judicial authorities 
that they will accept, or are capable of accepting, a fact of that 
kind-based solely on a psychological impossibility, a mental 
disposition-as irresistible evidence, demolishing all incrimi­
nating material evidence of whatever kind? No, they will not 
accept it, they will not have it on any account, because they 
have found a box and because a man tried to hang himself, 
"which he could not have done unless he had known he was 
guilty !" That is the fundamental question, that is why I get 
excited ! Try to understand !' 
'Well, I can see you are excited. Stop a minute; I forgot to 
ask you : what is there to show that the box and the earrings 
really came from the old woman's trunk?' 
'It has been proved,' answered Razumikhin with apparent 
reluctance, frowning; 'Koch recognized the thing and indicated 
the borrower, and he proved conclusively that it really was 
his.' 
'That's bad. Now another thing : did no one see Nikolay 
when Koch and Pestryakov went upstairs, and can't it be 
proved somehow?' 
'That 's just it, nobody did see him,' answered Razumikhin 
with some annoyance, 'and that is bad ; even Koch and 
Pestryakov didn't notice them as they went past on their way 
upstairs, although their testimony would not mean very much 
now. "We saw," they say, "that the flat was open, and that 
work must be going on in it, but we did not pay any attention 
to it as we passed and we cannot recollect clearly whether there 
were workmen in it at the time, or not." ' 
'Hm. It comes to this, that the only thing in their favour is 
that they were pummelling each other and laughing. Let us 
grant that it is powerful evidence, but . . .  Let me ask you now : 
how do you explain the whole episode? How can you account 
for the finding of the earrings, if he really found them, as he 
testifies ?' 
'How do I account for it? There is nothing to account for ;  

136 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
it 's as clear as daylight. At any rate, the path the investigation 
must follow is plain and evident, and it is precisely the box 
that has demonstrated it. The real murderer dropped those 
earrings. He was upstairs, behind a locked door, when Koch 
and Pestryakov knocked. Koch acted like a fool and went 
downstairs ; then the murderer slipped out and also started 
downstairs, because there was no other way out for him. On 
the way down he hid from Koch, Pestryakov, and the porter 
in the empty flat, at the exact time when Dmitri and Nikolay 
had run out of it, and stood behind the door. When the porter 
and the others had gone past up the stairs, he waited until the 
sound of steps had died away and went calmly down at the 
very moment when Dmitri had run out into the street with 
Nikolay, the little crowd had dispersed, and nobody was left 
in the gateway. He may even have been seen, without being 
noticed ; plenty of people go past. He dropped the box out of 
his pocket while he stood behind the door, and did not notice 
because he had other things to think about. But the box shows 
quite clearly that it was there that he stood. That 's all there 
is to it !' 
'Clever ! No, my dear chap, that's clever ! It is altogether too 
ingenious ! ' 
'But why, why?' 
'Simply because it is too neatly dove-tailed . . . like a 
play.' 
'Oh !' Razumikhin began, but at that moment the door 
opened and a new personage came in, a stranger to everybody 
in the room. 
C H A P T E R  V 
THIS was a gentleman no longer young, starchy and pompous, 
with a wary and irritable face, who began by stopping in 
the doorway and looking round with offensively-unconcealed 
astonishment in his eyes, which seemed to be asking : 'Where 
on earth have I got to?' Mistrustfully, and with a certain 
pretence of being shocked and outraged, he scanned Raskol­
nikov's crowded, low-ceilinged 'ship's cabin'. With the same 
astonishment he transferred his gaze to Raskolnikov himself, 
lying undressed, unwashed, and unkempt on his wretched dirty 
sofa and returning his look with one equally steady. Then, 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
1 37 
with the same slowness, he began to examine the tousled, 
unshaven, and dishevelled Razumikhin, who did not move from 
his place but in his turn looked straight at the visitor with an 
expression of arrogant inquiry. The tense silence lasted for a 
minute, but then, as was to be expected, there was a slight 
alteration in the atmosphere. Realizing, perhaps, from some 
slight but quite definite indications that an exaggerated rigidity 
of bearing would accomplish precisely nothing in this 'ship's 
cabin', the newcomer turned with a softer but still rather stiff 
courtesy towards Zosimov and asked, articulating every syllable 
with great distinctness : 
'Rodion Romanovich Raskolnikov, a student or former 
student?' 
Zosimov stirred sluggishly and would perhaps have answered 
if Razumikhin, who had not been asked, had not anticipated 
him : 
'There he is on the sofa ! What do you want?' 
The familiarity of this shook the starchy gentleman ;  he 
was even on the point of speaking to Razumikhin, but he 
managed to stop himself just in time and hastily turned back to 
Zosimov. 
'That is Raskolnikov !' drawled Zosimov, gesturing towards 
the patient, and he yawned, opening his mouth prodigiously 
wide and keeping it open for a prodigiously long time. Then 
he slowly inserted his fingers into his waistcoat-pocket, drew 
out an enormous bulging gold hunter, opened it, looked at it, 
and returned it equally slowly to its place. 
Raskolnikov himself was still lying on his back in silence, 
with his eyes fixed steadily but vacantly on his visitor. His 
face, now that he had turned away from the engrossing flower 
on the wallpaper, was extraordinarily pale and had an expres­
sion of intense suffering, as though he had just undergone a 
painful operation or been subjected to torture. But gradually 
the newcomer began to awaken in him an ever-intensifying 
chain of emotions, first attention, then perplexity, then mistrust, 
and even almost fear. When, however, Zosimov pointed him 
out as Raskolnikov, he sat up abruptly with a start and said 
in a defiant but feeble and broken tone : 
'Yes ! I am Raskolnikov ! What do you want?' 
The visitor looked at him closely and replied importantly : 
'Peter Petrovich Luzhin. I flatter myself that my name is not 
unknown to you.' 

1 38 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
Raskolnikov had been expecting something quite different, 
and he looked at him dully and thoughtfully without answering, 
as though this were absolutely the first time he had heard Peter 
Petrovich's name. 
'What? Have you really not yet received a letter with some 
mention of me in it?' asked Peter Petrovich, a little deflated. 
In answer to this, Raskolnikov let himself sink back on his 
pillow, put his hands behind his head, and turned his eyes to 
the ceiling. Anxiety showed in Luzhin's face. Zosimov and 
Razumikhin studied him with even greater curiosity than 
before, and he seemed at last quite put out of countenance. 
'I supposed, indeed I counted on it,' he mumbled, 'that a 
letter, posted more than ten days, in fact almost a fortnight, 
ago . .  .' 
'I say, why should you keep on standing by the door?' 
interrupted Razumikhin. 'If you have something to say, sit 
down; you and Nastasya get in each other's way there. Move 
aside, Nastasyushka, and let him pass ! Come this way; here 's 
a chair. Squeeze your way in.' 
He pushed his chair away from the table, freeing a narrow 
space between the table and his knees and waited in a rather 
awkward posture for the visitor to 'squeeze his way' through 
the narrow opening. He had chosen his moment so well that 
it was impossible to refuse, and the visitor hastily pushed past 
him, stumbling, to the chair, and sat down, looking suspi­
ciously at Razumikhin. 
'Don't be upset,' the latter rattled on; 'Rodya has been ill 
for the past five days, and delirious for three of them, but he is 
much better now and has even recovered his appetite. This is 
his doctor here, who has just been having a look at him, and I 
am a friend of his, another former student, and I am looking 
after him; so don't be embarrassed, but take no notice of us 
and go on with your business.' 
'I thank you. But shall I not be disturbing the patient with 
my presence and conversation?' said Peter Petrovich, addressing 
Zosimov. 
'N-no,' drawled Zosimov, with another yawn ; 'you may 
even entertain him.' 
'Oh, he's been in his right senses for a long time, in fact 
since this morning,' continued Razumikhin, whose familiarity 
seemed to spring from such genuine simple-heartedness that 
Peter Petrovich began to reconsider his mistrustful attitude, 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
1 39 
perhaps partly because this impudent ragamuffin had after all 
introduced himself as a student. 
'Your mama . .  .' began Luzhin. 
'Hm !' commented Razumikhin loudly. Luzhin looked at 
him inquiringly. 
'I didn't mean anything. Go on . .  .' 
Luzhin shrugged his shoulders. 
' . . .  Your mama had already begun a letter to you during 
my sojourn in their neighbourhood. When I arrived here, I 
purposely allowed some days to elapse before seeking you out, 
so that I might come to you with full assurance that you had 
been apprised of everything; but now, to my astonishment . .  .' 
'I know, I know !' broke in Raskolnikov impatiently, with an 
expression of irritation. 'So you're the bridegroom, are you? 
Well, I know about it . . .  That's enough !' 
Although Peter Petrovich was decidedly offended, he said 
nothing, but sat visibly striving to understand what all this 
could mean. There was a minute's silence. 
Meanwhile, Raskolnikov, who had turned slightly towards 
him when he answered, was again gazing at him earnestly, 
with enhanced curiosity, as though he had not examined him 
properly before or had been suddenly struck by some new aspect 
of his appearance; he even raised himself from his pillows to 
do so. Peter Petrovich's general appearance had indeed some­
thing rather special and striking about it, something which 
justified the appellation of 'bridegroom' flung at him so un­
ceremoniously. To begin with, it was evident, it was even 
conspicuous, that he had made strenuous use of his few days 
in the capital in order to get himself fitted out and spruced up 
in anticipation of his bride's arrival, a harmless and pardonable 
activity enough. Even his own consciousness of the gratifying 
change for the better in himself, though perhaps too self­
satisfied, might be forgiven in the circumstances, for Peter 
Petrovich was enrolled among the bridegrooms. All his clothes 
were newly come from the tailor, and they were all very good, 
even if they were perhaps a little too new and too obviously 
designed for a particular purpose. His elegant, spick-and-span 
round hat testified to the same purpose : he treated it somewhat 
too respectfully, nursing it carefully in his hands. A coquettish 
pair of real French lilac-coloured gloves also betrayed the same 
purpose, if only by the fact that he did not wear them but 
carried them in his hand for show. In Peter Petrovich's dress 

140 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
light and youthful colours predominated. He was wearing a 
handsome light-brown summer jacket, light-weight bright­
coloured trousers and waistcoat, newly-purchased thin linen, 
a stock of the finest cambric, with pink stripes ; and it must be 
said that all this suited Peter Petrovich well enough. Even 
without the help of his youthful clothes, his fresh and handsome 
face looked younger than his forty-five years. His cheeks were 
very pleasantly shaded by dark mutton-chop whiskers, which 
thickened into a handsome bushiness on each side of his 
shiningly clean-shaven chin. His hair, receding ever so slightly 
from his forehead, had been combed and curled by a barber, 
but this circumstance did not make him look comical or 
foolish, as is so often the case, since curled hair usually makes 
a man look like a German at his wedding. If there was any­
thing displeasing or unsympathetic in this sedate and quite 
good-looking countenance it arose from quite other causes. 
·when he had completed his unceremonious scrutiny of Mr. 
Luzhin, Raskolnikov sank back on his pillow with a malicious 
smile and resumed his former study of the ceiling. 
But Mr. Luzhin was now firmly in control of himself and 
had apparently decided to ignore all this strange behaviour 
for the present. 
'I regret, with complete and absolute sincerity, that I find 
you in this state,' he began again, breaking the silence with 
an effort. 'If I had known of your illness I should have called 
on you sooner. But, you know, the cares of business ! . . . I have 
besides an extremely important case in the Senate; I do not 
mention those other cares which you may easily guess at. I 
expect your people, I mean your mama and sister, at any 
moment . . .  ' 
Raskolnikov stirred and seemed about to say something; 
his face showed some perturbation. Peter Petrovich stopped 
and waited, but as nothing followed he went on : 
'At any moment. I have found them quarters for the time 
being . . .  ' 
'Where?' asked Raskolnikov feebly. 
'Not at all far from here, in Bakaleev's house . . .  ' 
'That's on Voznesensky Prospect,' interrrupted Razumi­
khin ; 'there 's a cheap hotel occupying two floors of the build­
ing; the merchant Yushin runs it; I've been there.' 
'Yes, it's a hotel . . .  
' 
'It is a horrible place, dirty and stinking, and its character 

CRIME AND PU NISHMENT 
is suspect; there have been various incidents, and God knows 
who lives there. What took me there was a disgraceful affair. 
It is cheap, though.' 
'I, of course, could not command such information, since I am 
myself a newcomer,' retorted Peter Petrovich, nettled. 'I have 
taken, however, two completely and absolutely clean little 
rooms, and since it is for an extremely short space of time 
. I 
have already found our real, that is to say, our future flat,' he 
went on, turning to Raskolnikov; 'it is being made ready for us. 
Meanwhile I myselflive very inconveniently in rooms, very near 
here, at Mrs. Lippewechsel's, in the lodgings of my young friend 
Andrey Semenovich Lebezyatnikov; it was he who told me of 
the Bakaleev house . 
.' 
'Lebezyatnikov?' said Raskolnikov slowly, as if remembering 
something. 
'Yes, Andrey Semenovich Lebezyatnikov. He is employed in 
one of the Ministries. Do you know him?' 
'Yes . . .  no . .  .' answered Raskolnikov. 
'Excuse me, I thought from your question that you did. 
I was at one time his guardian . . .  a very nice young man . . .  
and interested in public affairs . . .  I am always glad to meet 
young people; you learn from them what is new.' Peter 
Petrovich looked hopefully round at everybody. 
'In what respect?' asked Razumikhin. 
'In the most serious, so to say, in the most essential respect,' 
eagerly responded Peter Petrovich, as if glad of the question. 
'You see, it is ten years since I was last in St. Petersburg. All 
these new ideas, reforms, theories, have penetrated even to us 
in the provinces, but to see the whole picture and see it clearly, 
one must be in the capital. Well, sir, my meaning was that one 
sees most and learns most from study of the younger generation. 
And I confess I was glad . . .' 
'Why, exactly?' 
'Your question is very far-reaching. I may be mistaken, but 
it seems to me that I find a clearer point of view, a more, so to 
say, critical approach, greater practical ability . .  .' 
'That is true,' put in Zosimov. 
'Nonsense ! There's no practical ability,' Razumikhin caught 
him up. 'Practical ability has to be laboriously acquired, it 
doesn't drop out of the clouds. And for almost two hundred 
years we've had nothing to do with practical affairs. Plenty 
of ideas wandering about, no doubt,' he went on to Peter 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
Petrovich, 'and a desire to be good, a rather childish one, 
perhaps ; and integrity can be found too, in spite of the enor­
mous number of knaves among us ; but there 's no practical 
ability ! Practical men, men of business ability, wear white 
collars, and are prosperous.' 
'I do not agree with you,' objected Peter Petrovich, with 
evident enjoyment. 'Some people go to extremes. There are 
irregularities, but we must be lenient : the extremes testify to 
zeal for the cause, and to the anomalous circumstances in 
which the cause finds itself. If too little has been done, there 
has not after all been much time. I do not speak of means. In 
my personal opinion, if you like, something definite has been 
accomplished; new, beneficial ideas have been propagated, 
and new and wholesome writings disseminated, in place of the 
old fantastic and romantic ones ; literature has been given a 
tinge of maturity; many harmful prejudices have been rooted 
out and held up to ridicule . . .  In a word, we have irrevocably 
severed ourselves from the past, and that, in my opinion, is an 
achievement, sir . .  .' 
'What a parrot ! He's trying to make a good impression,' 
pronounced Raskolnikov suddenly. 
'What?' asked Peter Petrovich, who had not caught this, 
but he received no answer. 
'That is all very just,' Zosimov hastened to interpose. 
'Is it not true, sir?' went on Peter Petrovich, with a friendly 
glance at Zosimov. 'You yourself will agree,' he turned again 
to Razumikhin, with a hint of triumphant superiority in his 
manner, and only just saved himself from adding 'young man', 
'that there is some advance or, as they say now, progress, at 
least in the name of science and economic truth . .  .' 
'Commonplaces !' 
'No, sir ! If, for example, in earlier times it was said to me : 
"Love your neighbour" and I acted on it, what was the result?' 
continued Peter Petrovich, with perhaps excessive haste. 'The 
result was that I divided my cloak with my neighbour and we 
were both left half-naked, for according to the Russian proverb : 
"If you run after two hares, you will catch neither." Science, 
however, says : love yourself first of all, for everything in the 
world is based on personal interest. If you love yourself alone, 
you will conduct your affairs properly, and your cloak will 
remain whole. Economic truth adds that the more private 
enterprises are established and the more, so to say, whole 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
143 
cloaks there are in a society, the firmer will be its foundations 
and the more will be undertaken for the common good. That 
is to say, that by the very act of devoting my gains solely and 
exclusively to myself, I am at the same time benefiting the 
whole community, and ensuring that my neighbour receives 
something better than half a torn cloak, and that not by private, 
isolated bounty, but as a consequence of the general economic 
advancement. The idea is simple, but, unfortunately, has been 
too long in finding acceptance, obscured as it is by vaporous 
ideals and misguided enthusiasms; a certain keenness of in­
tellect, it would seem, is necessary to realize . .  .' 
'Excuse me, my own intellect is not very keen,' interrupted 
Razumikhin brusquely, 'and therefore we will stop there, if 
you please. There was after all some purpose in my remarks, 
but for three years I have been so sick of this kind of self­
congratulatory babbling, this ceaseless inexhaustible flow of 
platitudes, these monotonous repetitions over and over again 
of the same old commonplaces, that I swear I blush even to 
hear them all aired again. You, of course, were anxious to 
produce a good impression by displaying your knowledge, and 
that is pardonable ; I do not condemn you for it. I, though, 
only wanted to find out what sort of person you were, because, 
you see, so many varieties of opportunists have hitched them­
selves on to the common cause, and so distorted everything 
they touched in their own interests, that they have befouled 
the whole cause. Well, enough of that !' 
'My dear sir,' Mr. Luzhin was beginning, bridling with an 
extraordinary assumption of dignity, 'are you trying, and with 
such lack of ceremony, to imply that I . .  .' 
'Oh, really, really ! . . .  How could I ?  Let us have done with 
this !' Razumikhin cut him short, and abruptly resumed his 
former conversation with Zosimov. 
Peter Petrovich proved wise enough to accept this explana­
tion. In a minute or two, however, he decided to go. 
'I hope that this acquaintance of ours, now that it has been 
initiated,' he said to Raskolnikov, 'will grow closer, when you 
are restored to health, in view of the circumstances known to 
you . . .  I particularly wish you a speedy recovery . . .  
' 
Raskolnikov did not even turn his head. Peter Petrovich 
prepared to rise. 
'The murderer was certainly a client,' affirmed Zosimov. 
'Quite certainly,' agreed Razumikhin. 'Porfiry does not 

144 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
betray his ideas, but all the same he is interrogating those who 
pawned things with her . .  .' 
'Interrogating them?' asked Raskolnikov loudly. 
'Yes. What then?' 
'Nothing.' 
'How does he get hold of them?' asked Zosimov. 
'Koch has indicated some of them; the names of others were 
written on the wrappings of their pledges, and some came of 
themselves when they heard . . .  ' 
'Well, he must be a cunning and experienced rascal. What 
audacity ! What resolution !' 
'That is exactly what he isn't !' interrupted Razumikhin. 
'That is where you all go wrong. I say he was clumsy and 
inexperienced; this was probably his first attempt. Postulate a 
shrewd and calculating rogue, and the whole affair is most 
improbable. But suppose him to have been inexperienced, 
and it emerges that it was nothing but chance that saved him 
from disaster, and what cannot chance accomplish? Perhaps 
he did not even foresee the obstacles he would meet with ! And 
how did he manage the affair? He took ten or twenty roubles' 
worth of things, stuffed his pockets with them, rummaged 
in the old woman's trunk among old rags-and in the top 
drawer of the chest of drawers, in a box, there was found 
fifteen hundred roubles in cash, besides some notes. He didn't 
even know how to commit robbery, he could only murder ! 
It was the first attempt, 1 tell you, the first attempt; and he 
lost his head. And it was not calculation but chance that saved 
him.' 
'You seem to be talking of the recent murder of an old 
woman,' put in Peter Petrovich, addressing Zosimov. He was 
already standing with his hat and gloves in his hand, but 
waiting for a chance to let fall a few more words of wisdom 
before he left. He evidently went to some trouble to make a 
favourable impression, and his vanity had conquered his good 
sense. 
'Yes. Have you heard of it?' 
'I have heard it talked of.' 
'Do you know the details ?' 
'I cannot say that I do ; what interests me is something 
different, the whole problem, so to say. I do not speak of the 
increase in crime among the lower classes during the past five 
years or so, nor of the unbroken series of cases of robbery and 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
145 
arson everywhere; for me the strangest thing is that even in 
higher social circles crime is increasing in the same way, and, 
so to say, on parallel lines. In one place we hear of a former 
student assaulting a postmaster ; in another, people of pro­
minent social position have been forging notes ; in Moscow, 
they have caught a whole band of counterfeiters of tickets in 
the last lottery-and one of the leading spirits was a Reader 
in Universal History; somewhere else one of our Embassy 
Secretaries has been murdered for mysterious financial reasons 
. . .  And if now this old pawnbroker woman has been killed by 
one of her clients, that means he must be a person of some 
social standing, for peasants do not pawn articles of value. 
How are we to explain this depravity, so to say, among the 
civilized elements of our society?' 
'Many economic changes . .  .' responded Zosimov. 
'How are we to explain it?' put in Razumikhin. 'It can be 
explained precisely by our too deeply ingrained lack of prac­
tical ability.' 
'How is that, sir?' 
'Well, what did that Reader of yours in Moscow answer 
when he was asked why he had counterfeited tickets? :  "Every­
body else gets rich by various means, and we wanted to get 
rich too, as quickly as we could.'' I don't remember the exact 
words, but the idea was to do it at other people's expense, as 
quickly as possible, and without labour. They were used to 
having everything found for them, to being in leading-strings, 
to being spoon-fed. When the 
great hour struck; they revealed 
what they were . .  .' 
'But what about morals? And, so to say, principles?' 
'What are you making so much fuss about?' broke in 
Raskolnikov unexpectedly. 'It has worked out in accordance 
with your own theory.' 
'How do you mean, in accordance with my theory?' 
'Carry to its logical conclusion what you were preaching 
just now, and it emerges that you can cut people's throats . .  .' 
'Oh, come, that's nonsense !' exclaimed Luzhin. 
'No, that is not so !' said Zosimov. 
Raskolnikov was pale, his upper lip trembled, and he was 
breathing with difficulty. 
'There is reason in all things,' continued Luzhin haughtily; 
'an economic idea is not yet an invitation to murder, and if 
only we assume . .  .' 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
'Is it true,' broke in Raskolnikov again, in a voice trembling 
with fury, with an undertone of pleasure in being insulting, 
'is it true that you told your fiancee, at the very time when 
you had received her consent, that your greatest reason for 
rejoicing . . .  was that she was poor . . .  because it is better to 
take a wife out of poverty, so that you can dominate over her 
afterwards . . .  and reproach her with the benefits you have 
heaped on her . . .  ?' 
'My dear sir !' exclaimed Luzhin, in furious irritation. He 
was blushing and confused. 'My dear sir . . .  such a distortion of 
my meaning ! Excuse me, but I am obliged to say openly that 
the rumours which have reached you, or rather which have 
been conveyed to you, have not the slightest foundation in 
fact, and I . . .  suspect I know who . . .  in a word . . .  this shaft 
. . .  in one word, your mama . . .  With all her excellent qualities 
she seemed to me, even before this, to have a somewhat emo­
tional and romantic turn of mind . . .  Nevertheless, I was a 
thousand leagues from supposing that she could put so fantas­
tically perverted a construction on the matter . . .  And finally 
. . .  finally . .  . ' 
'Do you know what?' exclaimed Raskolnikov, raising himself 
on his pillow and fixing him with keen and glittering eyes ; 'do 
you know what?' 
'What, sir?' Luzhin paused and waited, with an offended 
and inquiring expression. The silence lasted for a few seconds. 
'This, that if you ever again . . .  dare to say so much as a 
single word . . .  about my mother . . .  I shall throw you down-
stairs !' 
'What is the matter with you?' cried Razumikhin. 
Luzhin turned pale and bit his lip. 'Ah, so that is it, sir ! 
Let me, sir, tell you,' he began deliberately, and exerting all 
his strength to control himself, but choking with anger never­
theless, 'I realized your hostility from the first, but I remained 
here on purpose, so as to learn still more. Much may be 
forgiven a sick man and a relative, but now, sir . . .  you . . .  
never . .  . ' 
'I am not ill !' exclaimed Raskolnikov. 
'So much the worse, sir !' 
'Take yourself off, and to the devil with you !' 
But Luzhin was already leaving without waiting to finish 
what he was saying, making his way once more between table 
and chair; Razumikhin stood up this time to let him pass. 

C RIME AND P UNISHMENT 
147 
He went out without a glance at anybody, without so much 
as nodding to Zosimov, who had for some time been making 
signs to him to leave his patient alone. As he stooped to 
go through the door, he lifted his hat with exaggerated care 
to shoulder level, and the very curve of his back seemed to 
express resentment at being so shockingly insulted. 
'Can people really behave like that?' said Razumikhin, 
shaking his head in perplexity. 
'Go away, go away, all of you !' exclaimed Raskolnikov in 
a frenzy. 'You torture me; will you leave me alone? I am not 
afraid of you ! I am not afraid of anyone, not of anyone, now ! 
Get out ! I want to be alone, alone, alone, alone !' 
'Come on !' said Zosimov, signing to Razumikhin. 
'Well . . .  but ought we to leave him like this?' 
'Come on!' repeated Zosimov firmly, and went out. Razumi­
khin waited a moment in doubt, and then ran to overtake him. 
'It might make matters worse, if we crossed him,' said 
Zosimov on the stairs. 'He must not be irritated . .  .' 
'What is the matter with him ?' 
'If only he could be given some sort of push in the right 
direction, that would be the thing. He had plenty of energy 
just now . . . You know, he has something on his mind ! . . .  
Something immovable, weighing him down . . . That is 
decidedly what I am very much afraid of.' 
'But there's this fellow, perhaps, this Peter Petrovich. You 
could tell from what they said that he is marrying Rodya's 
sister, and that Rodya had a letter about it, just before his 
illness . .  .' 
'Yes ; the devil prompted him to come just now; he may 
have upset everything. But did you notice that he was quite 
indifferent and had nothing to say to anything, except one 
thing that seemed to rouse him thoroughly : this murder 
. . .  ?' 
'Yes, yes,' agreed Razumikhin, 'I did notice it. He is both 
interested and scared. It was that they startled him with in the 
police office, the day he fell ill; he fainted.' 
'You must tell me more about it this evening, and then I 
shall have something to tell you. He interests me, very much. 
I shall go back in half an hour to see how he is . . .  There won't 
be any inflammation, though . .  .' 
'Thank you ! Meanwhile, I will wait at Pashenka's and keep 
an eye on him through Nastasya . .  .' 

148 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
After they had gone, Raskolnikov eyed Nastasya anxiously 
and impatiently, but she lingered over her departure. 
'Will you drink your tea now?' she asked. 
'Later ! I'm sleepy ! Go away !' 
He turned with a jerk to the wall ; Nastasya went out. 
C HA P T E R V I  
N o  sooner had she gone than he got up, fastened the door by 
its hook, unwrapped the parcel of clothes Razumikhin had 
brought, and began to dress. Strangely enough, he had now 
become quite calm ; the half-insane ravings of a short time 
before and the panic fear of the past days had alike vanished. 
This was the first minute of a strange, sudden tranquillity. His 
movements were neat and precise, and revealed a resolute 
purpose. 
'Today, today . . .  ' he muttered to himself. He was aware 
however, that he was still weak, but an inner tension, so acute 
that it had resulted in calmness and unshakeable resolution, 
had endowed him with added strength and self-confidence; 
he hoped, though, that he would not collapse in the street. 
When he had finished dressing in the new clothes, he looked 
at the money lying on the table, hesitated for a moment and 
put it in his pocket. There were twenty-five roubles. He took 
also all the small coins, the change from the ten roubles spent 
by Razumikhin on clothes. Then he quietly undid the hook 
and went out of the room and down the stairs, glancing through 
the open kitchen door as he went past; Nastasya was standing 
with her back to him, stooping to blow out his landlady's 
samovar. She did not hear anything. And indeed who would 
have suspected that he would go out? A minute later he was in 
the street. 
It was about eight o'clock and the sun was going down. 
The heat was still as oppressive as before, but he greedily 
breathed the dusty, foul-smelling, contaminated air of the town. 
His head began to feel ever so slightly dizzy; a wild kind of 
energy flared up in his sunken eyes and pallid wasted face. 
He did not know, or stop to think, where he was going; he 
knew only one thing : that he must finish with all this today, 
once and for all, and at once ; that otherwise he would not go 
back home, because he would not live like this! But how finish 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
149 
with it? What was he to do? Of this he had no conception, and 
he refused to think about it. He banished thought. Thought 
was a torment. He merely knew instinctively that everything 
must be changed, one way or another; 'somehow, no matter 
how,' he repeated with desperate, obstinate self-reliance and 
resolution. 
. 
By force of habit, he turned towards the Haymarket, follow­
ing the usual course of his former walks. Before he reached the 
Haymarket he came upon a black-haired young man standing 
in the road before a grocer's shop, grinding out a sentimental 
ballad on a barrel-organ. He was accompanying a fifteen-year­
old girl, who stood before him on the pavement, dressed like a 
young lady in a crinoline and short mantle, wearing gloves 
and a straw hat with a flame-coloured feather; all these things 
were old and worn out. In a coarse, grating, but fairly strong 
and pleasing voice, she was singing her ballad in the hope of 
getting a copeck or two from the shop. Raskolnikov stopped 
near them and listened with two or three bystanders, then 
took out a five-copeck piece and put it in the girl's hand. She 
broke off her song abruptly on the very highest and tenderest 
note and shouted roughly to her companion, 'That will do !' 
and both trudged away to the next shop. 
'Do you like street-singing?' asked Raskolnikov of a passer­
by, no longer young, and with the look of an idler, who had 
been standing by him near the organ-grinder. The man looked 
oddly at him, in great astonishment. 'I do,' went on Raskol­
nikov, with an expression as though he were speaking of some­
thing much more important than street-singing; 'I like to hear 
singing to a barrel-organ on a cold, dark, damp autumn 
evening-it must be damp-when the faces of all the passers-by 
look greenish and sickly ; or, even better, when wet snow is 
falling, straight down, without any wind, you know, and the 
gas-lamps shine through it . .  .' 
'I don't know, sir . . .  Excuse me . . .  ' muttered the gentleman, 
frightened alike by the question and by Raskolnikov's strange 
appearance, and he crossed to the other side of the street. 
Raskolnikov went straight on and came to the corner where 
the dealer and his wife, who had been talking that time to 
Lizaveta, were usually to be found ; they were not there this 
time. Recognizing the place, he stopped and addressed a lad 
in a red shirt, who stood yawning at the door of a corn­
chandler's shop. 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
'There is a trader who does business here at the corner, 
with his wife, a woman from the country, isn't there?' 
'All sorts of people do business here,' answered the lad, dis-
dainfully measuring him with his eyes. 
'What is he called?' 
'What he was christened.' 
'Surely you are from Zaraysk, aren't you? Or what Govern­
ment?' 
The lad looked at Raskolnikov again. 
'We haven't Governments, your Excellency, in our parts, 
only Districts ; and it was my brother who was smart and went 
away to work, but I stayed at home, so I don't know, sir. 
Pardon me, your Excellency, in your generosity.' 
'Is that an eating-house, upstairs there?' 
'It 's a public house, and it has billiards ; you can find 
princesses*there . . .  Tra-la-la !' 
Raskolnikov crossed the square. At the corner a dense crowd 
was standing; they were all country people. He made his way 
into the thick of them, looking at people's faces. He felt some­
how drawn to talk to everybody. But the peasants took no 
notice of him ; they were all gathered in little clusters, talking 
noisily. He stopped, thought a moment, and went down the 
right-hand pavement towards Voznesensky Prospect. Once 
clear of the square, he came into a lane. 
He had often before walked through this short street, which 
curved round from the square into Sadovaya Street. Recently, 
whenever he had felt sick of things, he had been drawn to roam 
about all these parts, 'so as to feel even more nauseated'. Now, 
however, he was not thinking of anything as he turned into 
the street. There is in it a large building, all given up to various 
establishments for eating and drinking; women were constantly 
corning out of them, dressed as if they were 'just running out 
to a neighbour's', with bare heads and no outer garments over 
their dresses. Here and there they gathered in groups on the 
pavement, mostly near the entrances to the lower floor, where 
one might go down a couple of steps into various places of 
entertainment. In one of these at the moment there was a 
clatter and hubbub that filled the street, a guitar strummed, 
and somebody was singing; all was merriment. There was a 
big group of women crowding round the entrance ; some were 
sitting on the steps and some on the pavement, others stood 
talking together. In the road near by lounged a drunken soldier 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
with a cigarette, swearing loudly; he seemed to be intending to 
go in somewhere, but to have forgotten where. One ragamuffin 
was abusing another, and a man was lying dead-drunk across 
the pavement. Raskolnikov stopped near the big group of 
women. Some of them were talking in hoarse voices ; they were 
all in cotton dresses and goatskin shoes, and their heads were 
bare. Some of them were over forty, but some were only about 
seventeen : most of them had black eyes. 
The singing and all the noise and hubbub down there 
attracted him . . .  From the street he could hear, through the 
laughter and squealing, somebody dancing with reckless aban­
donment, beating time with his heels, to the accompaniment 
of the guitar and the thin remote falsetto of the singing. He 
listened intently, thoughtfully, sombrely, stooping down to 
look curiously into the entrance. The thin voice of the singer 
flowed out to him : 
'Oh, my fine and darling bobby, 
Do not beat me so unjustly !'-
Raskolnikov strained desperately to hear the words, as though 
they were of supreme importance. 
'Shall I go in?' he thought, 'People are laughing--drunk of 
course. But wouldn't it be a-good idea to get drunk myself?' 
'Won't you come in, kind gentleman?' asked one of the 
women, in a voice that had not yet grown completely husky 
but was still fairly clear. She was young and-alone of the 
whole group-not unattractive. 
'Hello, here 's a pretty girl !' he answered, straightening up 
to look at her. 
She smiled, very pleased at the compliment. 
'You're very nice-looking yourself,' said she. 
'How thin, though !' commented another in a bass voice. 
'Have you just been discharged from the hospital, or some­
thing?' 
'You lot are all trying to look like generals' daughters, but 
every one of you's got a snub nose !' broke in a peasant who 
had just come up, with a sly grinning mask of a face. He was 
tipsy and his jacket hung unbuttoned. 'Highjinks, eh ?' 
'Now you've come, you can just go away again !' 
'I'm going ! Toothsome dainties you are !' 
He stumbled down the steps. 
Raskolnikov moved on. 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'Listen, fine gentleman !' one of the wenches called after him. 
'What?' 
She grew confused. 
'Kind gentleman, I shall always be glad to pass an hour 
with you, but not now. I shouldn't like to have you on my 
conscience. Give me six copecks to buy a drink, like a kind 
lover !' 
Raskolnikov pulled some coins out of his pockets, three 
five-copeck pieces. 
'Oh, what a kind-hearted gentleman !' 
'What is your name?' 
'Ask for Duklida.' 
'Well really, what sort of behaviour is that?' said one of the 
group, motioning with her head towards Duklida. 'I simply 
don't know how she can ask for money like that ! I'm sure 
I should sink through the ground with shame . . .  ' 
Raskolnikov looked at her curiously. She was a pock-marked 
woman of about thirty, covered with bruises, and her lip was 
swollen. Her censure was uttered in a quiet and serious manner. 
'Where was it,' Raskolnikov thought, as he walked on, 
'where was it that I read of how a condemned man, just before 
he died, said, or thought, that if he had to live on some high 
crag, on a ledge so small that there was no more than room 
for his two feet, with all about him the abyss, the ocean, 
eternal night, eternal solitude, eternal storm, and there he 
must remain, on a hand's-breadth of ground, all his life, a 
thousand years, through all eternity-it would be better to 
live so, than die within the hour? Only to live, to live ! No 
matter how-only to live ! . . .  How true ! Lord, how true ! How 
base men are ! . . .  And he is worse who decries them on that 
account !' he added, a minute later. 
He came out into another street. 'Ah ! The "Crystal Palace" ! 
Razumikhin was talking about it. Only what on earth do I want 
here? Yes, to read ! . . .  Zosimov said he had seen something in 
the newspapers . . .  ' 
'Have you newspapers here?' he asked, entering a very 
well-ordered and spacious tavern, consisting of several rooms, 
all rather empty. Two or three customers were drinking tea, 
and in one of the farther rooms a group of four or five men 
sat drinking champagne. Raskolnikov thought Zametov was 
one of them, but from so far away he could not be sure. 
'What does it matter?' he thought. 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
153 
'Vodka, sir?' asked the waiter. 
'I'll have tea. And bring me some newspapers, old ones, 
for the last five days or so ; it'll be worth a tip to you.' 
'Yes, sir. Here is today's, sir. And vodka, sir?' 
The tea and the old newspapers appeared. Raskolnikov sat 
down and began to search through them : 'Izler . . .  lzler . . .  
Azteks . . . Azteks . . . Izler . . . Bartola . . . Massimo . . . 
Azteks . . .  lzler . . .  Pah, where the devil . . .  ? Ah, here are the 
news items : Woman Falls Downstairs .
.
.
 Vodka Causes 
Workman's Death . . .  Fire on the Sands . . .  Fire in Peter-
burgsky Quarter* . . . Another Fire in Peterburgsky Quarter 
. . .  Another Fire in Peterburgsky Quarter . . .  lzler . . .  Izler 
. . . Izler . . . lzler . . . Massimo . . . Ah, here . . .' 
At last he had found what he was looking for, and he began 
to read ; the lines danced before his eyes, but he read the whole 
report and turned eagerly to the succeeding numbers for later 
additions. His hands, as he turned over the pages, shook with 
feverish impatience. Suddenly somebody sat down next to 
him at his table. He looked up. It was Zametov, Zametov 
himself, looking exactly the same, with his rings and his watch­
chain, with his dark, curly hair neatly parted and pomaded, 
in his fashionable waistcoat, his rather shabby frock-coat and 
his not very fresh linen. He seemed cheerful ; at any rate his 
smile was cheerful and good natured. His swarthy face was a 
little flushed with champagne. 
'Hello, you here ?' he began, in a puzzled tone, and as if 
they had been acquainted for ages, 'and it was only yesterday 
that Razumikhin was telling me you were still delirious. Very 
odd ! You know I went to see you . . .  ' 
Raskolnikov had known he would come over to him. He 
laid the newspapers aside and turned to Zametov. There was 
a smile on his lips, with a hint of irritable impatience in it. 
'I know you did,' he answered, 'I heard about it. You looked 
for my sock . . . You know, Razumikhin raves about you. 
He says you took him to Louisa Ivanovna's-you know, the 
one you were doing your best for, that time; you kept winking 
at that Lieutenant Squib, and he just wouldn't. understand, 
do you remember ? Yet it hardly seemed possible not to under­
stand-it was clear enough, . . .  eh?' 
'But what a hot-head he is !' 
'Who, the Squib ?' 
'No, your friend Razumikhin . .  . ' 

154 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'You do pretty well for yourself, Mr. Zametov; you get into 
the very nicest places for nothing. Who was that pouring 
champagne into you just now?' 
'Well, we were . . .  just having a drink . . .  It did flow pretty 
freely.' 
'Just a bonus ! You turn everything to account !' Raskolnikov 
laughed. 'Never mind, my dear boy, never mind !' he added, 
slapping Zametov on the back, 'I am not talking like this from 
spite, "but in pure affection, playfully", as that workman of 
yours said, when he was punching Mitka, in that case of the 
old woman.' 
'How do you know that?' 
'Perhaps I know more than you do.' 
'What a queer chap you are, to be sure . . .  I suppose you 
are still very ill. You ought not to be out . .  .' 
'I seem strange to you?' 
'Yes. What are those newspapers you are reading?' 
'Newspapers.' 
'There is a lot in them about fires.' 
'No, I'm not reading about the fires.' He looked mysteriously 
at Zametov; a mocking smile played about his mouth once 
more. 'No, not about the fires,' he went on, with a wink. 'Admit, 
my dear young man, that you are dreadfully anxious to know 
what I was reading about.' 
'I am not anxious a t all ; I was only asking. Isn't that allowed? 
Why do you keep on . . .  ?' 
'Listen, you're an educated man, aren't you, a literary 
man?' 
'I reached the sixth class in high school,' answered Zametov 
with some dignity. 
'The sixth ! Well, my fine young cock-sparrow ! With your 
hair all combed and curled, and your rings-you're a rich 
man ! Pah, what a pretty little fellow !' Raskolnikov broke into 
a nervous laugh, straight into Zametov's face. He started back, 
not so much affronted as struck with astonishment. 
'Dear me, how strange you are !' repeated Zametov, very 
seriously. 'I think you must still be delirious.' 
'Delirious? That 's a lie, cock-sparrow ! . . .  So I'm strange, 
am I ?  But, you're very curious about me, aren't you, very 
curious?' 
'Yes, very.' 
. 
'Well, shall I tell you what I was reading about, what I had 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
155 
been looking for? You see, of course, how many issues I have 
had brought. Suspicious, isn't it?' 
'Well, tell me.' 
'All ears, are you?' 
'What do you mean, all ears?' 
'I'll tell you that later, but now I will declare to you . . .  no, 
better, I'll "confess" . . .  No, that's not right either : I will 
"make a statement", and you shall take it down-that 's it ! So, 
I state that I was reading . . .  that I was interested in . . .  that 
I was looking for . . .  that I was searching . . .  ' Raskolnikov 
screwed up his eyes and waited-: 'I was searching-and that 
is why I came here-for something about the murder of the 
old woman, the moneylender,' he brought out at last, almost 
in a whisper, bringing his face very close to Zametov's. 
Zametov looked steadily back at him, without stirring or movѬ 
ing his face away. Mterwards, what seemed strangest about all 
this to Zametov was this silence that lasted for a full minute, 
while they remained looking at one another without movѭ 
ing. 
'What does it matter what you were reading?' he exclaimed 
in a fit of exasperated perplexity. 'And what has it to do with 
me? What is all this about?' 
'It was that same old woman,' Raskolnikov went on in the 
same whisper, without flinching at Zametov's exclamation, 
'that you had begun to talk about, you remember, in the 
office, when I fainted. Now do you understand?' 
'What is all this? What do you mean-"understand" ?' said 
Zametov, almost alarmed. 
Raskolnikov's fixed and serious expression was transformed 
in an instant, and he broke out into the same nervous laughter 
as before, as if he had not the strength to control himself. And 
in a flash he remembered, with an extraordinary intensity of 
feeling, another instant, when he had stood behind a door 
with an axe, while the bolt rattled, and outside the door 
people were swearing and trying to force a way in, and he 
was suddenly filled with a desire to shriek out, to exchange 
oaths with them, stick out his tongue at them, mock at them, 
and laugh, laugh, laugh. 
'Either you are mad, or . .  .' said Zametov, and then stopped 
as though struck by some thought which had come unexѮ 
pectedly into his mind. 
'Or? Or what? Well, what? Tell me, can't you?' 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
'Nothing !' answered Zametov angrily. 'We're talking non­
sense !' 
Both were silent. Mter his unexpected paroxysmal outburst 
of laughter, Raskolnikov had become thoughtful and melan­
choly. He leaned his elbows on the table and propped his head 
on his hand. He seemed to have completely forgotten Zametov. 
The silence lasted for some time. 
'Why don't you drink your tea? It will be cold,' s:itid 
Zametov. 
'What? Oh, my tea? . . .  All right . .  .' Raskolnikov took a 
gulp from his glass, put a piece of bread in his mouth, and 
then, looking at Zametov, seemed suddenly to remember what 
he was doing and rouse himself; at the same time, the original 
derisive smile returned to his face. He went on drinking tea. 
'Recently there has been a great increase of swindling,' said 
Zametov. 'I read not so long ago in the Moscow ].!urnal that 
a whole gang of counterfeiters had been caught. There were 
quite a lot of them. They had been forging notes.' 
'Oh, that was a long time since. I read about it a month 
ago,' answered Raskolnikov calmly. 'So you think of them as 
swindlers, do you?' he added with a smile. 
'What else could you call them?' 
'Them? They were children, greenhorns ! They collected 
fifty people for an undertaking like that ! Is it credible? Three 
would almost have been too many, and even then each one of 
them would have had to have more faith in the others than he 
had in himself! Otherwise it would only need one to babble 
in his cups and the whole thing would go smash ! Greenhorns ! 
They hired unreliable people to change the notes at the bank; 
is that the sort of job to entrust to the first person who comes 
along? Well, suppose that, raw beginners as they were, they 
had succeeded, suppose each of them had managed to change 
a million roubles' worth of counterfeits, what about afterwards ? 
-the rest of their lives? Each one dependent on every other 
for the whole of his life ! Better to hang yourself! But they didn't 
even know how to change their stuff: here is one changing it 
in a bank, and when he is handed five thousand his hands 
tremble. He counts over four thousand, but he takes the rest on 
trust, without counting, thrusts it into his pocket, and makes off. 
Well, suspicion is aroused. And everything is ruined because 
of one fool ! No, really it 's impossible !' 
'For his hands to tremble?' Zametov took him up. 'No, that 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
157 
is possible, sir. I'm quite convinced that it is possible. Some­
times you just can't stand it.' 
'What, that?' 
'You, no doubt, could? Well, I couldn't !  Run into such 
awful danger for a fee of a hundred roubles ! Take a fake note 
-where ?-into a banking office, where they specialize in just 
such matters-no, I should have to turn tail. Wouldn't you ?' 
Raskolnikov again suddenly felt the urge to 'stick out his 
tongue'. An occasional shiver ran down his spine. 
'I shouldn't behave like that,' he began long-windedly. 
'This is how I should change it : I should count over the first 
thousand, very carefully, three or four times, looking at every 
note; then I should start on the second thousand and begin 
counting it, then when I got to the middle, I should take out 
some fifty-rouble note and hold it up to the light, turn it 
over and hold it up to the light again-isn't it a bad one? 
"I'm afraid of bad money," say I ;  "a relative of mine once 
lost twenty-five roubles like that"-and I should tell the whole 
story. Then when I began to count the third thousand-"No, 
wait a moment; I think I miscounted the seventh hundred in 
that last thousand"-; the doubt would grow, I should leave 
the third thousand and go back to the second-and so on with 
all five. And when I had finished, I should take a note out of 
the fifth thousand and another from the second, hold them up 
to the light again, look doubtful, "please give me others in 
exchange for these"-and I should have got the cashier into 
such a stew that he would be aching to get rid of me. Well, 
finally, it would all be done, I should go and open the door­
but no, excuse me, I should go back again to ask some question 
or get some explanation. That 's how I should do it !' 
'Pah, what terrible things you say !' said Zametov laughing. 
'Only all this is only talk, and in reality you would be sure to 
trip up. I tell you, it seems to me impossible, not only for you 
and me, but even for a desperate and experienced man, to 
answer for himself in such a matter. Here 's an example close 
at hand : an old woman has been murdered in our quarter of 
the city. Here, then, was a desperate rogue, running the most 
appalling risks in broad daylight and only saved by a miracle­
but all the same, his hands trembled ; he didn't succeed in carry­
ing out his robbery-he couldn't stand it; it's clear from what 
we know of the case . .  .' 
Raskolnikov seemed almost offended. 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'Clear, is it ? Catch him then, go on !' he cried, taking a 
malicious pleasure in provoking Zametov. 
'He'll be caught, all right.' 
'Who'll do it? You? You'll catch him ? You'll soon get tired 
of trying. I'll tell you what you regard as the most important 
thing : is a man spending freely or not? Here's someone who 
hadn't any money, and now he's suddenly begun to spend­
it must be him ! Any child could demolish that argument if 
he wanted to !' 
'But that's just it-that's exactly what they all do,' answered 
Zametov; 'commit a cunning murder, risk their lives-and 
then straight into the pub ! It is throwing money about that 
gets them caught. Not everybody is as clever as you, you know. 
Of course, you wouldn't run off to the pub, would you?' 
Raskolnikov frowned and stared at Zametov. 
'I suppose you've developed a taste for my methods, and 
would like to know what I would have done in this case as 
well ?' he threw out, sounding rather displeased. 
'Yes, I should,' answered Zametov firmly and gravely. His 
manner and tone seemed indeed to have grown too serious. 
'Very much?' 
'Yes, very much.' 
'Good. This is how I should have acted,' began Raskolnikov. 
Once again his face was close to Zametov's, once again he kept 
his eyes fixed on him, once again he spoke in a whisper, that 
this time made his hearer shudder. 'This is what I should have 
done. I should have taken the money and the things and as soon 
as I left the place, before I went anywhere else, I should have 
gone to some place that was not overlooked, but had fenc­
ing all round, and where there was almost nobody about­
perhaps a market-garden or something of that sort. I should 
have looked into this yard earlier and found a stone weighing 
a pound or more, somewhere in a corner near the fence, left 
there, perhaps, from the building of a house ; I should have 
lifted the stone-there would have to be a little hollow under 
it-and in the hollow I should have put all the things and the 
money. I should have put them in and rolled the stone over 
them so that it looked the same as before, I should have pressed 
it down with my foot, and then I should have gone away. 
And for a year, for two years, I should not have taken away 
anything, perhaps for three years-well, now look for your 
murderer ! Vanished into thin air !' 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
159 
'You're mad !' said Zametov, also for some reason in a 
whisper, and recoiled suddenly from Raskolnikov. The latter's 
eyes were glittering, he had grown shockingly pale, and his 
upper lip trembled and twitched. He leaned as near as possible 
to Zametov and began moving his lips, but no sound came from 
them ; they remained like this for half a minute. He knew what 
he was doing, but he could not restrain himself. A terrible 
word trembled on his lips, as the bolt had trembled then on 
the door : now, now, the bolt will give way; now, now, the 
word will slip out; oh, only to say it ! 
'And what if it was I who killed the old woman and Liza­
veta?' he said suddenly, and-came to his senses. 
Zametov looked at him wildly, and went as white as a sheet. 
He smiled crookedly. 
'Can it really be so?' he said, in a barely audible tone. 
Raskolnikov looked furiously at him. 
'Admit that you believed it ! Yes ! You did, didn't you?' 
'Not at all ! Now less than ever !' said Zametov hastily. 
'You're caught at last ! The cock-sparrow is caught ! If you 
believe it now less than ever, that means that you believed it 
before !' 
'No, certainly not !' exclaimed Zametov, in evident confusion. 
'Was that why you startled me, just to lead up to this?' 
'So you don't believe it? But what did you begin to talk 
about that time as soon as I had left the office? And why did 
Lieutenant Squib interrogate me after I fainted ? Here !' he 
called to the waiter, getting up and taking his cap, 'how much?' 
'Thirty copecks altogether, sir,' answered the waiter, hurry­
ing up. 
'Here are twenty besides for yourself. Look what a lot of 
money !'-and he held out to Zametov his shaking hand full 
of notes. 'Red notes, blue notes, twenty-five roubles. Where 
does it come from? And where have the new clothes appeared 
from? Of course, you know I hadn't a copeck. No doubt my 
landlady has already been questioned . . .  Well, that's enough ! 
Assez cause! Good-bye, until our next . . .  most delightful . . .  
meeting! . . .  
' 
He went out, shaking all over, with a feeling of wild hysteria 
mingled with almost unendurable pleasure; and yet his mood 
was gloomy, and he felt terribly weary. His face was distorted 
as if he had had some kind of seizure. His fatigue increased 
rapidly. His energies seemed now to be aroused and summoned 

1 60 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
up in a moment, at the slightest stimulus, with the first sensa­
tion of irritation, and to fail with the same suddenness, as 
rapidly as his emotion waned. 
Zametov, left alone, sat where he was for a long time, in 
great perplexity. Raskolnikov had unexpectedly overturned 
all his ideas on a certain point and enabled him to come to a 
definite conclusion. 
'Ilya Petrovich is a blockhead !' he decided finally. 
As Raskolnikov opened the door into the street he ran 
straight into Razumikhin on the steps. Neither saw the other 
even when a pace separated them, so that they almost rammed 
their heads together. They stood for some time, measuring each 
other with their glances. Razumikhin was in a state of utter 
amazement, but suddenly anger, real anger, flashed menacingly 
in his eyes. 
'So this is where you are !' he shouted at the top of his voice. 
'You're supposed to be in bed, and you've run away. And I 
was ready to look for you under the sofa, and all the attics 
have been searched ! Nastasya very nearly got a beating on 
your account . . .  And this is where he is ! Rodka, what does 
this mean? Tell me the truth ! Confess ! Do you hear?' 
'It means that I was bored to death with all of you, and I 
want to be alone,' calmly answered Raskolnikov. 
'Alone ! When you can't walk yet, and your ugly mug is as 
white as a sheet, and you're panting for breath ! Idiot ! . . .  
What were you doing in the "Crystal Palace" ?  Own up at 
once !' 
'Will you let me pass?' said Raskolnikov, and tried to walk 
past him. At this, Razumikhin, quite beside himself, seized:him 
fiercely by the shoulders. 
'Let you pass? You dare to say that to me? Do you know 
what I shall do with you this minute? I shall pick you up 
bodily, tie you into a bundle, carry you home under my arm, 
and put you under lock and key !' 
'Listen, Razumikhin,' began Raskolnikov quietly and appar­
ently quite calmly, 'can't you see that I don't want your 
kindness? Why will you persist in trying to do good to people 
who . . .  spit on it, . . .  people who seriously find your kindness 
beyond endurance? Tell me, why did you seek me out at the 
beginning of my illness ? For all you know, I might have been 
glad to die. Surely I've shown you clearly enough today that 
you annoy me, that I'm . . .  sick of you ! What you are really 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
161 
trying to do is pester people ! I assure you that all you are doing 
seriously impedes my recovery, because it is a constant irrita­
tion to me. You know that Zosimov went away just now so as 
not to irritate me. Then, for God's sake, you go away as well ! 
What right have you, after all, to restrain me by force? And 
can't you see that I'm talking now absolutely in my right 
mind? How, tell me, how can I word my entreaties so that you 
will at last stop forcing yourself on me and trying to do me 
good? Perhaps I'm ungrateful, perhaps I am mean and base, 
only leave me alone, all of you, for God's sake leave me alone ! 
Leave me alone !' 
He had begun calmly enough, rejoicing in the thought of 
all the venom he was preparing to pour out, but by the time 
he came to the end of his speech he was raving madly and 
choking with rage, as he had done before, talking to Luzhin. 
Razumikhin paused for a moment in thought, and then 
released his arm. 
'Go to the devil then,' he said quietly and almost thought­
fully. 'Stop !' he roared abruptly, when Raskolnikov would 
have moved away. 'Listen to me. Let me tell you, people of 
your sort are all, down to the last man, babblers and braggarts ! 
If the slightest thing goes wrong, you make as much fuss as a 
hen cackling over an egg ! Even there you aren't original, but 
steal from other authors. There isn't a sign of independent 
existence in you ! You're made of candle-grease and you have 
buttermilk in your veins for blood ! I don't trust a single one 
of you ! Your first concern in any circumstances is how not to 
resemble a human being. Wai-ai-ait !' he cried with redoubled 
fury, seeing that Raskolnikov was again about to go ; 'hear me 
out ! You know, I have some friends coming for a house­
warming party today; perhaps they've arrived already. I've 
left my uncle there-I dropped in just now-to receive my 
guests. So if you weren't a fool, an utter fool, a confounded 
fool, a translation from the original-look Rodya, I admit 
you're an intelligent chap, but you are a fool !-well, if you 
weren't a fool, you'd be better off going to my place and spend­
ing a pleasant evening there than running around aimlessly 
like this. After all, you have come out, so what's the odds ? 
I'd get in a nice soft arm-chair for you, my landlord has one . . .  
A cup of tea, pleasant company . . .  Or no, you shall lie down 
on the couch-at any rate you will be among us . . . And 
Zosimov will be there. You'll come, won't you?' 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'No.' 
'Rubbish !' exclaimed Razumikhin impatiently. 'You don't 
know what you'll do; you can't answer for yourself! And you 
don't understand any of this . . .  I've quarrelled violently with 
people like this a thousand times and gone running back to 
them again . . .  You begin to be ashamed of yourself . . .  and 
go back to the fellow ! Now remember, Pochinkov's, third 
floor . . .  ' 
'Really, it almost looks as if you would allow anyone to beat 
you, Mr. Razumikhin, for the satisfaction of doing him good.' 
'Who? Me? I should twist his nose if he so much as dreamt 
of it . . .  Pochinkov's, number 4 7, in Babushkin's flat . . .  ' 
'I shall not come, Razumikhin,' Raskolnikov turned and 
walked away. 
'I bet you will !' called Razumikhin after him. 'Otherwise 
you . . .  otherwise I don't want anything to do with you. Hi, 
stop ! Is Zametov here?' 
'Yes.' 
'Did you see him?' 
'Yes.' 
'And talk to him?' 
'Yes.' 
'What about? All right, go to the devil ; don't tell me then ! 
Pochinkov's house, 47, Babushkin's, remember !' 
Raskolnikov reached Sadovaya Street and turned the 
corner. Razumikhin looked after him thoughtfully. At last he 
flung out his hands and turned to go in, but half-way up the 
steps he paused : 
'Devil take it !' he said to himself, almost aloud : 'he talks 
sensibly enough and as if . . .  Really, I'm a fool too ! As if 
lunatics didn't talk sensibly ! And I imagine Zosimov was 
afraid of something like this !' He rapped his forehead with his 
finger. 'Well, what if . . .  oh, how could I let him go alone? 
Perhaps he'll drown himself . . .  Oh, I missed my cue there ! 
It won't do !' 
And he ran back in pursuit of Raskolnikov, but the trail 
was cold already. He spat, and returned at a brisk pace 
to the 'Crystal Palace' to question Zametov as soon as pos­
sible. 
Raskolnikov went straight to the Voznesensky Bridge, 
stopped in the middle of it, leaned both elbows on the parapet, 
and gazed along the canal. Mter parting from Razumikhin he 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
1 63 
had felt so weak that he was hardly able to drag himself so far. 
He longed to sit down somewhere, or even lie down, in the street. 
Leaning over the water he looked mechanically at the last pink 
reflections of the sunset, at the row of buildings growing dark in 
the thickening dusk, at one distant window, high up in some 
roof along the left bank, that shone for an instant with flame 
as the last ray of the dying sun caught it, at the darkening 
water of the canal. Into the water he peered attentively, until 
at last red circles began to revolve before his eyes, the houses 
spun round, the passers-by, the carriages, the embankments, 
all reeled and swung dizzily. Suddenly he started, saved 
perhaps from another fainting fit by a strange and ugly sight. 
He felt someone standing beside him, on his right, and looked 
up ; it was a tall woman wearing a kerchief on her head, with a 
long, yellow, hollow-cheeked face and ·red-rimmed, sunken 
eyes. She was looking straight at him, but apparently without 
seeing him. With an abrupt movement she rested her right 
hand on the parapet, raised her right foot and threw it over 
the railing, followed it with her left, and flung herself into the 
canal. The filthy water parted and engulfed her for a moment, 
but then she rose to the surface and drifted gently with the 
current, face downwards, with her head and legs in the water 
and her skirt ballooning under her like a pillow. 
'She 's drowned herself!' cried a dozen voices ; people began 
running up and clustering on both banks and crowding on the 
bridge round Raskolnikov, who found himself hemmed in and 
squeezed from behind. 
'Oh Lord, that is our Afrosinyushka !' shrieked a woman's 
tearful voice somewhere near by. 'Oh, good heavens ! Save 
her ! Oh, kind friends, pull her out !' 
Shouts arose from the crowd : 'A boat, get a boat !' 
But there was no need for a boat; a policeman ran down the 
steps leading to" the edge of the canal, threw off his greatcoat 
and boots, and jumped into the water. His task was not very 
difficult; the water carried the woman to within two paces of 
the foot of the stairs, he seized her clothing with his right hand, 
and with his left clutched a pole held out to him by a 
colleague ; and the drowning woman was quickly pulled out. 
They laid her on the granite slabs of the landing-place. She 
speedily recovered consciousness and sat up, sneezing and 
sniffing and senselessly trying to dry her hands on her wet 
clothes. She said nothing. 

C RIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'She 's drunk herself to ruination, friends, to ruination,'­
this was the same woman's voice, now near Afrosinyushka ; 
'not long since she tried to hang herself as well ; they got her 
down, though. I had to go to the shop just now, and I left a 
little girl to look after her-and look what a terrible thing 
happens ! She's a respectable working woman; we live close by, 
the second house from the corner, just here . .  .' 
The crowd was dispersing, the police were still busy with 
the woman, someone shouted a reference to the police-station. 
. . . Raskolnikov had looked on with a strange feeling of 
indifference and detachment. Now he felt repelled . . .  -'No, 
it 's disgusting . . .  water . . .  no good,' he muttered to himself. 
'Nothing will happen. I needn't expect anything . . .  What 
can the police do ? . . .  And why isn't Zametov in the office? 
it's open at ten o'clock . .  .' He turned his back to the parapet 
and looked round him. 'Well, all right then !' he said decidedly, 
moved away from the bridge and turned towards the police­
station. His heart was empty and numb. He did not want to 
think about anything. Even his dejection had passed, and there 
was no trace of the energy with which he had left the house 'to 
make an end of it'. Complete apathy had taken its place. 
'Well, after all, this is one way out !' he thought, as he walked 
slowly and limply along the embankment. 'I shall be finished 
with it, all the same, because I will it . . .  But is it really a way 
out? Well, it doesn't matter ! I shall have my hand's-breadth of 
ground-ha ! What an end, though ! Is it really the end? 
Shall I tell them or shall I not? Oh . . .  the devil ! I am tired ; 
oh, to lie down somewhere, or sit . . .  soon ! The most shameful 
thing is that I carried it out so stupidly . . .  Well, to hell with 
that, too ! Pah, what nonsense runs in my head . .  .' 
To get to the office he had to go straight on and take the 
second turning to the left, and then it was only a few steps 
farther. But as he came to the first turning he stopped and 
reflected a moment, turned into the lane, and took a round­
about route, through two more streets, perhaps aimlessly, per­
haps to prolong the journey if only by a minute and gain a 
little more time. He walked along with his eyes on the ground. 
Suddenly it was as if someone whispered in his ear. He raised 
his head and saw that he was standing by that house, near the 
gates. It was the first time he had been there since that evening. 
An irresistible and inexplicable desire drew him on. He 
turned in, passed through the gateway, went into the first 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
entrance on the right and began to ascend the familiar stair­
case towards the first floor. The steep, narrow stairs were 
very dark. On every landing he stopped and looked about with 
curiosity. The window-frame on the first landing had been 
removed : 'It wasn't like this then,' he thought. On the second 
floor was the flat where Nikolashka and Mitka had been 
working. 'Shut up, and the door is newly painted ; it must be to 
let.' Here was the third floor . . .  and the fourth . . .  'Here it is !' 
Perplexity seized him : the door of the flat was open, and there 
were people in it; he could hear their voices. This was some­
thing entirely unexpected. After a short hesitation, he mounted 
the last steps and went into the flat. 
This flat also was being redecorated, and the workmen were 
inside. This circumstance astonished him; for some reason he 
had expected to find everything just as he had left it, perhaps 
even with the corpses in the same places on the floor. But now 
with its bare walls and empty rooms it seemed somehow 
strange. He went over to the window and sat down on . the 
sill. 
There were only two workmen, both young fellows, but one 
much younger than the other. They were putting new paper, 
white, with small lilac-coloured flowers, on the walls, in place 
of the old, rubbed, faded paper. For some reason Raskolnikov 
violently disapproved of this, and he looked with hostility at 
the new paper, as though he could not bear to see everything 
changed. 
The workmen were apparently late and were now hurriedly 
rolling up the paper ready to go home. They had hardly 
noticed Raskolnikov's entrance. They were talking about 
something. 
Raskolnikov crossed his arms and listened to 
them. 
'She comes in to me, like, in the morning,' the elder of the 
two was saying, 'ever so early, all dressed up to the nines. 
"What 's all this ?" says I, "why do you come parading and 
strutting up and down in front of me, peacocking about ?" So 
she says : "From now on, Tit Vasilyevich, I want to seem just 
right to you.'' So that 's how it is, you see ! And dressed up ! 
Just like a magazine !' 
'What do you mean, uncle, a magazine?' asked the younger. 
'Uncle' was evidently his mentor. 
'Well, a magazine, little brother, is pictures, like, coloured 
ones, and the tailor gets them sent to him every Saturday from 

1 66 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
foreign parts, and they are to show people what to wear, both 
men and women, see? Drawings, I mean. The men, they're 
mostly drawn in them short little overcoats, but as for the 
women, brother, such finery as they have, as you'd give a 
week's pay just to see them !' 
'The things there are in this here St. Petersburg !' enthu­
siastically exclaimed the younger man; 'there 's everything you 
could possibly think of.' 
'Yes indeed, little brother, you can find everything,' stated 
the other instructively. 
Raskolnikov got up and went into the other room, where the 
trunk, the bed, and the chest of drawers used to stand. The 
room seemed very small without the furniture. The wallpaper 
was unchanged ; in the corner the place where the icon-stand 
had been was sharply outlined on it. He looked round and then 
returned to the window. The older workman was following his 
movement with a sidelong look. 
'What do you want, sir?' he asked abruptly, addressing him. 
Instead of answering, Raskolnikov stood up again, went out 
into the passage, and pulled at the bell. The same bell, the same 
tinny sound ! He pulled it again, and then a third time, listen­
ing and remembering. The old tormenting frightening sensa­
tion began to bring back ever clearer and more vivid memories, 
he shuddered at every tinkle, and yet he felt more and more 
pleasure in the sound. 
'What do you want? Who are you?' cried the workman, 
coming out to him. Raskolnikov went in again. 
'I want to take the flat,' he said. 'I am looking round.' 
'People don't take flats at night; besides, you ought to apply 
to the porter.' 
'I see the floor has been washed ; are you going to stain it?' 
went on Raskolnikov. 'Isn't there any blood?' 
'What blood?' 
'There was an old woman murdered, and her sister. There 
was a great pool of blood here.' 
'What sort of man are you?' cried the workman un-
easily. 
'I ?' 
'Yes, you?' 
'You want to know, do you? . . .  Well, let 's go to the police 
office, I'll tell you there . . . ' 
The workman looked at him, puzzled. 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
'It 's time we went, sir; we're late. Come on, Aleshka. We've 
got to lock up,' said the older workman. 
'Let 's go, then,' answered Raskolnikov indifferently, and he 
went out first and walked slowly downstairs. As he came out 
under the gateway, he called : 'Hi, porter !' 
Several people were standing by the gate, watching the 
passers-by in the street : there were both porters, a country­
woman, a man in a long robe, and some others. Raskolnikov 
went straight towards them. 
'What do you want?' answered one of the porters. 
'Have you been to the police office?' 
'I was there just now. Why do you want to know?' 
'Was it open?' 
'Yes, it was.' 
'Was the assistant there?' 
'Some of the time. Why?' 
Raskolnikov did not answer, but stood beside him, thinking. 
'He came to look at the flat,' said the older workman, coming 
up to them. 
'What flat?' 
'The one we're working in. "Why,'' says he, "has the blood 
been washed out? There was a murder done here," he says, 
"and I've come to take the flat.'' And then he begins ringing 
the bell, and almost pulls it out. Then he says "Come to the 
police-station and I'll tell you all about it.'' Wouldn't take 
no for an answer !' 
The porter, frowning and perplexed, studied Raskolnikov. 
'And who are you?' he asked menacingly. 
'I am Rodion Romanovich Raskolnikov, a former student, 
living at Shil's house, here in the lane, not far away, in flat 
14. Ask the porter . . .  he knows me.' All this was said in a 
languid and preoccupied tone, while Raskolnikov kept his eyes 
fixed on the darkening street. 
'And what did you go to the flat for?' 
'To look at it.' 
'What is there to look at there?' 
'Why don't you take him to the police?' broke in the man 
in the long robe, and then was silent again. 
Without moving his head, Raskolnikov turned his eyes to­
wards the man, examined him carefully, and then said in the 
same quiet and languid tone : 'Let us go.' 
'You ought to take him !' asserted the man, more boldly. 

168 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'Why was he asking about that? Has he got something on his 
mind, eh?' 
' 
'Perhaps he 's drunk, perhaps he isn't, God knows !' muttered 
the workman. 
'What's it got to do with you ?' exclaimed the porter again, 
beginning to grow really angry. 'Why do you keep on in­
sisting?' 
'Are you afraid to go to the police, then?' asked Raskolnikov 
jeeringly. 
'Why should I be? Why do you keep on about it?' 
'He 's up to something !' exclaimed the peasant-woman. 
'Why do you talk to him?' shouted the other porter, a huge 
peasant with his tunic hanging open ѯnd a bunch of keys on 
his belt. 'Clear out ! . . .  You're up to some game or other, all 
right . . .  Get out !' 
And seizing Raskolnikov by the shoulder, he flung him 
out so roughly that he almost fell. He recovered himself, 
however, looked silently back at all of them, and went on his 
way. 
'A queer customer,' said the workman. 
'Folks is all queer nowadays,' said the peasant-woman. 
'All the same, he ought to have been taken to the police,' 
added the man in the long robe. 
'We don't want to get mixed up in anything,' said the 
big porter decidedly. 'It 's quite sure he 's up to something. 
He was asking for trouble, of course, but if you get yourself 
mixed up in something, you don't get clear so easily . . .  we 
know !' 
'Well, shall I go, I wonder, or not?' thought Raskolnikov, 
stopping in the middle of the road at a crossing and looking 
round as if he expected to hear the deciding word from some­
body. But no response came from any quarter; everything was 
blank and dead, like the stones he trod on, dead for him, and 
for him alone . . .  Suddenly at some distance, two hundred 
paces farther on, at the end of the street, in the gathering 
darkness, he made out voices, shouts, a crowd of people . .  . 
Some sort of carriage was standing in the middle of them . .  . 
Lights flashed . . .  'What is it?' Raskolnikov turned to the right 
and approached the crowd. He was ready to grasp at anything, 
and he smiled coldly as he thought of this, because his mind 
was firmly made up to go to the police, and he knew with 
certainty that all would soon be over. 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
r6g 
C H A P T E R  V I I  
I N  the middle of the street stood some gentleman's elegant 
carriage, harnessed to a pair of spirited grey horses ; there were 
no passengers and the coachman had got down from the box 
and was standing beside it; someone was holding the horses' 
heads. A great many people were crowding round, with police­
men in the forefront. One of them, with a lighted lantern in 
his hand, was stooping down to throw the light on something 
lying on the ground under the wheels. There were constant 
cries, exclamations, sighs ; the coachman seemed half-dazed, 
and kept repeating every so often :  
'What a terrible thing ! Oh Lord, how terrible !' 
Raskolnikov pressed through the crowd as opportunity 
offered, and at length saw the object of all the commotion and 
curiosity. On the ground, plainly unconscious, lay a man who 
had been crushed beneath the horses' hooves; he was very 
poorly dressed but his clothes, which were now covered with 
blood, had once been 'respectable'. Blood was flowing from 
his face and head, and his head was terribly battered and 
mutilated. It was evident that his injuries were very serious. 
'Oh Lord !' lamented the coachman, 'how can you guard 
against such things? It isn't as if I was driving very fast, or 
didn't call out to him, but I was going quite gently and slowly. 
Everybody saw it : they can all bear me out. He was too drunk 
to walk straight, that 's how it was. I saw him crossing the 
street, and he was staggering about and nearly falling-! 
shouted, three times altogether, and pulled in the horses ; but 
he went and fell right under their feet ! I don't know if he did it 
0n purpose, or if he was just too unsteady on his legs . . .  my 
horses are young and skittish-they shied, and he screamed­
they got more frightened . . . that 's how this awful thing 
happened.' 
'That 's just how it was !' testified a voice in the crowd. 
'He shouted, that's true, he called out to him three times,' 
said another. 
'Exactly three times, everybody heard him !' exclaimed a 
third. 
The coachman, however, was not very distressed or fright­
ened. It was evident that the carriage belonged to some 
rich and influential personage, who was awaiting its arrival 

1 70 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
somewhere; the police, of course, were anxious to facilitate this. 
It remained only to carry the injured man to the police-station 
and then to the hospital. Nobody knew his name. 
Meanwhile Raskolnikov had worked hi!; way through the 
crowd and was bending nearer. Suddenly, the light of the 
lantern fell on the unfortunate man's face, and he recognized 
him. 
'I know him, I know him !' he cried, pushing to the very 
front, 'he is a retired government clerk, called Marmeladov. 
He lives here, close by, in Kozel's house . . .  Get a doctor at 
once; I will pay, look !' He pulled some money out of his pocket 
and showed it to the policeman. He was surprisingly agitated. 
The police were pleased to have learnt the identity of the 
injured man. Raskolnikov gave his own name and address as 
well, and urged them, with as much vehemence as though it 
were a question of his own father, to carry the unconscious 
Marmeladov to his own room. 
'Here it is, only three doors away,' he said pleadingly, 'in 
the house of Kozel, the German, a rich man . . .  He was pro-
bably going home, drunk, now. I know him . . .  He is a drunk-
ard . . .  He has a family there, a wife and children, and there is 
a daughter besides. Why take him all the way to the hospital, 
when there 's actually a doctor in the house? I will pay . . . 
At any rate he'll be looked after by his own people, and at 
once, but he would die before you got him to the hospital . . .  ' 
He even managed to thrust something inconspicuously into 
the policeman's hand ; the proceeding he suggested was, 
however, clearly lawful, and, in any case, here assistance was 
nearer. Helpers were found, and the injured man was lifted 
and carried away. Kozel's house was some thirty paces away. 
Raskolnikov walked behind, supporting the head and indi­
cating the way. 
'This way, this way ! The head must go first up the stairs ; 
turn round . . .  that's it. I will pay, I shall be most grateful,' 
he murmured. 
Katerina Ivanovna, as usual, as soon as she had a free 
moment, had immediately taken to pacing her little room, 
from the window to the stove and back, with her crossed arms 
pressed to her breast, talking to herself and coughing. Lately 
she had taken to talking more and more often to her elder 
daughter, the ten-year-old Polenka, who, although she under­
stood only a little, yet knew very well that her mother needed 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
her, and therefore always followed her with her great wise 
eyes and strove her utmost to pretend she understood every­
thing. This time Polenka was undressing her little brother, 
who had been ailing all day, in order to put him to bed. While 
he waited for her to change his shirt, which had to be washed 
during the night, the little boy sat silently in a chair, upright and 
motionless with a solemn face, and with his little legs stretched 
out in front of him, squeezed tightly together, heels presented 
to the room and toes outspread. He was listening to what 
mama said to his sister, with pouted lips and eyes starting out 
of his little head, sitting exactly as all good little boys ought to 
sit when they are being undressed for bed. The still smaller 
little girl, in absolute rags, stood near the screen waiting her 
turn. The door to the stairs stood open, to get rid of at least 
some of the clouds of tobacco-smoke which escaped from the 
other rooms and constantly drove the poor consumptive int0 
long and torturing fits of coughing. Katerina Ivanovna seemed 
to have grown even thinner during the past week, and the red 
stains on her cheeks burned even brighter than before. 
'You wouldn't believe, Polenka, you can't even imagine,' 
she said as she walked about the room, 'how happily and in 
what luxury we lived at home with my papa, and now that 
dl'unkard has destroyed me, and he will destroy all of you too ! 
Papa was a Civil Colonel, and he almost became Governor; 
there was only one step higher for him, so that everybody used 
to come and say to him : "We already look upon you, I van 
Mikhaylovich, as our Governor." When I'-cough-'when 
!'-cough, cough, cough-'oh, accursed life !' she exclaimed, 
spitting out phlegm and clutching at her chest, 'when I . . .  oh, 
at the last ball . . .  at the Marshal's . . .  when Princess Bezzemel­
naya saw me . . . she gave me the blessing, later, when I 
married your papa, Polya . . .  she asked at once : "Isn't that 
the nice girl who did the shawl dance at the end of term?" . . .  
(That tear must be mended; take your needle and darn it at 
once, as I taught you, or else tomorrow'-cough-'tomorrow' 
-cough, cough, cough-'it will tear further !' she cried in a 
paroxysm of coughing.) 
'Prince Shchegolskoy-he was a 
Gentleman of the Bedchamber-had just arrived from St. 
Petersburg . . .  he danced the mazurka with me, and he wanted 
to come next day and make an offer; but I thanked him in the 
most complimentary terms and told him that my heart had 
long belonged to another. That other was your father, Polya; 

1 72 
C RIME AND PUNISHMENT 
papa was terribly angry . . .  Is the water ready? Well, give me 
the shirt . . .  and where are the socks ? . . .  Lida,' and she turned 
to her little daughter, 'you will have to sleep without a shirt 
tonight, somehow . . .  and put your stockings with it . . .  They 
must all be washed together . . .  Why doesn't that drunken 
ragamuffin come ? He's worn his shirt till it 's like a duster or 
sometlung, and it 's all torn . . .  I want to do them all at once, 
so that I need not tire myself out two nights running. Lord !'­
cough, cough, cough, cough. 'Again ! What is this?' she 
shrieked, seeing the crowd in the entrance and the people 
crowding into her room with some sort of burden. 'What is 
this? What are they carrying? Oh God !' 
'Where shall we put him?' the policeman was asking, look­
ing round. They had carried Marmeladov, unconscious and 
covered with blood, into the room. 
'On the sofa. Lay him straight on the sofa, with his head 
this way,' said Raskolnikov. 
'He was run over in the street-drunk !' shouted someone 
from the entrance. 
Katerina Ivanovna stood there pale and panting. The 
children were terrified. Little Lida shrieked, rushed to Polenka 
and put her arms round her, shaking all over. 
When Marmeladov had been laid down, Raskolnikov turned 
to Katerina Ivanovna. 
'For God's sake, be calm ; don't be alarmed !' he said quickly. 
'He was crossing the road, a carriage ran over him; don't be 
anxious, he will recover consciousness. I told them to bring 
him here . . .  I have been here, you remember . . .  He will 
come round. I will bear the expense.' 
'He's been asking for this !' shrieked Katerina Ivanovna in 
despair, and rushed to his side. 
Raskolnikov quickly saw that this woman was not one of 
those who instantly swoon away. In an instant a pillow, which 
nobody had thought of before, appeared under the unfortunate 
man's head; Katerina Ivanovna began to undress and examine 
him, busying herself over him without losing her head. She 
forgot about herself, bit her trembling lips and stifled the cries 
that tried to escape from her throat. 
Raskolnikov meanwhile persuaded somebody to run for the 
doctor. The doctor, it appeared, lived in the next building 
but one. 
'I have sent for the doctor,' he assured Katerina I vanovna. 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
1 73 
'Do not worry, I will pay him. Isn't there any water? . . .  And 
give me a napkin, or a towel, or something, quickly; we don't 
know yet what his injuries are . . .  He is hurt, but not killed, 
be assured of that . . .  We shall see what the doctor says.' 
Katerina Ivanovna hastened to the window; there, in a 
corner, a large earthenware bowl full of water stood on a broken 
chair, ready for the nocturnal washing of her husband's and the 
children's linen. This washing Katerina Ivanovna did with her 
own hands at least twice a week, and sometimes oftener, for 
things had got to such a pass that they had practically no 
change of linen left, but each member of the family had only 
one garment of each kind. Katerina Ivanovna could not 
tolerate dirt, and was willing to wear herself out with work 
that was beyond her strength, at night, while everybody was 
asleep, so as to be able to dry the wet things by morning and 
give them back clean, rather than see dirt in the house. She 
lifted the bowl to carry it to Raskolnikov but almost fell with 
the weight. He had already found a towel, and he damped it in 
the water and began to wash the blood from Marmeladov's 
face. Katerina Ivanovna stood there with her hands clasped 
to her breast, drawing her breath painfully. She was herself in 
need of help. Raskolnikov began to understand that he had 
perhaps done wrong in persuading them to bring the injured 
man here. The policeman also seemed doubtful. 
'Polya !' cried Katerina Ivanovna, 'run to Sonya at once. 
If she isn't at home, never mind, say that her father has been 
run over and she is to come at once . . .  when she gets in. 
Quickly, Polya ! Here, put a kerchief on your head !' 
'Run as fast as ever 'ou can !' shouted the little boy from his 
chair, and resumed at once his silent upright pose, with his eyes 
round, his legs stretched in front of him, and his toes spread out. 
Meanwhile the room had grown so full that there was not 
an inch of floor space left. The police had gone, except one 
who stayed behind for a time, trying to drive out again the 
people who had thronged in from the stairs. Practically every 
one of Mrs. Lippewechsel's lodgers, besides, had flocked out 
of the inner rooms, crowding at first into the doorway, and 
then pouring in a mass into the room itsel£ Katerina I vanovna 
flew into a passion. 
'You might at least leave people to die in peace !' she cried 
to the crowd ; 'what sort of side-show do you think vou've 
found? With cigarettes !' -cough, cough, cough-'wearing your 

1 74 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
hats, too ! . . .  There is one with his hat on ! . . .  Get out ! Show 
some respect at least for the dying !' 
Coughs choked her, but the rebuke had been effective. They 
even seemed a little afraid of Katerina Ivanovna; the lodgers, 
one after another, began to press back towards the door, with 
that strange inward glow of satisfaction which is always found, 
even among his nearest and dearest, when disaster suddenly 
strikes our neighbour, and from which not one of us is immune, 
however sincere our pity and sympathy. 
Voices, however, outside the door, were heard referring to 
the hospital and contending that people ought not to upset 
the house for nothing. 
'People ought not to die !' flashed Katerina Ivanovna, and 
was in the act of pulling open the door, to let loose a storm on 
their heads, when she ran into Mrs. Lippewechsel herself in 
the doorway. The landlady had only that moment heard of the 
accident and was hastening to restore order. She was an untidy 
and quarrelsome person. 
'Ach, mein Gott!' she exclaimed, flinging up her hands. 
'Your drunk husband has a horse trampled ! He should in the 
hospital ! It iss mine house !' 
'Amalia Ludwigovna ! I beg of you to consider what you 
are saying,' began Katerina lvanovna in a lofty manner (she 
always adopted this tone in speaking to her landlady, so that 
the latter should not 'forget her place', and even now she could 
not deny herself this pleasure). 'Amalia Ludwigovna . . .  ' 
'I haf told you, once for all, you should not dare to say to me 
Amaly Ludwigovna; I am Amaly-Ivan !' 
'You are not Amaly-Ivan, but Amalia Ludwigovna, and 
since I am not one of your base flatterers, like Mr. LebezyatՃ 
nikov, who is laughing outside the door now' (and indeed 
laughter and a cry of "They're at it again !" could be heard 
just outside the door), 'I shall always address you as Amalia 
Ludwigovna, although I really cannot understand why that 
designation is displeasing to you. You may see for yourself 
what has happened to Semen Zakharovich : he is dying. Per­
mit him at least to die in peace. I must request you to close that 
door immediately and allow no one to enter. Otherwise, I 
assure you, tomorrow your conduct shall be brought to the 
notice of His Excellency ·the Governor himsel£ The Prince 
knew me in my girlhood, and he remembers Semen Zakharo­
vich, to whom he did many kindnesses, very well. It is well 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
1 75 
known that Semen Zakharovich had many friends and patrons, 
whom he himself abandoned in his honourable pride, being 
conscious of his unhappy failing, but now we are being helped 
by a noble-hearted young man' (she indicated Raskolnikov) 
'of means and influential connexions, whom Semen Zakharo­
vich knew as a child, and be assured, Amalia Ludwigovna . . .  
' 
All this poured out in an ever-increasing torrent of eloquence, 
until a fit of coughing cut short Katerina Ivanovna's oratory. 
At the same moment the dying man recovered consciousness 
and groaned, and she hurried to him. He opened his eyes and 
they rested, without recognition or understanding, on the 
figure of Raskolnikov standing close to him. He was drawing 
deep, laboured breaths at long intervals ; blood trickled from 
the corners of his mouth ; drops of sweat stood on his forehead. 
He did not know Raskolnikov, and his eyes began to wander 
uneasily. Katerina Ivanovna's look was stern and sad, and 
tears were flowing from her eyes. 
'Oh God, his whole chest is crushed in ! Look at the blood, 
the blood !' she said in despair. 'We must take off all his outer 
things ! Turn yourself a little, Semen Zakharovich, if you can,' 
she cried to him. 
Marmeladov recognized her. 
'A priest !' he murmured hoarsely. 
Katerina Ivanovna walked away to the window and leaned 
her forehead against the frame, exclaiming in desperation : 
'Oh, accursed life !' 
'A priest !' said the dying man again, after a moment of 
silence. 
'They've go-o-one !' shrieked Katerina I vanovna; he heard 
the clamour and was silent. His timid anxious glance sought 
her out; she had returned to his side and stood by his pillow. 
He seemed a little calmer, but not for long. Soon his eye fell 
on little Lida (his favourite), who stood in the corner shivering 
as though with fever and watching him with her wondering 
eyes childishly intent. 
'But . . .  but . .  .' he indicated her uneasily. He was trying 
to say something. 
'What is it this time?' cried Katerina I vanovna. 
'Bare-footed ! bare-footed !' he murmured, with his half­
conscious eyes fixed on the little girl's bare legs and feet. 
'Be quiet !' exclaimed Katerina Ivanovna irritably. 'You 
know why she goes barefoot !' 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'Thank God, the doctor !' exclaimed Raskolnikov, over­
joyed. 
The doctor, a neat little old man, a German, came in 
looking about him with an air of mistrust; he went up to the 
injured man, felt his pulse, carefully touched his head, and 
with Katerina Ivanovna's help, unbuttoned his blood-soaked 
shirt and laid bare his chest. It was all crushed, trampled, and 
lacerated; several ribs on the right side were broken. On the 
left, immediately over the heart, was a great yellowish-black 
mark, left by the cruel blow of a hoof. The doctor frowned. 
The policeman explained that the unfortunate man had been 
caught by the wheel and dragged along the roadway for some 
thirty yards. 
'It is surprising that he ever recovered consciousness at all,' 
whispered the doctor softly to Raskolnikov. 
'What is your opinion?' asked he. 
'He is dying now.' 
'Is there really no hope?' 
'None at all ! He is on the point of death . . .  The head is 
very badly injured, too . . .  Hm. Perhaps I might let some 
blood . . .  but . . .  it would do no good. He will certainly be 
dead in five or ten minutes.' 
'But surely you ought at least to try it?' 
'Perhaps so . . .  However, I warn you that it will be quite 
useless.' 
Now steps were heard approaching again, the crowd in the 
entrance parted, and the priest, a little old man with grey hair, 
appeared on the threshold carrying the sacrament. A police­
man had gone for him from the scene of the accident. The 
doctor immediately made way for him, exchanging a significant 
glance with him as he did so. Raskolnikov begged the doctor 
to stay, if only for a short time. He shrugged his shoulders and 
remained. 
They all stood aside. The dying man's confession was very 
short and it is doubtful if he had any clear idea of what was 
happening; he was capable of uttering only vague broken 
sounds. Katerina Ivanovna took Lidochka, lifted the little boy 
from the chair, knelt down in the corner by the stove and made 
the children kneel in front of her. The little girl only shivered ; 
but the boy, on his little bare knees, raised his hand, crossed 
himself, and bowed to the ground, knocking his forehead on 
the floor, a process which seemed to afford him great satisfac-

C R I ME AND PUNISHMENT 
1 77 
tion. Katerina I vanovna was biting her lips to keep back the 
tears; she also was praying; occasionally she straightened the 
little boy's shirt, and once, without rising from her knees or 
ceasing her prayers, she managed to take a shawl from the 
chest of drawers and throw it round the little girl's shoulders, 
which were almost bare. Meanwhile the door from the inner 
rooms began to open again under the pressure of the curious, 
and in the little lobby the onlookers were crowding thicker 
and thicker, from every flat on the staircase; but they did not 
cross the threshold of the room. A single candle lighted the 
scene. 
At this moment Polenka, who had been for her sister, 
hurriedly pushed through the crowd in the entrance. She 
came in, out of breath with running, took off her kerchief, 
looked round for her mother, went to her and said : 'She is 
coming ! I met her in the street.' Her mother made her kneel 
down next to her. Out of the crowd, noiselessly and timidly, 
appeared a young girl, and her sudden appearance was strange 
in that room, in the midst of poverty, rags, death, and despair. 
Her own clothes were ragged enough, but her tuppenny­
ha'penny finery, in the taste and style of her special world of 
the streets, testified clearly and shamelessly to the purpose for 
which it had been chosen. Sonya stopped in the lobby, near 
the door, but without crossing the threshold of the room, 
utterly forlorn and apparently unconscious ofher surroundings ; 
she seemed forgetful alike of her garish fourth-hand silk dress, 
indecently out of place here with its ridiculous long train and 
immense crinoline blocking the whole doorway, of her light­
coloured boots, of the sunshade she carried with her, although 
it was useless at night, and of her absurd little round straw hat 
with its bright flame-coloured feather. From under this hat, 
worn with a boyish tilt to one side, looked out a thin, pale, 
frightened little face; the mouth hung open and the eyes stared 
in terrified fixity. Sonya was small, about eighteen years old, 
thin but quite pretty, with fair hair and remarkable blue eyes. 
She kept them fixed on the bed and the priest; she was breathless 
with the speed of her arrival. At length the whispering among 
the crowd, or some of the words said, seemed to reach her ears ; 
she cast down her eyes, took a step across the threshold and 
stood inside the room, but still very near the door. 
The confession had been made and the sacrament adminis­
tered. Katerina Ivanovna again approached her husband's 

1 78 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
bed. The priest moved away, but turned before he left to say 
a word of exhortation and solace to Katerina I vanovna. 
'And what shall I do with these ?' she interrupted sharply 
and irritably, indicating the little ones. 
'God is merciful. Put your trust in the help of the Most 
High,' began the priest. 
'Ah ! Merciful, but not to us !' 
'That is sinful, wicked !' he remarked, shaking his head. 
'And what is this?' exclaimed Katerina Ivanovna, pointing 
to her husband. 
'It may be that those who were the involuntary cause of 
your distress will be willing to compensate you, if only for the 
loss of income . . . ' 
'You do not understand me !' irritably exclaimed Katerina 
Ivanovna, waving her arms. 'Why should there be any com­
pensation? He was drunk and he crawled under the feet of the 
horses himself! And what income? All I had from him was 
suffering. He was a drunkard and threw away everything we 
had in drink ! He robbed us and took the money to the public 
house ; he spent their lives and mine in the public house ! Thank 
God he is dying ! Our loss will be less !' 
'You must forgive in the hour of death. This is sinful, 
madam; such sentiments are a grievous sin !' 
Katerina Ivanovna was busying herself over the injured 
man, giving him something to drink, wiping the sweat and 
blood from his face, straightening his pillow, and only occa­
sionally finding time for a word to the priest in the midst of her 
activities. Now she turned on him, almost beside herself. 
'Oh Lord ! Those are only words, nothing but words ! 
Forgive ! Today, if he had not been run over, he would have 
come home drunk, with his only shirt dirty and ragged, and 
gone to bed to sleep like a log, while I splashed about in water 
till the dawn, washing his old clothes and the children's and 
drying them out of the window, and as soon as it was light 
I should have had to sit down and mend them-that is how 
my night would have been spent . . . So why even talk of 
forgiveness? I have forgiven him !' 
A terrible, deep-seated cough cut short her words. She spat 
into a handkerchief and thrust it towards the priest, painfully 
clutching her breast with the other hand. The handkerchief 
was full of blood . . . 
The priest bowed his head and said nothing. 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
1 79 
Marmeladov was in the last agony; he did not move his 
eyes from Katerina lvanovna's face, bent over him once more. 
He kept trying to say something to her; moving his tongue with 
an enormous effort, he even managed to utter some inarticulate 
words, but Katerina I vanovna, understanding that he wanted 
to ask her forgiveness, immediately exclaimed peremptorily : 
'Quiet ! Don't ! . . .  I know what you want to say!' The dying 
man was silent; but then his wandering glance fell on the door, 
and he saw Sonya. 
Until that instant he had not noticed her; she stood in a 
shadowy corner. 
'Who is that? Who is it?' he asked suddenly in a hoarse 
panting voice, full of agitation, with his alarmed gaze directed 
to the door, where his daughter was standing. He even tried to 
raise himself. 
'Lie down ! Lie down !' exclaimed Katerina lvanovna. 
But with unnatural strength he managed to prop himself 
on his arm. His wild unmoving gaze remained fixed for some 
time on his daughter, as though he did not recognize her. 
Indeed, he had never before seen her in such a costume. 
Suddenly he did recognize her, humiliated, crushed, ashamed 
in her gaudy finery, submissively waiting her turn to take leave 
of her dying father. Infinite suffering showed in his face. 
'Sonya ! Daughter ! Forgive me !' he cried, and tried to 
stretch out his hand towards her, but without its support he 
fell and crashed down headlong from the sofa; they rushed to 
lift him up, and laid him down again, but he was going. Sonya 
uttered a feeble cry, ran forward, put her arms round him, 
and almost swooned in that embrace. He died in her arms. 
'He brought his fate on himself!' cried Katerina lvanovna, 
when she saw her husband's corpse. 'And what shall I do now? 
How am I to bury him? And how shall I feed them, tomorrow?' 
Raskolnikov went up to her. 
'Katerina I vanovna,' he began, 'last week your late husband 
told me the story of his life and everything connected with it. 
You may be sure that he spoke of you with great respect and 
appreciation. From that evening when I learnt how devoted 
he was to all of you, and how he loved and honoured you 
especially, Katerina lvanovna, from that evening, in spite of 
his unfortunate weakness, we were friends . . .  Permit me now 
to . . .  contribute . . .  towards the repayment of a debt to my 
departed friend. Take this . . .  it is twenty roubles, I think-

x8o 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
and if it can be of any assistance to you, then . . .  I . . .  in short, 
I will come again-! will certainly come again . . .  perhaps I 
may look in tomorrow . . .  Good-bye !' 
And he hurried out of the room, pushing his way towards 
the stairs as quickly as he could, through the crowd ; among 
them he suddenly collided with Nikodim Fomich, who had 
been informed of the accident and had decided to make the 
necessary arrangements in person. They had not met since the 
scene in the office, but Nikodim Fomich recognized him at 
once. 
'Oh, is that you ?' he asked. 
'He is dead,' answered Raskolnikov. 'The doctor has been 
here, and a priest; everything is in order. Do not distress a 
very unhappy woman, who is a consumptive besides. En­
courage her if you can . . .  You are a good man, I know . . .  ' 
he added with a smile, looking straight into his eyes. 
'But what is this ? You are soaked with blood,' remarked 
Nikodim Fomich, examining by the light of a lantern some 
fresh stains on Raskolnikov's waistcoat. 
'Yes, I am . . .  I am all over blood-stains !' said Raskolnikov, 
with a peculiar look; then he smiled, nodded his head, and 
turned down the stairs. 
He went down quietly, without hurry; he was in a fever 
again, but unconscious of the fact, and full of a strange new 
feeling of boundlessly full and powerful life welling up in him, 
a feeling which might be compared with that of a man con­
demned to death and unexpectedly reprieved. Half-way down 
the stairs he was overtaken by the priest returning home ; 
Raskolnikov silently let him pass, and they exchanged bows 
without speaking. Then, when he was descending the last few 
stairs he heard hurried steps behind him. Someone was running 
after him. It was Polenka, hurrying down behind him and 
calling : 'Listen ! Listen !' 
He turned to her. She ran down the last flight of stairs and 
stopped just in front of him, one step higher. A dim light came 
from the courtyard. Raskolnikov looked at her nice thin little 
face smiling at him and looking at him with childish cheerful­
ness. She had run after him with a message which evidently 
gave her great pleasure. 
'Listen, what is your name? . . . And next, where do you 
live?' The words came in a rush, in a breathless little voice. 
He laid both hands on her shoulders, finding a certain 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
181 
happiness in looking at her. It seemed to him a very pleasant 
thing to do, though he did not know why. 
'Who sent you?' 
'It was my sister Sonya,' answered the little girl, with a still 
more cheerful smile. 
'There, I knew it was your sister Sonya.' 
'Mama sent me as well. When Sonya was just sending me, 
mama came as well and said "Run as quick as you can, 
Polenka !" ' 
'Do you love your sister Sonya?' 
'I love her better than anybody !' said Polenka with great 
firmness, and her smile grew suddenly serious. 
'And will you love me?' 
By way of answer, he saw the child's little face brought near 
to him and her full little lips naively protruded to kiss him. 
Suddenly her thin little match-sticks of arms were wound 
tightly round his neck, her head rested on his shoulder, and 
the little girl began to cry quietly, pressing her face harder 
and harder against him. 
'It is so sad for poor papa !' she said after a minute, lifting 
her tear-stained little face and wiping her eyes with her hands. 
'Such dreadful things have been happening lately,' she added 
unexpectedly, with that particularly sedate expression that 
children strive to adopt when they want to talk like the 
'grown-ups'. 
'And did papa love you?' 
'He loved Lidochka best of all,' she announced very seriously, 
without a smile, just like a grown-up, 'because she is little, and 
because she 's delicate besides, and he always used to bring 
her presents; but he taught us to read, and he taught me 
grammar and scripture,' she added with pride, 'and mama 
didn't say anything, only we knew she liked it, and papa 
knew, and mama wants to teach me French, because it is time 
for me to be educated.' 
'And do you know how to pray?' 
'Why, of course we do ! We have for a long time. I am a big 
girl, so I pray to myself, but Kolya and Lidochka pray aloud 
with mama. First they say "Hail, Mary !" and then another 
prayer : "0 God, forgive sister Sonya and bless her" and then 
"0 God, forgive our other papa and bless him,'' because our 
old papa is dead, and this one is our other one, and we pray 
for the old one too.' 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'Polechka, my name is Rodion; pray for me too sometimes : 
"and thy servant Rodion"-just that.' 
'I will pray for you all my life,' said the little girl passion­
ately, and then suddenly laughed again, threw herself on him, 
and hugged him tightly once more. 
Raskolnikov told her his name and address, and promised to 
return the next day without fail. When she left him she was 
rapturously happy. It was about eleven o'clock when he went 
out into the street. Five minutes later he was standing on the 
bridge, on the exact spot where the woman had thrown herself 
into the water. 
'Enough !' he said decidedly and solemnly. 'Away with 
illusions, away with imaginary terrors, away with spectres ! . . .  
Life is ! Was I not living just now? My life did not die with the 
old woman ! May she rest in peace and-enough, old woman, 
your time has come ! Now comes the reign of reason and light 
and . . .  and freedom and power . . .  now we shall see ! Now we 
shall measure our strength !' he added arrogantly, as though he 
were addressing some dark power and summoning it up. 'Mter 
all . . .  I am very weak at this moment, but . . .  I think all my 
illness has gone. I knew it would, when I came out just now. 
By the way, Pochinkov's house is only a couple of steps away. 
I should have to go to Razumikhin's even if it were much 
farther than that . . .  Let him win his bet ! . . .  Let him laugh, 
even-it doesn't matter, let him ! . . .  Strength, strength is what 
I need ; nothing can be done without strength; and strength 
must be gained by strength-that is something they do not 
know,' he added proudly and self-confidently, and he left the 
bridge, though he could hardly put one foot before the other. 
His pride and self-confidence grew with every minute; in each 
succeeding minute he was a different man from what he had 
been in the preceding one. But what had happened that was 
so special? What had so transformed him? He himself did not 
know; it had come to him suddenly, as to a man clutching at a 
straw, that even for him it was 'possible to live, that life was 
still there, that his life had not died with that old woman'. 
Perhaps he had been in too much haste to reach this conclusion, 
but of this he did not think. 
'But I asked for "thy servant Rodion" to be remembered in 
their prayers,' flashed through his mind ; 'well, that 's just in 
case !' he added, and laughed at his own childish quibbling. 
He was in excellent spirits. 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
1 83 
He found Razumikhin easily; the new lodger was already 
known in Pochinkov's, and the porter showed him the way at 
once. From half-way upstairs he could already distinguish the 
clatter and lively talk of a large gathering. The door to the 
staircase stood open; he could hear voices raised in discussion. 
Razumikhin's room was fairly large, and there were about 
fifteen people in it. Raskolnikov stopped in the little hall. 
There, beyond a partition, two servants of the landlord's 
were busy with two large samovars, various bottles and plates, 
and dishes of patties and zakuski brought from the landlord's 
kitchen. Raskolnikov sent in for Razumikhin, who came 
running out, delighted. At the first glance it was evident that 
he had had much more than usual to drink, and although he 
practically never got drunk, this time he showed some signs of 
being affected. 
'Listen,' said Raskolnikov hurriedly, 'I only came to say that 
you've won your bet and that it is true nobody knows what he 
may do. But I can't come in; I feel too faint to stand. So : hail 
and farewell ! Come and see me tomorrow, though . .  
.' 
'Do you know what? I'll see you home. When you say 
yourself that you are weak, then . .  .' 
'What about your guests? Who is that, with curly hair, who 
just looked this way?' 
'That? God knows ! Some acquaintance of my uncle's, I 
suppose, or perhaps he just came without waiting to be invited. 
I shall leave my uncle with them; he is invaluable ; it is a pity 
you can't make his acquaintance now. But to the devil with all 
of them ! I can't be bothered with them just now; besides, I 
need some fresh air. My dear chap, you came in the nick of 
time; another two minutes and I swear I'd have got into a 
fight ! They talk such confounded nonsense . . . You can't 
imagine what heights of idiotic nonsense a man can finally 
soar to ! But of course you can imagine it-don't we talk rot 
ourselves? \Vell, let them talk it if they want to ; later on they'll 
talk sense, no doubt . . .  Sit down a minute; I'll get Zosimov.' 
Zosimov showed some eagerness as he hurried over to 
Raskolnikov, and a noticeable and rather odd curiosity. Soon 
his face cleared. 
'You must get some sleep without delay,' he pronounced, 
having examined his patient as well as he could, 'and take a 
dose of medicine before you go to bed. Will you take it? I got 
it ready a short time ago . . .  it 's a powder.' 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'Two if you like,' answered Raskolnikov. 
The powder was taken on the spot. 
'It is a good idea for you to take him home yourself,' re­
marked Zosimov to Razumikhin ; 'we shall see what happens 
tomorrow, but things are not at all bad today : there is a 
decided change since a little time ago. Well, we live and 
learn . .  .' 
'Do you know what Zosimov whispered to me just now, as 
we came out?' blurted Razumikhin, as soon as they were in 
the street. 'I am telling you this straight out, my dear chap, 
because he is a fool. Zosimov told me to talk freely to you on the 
way and make you do the same, and then tell him about it 
afterwards, because he has an idea . . .  that you . . .  are mad, 
or pretty near it. Just imagine that ! To begin with, you are 
three times as clever as he; in the second place, if you aren't a 
lunatic, why should you care what rubbish he has got into his 
head ? ;  and in the third place, that lump of flesh specializes in 
surgery, but now he 's cracked on the subject of mental diseases. 
What set him definitely on your track was the conversation 
you had today with Zametov.' 
'Did Zametov tell you about it?' 
'Everything, and he did quite right. I understood all the 
ins and outs of it then, and so did Zametov . . .  Well, in one 
word, Rodya . . .  the point is . . .  I'm just a shade drunk just 
now . . .  But that doesn't matter . . .  the point is, that that idea 
. . .  you understand? . . .  really had got into their heads . . .  you 
understand? That is, none of them dared say it aloud, because 
it's such ridiculous balderdash, and especially after they'd 
arrested that painter, it put the extinguisher on all that for 
good. But why were they such fools? I gave Zametov a bit of 
a drubbing at the time-this is between ourselves, my dear 
chap ; please don't even hint that you know about it; I have 
noticed that he is very touchy; it was at Louisa's. But today, 
today everything has become clear. It was principally Ilya 
Petrovich. He took advantage of your faint that time in the 
office, but even he was ashamed of it afterwards; I know for a 
fact . .  .' 
Raskolnikov listened avidly. Razumikhin had drunk enough 
to make him let things out. 
'I fainted because it was stuffy and smelt of paint,' said 
Raskolnikov. 
'Why bother to explain? And it wasn't only the paint; your 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
collapse had been coming on for a whole month : Zosimov 
will bear witness ! Only how cut up that boy is now, you simply 
can't imagine ! "I am not worth his little finger !" he says­
Yours, that is. He 's not a bad chap sometimes, my dear fellow. 
But the lesson, the lesson you gave him today in the "Crystal 
Palace"-that put the finishing touch on ! You know, you gave 
him a fright at first, you worked him up into a fever ! ;  you 
almost made him convinced again of all that monstrous 
rubbish and then suddenly-you stuck your tongue out at him : 
"There you are," says you, "you've been caught !" Perfect ! 
He 's crushed, he 's overwhelmed ! You're a master, I swear it; 
that's just what they need ! Oh, why wasn't I there? He was 
waiting terribly impatiently for you just now. Porfiry would 
like to know you, too . . .  ' 
'And . . .  he as well . . .  But why am I supposed to be mad?' 
'Well, not exactly mad. It seems, my dear fellow, I've been 
letting out too much . . .  He was struck, you see, by the fact 
that only this one point interested you . . .  Now it is clear why 
you were interested ; knowing all the circumstances . . . and 
how this irritated you at the time and got mixed up with your 
illness . . .  I'm a little drunk, my dear fellow, only he has some 
idea of his own, though God knows what it is . . .  I tell you 
he 's mad on the subject of mental illness. But you needn't give 
a damn . . .  ' 
Both were silent for some moments. 
'Listen, Razumikhin,' began Raskolnikov, 'I want to tell 
you something frankly : I've just been at a dead man's house­
a clerk who has died . . .  I gave all my money to them . . .  and 
besides, I have just been kissed by a creature who, even if I 
had killed anybody, would still . . .  in a word, I saw another 
creature . . .  with a flame-coloured feather . . .  but, however, 
I am wandering. I am very weak, give me your arm . . .  the 
staircase is just here.' 
'What is the matter? What is it?' asked Razumikhin 
anxiously. 
'My head feels a little dizzy, but that isn't it; it is that I feel 
so sad, so sad !-like a woman . . .  really ! Look, what is that? 
Look, look !' 
'What do you mean?' 
'Don't you see? There is a light in my room, do you see? 
-through the crack . .  .' 
They were standing at the foot of the last flight, level with 

I86 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
the landlady's door, and they could indeed see from below 
that there was a light in Raskolnikov's room. 
'Strange ! Perhaps it 's Nastasya,' remarked Razumikhin. 
'She is never in my room at this hour, and besides she must 
be in bed long since, but . . .  it is all one to me ! Good-bye !' 
'What do you mean? I am seeing you home. I shall go in 
with you !' 
'I know you will, but I want to shake your hand and say 
good-bye to you here and now. Well, give me your hand, and 
good-bye !' 
'What is the matter with you, Rodya ?' 
'Nothing. Come; you will be a witness . .  .' 
They began to climb the stairs, and the idea came into 
Razumikhin's mind that Zosimov might be right. 'Oh, dear ! 
I've upset him with my chatter !' he muttered to himself. 
Suddenly, as they approached the door, they heard voices in 
the room. 
'What can this be?' cried Razumikhin. 
Raskolnikov reached the door first and opened it wide, 
opened it and stood rooted on the threshold. 
His mother and sister were sitting on his sofa, where they 
had been waiting for him for an hour and a hal£ Why was 
it that their arrival was the last thing he expected, and that 
they were the last thing he had thought of, in spite of the news, 
repeated that very day, that they were coming, were on the 
way, would soon arrive? All through that hour and a half 
they had plied Nastasya with questions in turn, until they had 
heard everything in the fullest detail. She was standing before 
them now. They were almost beside themselves with fright 
when they heard that 'he ran away today', a sick man and 
certainly, from what they had been told, delirious. 'Oh God, 
what has become of him?' They had both been crying, and 
both had suffered untold agonies during that hour and a half 
of waiting. 
A cry of rapturous joy greeted Raskolnikov's appearance. 
Both flung themselves towards him. But he stood like one dead; 
a sudden, unbearable thought had struck him like a clap of 
thunder. He did not lift his arms to embrace them; he could 
not. His mother and sister clasped him in their arms, kissed 
him, laughed, cried . . .  He took a step forward, faltered, and 
fell to the ground in a swoon. 
Agitation, cries of alarm, groans . . .  Razumikhin, who had 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
been standing on the threshold, rushed into the room and seized 
the invalid in his powerful arms, and Raskolnikov found him­
self on the sofa in an instant. 
'It is nothing, nothing!' cried Razumikhin, 'it is only a faint, 
a trivial matter ! Only just now the doctor said that he was 
much better, that he was quite well ! Water ! Look, he 's coming 
to himself now ! He's quite come round, see ! . .  .' 
And seizing Dunechka's hand so forcibly that he almost 
twisted it off, he made her stoop down to see that 'he's quite 
come round'. Raskolnikov's mother and sister both looked at 
Razumikhin with tenderness and gratitude as though he were 
Providence itself; they had learnt from Nastasya what this 
'brilliant young man' (as Pulkheria Alexandrovna Raskol­
nikova herself termed him in intimate conversation with Dunya 
that evening) had been to their Rodya throughout his illness. 

PART THREE 
C HA P T E R  I 
RASKOLNIKOV sat up on the sofa. 
He made a feeble gesture to Razumikhin to cut short his 
flow of warm but incoherent reassurances to his mother and 
sister, took a hand of each, and sat for a minute or two looking 
silently from one to the other. This look frightened his mother. 
It showed not only an emotion so intense as to be painful, but 
also a sort of insane fixity. Pulkheria Alexandrovna burst into 
tears. Avdotya Romanovna was pale; her hand trembled in 
her brother's. 
'Go home . . .  with him,' he said in a broken voice, indicating 
Razumikhin, 'until tomorrow; tomorrow, everything . . .  When 
did you arrive?' 
'This evening, Rodya,' answered Pulkheria Alexandrovna; 
'the train was terribly late. But, Rodya, nothing could induce 
me to leave you now. I will spend the night here beside you . . .  ' 
'Don't torment me !' he said, with an irritated gesture. 
'I will stay with him !' exclaimed Razumikhin; 'I will not 
leave him for an instant. As for those people at my place, they 
can go to the devil for all I care; and if they want to take 
offence, they can. Anyhow, my uncle is there to look after 
them.' 
'Oh, how can I thank you?' Pulkheria Alexandrovna was 
beginning, clasping Razumikhin's hand once more, but Ras­
kolnikov interrupted her again. 
'I can't stand this, I can't stand it,' he repeated fretfully; 
'don't torture me ! Enough ! Please go away ! .
.
• I can't stand 
any more !' 
'Come, mama; let us at any rate leave the room for a short 
time,' whispered Dunya, frightened. 'You can see we are too 
much for him.' 
'And am I not even to look at him, after three years ?' wept 
Pulkheria Alexandrovna. 
'Wait !' said he, stopping them again. 'You keep on inter­
rupting and my mind gets confused . . .  Have you seen Luzhin ?' 
'No, Rodya, but he knows that we have arrived. We have 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
x8g 
heard, Rodya, that Peter Petrovich was good enough to call on 
you today,' said Pulkheria Alexandrovna rather timidly. 
'Yes . . .  he was good enough . . .  Dunya, I told Luzhin I 
should throw him downstairs, and sent him packing . . .  ' 
'Rodya, what are you saying? You really . . .  you don't 
mean to say . . .  ' began Pulkheria Alexandrovna, startled, but 
she looked at Dunya and stopped. 
Avdotya Romanovna, with her eyes fixed on her brother, 
waited. Nastasya had already told them as much of the quarrel 
as she could understand or convey to them, and both had 
awaited this moment in a torment of doubt and anxiety. 
'Dunya,' went on Raskolnikov with an effort, 'I will not 
have this marriage, and so, tomorrow, the first words you say 
to Luzhin must be to dismiss him. Then we need never so much 
as speak of him again.' 
'Oh, my God !' exclaimed Pulkheria Alexandrovna. 
'Think what you are saying, brother !' began Avdotya 
Romanovna, flaring up. But she controlled herself at once. 
'Perhaps you are not fit just now, you are tired,' she said gently. 
'Raving? No . . . You are marrying Luzhin for rry benqit, 
and I do not accept the sacrifice. So before tomorrow write 
him a letter . . .  dismissing him . . .  Give it to me to read in the 
morning, and let that be the end of it !' 
'That I cannot do !' exclaimed the young woman, offended. 
'What right . . .  ?' 
'Dunechka, you are quick-tempered yourself; stop now; 
tomorrow . . .  Can't you see . . . ?' exclaimed her mother in 
fresh alarm, hastening to Dunya. 'Oh, we had better go !' 
'He's raving !' exclaimed the tipsy Razumikhin, 'or how 
would he dare? He'll have got that bee out of his bonnet by 
tomorrow . . .  He really did turn him out today. That 's true 
enough. But then, the other fellow lost his temper too . . .  He 
was holding forth here, showing off his knowledge, but he 
went away with his tail between his legs . . .  
' 
'So it is true !' exclaimed Pulkheria Alexandrovna. 
'Till tomorrow, brother,' said Dunya compassionately; 'let 
us go, mama . . .  Good-bye, Rodya !' 
'Listen, sister,' he repeated, with all the strength remaining 
to him, as she went, 'I am not raving; this marriage is an 
infamy. I may be infamous, but you should not . . .  one is 
enough . . . ; though I am infamous, I would disown such a 
sister. It is either me or Luzhin ! Go now . .  .' 

1 90 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'You must be out of your mind ! You're behaving like a 
tyrant !' shouted Razumikhin, but Raskolnikov did not answer, 
perhaps because he was not strong enough. He lay down and 
turned towards the wall, completely exhausted. Avdotya 
Romanova looked questioningly at Razumikhin ;  her black 
eyes were flashing and Razumikhin was quelled by her glance. 
Pulkheria Alexandrovna seemed rooted to the spot. 
'I can't possibly leave !' she whispered, almost desperate, 
to Razumikhin. 'I will stay here somewhere . . .  Take Dunya 
home.' 
'And ruin everything !' said Razumikhin, losing his temper, 
but also speaking in a whisper. 'Come out at least on to the 
stairs. Give us a light, Nastasya ! I solemnly assure you,' he 
went on, still in a half-whisper, although they were now 
outside the room, 'that not long since he came very near to 
striking us, the doctor and me ! Do you understand? the doctor 
himself! And the doctor yielded and left, so as not to annoy 
him, and I stayed downstairs on guard. But he got dressed and 
slipped out. And he will slip out again in the night if you 
upset him, and do himself some injury . .  .' 
'Oh, what are you saying?' 
'Besides, Avdotya Romanovna can't be in an hotel-room 
without you. Think what sort of place you are staying in ! 
Surely that scoundrel Peter Petrovich would have done better 
to look for respectable lodgings for you . . .  You know I am a 
little drunk and that is why I . . .  became abusive; don't pay 
any . .  .' 
'But I shall go to the landlady here,' insisted Pulkheria 
Alexandrovna, 'and beg her to give Dunya and me a corner 
for tonight. I cannot leave him like this, I cannot !' 
While she spoke she was standing on the landing outside the 
landlady's door. Nastasya stood on a lower step holding a light 
for them. Razumikhin was extraordinarily excited. Half an 
hour before, when he had been taking Raskolnikov home, 
although he had been, as he was prepared to admit, too talka­
tive, he had felt cheerful and fairly fresh, in spite of the enor­
mous amount he had drunk during the evening. Now his state 
was one almost of exaltation, and it seemed as though all the 
vodka he had drunk had mounted to his head again, and with 
redoubled force. He stood with the two ladies, clasping a hand 
of each, exhorting them and setting forth his arguments with 
amazing clarity, and, apparently for greater conviction, squeez-

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
ing their hands more painfully tight, as if in a vice, with every 
word, while his eyes devoured Avdotya Romanovna, who 
seemed not at all disconcerted by this. Once or twice the pain 
made them try to free their hands from his huge bony ones, 
but he was so far from realizing what was the matter that he 
only pulled them more strongly towards him. If they had 
bidden him throw himself then and there head-first down the 
stairs to serve them he would have obeyed instantly, without 
argument or question. Pulkheria Alexandrovna, preoccupied 
with anxiety for her Rodya, although she felt that this was a 
very eccentric young man and was squeezing her hand much too 
painfully, was unwilling, since she regarded him as having been 
sent by Providence, to attach any importance to all his little 
eccentricities. But Avdotya Romanovna, although she was 
equally anxious for her brother, and although she was not of a 
timorous disposition, felt something very like consternation, 
and even fear, when she met the wild, flashing, fiery glance of 
her brother's friend, and only the boundless confidence in­
spired by Nastasya's account restrained her impulse to run 
away, dragging her mother with her. She understood also that 
they might perhaps find it impossible to run away from him 
now. However, after some ten minutes she found herself much 
more composed : Razumikhin had the faculty, whatever his 
mood, of revealing his whole being in one moment, so that 
everybody knew at once what sort of person he was dealing 
with. 
'You can't go to the landlady; it would be a most terribly 
stupid thing to do !' he cried, trying to convince Pulkheria 
Alexandrovna. 'Although you are his mother, if you stay it will 
drive him to distraction, and then God knows what will 
happen. Listen, I'll tell you what : N astasya shall sit with him 
now, and I will take you both home, because you can't go 
through the streets alone : here in St. Petersburg, in that respect 
. . .  Well, never mind that ! . . .  Then I shall hurry straight back 
here, and I give you my word of honour that within a quarter 
of an hour I will bring you back a report of how he is, whether 
he is asleep or not, and so on. Then, listen ! I shall go instantly 
to my rooms-I have some guests there, but they are all drunk, 
-get Zosimov-that is the doctor who is attending him, he is 
there too, but he isn't drunk; he never gets drunk !-take him 
to Rodka and then straight on to you. That means you will 
have two accounts of him-and one of them from the doctor, 

192 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
you understand, from the doctor himself; that 's not at all the 
same thing as one from me ! If the news is bad, I promise faith­
fully I will bring you back here myself, and if it is good, then 
you can go to bed. I will spend the night here, but in the 
passage, so that he won't even hear me, and I will tell Zosimov 
to sleep in the flat too, so as to be within easy reach. Well, 
which will be better for him just now, you or the doctor? You 
know the doctor will be more use, much more use. Well then, 
go home ! You can't go to the landlady; I can, but you can't : 
she won't allow it, because . . .  because she 's a fool. She is 
jealous of Avdotya Romanovna because of me, if you want to 
know, and of you as well . . .  But especially of Avdotya Roman­
ovna . . .  She is a completely, an entirely unexpected character ! 
However, I am a fool, too . . .  Never mind ! Let us go ! Do you 
trust me? Well, do you trust me or not?' 
'Come along, mama,' said Avdotya Romanovna. 'I am sure 
he will keep his promise. He has saved my brother's life already, 
and if the doctor will really agree to spend the night here, what 
could be better?' 
'See, you . . .  you . . .  you understand me, because you are an 
angel !' exclaimed Razurnikhin rapturously. 'We are going ! 
Nastasya ! Upstairs this instant and sit with him, with a light; 
I shall be back in a quarter of an hour . .  .' 
Pulkheria Alexandrovna was not completely convinced, 
but she raised no further objections. Razumikhin took them 
both by the arm and drew them down the stairs. However, he 
worried her a little, too : 'he may be kind and efficient, but 
is he in a condition to fulfil his promise? Look at the state he 's 
. 
I 
' 
Ill .
•
•
•
 
'Ah, I understand ; you think I'm drunk !' said Razumikhin, 
divining her thoughts and breaking in on them. His enormous 
strides took him along the pavement at such a pace that the 
ladies could hardly keep up with him, but he did not notice 
this. 'Nonsense !-that is . . .  I am drunk, fool that I am, but 
that is not the point : I am not drunk with wine. But, as soon 
as I saw you, it went to my head . . .  But never mind me ! Don't 
pay any attention; I am talking rot; I am beneath you . . .  I 
am infinitely far beneath you ! . . .  When I have taken you 
home, I shall pour a couple of buckets of water over my head, 
from the canal here, and I shall be all right . .  , If only you 
knew how I love you both ! Don't laugh, and don't be angry ! 
. . .  You may be angry with everybody else, but not with me. 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
193 
I am his friend, and that means I am yours. I want that so 
much . . .  I had a presentiment . . .  last year, there was a 
moment when . . .  However, it can't have been a presentiment 
at all, because now I feel as if you had fallen from the skies. 
Perhaps I shan't sleep all night . . .  Not long since, Zosimov 
was afraid he might go out of his mind . . .  That is why he must 
not be irritated . . .  ' 
'What are you saying?' exclaimed the mother. 
'Did the doctor really say that?' asked Avdotya Romanovna, 
alarmed. 
'Yes, he did, but it is wrong, quite wrong. He gave him 
some medicine, a powder, I saw it, and then you arrived . . . 
Ah ! . . .  It would have been better if you had arrived tomorrow ! 
We did right to come away. And in an hour's time Zosimov 
will give you a report about everything. He is very far from 
drunk ! And I shall no longer be drunk . . .  Why did I get so 
worked up? Because those damned fellows drew me into an 
argument. I have taken an oath not to agree . . . They talk 
such rot! I almost came to blows with them. I have left my 
uncle presiding there . . .  Well, would you believe it: they 
demand complete impersonality, they find the highest enjoy­
ment in it ! If one could only not be oneself, if one could be less 
like oneself than anything ! That is what they consider to be 
the most complete progress. And if it were only their own 
nonsense they talked, but . .  .' 
'Listen !' interrupted Pulkheria Alexandrovna diffidently, 
but this seemed only to increase his fervour. 
'What do you think?' cried Razumikhin in a still louder 
tone. 'Do you think I am annoyed because they talk nonsense? 
Rubbish ! I like people to talk nonsense. It is man's unique 
privilege, among all other organisms. By pursuing falsehood 
you will arrive at the truth ! The fact that I am in error shows 
that I am human. You will not attain to one single truth until 
you have produced at least fourteen false theories, and perhaps 
a hundred and fourteen, and that is honourable enough in its 
fashion; but we can't even produce our errors out of our own 
heads. You can talk the most mistaken rubbish to me, and if it 
is your own, I will embrace you ! It is almost better to tell 
your own lies than somebody else's truth ; in the first case you 
are a man, in the second you are no better than a parrot ! Truth 
remains; but life can be choked up ; there have been instances. 
Well, what are we all now? We are all, without exception, 

194 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
children in the kindergarten, in respect of science, progress, 
thought, invention, ideals, desires, liberalism, judgement, expe­
rience, and everything, everything, everything, everything ! 
We have been content to rub along on other people's ideas­
we have rusted away ! That is so, isn't it? What I say is true, 
isn't it?' exclaimed Razumikhin, shaking and squeezing both 
ladies' hands. 'Isn't it?' 
'Oh, good gracious, I don't know,' said poor Pulkheria 
Alexandrovna. 
'Yes, yes, it 's true enough . . .  although I don't agree with 
everything you say,' said Avdotya Romanovna seriously, and 
exclaimed sharply with pain as he gripped her hand tighter 
than ever. 
'True? You say it 's true? Well, after this you . . .  you • . .  
', 
he cried rapturously, 'you are a fountain of kindness, purity, 
reason and . . .  perfection ! Give me your hand, give it me . . .  
and give me yours too ; I must kiss your hands on my knees, 
here and now !' 
And he fell on his knees on the pavement, which fortunately 
was deserted at this hour. 
'Stop, I beg you ! What are you doing?' cried Pulkheria 
Alexandrovna in the greatest alarm. 
'Get up, get up !' said Dunya, laughing and alarmed at the 
same time. 
'Not until you have given me your hands ! There ! I have 
done; you see I have got up. Let us go on ! I am a miserable 
dolt; I am far beneath you, I am drunk, and I am ashamed . . .  
I am not worthy to love you, but to worship you is every man's 
obligation unless he is no more than a brute beast ! And I have 
fulfilled that obligation . . . Here is your hotel, and on this 
account, at least, Rodion was right to turn Peter Petrovich out ! 
How dared he send you to such a place? It is disgraceful ! Do 
you know what sort of people are received here? And you his 
betrothed ! You are engaged to him, aren't you? Well, I must 
tell you after this that your fiance is a scoundrel ! . .  .' 
'Mr. Razumikhin, you forget yourself .
.
 .' Pulkheria 
Alexandrovna was beginning. 
'Yes, yes, you are right; I have forgotten myself, and I 
apologize,' said Razumikhin, recollecting himself, 'but . . . 
but . . .  you must not be angry with me for saying what I did ! 
Because I am speaking sincerely, and not for a reason that .
.
•
 
hm ! . . .  that would be ignoble; in one word, it is because in 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
1 95 
you I . . .  hm ! .
•
.
 well, let it be; I need not, I will not say why, 
I dare not ! . . .  But all of us saw, when he came in, that that 
man does not belong to our world. Not because when he came 
he had had his hair curled at the barber's, not because he was 
in a hurry to display his intellectual powers, but because he is 
a spy and a profiteer, because he is quite plainly a Jew and a 
mountebank. Do you suppose him to be intelligent? No, he is a 
fool, a fool ! Well, is he a match for you? Good God, no ! You 
see, ladies,' and he stood still on the stairs leading up to the 
hotel, 'although those guests of mine are all drunk, they are 
honest, and although we do err, because after all I err too, 
yet by pursuing our errors we arrive at last at the truth because 
we are on the right path; but Peter Petrovich . . .  is not on the 
right path. Although I was cursing them right and left just 
now, I respect them all; and though I don't respect him, I 
like even Zametov, because he's only a puppy ! Even that idiot 
Zosimov, because he 's honest and he knows his job . . .  Well, 
that 's enough ; everything has been said, and forgiven. It has 
been forgiven, hasn't it? Well, come along. I know this corridor, 
I've been here ;just here, in number three, there was a scandal . . .  
Well, where are you? What number? Eight? Well, lock your 
door for the night, and don't let anybody in. I shall be back 
with news in a quarter of an hour, and then again half an hour 
later with Zosimov. You'll see ! Good-bye ! I'm off!' 
'Oh dear, Dunechka, what will come of this?' said Pul­
kheria Alexandrovna, turning to her daughter, full of fear and 
anxiety. 
'Don't worry, mama,' answered Dunya, taking off her hat 
and cloak. 'It was God Himself who sent that man to us, 
although he comes straight from some drinking bout. I am 
sure we can rely on him. And everything he has already done 
for my brother . . .  ' 
'Oh, Dunechka, God only knows if he will come. And how 
could I bring myself to leave Rodya? . . . This is not at all, 
not at all, how I expected to find him ! How forbidding he 
looked, as though he were not glad to see us . . .  ' 
There were tears in her eyes. 
'No, mama, that is not true. You didn't observe closely, you 
were crying all the time. He has been completely upset by this 
serious illness ; that is the reason for it all.' 
'Oh, this illness ! Something terrible will come of it, some­
thing terrible ! ' said her mother, timidly searching her daughter's 

196 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
eyes, so as to read all her thoughts, and already half­
comforted because Dunya was defending Rodya, which must 
mean that she had forgiven him. And trying to probe her still 
further, she added : 'I am sure he will change his mind to­
morrow.' 
'And I am sure he will say the same tomorrow . . . about 
that,' Avdotya Romanovna cut her short. Here was of course 
the rub, because this was the point which Pulkheria Alexan­
drovna now feared to discuss. Dunya went up to her mother 
and kissed her, and received a silent hug in return. Then her 
mother sat down to wait anxiously for Razumikhin's arrival, 
and timidly followed Dunya's movements as she walked about 
the room with folded arms, deep in thought. This thoughtful 
pacing from corner to corner was a habit with A vdotya 
Romanovna, and at such times her mother feared to break in 
on her reflections. 
Razumikhin's sudden, drink-inspired passion for Avdotya 
Romanovna was of course comical; but seeing her, especially 
now, as she paced the room with folded arms, pensive and sad, 
many might perhaps have found other excuses for him besides 
that of his condition. Avdotya Romanovna was remarkably 
good-looking, tall, extremely well-made, strong, self-assured, 
as her every gesture showed, without in the least detracting 
from the grace and tenderness of her movements. In face she 
resembled her brother, but it would have been possible to call 
her a beauty. Her hair was brown, of a slightly lighter shade 
than her brother's, and her sparkling, almost black eyes were 
proud and yet at times extraordinarily tender. Her complexion 
was pale, but not sickly; her face shone with freshness and 
health. Her mouth was a trifle small, and her dewy scarlet 
lower lip projected very slightly, like her chin-the only 
irregularity in that beautiful face, which gave it a rather self­
willed look and perhaps a touch of superciliousness. Her 
expression was rather serious and pensive than merry, but 
then, how well a smile became that face, and how well her 
young, free, merry laughter became her ! It was understand­
able that Razumikhin, hot-headed, frank, single-minded, 
honest, as strong as a hero of legend, and drunk into the bar­
gain, should have lost his head from the first moment, since 
he had never seen anybody like her. Besides, chance dictated 
that he should first see Dunya in a radiant moment of love 
and rejoicing at the reunion with her brother. Later, he saw 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
197 
her lower lip tremble with indignation in response to the 
arrogant ferocity of Rodya's commands-and he could resist 
no longer. 
He had spoken no more than the truth in his tipsy babbling 
there on the staircase when he said that Raskolnikov's eccen­
tric landlady, Praskovya Pavlovna, would be jealous not only 
of Avdotya Romanovna, but perhaps even of Pulkheria 
Alexandrovna herself. Although Pulkheria Alexandrovna was 
forty-three, her face retained traces of its former beauty, and 
besides, like almost all women who preserve into old age their 
clarity of mind, the freshness of their impressions, and the pure, 
honest ardour of their hearts, she seemed much younger than 
her years. Let it be said in parenthesis that the preservation 
of these things is the only way to keep beauty even in old age. 
Her hair was beginning to grow grey and thin, little radiating 
wrinkles had long since appeared round her eyes, her cheeks 
were hollow and withered with cares and anxieties, but it was 
still a beautiful face. It was like a portrait ofDunechka twenty 
years later, without the expressive pout of the lower lip. 
Pulkheria Alexandrovna was sentimental, but not cloyingly so, 
diffident and yielding, but only up to a certain point : she 
would yield much, consent to much, even to things running 
counter to her convictions, but there always remained a limit 
of honesty, principle, and firm conviction which nothing 
could induce her to overstep. 
Exactly twenty minutes after Razumikhin left them came 
two quiet but hurried taps on the door : he had returned. 
'I am not coming in; there is not time !' he said hastily, 
when the door was opened. 'He is sleeping like a baby, soundly 
and peacefully, and with luck he will sleep for ten hours. 
Nastasya is with him; I have told her not to leave him until 
I get back. Now I am going to get hold of Zosimov; he will 
report to you and then you can get some sleep yourselves. 
I can see you are completely worn out.' 
And he set off along the corridor. 
'What an efficient and . . .  devoted young man,' exclaimed 
Pulkheria Alexandrovna, extremely delighted. 
'He seems a very nice person,' answered Avdotya Roman­
ovna warmly, as she resumed her pacing about the room. 
Nearly an hour later steps were heard in the corridor and 
there was another knock at the door. Both the women were 
waiting, this time in complete reliance on Razumikhin's 

198 
C RIME AND PUNISHMENT 
promise; and indeed he had succeeded in bringing Zosimov. 
Zosimov had immediately agreed to leave the party and go to 
see Raskolnikov, but he had come to the ladies' room very 
unwillingly, mistrusting the assurances of the drunken Razumi­
khin. But his self-esteem was at once appeased, and even 
flattered; he realized that they had been waiting for him as 
for an oracle. He sat with them for exactly ten minutes, and 
managed to convince and reassure Pulkheria Alexandrovna. 
He spoke with extreme sympathy, but with reserve and forceful 
seriousness, the picture of a twenty-seven-year-old doctor at an 
important consultation, not deviating by a single word from 
the subject or showing the least desire to enter into more 
private and personal relations with the two ladies. Although 
he remarked Avdotya Romanovna's brilliant good looks as 
soon as he went in, he made an immediate effort not to notice 
her at all during the rest of his visit, and addressed himself ex­
clusively to Pulkheria Alexandrovna. All this gave him immense 
inward satisfaction. He had found his patient, he said, in a 
very satisfactory condition. According to his observations, the 
illness had some psychological causes in addition to the bad 
material conditions the patient had been living in for the past 
few months ; 'it is, so to say, a product of many complex moral 
and material influences, anxieties, apprehensions, worries, 
certain ideas . . .  and other things.' Without looking directly 
at Avdotya Romanovna he perceived that she was listening 
with special attentiveness, and became more expansive on 
this subject. To Pulkheria Alexandrovna's timid and uneasy 
question about 'some suspicions of mental disturbance', he 
answered, smiling calmly and frankly, that his words had been 
exaggerated; that, of course, he had observed in his patient a 
certain fixed idea, some indication of monomania-since he, 
Zosimov, was particularly interested in this extremely absorb­
ing branch of medicine-but it must be remembered that 
practically up to that day the patient had been delirious, and 
. . . and, of course, the arrival of his family would have a 
salutary, strengthening, and settling effect-'if only new shocks 
can be avoided,' he added significantly. Then he got up, bowed 
sedately but affably, and, accompanied by blessings, fervent 
gratitude, and prayers, went out, after pressing the little hand 
that Avdotya Romanovna held out to him of her own accord, 
extremely pleased with his visit and still more so with him­
self. 

C RIME AND PUNISHMENT 
rgg 
'We will have a talk tomorrow; now you simply must go to 
bed,' insisted Razumikhin, as he left with Zosimov. 'I shall 
be here with a report tomorrow as early as possible.' 
'But what a delightful girl that Avdotya Romanovna is !' 
remarked Zosimov, almost licking his lips, as they emerged 
into the street. 
'Delightful? Did you say delightful?' roared Razumikhin, 
flinging himself on Zosimov and seizing him by the throat. 
'If you ever dare . . .  Do you understand? Do you understand?' 
he cried, shaking him by the collar and pinning him against 
the wall. 'Do you hear me?' 
'Let me go, you drunken devil !' said Zosimov, struggling 
free, and then, when Razumikhin had let him go, looked 
closely at him and began to roar with laughter. Razumikhin 
stood before him with dangling arms, lost in grave and sombre 
thoughts. 
'Of course, I am an ass,' he said, brooding like a thunder­
cloud, 'but then . . .  so are you.' 
'Well, no, brother; not at all. I don't cherish any impossible 
dreams.' 
They walked along in silence, and it was only as they 
approached Raskolnikov's flat that Razumikhin, very troubled, 
spoke again. 
'Listen,' he said to Zosimov, 'you're a good chap, but 
besides all your other bad qualities, you're a womanizer, as 
I know, and a filthy one. You're a weak and spineless scoun­
drel, you're capricious, you're self-indulgent, you can't refuse 
yourself anything, and I call all that filthy, because it leads you 
straight into the muck. You've grown so soft that I confess I 
simply can't understand how you can still be a good and even 
selfless doctor. You sleep on a feather-bed (and you a doctor !) 
and yet you'll get out of bed to go to a patient. In three years' 
time you won't do that any more . . .  Well, let it go ; that isn't 
the point, but this is : you will spend tonight in the landlady's 
flat (it took some doing, but I persuaded her) and I in the 
kitchen ; so you'll have the chance of getting more intimately 
acquainted ! Not in the way you think ! There 's not even a 
suggestion of that here, brother !' 
'I'm not thinking anything !' 
'This woman, brother, is all modesty, reticence, shyness, and 
resolute chastity, and yet at the same time, a few sighs, and 
she is as melting as wax, yes, as wax. Preserve me from her, for 

200 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
all the devils in hell ! A fetching creature ! . . .  I will repay you, 
with my life if need be !' 
Zosimov laughed more heartily still. 
'Well, you are worked up, aren't you? But why me?' 
'I assure you it won't be much trouble; you can talk any 
sort of sloppy nonsense you like, so long as you sit beside her 
and talk. Besides, you're a doctor; begin curing her of some­
thing. I swear you won't regret it. She has a piano, and you 
know I strum a little; I've got a song there, a genuine Russian 
one : "I weep scalding tears." She likes real Russian songs­
well, so it began with the songs, and you are a virtuoso on the 
pianoforte, a maestro, a Rubinstein . . . I swear you won't 
regret it !' 
'Why, have you given her some sort of promise or something? 
You've put something in writing perhaps ? Did you promise 
to marry her?' 
'No, no, nothing of the sort, absolutely nothing ! And she is 
not like that at all ; Chebarov approached her . .  .' 
'Well then, just drop her!' 
'No, that's impossible !' 
'Why is it impossible?' 
'Well, it just is, and that 's all about it ! There is a certain 
element of charm in this business, my dear chap.' 
'Well, why did you try to make a conquest of her?' 
'I didn't; perhaps I was even conquered myself, fool that 
I am; but it 's absolutely all one to her whether it 's you or me, 
so long as there is someone to sit beside her and sigh. Here, my 
dear chap . . .  I don't know how to express it to you, but here 
. . . well, you know a lot about mathematics, and you still 
study it, I know . . . well, begin to go through the integral 
calculus with her-I swear I'm not joking, I'm perfectly 
serious-it makes absolutely no difference to her; she will look 
at you and sigh, for a whole year together. I, among other 
things, talked to her at great length, two days running, about 
the Prussian Chamber of Nobles (because what can one talk to 
her about ?)-and she only sighed and glowed ! Only don't 
begin to talk about love-she 's so painfully shy-well, and 
look as if you couldn't tear yourself away-well, that 's enough. 
You'll be terribly comfortable; just like home-read, sit, lie 
on the sofa, write-. You can even kiss her, if you're careful.' 
'But why should I do all this?' 
'Oh, I don't seem able to explain it to you anyhow ! Look : 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
201 
you two are just like one another ! I thought of you before, in 
fact . . .  You will end up that way anyhow, and isn't it all one 
to you whether it 's sooner or later? Here, my dear chap, is the 
beginning of a feather-bed existence-yes, and more than that ! 
Here you will get drawn in; here is the end of the world, an 
anchorage, a peaceful haven, the central point of the earth, 
the three fishes on which the world is based, the essence of 
pancakes, of rich pies, of the evening samovar, of peaceful 
sighs and warm jackets and warm stoves to lie on-just as if 
you were dead and yet still alive-all the advantages of both 
states at one and the same time ! Devil take it, my dear chap, 
I've been running on, and it 's time we went to bed. I some­
times wake up in the night; if l do I will go in and take a look 
at him. But it doesn't matter, it's unnecessary; everything is 
all right. Don't bother specially, but if you like, you go in and 
see him as well. But if you notice anything, delirium, for 
example, or a temperature or anything, wake me at once. 
But there won't be anything . . .  
' 
C H A P T E R  I I  
NEXT day, Razumikhin awoke at eight o'clock in a serious 
and troubled mood. Many new and unforeseen perplexities 
seemed to have sprung up in him that morning. He had not 
before so much as dreamed that he would ever experience 
such an awakening. He remembered every detail of the pre­
vious day, and knew that something out of the ordinary had 
happened to him, that he had received an impression of a kind 
that he had never known before, and quite unlike all others. 
At the same time he clearly realized that the dream that had 
set his imagination aflame was in the highest degree unrealiz­
able, so much so that he was ashamed of it, and quickly 
transferred his attention to other, more urgent, anxieties and 
problems inherited from that 'thrice-accursed yesterday'. 
His most horrifying recollection was of how 'ignobly and 
disgustingly' he had behaved, not only in being drunk, but in 
taking advantage of a young girl's situation to abuse her 
fiance in front of her, out of stupid and hastily conceived 
jealousy, when he knew nothing either of their mutual relation­
ship and obligations or, properly speaking, of the man himself. 
And what right had he to condemn him so hastily and rashly? 
Who had appointed him the judge? Surely such a being as 

202 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
Avdotya Romanovna was not capable of giving herself to an 
unworthy man for money? Therefore there must be some 
worth in him. The hotel? But really, how could he know what 
sort of place it was? After all, he was having a flat got ready . . .  
Pah, how ignobly he had behaved ! And what sort of justi­
fication was there in the fact that he had been drunk? That 
was a stupid excuse, which made him seem still baser. In vino 
veritas, and here the whole truth had come out, 'that was, all 
the foulness of his boorish, jealous heart had come out !' And 
was it in any way permissible for him, Razumikhin, to cherish 
any such dream? What was he in comparison with this girl­
he, the drunken scoundrel and braggart of yesterday? 'Is such a 
ridiculous and cynical comparison possible at all?' He crim­
soned at the thought, and at the same time suddenly recol­
lected how yesterday, on the stairs, he had told them that the 
landlady would be jealous of Avdotya Romanovna on his 
account. This was quite unbearable. With a wide swing of his 
arm he struck the stove with his fist, hurting his hand and 
dislodging a brick. 
'Of course,' he muttered to himself after a minute, in a 
mood of self-abasement, 'of course, I can't gloss over or efface 
all this nastiness, now or ever . . .  and so I must not even think 
of it, but appear before them in silence and . . . fulfil my 
obligations . . .  also in silence and . . .  and not ask forgiveness, 
but say nothing, and . . .  and now, of course, everything is 
ruined !' 
All the same, when he dressed he made a more elaborate 
toilet than usual. He had no other clothes, and even if he had, 
would perhaps not have put them on, would 'purposely' not 
have put them on. But in any case he could not go on being a 
dirty and slovenly cynic; he had no right to offend other 
people's susceptibilities, especially when they needed him and 
had invited him to come and see them. He brushed his clothes 
carefully. His 
.
linen was always presentable ; in this respect 
he was particularly clean and neat. 
This morning he washed with great care-he got soap from 
Nastasya, and washed his hair, his neck, and, with especial 
pains, his hands. When, however, it came to the question of 
whether he should shave his stubble or not (Praskovya Pav­
lovna still kept the excellent razor that had belonged to her 
late husband, Mr. Zarnitsyn) it was decided, somewhat 
emphatically, in the negative : 'Let it stay as it is ! What if they 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
203 
should think that I shaved because . . .  they certainly will think 
so ! I would not have that for the world !' 
And . . . and the chief thing was, he was very coarse and 
dirty, and had the manners of the pot-house ; and . . . and 
suppose he knew that he, in however small a degree, was a 
decent fellow . . .  well, what was there to be proud of in being 
a decent fellow? Everybody ought to be decent, and more 
besides and . . .  (he remembered) he had been involved in some 
things . . . not exactly dishonourable, but all the same ! . . . 
And what designs he had had ! . . .  Hrn . . .  'And to put all this 
beside Avdotya Rornanovna ! Oh, the devil ! Well, let it be so ! 
I shall be purposely dirty, bawdy, and drunken, and be hanged 
to it ! I shall be worse still ! . .  .' 
Zosirnov, who had spent the night in Praskovya Pavlovna's 
drawing-room, found him in the midst of this monologue. 
He was going horne, and was in a hurry to take a look at his 
patient. Razurnikhin reported that he was sleeping like a top. 
Zosirnov gave orders that he was not to be disturbed until he 
awoke of his own accord. He promised to look in himself 
between ten and eleven. 
'If only he is at horne,' he added. 'It 's the very devil when 
you have no control over your own patient, and yet you're 
supposed to treat him. Do you know whether he is going there, 
or they are corning here?' 
'They here, I think,' answered Razurnikhin, who had under­
stood the drift of the question, 'and they will, of course, have 
family matters to talk o£ I shall leave them. You, as the doctor, 
have naturally more rights than I have.' 
'But I'm not their confessor either ; I shall just come and then 
go away; I have plenty of other things to do.' 
'One thing worries me,' interrupted Razurnikhin, frowning. 
'Yesterday, when I was drunk, I let slip various foolish things 
to him on our way horne . . .  various . . .  among other things, 
that you were afraid that he . . . might have a tendency to 
madness.' 
'You let that out to the ladies yesterday, as well.' 
'I know it was idiotic ! I ought to be whipped ! But tell me, 
had you really a definite idea?' 
'Oh, that's nonsense; what definite idea? You yourself 
described him as a monomaniac when you called me in . . . 
Well, yesterday we added fuel to the flames, you did, I mean, 
with those stories . . . about that painter; a good subject of 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
conversation, when perhaps it was that that threw him off 
balance in the first place ! If I had known exactly what hap­
pened in the office that time, and that some scoundrel had . . .  
offended him with that suspicion . . .  hm . . .  I shouldn't have 
allowed such talk yesterday. You know these monomaniacs 
can make an ocean out of a puddle and believe the most 
fantastic illusions to be real. As far as I remember, half the 
business became clear to me yesterday from that story of 
Zametov's. All right ! I know a case of a hypochondriac, a man 
of forty, who could not endure an eight-year-old boy's merry 
chatter at table, day after day, and killed him ! And here you 
have a man all in rags, an impudent scoundrel of a police 
officer, an illness just coming on, and a suspicion of that kind ! 
To a hypochondriac who is delirious ! In the face of excep­
tional, lunatic, vanity ! And here, perhaps, lies the point of 
departure of the illness ! Well, the devil only knows ! . . .  By the 
way, this Zametov is really a nice lad, only . . .  hm . . .  there 
was no need for him to repeat all that. He's a terrible babbler.' 
'But whom did he tell? You and me.' 
'And Porfiry.' 
'Well, what if he did tell him?' 
'By the way, have you any influence with them, his mother 
and sister? They ought to be very careful with him today . .  .' 
'They can be persuaded,' reluctantly answered Razumikhin. 
'And why did he behave as he did towards that Luzhin? 
I shouldn't think she could be averse to a man with money 
. . .  they haven't got a bean, have they?' 
'Why all these questions?' exclaimed Razumikhin irritably. 
'How should I know whether they have a bean or not? Ask 
them yourself and perhaps you will get to know . . .  
' 
'Pah, how stupid you are sometimes ! You are still feeling the 
effects of yesterday's drinking. Good-bye; thank your Praskovya 
Pavlovna from me for her hospitality. She locked herself in 
and didn't answer the good morning I gave her through the 
door, but she was up at seven o'clock, for her samovar was 
carried through the passage from the kitchen . . . I wasn't 
considered worthy of the honour of seeing her . . .  
' 
At exactly nine o'clock Razumikhin presented himself at 
Bakaleev's hotel. The ladies had been awaiting him with 
febrile impatience for a very long time. They had got up 
at about seven o'clock or even earlier. When he went in he 
was glowering like a thunder-cloud, and he made his bows 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
awkwardly, and immediately grew furious at himself, of course. 
He had reckoned without his hosts ; Pulkheria Alexandrovna 
positively flung herself upon him, seized both his hands, and 
seemed on the point of kissing them. He looked timidly at 
Avdotya Romanovna, but even that proud face bore in that 
moment such an expression of gratitude and friendship, such 
whole-hearted and to him unexpected esteem (instead of the 
mocking glances and involuntary ill-concealed scorn he ex­
pected) that he might almost have felt easier if he had been 
met with abuse; as it was, he was almost sheepish. Fortunately, 
there was a theme of conversation at hand, and he turned 
quickly to it. 
Having learnt that her son 'was not yet awake', but that 'all 
was well', Pulkheria Alexandrovna declared that this was all 
for the best, 'because she very, very, very much wanted to talk 
things over first.' There followed a question about whether he 
had breakfasted, and an invitation to join them, since they had 
waited for him before having breakfast. Avdotya Romanovna 
rang the bell, which was answered by a slovenly ragamuffin. 
Tea was ordered and, after a long interval, served, but in such 
a dirty and unseemly fashion that the ladies were ashamed. 
Razumikhin started an energetic tirade against the place, but, 
remembering Luzhin, stopped in confusion, and was very glad 
when Pulkheria Alexandrovna began to ply him with endless 
questions. 
He talked for three-quarters of an hour, continually inter­
rupted and cross-questioned, and managed to communicate 
as much as he knew of the more important and essential facts 
ofRodion Romanovich's life during the past year, ending with 
a circumstantial account of his illness. He left out, however, 
a good deal which he felt it wiser to omit, including the scene 
in the police office and its consequences. His story was eagerly 
listened to, but when he thought he had finished, and satisfied 
his hearers, he found that as far as they were concerned he had 
hardly begun. 
'Tell me, tell me, what do you think . . .  oh, excuse me, I 
don't even yet know your name,' began Pulkheria Alexan­
drovna hurriedly. 
'Dmitri Prokofich.' 
'Well, Dmitri Prokofich, I should very, very much like to 
know . . .  how, in general . . .  he now regards subjects . . .  that 
is, I mean . . .  how can I express it? Perhaps I had better say, 

206 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
what are his likes and dislikes? Is he always so irritable? What 
are his desires, his dreams, if I can put it like that? What 
things influence him now? In one word, I should like . . .  ' 
'Oh, mama, how can anybody answer all that in one breath?' 
said Dunya. 
'Oh, dear, you know I didn't in the least expect to find him 
like this, not in the least, Dmitri Prokofich.' 
'That is very natural,' answered Dmitri Prokofich. 'I have 
no mother, but my uncle comes here every year, and nearly 
every time he doesn't even recognize my appearance, and he 
is a clever man; well, a lot of water has flowed under the bridges 
in your three years of separation. But what can I tell you? I 
have known Rodion for a year and a half; he is moody, 
melancholy, proud, and haughty; recently (and perhaps for 
much longer than I know) he has been morbidly depressed and 
over-anxious about his health. He is kind and generous. He 
doesn't like to display his feelings, and would rather seem 
heartless than talk about them. Sometimes, however, he is not 
hypochondriacal at all, but simply inhumanly cold and un­
feeling. Really, it is as if he had two separate personalities, 
each dominating him alternately. Sometimes he is dreadfully 
taciturn : he has no time for anything-people are always inter­
fering with him-but he spends all his time lying there doing 
nothing. He never jests, not because he lacks the sharpness of 
wit for it, but because he has no time for such trifles. He doesn't 
hear people out. He is never interested in the same things as 
other people at any given moment. He sets a terribly high 
value on himself, not, I think, without some justification. Well, 
what else? . . .  I think your arrival will have a most salutary 
effect on him.' 
'God grant it may!' cried Pulkheria Alexandrovna, tor­
mented by Razumikhin's account of her Rodya. 
Now at last Razumikhin looked more cheerfully at Avdotya 
Romanovna. He had glanced at her often as he talked, but 
fleetingly, turning his eyes away again after a moment. 
Avdotya Romanovna had listened attentively, now sitting at 
the table, now getting up and walking about the room in her 
usual fashion, with folded arms and compressed lips ; occasion­
ally she put in a question, without interrupting her thoughtful 
pacing. She too had a habit of not hearing people out to the end. 
She wore a dark-coloured dress of thin material with a small 
diaphanous white scarf knotted round her neck. Razumikhin 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
noticed many indications that the two women were in ex­
tremely poor circumstances. Had Avdotya Romanovna been 
arrayed like a queen, he would probably not have feared her 
at all; now, perhaps just because she was so poorly dressed and 
because he was conscious of the narrowness of their circum­
stances, his heart was filled with apprehension, and he became 
nervous of the effect of every one of his words and gestures. 
This served to increase his embarrassment and self-distrust. 
'You have told us many curious things about my brother's 
character and . . .  told them in an impartial manner. That was 
right; I had thought you positively worshipped him,' said 
Avdotya Romanovna with a smile. 'It seems likely, too, that 
he ought to have some woman near him,' she added reflec­
tively. 
'I did not say that, but perhaps you are right; only . . . ' 
'What?' 
'He really does not love anyone ; perhaps he never will,' said 
Razumikhin. 
'You mean he is not capable of loving?' 
'You know, Avdotya Romanovna, you are terribly like your 
brother, in every way !' he blurted out, to his own surprise. 
Immediately, remembering what he had just been saying about 
her brother, he was covered with confusion and as red as a 
lobster. Looking at him, Avdotya Romanovna could not help 
laughing. 
'You may both be mistaken about Rodya,' put in Pulkheria 
Alexandrovna, rather shocked. 'I am not talking about just 
now, Dunechka. What Peter Petrovich writes in this letter . . .  
and what you and I suppose . . .  may be untrue, but you can't 
imagine, Dmitri Prokofich, how capricious and-what shall I 
say?-cranky, he is. I never could understand his nature, even 
when he was only fifteen years old. I am convinced that he 
might suddenly do something with himself now that no other 
man would think of doing . . . There 's no need to look far 
for an example : do you know how surprised and stunned I was, 
indeed it almost killed me, when he took it into his head that he 
was going to marry that . . .  what 's her name? . . .  the daughter 
of this Mrs. Zarnitsyna, his landlady?' 
'Do you know the details of the story?' asked Avdotya 
Romanovna. 
'Would you not think,' continued Pulkheria Alexandrovna 
warmly, 'that my tears, my entreaties, my illness, my possible 

208 
C RIME AND PUNISHMENT 
death from grief, our poverty, would have stopped him? No, he 
would have trampled coolly over every obstacle. But surely, 
surely he loves us ?' 
'He himself never said anything to me about that affair,' 
answered Razumikhin cautiously, 'but I have heard something 
about it from Mrs. Zarnitsyna, who is not a very communica­
tive person either, and what I did hear was perhaps a little 
strange . . .  ' 
'But what, what did you hear?' asked both women together. 
'Well, nothing very particular, really. I only learnt that this 
marriage, which had been completely settled and was only 
prevented from taking place by the bride's death, was very 
much against the wishes of Mrs. Zarnitsyna herself . . .  They 
say the bride, besides, was not even pretty, in fact they say 
she was very plain . . .  and very sickly and . . .  and odd . . .  
but apparently she had some good qualities. She certainly 
must have had; otherwise it is quite incomprehensible . . .  She 
had no dowry, either, but he would never take a dowry into 
account . . .  It is very difficult to form a judgement of such a 
case.' 
'I am sure she had many virtues,' remarked Avdotya Roman­
ovna shortly. 
'God forgive me, but I was glad when she died, although 
I don't know which of them would have destroyed the other; 
would he have ruined her, or she him?' concluded Pulkheria 
Alexandrovna. Then, cautiously, with many hesitations and 
repeated glances at Dunya, who obviously found them dis­
pleasing, she resumed her questions about the scene of the 
day before between Rodya and Luzhin. This incident plainly 
worried her more than anything else; she seemed alarmed and 
agitated by it. Razumikhin told the whole story again in 
detail, and this time added his own conclusions; he directly 
accused Raskolnikov of intentionally offending Peter Petro­
vich, and found his illness but small excuse for him. 
'He planned it before his illness,' he added. 
'I think so too,' said PulkheriaAlexandrovna, with a dejected 
air. But she was struck by the discreet and even respectful 
tone of Razumikhin's references this time to Peter Petrovich, 
and so was Avdotya Romanovna. 
Pulkheria Alexandrovna could not refrain from asking: 'So 
that is your opinion of Peter Petrovich ?' 
'I could hold no other of your daughter's future husband,' 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
209 
answered Razumikhin, firmly and warmly, 'and l don't say 
that only out of ordinary politeness, but because . . .  because 
. . .  well, for one reason alone, that Avdotya Romanovna has 
chosen him of her own free will. And if I was so abusive about 
him yesterday it was because I was filthily drunk and . . .  mad 
besides; yes, mad, out of my mind; I had completely lost my 
senses . . .  and today I am ashamed of it !' He blushed and said 
no more. Avdotya Romanovna had also coloured, but she did 
not break the silence. She had not uttered a word from the 
moment Luzhin was first spoken of. 
Meanwhile Pulkheria Alexandrovna, without her support, 
was evidently in a state of indecision. At length, stumblingly, 
with her eyes fixed on her daughter, she explained that one 
thing was worrying her extremely. 
'You see, Dmitri Prokofich,' she began . . .  'Shall I be quite 
frank with Dmitri Prokofich, Dunechka ?' 
'Of course, mama,' said Avdotya Romanovna seriously. 
'This is how it is,' her mother hurried on, as if a weight had 
been lifted from her shoulders by this permission to com­
municate her trouble. 'Very early this morning we received a 
note from Peter Petrovich, in answer to ours yesterday inform­
ing him of our arrival. You see, yesterday he ought to have 
met us at the station, as he promised. Instead of that, he sent 
some sort of servant to meet us, give us the address of this hotel, 
and bring us here. Peter Petrovich had instructed him to tell us 
that he would come here himself this morning. Instead of that 
this note arrived from him . . .  The best thing would be for you 
to read it : here is the point that most worries me . . .  you will 
see at once what that point is and . . .  tell us your frank opinion, 
Dmitri Prokofich. You understand Rodya's character best; 
and are best able to advise us. I must warn you that Dunya 
made her mind up at once, but I don't yet know what to do 
and . . .  I waited for you.' 
Razumikhin opened the note, which bore the previous day's 
date, and read the following : 
'Dear Madam, Pulkheria Alexandrovna, 
'I have the honour to inform you that, owing to difficulties 
which arose unexpectedly, I was unable to meet you on the 
platform, but sent for that purpose a very competent person. 
I must equally deprive myself of the honour of seeing you this 
morning, owing to pressing business in the Senate and in order 

2 1 0  
CRIME A N D  PUNISHMENT 
not to impede the family reunion of yourself with your son and 
Avdotya Romanovna with her brother. I shall have the honour 
of calling upon you and paying my respects no later than 
tomorrow at exactly eight o'clock in the evening, and I venture 
to add my earnest and, I may say, imperative request that 
Rodion Romanovich shall not be present at our meeting, since 
he was atrociously and uncivilly offensive to me on the occasion 
of my visit to him yesterday on his bed of sickness, and besides 
I personally having to seek an essential and circumstantial 
explanation of a certain point with you, a matter of which I 
desire to know your interpretation. I have the honour hereby 
to give you previous notification that if, despite my request, 
I do meet Rodion Romanovich, I shall find myself obliged to 
withdraw immediately, and the consequences must be on your 
own head. I wtj.te this on the supposition that Rodion Romano­
vich, who appeared so ill at my visit, had completely recovered 
in the space of two hours, and that he may therefore be able to 
leave his abode and visit you. I am confirmed in this by the 
evidence of my own eyes, having seen him in the flat of a certain 
drunkard, who had been run over and was dying, to whose 
daughter, a notoriously ill-conducted female, he gave almost 
twenty-five roubles, on the pretext of funeral expenses, which 
surprised me greatly, knowing with what pains you had 
acquired this sum. In conclusion, I present my respectful 
compliments to Avdotya Romanovna and beg you to accept 
the assurance of the devoted esteem of 
Your humble servant 
P. Luzhin.' 
'What am I to do now, Dmitri Prokofich ?' said Pulkheria 
Alexandrovna, almost in tears. 'How can I suggest to Rodya 
that he should not come? Yesterday, he was so insistent that 
Peter Petrovich should be dismissed, and now we are told that 
he himself is not to be received !  And when he learns of it, he 
will come on purpose, and . . .  what will happen then?' 
'Do whatever Avdotya Romanovna has decided,' answered 
Razumikhin promptly and calmly. 
'Oh dear! She says . . .  God only knows what she says, and 
she will not explain why ! She says it will be best, or rather not 
exactly best, but for some reason she thinks it is absolutely 
essential, for Rodya to make a point of coming here at eight 
o'clock, and for them to meet . . .  But I didn't want to show 

C R IME AND PUNISHMENT 
2 1  I 
him this letter at all, but to arrange some subterfuge with your 
help, so that he should not come . . . because he is so easily 
upset . . .  And I don't understand at all who this drunkard was 
who died, or who this daughter is, or how he could give her 
the last of his money . . .  which . . .  ' 
'Which cost you so dear, mama,' added Avdotya Romanovna. 
'He was not himself yesterday,' said Razumikhin thought­
fully. 'If you knew what he did in the restaurant, although it 
was clever enough . . . hm ! Something was said about some 
dead man and some girl or other as we were walking home, 
but I didn't understand a word of it . . .  However, yesterday 
I myself was . .  . '  
'Best of all, mama, let us go and see him, and then I am 
sure we shall see at once what to do. And besides it is quite 
time-good 
heavens, 
it's nearly eleven o'clock !' Dunya 
exclaimed, glancing at the magnificent gold and enamel watch 
which hung on a thin Venetian chain round her neck, and 
which was very much out of harmony with the rest of her 
attire. 'A present from her fiance,' thought Razumikhin. 
'Oh, it is time we went, quite time, Dunechka !' exclaimed 
Pulkheria Alexandrovna, with restless anxiety. 'He will think 
we are angry about yesterday, because we are so long in com­
ing. Oh dear !' 
She bustled about as she spoke, putting on her hat and cloak. 
Dunechka also put on her things. Her gloves were not only 
shabby, but worn into holes, as Razumikhin noticed, and yet 
the obvious poverty of their dress gave both ladies that look of 
special dignity which is always found in those who have the 
art of wearing poor clothes well. Razumikhin looked reverently 
at Dunechka and was proud to be her escort. 'That queen,'* 
he thought, 'who mended her own stockings in prison, certainly 
looked a real queen at that moment, perhaps even more so 
than in her state appearances and triumphs.' 
'Oh dear !' exclaimed Pulkheria Alexandrovna, 'I little 
thought I should dread a meeting with my own son, with my 
dear, darling Rodya, as I do now ! . . .  I dread it, Dmitri 
Prokofich !' she added, with a faint-hearted expression. 
'Don't be afraid, mama,' said Dunya, kissing her. 'Rather 
trust him. I do.' 
'Oh dear ! So do I, but I did not sleep all night !' cried the 
poor woman. 
They went out. 

2 1 2  
CRIME A N D  PUNISHMENT 
'You know, Dunechka, when I got a little sleep, towards morn­
ing, I dreamt of the late Marfa Petrovna . . .  She was all in white 
. . .  and she came up to me and took my hand, and shook her 
head severely, so severely, as though she were blaming me for 
something . . .  Does that forebode good or evil? Oh dear me, 
Dmitri Prokofich, you don't know yet : Marfa Petrovna is dead !' 
'No, I didn't know. Who is Marfa Petrovna?' 
'It was very sudden ! Imagine . .  .' 
'Mterwards, mama,' put in Dunya. 'Mter all, he doesn't 
even know who Marfa Petrovna was.' 
'Oh, don't you? I thought you knew all about it. You must 
forgive me, Dmitri Prokofich; I have completely lost my wits 
this last day or two. The fact is that I look on you as our special 
Providence, and so I am convinced that you know everything. 
I think of you as one of the family . . .  Don't be angry with me 
for saying so. Oh, good heavens ! What is the matter with your 
right hand ? Have you hurt it?' 
'Yes, I have,' murmured the beatified Razumikhin. 
'Sometimes I speak too directly from the heart, and Dunya 
criticizes me . . .  But, good God, what a cubby-hole he lives in ! 
I wonder if he is awake yet. And that woman, his landlady, 
calls it a room ! Listen ! You say he doesn't like to show his 
feelings, so perhaps I shall annoy him with my . . .  weakness . . .  
Won't you teach me to deal with him, Dmitri Prokofich? You 
know, I am completely at a loss.' 
'Don't question him closely about anything if you see that 
he is frowning and, in particular, don't ask him many ques­
tions about his health; he does11't like it.' 
'Oh, Dmitri Prokofich, how hard it is to be a mother ! But 
here are the stairs . . .  How horrible they are !' 
'Mama, you are quite pale ; calm yourself, darling,' said 
Dunya, putting her arm round her mother. 'He ought to be 
happy to see you, and yet you torment yourself so,' she added, 
with flashing eyes. 
'Wait. I will go ahead and see if he is awake.' 
The ladies quietly followed Razumikhin up the stairs, and 
when they came level with the landlady's door on the fourth 
floor, they saw that it was ajar and that two lively black eyes 
were watching them through the narrow opening from the 
dark interior. When their glances met, however, the door was 
suddenly slammed with such a noise that Pulkheria Alexan­
drovna almost cried out with fright. 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
C H A P T E R  I I I  
'HE is better, he is better !' called out Zosimov cheerfully, as 
they went in. He had arrived some ten minutes earlier, and 
was sitting in his old place on the end of the sofa. Raskolnikov 
sat at the opposite end, fully dressed and even carefully washed 
and combed, as he had not been for a long time. The room 
seemed to fill up at once, but Nastasya managed nevertheless 
to crowd in behind the visitors and settled herself to listen. 
Raskolnikov really was almost well, especially in comparison 
with the previous day, but he was still very pale; abstracted, 
and gloomy. He looked like a man who has been wounded or 
suffered intense physical pain; his brows were knitted, his lips 
compressed, his eyes sunken. He spoke rarely and reluctantly, 
as if under compulsion or to fulfil an obligation, and there was a 
certain amount of restlessness in his movements. 
He needed only a sling or a finger-stall to look exactly like 
a man with a poisoned finger or a painfully injured arm, or 
something of that nature. 
Even his pale and gloomy countenance, however, lit up for 
a moment at the entrance of his mother and sister, but this 
served only to give him an expression of more intensely con­
centrated torment instead of the diffused anguish that had 
been there before. The light soon faded, but the torment 
remained, and Zosimov, watching and Studying his patient 
with all the youthful zeal of the doctor who has only lately 
begun to practise, was surprised to see that when his family 
came in he showed not so much gladness as a weary, hidden 
determination to endure for an hour a new torture, which 
could not be avoided. He saw afterwards how almost every 
word of the conversation that followed seemed to touch some 
sore place in his patient and irritate it; at the same time he was 
surprised by the way in which yesterday's monomaniac, who 
had been goaded almost to raving madness by the smallest 
word, now managed to control himself and conceal his feelings. 
'Yes, I myself can tell that I am almost well again,' said 
Raskolnikov, greeting his mother and sister with a kiss that 
made Pulkheria Alexandrovna radiant. 'And I don't say that 
as I said it yesterday,' he added as he turned to Razumikhin 
and warmly pressed his hand. 
'I am really quite astonished at him today,' began Zosimov, 

2 14 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
who was very pleased to see the newcomers, since in ten 
minutes he had completely lost the thread of his conversation 
with his patient. 'In two or three days, if this continues, he will 
be just as he was, I mean as he was a month ago, or two . . .  or 
perhaps even three. This, you see, has been coming on for a 
long time . . .  hasn't it? Confess now that perhaps you were to 
blame,' he added with a cautious smile, as though he still 
feared to irritate his patient. 
'Very likely,' answered Raskolnikov coldly. 
'I am saying this,' continued Zosimov expansively, 'because 
your complete recovery now depends chiefly on yourself. Now 
that it is possible to talk to you, I should like to impress on you 
that it is essential to remove the original, so to speak, radical 
causes whose influence caused the inception of your unhealthy 
condition, and then you will be cured; if not, things will get 
even worse. I do not know what these fundamental causes were, 
but they must be known to you. You are intelligent and must 
certainly have kept yourself under observation. It seems to me 
that the beginning of your disorder coincided with your leaving 
the university. You cannot remain without occupation, and 
therefore hard work and a goal kept firmly before you would, 
I think, be of great help to you.' 
'Yes, yes, you are quite right. I shall re-enter the univer­
sity as soon as possible, and then everything . . .  will run 
smoothly . . .  ' 
Zosimov, who had begun dispensing this sage advice partly 
for its effect on the ladies, was naturally rather disconcerted 
when, at the end of his discourse, he looked at the person he 
had been addressing and saw a distinctly mocking expression 
on his face. However, this lasted only for a moment. Pulkheria 
Alexandrovna immediately began to express her thanks to 
him, especially for his visit to their hotel the previous night. 
'What, did he go to see you during the night?' asked Raskol­
nikov, somewhat disturbed. 'So you didn't get any sleep after 
your journey?' 
'Oh, Rodya, that all happened before two o'clock. Dunya 
and I never went to bed before two o'clock at home.' 
'I don't know how to thank him either,' went on Raskol­
nikov, frowning and looking down. 'Setting aside the question 
of money-you will excuse me for mentioning it-' (turning to 
Zosimov) 'I do not even know how I have deserved such 
special attention from you. I simply can't understand it . . .  

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
2 1 5 
and . . .  and it distresses me not to understand ; I am quite 
open with you.' 
'Do not worry,' said Zosimov, with a forced laugh. 'Suppose 
yourself to be my first patient. We doctors who have just begun 
to practise love our first patients like our own children; some 
of us indeed almost fall in love with them. And you know I am 
not very rich in patients.' 
'I say nothing about him,' added Raskolnikov, indicating 
Razumikhin, 'but he has had nothing from me, either, but 
insults and trouble.' 
'What nonsense ! You're in a very sentimental mood today, 
aren't you?' exclaimed Razumikhin. 
Ifhe had had morepenetration he would have seen that it was 
very far from being a sentimental mood, but something like 
the very opposite. But Avdotya Romanovna noticed it. Her 
eyes followed her brother with anxious attention. 
'Of you, mama, I dare not even speak,' he went on, as if it 
were a lesson he had been studying since morning. 'It is only 
today that I am able to form some idea of the torments you 
must have suffered yesterday, waiting for me to return.' So 
saying, he suddenly held out his hand to his sister, smiling. 
In that smile there gleamed this time a flash of genuine, 
unfeigned emotion. Dunya grasped his hand and pressed it 
warmly, with joy and gratitude. This was the first time he had 
made any overture to her since the previous day's disagreement. 
Their mother's face shone with pride and happiness at the sight 
of the silent but definite reconciliation between the brother and 
sister. 
'Now that's what I absolutely love him for !' murmured 
Razumikhin, who was always prone to exaggeration, flinging 
himself round in his chair. 'He is always capable of such 
gestures ! . 
. 
. '  
'And how well everything becomes him,' thought his mother; 
'what noble impulses he has, and how simply and delicately 
he resolved yesterday's difficulty with his sister, merely by 
holding out his hand at that moment with such a nice look . . .  
And what fine eyes he has, and how handsome he is ! . . .  He is 
even better-looking than Dunechka . . .  But, oh dear, what 
clothes ; how badly he is dressed ! Vasya, the errand-boy in 
Manasy Ivanovich's shop, is better dressed ! . . .  Oh, if only, if 
only I could spring to his side, put my arms round him, and . . .  
weep-but I am afraid, afraid . . .  oh Lord, he is so . . .  now, 

2 16 
C RIME A N D  PUNISHMENT 
indeed, he speaks kindly, but I am afraid ! But what am I 
afraid of? . . .  ' 
'Oh, Rodya, you would not believe,' she hastened to reply 
to his last remark, 'how . . . unhappy Dunechka and I were 
yesterday ! Now, when it is all over and done with, and we are 
all happy again-1 can tell you about it. Imagine : we came 
running here, almost straight from the train, to take you in our 
arms, and the woman-oh, there she is ! Good morning, 
Nastasya ! . . .  She broke it to us suddenly, that you were ill 
with delirium tremens and that in your fever you had just 
slipped away from the doctor, and out of the house, and that 
they were looking for you. You would not believe the effect 
this had on us. I remembered at once the tragic end of Lieu­
tenant Potanchikov, whom we used to know, a friend of your 
father's-you will not remember him, Rodya-who also had 
delirium tremens, and who ran out of the house in just the 
same way, and fell into a well in the courtyard, and they could 
not recover his body until the next day. And of course we 
exaggerated things still more. We were on the point of hurrying 
away to find Peter Petrovich, so that with his help at least . . .  
because you know we were alone, quite alone,' she wailed piti­
fully, and then suddenly stopped short, remembering that it 
was rather dangerous to talk of Peter Petrovich, in spite of the 
fact that 'everybody was quite happy again'. 
'Yes, yes . . .  it was all of Gourse . . .  very trying . .  .' muttered 
Raskolnikov in answer, but with so absent-minded and in­
attentive an air that Dunechka looked at him puzzled. 
'What the deuce was it I wanted to say besides?' he con­
tinued, making an effort to remember. 'Oh, yes : please, mama, 
and you too, Dunechka, don't think I was unwilling to come 
to you this morning, but waited for you to come here first.' 
'There is no need to say that, Rodya ! . .  .' cried Pulkheria 
Alexandrovna in surprise. 
'Is he saying these things from a sense of duty, I wonder?' 
thought Dunechka. 'He is asking forgiveness and making 
friends again, as though it was part of his job, or as though he 
had got a lesson by heart.' 
'I meant to come as soon as I woke up, but the state of my 
clothes delayed me; I forgot yesterday to tell her . . .  Nastasya 
. . .  to wash out the blood . . .  I have only just got dressed.' 
'Blood? 
What blood ?' asked Pulkheria Alexandrovna, 
alarmed. 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
2 1 7  
'It 's just . . .  don't worry. I got it because while I was 
wandering about yesterday-! was still a bit light-headed­
! came into contact with a man who had been run over . . .  a 
certain clerk . . . ' 
'Light-headed? But you remember everything,' interrupted 
Razumikhin. 
'Yes, that 's true,' answered Raskolnikov, rather uneasily. 
'I remember everything, down to the smallest detail, and yet 
if you were to ask me why I did something, or went somewhere, 
or said something, I don't think I could give a clear explana­
tion.' 
'That is a very well-known phenomenon,' Zosimov joined in. 
'Sometimes actions are performed very skilfully, most cleverly, 
but the aims of the actions, and their origin, are confused, and 
depend on various morbid influences. It is like a dream.' 
'Perhaps it is a good thing that he supposes me to be more 
or less mad,' thought Raskolnikov. 
'But something like that may perhaps take place with people 
who are quite well,' remarked Dunechka, with a worried look 
at Zosimov. 
'A very true observation,' he answered. 'In that sense, 
indeed, all of us are very frequently more or less deranged, 
with the slight difference that the "sick" are a little more 
deranged than we, and therefore we must inevitably draw the 
distinction. But a completely harmonious person, it is true, 
is hardly to be found; in tens, or perhaps hundreds, of thou­
sands you will meet with only one, and then not a very good 
. 
' 
speCimen . . .  
The word 'deranged', carelessly let drop by Zosimov, grow­
ing eloquent on his favourite theme, caused foreheads to 
wrinkle anxiously. Raskolnikov, sitting abstractedly with a 
strange smile on his pale lips, seemed to pay no attention, but 
pursued his own train of thought. 
'Well, what about this man who was run over? I interrupted 
you,' exclaimed Razumikhin hastily. 
'What?' Raskolnikov roused himself. 'Yes . . .  well, I got 
blood on me when I helped to carry him into the flat . . .  By the 
way, mama, I did something unforgivable yesterday; I must 
really have been out of my senses. Yesterday I gave away all 
the money you sent me . . .  to his wife . . .  for the funeral. She 
is a widow now, a pathetic creature, consumptive . . .  three 
hungry little orphans . . .  in an empty house . . .  and there is 

2 18 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
another daughter . . .  Perhaps you would have given her the 
money yourself, if you had seen . . .  But I had no right whatever 
to do so, I confess, especially as I knew how you had obtained 
the money. If you want to help people you must have the 
right, or else "Crevez, chiens,* si vous n' etes pas contents !'" He 
laughed. 'Is that right, Dunya ?' 
'No, it is not,' answered Dunya firmly. 
'Bah ! You too . . .  have your own plans ! . .  .' he muttered, 
looking at her almost with hatred and with a mocking smile. 
'I ought to have considered that . . .  ·well, it's praiseworthy ; 
it is better for you . . .  you come to a certain limit and if you 
do not overstep it, you will be unhappy, but if you do overstep 
it, perhaps you will be even more unhappy . . .  However, this 
is all rubbish !' he added irritably, annoyed at having allowed 
himself to be diverted. 'I only wanted to say, that I ask your 
forgiveness, mama,' he finished harshly and abruptly. 
'Don't go on, Rodya. I am sure that everything you do is 
right !' said his mother. 
'Don't be too sure,' he answered, with a wry smile. A silence 
followed. There had been something strained alike in all this 
talk and the silence, the reconciliation, and the forgiveness, and 
everybody was conscious of it. 
'It is as though they were afraid of me,' thought Raskolnikov, 
looking frowningly at his mother and sister. The longer Pul­
kheria Alexandrovna kept silent, indeed, the more timid she 
became. 
The thought occurred to him that it was when they were 
absent that he really loved them. 
'You know, Rodya, Marfa Petrovna is dead !' Pulkheria 
Alexandrovna broke the silence. 
'Who is Marfa Petrovna ?' 
'Good gracious ! Marfa Petrovna Svidrigaylov ! I wrote you 
a great deal about her.' 
'Oh, I remember . . .  So she is dead? Really?' said Raskol­
nikov, looking as if he had just started awake. 'Can she really 
be dead? What did she die of?' 
'Just think, she had a stroke,' Pulkheria Alexandrovna 
hurried on, pleased at his interest, 'and exactly at the time 
when I was sending you my letter, in fact on the very same day ! 
Imagine, that horrible man seems to have been the cause of 
her death as well ! They say he beat her dreadfully !' 
'Did they really live like that?' he asked, turning to his sister. 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
2 1 9 
'No ; quite the contrary, really. He was Մlways very patient 
and very polite with her. There were many times when he was 
even too indulgent with her, during those seven years . . .  Then 
suddenly he somehow lost patience.' 
'So he 's not so horrible after all, if he restrained himself for 
seven years? Apparently you stand up for him, Dunechka.' 
'No, no, he 's a horrible man ! I can't imagine a worse,' 
answered Dunya, almost with a shudder. She frowned and 
relapsed into thought. 
'It happened in the morning,' Pulkheria Alexandrovna 
hurried on. 'Immediately afterwards she ordered the carriage 
so as to drive into town after dinner, because she always drove 
into town when such things happened; they say she made a 
very good meal . . .  
' 
'In spite of her beating?' 
' . . .  Well, that was always her . . .  habit, and as soon as she 
had dined, she went for her bathe immediately, so as not to be 
late for the drive . . . You see, she was taking some sort of 
bathing cure; they have a cold spring there, and she bathed in 
it regularly every day. As soon as she entered the water she 
had a stroke !' 
'I should think so !' said Zosimov. 
'And he had beaten her severely?' 
'Really that makes no difference,' replied Dunya. 
'Hm ! But, mama, why have you such a passion for trivial 
gossip?' said Raskolnikov, with sudden unexpected irritation. 
'Oh, my dear, I really didn't know what to talk about,' 
burst out Pulkheria Alexandrovna. 
'Are you all afraid of me, or something?' he asked with a 
twisted smile. 
'Actually, that is true,' said Dunya, looking directly and 
severely at her brother. 'As she came upstairs, mama was so 
terrified that she was crossing herself.' 
His face twitched convulsively. 
'Oh, why did you say that, Dunya? Please don't be angry, 
Rodya . . . How could you, Dunya ?' said Pulkheria Alexan­
drovna in confusion. 'Here I was thinking, all the way in the 
train, how we should see each other, and how we should tell 
one another all about everything . . .  and I was so happy, I 
hardly noticed the journey. But what am I saying? I am happy 
now, too . . .  You shouldn't have said that, Dunya ! It makes 
me happy just to see you, Rodya . .  .' 

220 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'Don't go on, mama !' he murmured in confusion, pressing 
her hand without looking at her. 'There'll be plenty of time 
for us to talk to our hearts' content !' 
Then he faltered and turned pale; again that same terrible 
feeling of deadly cold swept through him ; again he realized 
clearly and vividly that he had just uttered a dreadful lie, that 
not only would it now never be given to him to talk to his heart's 
content but that now he could never talk at all, to anybody. The 
impact of this tormenting idea was so strong that for a moment 
he completely lost himself, and he stood up and, without a 
glance at anybody, made for the door. 
'What are you doing?' exclaimed Razumikhin, seizing his 
arm. 
He sat down again and looked round ; they were all looking 
at him in wonder and perplexity. 
'Why are you all so tiresome?' he exclaimed suddenly. 'Say 
something ! Don't just sit there ! Well, say something ! Let us 
talk . . .  Did we come together just to sit and say nothing? . . .  
Say something or other !' 
'Thank God ! I thought we were going to have a repetition 
of yesterday,' said Pulkheria Alexandrovna, crossing herself. 
'What is the matter, Rodya?' asked Avdotya Romanovna 
mistrustfully. 
'Oh, nothing. I just remembered something,' he answered, 
and laughed. 
'Well, if that 's all, it 's all right ! Otherwise I would have 
thought . . .  ' murmured Zosimov, getting up. 'However, it is 
time I went ; I will look in again, perhaps . . .  ifl find you in • . .  ' 
He made his bows and went out. 
'What a nice man !' remarked Pulkheria Alexandrovna. 
'Yes ; nice, excellent, well-educated, intelligent . . .' said 
Raskolnikov, talking with great rapidity and with a vivacity 
he had not previously shown. 'I can't remember where I met 
him, before my illness . . .  But I did meet him somewhere, 
I think . . .  Here is another nice man,' and he nodded towards 
Razurnikhin. 'Do you like him, Dunya ?' he asked with a 
sudden inexplicable burst of laughter. 
'Yes, very much,' answered Dunya. 
'Oh, what a . . .  swine you are !' said Razumikhin, blushing 
and painfully embarrassed. He stood up. Pulkheria Alexan­
drovna smiled slightly and Raskolnikov roared with laughter. 
'Where are you going?' 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
22 1 
'I . . .  I must go as well.' 
'There is absolutely no need for you to go; stay here !' 
Zosimov has gone, so you must go. Well, don't . . .  What time 
is it? Is it twelve yet? What a charming little watch you have, 
Dunya ! But why are you all silent again? You are leaving me 
to do all the talking ! . . .' 
'It was a present from Marfa Petrovna,' answered Dunya. 
'It was very expensive, too,' added Pulkheria Alexandrovna. 
'Ah ! . . .  It is almost too big for a lady's watch.' 
'I like them like that,' said Dunya. 
'So it isn't a gift from her fiance,' thought Razumikhin, 
feeling for some unknown reason very pleased. 
'And I thought it was a present from Luzhin,' remarked 
Raskolnikov. 
'No, he hasn't given Dunechka anything yet.' 
'Ah ! . . .  Do you remember, mama, that I fell in love and 
wanted to get married?' he said, looking at his mother, who was 
struck by the strange manner and tone in which he spoke of it. 
'Oh, my dear, yes !' Pulkheria Alexandrovna exchanged 
glances with Dunechka and Razumikhin. 
'Hm ! Yes ! What can I tell you about her? I don't remember 
much. She was not very strong,' he went on, with his eyes again 
fixed on the ground, and absorbed, as it were, in his thoughts ; 
'she was always ailing; she liked to give to beggars ; she was 
always dreaming of a convent, and once she burst into tears 
when she began to talk to me about it. Yes, yes . . .  I remember 
. . .  I remember very well. She was . . .  very plain. I don't 
really know what attracted me to her; I think it may have been 
that she was always ill . . . If she had been lame as well, or 
hump-backed, I might very likely have loved her even more 
. . .  
' (He smiled thoughtfully.) 'It was simply . . .  a sort of 
spring fever . .  .' 
'No, it wasn't only that,' said Dunya vigorously. 
He looked at his sister with earnest attention, but seemed not 
to hear or perhaps not to understand her words. Then, with 
an air of profound melancholy, he rose, crossed to his mother, 
kissed her, and returned to his seat. 
'You still love her,' said Pulkheria Alexandrovna, moved. 
'Her? Still? Oh, yes . . .  you are talking of her ! No. That 
might all belong to another world . . .  and it is a long time ago. 
Yes, and everything round me seems as if it were happening 
somewhere else . . .' 

222 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
He peered at them. 
'Even you . . .  it is as if I were looking at you from a thou­
sand miles away . . .  But God only knows why we're talking 
about this. And why keep on asking questions?' he added 
irritably, and was silent, again deep in thought and biting 
his nails. 
'What a dreadful room you have, Rodya, just like a coffin,' 
said Pulkheria Alexandrovna, breaking the oppressive silence. 
'I'm sure it is responsible for at least half your depression.' 
'Room?' said he absently. 'Yes, the room made a big con­
tribution . . .  I've thought of that too . . .  But if you knew what 
a strange idea you have just expressed, mama !' he added 
abruptly, with a mysterious smile. 
It wanted but a little more for the company of the family 
from whom he had been separated for three years, and the 
intimate tone of the talk combined with the impossibility of 
finding any subject at all of real conversation, to become 
absolutely unbearable. There was, however, one urgent matter 
that simply must be settled, one way or another, that day; 
he had made up his mind on that point when he woke up. 
Now he was glad to turn to it as a  way ofescape from the present 
difficulties. 
'Listen, Dunya,' he began drily and seriously. 'Of course 
I beg your forgiveness for yesterday, but I think it my duty 
to remind you that I do not intend to give way on the main 
point. You must choose between me and Luzhin. I may be no 
good, but you ought not to do this. It must be one or the other. 
If you marry Luzhin I shall immediately cease to call you 
sister.' 
'Rodya, Rodya ! This really is yesterday all over again,' 
cried Pulkheria Alexandrovna, distressed. 'And why will you 
persist in saying you are no good? That I cannot bear. It was 
just the same yesterday . . .  ' 
'Brother,' said Dunya firmly, and as drily as her brother, 
'there is a mistake here on your part. I have been thinking 
about it since last night and trying to find the mistake. It is all 
bound up with the fact that you seem to suppose I am sacri­
ficing myselffor somebody. That is quite wrong. I am marrying 
simply for my own sake, because I find things difficult; of 
course I shall be pleased ifl am able to be of some assistance to 
my family, but that is not the most important factor in my 
decision . .  . ' 

C R I ME AND PUNISHMENT 
223 
'She is lying !' he thought, biting his nails in vicious anger. 
'She is proud, and unwilling to admit that she wanted to be 
able to confer benefits on me. Pure arrogance ! Oh, ignoble 
natures ! Their love is like hate . . .  Oh, how I . . .  hate them all !' 
'In short, I am marrying Peter Petrovich,' continued Du­
nechka, 'because it is the lesser of two evils. I am prepared to 
fulfil honourably all that he expects of me, and so I am not 
deceiving him . . .  Why did you smile just now?' 
She coloured and anger flashed from her eyes. 
'You will fulfil everything?' he asked, smiling bitterly. 
'Within certain limits. The manner and form of Peter 
Petrovich's proposal showed me at once what he required. Of 
course he values himself somewhat too highly, but I hope he 
values me as well . . .  Why are you laughing again?' 
'And why are you blushing again? You are lying, sister, you 
are lying deliberately, out of pure feminine obstinacy, just to 
get your own way in spite of me . . .  You cannot have any 
respect for Luzhin; I have seen him and spoken to him. 
Therefore you are selling yourself for money, and so, in any 
case, you are acting basely, and I am glad that you can at any 
rate blush.' 
'That isn't true; I am not lying !' cried Dunechka, losing all 
her composure. 'I am not going to marry him without the 
conviction that he will value and esteem me ; I am not going to 
marry him without being sure that I can respect him. Fortu­
nately I can convince myself of that with great certainty, and 
this very day. And such a marriage is not ignoble, as you call it ! 
And if you were right, if I had really decided on a base action, 
would it not be pitiless cruelty on your part to talk to me as you 
have done? Why should you demand from me a heroism 
which, perhaps, you yourself are not capable of? That is 
tyranny, despotism ! Ifl destroy anybody it will be myself and 
nobody else . . .  I have not killed anybody ! . . .  Why are you 
looking at me like that? Why are you so pale? Rodya, what is 
the matter? Rodya, dear !' 
'Oh dear, he is going to faint, and it is your fault !' cried 
Pulkheria Alexandrovna. 
'No, no . . .  rubbish . . .  it's nothing ! . . .  My head felt a little 
dizzy. It's not a faint . . .  You are obsessed with the idea of 
fainting ! Hm ! yes . . .  what the deuce was I saying? . . .  Yes : 
how do you propose to convince yourself today that you can 
respect him and that he . . .  respects you, wasn't it? . . .  as you 

224 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
said you would? I think you said today, or did I mishear you?' 
'Mama, show my brother Peter Petrovich's letter,' said 
Dunechka. 
Pulkheria Alexandrovna, with a trembling hand, gave him 
the letter. He took it curiously. Before opening it, however, 
he gave Dunya a look of sudden amazement. 
'Very odd !' he said slowly, as if suddenly struck by a new 
idea. 'Why am I making so much fuss ? Why all this clamour? 
You must marry whom you please !' 
His words seemed to be meant for himself, but he spoke 
them aloud, and he continued to look at Dunya for some time, 
as if he were perplexed. 
At last, still with the same expression of wonder, he opened 
the letter and began to read it slowly and carefully. He read 
it through twice. Pulkheria Alexandrovna was extremely 
agitated, and all of them expected something extraordinary. 
'I find it very surprising,' he began, after some reflection, 
as he returned the letter to his mother; his words were not 
addressed to anyone in particular. 'He is a business man, a 
lawyer, and his conversation is even . . .  pretentious, and yet 
his letter is really illiterate'. 
There was a general stir; this was quite unexpected. 
'Well, but they all write like that,' said Razumikhin abruptly. 
'Have you read it?' 
'Yes.' 
'We showed it to him, Rodya, we . . .  asked his advice just 
now,' began Pulkheria Alexandrovna, in some confusion. 
'It is only the special legal style,' broke in Razumikhin. 'All 
legal documents are still written like that.' 
'Legal? Yes, it is a legal or a business style . . .  It is not 
perhaps very illiterate, but it is not highly literary ; it is com­
mercial !' 
'Peter Petrovich does not try to conceal the fact that he has 
not had an expensive education; he is proud of being a self­
made man,' remarked Avdotya Romanovna, rather hurt by 
her brother's new tone. 
'Well, if he is, he has some reason to be; I don't deny it. You, 
sister, seem to be offended because all I got out of the letter 
was such a frivolous remark, and you think I talked about 
trivialities simply out of spite, to crow over you. On the con­
trary, there came into my mind, in connexion with the style, 
an idea that is quite vital in the present case. There is one very 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
225 
clear and significant expression there : "on your own head be 
it," and there is besides the threat of leaving immediately if I 
come. That threat of leaving is exactly the same as a threat of 
abandoning you both if you don't obey him, and that after 
bringing you to St. Petersburg. Well, do you think it is possible 
to take the same offence at such an expression from Luzhin 
as if he' (he gestured towards Razumikhin) 'had written it, 
or Zosimov, or any of us ?' 
'N-no,' answered Dunechka, more cheerfully. 'I knew quite 
well that it was too naively expressed, and that he is perhaps 
not a very accomplished writer . . . You were quite right, 
brother. I did not even expect . . .  ' 
'It is expressed in legal language, and in legal language it 
must be written like that, but the result was blunter and 
coarser than he perhaps wished. However, I must disillusion 
you a little : there is another expression in that letter that is a 
libel on me, and a very mean one. Yesterday I gave some money 
to a widow, ill with consumption and crushed by misfortune, 
not "on the pretext of funeral expenses" but straightforwardly 
for the funeral; and I did not put it into the hands of the 
daughter, a girl, as he says, "of notorious character" (and whom 
I saw yesterday for the first time in my life), but into those of the 
widow hersel£ In all this I see a too hasty desire to vilify me 
and make mischief between us. Again we have it legally 
expressed, that is, with too plain a disclosure of the object and 
with altogether nai:ve hastiness. He is an intelligent man, but 
intelligence alone is not nearly enough when it comes to acting 
wisely. It all gives us a picture of the man, and . . .  I do not 
think that he values you highly. I tell you this solely for your 
own good, because I sincerely wish you well . . .  ' 
Dunechka did not answer; her decision had already been 
made ; she was only waiting for the evening. 
'Then what have you decided, Rodya ?' asked Pulkheria 
Alexandrovna, now even more worried than before by his 
sudden new business-like way of speaking. 
'What do you mean : "decided" ?' 
'Well, Peter Petrovich writes that you must not be there and 
that he will go away . . .  if you come. So . . .  will you be there?' 
'It is obviously not for me to decide but firstly for you, if you 
are not offended by Peter Petrovich's demand, and secondly 
for Dunya, if she also is not offended. I shall do what you think 
best,' he added drily. 

226 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'Dunechka has already decided, and I fully agree with her,' 
Pulkheria Alexandrovna hastened to say. 
'I decided to request you, Rodya, to urge you, not to fail 
to be with us at this meeting,' said Dunya. 'Will you come?' 
'Yes, I will come.' 
'And I will ask you to come at eight o'clock as well,' she 
said, turning to Razumikhin. 'Mama, I am inviting him also.' 
'Quite right, Dunechka. Well,' added Pulkheria Alexan­
drovna, 'let it be as you have decided. It is a relief to me too ; 
I don't like lying and pretending ; it will be better if we speak 
the truth honestly . . .  Let Peter Petrovich be angry or not, just 
as he likes ! ' 
C H A P T E R  I V  
AT that moment the door opened quickly, and a young woman 
came in and looked timidly round. They all turned towards 
her with surprise and curiosity. Raskolnikov did not recognize 
her at first. It was Sofya Semenovna Marmeladova. He had 
seen her for the first time on the previous day, but at such a 
time, in such circumstances, and in such a dress that what 
remained in his mind was a memory of an entirely different 
person. Today he saw a simply and even poorly dressed girl, 
still very young, hardly more than a child, with a modest and 
becoming manner and a bright but rather frightened face. 
She was wearing a very simple house-dress and an old and 
unfashionable hat; but she still carried a sunshade, as she had 
done the day before. When she saw a room unexpectedly full 
of people, her embarrassment was so great that she quite lost 
her head and made a motion to withdraw. 
'Oh . . .  is that you?' said Raskolnikov in extreme astonish­
ment, and himself became suddenly embarrassed. 
It came at once into his mind that his mother and sister 
already knew a little, from Luzhin's letter, of a girl of 'notori­
ous' conduct. He had but just now been protesting against 
Luzhin's libellous statement and asserting that he had seen 
the girl only once, and now suddenly she herself had entered 
the room. He remembered also that he had not made any 
protest against the expression : 'notoriously ill-conducted'. All 
these ideas flashed in a confused way through his brain. But 
looking more closely at her he saw that this debased creature 
was so humbled that he was filled with pity. When she seemed 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
227 
about to run away in terror it was as if something turned over 
inside him. 
'I didn't expect you,' he said hastily, stopping her with a 
look. 'Please sit down. I suppose you have come from Katerina 
lvanovna. Excuse me, not here; sit there . . .  
' 
When Sonya came in, Razumikhin, who had been sitting on 
a chair close to the door, stood up to let her pass. Raskolnikov 
had at first meant to indicate to her the place at the end of the 
sofa where Zosimov had sat, but recollecting that it was too 
familiar a place, since the sofa served as his bed, hurriedly 
pointed to Razumikhin's chair instead. 
'And you sit here,' he said to Razumikhin, putting him in 
Zosimov's place. 
Sonya sat down, almost shaking with fright, and looked 
timidly at the two ladies. It was plain that she herself did 
not know how she could sit down in their presence. This 
thought so terrified her that she sprang up again, and in the 
greatest embarrassment addressed Raskolnikov. 
'I . . .  I . . .  called for a moment; excuse me for disturbing 
you,' she began, stammering. 'I have come from Katerina 
lvanovna ; she had nobody to send . . .  Katerina lvanovna 
wanted me to beg you most earnestly to come tomorrow morn-
ing to the funeral . . .  after the mass . . .  at the Mitropha-
nyevsky Cemetery, and afterwards at our . . .  at her place . . .  
for some refreshment . . .  Please do her the honour . . .  She told 
me to ask you to come.' 
Sonya stumbled and stopped speaking. 
'I will certainly try . . .  certainly,' answered Raskolnikov, 
who had remained standing, and he too stumbled in his speech 
so that he could not finish. 'Do please sit down,' he added 
abruptly; 'I must speak to you. Please . . .  perhaps you are in a 
hurry . . .  but be good enough to spare me two minutes . . .  
' 
He moved a chair forward. Sonya sat down again and again 
threw a quick, timid, embarrassed look at the ladies and again 
cast down her eyes. 
Raskolnikov's pale face flushed; he shuddered violently and 
his eyes burned. 
'Mama,' he said in a firm and insistent tone, 'this is Sofya 
Semenovna Marmeladova, the daughter of that unfortunate 
Mr. Marmeladov, whom I saw run over yesterday, and of 
whom I have already told you . . .  ' 
Pulkheria Alexandrovna looked at Sonya with narrowed 

228 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
eyes. Although she was disconcerted by Rodya's challenging 
and insistent glance, she could not deny herself that satis­
faction. Dunechka fixed her serious, perplexed gaze on the 
poor girl's face and watched her steadily. When she heard 
herself introduced Sonya seemed about to raise her eyes, but 
became even more embarrassed than before. 
'I wanted to ask you,' said
. 
Raskolnikov, turning quickly 
to her, 'how things went with you today. I hope you were not 
disturbed . . .  for example, by the police.' 
'No, everything was all right . . .  After all, the cause of death 
was all too clear; we were not worried ; but now the lodgers are 
getting annoyed.' 
'Why?' 
'Because the body has been there a long time . . .  of course 
the weather is very hot and there is a smell . . . so today, 
towards vesper time, it will be taken to the cemetery chapel, 
until tomorrow. At first Katerina Ivanovna did not want that, 
but now she sees herself that it is necessary . . .  ' 
'Today, then?' 
'She asks you to do us the honour of being at the church 
tomorrow for the funeral, and afterwards at her home for the 
dinner.' 
'Is she arranging a dinner?' 
'Yes, just something cold ; she particularly wante? me to 
thank you for having helped us yesterday . . .  without you we 
should have had nothing for the funeral.' Her lips and chin 
began to quiver, but she mastered her emotion and again sat 
with downcast eyes. 
While they talked Raskolnikov had been watching her 
closely. She had a thin, a very thin, angular, and pale little 
face, with rather irregular features and a pointed little nose 
and chin. She could not have been called even pretty, but her 
blue eyes were so clear and bright, and, when they lighted up, 
her whole expression was so simple-hearted and good, that one 
was involuntarily charmed with her. Her face and her whole 
person had moreover one characteristic feature : in spite of her 
eighteen years she seemed almost a little girl still, much 
younger than her age, little more than a child, indeed, and 
sometimes there was something almost comically youthful 
about her movements. 
'But surely Katerina I vanovna could not contrive every­
thing, and even plan a meal afterwards, on such a small 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
229 
sum?' asked Raskolnikov, obstinately prolonging the conversa­
tion. 
'The coffin will be very simple . . . and everything will be 
simple, so it will not cost much . . .  Katerina Ivanovna and I 
have reckoned it all out, and there will be enough left for us to 
honour his memory with some refreshment . . .  and Katerina 
I vanovna wants that very much . . .  You can't . . .  it is a com-
fort to her . . .  she is like that, as you know . . .  ' 
'I understand, I understand . . .  of course . . .  Why are you 
looking round my room? Mama here says it is like a coffin.' 
'You gave us all you had yesterday !' she burst out in answer, 
in a fierce rapid whisper, and then fixed her eyes once more on the 
floor. Her lips and chin quivered again. She had been struck from 
the first by the poverty ofRaskolnikov's surroundings, and now 
these words seemed to tear themselves from her of their own 
volition. A silence followed. Dunechka's eyes brightened, and 
even Pulkheria Alexandrovna looked kindly at Sonya. 
'Rodya,' she said, getting up from her seat, 'we shall, of course, 
dine together. Come, Dunechka . . .  You, Rodya, ought to go 
for a little walk, and then lie down and rest, and afterwards 
come to us as soon as you can . . .  I am afraid we have tired 
you out . .  .' 
'Yes, yes, I will come,' he answered hastily, standing up. 
'However, I have something to do . .  .' 
'But surely you don't intend to stay and dine by yourself?' 
cried Razumikhin, looking with astonishment at Ra5kolnikov. 
'Why do you say that?' 
'Yes, yes, I will come, of course, of course . . .  But stay here a 
minute. You don't need him just now, do you, mama? I am 
not taking him away from you?' 
'Oh no, no ! But you will be kind enough to come to dinner, 
Dmitri Prokofich?' 
'Please come,' requested Dunya. 
Razumikhin, beaming, bowed his farewells. There followed 
a moment of sudden strange embarrassment. 
'Good-bye, Rodya, or rather au revoir; I don't like saying 
"good-bye". Good-bye, Nastasya . . .  oh, I've said it again !' 
Pulkheria Alexandrovna meant to bow to Sonya as well, 
but somehow she did not manage it, and hurried from the room. 
But Avdotya Romanovna waited, as it were, her turn, and, 
as she followed her mother past Sonya, made her a deep 
and courteous bow. Sonya, confused, bowed hastily with a 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
startled air, and an almost painful feeling was reflected in her 
face, as if Avdotya Romanovna's politeness and attention were 
oppressive and even tormenting to her. 
'Good-bye, Dunya !' cried Raskolnikov, from the entrance; 
'give me your hand !' 
'But I did, don't you remember?' answered Dunya, turning 
to him with awkward tenderness. 
'Well, give it me again, then !' 
And he squeezed her fingers tightly. Dunechka smiled at 
him, blushed, quickly withdrew her hand and, also radiantly 
happy, followed her mother. 
'Well, this is splendid !' he said to Sonya, coming back into 
the room, and looking at her with an expression of serenity. 
'Heaven rest the dead, but the living must live ! Mustn't they, 
mustn't they? That is so, isn't it?' 
Sonya looked in astonishment at the sudden brightening 
of his face. He watched her closely and in silence for some 
moments; in those moments all her father had told him about 
her passed through his mind . . .  
'Oh dear, Dunechka !' said Pulkheria Alexandrovna, as soon 
as they reached the street, 'I am almost glad to have come 
away; it is somehow a relief. Well, could I ever have thought 
yesterday, in the train, that I should be glad for such a reason?' 
'I tell you again, mama, that he is still ill. Can you not see 
it? Perhaps it was worrying on our account that first upset 
him. We must make allowances, and we can forgive many, 
many things . . . ' 
'You didn't make many allowances yourself!' broke in Pul­
kheria Alexandrovna hotly and jealously. 'You know, Dunya, 
I looked at the two of you, and you are the absolute image 
of him, not so much in face as in mind; you are both of a 
melancholic temper, both moody and hasty, both arrogant, 
both generous . . . I suppose it is not possible that he is an 
egoist, eh, Dunechka? . . .  But when I think what is going to 
happen this evening, my heart quite fails me !' 
'Don't worry, mama. What must be, will be.' 
'But, Dunechka, only think of our situation now ! What if 
Peter Petrovich withdraws?' incautiously said poor Pulkheria 
Alexandrovna. 
'What will he be worth if he does?' answered Dunechka 
sharply and scornfully. 

C RIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'We did right to come away now,' Pulkheria Alexandrovna 
hastily interrupted. 'He had something to do. It will be good 
for him to go out and get a breath of air . . .  it 's terribly close 
in his room . . .  but where can one get fresh air here? Even in 
the streets it is like an unventilated room . . .  Stop ; move out 
of the way ! You will be crushed; they are carrying something. 
Why, it is actually a pianoforte ! How they push ! . . .  I am very 
much afraid of that girl, too . . .  ' 
'What girl, mama?' 
'You know, that Sofya Semenovna, who was there just 
now . .  .' 
'But why?' 
'I have a presentiment, Dunya. Believe me or not, as soon 
as she came in, I instantly thought there was something there, 
something very important . .  . ' 
'There is nothing there at all !' exclaimed Dunya, irritated. 
'You and your presentiments, mama ! He has only known her 
since yesterday, and when she came in now he didn't recognize 
her.' 
'Well, you'll see ! . . .  She worries me. You'll see, you'll see ! 
I was quite frightened : she looked at me, she looked at me with 
such eyes that I could hardly sit still, you remember, when he 
began to introduce her. It seems very odd to me : look at the 
way Peter Petrovich writes about her, and yet he intro­
duced her to us, to you as well ! So he must be interested 
in her !' 
'It doesn't matter what he writes ! People said things, and 
wrote them, about us as well; have you forgotten that? I am 
sure she is . . .  nice, and that all that is . . .  rubbish !' 
'God grant it !' 
'And Peter Petrovich is 
a wretched scandal-monger !' 
snapped Dunechka suddenly. 
Pulkheria Alexandrovna winced, and the conversation 
dropped. 
'This is what I want to say to you . .  .' said Raskolnikov, 
taking Razumikhin over to the window. 
'Then I will tell Katerina Ivanovna that you will come . .  .' 
said Sonya hastily, preparing to leave. 
'One moment, Sofya Semenovna; we have no secrets, you 
are not in the way . . .  I should like another word with you . . .  
Well, now,' he broke off without finishing his sentence, and 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
tumed to Razumikhin. 'I think you know this . . .  what's his 
name? . . .  Porfiry Petrovich?' 
'Naturally ! He's a relative of mine. What is all this ?' said 
Razumikhin, suddenly curious. 
'Well, he is now in charge . . .  of that case . . .  about that 
murder . . .  you were saying so yesterday . . .  isn't he? 
'Yes . . .  well ?' Razumikhin was all agog. 
'He was asking for the people who pawned things with her, 
and there are two pledges of mine there, not worth much, but 
they are my sister's ring, that she gave me as a keepsake when 
I came here, and my father's silver watch. They are only worth 
five or six roubles altogether, but I value them for their 
associations. Well, what ought I to do now? I don't want to 
lose them, especially the watch. Just now I was trembling for 
fear my mother should ask to see the watch, when we were 
talking about Dunechka's. It is the only thing we have left 
of my father's. It would make her ill if it were lost. Women ! So 
tell me what to do. I know I shall have to report it to the police. 
But wouldn't it be better to go to Porfiry himself? What do 
you think? Something must be done about it as soon as possible. 
Mama will ask about it before dinner, see if she doesn't !' 
'Certainly not to the police, but definitely to Porfiry !' 
exclaimed Razumikhin, extraordinarily excited. 'Well, how 
pleased I am ! Why are we waiting here? Let us go at once; 
it 's only a step and he is sure to be in.' 
'Very well . . . let us go . . .' 
'He will be very, very, very pleased to meet you. I have 
told him a lot about you at different times . . .  I was talking 
about you only yesterday. Come on ! . . .  So you knew the old 
woman? Precisely ! . . .  This has all tumed out splen-did-ly ! 
. . .  Oh, yes . . .  Sofya lvanovna . .  . ' 
'Sofya 
Semenovna,' Raskolnikov corrected him. 
'Sofya 
Semenovna, this is my friend Razumikhin, and he 's a very 
good chap . .  .' 
'If you have to go now . .  .' began Sonya, still more embar­
rassed, and not looking at Razumikhin. 
'Yes, we will go !' decided Raskolnikov. 'I will call on you 
later today. Only tell me, Sofya Semenovna, where do you 
live?' 
He was not exactly confused, but he spoke as if he were in a 
hurry, and avoided her eyes. Sonya, blushing, gave him her 
address. They all went out together. 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
233 
'Aren't you going to fasten the door?' asked Razumikhin, 
descending the steps behind them. 
'I never do . . .  Though I've been meaning to buy a lock for 
two years,' he added carelessly. 'They are fortunate people 
who have nothing to lock up, aren't they?' he said to Sonya, 
laughing. 
They stopped in the gateway of the house. 
'Do you go to the right, Sofya Semenovna? By the way, 
how did you find me?' he asked, but as if he really wished to 
say something quite different. He wanted to look into her 
clear, quiet eyes, but somehow seemed unable to do so. 
'Why, you told Polechka the address yesterday !' 
'Polya? Oh, yes . . .  Polechka ! That is . . .  the little . . .  that is 
your sister? So I gave her my address?' 
'Have you forgotten?' 
'No . . .  I remember . . .  ' 
'And I heard about you from my poor father that time . . .  
Only then I did not know your surname, and he didn't know 
it either . . .  But when I got here today, since I got to know 
your name yesterday . . .  I asked : where is there a Mr. Raskol-
nikov living here? . . .  I didn't know that you were a lodger; 
like me . . .  Good-bye . . .  I will tell Katerina Ivanovna ._ . .' 
She was terribly pleased to have got away at last; she hurried 
along with downcast eyes, to get out of their sight as soon as she 
could, to cover as quickly as possible those twenty paces before 
she could turn the corner and be alone at last, and walk 
rapidly along looking at nobody, noticing nothing, but think­
ing, remembering, re-creating every word that had been said 
and every circumstance of her visit. Never, never, had she felt 
anything like this. A whole new world rose indistinct and 
unexplored before her eyes. She remembered suddenly that 
Raskolnikov himself meant to call on her today, perhaps this 
morning, perhaps almost immediately. 
'Only not today, please not today !' she murmured with a 
sinking heart, as if she were pleading with someone, like a 
frightened child. 'Oh, good heavens ! He is coming to see me 
. . .  into that room . . .  he will see . . .  oh, heavens !' 
Certainly she was in no state to notice at that moment a 
gentleman, unknown to her, who was assiduously following 
on her heels. He had accompanied her ever since she came out 
of the gate. When the three of them stopped to talk for a 
moment in the street, this passer-by, walking round them, had 

234 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
started as he unexpectedly caught Sonya's words : 'and I asked : 
where does Mr. Raskolnikov live?' He gave all three a quick 
but searching glance, especially Raskolnikov, whom Sonya 
was addressing; then he took note of the house. It was all done 
in a moment, as he passed by, and then, trying not to attract 
any attention, he went on, shortening his step as though 
expecting somebody. He was waiting for Sonya; he had seen 
that they were saying good-bye and that Sonya was going 
straight home. 
'But where to? I have seen that face somewhere,' he thought. 
'I must find out.' 
When he came to the corner he crossed to the other side of 
the street, turned, and saw that Sonya was coming the same 
way, noticing nothing. When she reached the corner, she also 
turned into the street. He followed her along the opposite 
pavement, not taking his eyes off her; after some fifty yards he 
crossed again to Sonya's side of the street, caught her up, and 
followed five paces behind her. 
He was a man of about fifty, rather tall, stout, with wide 
sloping shoulders that gave him a round-shouldered look. He 
was stylishly but comfortably dressed, and had the air of a 
great gentleman. He carried an elegant cane, with which he 
tapped the pavement at every step, and his gloves were newly 
cleaned. His broad face, with its high cheek-bones, was pleasant 
enough, and his complexion had a fresh colour that did not 
belong to St. Petersburg. His hair, which was very fair, was 
still thick, and had only the merest touch of grey in it; his thick, 
wide, spade-shaped beard was even lighter in colour than his 
hair. His blue eyes had a cold, watchful, considering look; his 
lips were very red. He was altogether remarkably well-pre­
served, and looked much younger than his years. 
When Sonya reached the Canal they had the pavement to 
themselves. Watching her, he had noticed that she was thought­
ful and abstracted. Sonya reached the house she lived in and 
turned in at the gate ; he followed her, seeming rather surprised. 
In the courtyard, she turned to the right, towards the corner 
where her staircase was. 'Oh !' murmured the stranger, and 
began to ascend the steps behind her. It was only now that 
Sonya noticed him. She went up to the third floor, turned along 
the corridor, and rang at the door of Number g, which bore 
the inscription in chalk : Kapernaumov, Tailor. 'Oh !' repeated 
the stranger, full of amazement at this strange coincidence, 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
235 
and rang at Number 8, next door. The doors were about five 
yards apart. 
'You live at Kapernaumov's !' he said, looking at Sonya 
and laughing. 'He mended a waistcoat for me yesterday. I live 
here, next door to you, at Madam Gertrude Karlovna Ress­
lich's. How strangely things turn out !' 
Sonya looked attentively at him. 
'We are neighbours,' he continued with a certain peculiar 
gaiety. 'I have been in the town only two days. Well, good-bye 
till we meet again.' 
Sonya did not answer; the door opened and she slipped 
inside. She felt somehow ashamed and shy. 
On the way to see Porfiry, Razumikhin was in a peculiarly 
excited state. 
'This is splendid, my dear chap !' he repeated several times, 
'and I am glad ! I am glad !' 
'But why are you glad?' wondered Raskolnikov to himself. 
'I didn't know that you too had pawned things with the old 
woman. And . . .  and . . .  was this long ago? I mean, is it long 
since you were there?' 
'What a naive simpleton he is !' 
'When? . .  .' Raskolnikov stopped, considering. 'I think I 
was there two or three days before her death. However, I am 
not going to redeem the things now,' he said hastily, with special 
solicitude for the things ; 'why, I've only got one rouble in silver 
again . . .  thanks to my cursed delirious state yesterday . .  .' 
He laid special stress on the last words. 
'Oh, yes, yes, yes.' For some reason Razumikhin seemed in 
a hurry to agree with everything. 'So that is one reason why 
you were . . .  so thunder-struck then . . .  and you know, when 
you were delirious you kept talking about some rings and chains 
or other ! . . .  Yes, yes . . .  It is clear, everything is clear now.' 
'Listen to that ! That idea must have taken firm root among 
them. ·why, this man here would go to the stake for me, and 
here he is, rejoicing because it is cleared up why I mentioned 
rings in my delirium ! That must have confirmed the ideas they 
were all cherishing! . . 
. '  
'Shall we find him in?' he asked aloud. 
'Yes, we shall find him,' said Razumikhin. 'He's a splendid 
chap, brother, you will see ! He's a little awkward. I don't 
mean that he 's not well-bred ; when I say he is awkward I 
mean it in another respect. He is an intelligent fellow, very 

236 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
intelligent, he 's nobody's fool, but he is of a rather peculiar 
turn of mind . . .  He is incredulous, sceptical, cynical. He likes 
to mislead people, or rather to baffle them . . .  Well, it 's an old 
and well-tried method . . .  He knows his business, knows it 
very well . . . Last year he investigated and solved a case, 
another murder, where the scent was practically cold. He is 
very, very anxious to make your acquaintance !' 
'But why should he be?' 
'I don't mean in order to . . .  You see, recently, since you 
fell ill, I have been driven to talking about you a great deal 
. . .  Well, he listened . . .  and when he heard you were studying 
law and that circumstances prevented you from finishing the 
course, he said it was a great pity. And I gathered . . .  I mean 
from all this taken together, not just that one thing; yesterday 
Zametov . . . You know, Rodya, I talked a lot of nonsense 
yesterday, when I was drunk, as we walked home . . .  and, my 
dear fellow, I am afraid you may have exaggerated it, you 
see . .  .' 
'What do you mean? That I'm supposed to be mad? Well, 
perhaps it's true.' 
He gave a forced smile. 
'Yes, yes . . .  I mean, hang it, no ! . . .  Well, everything I 
said (about other things as well) was rubbish, and just because 
I was drunk.' 
'Why apologize? I am so bored with the whole thing !' 
exclaimed Raskolnikov, with exaggerated irritation, which 
was, however, partly feigned. 
'I know, I know, I understand. You may be sure I under­
stand. I am ashamed even to speak of it . . .  ' 
'In that case, don't!' 
They were silent. Razumikhin's mood was one of wild 
excitement, and Raskolnikov recognized it with loathing. He 
was, besides, disturbed by what Razumikhin had just said 
about Porfiry. 
'I shall have to make the most of my illness,' he thought, 
with a pale face and a thumping heart, 'and as naturally as I 
can. The most natural seeming thing would be not to call 
attention to it at all. To refrain by an obvious effort ! No, an 
dfort would be unnatural again . . .  Well, we shall see . . .  how 
things turn out . . .  presently . . .  Is it a good thing or not, that 
I have come ? The moth flying into the candle of itself. My 
heart is thumping, and that is not a good thing ! . . .  ' 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
237 
'It's in this grey house,' said Razumikhin. 
'The most important thing is, does Porfiry know or doesn't 
he, that I was in that old witch's flat yesterday . . .  and asked 
about the blood? I must get to know that at the very outset; 
I must find out from his face, as soon as I go in; o-ther-wise . . .  
I'll find out, if it 's the end of me !' 
'Do you know,' he said, turning to Razumikhin with a 
mischievous smile, 'I have noticed today, my dear fellow, that 
you have been in a state of extraordinary excitement ever since 
this morning? Isn't that true?' 
'Excitement? I am not in the least excited,' lied Razumikhin. 
'No, my dear fellow, I'm right. It's quite noticeable. You 
were sitting on the edge of your chair, as I've never seen you 
do before, and twitching as if you had cramp. You kept jump­
ing up for no reason at all. One minute you were angry, the 
next your ugly mug became as sweet as sugar-candy. You even 
blushed ; you blushed especially red when you were invited to 
dinner.' 
'No such thing ! It's a lie ! . . .  What makes you talk like this?' 
'And why are you squirming like a schoolboy? What the 
devil? You're blushing again !' 
'What a beast you are, though !' 
'What are you getting embarrassed about? Romeo ! Just 
wait; I'll repeat this today, somewhere ! Ha, ha, ha l It will 
amuse mama . . .  and somebody else . . .  ' 
'Listen, listen ! Listen to me, this is serious ! Really, this . . .  
what next? The devil !' wound up Razumikhin, full of con­
fusion and cold with fright. 'What are you going to tell them? 
I, brother . . .  Pah ! What a cad you are !' 
'Just like a June rose ! And how well it becomes you, ifyou 
only knew. A Romeo six feet tall ! And how carefully you have 
washed today; why, you even cleaned your nails, didn't you? 
When did that happen before? And as true as I'm alive, you've 
put pomade on your hair ! Bend down !' 
'You cad !' 
Raskolnikov laughed so heartily that he seemed quite 
unable to control himself; thus they entered Porfiry Petrovich's 
flat in a gust of laughter. This was what Raskolnikov wanted; 
from inside they could be heard laughing as they came in, 
and still guffawing in the hall. 
'Not one word here, or I'll . . . brain you !' whispered 
Razumikhin furiously, gripping Raskolnikov's shoulder. 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
C H A P T E R  V 
RASKOLNIKOV was already going in. He entered looking as 
if it cost him a great effort to prevent his laughter from bursting 
out again. Razumikhin, with a thoroughly disconcerted and 
savage mien, as red as a peony, stumbled shamefacedly after 
him, lanky and ungainly. His face and his whole appearance 
were really funny enough at that moment to justify Raskol­
nikov's laughter. Without waiting to be introduced, Raskol­
nikov bowed to their host, who was standing in the middle of 
the room looking inquiringly at them, and shook hands with 
him, still obviously struggling violently to subdue his hilarity 
sufficiently to get out a word or two introducing himself. But 
hardly had he succeeded in regaining a straight face than he 
glanced again, as if involuntarily, at Razumikhin, and broke 
down once more : the smothered laughter burst out all the 
more uncontrollably for the powerful restraint he had put on it 
before. The extraordinary fury with which Razumikhin met 
this hearty-seeming laughter lent the whole scene an air of 
unaffected merriment and, what was more important, natural­
ness. As if on purpose, Razumikhin added still more to the 
effect. 
'Damn it all !' he roared, waving his arm and bringing down 
with a crash and a jingle a small round table on which stood 
a glass of tea. 
'Why wreck the furniture, gentlemen? You are damaging 
Government property,' cried Porfiry Petrovich cheerfully. 
This, then, was the scene : Raskolnikov stood there still 
holding his host's hand, still laughing, but conscious of having 
gone far enough and waiting for the right moment to stop 
naturally. Razumikhin, his confusion completed by the fall 
of the table and the breaking of the tumbler, looked gloomily 
at the fragments, spat, turned abruptly to the window and stood 
looking out but seeing nothing, with his back to the room and 
a terrible scowl on his face. Porfiry Petrovich was laughing, and 
seemed willing to go on laughing, but it was plain that some 
explanation must be given to him. On a chair in the corner 
Zametov had been sitting. He had risen when thevisitorsentered, 
and now waited, with his lips stretched into a smile but with 
perplexity and even incredulity in his eyes as he watched the 
scene, looking at Raskolnikov in particular with something like 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
239 
bewilderment. His unexpected presence affected Raskolnikov 
unpleasantly. 
'I shall have to take that into consideration, too,' he thought. 
'Please excuse me,' he began, with forced embarrassment. 
'Raskolnikov . . .  ' 
'Not at all. I am pleased to see you, and your entrance was 
pleasing too . . .  Well, isn't he going to say "Good morning" ?' 
said Porfiry Petrovich, with a gesture of his hand towards 
Razumikhin. 
'I really haven't the least idea why he 's so furious with me. 
I only said, as we were coming here, that he was like Romeo, 
and . . .  proved it, and that was all, I think.' 
'He must have a very serious reason for getting so angry 
over a word,' laughed Porfiry. 
'There speaks the detective ! . . . The devil take the lot of 
you !' snapped Razumikhin, and then, beginning to laugh 
himself, with a suddenly cheerful face, went up to Porfiry 
Petrovich. 
'Enough of this ! We're all fools. To business ! My friend 
here, Rodion Romanovich Raskolnikov, of whom you have 
heard, in the first place wants to make your acquaintance, and 
in the second place has a small piece of business to do with 
you. Rullo ! Zametov ! How do you come to be here? Do you 
know each other? Have you been acquainted long?' 
'This is something new !' thought Raskolnikov anxiously. 
Zametov seemed a little disconcerted, but not extremely so. 
'We met yesterday at your place,' he said easily. 
'That means Heaven has spared me the trouble; last week, 
Porfiry, he was pestering me to give him an introduction to 
you, and now you have managed it between you without me 
. . .  Where do you keep your tobacco?' 
Porfiry Petrovich was informally dressed, in a dressing­
gown and slippers trodden down at the heel ; his linen was 
spotless. He was a man of about thirty-five, rather short and 
stout, and somewhat paunchy. He was clean-shaven, and the 
hair was cropped close on his large round head, which bulged 
out at the back almost as if it were swollen. His fat, round, 
rather snub-nosed, dark-skinned face had an unhealthy 
yellowish pallor, and a cheerful, slightly mocking expression. 
It would have seemed good-natured were it not for the ex­
pression of the eyes, which had a watery, glassy gleam under 
lids with nearly white eyelashes, which twitched almost as 

240 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
though he were continually winking. The glance of those eyes 
was strangely out of keeping with his squat figure, almost like a 
peasant-woman's, and made him seem more to be reckoned 
with than might have been expected at first sight. 
As soon as he heard that his visitor had a 'small piece of 
business' to do, Porfiry Petrovich invited him to sit on the sofa, 
installed himself on the other end, and fixed his eyes on him 
with an air of expecting a speedy exposition ofthe matter, and 
that kind of concentrated and almost too serious attention that 
we find so disconcerting and overwhelming, especially from a 
new acquaintance, and particularly when the subject we are 
expounding is, in our own eyes, utterly out of proportion with 
the extraordinarily weighty consideration it receives. Raskol­
nikov, however, explained his business shortly and coherently, 
in clear and exact terms, and felt pleased that he had succeeded 
fairly well in keeping his eyes on Porfiry. Porfiry Petrovich did 
not once take his own eyes from his guest. Razumikhin, sitting 
at the opposite side of the table, followed with restless im­
patience, constantly turning his eyes from one to the other and 
back again, which all looked a little silly. 
Raskolnikov silently cursed him for a fool. 
'You ought to make a statement to the police,' said Porfiry, 
looking very business-like, 'to the effect that, having learnt of a 
certain occurrence-of this murder, that is-you desire in 
your turn to inform the examining magistrate in charge of the 
investigation that such-and-such things belong to you and that 
you wish to redeem them . . .  or words to that effect . . .  but 
they will write it for you.' 
'The fact is that at the present time . .  .' began Raskolnikov, 
trying to seem as embarrassed as possible, 'I am not exactly in 
funds . . .  and even such a trifling sum is not possible for me . . .  
You see, I should merely like to report now that the things are 
mine, and that when I have the money . .  .' 
'That doesn't matter,' answered Porfiry Petrovich, receiving 
these financial explanations with some coldness ; 'if, however, 
you prefer it, you may write direct to me, to the same effect; 
that is, having learnt of so-and-so, and offering the information 
that certain things are yours, you request . . .  ' 
'Can this be done on unstamped paper?' hastily interrupted 
Raskolnikov, once more interesting himself in the financial 
side of the matter. 
'Oh, yes. Stamped paper is not necessary at all !' Suddenly, 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
24I 
with an openly mocking expression, he screwed up his eyes 
as if he were winking. Perhaps, however, this was only Raskol­
nikov's imagination, for it lasted only for a moment. At any 
rate there had been something, and Raskolnikov could have 
sworn he had been winked at, God alone knew why. 
'He knows !' flashed through his brain like lightning. 
'Excuse me for troubling you with such trifles,' he went on, 
a little disconcerted ; 'my things aren't worth more than five 
roubles altogether, but they are especially dear to me for the 
sake of the people from whom I had them, and I confess I was 
very much afraid, when I heard . .  . '  
'Yes, you positively flew up in the air yesterday, when I let 
out to Zosimov that Porfiry was questioning the people who 
had pawned things !' agreed Razumikhin with evident purpose. 
This was unendurable. Raskolnikov could not restrain him­
self from turning on him a flashing glance from black eyes 
burning with rage. But he immediately recollected himself. 
'You are laughing at me, my dear fellow, aren't you?' he 
said, with artfully contrived irritation. 'I confess that I am 
perhaps too concerned with what you think is rubbish ; but 
I ought not to be considered selfish-or greedy on that account, 
and in my eyes those two trifling trinkets may be anything but 
rubbish. I told you just now that that almost worthless silver 
watch was the only thing left of my father's. You may laugh 
at me, but my mother has come to see me'-he turned abruptly 
to Porfiry-'and if she knew'-here he turned quickly back to 
Razumikhin, trying hard to make his voice tremble-'that 
that watch was lost, she would be in despair ! Women !' 
'But really, that 's not so ! I didn't mean that at all ! Quite 
the contrary,' exclaimed Razumikhin indignantly. 
'Have I done well? Did it seem natural? Wasn't it too 
exaggerated?' Raskolnikov asked himself anxiously. 'Why did 
I say "women" like that?' 
'So your mother has come to see you?' inquired Porfiry 
Petrovich for some reason. 
'Yes.' 
'When was this?' 
'Yesterday evening.' 
Porfiry was silent, as if considering. 
'Your things could not possibly be lost in any event,' he 
went on coldly and quietly, 'Indeed, I had been expecting you 
here for some time.' 

242 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
And as though he had said nothing out of the ordinary, he 
busied himself with procuring an ash-tray for Razumikhin, 
who was mercilessly scattering cigarette-ash on the carpet. 
Raskolnikov started, but Porfiry, still concerned over Razumi­
khin's cigarette, did not appear to see him. 
'Wha-at? Expecting him? Do you mean to say you knew 
he had pawned things there?' exclaimed Razumikhin. 
Porfiry Petrovich turned back to Raskolnikov. 
'Both of your things, the watch and the ring, were in her 
room, wrapped in a piece of paper with your name clearly 
written on it in pencil, together with the dates on which she 
had them from you . .  .' 
'How do you come to be so observant?' began Raskolnikov 
with an awkward laugh, trying hard to look him straight in the 
eye; he could not refrain from adding: 
'I made that remark just now because there must have been 
so many people who pawned things . . .  that it would be difficult 
for you to remember them all . . .  But you, on the contrary, 
seem to remember them all so clearly, and . . .  and . .  .' 
'Stupidity ! Weakness ! Why did I say that?' 
'But almost all of them are known now, and in fact you 
were the only one who had not come to us,' answered Porfiry, 
with a barely perceptible shade of mockery. 
'I have not been very well.' 
'I had heard so. I had even heard that something had 
seriously upset you. You are rather pale even now.' 
'Not at all . . .  on the contrary, I am quite well !' broke in 
Raskolnikov rudely and angrily. His sudden change of tone 
came from the bad temper seething uncontrollably within him. 
'If I speak in anger I shall give myself away,' flashed again 
through his mind. 'But why do they torment me? . .  . ' 
'Not very well !' interposed Razumikhin ;  'what an under­
statement !  Until yesterday he was practically raving .
.
.
 
Would you credit it, Porfiry, he was barely on his feet again, 
and as soon as Zosimov and I turned our backs yesterday, he 
got dressed, slipped away secretly, and went running about the 
streets till almost midnight? And all this, I tell you, in absolute 
delirium ! Imagine it ! A most extraordinary thing! '  
'Really, in absolute delirium? Please tell me about it,' said 
Porfiry, shaking his head like a peasant-woman. 
'Rubbish ! Don't believe him ! However, you don't need 
me to tell you; you don't believe him anyway,' burst out 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
243 
Raskolnikov with excessive rage. But Porfiry Petrovich did not 
appear to hear these strange words. 
'How could you have gone out, unless you were delirious?' 
asked Razumikhin, suddenly growing heated. 'Why did you 
go out? What for? . . .  And why do it by stealth? Had you any 
sane idea in your head? Now that all danger is past, I can speak 
straight out.' 
'They got on my nerves yesterday,' said Raskolnikov, turning 
to Porfiry with an impudently provocative smile, 'and I ran 
away from them to take rooms where they would not find me; 
I took a lot of money with me. Mr. Zametov there saw it. 
What do you say, Mr. Zametov, was I in my right mind or not, 
yesterday? Settle the argument for us.' 
At that moment he would have liked to strangle Zametov; 
he could not bear the way he sat there in silence and looked 
at him. 
'In my opinion, you talked very sensibly, even cleverly, 
only you were too irritable,' declared Zametov drily. 
'Nikodim Fomich was telling me today,' put in Porfiry 
Petrovich, 'that he met you very late last night at the home of a 
clerk who had been run over . .  .' 
'Well, just take that clerk now !' Razumikhin took him up. 
'Weren't you out of your mind there ? Giving the widow every 
penny you had for the funeral ! Well, if you wanted to help­
you might have given them fifteen or even twenty roubles, so 
long as you left yourself at any rate three or so, but you simply 
flung away the whole twenty-five !' 
'Perhaps I have found a treasure somewhere, that you know 
nothing about. Yesterday I felt generous . . .  Mr. Zametov 
knows I found a treasure ! . . .  Be good enough to excuse us,' 
he added, turning with trembling lips to Porfiry, 'for taking up 
half an hour of your time with such wrangling over trifles. 
It must be very boring for you.' 
'Not at all, sir ! On the contrary, on the co-ontrary ! If only 
you knew how you interest me ! It is interesting both to see 
and to hear . . .  and I admit I am very glad you have at last 
brought yourself to come and see me . .  .' 
'What about some tea? My throat is dry !' cried Razumikhin. 
'An excellent idea ! Perhaps everybody will join us? And 
wouldn't you like . . .  something a little stronger first?' 
'Off with you !' 
Porfiry Petrovich went out to order tea. 

244 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
Raskolnikov's thoughts were whirling like a tornado. He 
felt exasperated. 
'What is most significant is that they don't even attempt 
concealment; there is no standing on ceremony! How did you 
come to talk about me to Nikodim Fomich, if you knew 
nothing of me? It comes to this, they don't even want to hide 
that they are after me like a pack of hounds ! They spit in my 
face quite openly !' He was trembling with fury. 'Well, go 
straight to the point, don't play with me like a cat with a mouse ! 
That is really uncivilized, Porfiry Petrovich, and perhaps I 
won't put up with it any longer . . .  I will stand up and blurt 
out the whole truth in your faces ; you shall see how I despise 
you ! . .  .' He was breathing with difficulty. 'But what if it is all 
my imagination? What if it is a delusion, what if I am quite 
mistaken, and it is simply my inexperience that makes me lose 
my temper and fail to keep up this wretched role I am playing? 
Perhaps it was all unintentional? All their words are quite 
ordinary, but there is something in them . . .  All of them might 
be said at any time, but still there is something. Why did he say 
so directly "in her room" ? Why did Zametov add that I talked 
cleverly? Why do they take the tone they do? Yes . . .  the tone 
. . .  Razumikhin just sat there; why didn't he notice anything? 
That innocent booby never does notice anything. I'm feverish 
again ! . . . Did Porfiry wink at me, or not? What nonsense; 
why should he wink? Are they trying to work on my nerves, 
I wonder, or are they just laughing at me? Either it 's all a 
delusion, or they know ! . . .  Even Zametov is insolent . .  , or 
isn't he? He has thought things over since last night. I thought 
he would ! He is at home here, and yet it is his first visit. 
Porfiry doesn't think of him as a visitor; he sits with his back 
to him. They're as thick as two thieves, and undoubtedly 
because if me ! I am certain they were talking of me before we 
arrived ! . . .  Do they know about that flat? I wish they would 
get on with things ! . . .  When I said I had run away to take a 
flat, he let it pass, he didn't take me up. But it was clever of 
me to bring in that about the flat; it will be useful later on . . .  
In delirium? says he . . . Ha, ha, ha. He knows everything 
about yesterday evening ! But he didn't know my mother had 
come ! . . .  And that old hag had written down the date with 
her pencil ! . . .  Oh no ! I shall not give myself away ! Really, 
you have no facts yet, all this is only supposition ! No, produce 
some facts ! Even the flat is not evidence, but delirium; I know 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
245 
what to tell them . . .  Do they know about the flat? I shan't go 
away without finding out ! Why did I come? But I am getting 
agitated, and that, perhaps, is evidence ! Pah, how easily I get 
upset ! But perhaps that 's a good thing : I am playing a sick 
man . . . He is sounding me out. He will get me muddled. 
Why did I come?' 
The thoughts went racing through his head. 
It was only a few moments before Porfiry Petrovich returned. 
He seemed to have grown suddenly cheerful. 
'Since your party yesterday, my dear chap, my head . . .  
In fact I hardly know whether I'm standing on it or my heels,' 
he began in a quite different tone, smiling at Razumikhin. 
'Well, did you find it interesting? I had to leave you at the 
most interesting point, didn't I ?  Who won?' 
'Nobody, of course. We had arrived at discussing the eternal 
verities, and we were just floating round in the clouds.' 
'Imagine, Rodya, what we were discussing yesterday : is 
there or is there not such a thing as crime ?*I told you we were 
talking damned nonsense.' 
'What is there surprising in that? It's an ordinary social 
question,' answered Raskolnikov absently. 
'The question was not put like that,' answered Porfiry. 
'Not quite like that, it 's true,' agreed Razumikhin at once, 
beginning to hurry and grow excited, as usual. 'Look, Rodion : 
listen and tell us your opinion. I want you to. Yesterday I had 
done my very best with them, and I was waiting for you to 
turn up ; I had told them you were coming . . .  It began with 
the Socialists' view. You know what that is : crime is a protest 
against the unnatural structure of society-and only that, 
nothing more, and no other causes are admissible-and that's 
all ! . .  . ' 
'That 's not true,' cried Porfiry Petrovich. He was growing 
visibly more animated, and he kept laughing as he looked at 
Razumikhin, making him grow still hotter. 
'N-nothing else is 
admitted !' interrupted Razumikhin 
hotly; 'it is perfectly true ! I will show you some of their little 
books : they explain everything by the "deleterious influence 
of the environment" -and that 's all ! Their favourite cliche . . .  
From that it follows that if society is properly organized, all 
crimes will instantly disappear, since there will be nothing to 
protest against, and everybody will immediately become law­
abiding. Nature is not taken into account, nature is banished, 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
nature is not supposed to exist ! In their philosophy, it is not 
humanity, following the path of historical, living, development 
to the end, that will finally evolve into the perfect society, but, 
on the contrary, a social system, devised by some mathema­
tician's brain, will instantly reorganize humanity, make it 
righteous and innocent in a flash, with greater speed than any 
living process, and without the aid of living historical develop­
ment ! That is why they are instinctively hostile to history : 
"there is nothing in it but infamy and stupidity" -and their 
explanation of everything is simply stupidity alone. That is 
why they do not like the living process of life : they have no 
use for the living soul. The living soul demands life, the living 
soul will not submit to mechanism, the living soul must be 
regarded with suspicion, the living soul is reactionary ! But 
their social system, although it smells of carrion, can be made 
from india-rubber-and it will be nicely slavish, it will have 
no will, it will not be alive, it will never rebel ! And the result 
of it all is that their whole effort is directed to nothing but 
bricklaying and the arrangement of rooms and corridors in a 
phalanstery. The phalanstery is ready: but nature is not ready 
for a phalanstery; it wants life ; the living process is not yet 
fulfilled ; it is too early for the churchyard. You cannot divert 
the course of nature by logic alone ! Logic can anticipate three 
possibilities, but there are millions of them ! Cut out all the 
millions and you bring it all down to the question of comfort ! 
A very easy solution of the problem ! It is temptingly clear-cut, 
and there is no need to think ! That is the main point-you 
needn't think. The whole mystery of life can be put on two 
sheets of printed paper !' 
'There 's an outburst for you, a regular drum-roll ! We must 
hold him down,' laughed Porfiry. 'Just imagine,' he added, 
addressing Raskolnikov, 'it was like this yesterday evening, 
only there were six voices all going in one room, and everybody 
was fuddled with punch-can you picture it? No, brother, 
you are mistaken : "environment" means a great deal in crime, 
I assure you.' 
'I know that, but tell me this : a man of forty assaults a ten­
year-old girl-was it his environment that made him do it?' 
'Well, perhaps it was, strictly speaking,' remarked Porfiry 
with astonishing authority; 'a crime against a little girl may 
very well be explained by "environment".' 
Razumikhin was all but foaming at the mouth. 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
247 
'Listen, would you like me to deduce for you this minute,' 
he shouted, 'that you have white eyelashes simply because the 
great tower of Ivan the Great is two hundred and fifty feet 
high, and reason it out clearly, accurately, progressively and 
even with a shade of liberalism? I will do it ! Would you like 
to bet I can't?' 
'Done ! Let us listen to his deduction !' 
'Damn it all, he's a complete hypocrite !' cried Razumikhin, 
jumping up and waving his arms. 'It's not worth while talking 
to you ! Of course, he 's doing all this on purpose ; you don't 
know him yet, Rodion ! Yesterday he took their part as well, 
just so as to make fools of everybody. And good Lord, the 
things he said yesterday ! And they were delighted with him ! . . .  
He 's quite capable of keeping this up for a couple of weeks. 
Last year, for some reason, he assured us he was going into a 
monastery : he persisted in it for two months ! Not long ago he 
took it into his head to announce that he was getting married, 
and that everything was ready for the wedding. He even got 
new clothes, and we were all congratulating him. He hadn't 
got a fiancee or anything else; it was all a fraud !' 
'There you're wrong again ! I had got the new clothes before. 
It was because of the new clothes that I thought of fooling you 
all.' 
'Are you really so fond of mystification ?' asked Raskolnikov 
carelessly. 
'Don't you think I am? Just wait, I will take you in too­
ha, ha, ha l No, do you see, I will tell you the whole truth. 
Apropos of all these questions-crimes, environments, little 
girls-! have just remembered-(but it always interested me) 
an article of yours : 'Concerning Crime'* . . .  or some such title, 
I forget; I don't remember. I had the pleasure of reading it 
two months ago in Periodical Discourses.' 
'My article? In Periodical Discourses?' asked Raskolnikov, 
mystified. 'I certainly wrote an article six months ago, when I 
left the university, in connexion with some book, but I sent it 
to Week?J' Discourses, not Periodical Discourses.' 
'It came out in Periodical Discourses.' 
'Of course, Weekry Discourses has ceased to exist, that is why 
they did not print it at the time . .  . ' 
'That is true; but when it ceased publication, Weekry Dis­
courses was merged with Periodical Discourses, and so your article 
appeared there two months ago. Didn't you know?' 

C RIME AND PUNISHMENT 
Raskolnikov had indeed known nothing about it. 
'Good gracious, but you can ask them to pay you for your 
article ! But what an odd character you are ! You live so isolated 
that you don't know even things like this, that directly concern 
you. It is a fact, though.' 
'Bravo, Rodka ! I didn't know either !' exclaimed Razumi­
khin. 'I shall hurry to the reading-room this very day and ask 
for the number. Two months ago ? What was the date? It 
doesn't matter, I can find out. Here 's a fine trick ! Fancy saying 
nothing about it !' 
'But how did you get to know the article was by me? It was 
signed with an initial.' 
'Quite by chance, only a few days ago. Through the editor; 
I know him . . .  I was very interested.' 
'I surveyed, I remember, the psychological condition of the 
criminal throughout the commission of the crime.' 
'Yes, and you insist that the act of committing a crime is 
always accompanied by some morbid condition. Very, very 
original, but . . .  it was not that part of your article that specially 
interested me, but a certain idea, put forward towards the end, 
which you unfortunately do not elucidate, but merely refer 
to in passing . . .  In a word, you introduce, if you remember, a 
hint to the effect that there are persons who are able, or rather, 
not who are able but who have every right, to commit any 
wrong or crime, and that laws, so to say, are not made for them.' 
Raskolnikov smiled at this forced and deliberate perversion 
of his idea. 
'What? What is this? A right to commit crime? But I sup­
pose not because of "unfavourable environment" ?' inquired 
Razumikhin, with something approaching alarm. 
'No, no, not altogether because of it,' answered Porfiry. 
'The point is that in his article people are divided into two 
classes, the "ordinary" and the "extraordinary". The ordinary 
ones must live in submission and have no right to transgress 
the laws, because, you see, they are ordinary. And the extra­
ordinary have the right to commit any crime and break every 
kind of law just because they are extraordinary. I think that 
is what you say, if I am not mistaken?' 
'How can it be? He can't possibly have said that !' muttered 
the puzzled Razumikhin. 
Raskolnikov smiled again. He had at once grasped what 
they were driving at, and what they wished to push him into 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
249 
saying. He could remember his article; he decided to accept 
the challenge. 
'That is not quite what I say,' he began simply and modestly. 
'I admit, however, that you have given an almost correct 
exposition of it, or even, if you like, a completely faithful one 
. .  .' (He found it almost pleasurable to agree that the account 
was quite faithful.) 'The only difference is that I do not in the 
least insist that the extraordinary people are absolutely bound 
and obliged to commit offences on any and every occasion, as 
you say I do. I hardly think any such article would have been 
allowed to be published. I simply intimate that the "extra­
ordinary" man has the right . . .  I don't mean a formal, official 
right, but he has the right in himself, to permit his conscience 
to overstep . . .  certain obstacles, but only in the event that his 
ideas (which may sometimes be salutary for all mankind) 
require it for their fulfilment. You are pleased to say that my 
article is not clear; I am ready to elucidate it for you, as far as 
possible. Perhaps I am not mistaken in supposing that is what 
you want. Well, then. In my opinion, if the discoveries of 
Kepler and Newton, by some combination of circumstances, 
could not have become known to the world in any other way 
than by sacrificing the lives of one, or ten, or a hundred or more 
people, who might have hampered or in some way been ob­
stacles in the path of those discoveries, then Newton would 
have had the right, or might even have been under an obliga­
tion . . .  to remove those ten or a hundred people, so that his 
discoveries might be revealed to all mankind. It does not 
follow from this, of course, that Newton had the right to kill 
any Tom, Dick, or Harry he fancied, or go out stealing from 
market-stalls every day. I remember further that in my article 
I developed the idea that all the . . .  well, for example, the 
law-givers and regulators of human society, beginning with the 
most ancient, and going on to Lycurgus, Solon, Mahomet, 
Napoleon and so on, were without exception transgressors, by 
the very fact that in making a new law they ipso facto broke an 
old one, handed down from their fathers and held sacred by 
society; and, of course, they did not stop short of shedding 
blood, provided only that the blood (however innocent and 
however heroically shed in defence of the ancient law) was 
shed to their advantage. It is remarkable that the greater part 
of these benefactors and law-givers of humanity were particu­
larly blood-thirsty. In a word, I deduce that all of them, not 

250 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
only the great ones, but also those who diverge ever so slightly 
from the beaten track, those, that is, who are just barely capable 
of saying something new, must, by their nature, inevitably be 
criminals-in a greater or less degree, naturally. Otherwise 
they would find it too hard to leave their rut, and they cannot, 
of course, consent to remain in the rut, again by the very fact 
of their nature; and in my opinion they ought not to consent. 
In short, you see that up to this point there is nothing specially 
new here. It has all been printed, and read, a thousand times 
before. As for my division of people into ordinary and extra­
ordinary, that I agree was a little arbitrary, but I do not insist 
on exact figures. Only I do believe in the main principle of 
my idea. That consists in people being, by the law of nature, 
divided in general into two categories : into a lower (of ordinary 
people), that is, into material serving only for the reproduction 
of its own kind, and into people properly speaking, that is, 
those who have the gift or talent of saying something new in their 
sphere. There are endless subdivisions, of course, but the 
distinctive characteristics of the two categories are fairly well 
marked : the first group, that is the material, are, generally 
speaking, by nature staid and conservative, they live in obedi­
ence and like it. In my opinion they ought to obey because 
that is their destiny, and there is nothing at all degrading to 
them in it. The second group are all law-breakers and trans­
gressors, or are inclined that way, in the measure of their 
capacities. The aims of these people are, of course, relative and 
very diverse; for the most part they require, in widely different 
contexts, the destruction of what exists in the name of better 
things. But if it is necessary for one of them, for the fulfilment 
of his ideas, to march over corpses, or wade through blood, 
then in my opinion he may in all conscience authorize himself 
to wade through blood-in proportion, however, to his idea and 
the degree of its importance-mark that. It is in that sense 
only that I speak in my article of their right to commit crime. 
(You will remember that we really began with the question of 
legality.) There is, however, not much cause for alarm : the 
masses hardly ever recognize this right of theirs, and behead 
or hang them (more or less), and in this way, quite properly, 
fulfil their conservative function, although in following genera­
tions these same masses put their former victims on a pedestal 
and worship them (more or less). The first category are always 
the masters of the present, but the second are the lords of the 

C R IME AND P UNISHMENT 
future. The first preserve the world and increase and multiply; 
the second move the world and guide it to its goal. Both have 
an absolutely equal right to exist. In short, for me all men have 
completely equivalent rights, and-vive la guerre eternelle-unti1 
we have built the New Jerusalem; of course !' 
'You do believe in the New Jerusalem, then?' 
'Yes, I do,' answered Raskolnikov firmly; he said this with 
his eyes fixed on one spot on the carpet, as they had been all 
through his long tirade. 
'A-and you believe in God? Forgive me for being so in-
quisitive.' 
'Yes, I do,' repeated Raskolnikov, raising his eyes to Porfiry. 
'A-a-and do you believe in the raising of Lazarus?' 
'Y-yes. Why are you asking all this?' 
'You believe in it literally?' 
'Yes.' 
'Ah . . .  I was curious to know. Forgive me But, returning 
to the previous subject-they are not always put to death. 
Some, on the contrary . .  .' 
'Triumph during their lifetime? Oh, yes, some achieve their 
ends while they still live, and then . .  .' 
'They begin to mete out capital punishment themselves ?' 
'If necessary, and, you know, it is most usually so. Your 
observation is very keen-witted.' 
'Thank you. But tell me : how do you distinguish these 
extraordinary people from the ordinary? Do signs and portents 
appear when they are born? I mean to say that we could do 
with rather greater accuracy here, with, so to speak, rather 
more outward signs : please excuse the natural anxiety of a 
practical and well-meaning man, but couldn't there be, for 
example, some special clothing, couldn't they carry some kind 
of brand or something? . . .  Because, you will agree, if there 
should be some sort of mix-up, and somebody from one cate­
gory imagined that he belonged to the other and began "to 
remove all obstacles", as you so happily put it, then really . . .  ' 
'Oh, that very frequently happens ! This observation of yours 
is even more penetrating than the last.' 
'Thank you.' 
'Not at all. But you must please realize that the mistake is 
possible only among the first group, that is, the "ordinary" 
people (as I have called them, perhaps not altogether happily). 
In spite of their inborn inclination to obey, quite a number of 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
them, by some freak of nature such as is not impossible even 
among cows, like to fancy that they are progressives, "destroy­
ers", and propagators of the "new word", and all this quite 
sincerely. At the same time, they really take no heed of new 
people;* they even despise them, as reactionary and incapable 
of elevated thinking. But, in my opinion, they cannot constitute 
a real danger, and you really have nothing to worry about, 
because they never go far. They might sometimes be scourged 
for their zealotry, to remind them of their place; there is no 
need even for anyone to carry out the punishment : they will 
do it themselves, because they are very well conducted : some 
of them do one another this service, and others do it for them­
selves with their own hands . . .  And they impose on themselves 
various public penances besides-the result is beautifully edi­
fying, and in short, you have nothing to worry about . . .  This 
is a law of nature.' 
'Well, at least you have allayed my anxieties on that score 
a little; but here is another worry : please tell me, are there 
many of these people who have the right to destroy others, of 
these "extraordinary" people? I am, of course, prepared to 
bow down before them, but all the same you will agree that 
it would be terrible if there were very many of them, eh ?' 
'Oh, don't let that trouble you either,' went on Raskolnikov 
in the same tone. 'Generally speaking, there are extremely few 
people, strangely few, born, who have a new idea, or are even 
capable of saying anything at all new. One thing only is clear, 
that the ordering of human births, all these categories and 
subdivisions, must be very carefully and exactly regulated by 
some law of nature. This law is, of course, unknown at present, 
but I believe that it exists, and consequently that it may be 
known. The great mass of men, the common stuff of humanity, 
exist on the earth only in order that at last, by some endeavour, 
some process, that remains as yet mysterious, some happy 
conjunction of race and breeding, there should struggle into 
life a being, one in a thousand, capable, in however small a 
degree, of standing on his own feet. Perhaps one in ten thousand 
(I am speaking approximately, by way of illustration) is born 
with a slightly greater degree of independence, and one in a 
hundred thousand with even more. One genius may emerge 
among millions, and a really great genius, perhaps, as the 
crowning point of many thousands of millions of men. In short, 
I have not been able to look into the retort whence all this 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
253 
proceeds. But a definite law there must be, and is; it cannot 
be a matter of chance.' 
'What 's the idea? Are you both joking or something?' 
exclaimed Razumikhin at last. 'You are amusing yourselves 
at one another's expense, aren't you? Sitting there and poking 
fun at one another ! Are you serious, Rodya ?' 
Raskolnikov did not answer, but silently lifted towards him 
his pale and almost sorrowful face. And it seemed to Razu­
mikhin that Porfiry's open, obtrusive, provocative, and un­
mannerly causticity contrasted strangely with that calm and 
melancholy face. 
'Well, my dear fellow, if this is really serious, then . . .  Of 
course you are right when you say that it is not new, but 
similar to what we have heard and read thousands of times ; 
but what is really original in it-and what I am sorry to say, 
belongs only to you-is that you uphold bloodshed as a matter 
if conscience and even, if you will forgive my saying so, with 
great fanaticism . . .  This, therefore, is the main idea of your 
article. This moral permission to shed blood is . . .  seems to me 
more terrible than official, legal, licence to do so . .  .' 
'You are quite right. It is more terrible,' Porfiry re­
sponded. 
'No, you got carried away somehow! That is where the 
mistake lies. I will read it . . . You were carried away ! You 
cannot think so . . .  I will read it.' 
'You will not find all this in the article ; it is only hinted at 
there,' said Raskolnikov. 
'Yes, yes.' Porfiry was restless. 'I am almost clear now about 
how you look upon crime, but . . .  please forgive me for being 
so importunate (I am ashamed to be troubling you so much)­
but, you see, although you greatly reassured me just now about 
mistaken confusion between the two categories . . . I keep 
worrying about various practical cases ! Suppose somebody, 
some young man, fancies he is a Lycurgus* or Mahomet-a 
future one, of course-and grant that he is to remove all 
obstacles to that end . . .  "I have in front of me,'' says he, "a 
long campaign, and money is necessary for it" . . .  Well, he 
begins to acquire supplies for the campaign . . .  you know what 
I mean?' 
Zametov in his corner suddenly snorted. Raskolnikov did 
not even raise his eyes to him. 
'I must admit,' he replied quietly, 'that such cases must in 

254 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
fact occur. The rather stupid and conceited, especially the 
young, are particularly liable to rise to that bait.' 
'You do see it. Well, what then?' 
'This,' smiled Raskolnikov. 'I am not to blame for it. It does 
happen, and it always will. He' (he nodded towards Razumi­
khin) 'said just now that I uphold bloodshed. What then? 
Society after all is only too well supplied with the weapons of 
exile, prison, the examining magistrate, hard labour . . .  what 
is there to worry about? Hunt out your thief! . .  .' 
'Well, and if we find him?' 
'It serves him right.' 
'Logical enough. And what about his conscience ?' 
'What concern is it of yours?' 
'Well, on the grounds of humanity.' 
'Any man who has one must suffer if he is conscious of error. 
That is his punishment-in addition to hard labour.' 
'Well, but the real geniuses,' asked Razumikhin, frowning, 
'those to whom you have granted the right to kill, ought surely 
not to suffer at all, even for the spilling of blood?' 
'Why do you say "ought" ? There is no question either of 
permitting or of forbidding it. Let them suffer, if they feel pity 
for the victims . 
. 
• Suffering and pain are always obligatory 
on those of wide intellect and profound feeling. Truly great 
men must, I think, experience great sorrow on the earth,' he 
added, suddenly thoughtful, as though to himself. 
He raised his eyes, looked pensively at them all, smiled, and 
took up his cap. He was too tranquil, compared with his state 
when he came in, and he felt conscious of it. Everybody 
stood up. 
'Well, grumble at me if you like, be angry if you like; I can't 
help it,' began Porfiry Petrovich again. 'Let me asl.: one more 
little question (I am troubling you a great deal !) ;  I should like 
to bring in just one little idea, solely so as not to forget . .  .' 
'Very well ; tell me your little idea,' said Raskolnikov, stand­
ing waiting before him, pale and serious. 
'It is this . . .  really, I hardly know how best to express it 
. . .  it is a very trifling little idea . . .  Psychological . . .  Well, 
this is it : when you were composing your article-surely it 
could not be, he, he, that you did not consider yourself . . .  just 
a tiny bit . . .  to be also an "extraordinary" man, one who 
was saying a new word-in your sense, that is . . .  Surely that is 
so?' 

C R IM E  AND PUNISHMENT 
255 
'Very likely,' answered Raskolnikov disdainfully. Razumi­
khin made a movement. 
'And if it is so, can you yourself have decided-well, in 
view of some lack of worldly success, and embarrassed circum­
stances, or for the betterment in some way of mankind-to 
step over those obstacles? . . .  Well, for instance to kill and 
steal? . . .  
' 
Again he suddenly seemed to wink at him with his left eye, 
and laugh noiselessly-exactly as before. 
'If I had indeed done so, then of course I should not tell 
you,' answered Raskolnikov, with haughty, challenging dis­
dain. 
'No, really; I was only very interested, just for the compre­
hension of your article, and only in a purely literary respect . . .  ' 
'Pah, how impudently obvious !' thought Raskolnikov with 
disgust. 
'Allow me to remark,' he answered drily, 'that I do not 
consider myself a Mahomet or a Napoleon . . .  nor anyone 
whatever of that sort, and consequently, not being them, I am 
unable to give you a satisfactory explanation of how I should 
act if I were.' 
'Oh, come, who among us in Russia doesn't think himself a 
Napoleon now?' said Porfiry with sudden dreadful familiarity. 
This time there was decidedly something special in the intona­
tion of his voice. 
'Wasn't it indeed some future Napoleon who last week dis­
patched our Alena I vanovna with an axe?' blurted Zametov 
from his corner. 
Raskolnikov was silent, gazing steadily and resolutely at 
Porfiry. Razumikhin frowned blackly. Even before this he had 
begun to notice something. He looked angrily round. There 
was a minute of bleak silence. Raskolnikov turned to go. 
'Are you going already?' asked Porfiry effusively, holding 
out his hand with excessive amiability. 'I am very, very pleased 
to have made your acquaintance. As for your application, 
have no doubts about it. Write just exactly what I told you. 
Or better still, come and see me there yourself . . .  some time 
soon 
• . . tomorrow if you like. I am sure to be there round 
about eleven o'clock. We will arrange everything . . .  and have 
a little talk . . .  You, as one of the last who were there, could 
pՅrhaps tell us something . .  .' he added, with a most benevolent 
mr. 

256 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'Do you wish to interrogate me officially, with all the forma­
lities ?' sharply asked Raskolnikov. 
'No, why? It is quite unnecessary for the present. You mis­
understand me. You see, I don't like to let any opportunity 
pass, and . . .  and I have already talked to all the other bor-
rowers . . .  from some of them I took depositions . . .  and you, 
as the last of them . . .  Oh, yes, by the way !' he exclaimed, 
suddenly delighted with something; 'I've just this moment 
remembered what I was going to say.' He turned to Razumi­
khin. 'You know how you drummed it into me about that 
Nikolashka? . . .  Yes, I know, I know . . .  ' turning back to 
Raskolnikov, 'that the lad is clear, but what could I do? And 
Mitka had to be worried, too . . .  Well, this is the point, the 
essential thing: when you were going upstairs . . .  I think you 
said you were there between seven and eight?' 
'Yes,' answered Raskolnikov, with an unpleasant feeling 
that he might not have said it at all. 
'Well, going past at some time after seven, on the staircase, 
did you by any chance see, in the open flat on the second 
floor-you remember ?-two workmen, or at any rate one of 
them? They were painting. Did you notice? It is very, very 
important for them ! . . .  ' 
'Painters? No, I didn't see them,' answered Raskolnikov 
slowly, as if he were cudgelling his memory. At the same time 
he was straining every faculty in tortured anxiety to divine 
as quickly as he might where the pitfall lay, and make sure 
that he did not miss anything. 'No, I didn't see them, and I 
didn't in fact notice any flat open . . .  but there on the fourth 
floor' (he had by now triumphantly discovered the trap) 'I 
remember that a clerk was removing from his flat . . .  opposite 
Alena Ivanovna's . . .  I remember . . .  I remember that clearly 
. . . Soldiers were carrying out some sort of sofa and I was 
squeezed against the wall . . .  But painters-no, I don't remem­
ber that there were any painters . . .  and I don't think there 
was a flat open anywhere. No, there wasn't . .  .' 
'But what are you talking about?' cried Razumikhin sud­
denly, apparently pulling himself together and realizing some­
thing. 'Surely the painters were working on the very day of the 
murder, and he was there three days before ! What makes you 
ask him about them?' 
'Oh, I've got mixed up !' Porfiry struck his forehead. 'Devil 
take it, this business is driving me out of my senses !' he went 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
257 
on, turning apologetically to Raskolnikov. 'It would have been 
so important to us, if we could have learnt that they had been 
seen, in that flat, at some time after seven, that I fancied just 
now that you could tell us . . .  I was quite mixed up !' 
'Then you ought to be more careful,' remarked Razumikhin 
in surly tones. 
The last words were spoken in the entrance-hall. Porfiry 
Petrovich conducted them to the door with extreme politeness. 
Both were sullen and gloomy when they emerged into the 
street, and they walked some steps without a word. Raskolnikov 
drew a long breath . . .  
C H A P T E R  V I  
' . . . I DON 'T believe it ! I can't believe it !' repeated Razumi­
khin in bewilderment, trying with all his might to refute 
Raskolnikov's arguments. They were approaching Bakaleev's, 
where Pulkheria Alexandrovna and Dunya had long been 
expecting them. Razumikhin, in the heat of the discussion, 
kept stopping in the road, embarrassed and excited by the 
fact that for the first time they were talking plainly of it. 
'Then don't believe it !' answered Raskolnikov with a cold 
and careless smile. 'As usual, you noticed nothing, but I 
weighed every word.' 
'You are over-anxious, that is why . . . Hm . . . I admit 
Porfiry's tone was really rather strange, and that wretch 
Zametov was particularly odd ! . . . You are right, there was 
something about him-but why? Why?' 
'He has been thinking it over since last night.' 
'No, on the contrary, on the contrary! If they had had such 
a brainless idea, they would have done their best to hide it. 
They would have kept their hands concealed, so as to catch you 
later . . .  But this-it was so reckless and so bare-faced !' 
'If they had had facts, real facts, to go on, or any kind of 
foundation for their suspicions, they would indeed have tried 
to hide their game, in the hope of a still greater victory (but 
they would long ago have made a search of my room !). But 
they have no facts, not one-it is all ambiguous and illusory, 
a will-o'-the-wisp-that is why they are trying to browbeat 
me with their impudence. Perhaps he was furious at not 
having any facts and his annoyance made him break out. Or 
perhaps he has some design . . .  He seems an intelligent man . . .  

258 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
Perhaps he wanted to frighten me by pretending that he knew 
. . .  That, my dear fellow, is your psychology . . .  However, it 
nauseates me to enter into explanations of all this. Drop 
it !' 
'And it is an insult to you, you are outraged ! I understand 
you ! But . . .  since we have begun to speak plainly (an excel­
lent thing, and I am glad we are doing it at last !)-I will 
frankly admit now that I have noticed it in them for some time, 
this idea, but only, of course, the vaguest trace, a creeping sus­
picion; only why even so much? How can they dare? Where 
do the hidden roots of it lie? If you knew how furious I am ! 
What, all this just because a poor student, crippled with 
poverty and hypochondria, on the verge of a cruel illness and 
perhaps already affected by it (note that !), a prey to anxiety, 
self-centred, conscious of his own worth, who has spent six 
months in isolation in his corner, in tattered clothes and boots 
without soles, stands before some copper or other and suffers 
his abuse; here he is, confronted with an unexpected debt, 
an overdue bill in favour of this fellow Chebarov, evil-smelling 
paint, a temperature of thirty degrees Reaumur, a stifling 
atmosphere, a crowd of people, talk about the murder of a 
person he has visited shortly before, and all this on an empty 
stomach ! How on earth could he help fainting? And that, that 
alone is the basis of all this ! What the devil? I know it is very 
trying for you, but in your place, Rodka, I should have burst 
out laughing in their faces, or better still, have spat in every 
one of their ugly mugs, and more than once; and, with due 
deliberation, as it should always be done, I should have dis­
tributed a couple of dozen slaps in the face among them, and 
left it at that. Cheer up ! To hell with them ! It's a disgraceful 
affair !' 
'All the same, he summed it up very well,' thought Raskol­
nikov. 
'To hell with them? But there's another examination to­
morrow !' he said bitterly. 'Must I really enter into explana­
tions with them ? I am annoyed with myself, too, for that 
degrading scene with Zametov in the tavern yesterday . . .  ' 
'Hang it all ! I will go to Porfiry myself. I am related to him, 
and I'll screw it out of him; he shall lay bare the whole thing 
to the roots. And Zametov-I'll . . .  ' 
'At last he has guessed right !' thought Raskolnikov. 
'Stop !' exclaimed Razumikhin, seizing his friend by the 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
259 
shoulder; 'stop ! You are wrong ! I have been thinking and 
you've made a mistake ! What sort of trap was it? You say the 
question about the workmen was a trap? Work it out ! If you 
had done that, would you have let it out that you had seen the 
flat was being painted . . .  and seen the workmen? On the 
contrary, you would have said you saw nothing, even if you 
had seen them ! Who would admit something that told against 
himself?' 
'If I had done that deed, I should certainly have said that 
I had seen the flat and the workmen,' answered Raskolnikov 
reluctantly and with evident distaste. 
'But why testify against oneself?' 
'Because only moujiks and very inexperienced greenhorns 
instantly and flatly deny everything, under questioning. Any 
man with even a scrap of intelligence or experience will be 
sure to try to admit, as far as possible, all material facts that 
cannot be avoided; only he will look for other reasons for them, 
turn them to reveal special and unexpected facets, which will 
give them a different meaning, and place tliem in a new light. 
Porfiry could count on my answering like that, and saying that 
I had seen them, for the sake of plausibility, and then turning 
up something to explain . . .  ' 
'But he would have told you at once that the workmen could 
not have been there two days before and that consequently 
you must yourself have been there on the day of the murder, 
between seven and eight o'clock. And you would have been 
tripped up by a trifle !' 
'He counted on that, too; he thought I would not have time 
to consider, but would hasten to give a plausible answer, 
forgetting that the workmen could not have been there two 
days earlier.' 
'But how could you forget that?' 
'Very easily. It is those trifling details that most easily trip 
up clever people. The cleverer a man is, the less he expects to be 
caught out by something simple. In fact to throw the cleverest 
people off balance you must use the simplest means. Porfiry 
is not nearly as stupid as you imagine . . .  ' 
'After all this, he 's a scoundrel, though !' 
Raskolnikov could not help laughing. But at the same time 
there seemed to him to be something strange in his own 
liveliness and the readiness with which he had explained the 
last point, when he had conducted all the previous conversation 

C RIME AND P UNISHMENT 
with sullen distaste and plainly only because it was unavoid­
able, considering the object he had in view. 
'I let myself be carried away,' he thought. 
But almost in the same moment he grew uneasy, as if struck 
by an unexpected and worrying idea. His uneasiness increased. 
They had reached the entrance of Bakaleev's. 
'You go on by yourself,' he said abruptly. 'I shall be back in a 
minute.' 
'Where are you going? We've arrived !' 
'I must, I must; I have something to do . . .  I will come in 
half an hour . . .  Tell them.' 
'Have it your own way. I'll go Ѱith you.' 
'Why? Do you want to torture me as well?' cried Raskol­
nikov with such bitter exasperation and with such a look of 
despair that Razumikhin was discouraged. He stood for some 
time on the steps and morosely watched his friend walk 
quickly in the direction ofhis own room. Finally, with clenched 
teeth and hands, he swore an oath that that very day he would 
squeeze Porfiry like a lemon, and went upstairs to assuage 
Pulkheria Alexandrovna's alarm at their long absence. 
When Raskolnikov arrived at his own house, his temples 
were damp with sweat and he was panting. He hurried up the 
stairs, entered his open door, and fastened it with the hook. 
Then, frantic with fear, he rushed into the corner, thrust his 
hand into that hole in the wallpaper where the things had lain, 
and spent several minutes in searching it minutely, groping in 
every cranny and in every fold in the paper. When he found 
nothing, he stood up and drew a deep breath. Going up the 
steps to the door ofBakaleev's, he had suddenly imagined that 
one or other of the things, some chain or link or even perhaps 
a piece of the paper they had been wrapped in, with an 
inscription in the old woman's hand, might somehow have 
slipped down and got lost in a crack, to confront him at some 
later time as unexpected and irresistible evidence. 
He stood as if lost in thought and a strange, humble, half­
vacant smile played on his lips. At last he picked up his cap 
and quietly left the room. His ideas were confused. He was 
still abstracted as he came out to the gate. 'There he is !' called 
a loud voice ; he raised his head. 
The porter was standing at the door of his lodge, pointing 
him out to a little man who looked like a superior workman or 
small tradesman, but since he was wearing a sort of long robe 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
and a waistcoat, from a distance he resembled a peasant­
woman. His head, in a greasy cap, hung down, and his whole 
figure seemed to stoop. From his flabby wrinkled face he seemed 
to be over fifty; his sunken little eyes looked hard, morose, and 
discontented. 
'What is it?' asked Raskolnikov, approaching the porter. 
The stranger looked sideways at him, frowning, and studied 
him intently and lingeringly, then he turned slowly round 
and without a word walked out through the gate into the 
street. 
'But what is it?' cried Raskolnikov. 
'That person there was asking if a student lived here-he 
gave your name and asked who you lived with. You came out 
just then, I pointed you out, and he went. That 's all about 
it.' 
The porter also seemed a little puzzled, but not very, and 
after standing thinking a moment or two longer he turned 
round and went back into his lodge. 
Raskolnikov dashed out after the stranger, and immediately 
caught sight of him walking along the other side of the street, 
at the same even, unhurried pace, with his eyes fixed rumina­
tively on the ground. He overtook him quickly, and walked for 
a short time behind him ; then he drew level and looked side­
ways at his face. The man noticed him at once and looked 
quickly at him, then dropped his eyes again ; they walked on 
thus for about a minute, side by side, without speaking. 
'Were you asking the porter for me?' said Raskolnikov at 
last, in a low voice. 
The man made no answer and did not even look at him. 
There was silence once more. 
'Why do you . . .  come to ask for me . . .  and then say nothing? 
. . .  What is all this?' Raskolnikov's voice cracked, and his 
words seemed unwilling to emerge clearly. 
This time the man raised his head and looked at him with 
sombre ominous eyes. 
'Murderer !' he said suddenly, in a low but clear and distinct 
voice. 
Raskolnikov went on walking beside him. His knees felt 
terribly weak, a chill ran up his spine, his heart seemed to 
stop for a moment and then began to thump as though it had 
torn loose from its place. They walked on again thus, in 
complete silence, for a hundred yards. 

262 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
The man did not look at him. 
'But why do you . . .  what . . .  who is a murderer ?' muttered 
Raskolnikov hardly audibly. 
'You are,' pronounced the stranger still more distinctly and 
impressively, with a smile of triumphant hatred, and again he 
looked straight at Raskolnikov's pale face and his staring eyes. 
They came to a crossing, and the man turned into the street 
on the left and walked on without looking round. Raskolnikov 
stood still and watched him for a long time. He saw the man 
turn after he had gone some fifty paces and look back at him, 
still standing motionless in the same place. It was impossible 
to be sure, but it seemed to Raskolnikov that his face again 
wore its coldly hostile and triumphant smile. 
With languid, feeble steps, with shaking knees and a feeling 
offrozen horror, Raskolnikov turned back and mounted to his 
room. He took off his cap and laid it on the table, and then 
stood there motionless for some ten minutes. Then, drained 
of all strength, he lay down on the sofa and painfully stretched 
himself out on it, with a feeble groan; his eyes were closed. 
He lay there for about half an hour. 
He could not think. His mind held ideas, or fragments of 
ideas, disconnected and incoherent images-the faces of people 
he had known as a child or seen once and never remembered 
again, the belfry of the Church of the Ascension, the billiard­
table in some public house, with an officer playing at it, the 
smell of cigars in a basement tobacco shop, a tavern, a back 
staircase, sloppy with dish-water and strewn with egg-shells, 
the Sunday sound of bells borne in from somewhere . . . all 
changing and whirling in dizzy spirals. Sometimes an image 
pleased him and he tried to cling to it, but it would fade away. 
He had a diffused inner feeling of oppression, but it was not 
marked ; sometimes, indeed, all seemed well . . .  A slight shiver 
shook him persistently, and this also was an almost pleasurable 
sensation. 
He heard Razumikhin's hurried steps and his voice, shut 
his eyes, and feigned sleep. Razumikhin opened the door and 
stood considering on the threshold for a short space. Then he 
stepped quietly into the room and cautiously approached the 
sofa. Nastasya's voice could be heard whispering : 
'Don't disturb him. Let him have his sleep out. Then he can 
have something to eat.' 
'Exactly,' answered Razumikhin. 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
263 
They went out carefully, and closed the door. Another half­
hour went by. Raskolnikov opened his eyes and lay on his back 
with his hands behind his head. 
'Who is he? Who is this man who seems to have sprung 
up from nowhere ? Where was he and what did he see? Every­
thing, doubtless. But where was he standing as he looked on? 
Why has he risen out of the ground only now? And how 
could he see-could it be possible? Hm . . .  ,' he went on, 
turning cold and shuddering, 'what about the jeweller's 
case that Nikolay found behind the door-was that possible 
either? Evidence ! You overlook one infinitesimal detail-and 
it builds up to a whole Egyptian pyramid of evidence ! 
A fly was buzzing round, and it saw ! Can such things be 
possible?' 
Suddenly he was conscious, with repulsion, of how physically 
weak he had become. 
'I ought to have known it,' he thought, with a bitter smile. 
'How, knowing myself, foreknowing myself, dared I take the 
axe and stain my hands with blood ? It was my duty to know 
beforehand . . .  Ah ! but really I did indeed know beforehand ! 
. . .  ' he whispered despairingly. 
At times he seemed to stand motionless in contemplation of 
some particular idea. 
'No, those people are not made like this; the real ruler, to 
whom everything is permitted, destroys Toulon, butchers in 
Paris, forgets an army in Egypt: expends half a million men in a 
Moscow campaign, shakes himself free with a pun in Wilno, 
and when he is dead they put up statues to him ; everything is 
permitted to him. No ! Such people are plainly not made of 
flesh, but of bronze !' 
A sudden irrelevant thought nearly made him laugh. 
'Napoleon, the pyramids, Waterloo-and a vile, withered 
old woman, a moneylender, with a red box under her bed­
what a mishmash even for somebody like Porfiry Petrovich to 
digest !  . . . How could he, indeed? Aesthetic considerations 
forbid. "Does a Napoleon crawl under an old woman's bed?" 
he will say. Oh, what rubbish ! . .  . ' 
At times he felt that he was wandering; he had fallen into 
a state of feverish exaltation. 
· 
'The old hag is nothing !' he thought disconnectedly, with 
mounting excitement. 'Perhaps the old woman was a mistake, 
but she is not the point. The old woman was only a symptom of 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
my illness . . .  I wanted to overstep all restrictions as quickly 
as possible . . . I killed not a human being but a principle ! 
Yes, I killed a principle, but as for surmounting the barriers, 
I did not do that; I remained on this side . . .  The only thing 
I knew how to do was kill ! And I could not do that properly 
either, it seems . . .  A principle? Why was that foolish fellow 
Razumikhin railing at the Socialists just now? They are 
industrious and business-like people; they work for the "com­
mon weal" . . .  No, I have only one life given to me, and it 
will never come again ; I do not want to wait for the "common 
weal". I want to have my own life, or else it is better not to live 
at all. What then? I only didn't want my mother to go hungry 
without doing what I could, while we waited for the "common 
weal". "I," they say, "contribute one brick to the building 
of the common weal and that gives me full satisfaction." Ha, ha ! 
But what about me? Mter all, I shall only live once, and after 
all I also want . . .  Oh, aesthetically speaking, I am a louse, 
nothing more,' he added, suddenly beginning to laugh like a 
madman. 'Yes, I really am a louse,' he went on, clinging to the 
idea with malicious pleasure, burrowing into it, playing with 
it for his own amusement, 'if only because, first, I'm arguing 
now about being one, secondly, I've been importuning all­
gracious Providence for a whole month, calling on it to witness 
that it was not for my own selfish desires and purposes that I 
proposed to act (so I said), but for a noble and worthy end 
. . .  ha, ha ! Because, thirdly, in the execution of my design I 
devoted so much attention to securing the utmost justice 
accurately calculated by weight and measure : from all the 
lice on earth, I picked out absolutely the most useless, and 
when I had killed her, I intended to take from her exactly as 
much as I needed for my first step, and neither more nor less 
(and all the rest, consequently, would have gone to the monas­
tery for the repose of her soul-ha, ha !) . . .  Finally, I am a 
louse because,' he went on, grinding his teeth, 'because I myself 
am, perhaps, even worse and viler than the louse I killed, and 
I knew beforehand that I should tell myself so after I had killed 
her ! Can anything compare with such horror? Oh, platitudes ! 
What baseness ! . . .  Oh, how well I understand the Prophet, 
on horseback; scimitar in hand : "It is the will of Allah, there­
fore obey, thou trembling creature !" He is right, he is right, 
the Prophet, when he establishes a mar-vell-ous battery across 
a street somewhere and mows down the innocent and the 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
guilty, without deigning to justify himself! Obey, trembling 
creature, and-do not will, because-that is not your affair ! 
. . .  Oh, nothing, nothing will make me forgive that old 
witch !' 
His hair was damp with sweat, his trembling lips were 
parched, his immovable gaze was fixed on the ceiling. 
'My mother, my sister, how I loved them ! What makes me 
hate them now? Yes, I hate them, hate them physically; 
I cannot bear them near me . . .  A short time ago I went up to 
my mother and kissed her, I remember . . .  To embrace her, 
and think that if she knew . . .  was I to tell her then? It is just 
the sort of thing I'm capable of . . .  Hm ! She ought to be like 
me,' he thought, forcing himself to struggle against his growing 
delirium. 'Oh, how much I hate that old woman now ! I think 
I should kill her again if she came back to life ! Poor Lizaveta ! 
Why had she to turn up? . . .  It is strange though; I wonder why 
I hardly ever think of her, as though I had not killed her . . .  
Lizaveta ! Sonya ! Poor, meek, gentle creatures, with meek 
eyes ! . . .  Why do they not weep? Why do they not groan? . . .  
They give up everything . . . they look at you meekly and 
gently . . .  Sonya, Sonya, gentle Sonya ! . . .  ' 
He had drifted into sleep; it seemed strange that he could 
not remember how he came to be in the street. It was already 
late. The twilight had deepened, the full moon was shining 
brighter and brighter; but the air was particularly stifling. 
The streets were crowded with people going home from work 
or out for a walk; there was a smell of lime, and dust, and 
stagnant water. Raskolnikov was melancholy and anxious ; he 
recollected clearly that he had come out with some definite 
purpose, that there was something he must hasten to do, but 
he could not remember what it was. Suddenly he stopped, 
seeing on the opposite pavement a man standing and waving 
to him. He crossed the street towards him, but the man turned 
abruptly and unconcernedly walked away, with lowered head, 
without looking back or giving any sign that he had summoned 
him. 'Did he really call me?' wondered Raskolnikov, but 
began to follow. After some ten paces he suddenly recognized 
the stoop-shouldered stranger in the long robe, and was 
terrified. Raskolnikov followed him at a distance ; his heart 
thumped ; they turned into a lane-still the man did not turn 
round. 'Does he know that I am following him?' thought 
Raskolnikov. The man turned in at the gate of a large house. 

266 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
Raskolnikov hurried to the gate and looked to see if he would 
not turn round and call him. And in fact, when he reached the 
other end of the arched gateway and was emerging into the 
courtyard, he did turn round and again seemed to beckon to 
him. Raskolnikov at once entered, but when he reached the 
courtyard the stranger was no longer there. Consequently, he 
must have turned into the first staircase. Raskolnikov hurried 
after him. From two flights higher up, indeed, he heard 
measured, unhastening steps. Strangely enough, the staircase 
seemed somehow familiar. There was the window on the first 
floor; the mysterious and melancholy moonlight shone through 
the panes. Here was the second floor. Oh ! This was the same 
flat where the painters had been working . . .  How was it he 
had not known at once? The steps of the man in front had 
died away; 'that means he is standing still or has hidden 
somewhere !' Here was the third floor : should he go any farther? 
How quiet it was up there, so quiet that it was terrible ! . . .  But 
he went on. The sound of his own steps alarmed and frightened 
him. Heavens, how dark it was ! The stranger was probably 
standing hidden in a corner. Ah, here was a flat with its stair­
case door open; he hesitated and went in. It was very dark 
inside, and empty, as though everything had been removed ; 
very quietly, on tiptoe, he went into the sitting-room : the whole 
room was bathed in clear moonlight; everything here was as 
before : chairs, mirror, yellow sofa, and pictures in frames. The 
huge, round copper-red moon was looking straight through the 
window. 'The stillness comes from the moon,' thought Raskol­
nikov; 'she must be asking riddles now.' He stood and waited, 
waited a long time, while the moonlight grew quieter, and his 
heart thumped more violently, until it became painful. The 
stillness continued. Suddenly he heard a momentary dry 
cracking sound, as if a twig had snapped ; then all was silent 
again. A fly woke up, bumped against the window pane, and 
set up a whining buzz. At that moment, in the corner between 
a small cupboard and the window, he saw what looked like a 
woman's cloak hanging on the wall. 'Why is there a cloak 
there?' he thought. 'It was not there before . .  .' He stole quietly 
up to it, and realized that someone seemed to be hidden behind 
it. He moved it carefully aside with his hand, and saw a chair 
standing there, and the old woman sitting huddled up in it. 
Her head hung down so that he could not see her face, but 
it was she. He stood over her. 'She is afraid !' he thought, and 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
267 
stealthily withdrawing the axe from its loop he struck her on 
the crown of the head, once and again. But it was strange : 
she did not even stir under the blows ; it was as if she were 
made of wood. He grew afraid, and stooped nearer to look at 
her, but she bent her head even lower. He crouched down to 
the floor and looked up into her face from below, looked once 
and froze where he was : the old woman sat there laughing, 
overcome with noiseless laughter, striving with all her powers 
to prevent his hearing it. Suddenly it seemed to him that the 
bedroom door had opened a crack, and that whispering and 
laughter were coming from there too. Madness seized him : 
he began frenziedly striking the old woman on the head, but 
with every blow of the axe the sound of whispering and laughter 
in the bedroom grew stronger and louder, and the old woman 
shook with mirth. He tried to flee, but the entrance was full of 
people, all the doors stood open, and the landing and the stairs 
below were one mass of people, a sea of heads, all looking at 
him, and all silent, waiting, without a sound . . .  His heart 
laboured, his legs were rooted and would not stir . . .  He tried 
to scream, and . . .  awoke. 
He drew a deep breath, but the dream seemed strangely 
to be continuing : his door was wide open and on the threshold 
stood a complete stranger, looking fixedly at him. 
He had hardly opened his eyes before he closed them again. 
He lay on his back, motionless. 'Is this still the dream, or not?' 
he thought, and imperceptibly raised his lids a fraction to 
look; the stranger still stood in the same place, still gazing at 
him. Suddenly he stepped quietly across the threshold, closed 
the door behind him, walked to the table, waited there a short 
time-with his eyes fixed on Raskolnikov the whole time-and 
gently, noiselessly, sat down on the chair by the sofa; he laid 
his hat on the floor by his side, propped both hands on his stick 
and leaned his chin on them. It was plain that he was prepared 
for a long wait. As far as Raskolnikov could see in quick 
glimpses through his lashes, the visitor was a man no longer 
young, stout, with a bushy, light-coloured, almost white, 
beard . . .  
Some ten minutes passed. It was still light, but beginning to 
grow dusk. Absolute stillness reigned in the room. No sound 
came from the stairs. Only a large fly buzzed and bumped 
against the pane. At last, unable to endure any longer, Raskol­
nikov abruptly raised himself to a sitting position. 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'Well, say something ! What do you want?' 
'Of course I knew very well that you were not asleep, but 
only pretending,' replied the stranger oddly, with a tranquil 
smile. 'Allow me to introduce myself: Arkady Ivanovich 
Svidrigaylov . . .  ' 

PART F O U R  
C H A P T E R  I 
' CAN this be the dream continuing?' thought Raskolnikov 
again. He watched his unexpected visitor warily and mistrust­
fully. 
'Svidrigaylov? Nonsense ! That's impossible !' he said at last 
aloud, in perplexity. 
The visitor did not seem at all surprised at this exclamation. 
'I have called on you for two reasons ; first, because I wanted 
to become acquainted with you personally, having long known 
of you through most interesting and favourable reports; and 
secondly, because I cherish the hope that you will not refuse 
to help me in a project which directly concerns the interests 
of your sister, Avdotya Romanovna. It is possible that she is so 
prejudiced against me that she would not even allow me to 
come anywhere near her without some recommendation, but 
with your help, on the other hand, I am confident . . .  
' 
'Your confidence is misplaced,' interrupted Raskolnikov. 
'May I ask if it is true that they arrived only yesterday?' 
Raskolnikov did not answer. 
'I know it was yesterday. I myself, indeed, arrived only the 
day before yesterday. Well, Rodion Romanovich, I will say 
this to you : I see no need to justify myself, but be good enough 
to tell me what was so criminal in my conduct in all that affair, 
judged sensibly and without prejudice?' 
Raskolnikov still watched him without speaking. 
'The fact that in my own house I persecuted a defenceless 
girl and ''insulted her with my vile proposals"-is that it? (You 
see I anticipate you !) But you have only to suppose that I, too, 
am a man, et nihil humanurrt . . .  in one word, that I also am 
capable of being attracted and falling in love (which after all is 
not a matter that depends on our will), and everything is 
explained in the most natural manner. The whole question is : 
am I a monster or am I myself a victim? And if I am a victim ? 
When I proposed to the object of my affections that she should 
fly with me to America or to Switzerland, I may have cherished 
the most honourable sentiments and thought I was furthering 

270 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
our mutual happiness. Reason, you know, is passion's slave ; 
perhaps, after all, it was to myself I did most harm ! . .  .' 
'That is quite beside the point,' interrupted Raskolnikov 
with distaste. 'The simple fact is that whether you are right or 
wrong they find you repugnant, and therefore have no wish to 
know you. They will have nothing to do with you. Take your­
self off! . . .  ' 
Svidrigaylov laughed aloud. 
'But you . . .  but there is no getting round you !' he said, 
laughing in the most candid manner. 'I thought I could be 
artful, but no, you instantly put your finger on the real point !' 
'But you are still trying to be artful at this very moment.' 
'Well, what then? What then?' repeated Svidrigaylov, still 
laughing heartily. 'It was what is called bonne guerre, and the 
most innocent of deceptions ! . . .  All the same, you interrupted 
me; and, whether or no, I repeat again : there would have been 
no unpleasantness but for the incident in the garden. Marfa 
P_etrovna . . . ' 
'They say that you drove Marfa Petrovna into her grave; 
is that so?' rudely interrupted Raskolnikov. 
'Oh, you have heard of that, too ? But of course you would 
have . . .  Well, in answer to your question, I hardly know what 
to say, although my conscience is perfectly clear in that respect. 
I mean, you mustn't think that I have any misgivings on that 
score : everything was quite regular and correct; the medical 
inquiry revealed apoplexy, as a result of bathing immediately 
after a heavy meal accompanied by almost a bottle of wine, 
and indeed there was nothing else it could have shown . . .  No, 
sir; but I'll tell you what I have been wondering for some time, 
especially on my way here in the train; did I not contribute to 
this . . .  unfortunate accident in some degree, by causing some 
mental disturbance or something of that kind? But I came to 
the conclusion that it positively could not be so.' 
Raskolnikov laughed. 
'Why should you want to worry about that?' 
'What are you laughing at? Consider : I gave her only a 
couple of blows with a riding-switch, and it didn't even leave 
a mark. Please don't think me cynical : I am quite aware that 
I behaved atrociously, and so on and so forth; but I also know 
quite well that Marfa Petrovna may even have been pleased 
at this evidence of passion, so to speak. All that business about 
your sister had been wrung absolutely dry. l\1arfa Petrovna 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
271 
had already been obliged to stay at home for two days; she 
had no fresh excuse for going to town, and they were all bored 
there with that letter of hers (you heard about her reading the 
letter?) . And suddenly those two blows fell; they might have 
come from heaven ! . . .  The first thing she did was to order the 
carriage ! . . .  Not to mention the fact that it sometimes happens 
that women are highly gratified at being outraged, in spite 
of their apparent indignation. It happens with everybody : 
mankind in general loves to be affronted, have you noticed ? 
But especially women. You might almost say it 's their only 
amusement.' 
At one time Raskolnikov thought of ending the interview 
by getting up and going away. But a certain amount of curiosity, 
and even some calculation, kept him back for the time being. 
'Do you like fighting?' he asked absently. 
'No, not particularly,' calmly answered Svidrigaylov. 'I 
hardly ever came to blows with Marfa Petrovna. We lived 
very peaceably together and she was always quite satisfied 
with me. In all our seven years of marriage I used the whip 
only twice altogether (not counting a third, quite equivocal 
occasion) : once, two months after our marriage, immediately 
after we arrived in the country, and again this last time. And 
did you think I was such a tyrant, a reactionary, a slave­
driver? Ha, ha ! . . .  By the way, do you remember, Rodion 
Romanovich, how a few years ago, in the days of beneficent 
publicity, a nobleman-! forget his name-was publicly held 
up to shame* in the press for having thrashed some German 
woman in a railway-carriage? Do you remember? About that 
time, in the very same year, I think, there was "the disgraceful 
affair of the Century" (you remember, the Egyptian Nights; the 
public reading. Those black eyes ! Oh, where are you, golden 
days of our youth?) . Well, sir, this is my opinion : I don't feel 
any deep sympathy for the gentleman who administered the 
thrashing, because after all it . . .  well, what is there to sym­
pathize with? But at the same time, I can't help saying that 
from time to time one comes across such provoking "Germans" 
that I don't think there is a single progressive who could 
answer for himself. Nobody looked at the subject from that 
point of view then, but all the same that is the truly humane 
point of view, it really is !' 
Having said this, Svidrigaylov suddenly laughed again. It 
was clear to Raskolnikov that this was a man who had firmly 

272 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
made up his mind to something, but would keep his own 
counsel. 
'You must have been several days with nobody to talk to, 
I suppose?' he asked. 
'Almost nobody. Why? Are you surprised to find me so 
easy-going a person?' 
'No, I am surprised because you are almost excessively 
amiable.' 
'Because I did not take offence at the rudeness of your 
questions? Is that it? But . . .  why should I be offended? As you 
asked, so I answered,' he added, with a surprisingly artless 
expression. 'You know, I take no particular interest in any­
thing,' he went on, musingly. 'Especially now I have nothing to 
occupy me . , .  However, you may believe, if you care to, that 
I am making up to you with an ulterior motive, especially as 
I told you myself that I have something to see your sister about. 
But I will freely acknowledge that I am bored to death, 
especially these last three days, so that I am very glad to have 
you to talk to . . .  Don't be angry, Rodion Romanovich, but 
you yourself somehow seem terribly odd to me. Say what you 
please, but there is something strange about you just now ; not, 
that is, particularly at this moment, but now generally speak­
ing . . .  Well, well, I won't go on; don't scowl ! Really I am not 
such a bear as you suppose.' 
Raskolnikov looked at him sombrely. 
'Perhaps you are not a bear at all,' he said. 'I even think 
that you are a very well-bred man, or at least know how to 
behave like one on occasion.' 
'I am not particularly interested in anybody's opinion,' 
answered Svidrigaylov drily and with a touch of haughtiness, 
'and therefore why not be a bit of a vulgarian, since that guise 
is so appropriate to our climate and . . .  and especially if one 
has a natural tendency that way?' he added, with another 
laugh. 
'But I have heard that you have many acquaintances here. 
You are surely "not without connexions", as it is termed. Why 
then, in that case, should you have recourse to me, except to 
further some purpose of your own?' 
'It is true that I have friends here,' assented Svidrigaylov, 
ignoring the main point, 'and I have already met some of them, 
in the three days that I've been hanging about here. I recog­
nize them as the sort of people I know and I think they 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
273 
recognize me in the same way. That is a matter of course, 
since I am decently dressed and not reckoned a poor man; 
the abolition of serfdorrf has made no difference to me : my 
income, derived from forests and water-meadows, is not 
diminished by it. But . . .  I won't go to see them. I was bored 
with them before; this is my third day here and I haven't called 
on anybody . . .  And what a town this is ! I wish you could tell 
me how it has come to be like this. A town of clerks and all 
kinds of seminarists rit 's true I didn't notice much when I was 
having a good time here before, eight years ago . . .  Now I 
swear I have no confidence in anything but anatomy !' 
'In anatomy?' 
'As for these political clubs, these Dussauts,* these hair­
splitting discussions of yours, or whatever other evidence of 
progress you may have here-well, they must all get on without 
me,' he went on, again ignoring the question. 'And I don't want 
to be a card-sharper, either.' 
'Have you ever been one?' 
'How could I help it? There was a whole set of us, all highly 
respectable, eight years ago; we had a very good time; there 
were rich men among us, and poets, and, you know, we all 
had the most charming manners. Generally speaking, in our 
Russian society the very best manners are found among those 
who are used to being beaten-have you noticed that? Of 
course, now I've fallen off with being in the country. All the 
same, in those days I was nearly put in prison for debt by a 
Greek from Nezhin. Then Marfa Petrovna turned up, bar­
gained with him, and bought me off for thirty thousand sil­
ver roubles. (I owed seventy thousand altogether.) We were 
united in lawful wedlock, and she took me off immediately 
into the country, like some treasure. She was five years older 
than me, you know. She loved me dearly. For seven years 
I never left the country. And note this : all her life she held that 
document (made out to someone else) over my head, that note 
for thirty thousand roubles, so that if I had ever had any 
thought of rebellion, it would have been straight into the trap 
with me ! And she would have done it ! Women, you know, see 
nothing incongruous in all that.' 
'And if it hadn't been for that, would you have cut and run?' 
'I don't know how to put it. I hardly found that the docu­
ment hampered me at all. I didn't want to go anywhere, and 
Marfa Petrovna herself once or twice suggested that I should 

274 
C RIME AND PUNISHMENT 
go abroad, seeing that I was bored. But what would have been 
the use? I had been abroad before, and I always hated it. 
I don't know why, but you look at the dawn breaking, the bay 
of Naples, the sea, and you are sad. The worst of it is, you 
know, that you really do grieve for something. No, better stay 
in your own country; here at least one can blame somebody 
else for everything and find excuses for oneself. Perhaps I might 
go on an expedition to the North Pole; becausej'ai le vinmauvais* 
I have no taste for drinking, and there is nothing else left for 
me to do. I have tried and I know. But I'll tell you what, they 
say Berg* is going to make an ascent in a great balloon on 
Sunday in the Yusupov Gardens, and that he will take passen­
gers up for a consideration. Is that true?' 
'Why, would you go up ?' 
'I ? No . . .  I only asked,' murmured Svidrigaylov, as if he 
were really thinking of something else. 
'What does he really want, I wonder?' thought Raskolnikov. 
'No, the document was no embarrassment to me,' went on 
Svidrigaylov thoughtfully. 'I stayed in the country of my own 
accord. And about a year ago, on my name-day, l\1arfa 
Petrovna gave it back to me, and a considerable sum of money 
besides. She had some capital, you know. "You see how I trust 
you, Arkady Ivanovich"-those were her very words. Don't 
you believe that she used those words? But you know, in the 
country I had become the complete squire ; everybody knows 
me in those parts. And I sent for some books as well. Marfa 
Petrovna approved at first, but afterwards she was always 
afraid I should study too much.' 
'You appear to miss Marfa Petrovna very much.' 
'I do? Perhaps. Yes, it may be so. By the way, do you believe 
in ghosts?' 
'What kind of ghosts ?' 
'The usual kind, of course !' 
'Do you ?' 
'Well, perhaps not, pour vous plaire •
•
•
 That is, I don't exactly 
disbelieve in them . .  .' 
'Have you ever seen one?' 
Svidrigaylov looked at him rather strangely. 
'Marfa Petrovna is good enough to visit me sometimes.' 
'What do you mean by that?' 
'She has already been three times. The first time I saw her 
was on the very day of the funeral, an hour after we came 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
275 
away from the cemetery. That was the day before I left for here. 
The second time was on the way here, at Malaya Vishera 
station, the day before yesterday; the third was two hours ago 
in the room where I am living. I was alone.' 
'And awake?' 
'Wide awake. I was awake all three times. She comes, speaks 
a few words, and leaves by the door, always by the door. You 
can almost hear her even.' 
'I wonder why I thought that something of that kind was 
certainly happening to you,' said Raskolnikov suddenly, and 
was immediately filled with astonishment at his own words. 
He was very excited. 
'In-deed? You thought that?' asked Svidrigaylov, surprised. 
'Really? Well, didn't I say we had something in common, eh?' 
'You never said that !' answered Raskolnikov sharply and 
with some heat. 
'Didn't I ?' 
'No !' 
'I thought I had. Just now, when I came in and saw you 
lying with your eyes shut, pretending to be asleep, I said to 
myself at once: "This is the very man !" '  
'What do you mean by "the very man" ? What are you 
talking about?' cried Raskolnikov. 
'Talking about? I really don't know . .  .' murmured Svidri­
gaylov, candidly, seeming puzzled himself. 
There was a minute of silence, while they stared at one 
another. 
'What nonsense !' exclaimed Raskolnikov in a tone of annoy­
ance. 'What does she talk about, when she appears to you?' 
'She? Oh, the silliest rubbish you can imagine, and (people 
are very odd !) that makes me really angry. She came in the 
first time-I was tired, you know, with the funeral, the 
requiem mass, the prayers, and the meal afterwards, and at 
last I was alone in the study ; I had lit a cigar and sat thinking 
-she came in at the door, and she said "Arkady Ivanovich, 
with all the upset today you've forgotten to wind up the clock 
in the dining-room.'' Well, all those seven years I had wound 
up that clock every week, and if I forgot, she always used to 
remind me. The next day I was on the way here. At daybreak, 
I got out at a station and got some coffee-! had spent the 
night dozing fitfully, and I was very tired and could hardly keep 
my eyes open ; I looked up, and suddenly Marfa Petrovna sat 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
down beside me with a pack of cards in her hands. "Wouldn't 
you like me to tell your fortune for the journey, Arkady 
I vanovich ?" She was very good at telling fortunes. I shall 
never forgive myself for not letting her tell it. I took fright and 
hurried away; it is true that the bell went just then. Today, 
I was sitting smoking, with an over-loaded stomach after a 
perfectly wretched dinner brought from a cook-shop-when 
suddenly Marfa Petrovna came in, all dressed up in a new 
green silk dress with a long train. "Good afternoon, Arkady 
I vanovich ! How do you like my dress? Aniska can't make them 
like this." (Aniska is our dressmaker in the country. She used 
to be a serf, and she learnt her trade in Moscow-a pretty 
girl.) She stood in front of me and turned round. I inspected 
the dress and then I looked very, very carefully at her, and 
said : "What makes you go to all the trouble of coming to me 
for such trifles?" "Good gracious, my dear, it 's getting im­
possible to disturb you about anything !" To tease her, I said. 
"Marfa Petrovna, I want to get married." "That depends on 
you, Arkady Ivanovich, but it isn't very creditable to rush here 
and get married again, almost before your wife is buried. If 
you could even be trusted to choose well ! But no, I know it 
will do neither her nor you any good, and nice people will laugh 
at you." Then she took herself off, and I seemed to hear her 
train rustling. What nonsense, isn't it?' 
'But perhaps this is all lies, eh?' responded Raskolnikov. 
'I don't often lie,' Svidrigaylov answered thoughtfully, as 
if he had not noticed the rudeness of the question. 
'And had you never seen any apparitions before?' 
'Y-yes, I had, just once in my life, six years ago. I had a 
servant, Philka; we had just buried him, and I forgot and 
called out : "Philka, my pipe !" He came in and went straight 
to the cabinet where I keep my pipes. I thought: "He is taking 
his revenge on me," because we had had a fierce quarrel just 
before his death. "How dare you come into my presence," said 
I, "with a hole in your elbow? Get out, you rascal !" He turned 
and went out, and he has never come again. I didn't tell Marfa 
Petrovna at the time. I wanted to have prayers for his soul, but 
I was ashamed.' 
'You ought to see a doctor.' 
'I don't need you to tell me that there is something wrong 
with me, although I honestly don't know what; it seems to me 
that I am probably five times as healthy as you. I did not ask 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
277 
you whether you believe that people see ghosts. I asked you 
whether you believe that ghosts exist.' 
'No, nothing would make me believe it !' cried Raskolnikov 
with some heat. 
'What do people usually say?' murmured Svidrigaylov, as 
though he were talking to himself, with head bent and eyes 
turned aside. 'They say : "You are sick, and so what you think 
you see is nothing more than the unreal dream of your feverish 
mind." But you know, that is not strictly logical. I agree that 
ghosts appear only to the sick, but that proves only that they 
cannot appear to anybody else, not that they have no real 
existence.' 
'Of course they don't exist !' insisted Raskolnikov irritably. 
'You think not?' went on Svidrigaylov, slowly turning his 
eyes on him. 'Well, suppose we reason like this (I wish you 
would help me here) : Apparitions are, so to speak, shreds and 
fragments of other worlds, the first beginnings of them. There 
is, of course, no reason why a healthy man should see them, 
because a healthy man is mainly a being of this earth, and 
therefore for completeness and order he must live only this 
earthly life. But as soon as he falls ill, as soon as the normal 
earthly state of the organism is disturbed, the possibility of 
another world begins to appear, and as the illness increases, so 
do the contacts with the other world, so that at the moment of 
a man's death he enters fully into that world. It is a long time 
since I first developed this argument. If you believe in the life 
hereafter, you may accept this reasoning too.' 
'I do not believe in a life hereafter,' said Raskolnikov. 
Svidrigaylov remained thoughtful. 
'What if there is nothing there but spiders or something like 
that?' he said suddenly. 
'This is a madman,' thought Raskolnikov. 
'Eternity is always presented to us as an idea which it is 
impossible to grasp, something enormous, enormous ! But why 
should it necessarily be enormous ? Imagine, instead, that it will 
be one little room, something like a bath-house in the country, 
black with soot, with spiders in every corner, and that that 
is the whole of eternity. I sometimes imagine it like that, you 
know.' 
'But surely, surely, you can imagine something juster and 
more comforting than that !' exclaimed Raskolnikov, painfully 
moved. 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'Juster? For all we know, that may be just; and, you know, 
I would certainly make it like that, deliberately !' answered 
Svidrigaylov, with a vague smile. 
At this monstrous answer a chill seized upon Raskolnikov. 
Svidrigaylov raised his head, gazed steadily at him, and sud­
denly laughed aloud. 
'No, but think of this,' he cried. 'Half an hour ago we had 
never seen one another, we look on one another as enemies, and 
there is still a question to be settled between us; we've dropped 
the question and just look what nonsense we are talking ! Well, 
wasn't I right when I said we were kindred spirits?' 
'Be good enough,' said Raskolnikov irritably, 'to allow me to 
ask for an immediate explanation of why you have conde­
scended to honour me with a visit . . .  and . . .  and . . .  I am in 
a hurry; I have no time to spare. I must go out . . .  ' 
'Certainly, certainly. Your sister, Avdotya Romanovna, is 
marrying Mr. Peter Petrovich Luzhin, isn't she?' 
'Can't you manage to avoid asking questions about my 
sister, or mentioning her name? I cannot understand how you 
dare utter her name in my presence, if you really are Svidri­
gaylov.' 
'But she is exactly what I came to talk about, so how can I 
help mentioning her?' 
'Very well ; but say it as quickly as possible !' 
'I am convinced that you must already have made up your 
mind about this Mr. Luzhin (a connexion ofmine by marriage) , 
if you have either been in his company for as long as half an 
hour or heard any faithful account of him. He is not a fitting 
match for Avdotya Romanovna. In my opinion, Avdotya 
Romanovna is sacrificing herself, with great nobility and 
without counting the cost, for . . .  for her family. It seemed to 
me, from all I had heard of you, that for your part you would 
be very pleased if this match could be broken off without 
harming her interests. Now that I know you personally, I am 
sure of it.' 
'All this is very innocent of you; excuse me, I meant in­
solent,' said Raskolnikov. 
'That is to say that my motives are purely selfish. Don't 
worry, Rodion Romanovich, ifl were considering only my own 
interests I should not have expressed myself so bluntly. I am 
not a complete fool. In this connexion, let me tell you a strange 
psychological fact. A short time ago, justifying my love for 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
279 
Avdotya Romanovna, I spoke of myself as a victim. Well, you 
must know that now I feel no love for her whatever, none at all, 
so that even to me it seems very strange, since I really did feel 
something . . .' 
'As a result of idleness and depravity,' interrupted Raskol­
nikov. 
'Well, I am indeed idle and depraved. But your sister has 
so many excellent qualities that even I could not but be im­
pressed by them to some extent. But it all amounted to nothing, 
as I see now.' 
'And have you seen it for long?' 
'I had begun to notice it even earlier, but I finally convinced 
myself the day before yesterday, almost at the moment of my 
arrival in St. Petersburg. In Moscow I still imagined that I was 
coming here to try to win Avdotya Romanovna's hand as 
Mr. Luzhin's rival.' 
'Excuse me for interrupting you. Please cut your story short, 
if you can, and come straight to the purpose of your visit. I am 
in a hurry. I have to go out . .  .' 
'With the greatest pleasure. Mter I had arrived here and 
decided to undertake a certain . . .  journey, I wished to make 
the necessary preliminary arrangements. My children have 
remained with their aunt; they are well provided for and have 
no need of me. And indeed I am not much of a father ! For 
myself I have taken only what Marfa Petrovna gave me a 
year ago. It is enough for me. Excuse me, I am coming to the 
point now. Before this journey which I may perhaps take, 
I want to settle accounts with Mr. Luzhin. It is not that I 
dislike him so extremely, but he was the cause of my quarrel 
with Marfa Petrovna, when I found out that she had contrived 
this marriage. Now, with your help and perhaps in your 
presence, I should like to have an interview with Avdotya 
Romanovna, and tell her firstly that her association with 
Mr. Luzhin will not only not be of any advantage to her but 
will probably bring her definite harm. Then, after begging 
her forgiveness for all the recent unpleasantness, I should ask 
permission to offer her ten thousand roubles and thus make 
easier the break with Mr. Luzhin, a break from which I am 
sure she herself would not be averse if only it appeared 
possible.' 
'But you really are mad !' exclaimed Raskolnikov, more 
surprised than angry. 'How dare you say such things ?' 

280 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'I knew you would make a fuss. But to begin with, although I 
am not rich, I can dispose of ten thousand roubles quite freely; 
that is to say I have absolutely no need of it, absolutely none. 
Unless Avdotya Romanovna accepts it, I shall find some more 
foolish use for it. That is the first point. The second is that my 
conscience is perfectly clear; there is no ulterior motive behind 
my offer. You may believe me or not, as you choose, but both 
Avdotya Romanovna and you will realize it later. The whole 
point is that I really did cause some trouble and unpleasant­
ness to your sister, whom I greatly respect, and therefore, as I 
sincerely repent of it, I earnestly desire-not to buy myself off, 
not to pay for the unpleasantness, but purely and simply to do 
something for her good, on the basis that I do not really claim 
the privilege of doing nothing but harm. If my offer contained 
one-millionth part of calculation, I should not have made it so 
bluntly, and I should not have offered her only ten thousand 
roubles when a mere five weeks ago I was offering her much 
more. Besides, in a very, very short time I may perhaps be 
marrying another young lady and that fact alone ought to 
destroy any suspicion that I might have designs on Avdotya 
Romanovna. 
Finally, I will say that if she marries Mr. 
Luzhin, Avdotya Romanovna will be taking the same money, 
but from another source . . .  Don't be angry, Rodion Romano­
vich. Consider it coolly and calmly.' 
Svidrigaylov was himself extremely cool and calm as he 
said this. 
'I beg you to stop,' said Raskolnikov. 'However you look at 
it, this is unforgivable impudence.' 
'Not at all ! If that were so, a man could do his fellow men 
nothing but harm in this world, and would have no right to 
do a particle of good, because of empty conventions. That is 
absurd. Surely if, for example, I died and left this money to 
your sister in my will, she would not then refuse to accept it?' 
'Quite possibly she would.' 
'No, I won't believe that ! However, if the answer is no, 
there is no more to be said. But ten thousand roubles may be a 
very good thing on occasion. In any case, I beg you to tell 
Avdotya Romanovna what I have said.' 
'No, I won't tell her.' 
'In that case, Rodion Romanovich, I shall be obliged to 
seek a personal interview, which would mean troubling her.' 
'If I do tell her, will you make no effort to see her yourself?' 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
281 
'I don't know what to say. I should very much like to see her 
once.' 
'There is no hope of that.' 
'I'm sorry. However, you don't know me. Perhaps now we 
may become closer friends.' 
'You think we can be friends?' 
'Why shouldn't we?' said Svidrigaylov with a smile. He rose 
and took up his hat. 'I really didn't come here with the inten­
tion of troubling you for long, and I wasn't much counting 
on anything, although this morning I was greatly struck with 
your face . .  .' 
'Where did you see me this morning?' asked Raskolnikov 
uneasily. 
'Oh, it was quite accidental . . .  I keep fancying there is 
something very like me in you . . .  Don't worry, I am not a bore; 
I got on well enough with the other card-sharpers, I never 
bored the great Prince Svirbey, who is a distant relative of 
mine, I could write about Raphael's Madonnas in Mrs. 
Prilukova's album, I lived for seven years without a break with 
Marfa Petrovna, I used to spend the night in Vyazemsky's 
house in the Haymarket in the old days, and perhaps I will 
go up with Berg in his balloon.' 
'Well, all right. May I ask if you will be leaving soon?' 
'Leaving?' 
'Yes, on that journey . . .  you spoke ofit yourself.' 
'The journey? Oh, yes .
•
.
 I did speak to you of a journey . . .  
Well, that 's a far-reaching question . . .  But if only you knew 
what you are asking about!' he added abruptly in a loud voice, 
and laughed shortly. 'Perhaps I may get married instead of 
making that journey; they are trying to make a match for me.' 
'Here?' 
'Yes.' 
'How have you found time for that?' 
'But I do want to see Avdotya Romanovna once. I ask you 
most earnestly. Well, good-bye . . .  Oh, yes ! I was forgetting 
something. Please tell your sister, Rodion Romanovich, that 
she is remembered in Marfa Petrovna's will for three thousand 
roubles. That is quite definite. Marfa Petrovna made arrange­
ments a week before her death, and it was done in my presence. 
In two or three weeks' time Avdotya Romanovna will be able 
to receive the money.' 
'Are you speaking the truth?' 

C RIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'Yes. Tell her. Well, sir, your servant. I am staying very near 
here, you know.' 
As he left, Svidrigaylov bumped into Razumikhin at the 
door. 
C H A P T E R  I I  
I T  was nearly eight o'clock. They were hurrying towards 
Bakaleev's house, in order to arrive before Luzhin. 
'Who was that?' asked Razumikhin, as soon as they reached 
the street. 
'That was Svidrigaylov, the landowner in whose house my 
sister was insulted when she was governess there. She had to 
leave, in fact she was turned out by his wife, Marfa Petrovna, 
because of his amorous advances to her. Later Marfa Petrovna 
begged Dunya's pardon, and now she has died suddenly. We 
were talking ofher not long ago. I am very much afraid of that 
man, I don't know why. He came to St. Petersburg immedi­
ately after his wife's funeral. He seems very strange, and he has 
some plan . . .  It is as if he knew something . . .  Dunya must be 
protected from him . . .  that 's what I wanted to tell you. Are 
you listening?' 
'Protected ! What can he do to Avdotya Romanovna? Well, 
thank you for telling me this, Rodya . . .  We will protect her ! 
. . .  Where does he live?' 
'I don't know.' 
'Whydidn'tyou askhim? What a pity ! However, I'll findout!' 
'Did you see him?' asked Raskolnikov after a short silence. 
'Yes, I noticed him; I noticed him particularly.' 
'You really did see him? Did you see him clearly?' insisted 
Raskolnikov. 
'Yes, I remember him clearly. I should recognize him among 
a thousand. I have a good memory for faces.' 
They were silent again. 
'Hm . . .  that 's all right . .  .' muttered Raskolnikov. 'Other­
wise you know . . .  I almost thought . . .  I still keep thinking . . .  
that perhaps it was an illusion.' 
'What are you talking about ? I don't follow.' 
'Well,' Raskolnikov went on, with a crooked smile, 'you all 
say that I am mad ; it seemed to me just now that perhaps I 
really am mad, and have simply seen an apparition.' 
'Why do you say that?' 
'After all, who knows? Perhaps I really am mad, and every-

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
283 
thing that has happened all this time has been only my 
imagination . . .  ' 
'Oh, Rodya, you are upset again ! . . .  What did he say? 
Why did he come?' 
Raskolnikov did not answer and Razumikhin thought for a 
minute. 
'Well, listen to my story,' he began. 'I looked in on you, 
but you were asleep. Then we had dinner and then I went to 
see Porfiry. Zametov was still there. When I tried to begin, 
nothing came of it. I simply could not find the right words. 
They seem not to understand, they are incapable of under­
standing, but they don't let that worry them. I took Porfiry 
aside, to the window, and began to talk to him, but again it. 
somehow came out wrong: he didn't look at me and I didn't 
look at him. At last I shook my fist in his face and told him, 
in a cousinly way, I would beat his brains out. He only looked 
at me. I spat and came away, and that was all. It was all very 
stupid. I didn't exchange a word with Zametov. But listen : 
I was afraid I'd spoilt things for you, but coming downstairs 
I had an idea-it positively flashed on me : what are we 
worrying about? If there were any danger to you, or anything 
like that, well, of course. But really, what is it to you? You 
have nothing to do with it, so be hanged to them ! We shall 
have the laugh of them afterwards. In your place, I should 
mystify them a bit more. How ashamed they will be later on ! 
Be hanged to them ! Later we can give them a drubbing, but 
now we will simply laugh at them.' 
'Yes, of course,' answered Raskolnikov. 'But what will you 
say tomorrow?' he thought. It was strange that until this 
moment it had never entered his head to wonder : 'What will 
Razumikhin think when he knows?' As he thought this, Raskol­
nikov looked hard at him. He took very little interest now in 
Razumikhin's account of his visit to Porfiry; so much water 
had flowed under the bridges since then ! . . .  
In the corridor they ran into Luzhin, who had turned up 
at exactly eight o'clock and was looking for the room, so that 
all three went in together, but without looking at one another 
or exchanging greetings. The young men went in first, and 
Peter Petrovich, to avoid any awkwardness, lingered a little 
in the passage, taking off his overcoat. Pulkheria Alexandrovna 
went out to welcome him on the threshold. Dunya was greeting 
her brother. 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
Peter Petrovich came in and bowed to the ladies civilly 
enough, though with redoubled primness. He looked, however, 
as though he had been somewhat taken aback and had not yet 
recovered. Pulkheria Alexandrovna, also a little out of counte­
nance, seated everybody at a round table on which a samovar 
was boiling. Dunya and Luzhin faced each other from opposite 
sides of the table. Razumikhin and Raskolnikov had Pulkheria 
Alexandrovna opposite them, Razumikhin nearer Luzhin and 
Raskolnikov next to his sister. 
There was a momentary silence. Peter Petrovich leisurely 
drew out a scented cambric handkerchief and blew his nose 
with the air of a virtuous man whose dignity has been wounded 
and who is firmly resolved to exact an explanation. While he 
was in the hall, the idea had occurred to him of going away 
without taking off his coat, thus inflicting a severe and im­
pressive punishment on the ladies and making them realize 
the whole situation. But he had not been able to make up his 
mind to this course. Besides, he was a man who did not like the 
unknown, and there were matters here to be cleared up. If his 
orders were so openly disobeyed, that meant there was some 
reason, and consequently it was better to learn what it was 
first. There would always be time to punish them, and it was 
in his power to do so. 
'I hope your journey was pleasant,' he said formally, address­
ing Pulkheria Alexandrovna. 
'Yes, thank God, Peter Petrovich.' 
'I am very pleased to hear it. And Avdotya Romanovna is 
not too tired, either?' 
'I am young and strong, I don't get tired, but it was very 
trying for mama,' answered Dunya. 
'It can't be helped; our national railways are very long. 
Our so-called "Mother Russia" is vast . . .  I, in spite of my own 
desires, was quite unable to meet you yesterday. I hope, how­
ever, that everything passed off without any particular trouble.' 
'Alas, no, Peter Petrovich, we felt very downcast,' declared 
Pulkheria Alexandrovna, with a peculiar intonation, 'and if 
God Himself had not sent Dmitri Prokofich to us yesterday, 
we should have been utterly lost. This is he, Dmitri Prokofich 
Razumikhin,' she added, introducing him to Luzhin. 
'I have already had the pleasure . . .  yesterday,' muttered 
Luzhin, with an unfriendly sidelong look at Razumikhin. He 
frowned and was silent. Peter Petrovich belonged to that order 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
of persons who seem extremely amiable in company and lay 
special claim to the social graces, but who, as soon as something 
is not to their liking, lose all their spring and become more like 
sacks of flour than animated and lively gentlemen. Silence 
fell again : Raskolnikov remained obstinately dumb, Avdotya 
Romanovna seemed unwilling to speak for the moment, 
Razumikhin could find nothing to say. Pulkheria Alexandrovna 
began to feel anxious again. 
'Marfa Petrovna is dead. Have you heard?' she began, 
resorting to her main topic of conversation. 
'Naturally I have heard. I was one of the first to know, and 
now I have brought you the news that immediately after his 
wife's funeral Arkady Ivanovich Svidrigaylov left in haste 
for St. Petersburg. So, at least, I hear from most trustworthy 
sources.' 
'For St. Petersburg? Here?' asked Dunya, exchanging 
alarmed glances with her mother. 
'Just so. And obviously he has some definite purpose, bearing 
in mind the haste of his journey and the antecedent circum­
stances in general.' 
'Good heavens ! Will he not leave Dunechka in peace even 
here?' exclaimed Pulkheria Alexandrovna. 
'I do not think that either you or Avdotya Romanovna has 
any particular cause for alarm, unless, of course, you yourselves 
consent to enter into sonie kind of relations with him. As for 
me, I am on my guard, and I am now making inquiries to 
discover where he is staying . . .  ' 
'Oh, Peter Petrovich, you cannot believe how much you have 
frightened me !' resumed Pulkheria Alexandrovna. 'I have seen 
him only twice, and I thought him horrible, horrible ! I am 
convinced he was the cause of poor Marfa Petrovna's death.' 
'About that it is impossible to reach a definite conclusion. 
My information is exact. I will not dispute that perhaps he was 
instrumental in hastening the course of events, so to say, by 
the moral influence of the affronts he gave her. As for his 
conduct and his moral character in general, I am in agreement 
with you. I do not know whether he is rich now, nor exactly 
what Marfa Petrovna left him ; I shall be informed of it in the 
shortest possible space of time ; but here in St. Petersburg, if 
he has any pecuniary resources at all, he will certainly resume 
his old courses. He is the most depraved, the most completely 
abandoned to vice, even of people of his own kind. I have 

286 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
substantial grounds for supposing that Marfa Petrovna, who 
had the misfortune to fall so deeply in love with him and 
redeem his debts eight years ago, was of service to him again 
in another connexion : only her efforts and sacrifices succeeded 
in suppressing, at the outset, criminal investigations involving 
a suspicion of brutal and, so to say, fantastic homicide, for 
which he might very well have been sent on a trip to Siberia. 
Such, if you wish to know, is the sort of man he is.' 
'Good heavens !' cried Pulkheria Alexandrovna. Raskolnikov 
was listening with great attention. 
'Were you speaking the truth when you said you had exact 
knowledge of this?' inquired Dunya in a severe and impressive 
tone. 
'What I am telling you is only what I myself heard, in 
confidence, from poor Marfa Petrovna. It must be remarked 
that from a legal point of view the matter is extremely obscure. 
There lived, and I believe still lives, here a certain foreigner, 
a woman called Resslich, who was a small money-lender and 
had other business interests. A long time ago Mr. Svidrigaylov 
had very intimate and mysterious relations with this Resslich 
woman. She had a distant relative, a niece I think, living with 
her, a deaf-and-dumb girl about fifteen, or perhaps only four­
teen, years old. This Resslich hated the girl, reproached her 
with every morsel she ate, and beat her unmercifully. One day 
the girl was found hanged in the attic. The verdict was that she 
had committed suicide. There, after the usual proceedings, the 
matter ended, but later, information was laid that the child 
had been . . .  cruelly abused by Svidrigaylov. It is true that it 
was all obscure, as the accusation came from another German, 
a woman of notorious character whose word could not be 
credited ; finally, no actual written statement was made, 
thanks to Marfa Petrovna's efforts and her money; it was all 
limited to rumours. Nevertheless, the rumours were very 
significant. You, of course, Avdotya Romanovna, heard while 
you were there the story of the man Philip, who died of brutal 
ill-treatment, six years ago, before serfdom was abolished.' 
'On the contrary, I heard that this Philip hanged himself.' 
'Just so, but he was driven, or rather persuaded, to his violent 
end by the ceaseless systematic persecution and punishments of 
Mr. Svidrigaylov.' 
'I do not know that,' answered Dunya drily. 'I only heard 
a very strange story about this Philip's being some sort of 

C R I ME AND P UNISHMENT 
287 
hypochondriac, a kind of home-grown philosopher, who, the 
servants said "read himself silly", and about his having hanged 
himself more because of the mockery than because of the beat­
ings of Mr. Svidrigaylov. While I was there he treated the 
servants well, and they liked him, even though they did blame 
him for Philip's death.' 
'I see, Avdotya Romanovna, that you are suddenly disposed 
to find excuses for him,' remarked Luzhin, with an ambiguous 
smile twisting his lips. 'He is certainly a man of great cunning 
with the ladies, and very fascinating to them, as the lamentable 
example of Marfa Petrovna, who died so strangely, serves to 
show. I only wished to be of service to you and your mama 
with my advice, in view of the new attempts on his part which 
are undoubtedly in store for us. As far as I am concerned, I am 
convinced that the fellow will certainly disappear once more 
into a debtor's prison. Marfa Petrovna, with her children to 
consider, was far from intending to settle any land on him, and 
if she did leave him anything, it must have been the unavoid­
able minimum, a trifle, a mere nothing, not enough to last a 
man of his habits a year.' 
'Peter Petrovich,' said Dunya, 'please let us stop talking of 
1\fr. Svidrigaylov. It makes me wretched.' 
'He has just been to see me,' said Raskolnikov suddenly, 
breaking his silence for the first time. 
There were exclamations on all sides and everybody turned 
to him. Even Peter Petrovich was roused. 
'An hour and a half ago, while I was asleep, he came in, 
woke me up, and introduced himself,' went on Raskolnikov. 
'He was quite at home and cheerful, and is perfectly confident 
that I shall become a friend of his. Among other things he was 
most persistent in seeking an interview with you, Dunya, and 
asked me to act as his intermediary. He has a suggestion to 
make to you : he told me what it was. Besides this, he reliably 
informed me that a week before her death Marfa Petrovna had 
left you three thousand roubles in her will, and you will be 
able to receive the money in a very short time.' 
'Thank God !' cried Pulkheria Alexandrovna, crossing her-
self. 'You must pray for her soul, Dunya !' 
'It really is true,' Luzhin burst out. 
'Well, what more?' asked Dunya, urgently. 
'Then he said that he was not rich and that all the estate 
goes to the children, who are now with their aunt. Then he 

288 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
told me he is staying somewhere not far from me-but I don't 
know where, I didn't ask . . .  ' 
'But what is it, what is it he wants to suggest to Dunya ?' 
asked Pulkheria Alexandrovna fearfully. 'Did he tell you ?' 
'Yes, he told me.' 
'What is it, then?' 
'I will tell you afterwards.' Raskolnikov turned to his tea 
and said no more. 
Peter Petrovich took out his watch and looked at it. 
'I must go. I have something to do. So I need not be in your 
way,' he added with an air of some pique, and made to rise 
from his chair. 
'Don't go, Peter Petrovich,' said Dunya. 'You know you 
intended to spend the evening with us. Besides, you yourself 
wrote that you wanted to discuss something with mama.' 
'Quite so, Avdotya Romanovna,' said Peter Petrovich im­
pressively, sitting down again but keeping his hat in his hands. 
'I did indeed desire an explanation both with you and with 
your respected mama, and on some most important points. 
But as your brother finds it impossible to discuss some proposal 
of Mr. Svidrigaylov's in my presence, I am unwilling, and 
indeed unable, to talk of most extremely important matters 
in the presence of outsiders. In addition, my most urgent and 
earnest request has not been fulfilled . . .  ' 
Luzhin's expression was bitter, and he again became 
majestically silent. 
'Your request that my brother should not be present at our 
meeting was disregarded entirely at my insistence,' said Dunya. 
'You wrote that my brother had insulted you; I think that the 
matter should be cleared up without delay, and that you should 
be reconciled. If Rodya really did insult you, he ought to and 
will ask your pardon.' 
Peter Petrovich immediately began to swagger. 
'There are some insults, Avdotya Romanovna, which, with 
the best will in the world, cannot be forgotten. There is a 
point in everything beyond which it is dangerous to go, for 
if once you do so, there can be no turning back.' 
'That was not, strictly speaking, what I was talking about, 
Peter Petrovich,' interrupted Dunya with a shade ofimpatience. 
'You must understand plainly that our whole future depends 
now on whether you clear all this up and make friends as 
quickly as possible, or not. I tell you candidly at the outset 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
289 
that I cannot see things in any other light, and if you set any 
value on me at all, this busineՆs must be settled once for all 
today, difficult as it may be. I repeat that if my brother is at 
fault he will ask your forgiveness.' 
'I am surprised that you should put the question in that 
way, Avdotya Romanovna.' Luzhin was growing more and 
more irritated. 'Valuing and, so to say, adoring you as I do, 
I may at the same time find it completely and absolutely 
possible not to like some member of your family. As an aspirant 
to the happiness of your hand, at the same time I cannot take 
upon myself obligations inconsistent . . .  
' 
'Oh, don't be so quick to take offence, Peter Petrovich,' 
interrupted Dunya with feeling. 'Be the wise and generous 
person I have always thought and would still like to think you. 
I have given you a solemn promise, I am engaged to you ; trust 
me in this matter, and believe that I am capable of judging 
it in an unbiased fashion. The fact that I am undertaking the 
role of judge is as much a surprise to my brother as to you. 
When today, after the receipt of your letter, I requested him 
not to fail to be here at our meeting, I told him nothing of my 
intentions. Please understand that if you cannot come to terms, 
I shall be obliged to choose between you : it must be either you 
or he. That is how the question stands, on your side and on his. 
I don't want to make any mistake in my choice, in fact I must not. 
For your sake I must break with my brother; for my brother's 
sake I must break with you. I can find out now for certain, as 
I want to, whether he is a brother for me. And about you : am I 
dear to you, do you prize me, are you the husband for me?' 
'Avdotya Romanovna,' said Luzhin, ruffled, 'I find your 
words too ominous ; nay, more, I must call them offensive, in 
view of the position I have the honour to occupy in relation 
to you. I will say nothing of the strange and insulting com­
parison, on the same level, between me and . . .  an insolent 
youth, but your words admit the possibility that the promise 
you gave might be broken. You say "either you or he" and 
by that very fact you show how little I mean to you . . . I cannot 
tolerate this, considering the relations and . . .  obligations 
which exist between us.' 
'What?' Dunya fired up. 'I put your interests alongside of 
everything that has until now been precious in my life, that 
has until now formed the whole of my life, and you are offended 
because I set too little value on you !' 

290 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
Raskolnikov did not speak, but he smiled sarcastically. 
Razumikhin was shivering with excitement; but Luzhin would 
not accept the reproach ; on the contrary, with every word he 
grew more captious and touchy, as though he were beginning 
to enjoy the dispute. 
'Love for the future companion of your life, for your hus­
band, should surpass love for your brother,' he answered 
sententiously, 'and in any case I cannot be put upon the same 
footing . . .  Although I insisted just now that I did not wish, 
and indeed was unable, to discuss in your brother's presence all 
the matters I came here intending to speak of, nevertheless 
I now propose to seek from your respected mama the explana­
tion, which I must insist on, of a point of the utmost importance, 
which injuriously affects me. Your son,' he went on, address­
ing Pulkheria Alexandrovna, 'yesterday, in the presence of 
Mr. Rassudkin* (or . . .  I think that is right? Excuse me, I 
can't remember your surname'-and he bowed graciously to 
Razumikhin-) 'insulted me by distorting an idea I had 
expressed to you in private conversation, over coffee, namely, 
that marriage with a poor girl who has had experience of life's 
bitterness is in my opinion more advantageous in connubial 
relations than with one who has known prosperity, for it is 
more beneficial to the morals. Your son deliberately exagger­
ated the meaning of my words to the point of absurdity, 
accusing me of evil intentions and, in my view, basing what he 
said on your correspondence. I shall count myselfhappy if you, 
Pulkheria Alexandrovna, find it possible to persuade me to the 
opposite effect and thus set my mind at rest to a considerable 
extent. Please inform me of the exact terms in which you 
reproduced my words in your letter to Rodion Romanovich.' 
'I don't remember,' said Pulkheria Alexandrovna in some 
confusion. 'I repeated them as I understood them. I don't 
know how Rodya repeated them again to you . . .  Perhaps he 
did exaggerate something.' 
'He could not have exaggerated them without your prompt­
ing.' 
'Peter Petrovich,' Pulkheria Alexandrovna declared with 
dignity, 'the proof that Dunya and I did not put a very bad 
construction on your words is that we are here.' 
'Well said, mama !' said Dunya approvingly. 
'It appears that I am at fault here, too !' said Luzhin 
resentfully. 

C RIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'Here you are, always blaming Rodion, Peter Petrovich, 
and you yourself recently told an untruth about him in your 
letter,' added Pulkheria Alexandrovna, gaining courage. 
'I do not remember writing anything that was not true.' 
'You wrote,' said Raskolnikov sharply, not turning to 
Luzhin, 'that yesterday I gave money not to the widow of the 
man who was killed, which is what really happened, but to his 
daughter (whom I had never even seen until yesterday) . You 
wrote it in order to make mischief between me and my 
family, and for the same purpose you used in addition the 
vilest terms about the conduct of a girl whom you do not know. 
All that is gossip of the meanest kind.' 
'Excuse me, sir,' answered Luzhin, shaking with anger, 'I 
enlarged upon your qualities and actions in my letter solely 
in order to comply with the request of your sister and your 
mama that I should inform them how I found you and what 
impression you produced on me. As for the matter alluded to 
in my letter, find me a single line that is unjust !-show me that 
you did not waste your money or that in that family, un­
fortunate though it is, there are no unworthy persons.' 
'In my opinion, with all your respectability you are not 
worth the little finger of the unhappy girl at whom you are 
casting stones.' 
'Does that mean that you could allow yourself to introduce 
her into the society of your mother and sister?' 
'I have already done so, if you want to know. I made her 
sit down today with mama and Dunya.' 
'Rodya !' exclaimed Pulkheria Alexandrovna. 
Dunechka blushed ; Razumikhin frowned. Luzhin smiled 
with haughty sarcasm. 
'You may see for yourself, if you will, Avdotya Romanovna,' 
said he, 'whether any agreement is possible between us. I hope 
that the matter is now cleared up and disposed of once and for 
all. I will withdraw, in order not to interfere further with the 
pleasures of a family gathering and the communication of 
secrets.' He rose and picked up his hat. 'But in going I shall 
permit myself the liberty of remarking that henceforward I 
hope to be spared such encounters and, so to say, compromises. 
I must particularly address this request to you, respected 
Pulkheria Alexandrovna, especially since my letter was directed 
to you, and to no one else.' 
Pulkheria Alexandrovna felt somewhat affronted. 

292 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'It seems that you think you already exercise complete 
control over us, Peter Petrovich. Dunya told you the reason 
why your request was not complied with ; she meant well. And 
you wrote to me as if you were giving orders. Are we to regard 
every wish of yours as a command? I must tell you, on the 
contrary, that you ought to behave with particular delicacy 
and forbearance towards us now, because, trusting you, we 
have abandoned everything to come here, and are consequently 
practically at your mercy already.' 
'That is not quite just, Pulkheria Alexandrovna, especially 
at the present moment, when Marfa Petrovna's legacy of three 
thousand roubles has just been announced. It seems to have 
been very well timed, judging by the new tone in which you 
have been speaking to me,' he added sarcastically. 
'And judging by that remark, we may certainly suppose that 
you counted on our helplessness,' observed Dunya irritably. 
'But now, at least, I can no longer count on it, and I 
particularly do not wish to hinder the communication of 
Arkady Ivanovich Svidrigaylov's secret proposals, which he has 
authorized your dear brother to deliver, and which, I perceive, 
possess for you a most important, and perhaps a very agree­
able, significance.' 
'Oh, heavens !' exclaimed Pulkheria Alexandrovna. 
Razumikhin could sit still no longer. 
'And are you not ashamed now, sister?' asked Raskolnikov. 
'Yes, Rodya, I am ashamed,' said Dunya. Pale with anger, 
she turned to Luzhin. 'Peter Petrovich, go !' 
Peter Petrovich appeared not in the least to have expected 
such an ending. He had had too much confidence in himself, in 
his power, and in the helplessness of his victims. Even now he 
could not believe it. He turned pale and his lips quivered. 
'Avdotya Romanovna, if I go out of that door now, with 
such a farewell, depend upon it I shall never return. Think 
well ! I mean what I say !' 
'What insolence !' cried Dunya, springing up from her place. 
'I do not wish you to return !' 
'What? So that's it !' exclaimed Luzhin, quite unable, even 
at the last moment, to believe in the rupture, and therefore now 
completely at a loss. 'That's it, is it ? Do you know, Avdotya 
Romanovna, that I should be justified in complaining?' 
'What right have you to speak to her like that?' intervened 
Pulkheria Alexandrovna hotly. 'What could you complain 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
293 
about? What right have you? Would I give my Dunya to such 
a man as you are? Go away ! Leave us altogether ! It is our own 
fault for having entered upon a wrong course, and mine most 
of all . .  .' 
'Nevertheless, Pulkheria Alexandrovna,' raved Luzhin in hot 
anger, 'you bound me by a promise that you are now going 
back on . . .  and finally . . .  finally . . .  I was involved by it, so 
to say, in expense . .  .' 
This last grievance was so much in keeping with Peter 
Petrovich's character that Raskolnikov, white with rage and 
with the effort of restraining it, suddenly lost control and­
roared 
with 
laughter. 
But 
Pulkheria 
Alexandrovna was 
furiously angry. 
'Expense? What expense was that? You are talking of our 
trunk, I suppose? But surely the guard carried it free of charge 
for you. And good heavens ! You say we bound you ! You must 
think again, Peter Petrovich ;  it was just the opposite : you 
bound us hand and foot !' 
'That 's enough, mama ; no more, please !' begged Avdotya 
Romanovna. 'Peter Petrovich, do me the favour of going !' 
'I am going. But one last word !' he said, having by now 
almost completely lost control of himsel£ 'Your mama seems 
to have quite forgotten that I decided to take you, so to say, 
when the gossip of the town about your reputation had spread 
all over the district. Scorning public opinion for your sake and 
vindicating your reputation, I was certainly completely and 
absolutely entitled to count on being recompensed and even 
to demand your gratitude . . .  And it is only now that my eyes 
have been opened ! I can see that perhaps my action in scorning 
the general view was completely and absolutely rash . .  . '  
'Is he asking to have his head broken?' cried Razumikhin, 
starting up ready to wreak vengeance on him. 
'You are a base, malicious person !' said Dunya. 
'Not a word ! Not a movement !' exclaimed Raskolnikov, 
holding Razumikhin back ; then, advancing until he almost 
touched Luzhin, he said quietly and distinctly : 'Be good enough 
to get out ! And not another word, or else . . .  ' 
Peter Petrovich, his pale face distorted with rage, looked at 
him for some seconds and then turned and went out, and 
rarely indeed has any man carried such vicious hatred in his 
heart as he now felt for Raskolnikov. He blamed him, and him 
alone, for everything. It is worthy of note that even as he 

294 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
descended the stairs he still imagined that the game was not 
utterly lost and that, as far as the ladies were concerned, 
things might still be set 'completely and absolutely' right. 
C H A P T E R  I I I  
THE point was that up to the very last minute he had not in 
the least expected such a break. He had blustered and bullied, 
never imagining even the possibility that two poor and un­
protected women could escape his power. His confidence was 
greatly strengthened by vanity and that degree of self-reliance 
which might best be called self-infatuation. Peter Petrovich, 
who had struggled up from nothing, was full of almost morbid 
admiration for himself, set a high value on his own brain and 
capabilities and sometimes, when he was alone, even admired 
his own face in the mirror. But more than anything in the 
world he loved and prized his money, got together laboriously 
and by every means in his power; it raised him to the level of 
everything that had been superior to him. 
When he had bitterly reminded Dunya just now that he had 
resolved to take her in spite of evil rumours about her, he 
had spoken with complete sincerity, and even felt the deepest 
indignation at her 'black ingratitude'. All the same, when he 
offered his hand to Dunya he was already fully convinced of 
the baselessness of the stories, which had been publicly refuted 
by Marfa Petrovna and long since dropped by everybody in 
the little town, who now warmly defended Dunya. Indeed, he 
would not have denied that he knew all this at the time. 
Nevertheless, he still rated very high his decision to raise Dunya 
to his own level, and considered it heroic. In talking of it to 
Dunya he had been expressing a cherished secret belief that 
had more than once aroused his own self-admiration and he 
could not understand how others could fail to admire his noble 
action. When he had paid his visit to Raskolnikov, he had 
entered with the feeling of a benefactor, prepared to reap his 
reward and taste the sweetness of compliments. And certainly 
now, as he went downstairs, he considered that he had been 
grossly insulted and that his virtues had not been recognized. 
As for Dunya, he simply could not do without her; giving 
her up was unthinkable. For several years now he had dreamed 
voluptuously of marriage, but he went on accumulating money 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
295 
bit by bit, and waited. He dwelt with rapture on the idea of a 
virtuous maiden, poor (she must be poor), very young, very 
pretty, well-born, well-educated and timorous, one who had 
known a great many misfortunes, and was completely humble 
before him, one who all her life would think of him as her 
saviour, reverence him, obey him, admire him and him alone. 
How many delightful scenes and episodes, with this seductive 
and playful theme, his imagination had created in quiet 
intervals of rest from business ! And now the dreams of so many 
years had almost come true; Avdotya Romanovna's beauty 
and education had made an impression on him, her helpless 
situation aroused his passion. He had found even more than 
he had dreamed of: here was a proud, wilful, virtuous girl, 
of a breeding and education superior to his own (he was 
conscious of this), and this being would be slavishly grateful 
to him all her life for his noble deed, and reverently humble 
herself before him, while he exercised absolute and unlimited 
dominion over her ! . . .  It seemed almost providential that 
not long before, after prolonged deliberation and forethought, 
he had at last resolved to make a decided change in his career 
and enter a wider sphere of activity, and at the same time to 
climb little by little into higher social circles, as he had long 
indulged in pleasant thoughts of doing . . .  In one word, he 
had determined to try St. Petersburg. He knew that with a 
woman's help it was 'completely and absolutely' possible to go 
far. The fascination of a charming, virtuous, and well-educated 
woman could make his path wonderfully pleasant, attract 
friends to him, cast a rainbow-coloured glory over his life . . .  
and now all was ruined ! This sudden, monstrous break had 
come on him like a clap of thunder. It was some hideous joke, 
an absurdity ! He had been only the tiniest bit overbearing; 
he had not even managed to have his say out; he had not 
really meant it all, but had got carried away-and it had ended 
so seriously ! Finally, in his own fashion he really loved Dunya, 
in his dreams he was already her lord and master-and then, 
suddenly . . .  No ! Tomorrow, tomorrow at latest, everything 
must be restored, the wound must be healed, the breach 
repaired and, most important of all, that insolent young puppy, 
the cause of the whole thing, must be destroyed. Involuntarily, 
with a painful sensation, he remembered Razumikhin . . .  but 
on that score he soon reassured himself: 'As though such a 
person could be put on his level !' But the one he really was 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
seriously afraid of was Svidrigaylov . . . In short, he foresaw 
a good deal of trouble .
.
•
 
'No, I am more to blame than anybody else,' said Dunya, 
embracing her mother and kissing her. 'I was blinded by 
his money, but I swear, brother, I didn't even imagine he 
was such a wretch. If I had seen through him before, nothing 
could have tempted me ! Don't judge me too harshly, brother.' 
'God has delivered us, God has delivered us !' Pulkheria 
Alexandrovna murmured, almost unconsciously, as though 
she had not yet fully realized what had happened. 
They were all extremely cheerful, and in five minutes they 
were even laughing. Sometimes, though, Dunechka, remem­
bering what had happened, grew pale and knitted her brows. 
Pulkheria Alexandrovna could not understand how she, too, 
could be glad ; only that morning a break with Luzhin had 
seemed a terrible catastrophe. Razumikhin was in raptures. 
He did not yet dare to express his delight, but he was feverishly 
excited, as though a monstrous weight had rolled off his heart. 
Now he had the right to devote his whole life to them, serve 
them . . .  And who knew what might happen? But he was 
afraid to pursue his thoughts farther, he feared his own imagina­
tion. And Raskolnikov went on sitting in his old place, seeming 
absent-minded and almost sullen. He, who had been the most 
insistent on Luzhin's dismissal, now seemed less interested than 
the others in what had just happened. Dunya could not help 
thinking that he was still angry with her, and Pulkheria 
Alexandrovna watched him apprehensively. 
'Well, what did Svidrigaylov say to you,' asked Dunya, 
approaching him. 
'Oh yes, yes !' exclaimed Pulkheria Alexandrovna. 
'He tried to insist on giving you ten thousand roubles, and 
besides that, he expressed a desire to see you once, in my 
presence.' 
'See her ! Not for anything in the world !' cried Pulkheria 
Alexandrovna. 'And how dare he offer her money?' 
Raskolnikov proceeded to repeat (rather drily) his talk with 
Svidrigaylov, omitting everything about Marfa Petrovna's 
ghost, in order to avoid unessential matters, since he felt averse 
to any but the most necessary conversation. 
'What answer did you give him?' asked Dunya. 
'At first I told him I would not give you any message. Then 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
297 
he declared that he would use every means in his power to 
obtain an interview himself. He averred that his passion for you 
had been a passing fancy, and that now he feels nothing for 
you . . .  He doesn't want you to marry Luzhin . . .  But his talk 
was very confused.' 
'How do you explain him to yourself, Rodya? What did 
he seem like to you?' 
'I confess I don't understand him very well. He offers you 
ten thousand roubles, but he told me he is not rich. He declares 
he is going away somewhere, and ten minutes later he has 
forgotten he said anything of the kind. He comes out also with 
the fact that he wants to get married, and that the match is 
already being arranged . . .  Of course he has some design, and, 
most likely, a bad one. But again, it is strange to think that he 
would tackle the matter so stupidly if his intentions were evil 
. . .  Of course, I refused the money on your behalf, once for alL 
Altogether he seemed to me very strange . . .  even . . .  perhaps 
just a little mad. But I might be mistaken ; it may be that he 
was trying to create a wrong impression. Marfa Petrovna's 
death seems to have affected him . . .  
' 
'God rest her soul !' exclaimed Pulkheria Alexandrovna. 
'I will always pray for her, always ! What would have become 
of us now, Dunya, without that three thousand roubles? It is 
just as though it had fallen from heaven ! Why, Rodya, this 
morning we had no more than three roubles to our name, and 
Dunechka and I were wondering how we could pawn her watch 
somewhere, so that we should not have to ask that man for 
money until he thought of it for himself.' 
Dunyaseemed almost thunder-struck by Svidrigaylov's offer. 
She still stood deep in thought. 
'He has some terrible purpose !' she half-whispered to herself, 
almost shuddering. 
Raskolnikov noticed her immoderate alarm. 
'I think I am destined to see him again more than once,' he 
said to her. 
'We will watch him ! I will track him down !' exclaimed 
Razumikhin, full of zeal. 'I won't let him out of my sight ! 
Rodya has given me permission. He said to me not long ago : 
"Look after my sister." Will you give me permission too, 
Avdotya Romanovna?' 
Dunya smiled and gave him her hand, but the worried look 
did not leave her face. Pulkheria Alexandrovna watched her 

298 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
timidly, but the thought of the three thousand roubles was 
evidently comforting to her. 
A quarter of an hour later they were all engaged in animated 
conversation. Even Raskolnikov, although he did not talk, 
had been listening attentively for some time. Razumikhin was 
holding forth. 
'And why, why should you go away?' his excited rhetoric 
flowed on ; 'what will you do in a little town? The main thing 
is that you are all together here, and you need one another­
you need one another very much, if you understand me. If it is 
only for a little time . . .  Accept me as a friend and partner, and 
I promise you we will devise a marvellous plan. Listen, I will 
explain it all to you in detail-the whole scheme. It had already 
occurred to me this morning, before anything had happened 
. . .  This is the point : I have an uncle (I will introduce him to 
you ; he is very nice and most respectable-a dear old man !) , 
and this uncle has a capital of a thousand roubles, but he lives 
on his pension and does not need it. For two years he has been 
trying to insist on my borrowing this thousand and paying him 
six per cent. for it. I can see his idea: he simply wants to help 
me. But last year I didn't need the money; this year, however, 
I was only waiting for him to come here and then I meant to 
borrow it. If you will contribute another thousand out of your 
three-that will be enough to begin with, and we will make a 
partnership. And to do what?' 
Then Razumikhin began to unfold his plan, explaining at 
some length that almost all our booksellers and publishers are 
bad because they have very little knowledge of their wares, 
while reasonably good books pay, generally speaking, and 
make a profit, sometimes a considerable one. Razumikhin had 
been dreaming of a publishing business, having worked for 
two years for other publishers. He had a fairly good knowledge 
of three European languages, although he had told Raskolnikov 
a week before that his German was weak. But this was with 
the object of persuading his friend to take half the translation 
and three roubles of the advance payment; he had been lying, 
and Raskolnikov had known that he lied. 
'Why, I ask you, should we let the opportunity slip when we 
have one of the most important essentials-money of our own?' 
cried Razumikhin enthusiastically. 'Of course it will need a lot 
of hard work, but we will work hard, you, Avdotya Roma­
novna, Rodion, and I . . . Some books yield a famous profit 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
299 
now ! The most important foundation for the undertaking is 
that we shall know just what ought to be translated. We shall 
translate, and publish, and learn, all at the same time. I can be 
useful there, because I have had experience. I've been poking 
my nose into publishing for two years now, and I know all the 
ins and outs ; you don't need to be a saint to make pipkins, 
believe me ! And why, why, let the chance slip? Why, I know­
and I've kept the knowledge to myself-two or three books, 
and the mere idea of translating and publishing them might 
well be worth a hundred roubles for each one ; indeed, for the 
idea of one of them I wouldn't take five hundred. And yet, do 
you know, if l told a publisher of them, he might perhaps hum 
and ha over them, they are such blockheads ! As for all the 
business of printing, paper, selling, leave that to me; I know 
all the tricks of the trade. We'll begin in a small way, then go 
on to bigger things, and at least we shall get a living out of it. 
In any case we shall get our capital back.' 
Dunya's eyes shone. 
'What you say pleases me very much, Dmitri Prokofich,' she 
said. 
'Of course, I know nothing about it,' put in Pulkheria 
Alexandrovna. 'Perhaps it is a good idea, but then again, God 
only knows ! It is something new and unknown. We shall, of 
course, have to stay here, if only for a time . . .  ' 
She looked at Rodya. 
'What do you think, brother?' asked Dunya. 
'I think it 's a very good idea of his,' he answered. 'Needless 
to say, it is early yet to dream of a publishing house, but we 
really might issue five or six books with every confidence of 
success. I know one myself that would certainly go well. As 
for his knowing how to run the business, there is no doubt of 
that; he understands it . . .  However, you will have plenty of 
time to make arrangements . . .  
' 
'Hurrah !' shouted Razumikhin. 'Stop a minute, there is a 
flat here, in this very house, belonging to the same landlord. 
It is a separate flat, distinct from the hotel and not communi­
cating with it, and it is furnished. There are three small rooms 
and the rent is moderate. Take it for the time being. I will 
pawn the watch for you tomorrow and bring you the money 
and then everything can be settled. The main thing is that 
you can all three live together, and Rodya can be with you . . .  
Where are you going, Rodya ?' 

300 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'What Rodya, are you going already?' asked Pulkheria 
Alexandrovna in alarm. 
'At such a moment !' cried Razumikhin. 
Dunya looked at her brother with incredulous surprise. He 
had his cap in his hands and was getting ready to leave. 
'You sound as though you were burying me, or saying 
good-bye for ever,' he said rather strangely. 
He tried to smile, but somehow the smile was not a success. 
'But really, who knows? Perhaps we are seeing each other 
for the last time,' he added unexpectedly. 
He had been thinking this to himself, and somehow it said 
itself aloud. 
'What is the matter?' cried his mother. 
'Where are you going, Rodya ?' asked Dunya in a strange tone. 
'I really must go,' he answered confusedly, as though he 
were hesitating what to say. But his pale face showed a definite 
resolution. 
'I wanted to say . . .  as I was coming here . . .  I wanted to 
tell you, mama . . .  and you, Dunya, that it would be better if 
we parted for a short time. I don't feel well, I am not easy . . .  
I will come to you later, of my own accord, when . . .  it is 
possible. I will remember you, and I love you . . .  Leave me ! 
Leave me alone ! I had decided this, even before . . . I had 
firmly decided . . .  Whatever happens to me, whether I perish 
or not, I want to be alone. Forget me altogether. It is better so 
. . .  Don't make inquiries about me. When it is necessary, I will 
come myself, or . . .  send for you. Perhaps it may all come right 
. . .  But now, if you love me, give me up . . .  Otherwise I feel 
I shall begin to hate you •
.
.
 Good-bye !' 
'Oh God !' cried Pulkheria Alexandrovna. 
His mother and sister were both terribly frightened ; so 
indeed was Razumikhin. 
'Rodya, Rodya, be reconciled with us, and let us be as we 
were before !' exclaimed his poor mother. 
Slowly he turned towards the door, slowly he walked to­
wards it. Dunya followed him. 
'What are you doing to our mother, brother?' she whispered, 
her eyes blazing with indignation. 
He looked sadly at her. 
'It's all right. I will come, I shall be coming,' he muttered 
only half-aloud, as if not fully conscious what he was talking of. 
He went out of the room. 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
gor 
'Heartless, wicked egoist !' exclaimed Dunya. 
'He is rna-a-d, but not heartless ! He is out of his mind. Don't 
you see that? It is heartless of you to call him so !' whispered 
Razumikhin hotly, close to her ear, while he clasped her hand 
tightly. 
'I will come back,' he exclaimed, turning to Pulkheria 
Alexandrovna, who seemed dazed and numb, and he hurried 
from the room. 
Raskolnikov was waiting for him at the end of the corridor. 
'I knew you would come running after me,' he said. 'Go 
back to them, be with them . . .  be with them tomorrow as well 
. . .  and always. Perhaps . . .  I will come . . .  ifl can. Good-bye !' 
And he walked away without offering his hand. 
'But where are you going? What do you mean? What is the 
matter with you? You can't do this sort of thing !' murmured 
Razumikhin, utterly at a loss. 
Raskolnikov stopped again. 
'Once for all, never ask me about anything. I cannot answer 
you . . .  Don't come to see me. I may perhaps come here . . .  
Leave me, but .
. . don't leave them. Do you understand ?' 
It was dark in the corridor; they were standing near a lamp. 
For almost a minute they looked at one another in silence. 
Razumikhin remembered that minute all the rest of his life. 
With every moment Raskolnikov's intent and fiery glance 
pierced more powerfully into his mind and soul. Suddenly 
Razumikhin shuddered. Something strange had passed be 
tween them . . . some idea, something like a hint, something 
terrible and monstrous, suddenly understood on both sides . . .  
Razumikhin grew as pale as a corpse. 
'Do you understand now?' said Raskolnikov abruptly, with 
painfully distorted features . . .  'Go back, go to them,' he added, 
turned away and hastily left the house . . .  
I shall not describe that evening in Pulkheria Alexandrovna's 
room, how Razumikhin returned to them, how he tried to 
reassure them, how he swore that it was essential to allow the 
sick man to rest, swore that Rodya would come to them, that 
he would come every day, that he was very seriously upset, 
and must not be irritated ; how he said that he, Razumikhin, 
would watch over him, he would get him a good doctor, the 
very best, he would arrange a consultation . . .  In a word, from 
that evening Razumikhin became a son and a brother to 
them. 

302 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
C H A P T E R  I V  
RASKOLNIKOV went straight to the house on the canal where 
Sonya lived. It was an old, green-painted house of three stories. 
He sought out the porter and got from him a vague direction 
to the tailor Kapernaumov's quarters. In a corner of the 
courtyard he found the entrance to a narrow, dark staircase, 
mounted it to the second floor and came out on to a passage 
that ran round the whole floor on the courtyard side. While he 
was wandering in the darkness, wondering where to find 
Kapernaumov's entrance, a door suddenly opened, three paces 
away from him; automatically he seized it. 
'Who is there?' asked a woman's voice, full of alarm. 
'Me . . .  I was coming to see you,' answered Raskolnikov, 
walking into the tiny hall. In it a candle in a battered copper 
candlestick stood on a broken chair. 
'You ! Good heavens !' exclaimed Sonya weakly, standing as 
if transfixed. 
'Which way is your room? Here?' 
And, trying not to look at her, Raskolnikov walked quickly 
into the room. 
A moment later Sonya came in with the candle, put it down, 
and stood in front of him, completely at a loss, full of inde­
scribable agitation, and visibly frightened by his unexpected 
visit. Her pale face was suddenly flooded with colour, and tears 
even stood in her eyes . . .  She felt at once sick and ashamed and 
glad . . .  Raskolnikov turned away quickly and sat down at the 
table. He took in the whole room at a glance. 
It was a large room, but very low ceilinged, the only one 
let by the Kapernaumovs ; the locked door to the left led to 
their other room. Opposite this, in the right-hand wall, was 
another door, always kept locked, which led into the next flat. 
Sonya's room was rather like a barn; the irregularity of its 
angles made it look misshapen. One wall, with three windows 
which gave on to the canal, was set obliquely, so that one 
corner, forming a terribly acute angle, seemed to run off into 
obscurity, and when the light was poor the whole of it could 
not even be seen properly; the other angle was monstrously 
obtuse. There was hardly any furniture in this large room. To 
the right, in the corner, was a bed, with a chair beside it nearer 
the door. Against the same wall, very close to the door into the 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
303 
other flat, stood a plain deal table covered with a blue cloth, 
with two cane chairs near it. By the opposite wall, not far from 
the narrow corner, was a small, plain, wooden chest of drawers, 
looking lost in the empty spaces. This was all there was in the 
room. The yellowish, dirty, rubbed wallpaper was darkened in 
the corners ; the room must have been damp and full of char­
coal fumes in winter. Its poverty was evident ;  the bed had not 
even curtains. 
Sonya silently watched the visitor who was so minutely and 
unceremoniously examining her room, and at last she even 
began to shake with fright, as though she stood before her 
judge and the ruler of her destiny. 
'I am late .
.
•
 Is it eleven o'clock yet?' he asked, still with­
out looking at her. 
'Yes,' murmured Sonya. 'Yes, it is !' she repeated hastily, 
as though this offered her a way of escape. 'My landlord's 
clock has just struck . . .  I heard it . . .  It is.' 
'I have come here for the last time,' went on Raskolnikov 
gloomily, although it was, in fact, the first. 'Perhaps I shall 
never see you again . . .  
' 
'Are you . . .  going away?' 
'I don't know . . .  Tomorrow . .  
.' 
'So you won't be at Katerina lvanovna's tomorrow?' said 
Sonya in a trembling voice. 
'I don't know. Tomorrow morning everything . . .  But that 
isn't the point; I came to say one word . .  .' 
He raised his preoccupied glance towards her, and suddenly 
noticed that he was sitting, while she still stood before him. 
'Why are you standing? Do sit down,' he said in a different 
voice, quiet and kind. 
She sat down. He looked at her gently and almost com­
passionately for some moments. 
'How thin you are : just look at your hand ! It is quite 
transparent. Your fingers are like a dead woman's.' 
He took her hand. Sonya gave a faint smile. 
'I was always like this,' she said. 
'When you lived at home too?' 
'Yes.' 
'Well, of course you were !' He spoke jerkily, and his ex­
pression and the sound of his voice had suddenly changed 
once more. He looked round again. 
'This is the place you rent from Kapernaumov ?' 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'Yes.' 
'Are they there, on the other side of the door?' 
'Yes . . .  They have a room like this one.' 
'Just one?' 
'Yes.' 
'If I lived in your room I should be afraid at night,' he 
remarked gloomily. 
'My landlords are very kind and good,' answered Sonya, 
still in the same lost, dazed state. 'All the furniture and every­
thing else . . .  everything belongs to them. And they are very 
kind, and the children often come in here . .  .' 
'Aren't they stammerers or something?' 
'Yes, . . .  he stammers and is lame besides. His wife is the 
same . . .  She doesn't exactly stammer, but she can't say all 
her words properly. She is kind, very kind. He is a former 
house-serf. And there are seven children . . . only the oldest 
stammers, the others are merely sickly . . . but they don't 
stammer. How do you know about them?' she added, with 
some astonishment. 
'Your father told me about it, that time. He told me all 
about you . . .  About how you went out at six o'clock and 
came back after eight, and about how Katerina I vanovna 
knelt by your bed.' 
Sonya was embarrassed. 
'I thought I saw him today,' she whispered hesitatingly. 
'Whom?' 
'My father. I was in the street, just near here, at the corner, 
between nine and ten o'clock, and I seemed to see him walking 
in front of me. It might just have been him. I would have liked 
to go to Katerina I vanovna's . . .  
' 
'You were walking the streets ?' 
'Yes,' whispered Sonya abruptly, again looking down in 
confusion. 
'I suppose Katerina Ivanovna used to beat you, when you 
lived at your father's?' 
'Oh, no. Why do you say that? No !' Sonya looked at him 
almost with terror. 
'You love her, then?' 
'Love her? But of course !' Sonya almost wailed, clasping 
her hands together in distress. 'Oh, you speak of her . . .  If only 
you knew ! She is really just like a child . . .  I suppose she has 
really lost her reason . . .  from grief. But how clever she used 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
to be . . . how generous . . . how good ! You know nothing, 
nothing at all . . .  Oh !' 
Sonya said this almost despairingly, wringing her hands in 
excitement and distress. Her pale cheeks had flushed again, 
and her eyes looked full of anguish. She was plainly very 
deeply moved, and longing to speak, to plead, to find expression 
for something. An almost insatiable compassion, if one can use 
the expression, was depicted in every feature of her face. 
'Beat me ! What makes you say that? Good heavens, beat 
me ! And even if she had, what of that? What of it? You know 
nothing, nothing at all . . .  She is so unhappy, oh, so unhappy ! 
And she is ill . . . She is seeking justice . . . She is pure. She 
believes there ought to be justice in everything, and she de­
mands it . . .  You might torture her, but she would not act 
unjustly. She does not see that one can't expect justice from 
people, and she gets exasperated . . .  Like a child, like a child ! 
She loves justice, she loves justice !' 
'And what will become of you?' 
Sonya looked questioningly at him. 
'They are left on your hands, you know. Even before, really, 
you had to bear the whole burden, and your father came to you 
for money to drink with. Well, but what will happen now?' 
'I don't know,' said Sonya sadly. 
'Will they remain where they are?' 
'I don't know. They are behind with the rent; and I hear 
that the landlady said today that she wanted to give them 
notice, and Katerina I vanovna says that she won't stay there 
another minute.' 
'What makes her so confident? Is she relying on you?' 
'Oh, no, don't speak like that ! . . .  We are one, we live as 
one.' Sonya had grown suddenly excited once more, and even 
angry, exactly like a ruffled canary or some other little bird. 
'And besides, what can she do? What else can she do?' she 
asked, growing more violently excited. 'How she cried today ! 
Her mind wanders, have you noticed? She gets muddled ; 
first she is childishly anxious that everything shall be nice 
tomorrow, and that we should have a dinner, and everything 
. . .  then she is wringing her hands, coughing up blood, crying, 
and then suddenly she begins to knock her head against the 
wall, as if she were utterly desperate. Then she takes comfort 
again. She pins all her faith on you ; she says you will help her, 
and that she will borrow a little money somewhere and go back 

306 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
to her old home, taking me with her, and open a boarding­
school for young ladies, with me to superintend it, and that a 
wonderful new life is beginning for us. She kisses me, caresses 
me, comforts me, and she really believes it all, all those 
fantastic dreams ! How can you contradict her? And all day 
she has been washing, cleaning, mending; with her feeble 
strength she dragged the tub into the room, and then she 
couldn't breathe, and had to lie down on the bed. This morning 
she and I went to the market to buy shoes for Polechka and 
Lena, because all they had have fallen to pieces ; only we 
hadn't enough money to pay for them, we were a lot short, 
and she had chosen such nice little boots, because she has very 
good taste, you don't know. And she began to cry there in the 
shop, with the shopman there, beca̒se she hadn't enough . . .  
Oh, how sad it was to see her.' 
'Well, after that one can understand . . .  your living like 
this,' said Raskolnikov, with a bitter smile. 
'And aren't you sorry, aren't you sorry for her?' exclaimed 
Sonya again. 'Yet I know you gave her your last penny, when 
you had seen nothing. If you had seen everything, good 
heavens ! And how often I have driven her to tears, how often ! 
Even this last week ! Yes, I ! Not more than a week before he 
died. I was cruel. And how many times I have behaved so, 
how many ! . . .  Oh, how painful it has been all day to remem­
ber it now !' 
Sonya wrung her hands as she spoke, with the pain of 
remembering. 
'You, cruel ?' 
'Yes, I, I !  I had gone there,' she continued, weeping, 'and 
my poor father said to me : "Read to me, Sonya,'' he said, 
"I have a headache. Read to me . . .  here is a book." It was 
some book he had got fromAndrey Semenovich Lebezyatnikov, 
who lives there; he used always to get such queer books. But I 
said "I must go," because I didn't want to read, and I had gone 
there chiefly to show Katerina I vanovna some collars ; Liza­
veta, the dealer, had let me have some collars and cuffs cheap, 
and they were quite new and very pretty, figured ones. 
Katerina Ivanovna liked them very much ; she put them on 
and looked at herself in the glass and she liked them very, very 
much : "Please give them to me, Sonya,'' she said. She said 
please, and she so wanted them. But when could she wear them ? 
It was just that they reminded her of the old, happy days. She 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
307 
looked at herself in the glass and admired herself, and she had 
had no dresses, none at all, no pretty things, for so many years ! 
And she would never ask anybody for anything; she is proud; 
she would rather give away her own last possessions, but now 
here she was asking for them-she liked them so much ! But 
I didn't want to give them away : "What use are they to you, 
Katerina Ivanovna?" I said. Yes, that is how I spoke to her. 
I should not have said that to her ! She just looked at me, and 
she was so terribly sad that I had refused her, that it made me 
sorry to see her . . .  And she wasn't sad about the collars, but 
because I had refused her, I could see that. And now I wish 
I could change it all, do it all over again, take back all those 
words . . .  Oh, I . . .  But why am I saying all this ? . . .  It makes 
no difference to you.' 
'You knew this Lizaveta, the dealer?' 
'Yes . . .  Did you know her?' asked Sonya, rather surprised. 
'Katerina I vanovna has consumption, in a very advanced 
stage; she will soon die,' said Raskolnikov after a silence, 
ignoring the question. 
'Oh, no, no, no !' With an unconscious gesture Sonya seized 
both his hands in hers, as though imploring him not to let it 
happen. 
'But really it will be better for her to die.' 
'No, not better, not better. It will not be better at all !' she 
repeated in terror, hardly conscious of what she said. 
'And the children? Where can they go then, except here?' 
'Oh, I don't know ! . . .' cried Sonya, almost desperate, 
clutching her head. It was plain that the idea had occurred to 
her many, many times before and that he had only made it 
start up again. 
'Well, if you become ill and are taken to hospital, while 
Katerina Ivanovna is still alive, what will happen then ?' he 
insisted pitilessly. 
'Ah, why do you say that? Why do you say it? It cannot 
happen !' Awful terror distorted Sonya's face. 
'Cannot happen?' went on Raskolnikov, with a cruel smile. 
'Are you insured against it ? Then what wiJI become of them? 
The whole lot will be turned into the street, she will cough as 
she begs, and knock her head against the wall, as she did today, 
and the children will cry . . . She will fall down in the street 
and be taken to the police and then to the hospital to die, and 
the children . .  . ' 

308 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'Oh, no ! . . . God will not allow it !' broke at last from 
Sonya's over-burdened heart. She had listened with an im­
ploring face, with her eyes on him and her hands clasped in 
silent supplication, as though it all depended on him. 
Raskolnikov got up and walked about the room. A minute 
passed. Sonya stood with hands and head hanging, in terrible 
anguish. 
'Can't you save, put something away for a rainy day?' he 
asked, stopping short in front of her. 
'No,' whispered Sonya. 
'Of course you can't ! Have you tried ?' he went on, almost 
sneering. 
'Yes.' 
'And it came to nothing ! Of course it did ! No need to ask !' 
He resumed his pacing about the room. Another minute 
went by. 
'You don't get money every day?' 
Sonya grew more confused than ever, and again colour 
flooded her face. 
'No,' she whispered, with a painful effort. 
'Polechka will probably go the same way,' he said abruptly. 
'No ! No ! That can't be ! No !' Sonya almost shrieked in 
desperation, as if someone had plunged a knife into her. 'God­
God will not allow such a terrible thing ! . . .  ' 
'He lets it happen to others.' 
'No, no ! God will protect her ! God will protect her !' she 
repeated, beside hersel£ 
'Perhaps God does not exist,' answered Raskolnikov, with 
malicious enjoyment. He looked at her and laughed. 
Sonya's face underwent a sudden awful change; a tremor 
passed across it. She looked at him with inexpressible re­
proach; she tried to say something, but she could not utter 
a word, and only covered her face with her hands and sobbed 
bitterly. 
'You say Katerina Ivanovna's mind is deranged ; your own 
mind is deranged,' he said after a short silence. 
Some five minutes passed. He went on walking up and down 
the room in silence, without looking at her. At last he went 
up to her; his eyes were glittering. He took her by the shoulders 
with both hands and looked into her weeping face. His piercing 
eyes were dry and inflamed, his lips twitched violently . . . 
With a sudden swift movement he stooped, fell to the ground, 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
309 
and kissed her foot. Sonya started back in fear, as though he 
were mad. Indeed, he looked quite mad. 
'Why, why do you do that? To me !' she murmured, turning 
white, and her heart contracted painfully. 
He rose at once. 
'I prostrated myself not before you, but before all human 
suffering,' he said wildly, and walked away to the window. 
'Listen,' he added, turning back to her after a minute; 'not 
long ago I told an offensive fellow that he was not worth your 
little finger . . .  and that I did my sister honour today, seating 
her beside you.' 
'Oh, why did you say that? Was she there?' cried Sonya, 
frightened. 'An honour to sit with me ! But I am . . .  a fallen 
creature . . .  Ah, why did you say it?' 
'I said it not because of your dishonour and your sin, but 
because of your great suffering. That you are a great sinner is 
true,' he added, almost exultantly, 'but your greatest sin is 
that you have abandoned and destroyed yourself in vain. Is 
that not horrible? Is it not horrible that you live in this filth, 
which is so loathsome to you, while at the same time you know 
(you have only to open your eyes) that you are helping nobody 
by it, and not saving anybody from anything? Tell me,' he 
said, almost frenziedly, 'how such shame and such baseness 
can exist in you side by side with other feelings, so different 
and so holy ! Surely it would be better, a thousand times better 
and wiser, to plunge into the water and end it all !' 
'But what will become of them?' asked Sonya faintly, gazing 
at him with anguish, but also without any apparent surprise 
at the suggestion. Raskolnikov looked at her strangely. 
He had read it all in her look. She must indeed have had 
that idea herself. Perhaps many times in her despair she had 
seriously thought of putting an end to everything, seriously 
enough not to be surprised now when he suggested it. She had 
not noticed even the harshness of his words. (The meaning of his 
reproaches and his peculiar view of her shame had of course 
also escaped her notice, as he saw.) But he fully understood 
how monstrously she was tormented, and had long been tor­
mented, by the thought of her dishonourable and shameful 
position. But what, he wondered, what could have prevented 
her until now from resolving to end it all? And it was only now 
that he fully realized what those poor little orphans and the 
pitiful, half-mad Katerina Ivanovna, with her consumption 

3 1 0  
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
and her way of knocking her head against the wall, meant to 
Sonya. 
Nevertheless, it was clear, again, that Sonya with her charac­
ter and the upbringing she had in spite of everything received, 
could not in any event continue as she was. The question 
remained for him : how could she have stayed in her present 
situation for so long without going mad, even if it were beyond 
her strength to throw herself into the water? Of course he 
understood that Sonya's position in society was fortuitous, was 
an accident, although unfortunately not exceptional or isolated. 
But the accidental nature of her position, the certain degree of 
education she had had, and all her earlier life might, it seemed, 
have killed her at the very first step on that abhorrent path. 
What had supported her? Surely it could not be depravity? 
All her shame had obviously touched her only mechanically; 
no trace of real corruption had yet crept into her heart; he 
could see that; it was her real self that stood before him . . .  
'Three ways are open to her,' he thought, 'to throw herself 
into the canal, to end in a madhouse, or . . .  or, finally, to 
abandon herself to debauchery that will numb her mind and 
turn her heart to stone.' The last idea was repulsive to him, 
but he was sceptical, he was young, he had an abstract and 
consequently cruel mind, and therefore he could not but be­
lieve that the last course, of yielding to corruption, was the 
most likely. 
'But can that be true?' he cried within his heart. 'Can that 
creature, who still preserves the purity of her soul, consciously 
sink at last into the abominable stench of that pit? Is it possible 
that she already feels the attraction, and that she has only been 
able to endure until now because vice no longer seems so 
disgusting to her? No, no, that cannot be !' he exclaimed, as 
Sonya had earlier. 'No, what has kept her from the canal until 
now is the thought of sin, and they, those children •
•
.
 And if she 
has not gone mad before this . . .  But who can say she has not? 
Is her reason really sound ? Can sane people talk as she does ? 
Could a healthy mind make her judgements? How can she 
possibly crouch over her own destruction, above the stinking 
pit into which she is being drawn, and wave her hands and 
stop her ears when she is told of the danger? Why does she?­
Because she expects a miracle to happen? Probably. And are 
pot all these things signs of madness?' 
He clung obstinately to this idea. It was a solution that 

he preferred 
her. 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
3 1 I 
to any other. He fixed his eyes intently on 
'So you pray a great deal to God, Sonya?' he asked her. 
Sonya said nothing. He stood and waited for her answer. 
'What should I do without God?' she said in a rapid, forceful 
whisper, glancing at him for a moment out of suddenly flashing 
eyes, and pressing his hand with hers. 
'Well, there it is !' he thought. 
'And what does God do for you in return?' he asked, 
probing deeper. 
Sonya was silent for a long time, as though unable to answer. 
Her flat little chest heaved with agitation. 
'Be quiet ! Do not ask ! You are not worthy ! . .  ' she ex­
claimed suddenly, looking at him severely and indignantly. 
'That 's it, that 's it !' he repeated to himself, insistently. 
'He does everything,' she said in a rapid whisper, her eyes 
again downcast. 
'That is the solution ! That is the explanation !' he decided, 
watching her with greedy curiosity. He looked with a new, 
strange, almost painful feeling at that thin, pale, angular little 
face, at those timid blue eyes that were capable of flashing with 
such fire, such stern, strong feeling, at that small figure, still 
shaking with indignation and anger, and it all seemed to him 
more and more strange, almost impossible. 'She has religious 
mania !' he repeated firmly to himsel£ 
On the chest of drawers lay a book. He had noticed it every 
time he passed in his pacing up and down ; now he took it up 
and looked at it. It was a Russian translation of the New 
Testament. Its leather binding was old and worn. 
'Where did you get this?' he called across the room. She was 
still standing in the same place, a few steps from the table. 
'It was brought to me,' she answered unwillingly, without 
looking at him. 
'Who brought it?' 
'Lizaveta. I asked her to.' 
'Lizaveta ! How strange !' he thought. Everything about 
Sonya seemed stranger and more extraordinary with every 
minute. He took the book to the candle and began to turn 
over the pages. 
'Where is that about Lazarus?' he asked abruptly. 
Sonya looked steadily at the ground without answering. 
She was standing turned a little away from the table. 

3 1 2  
C R I M E  AND PUNISHMENT 
'Where is that about the raising of Lazarus? Find it for me, 
Sonya.' 
She glanced at him sidelong. 
'You are looking in the wrong place . . . In the fourth 
gospel . .  .' she whispered sternly, without moving towards 
him. 
'Find it and read it to me,' he said. He sat down, with his 
elbows on the table and his head propped in his hands, and 
sombrely prepared to listen, with his eyes turned away. 
'In two or three weeks' time they will be welcoming her 
into the asylum ! It looks as though I should be there too, if not 
worse,' he muttered to himself. 
Sonya advanced hesitantly to the table. She had heard 
his strange request with incredulity, but she took the book. 
'Haven't you read it?' she asked, frowning at him across the 
table. Her voice grew more and more severe. 
'A long time ago . . .  When I was at school. Read it !' 
'And haven't you heard it in church?' 
'No, I . . .  didn't go. Do you go often?' 
'N-no,' whispered Sonya. 
Raskolnikov laughed. 
'I understand .
.
• You won't go to your father's funeral to-
morrow, then?' 
'Yes, I shall. I was there last week . . .  I had a requiem sung.' 
'Whose?' 
'Lizaveta's. She was murdered with an axe.' 
His nerves grew tauter and tauter. His head was beginning 
to swim. 
'You were friendly with Lizaveta?' 
'Yes . . .  She was good . . .  She came here . . .  not often . . . she 
couldn't. We used to read together and . . .  talk. She will see 
God.' 
The bookish words fell strangely on his ears. And here was 
again something new : some sort of secret meetings with Liza­
veta. And both of them religious maniacs. 
'I shall become one myself here ! It is catching !' he thought. 
'Read !' he exclaimed insistently and irritably. 
Sonya still hesitated. Her heart was throbbing. Somehow 
she dared not read to him. He looked at the 'unhappy mad­
woman' almost with torment. 
'Why? You are not a believer, are you? . .  .' she whispered 
softly, gasping a little. 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
'Read ! I want you to !' he insisted. 'You used to read to 
Lizaveta !' 
Sonya opened the book and found the place. Her hands 
shook, her voice failed. Twice she tried to begin, but could not 
utter the first word. 
'Now a certain man was sick, named Lazarus, of Bethany' 
. . .  she pronounced at last, with an effort, but after two or 
three words her voice broke like an over-strained violin string. 
Her breath caught and her heart laboured. 
Raskolnikov half understood why Sonya could not make 
herself read to him, and the more he understood, the more 
roughly and irritably he insisted. He knew very well how 
difficult it was for her to expose and betray all that was her own. 
He understood that those feelings in fact constituted her real 
long-standing secret, cherished perhaps since her girlhood, in 
the midst of her family, with an unhappy father, a stepmother 
crazed by grief, and hungry children, in an atmosphere of 
hideous shrieks and reproaches. At the same time he now knew 
and knew for certain that although she was troubled and 
feared something terrible if she were to read now, yet she had a 
tormenting desire to read, and read for him to hear, and read 
now, 'whatever might happen afterwards' . . .  He could see all 
this in her eyes and in her emotional agitation . . .  She mastered 
herself, overcame the spasm in her throat, which had cut off 
her voice in the first verse, and continued the reading of the 
eleventh chapter of St. John. She came to the nineteenth 
verse : 
'And many of the Jews came to Martha and Mary, to com­
fort them concerning their brother. 
'Then Martha, as soon as she heard that Jesus was coming, 
went and met him : but Mary sat still in the house. 
'Then said Martha unto Jesus, Lord, if thou hadst been here, 
my brother had not died. 
'But I know, that even now, whatsoever thou wilt ask of God, 
God will give it thee.' 
She stopped again, anticipating with shame that her voice 
would again begin to quiver and break. 
'Jesus saith unto her, Thy brother shall rise again. 
'Martha saith unto him, I know that he shall rise again in 
the resurrection at the last day. 
'Jesus said unto her, I am the resurrection and the life: he that 
believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live : 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
'And whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die. 
Believest thou this ?' 
'She saith unto him' (and drawing a painful breath, Sonya 
read clearly but strongly, as though she herself were confess­
ing her faith for all to hear :) 'Yea, Lord, I believe that thou 
art the Christ, the Son of God, which should come into the 
world.' 
She seemed about to stop, and glanced quickly up at him, 
but then controlled herself and went on reading. Raskolnikov 
sat listening, motionless, his elbows on the table, his eyes 
turned away. She read on to the thirty-second verse. 
'Then when Mary was come where Jesus was, and saw him, 
she fell down at his feet, saying unto him, Lord, if thou hadst 
been here, my brother had not died. 
'When Jesus therefore saw her weeping, and the Jews also 
weeping which came with her, he groaned in the spirit, and 
was troubled. 
'And said, Where have ye laid him? They said unto him, 
Lord, come and see. 
'Jesus wept. 
'Then said the Jews, Behold how he loved him ! 
'And some of them said, Could not this man, which opened 
the eyes of the blind, have caused that even this man should 
not have died?' 
Raskolnikov turned and looked at her with emotion : Yes, 
that was it ! Already she was shaking with real, genuine fever. 
He had expected this. She was approaching the moment of the 
greatest, the unheard-of miracle, and was filled with immense 
triumph. Her voice rang like a bell with the power of triumph 
and joy. Her eyes had grown dark, and the lines of print 
danced before them, but she knew the passage by heart. In the 
verse : 'Could not this man, which opened the eyes of the blind 
. .  .' she lowered her voice, and the warmth and passion of 
it expressed the doubt, reproach, and censure of the blind, 
unbelieving Jews, who were so soon, in an instant, to fall to 
the ground as if struck by lightning, sobbing, and believing . . .  
'And he, he who is also blind and unbelieving, he also will hear 
in a moment, he also will believe. Yes, yes ! Here and now !' she 
dreamed, and trembled with joyful expectancy. 
'Jesus therefore again groaning in himself cometh to the 
grave. It was a cave, and a stone lay upon it. 
'Jesus said, Take ye away the stone. Martha, the sister of 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
3I5 
him that was dead, saith unto him, Lord, by this time he 
stinketh : for he hath been deadfour days.' 
Sonya strongly emphasized the word four. 
'Jesus saith unto her, Said I not unto thee, that, if thou 
wouldest believe, thou shouldest see the glory of God? 
'Then they took away the stone from the place where the 
dead was laid. And Jesus lifted up his eyes, and said, Father, 
I thank thee that thou hast heard me. 
'And I knew that thou hearest me always : but because of 
the people which stand by I said it, that they may believe that 
thou hast sent me. 
'And when he thus had spoken, he cried with a loud voice, 
Lazarus, come forth. 
'And he that was dead came forth' (she read, loudly and exul­
tantly, cold and trembling as though her own eyes had seen it) 
'bound hand and foot with graveclothes : and his face was 
bound about with a napkin. Jesus saith unto them, Loose him, 
and let him go. 
' Then many of the Jews which came to Mary, and had seen the 
things which Jesus did, believed on him.' 
She read, and indeed could read, no farther, but closed the 
book and stood up quickly. 
'That is all about the raising of Lazarus,' she whispered 
abruptly and sternly, and stood without moving, turned away 
from him and not daring to raise her eyes to him, as though she 
were ashamed. Her feverish trembling continued. The candle­
end had long since burned low in the twisted candlestick, 
dimly lighting the poverty-stricken room and the murderer 
and the harlot who had come together so strangely to read the 
eternal book. Five minutes or more passed. 
'I came to say something to you,' said Raskolnikov loudly 
and abruptly, with a frown. He got up and went to Sonya, 
who raised her eyes silently to his. His look was grim and 
expressed a wild resolution. 
'Today I deserted my family,' he said, 'my mother and 
sister. I shall not go to them now. I have made a complete 
break.' 
'Why?' asked Sonya, stupefied. Her recent meeting with his 
mother and sister had left a strong, if rather obscure, impression 
upon her. She heard the news of the rupture almost with 
terror. 
'Now I have only you,' he added. 'Let us go on together .
.
•
 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
I have come to you. We are both alike accursed, let us go 
together !' 
His eyes glittered. 'He is like somebody half-mad !' thought 
Sonya in her turn. 
'Go where?' she asked, frightened, and involuntarily stepped 
back. 
'How should I know? I know only that our paths lie together, 
and I know it for certain-that is all. We have one goal !' 
She looked at him without understanding. She knew only 
that he was terribly and infinitely unhappy. 
'None of them will understand anything, if you talk to them,' 
he went on, 'but I have understood. I have come to you 
because I need you.' 
'I don't understand . .  .' whispered Sonya. 
'You will understand afterwards. Haven't you done the 
same? You too have stepped over the barrier . . .  you were able 
to do it. You laid hands on yourself, you destroyed a life . .
. 
your own (that makes no difference !). You might have lived by 
reason and the spirit, but you will end on the Haymarket . . .  
But you cannot endure, and if you remain alone you will 
go out of your senses, like me. You are like a madwoman 
even now; so we must go together, by the same path ! Let 
us go !' 
'Why? Why do you say that?' said Sonya, strangely and 
passionately stirred by his words. 
'Why? Because you can't remain like this-that 's why ! 
You must judge things seriously and directly at last, and not 
weep like a child and cry that God won't allow it. What will 
happen if you really are taken to the hospital tomorrow? She 
is out of her mind and consumptive, she will soon die, but the 
children? Won't Polechka be lost? Have you never seen children 
at the corner of the street, who have been sent out by their 
mothers to beg? I know where and how such mothers live. 
Children cannot remain children there. There a seven-year-old 
child is depraved and a thief. And yet children are the image 
of Christ. "Of such is the kingdom of God." He commanded 
us to love them and cherish them, they are the future of man­
kind . .  .' 
'But what must we do? What must we do ?' repeated Sonya, 
crying hysterically and wringing her hands. 
'What must we do? Demolish what must be demolished, 
once and for all, that is all, and take the suffering on ourselves ! 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
What? Don't you understand ? You will understand after­
wards . . .  Freedom and power, but above all, power ! Power 
over all trembling creatures, over the whole ant-heap ! . .  
That is the goal ! Remember this ! These are my parting words 
to you ! This may be the last time I shall talk to you. If I do not 
come tomorrow, you will hear all about it, and then remember 
what I say to you now. And at some later time, after many 
years, you may come to understand what they mean. If I do 
come tomorrow, I will tell you who killed Lizaveta. Good-bye.' 
Sonya started with terror. 
'Do you really know who killed her?' she asked, turning 
cold with horror, and looking at him wildly. 
'I know, and I will tell you . . .  You, and only you ! I have 
chosen you. I shall not come to ask your forgiveness, I shall 
simply tell you. I chose you long ago to tell this thing to, when 
your father talked about you. I thought of it when Lizaveta 
was alive. Good-bye. Don't give me your hand. Tomorrow !' 
He went out. Sonya had looked at him as if he were mad ; 
but she seemed insane herself, and she felt it. Her head was 
spinning. 'Good heavens ! How does he know who killed 
Lizaveta? What did those words mean? It is terrible !' But all 
the same, the idea did not cross her mind. Never once ! Never 
once ! . . .  'Oh, he must be dreadfully unhappy ! . . .  He had 
left his mother and sister. Why? What had happened? What 
were his intentions? What was that he had said to her? He 
had kissed her foot and said . . .  said (yes, he had said it clearly) 
that he could not live without her . . .  Oh, heavens !' 
Sonya passed a feverish and delirious night. Sometimes she 
started up, weeping and wringing her hands, then sank back 
again into fitful sleep, and dreamed of Polechka, of Katerina 
I vanovna, of Lizaveta, of reading the gospel, and of him . . .  
him with his pale face and burning eyes . . .  He would kiss her 
foot, and weep. Oh, heavens ! 
Beyond the door on the right, which shut off her room from 
Gertrude Karlovna Resslich's flat, was another room, which 
had long been empty. It belonged to Mrs. Resslich's flat, and 
was to let; cards on the gates of the house and notices stuck 
to the windows which overlooked the canal advertised this fact. 
Sonya had long been accustomed to thinking of the room as 
unoccupied. But all through that interview, behind the door 
of the empty room, Mr. Svidrigaylov had been concealed, 
standing and listening. When Raskolnikov went out, he stood 

C R IME AND PUNISHMENT 
there for a moment longer, thinking, then tiptoed into his own 
room next door, got a chair, and carried it close to the door 
leading into Sonya's room. The conversation had seemed to 
him interesting and important, and he had greatly enjoyed it 
-enjoyed it so much that he had brought the chair so that in 
future, the next day, for example, he should not be subjected 
again to the unpleasantness of standing on his feet for a whole 
hour, but be more comfortably placed and thus enjoy complete 
satisfaction in every respect. 
C H A P T E R  V 
THE next morning, when, at exactly eleven o'clock, Raskol­
nikov went into the Criminal Investigation section of the 
building which housed the police office of the Spasskaya District 
and asked to be announced to Porfiry Petrovich, he was surprised 
to be kept waiting so long ; it was at least ten minutes before he 
was summoned. According to his calculations they ought to 
have pounced on him at once. Meanwhile he stood in the 
waiting-room, and people who seemed to have no concern 
with him came and went past him. In the next room, which 
looked like an office, several clerks sat writing, and it was 
obvious that not one of them had the least idea who or what 
Raskolnikov was. He gazed round him with an anxious sus­
picious air, trying to see if there were not some guard near him, 
or somebody posted to keep a secret watch on him, so that he 
should not go away, but there was nothing of the kind. He saw 
clerks, persons occupied with trivial business, and a few other 
people, but nobody had anything to do with him ; as far as 
they were concerned, he could go to the farthest ends of the 
earth. He became more and more firmly convinced that if 
yesterday's enigmatic stranger, that apparition sprung out of 
the ground, really had seen everything, really knew everything, 
he, Raskolnikov, would hardly have been left to stand here and 
wait in peace. Would they indeed have waited for him until 
eleven o'clock, when he condescended to come to them? It 
followed that that man had either not yet reported what he 
knew or . . .  or knew nothing at all, had seen nothing (indeed, 
how could he have seen?), and consequently that everything 
that had happened yesterday had been no more than a phan­
tasmagoria created by his sick and excited imagination. Even 
yesterday, at the time of his intensest alarm and despair, this 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
3 19 
conjecture had suggested itself to him with growing force. Now, 
as he turned all these thoughts over in his head, and prepared 
to renew the conflict, he realized suddenly that he was trem­
bling-and at the idea that he could tremble with fear before 
the hateful Porfiry Petrovich, anger began to seethe in his 
heart. More than anything else he dreaded another encounter 
with that man ; he felt infinite, boundless hatred for him, and 
he even feared that his hatred would make him betray him­
self. So violent was his indignation that his trembling ceased 
at once; he was ready to go in with a cold and insolent air, 
and he promised himself to say as little as possible, but to 
watch and listen, and this time at least, come what might, to 
conquer his sick and overstrained nerves. At this moment 
Porfiry Petrovich sent for him to come in. 
Porfiry Petrovich proved to be alone in his office. This was 
a room neither large nor small, containing a large writing 
desk standing in front of a sofa upholstered in imitation leather, 
a bureau, a bookcase in one corner, and several chairs. It was 
all Government furniture, made of yellow polished wood. 
In one corner, in the wall, or rather the partition, at the back 
of the room, there was a closed door; there must be other 
rooms beyond the partition. When Raskolnikov came in, Por­
firy Petrovich at once shut the door behind him, and they 
remained alone. He had met his visitor with an appearance of 
great cheerfulness and affability, and it was only a few minutes 
afterwards that Raskolnikov noticed some signs that he was 
rather flustered, as though something had happened to put him 
at a loss or he had been discovered in something very private 
and secret. 
'Ah, my dear chap ! Here you are . . .  in our territory . . .  ' 
began Porfiry, holding out both hands to him. 'Well, do sit 
down, old man ! But perhaps you don't like being called "my 
dear chap" and . . .  "old man" tout court, like that? Please 
don't think I'm being too familiar . . .  Sit here, on the sofa.' 
Raskolnikov sat down without taking his eyes from him. 
'In our territory', the apologies for undue familiarity, the 
French expression 'tout court', and so on, were all character­
istic. 'He held out both his hands to me, but he didn't actually 
give me one ; he drew them back in time,' he thought, with a 
flash of suspicion. They were each watching the other, but as 
soon as their glances met, both turned their eyes away like 
lightning. 

320 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'I have brought you this paper . . .  about the watch . . .  here ! 
Is that right, or shall I write it out again?' 
'What? The paper? Yes, yes . . .  Don't worry, it is quite all 
right,' said Porfiry Petrovich, as though he were in a hurry, 
and only after he had said it took the paper and looked at it. 
'Yes, quite all right. Nothing else is necessary,' he repeated, 
with the same rapidity, and laid the paper on the desk. A 
minute later, while he was talking of something else, he took 
it up again and transferred it to his bureau. 
'I think you said yesterday that you wished to question me 
. . .  officially . . .  about my acquaintance with the . . .  murdered 
woman,' began Raskolnikov again. 'Why did I put in that 
I think?' flashed through his mind. 'And why am I so worried 
at having put it in?' came in another flash. 
Suddenly he felt that, simply because he was in Porfiry's 
presence, and had exchanged glances and one or two words 
with him, his uneasiness had instantly increased to gigantic 
proportions . . . and that this was terribly dangerous : his 
nerves were tense, his emotion was increasing. 'This is disas­
trous ! . . .  I shall say too much again.' 
'Yes, yes, yes ! Don't worry ! There is plenty of time, plenty 
of time,' murmured Porfiry Petrovich, who was wandering 
aimlessly round the table, with occasional dashes, as it were, 
first to the window, then to the bureau, then back to the table, 
now avoiding Raskolnikov's suspicious gaze, now suddenly 
standing still and looking straight at him. This small, plump, 
round figure, rolling like a ball about the room, and bouncing 
back off all the walls and corners, produced a very strange 
impression. 
'We have plenty of time, plenty of time ! . . .  Do you smoke? 
Have you your own? Here, here 's a cigarette,' he went on, 
handing one to his visitor . . .  'You know, I am receiving you 
here, but my own flat is just there, on the other side of the 
partition . . .  my official quarters. Just now I am out of it for a 
time. Some repairs had to be done. Now it 's almost ready for 
me . . .  you know, an official flat is a famous thing, isn't it? 
What do you think?' 
'Yes, it is,' answered Raskolnikov, looking at him almost 
mockingly. 
'A famous thing, famous . .  .' repeated Porfiry Petrovich, 
as if he had begun to think of something else. 'Yes, famous !' 
he almost shouted at last, suddenly turning his eyes on Raskol-

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
32 1  
nikov and coming to a stop two paces away from him. There 
was something stupid and trivial about this constant repetition 
that contrasted strongly with the serious, contemplative, and 
enigmatic look he now bent on his visitor. 
All this still further intensified Raskolnikov's bitter malice, 
and he could no longer resist issuing an ironical and rather 
indiscreet challenge. 
'Do you know,' he said suddenly, looking almost insolently 
at Porfiry Petrovich, and delighting in his own insolence, 
'there must exist, I believe, a lawyer's procedure, a legal 
method, applying to all sorts of investigations, by which they 
begin with trivial matters, far removed from the real subject, 
or even with something serious, so long as it is quite irrelevant, 
so as to encourage the person being interrogated, or rather to 
distract his attention and lull his mistrust, and then suddenly 
and unexpectedly stun him by hitting him on the crown of his 
head with the most dangerous and fatal question. Am I right? 
Isn't the principle enshrined in all the rules and precepts to 
this day?' 
'Yes, yes . . .  So you think that what I was saying about 
official quarters . . .  eh ?' Porfiry Petrovich screwed up his eyes 
and winked ; a look of cheerful slyness passed over his face, 
his wrinkled forehead became smooth, his eyes narrowed, his 
features relaxed, and he abandoned himself to prolonged 
nervous laughter which made his whole body quiver and shake. 
He was looking straight into Raskolnikov's eyes. The latter, 
with an effort, began to laugh too, but when Porfiry, seeing 
him also laughing, went off into guffaws which turned him 
crimson in the face, Raskolnikov's repulsion overcame his 
caution : he stopped laughing, scowled, and watched him with 
a fixed stare of hatred all the time that his long fit of laughter, 
which seemed indeed deliberately prolonged, lasted. The lack 
of caution was not all, however, on one side. Porfiry, apparently 
caught laughing at his visitor to his face, showed very little 
embarrassment at the aversion this treatment had aroused. 
To Raskolnikov this seemed very significant, he realized that 
earlier also Porfiry Petrovich had not been in the least em­
barrassed, but that perhaps he, Raskolnikov, had fallen into a 
trap ; that there was plainly something here, some sort of 
motive, he knew nothing of; that perhaps all Porfiry's pre­
parations had already been made, and now, this minute, they 
would be disclosed, and overw·helm him .
•
•
 

322 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
He went straight to the point at once, rising and taking up 
his cap. 
'Porfiry Petrovich,' he began resolutely, but in rather violent 
agitation, 'yesterday you expressed a desire that I should come 
here for some interrogation' (he stressed the word interroga­
tion). 'I have come, and if you need to ask me any questions, 
ask them, but if not, allow me to leave. I have no time to spare, 
I have things to do . . .  I have to be at the funeral of the clerk 
who was run over, about whom you . . .  also know,' he added, 
was immediately angry with himselffor the addition, and then 
grew at once even more agitated. 'I am sick and tired of all this, 
and have been for a long time . . .  It was partly that that made 
me ill . . .  and in one word,' he almost shrieked, feeling that the 
phrase about being ill was even more out of place, 'in one 
word, be good enough either to question me or to let me go 
at once . . .  and if you question me, do it in the proper form ! 
Otherwise I shall not allow it; meanwhile, good-bye for the 
present, since there is nothing for us two to do now.' 
'Good Lord ! What are you talking about? What is there 
for me to question you about?' clucked Porfiry Petrovich, with 
a complete change of tone and aspect, and an instant cessation 
of laughter. 'Please don't upset yourself,' he fussed now, 
beginning to wander about once more, and busying himself 
with making Raskolnikov sit down again. 'There is no hurry, 
there 's no hurry, and all that is pure nonsense ! I am, on the 
contrary, very glad that you have at last come to see me . . .  
I look upon you as a visitor. And you must forgive me, Rodion 
Romanovich, old man, for that confounded laughter.-Rodion 
Romanovich? I think that is your patronymic ? . . . I'm all 
nerves, and you amused me very much by the wittiness of your 
remark; sometimes, I assure you, I laugh till I shake like a 
jelly, for half an hour on end . . .  I laugh easily. With my 
constitution I am afraid I might even have a stroke. But 
sit down, what 's the matter? . . .  Please, old man, or I shall 
think you are angry . . .  ' 
Raskolnikov said nothing, but watched and listened, still 
scowling angrily. He sat down, however, but kept his cap in his 
hands. 
'I will tell you one thing, Rodion Romanovich, old chap, 
about myself, or rather in explanation of my character,' went 
on Porfiry Petrovich, still fussing about the room and, as 
before, apparently trying to avoid meeting his guest's eyes. 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
'I, you know, am a bachelor, and neither fashionable nor 
famous, and besides, I have developed as far as I am capable of, 
grown ripe, and settled down, and . . .  and . . .  have you ever 
noticed, Rodion Romanovich, that among us, here in Russia 
I mean, and especially in our St. Petersburg circles, if two 
intelligent men, like you and me, who do not know each other 
very well, but respect one another, so to speak, if two such 
men come together, for quite half an hour they cannot find 
anything to talk about-they sit there stiffly and feel awkward? 
Everybody can find some subject of conversation-the ladies, 
for instance, or fashionable people, people in high society, can 
always talk about something, c'est de rigueur, but middling 
people like us, thinking ones, that is, are all awkward and 
tongue-tied . . .  What is the cause of this? Whether it is because 
we have no interest in public affairs, or because we are very 
honest and don't want to deceive one another, I don't know. 
What do you think, eh? Put your cap down though; you look 
as though you were leaving at once. It makes me uncomfort­
able to see you . . .  And I really am delighted . . .  ' 
Raskolnikov put down his cap, still listening silently and 
seriously, with a frown, to Porfiry's vague, confused chatter. 
'Why, can he really be trying to distract my attention with 
this stupid talk?' 
'I can't very well offer you coffee here, but why not sit and 
enjoy yourself for five minutes or so with a friend?' Porfiry 
chattered on without stopping. 'You know, all these official 
duties . . .  Don't mind, old chap, if I keep walking up and 
down ; excuse me, I am very much afraid of offending you, 
but exercise is simply essential to me. I am always sitting, and 
I am so glad to move about for a few minutes . . .  haemorrhoids, 
you know . . .  I am always meaning to try gymnastics for it ; 
they say you can see all sorts of quite high officials, even Privy 
Councillors, skipping with a little rope; what a thing science 
is, in our day and age ! . . .  Just so . . .  But about my duties 
here, interrogations and all those formalities . . . you yourself 
mentioned questioning, old man . . .  well, you know, Rodion 
Romanovich, old man, sometimes the questioner is led astray, 
more than the one he is examining . . .  You made a very just 
and penetrating remark on that subject just now, old man.' 
(Raskolnikov had made no such remark.) 'You get all tangled 
up ! Yes, really; tangled up ! And it 's all the same thing over 
and over, over and over, like beating a drum ! There is a reform 

324 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
on the way, and we are all to be at any rate called something 
different. He, he, he ! As for our lawyer's procedure, as you so 
wittily term it-there I am completely in agreement with you. 
Who is there, tell me, out of all the people accused of crimes, 
even if they are absolute yokels, who does not know that they 
will try to lull his mistrust (as you happily express it) with 
irrelevant questions, and then unexpectedly stun him, he, he, 
he ! by hitting him on the crown of his head, to use your 
delightful metaphor, as if with an axe, he, he, he ! So you 
really thought that when I talked of my fiat I intended . . .  he, 
he ! You are very ironical. Well, I won't say any more. Oh, 
yes, by the way-one thing leads to another-you mentioned 
formalities just now, in connexion with questioning, you know 
. . .  But why bother about formalities?-in many cases, you 
know, they mean nothing. Sometimes justa friendly talk is much 
more use. The formalities will always be there, if necessary; 
allow me to assure you of that. But what are they, after all, I 
ask you ? An examining magistrate ought not to be hampered 
by them at every step. His business is, so to speak, some sort of 
an art, in its own way . . .  he, he, he !' 
Porfiry Petrovich paused a moment for breath. He had been 
running on without a break, now throwing off meaningless 
empty phrases, now slipping in a few enigmatic words, then 
again wandering off into nonsense. He was almost running 
about the room, with his fat little legs moving faster and faster, 
his eyes fixed on the ground, and his right hand thrust behind 
his back, while his left gesticulated ceaselessly, making various 
gestures that were always extraordinarily out of keeping with 
his words. Suddenly Raskolnikov noticed that once or twice, as 
he scurried about the room, he seemed to pause near the door 
for a moment, as though he were listening. 'Can he be expect­
ing something ?' 
'But you were really quite right,' Porfiry began again gaily, 
looking at Raskolnikov with extraordinary artlessness (which 
made him start and instantly prepare himself for something), 
'really right, when you laughed so wittily at our legal forms, 
he, he, he ! Indeed, our profound psychological methods (some 
of them) are made quite ridiculous, and perhaps even useless, 
if formalities are allowed to cramp them. Yes . . .  I am talking 
of forms again : well, if I recognize or rather suspect, that this, 
that, or the other man is guilty, in some case that is in my hands 
. . .  You are reading law, I believe, Rodion Romanovich?' 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'I was . .  . ' 
'Then here is an example to guide you, so to speak, in future 
-but please don't imagine that I am venturing to instruct 
you : look at the articles on crime you publish ! No, only I take 
the liberty of putting this example before you as a matter of 
fact-so suppose I consider that this person or that is a crimi­
nal, why, I ask, should I worry him before the proper time, even 
if I have evidence against him? One man, for example, I feel 
obliged to arrest at once, but another may be quite different, 
and so why not allow him to go free for a time, he, he? No, 
I see you do not quite understand, so I will put it more clearly : 
if I put him in custody too soon, I may by that be giving him, 
so to speak, moral support. He, he ! You are laughing?' (Raskol­
nikov had no idea of laughing; he sat with compressed lips, 
with his feverish gaze fixed on Porfiry's eyes.) 'Yet it is true, 
especially with some types, because people are very different; 
but of course only practice can guide one. Now you will say : 
evidence. Well, suppose there is evidence; but evidence, you 
know, old man, cuts both ways for the most part. I am only an 
investigator, and fallible like everybody else, I confess; I should 
like to produce deductions that are, so to speak, mathematically 
clear; I want to have evidence that is like two and two make 
four ! I want something like direct and incontrovertible proof! 
But if I put a man in custody at the wrong moment-even 
though I am sure that it was he-! may very likely be destroy­
ing my only means of incriminating him further; and why? 
Because I shall be giving him a definite position, so to speak, 
I shall give him, as it were, psychological certainty and tran­
quillity, and once he understands that he is definitely accused, 
he will retreat from me into his shell. They say that in Sebasto­
pol, immediately after the battle of the Alma; intelligent people 
were terribly afraid that the enemy would attack at once with 
all his force and take the town, but when they saw that the 
enemy preferred a regular siege and was already preparing his 
trenches, those intelligent people, they say, were thoroughly 
reassured and highly delighted : if a regular siege was intended, 
that meant that things would drag on for two months at least ! 
You're laughing again. You still don't believe me? Well, you 
are right as well. You are right, you are right ! These are all 
special cases, I agree; and the present case is really special ! 
But you ought to bear it in mind, my dear Rodion Romano­
vich, that the average case, the case for which all the legal forms 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
and tules are devised, which they are calculated to deal with, 
when they are written down in the textbooks, does not exist 
at all, because every case, every crime, for example, as soon 
as it really occurs, at once becomes a quite special case, and 
sometimes it is absolutely unlike anything that has ever hap­
pened before. Very comical things of that kind sometimes 
occur. Now, if I leave one gentleman quite alone, if I don't 
arrest him or worry him in any way, but if he knows, or at 
least suspects, every minute of every hour, that I know every­
thing down to the last detail, and am watching him day and 
night with ceaseless vigilance, if he is always conscious of the 
weight of suspicion and fear, he is absolutely certain to lose 
his head. He will come to me of his own accord, and per­
haps commit some blunder, which will provide, so to speak, 
mathematical proof, like two and two make four-and that 
is very satisfactory. This may happen even with a boorish 
peasant, all the more with people of our sort, the contemporary 
intellectuals, with their one-sided development. Because, my 
dear chap, a very important point is understanding what side 
of a man's nature has been developed. And the nerves, the 
nerves, you seem to have forgotten them. Nowadays, they are 
all sick, and fine-drawn, and irritable ! . . .  And everybody is 
so full of spleen ! And I tell you, in its way that provides a 
mine of information ! And why should I worry if a man goes 
freely about the town? Let him ! Let him be at large for a time ; 
I know that he is my prey, and that he can't escape me. Where 
could he run away to, he, he? Abroad ? A Pole will escape 
abroad, but not my man, especially as I am watching and 
have taken precautions. Or will he flee into the depths of the 
country? But the peasants live there, real homespun Russian 
peasants, and the modern educated man would rather go to 
prison than live with people as foreign to him as our peasants, 
he, he ! But all this is unimportant, external. What is running 
away?-it 's merely formal ;  the point isn't that he won't run 
away because he has nowhere to run to, but that psychologically 
he won't escape, he, he ! What an expression ! By a law of his 
nature he wouldn't escape, even if he had somewhere to escape 
to. Have you ever seen a moth with a candle? Well, he'll be 
just like that, he'll circle round me as if I were a candle : 
Freedom will no longer be a boon to him ; he will begin to 
brood, he will get himself into a muddle, entangle his own feet 
in a net, and worry himself to death ! . . .  More than that, he 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
327 
himself will provide me with a mathematical proof, of the 
nature of two and two make four-if only I allow a long 
enough interval between the acts of the drama . . .  And he'll 
keep on, keep on circling round me, closer and closer, and 
then, plop ! he'll fly straight into my mouth and I'll swallow 
him, and that will be very satisfactory, he, he, he ! Don't you 
believe me?' 
Raskolnikov did not answer, but sat pale and motionless, 
watching Porfiry's face with the same strained attention. 
'The lesson is a good one !' he thought, turning cold. 'It is 
no longer a case of cat and mouse, as it was yesterday. He is 
not showing me his strength, and . . .  hinting, for nothing : he is 
much too clever for that . . .  He has some other motive, but 
what? Ah, brother, it 's all nonsense your trying to scare me 
and be so clever ! You have no proof, and that man I saw 
yesterday doesn't exist ! You just want to get me confused and 
worked up beforehand, and then to pounce when I'm in the 
right condition for you, but you're making a mistake, you'll 
come a cropper ! But why, though, why give me such strong 
hints? . . .  Is he counting on the bad state of my nerves? . . . 
No, brother, you're mistaken, you'll come to grief, even if you 
have something up your sleeve. Well, now we shall see what 
it is.' 
And he braced himself as well as he could to meet the un­
known and terrible crisis. At moments he longed to throw 
himself on Porfiry and strangle him then and there. From the 
time he entered he had been afraid of his own rage. He was 
conscious of his dry lips flecked with foam, and of his ham­
mering heart. But he was determined not to say a word until 
the right time came. He knew this to be the right tactics in his 
position, since he would not only avoid letting anything slip, 
but also perhaps provoke his enemy by his silence into saying 
too much. So at least he hoped. 
'No, I see you don't believe me. You still think I'm a harm­
less buffoon,' Porfiry began again, growing more and more 
cheerful, ceaselessly giggling with pleasure, and once more 
circling round the room. 'Well, of course, you're right. God 
created me with such a figure that the only ideas I arouse in 
other people are comical ones ; I'm a clown ; but I'll tell you 
something, and I'll repeat it : you, my dear Rodion Romano­
vich (excuse an old man), are still a young man, in your first 
youth, so to speak, and therefore you esteem the human 

328 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
intellect above all things, like all young people. Abstract 
reasoning and the play of wit tempt you astray. It is exactly 
like the former Austrian Hojkriegsrath, for example (if my 
judgement of military matters is sound, that is) ; on paper they 
defeated Napoleon and took him prisoner, calculating and 
reasoning in the cleverest fashion there in the study, but then, 
you see, General Mack* surrendered with all his army, he, he, he ! 
I can see, I can see, Rodion Romanovich, old man, that you 
are laughing at me, a civilian, for taking my examples from 
military history. But what would you have, it 's a weakness of 
mine; I love the art of war, and I like reading all these military 
histories . . .  really, I've missed my vocation. I ought to have 
had a military career, really. I might not have become a 
Napoleon, but I should have become a major, he, he, he ! Well, 
my dear friend, now I'll tell you the whole truth, about this 
special case, that is ; reality and nature, my dear sir, are very 
important, and sometimes upset the most penetrating calcula­
tions ! Ah, listen to an old man, I am speaking seriously, Rodion 
Romanovich' (and saying this, Porfiry Petrovich, who was 
barely thirty-five, really seemed to grow old all at once ; even 
his voice changed, and he somehow shrivelled up), 'and besides 
I'm a very frank person. Am I a frank person, or not? What is 
your opinion? I think I am completely frank'; here I am telling 
you all these things for nothing, and don't even ask for any 
reward, he, he ! Well, I will proceed : wit, in my opinion, is a 
wonderful thing; it is, so to speak, the ornament of nature and 
the solace of life, and what riddles it can set sometimes !-so 
that a poor devil of an investigator is quite baffied, especially 
when his own fancy is liable to lead him astray as well, as 
always happens, since he is only human after all ! But the 
criminal's own nature comes to the rescue of the poor investi­
gator, that 's the point ! That 's what the young person, carried 
away by his own wit, and "over-stepping all obstacles" (as 
you so wittily and cleverly expressed it yesterday), doesn't 
think of. He, let us suppose, will lie, I mean our man, the 
special case, Mr. X, and lie extremely well, in the most marvel­
lously clever fashion; this would seem to be triumph, and he 
might expect to enjoy the fruits of his wit, and then plop ! 
he will fall in a faint, and that at the most interesting and 
shocking point ! It is illness, we will suppose, and rooms are 
sometimes stuffy, besides, but all the same ! All the same, he 
has given us an idea ! He lied incomparably well, but he 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
couldn't rely on his own nature. That 's it, that's where our 
skill comes in ! Another time, tempted by the playfulness of his 
own wit, he will make a fool of a man who suspects him, he will 
turn pale too naturally, too much as if it were real; and again he's 
given us an idea ! His trickery may be successful at first, but 
the other will revise his ideas, given time, if he isn't a dunder­
head. And it 's the same at every step ! Why? Because he will 
begin trying to forestall us, he will thrust himself in where he is 
not wanted, he will begin to talk incessantly about things he 
would do better to say nothing about, he will talk in allegories, 
he, he ! He will come of his own accord and begin asking 
why he hasn't been arrested long since, he, he, he !-and this 
happens with the sharpest-witted of men, versed in psycho­
logy and literature. Nature is a mirror, the very clearest of 
mirrors ! Look into it and admire ! But why are you so pale, Ro­
dion Romanovich? Is it too stuffy for you? Shall I open the 
window?' 
'Oh, don't trouble, please,' cried Raskolnikov, suddenly be­
ginning to laugh. 'Please don't trouble !' 
Porfiry stopped opposite him and after a pause began to 
laugh too. Raskolnikov got up from the sofa, abruptly cutting 
short his fit of laughter. 
'Porfiry Petrovich,' he said loudly and distinctly, although 
his trembling legs would hardly support him, 'at last I see 
plainly that you definitely suspect me of the murder of that 
old woman and her sister Lizaveta. I must tell you that for 
my part I had enough of this long ago. If you find that you 
have a legal right to prosecute me or arrest me, then do it ! 
But I will not permit anyone to laugh in my face and torment 
me . . .  ' 
His lips began to tremble, his eyes shone with fury, and his 
voice rose, although he had been trying to keep it low. 'I will 
not permit it,' he shouted, banging his fist violently on the 
table. 'Do you hear that, Porfiry Petrovich ? I will not per­
mit it !' 
'Good heavens ! What has brought this on again ?' cried 
Porfiry Petrovich, apparently thoroughly frightened. 'My dear 
fellow ! Rodion Romanovich ! My dear friend ! What is the 
matter?' 
'I will not permit it !' Raskolnikov shouted again. 
'My dear chap, quietly ! You will be heard, somebody will 
come ! And then what could we say to them? Think !' said 

330 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
Porfiry Petrovich in a frightened whisper, thrusting his face 
close to Raskolnikov's. 
'I won't permit it, I won't permit it !' repeated Raskolnikov 
mechanically, but he had also dropped his voice to a whisper. 
Porfiry turned quickly and ran to open the window. 
'I'll let some fresh air in ! And you must drink a little water, 
my dear fellow ! You've had an attack !' And he hurried towards 
the door to call for water; but there in the corner, luckily, 
was a carafe. 
'My dear chap, have some water,' he whispered, hurrying 
over to him with the carafe. 'It may do you good . .  .' Porfiry 
Petrovich's alarm and sympathy seemed so natural that Raskol­
nikov was silent and began to watch him with fierce curiosity. 
He did not take the water, however. 
'Rodion Romanovich ! My dear chap ! You'll drive yourself 
mad like this, I assure you. Ah ! Drink some. Even if it 's only 
a sip, do drink some water !' 
He forced a glass of water into his hand. Raskolnikov began 
to raise it mechanically to his lips, but then recollected himself 
and set it on the table with distaste. 
'Yes, you've had a little attack ! You're going the right way 
to bring your illness back, my dear fellow,' clucked Porfiry 
Petrovich with friendly sympathy, although he still looked a 
little disconcerted. 'Good Lord ! How can you be so careless of 
yourself? Here Dmitri Prokofich came to see me yesterday-! 
agree, I agree, I've got a nasty sarcastic nature, but just look 
what people have made of that ! . . .  Lord ! He came yesterday, 
after you'd gone, we had dinner, and he talked and talked, and 
I was absolutely flabbergasted ; well, thought I . . .  good Lord ! 
Did you send him ? But sit down, old man, for the love of 
Christ, sit down !' 
'No, I didn't send him. But I knew he had come, and why,' 
answered Raskolnikov sharply. 
'You knew?' 
'Yes. What of that?' 
'Just this, Rodion Romanovich, old man, that I don't know 
only about such actions of yours ; I am informed about every­
thing ! I know that you went to take that flat, just before night­
fall, when it was getting dark, and began ringing the bell, and 
asked about the blood and thoroughly puzzled the workmen 
and the porters. You know, I can understand your state of mind 
just then . . .  but all the same, you'll simply drive yourself mad 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
331 
like that, as true as I'm here ! You'll lose your wits ! There is 
indignation seething violently inside you, a generous indigna­
tion, at the injuries you have received, first from fate and then 
from the police, and you go rushing about from place to place, 
to force everybody, so to say, to speak out and so make an end 
of it at once, because you are sick of all these stupidities and 
suspicions. That is so, isn't it? Have I guessed your mood ? But 
in this way you are upsetting not only your own wits, but my 
Razumikhin's as well; and, really, he is too good a person for 
that, as you know yourself. You are ill, and he is kind and good, 
and your illness is infectious for him . . .  I will tell you, old chap, 
when you are calmer . . .  But sit down, old man, for Christ's 
sake. Please rest, you are terribly pale ; do sit down.' 
Raskolnikov sat down; his trembling had ceased, and his 
whole body felt hot. Stunned with amazement, he listened 
with strained attention to Porfiry Petrovich, who still seemed 
alarmed as he pressed his friendly attentions on him. But he 
did not oelieve one word he said, although he felt strangely 
inclined to believe him. He was struck with dismay by Porfiry's 
unexpected words about the flat : 'What is this ?' he thought. 
'So he knows about the flat, and he is telling me himself!' 
'Yes, we have had an almost exactly similar case in our 
practice, a case involving morbid psychology,' went on Porfiry 
in his rapid speech. 'A man falsely accused himself of murder, 
and how thoroughly he did it ! he created a complete but 
hallucinatory picture, brought forward facts, gave a circum­
stantial account of it, and got all and sundry muddled and 
confused, and why? He had been, quite unwittingly, the cause 
in part, but only in part, of the murder, and when he learnt 
that he had given the murderer a pretext, he got into a state 
of depression and stupor, began to imagine things, went com­
pletely out of his mind, and persuaded himself that he was the 
murderer ! Finally the Senate High Court tried the case, and 
the unhappy man was acquitted and put under proper care. 
One should be grateful to the Senate Court ! Alas ! Dear, dear, 
dear ! So what then, my dear chap ? Why, you may easily drive 
yourself into a raging fever, if you have these impulses to upset 
your own nerves, and go about at night ringing bells and ask­
ing questions about blood ! I've studied all this psychology in 
my practice. Sometimes, in just the same way, a man feels 
drawn to jump out of a window or off a church-tower, and 
the temptation is very strong. So with door-bells . . .  Illness, 

332 
CRIM E  AND PUNISHMENT 
Rodion Romanovich, illness ! You have begun to neglect your 
illness. You ought to consult an experienced doctor, but as it is, 
what good is that fat fellow of yours? . . .  You are liable to 
become delirious ! It is delirium that makes you do all those 
things ! . .  .' 
For a moment everything seemed to Raskolnikov to be 
spinning round. 
'Can it be possible,' flashed through his mind, 'that he is 
lying even now? No, impossible, impossible !' He pushed the 
thought away from him, realizing in time to what degree of 
rage and fury it might drive him, and feeling that the fury 
might be violent enough to make him lose his mind. 
'I wasn't delirious, I was quite conscious of what I was doing !' 
he cried, straining all his powers of judgement to fathom 
Porfiry's game. 'I was conscious, quite conscious ! Do you 
hear?' 
'Yes, I hear you, and I understand. Yesterday as well you 
said you were not delirious, you were particularly emphatic 
about not being delirious. I know everything you can say ! 
Ah ! . . .  But listen, Rodion Romanovich, my dear friend, there 
is at least this circumstance . . . If you really were guilty, or 
somehow mixed up in this damned business, would you, for 
heaven's sake, be so emphatic about not having been delirious, 
but on the contrary, in full possession of your faculties, when 
you did all that? And so specially insistent on it, with such 
particular obstinacy-would you ?-is it possible, for goodness 
sake? Quite the contrary, I should say. Indeed, if you really 
felt you had done something wrong you ought to insist that 
you certainly were delirious. I am right, aren't I ?' 
There was something sly about this question. Raskolnikov 
recoiled from Porfiry, who was stooping over him, as far as 
the sofa would allow, and watched him in silent perplexity. 
'Then about Mr. Razumikhin, that is about whether he 
came here yesterday from you or at your instigation, you ought 
certainly to have said that he came of his own accord, and 
concealed that you had anything to do with it. But you don't 
conceal it ! You even insist that you persuaded him to come !' 
Raskolnikov had never done so. A chill ran down his spine. 
'You keep on lying,' he said slowly and faintly, with a sickly 
smile distorting his lips, 'You want to prove to me again that 
you know my game, that you know all my answers before­
hand,' he went on, aware that he was no longer weighing his 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
333 
words as he should. 'You want to frighten me . . .  or else you 
are simply laughing at me . . .  ' 
As he said this, he continued to look into the face so close 
to his, and unbridled fury suddenly flashed again in his eyes. 
'You are lying all the time !' he cried. 'You yourself know 
perfectly well that the criminal's best plan is to tell the truth 
as far as he can . . .  to hide, as far as possible, nothing that he 
can reveal. I don't trust you !' 
'What a slippery person you are !' chuckled Porfiry. 'There 's 
no coping with you, old chap. You've got some fixed idea into 
your head. So you don't trust me? But I tell you that you trust 
me half-way already, and I'll make you trust me all the way 
yet, because I sincerely like you and wish you well.' 
Raskolnikov's lips trembled. 
'Yes, I do, and I will say one final thing to you,' went on 
Porfiry, lightly touching Raskolnikov's arm in a friendly 
fashion. 'One last thing : you must watch that illness of yours. 
Besides, your family is here now; you must think of them. You 
ought to take care of them and cherish them, but you only 
frighten them . . .  ' 
'What business is it of yours? How do you know about them? 
"Vhy are you so interested? You must be watching me, then, 
and you want to make sure I know it !' 
'Good Lord ! Why it was you, you yourself, who told me ! 
You don't realize that when you are agitated you tell every­
thing, to others as well as to me. I learnt a lot of interesting 
details yesterday from Mr. Razumikhin, Dmitri Prokofich. 
No, you interrupted me, but I tell you that in spite of all your 
brains, your mistrustfulness makes you unable to take a sensible 
view of things. For instance, to go back to the same subject, on 
this question of door-bells : I gave you that precious detail, 
that fact (for it is a fact to be considered, you know). I gave 
it you with both hands, I, an examining magistrate ! Don't you 
see anything in that? If I suspected you at all, should I have 
done that? On the contrary, I should first have lulled your 
suspicions, and pretended that I had not been informed of the 
fact; I should have drawn your attention in the opposite 
direction, and then stunned you, as with a blow on the head with 
an axe (to use your own expression) : "And what," I should have 
said "were you doing in the murdered woman's flat at ten 
o'clock, or nearer eleven, at night? Why were you ringing the 
bell? Why were you asking about the blood? And why did 

334 
C R IME AND PUNISHMENT 
you try to mislead the porter, and get him to go to the police 
lieutenant at the station?" That 's how I should have acted, 
if I had had even the slightest suspicion of you. I should have 
taken a statement from you in the proper form, made a search, 
and perhaps arrested you . . .  If I haven't acted like that it 
follows that I am not harbouring any suspicions ! But you have 
lost the capacity to take a sane view, and I repeat, you see 
nothing !' 
Raskolnikov's whole body quivered, so that Porfiry Petrovich 
could see it quite plainly. 
'You are lying all the time !' he said. 'I don't know what you 
are aiming at, but you do nothing but lie . . .  You weren't 
talking in that sense a few minutes ago, and I can't be mistaken 
about that . . .  Are you lying?' 
'I lying?' rejoined Porfiry, visibly growing a little heated, 
but still preserving the same cheerfully mocking expression, 
and apparently not at all worried by what Mr. Raskolnikov 
might think of him. 'Lying? . . .  Well, how was I acting towards 
you just now (and I an examining magistrate), when I was 
prompting you, showing you all the ways of defending yourself, 
supplying all that psychology : "Illness," I said, "delirium, 
being insulted, melancholia, police officers" and all the rest 
of it ? Eh? he, he, he ! There is one thing, however, to be said­
all these psychological means of defence, these excuses and 
evasion̓, are very insubstantial, and they cut both ways : 
"Illness, delirium," you say, "fancies, illusions, I don't remem­
ber"-that is all very well, but then why is it, old chap, that 
you see just these illusions in your sick delirium, and not others? 
There could have been others, couldn't there? He, he, he, he !' 
Raskolnikov looked at him proudly and scornfully. 
'In one word,' he said loudly and insistently, pushing Porfiry 
back a little as he stood up, 'in one word, what I want to know 
is this : Do you admit that I am definitely free from suspicion 
or not? Tell me that, Porfiry Petrovich, tell me definitely and 
finally, and quickly, at once !' 
'Here 's a fine fuss ! Well, what a fuss you make !' cried Por­
firy, with a sly, perfectly cheerful, and unruffled look. 'Why do 
you want to know, why do you want to know so much, when 
nobody has even begun to worry you yet? Really you are like a 
child crying for the fire to play with. And why are you so 
worried? Why do you thrust yourself upon us ? What are your 
reasons, eh? He, he, he !' 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
335 
'I tell you again,' shouted Raskolnikov furiously, 'that I 
cannot any longer endure . . .  ' 
'What? The uncertainty?' interrupted Porfiry. 
'Do not taunt me ! I will not have it . . .  I tell you I won't 
have it ! . . .  I can't and I won't ! . . .  Listen to me !' he shouted, 
banging the table with his fist again. 
'Quietly, quietly ! You will be heard ! I warn you seriously, 
look after yoursel£ I am not joking !' said Porfiry in a whisper, 
but this time his face had not its former expression of womanish 
good nature and alarm. On the contrary, now he was giving 
orders, frowning sternly and destroying at one blow, as it were, 
all mystery and ambiguity. But ̔t was only for a moment. 
Raskolnikov, perplexed, fell suddl!nly into a real frenzy; but 
strangely enough he again obeyed the injunction to speak 
quietly, although he was in a perfect paroxysm of fury. 
'I will not allow myself to be tortured !' As he had before, 
he suddenly dropped his voice to a whisper, instantly recog­
nizing with anguish and hatred that he felt obliged to submit 
to the command, and driven to greater fury by the knowledge. 
'Arrest me, search me, but be good enough to act in the proper 
form, and don't play with me ! Do not dare . . .  ' 
'Don't worry about the proper form,' interrupted Porfiry, 
with his former sly smile, apparently even gloating over Ras­
kolnikov. 'I invited you here informally, old man, in a very 
friendly fashion !' 
'I don't want your friendship ! I spit upon it ! Do you hear? 
And look : I am taking my cap and going. Well, what will you 
say now, if you intend to arrest me?' 
He seized his cap and went to the door. 
'But don't you want to see my little surprise?' chuckled 
Porfiry, seizing his arm again and stopping him by the door. 
He seemed to be growing ever more high-spirited and playful, 
and this made Raskolnikov finally lose control. 
'What little surprise? What is this?' he asked, stopping short 
and looking at Porfiry with terror. 
'Just a little surprise. Here it is, just behind the door, 
he, he, he !' (He pointed his finger at the closed door in the 
partition, which led into his living quarters.) 'I locked it in, so 
that it shouldn't run away.' 
'What is it? Where? What?' Raskolnikov went to the door 
and tried to open it, but it was locked. 
'It is locked. Here is the key!' 

336 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
And he showed him the key, which he had taken from his 
pocket. 
'You are still lying !' howled Raskolnikov, no longer restrain­
ing himself. 'You lie, you damned clown !' He rushed at Porfiry, 
who retreated towards the door, but without quailing. 
'I understand it all, all of it ! You are lying. You are teasing 
me to make me betray myself . .  .' 
'But you can't betray yourself any further, Rodion Romano­
vich, old chap. You're quite beside yourself. Don't shout. I shall 
call somebody.' 
'You are lying, nothing will happen ! Call your people ! You 
knew I was ill, and you tried to irritate me to madness, so that 
I should betray myself, that's what you were after ! No, bring 
out your facts ! I understand it all ! You have no facts, you 
have only paltry, rubbishy guesses, Zametov's guesses ! . . . 
You knew my nature, you wanted to drive me mad, and then 
stun me with priests and witnesses . . .  Are you waiting for 
them, eh? What are you waiting for? Where are they? Bring 
them out !' 
'What witnesses, old man? What an imagination you have ! 
And to act as you say would not be in accordance with the 
forms. You don't understand what the procedure is, my dear 
chap . . .  The forms are still there, as you will see for yourself!' 
muttered Porfiry, with his ear directed to the door. 
There seemed really to be some noise at this moment close 
to the door, in the other room. 
'Ah, they are coming !' cried Raskolnikov. 'You sent for 
them ! You were waiting for them ! You expected . . .  Well, 
bring them all here, deputies, witnesses, anything you like . . .  
bring them ! I am ready ! I am ready ! . .  . ' 
But now a strange thing happened, something so little to be 
foreseen in the ordinary course of things, that neither Ras­
kolnikov nor Porfiry Petrovich could have expected such a 
denouement. 
C H A P T E R  V I  
AFTERWARDs, remembering 
that 
moment, Raskolnikov 
recalled it in this way : 
The noise outside the door increased suddenly, and the door 
opened a little way. 
'What is it?' cried Porfiry Petrovich in annoyance. 'I gave 
orders not to .
.
 . '  

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
337 
There was no answer for a moment, but there were evidently 
several people outside the door, and they seemed to be pushing 
somebody away. 
'What is it?' repeated Porfiry Petrovich anxiously. 
'The prisoner Nikolay has been brought,' said a voice. 
'I don't want him ! Get out ! Wait till you're wanted ! 
Why is he here? What lack of discipline !' cried Porfiry, rushing 
to the door. 
'But he . . .  ' the same voice was beginning again, and was 
suddenly cut off. 
There were a couple of seconds, not more, of actual struggle; 
then somebody seemed to give somebody else a violent push, 
and immediately afterwards a very pale man walked straight 
into Porfiry Petrovich's office. 
At first sight, this man's appearance was very strange. He 
was looking straight before him, but seemed not to see anything. 
His eyes shone with resolution, but his face was deadly pale, 
as though he were going to execution. Even his twitching lips 
were white. 
He was still very young, of medium height, thin, with the 
hair cropped round his head, and spare, parched-looking 
features. He was dressed like an ordinary wor:f9.ng man. The 
man he had unexpectedly pushed aside burst into the room 
after him, and managed to seize him by the shoulder; he was 
a guard. But Nikolay jerked his arm and pulled himself free 
again. A few curious onlookers crowded in the doorway. Some 
of them tried to get into the room. All this had happened in the 
space of little more than a moment. 
'Get out ! You are too early ! Wait until you are sent for ! . . .  
·why did you bring him so soon?' grumbled Porfiry Petrovich, 
full of annoyance, and seeming very disconcerted. But Nikolay 
suddenly fell on his knees. 
'What do you want?' cried Porfiry in astonishment. 
'I am guilty ! The sin was mine ! I am the murderer !' 
answered Nikolay abruptly, panting, but in quite a loud 
voice. 
There was a stupefied silence, which lasted for several 
seconds ; even the guard recoiled. He did not approach Nikolay 
again, but retreated mechanically to the door and stood there 
without moving. 
'What is this?' cried Porfiry Petrovich, emerging from his 
momentary stupor. 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
'I . . .  am the murderer . .  .' repeated Nikolay, after a short 
pause. 
'What . . .  you . . .  what? . . .  Whom did you kill?' 
Porfiry Petrovich was clearly at a loss. 
Nikolay again said nothing for a moment. 
'Alena Ivanovna and her sister Lizaveta Ivanovna, I 
killed them . . . with an axe. Everything went black . . . ' he 
added suddenly, and then was silent again. He was still on his 
knees. 
Porfiry Petrovich stood for a short time as if plunged in 
thought, then abruptly roused himself and waved away the 
uninvited onlookers. They disappeared at once, and the door 
was closed. Then he looked at Raskolnikov, standing in the 
corner with his wild gaze fixed on Nikolay, and seemed about 
to approach him, but stopped, looked from him to Nikolay 
and back again, then once more back to Nikolay, and finally 
turned on Nikolay again as though he could not help him­
self. 
'What do you mean, running ahead with "everything went 
black"?' he shouted at him almost furiously. 'I haven't asked 
you anything about that yet . . .  Speak out : you killed them?' 
'I am the murderer . . .  I want to testify . .  .' said Nikolay. 
'0-oh ! What did you kill them with?' 
'With an axe. I got it for that.' 
'Oh, he 's in a hurry ! Alone?' 
Nikolay did not understand the question. 
'Was it you alone who killed them?' 
'Yes. Mitka is innocent, he had nothing to do with any of it.' 
'Don't be in such a hurry about Mitka ! 0-oh ! . . .  How is it 
then . . .  how did you come to run downstairs just then ? The 
porters met both of you, didn't they?' 
'I did it as a blind . . . that is why I ran with Mitka,' 
answered Nikolay quickly, as though he had prepared his reply 
beforehand. 
'Ah, so that 's it !' cried Porfiry angrily. 'That 's not his own 
idea; he 's picked it up somewhere,' he muttered to himself, 
and then his eyes fell on Raskolnikov again. 
He had evidently been so concerned with Nikolay that he 
had forgotten about Raskolnikov for the moment. Now he 
recollected himself, and seemed rather embarrassed . . .  
'Rodion Romanovich, my dear fellow ! Excuse me,' he said, 
hurrying over to him, 'I can't . . .  would you mind . . .  you 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
339 
should not be here . . .  and I . . .  You see what a surprise ! . . .  
Would you mind? . .  .' 
And taking him by the arm, he led him towards the door. 
'It seems that you didn't expect this,' said Raskolnikov, who 
had regained much of his courage, although he naturally could 
not clearly understand any of this. 
'Neither did you, old chap. Look how your hand shakes, 
he, he !' 
'You are trembling yourself, Porfiry Petrovich.' 
'So I am. I didn't expect this ! . . .  ' 
They were already at the door. Porfiry waited impatiently 
for Raskolnikov to go. 
'And aren't you going to show me your little surprise?' asked 
Raskolnikov suddenly. 
'He can talk like that, while his teeth are still chattering, 
he, he ! What an ironical person you are ! Well, good-bye for the 
present.' 
'I think we might say simply good-bye!' 
'That is as God wills, as God wills,' muttered Porfiry, with 
a wry smile. 
As he walked through the outer office, Raskolnikov noticed 
many eyes fixed on him. In the crowd in the ante-room he 
picked out the two porters from that house, to whom he had 
suggested going to the police that night. They were standing 
waiting for something. As soon as he reached the stairs he 
heard Porfiry Petrovich's voice again behind him. Turning, 
he saw him panting along after him. 
'One word, Rodion Romanovich ; as to all the rest of this, it 
is as God wills, but all the same there are some questions I 
must put to you, to comply with the formalities . . .  So we shall 
see each other again, you see !' 
And Porfiry stopped in front of him with a smile. 
'You see !' he added again. 
It might have been supposed that he wanted to say some­
thing more, but could not bring out the words. 
'And you must please forgive me, Porfiry Petrovich, for 
what I said just now . . .  I was angry,' began Raskolnikov, now so 
much emboldened that he could not resist the desire to show off. 
'It doesn't matter, it doesn't matter,' rejoined Porfiry, 
almost joyfully. 'I myself . . .  I have a venomous nature, I am 
sorry to say ! But we shall see each other again-and very many 
times, if God wills it ! . .  . '  

34° 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'And learn to know each other in the end?' rejoined Raskol­
nikov. 
'Yes, in the end we shall get to know each other,' agreed 
Porfiry, screwing up his eyes and looking at him gravely. 'Are 
you going to a party now?' 
'To a funeral.' 
'Oh, yes, to a funeral ! Look after your health; keep well . . .  ' 
'I don't know what I can wish you in return,' rejoined 
Raskolnikov, who had begun to go down the stairs, but turned 
round to face Porfiry again. 'I would wish you every success, 
but really, you know, yours is such a funny job !' 
'Why funny?' Porfiry Petrovich, who had also turned to go, 
pricked up his ears. 
'Well, just look how you must have teased and tormented 
that poor Mikolka, psychologically, in your usual way, until he 
confessed ; day and night you must have been trying to prove 
it to him : "you're the murderer, you're the murderer,'' and 
now that he has confessed you'll put him on the rack again : 
"You're lying,'' you say, "you aren't the murderer ! You can't 
be ! You've picked it up somewhere or other !" Well, after that, 
what else is it but a funny job ?' 
'He, he, he ! So you noticed that I told Nikolay just now that 
none of that was his own idea?' 
'How could I help it?' 
'He, he ! You are sharp-witted, very sharp-witted. You notice 
everything. A really quick mind ! You seize on the most comical 
aspect of things . . .  he, he ! It is Gogol, isn't it, among our 
writers, who is said to have that faculty in the highest degree?' 
'Yes, Gogol.' 
'Yes, Gogol . . .  Good-bye till our next most pleasant meet­
ing.' 
'Good-bye till then . .  .' 
Raskolnikov went straight home. He was so confused and 
bewildered that when he reached home and flung himself 
down on the sofa, he sat there for a quarter of an hour simply 
recovering and trying to get his thoughts into some kind of 
order. He did not even begin to reason about Nikolay ; he was 
dumbfounded; he felt that there was something astonishing 
and mysterious in Nikolay's confession that he was quite 
incapable of understanding at this moment. But Nikolay's 
confession was an actual fact. The consequences of that fact 
were immediately clear to him : the lie must be exposed, and 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
341 
then they would be on his trail again. But at least he was free 
until then, and he ought certainly to do something to help 
himself, for the danger to himself must inevitably return. 
But how great was it? The situation was becoming clear. 
Remembering roughly, in general outline, all the recent inter­
view with Porfiry, he could not help shuddering again with 
fear. He naturally did not yet know everything Porfiry had 
been aiming at, and therefore could not understand all his 
moves. But part of his hand had been revealed, and nobody, 
of course, knew better than he how terrible this 'lead' of 
Porfiry's had been from his point of view. A little more and he 
might have given the game away completely, even to the factual 
evidence. Knowing the weaknesses of his character, and having 
understood him and summed him up correctly at the first 
glance, Porfiry had taken almost the best possible line with him, 
though perhaps he had pursued it too vigorously. There was no 
disputing that Raskolnikov had managed to compromise him­
self seriously, but, all the same, no facts had yet been arrived 
at; everything was still only inferential. But had he got it right, 
did he understand it all properly now? What had Porfiry really 
been driving at today? Had he indeed been preparing some 
surprise? And what had it been? Was he really waiting for 
something or not? How would they have parted if Nikolay's 
arrival had not brought an unexpected climax? 
Porfiry had shown almost all his cards ; of course, he was 
taking a risk, but he had shown them and (so it seemed to 
Raskolnikov) if he had really had anything more, he would 
have shown it. What had his 'surprise' been? A joke? Had it 
meant anything, or not? Could it have concealed anything 
like factual evidence or a definite accusation? The stranger of 
yesterday? Where had he got to? Where was he today? If, 
indeed, Porfiry had got hold of something definite, it must be 
connected with that man . . .  
He sat on the sofa with his head hanging down, his face 
buried in his hands, and his elbows on his knees. A nervous 
trembling still shook his whole body. At last he rose, picked 
up his cap, stood thinking for a moment, and turned towards 
the door. 
Somehow he had a presentiment that for today at least he 
could almost certainly consider himself out of danger. His 
heart felt suddenly almost light : he was anxious to get to 
Katerina Ivanovna's. He was too late for the funeral, of course, 

342 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
but he would be in time for the dinner, and there he would see 
Sonya. 
He stopped, thinking, and with a feeble smile on his lips. 
'Today, today !' he repeated to himself, 'yes, this very day ! 
I must . .  .' 
He was on the point of opening the door when it began to 
open of itself. He started and recoiled. The door was opening 
slowly and quietly, and suddenly he saw a figure-yesterday's 
stranger from under the ground. 
The man stopped on the threshold, looked at Raskolnikov 
in silence, and then took a step into the room. His appearance 
was exactly the same as on the day before, the same figure, 
dressed in the same way, but his face and his look had under­
gone a considerable change : now he looked melancholy, and 
after a pause he sighed deeply. It only wanted for him to put 
the palm of his hand to his cheek and tilt his head to one side 
and he would have looked exactly like a peasant-woman. 
'What do you want?' asked Raskolnikov, terror-struck. 
The man said nothing, but suddenly bowed very low, almost 
to the ground, low enough at least to touch it with one finger 
of his right hand. 
'Who are you?' cried Raskolnikov. 
'I am guilty,' said the man quietly. 
'Of what?' 
'Of evil thoughts.' 
They looked at each other. 
'I was annoyed. When you came there that time (perhaps 
you had been drinking) and told the porters to go to the police 
and asked about the blood, I was annoyed that they left you 
alone, thinking you were drunk. I was so annoyed that I 
couldn't sleep. But I remembered your address, and came here 
yesterday and asked questions . . .  
' 
'Who came?' interrupted Raskolnikov, instantly beginning 
to remember. 
'I did. That is to say I injured you.' 
'So you come from that house?' 
'Why, I was standing there with them in the gateway, or 
have you forgotten ? I've followed my trade there for years and 
years. I am a furrier, a working furrier, and I take in work at 
home . . .  but more than anything I was annoyed . .  .' 
Suddenly Raskolnikov remembered clearly the scene of two 
days before; he imagined that besides the porters there had 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
343 
been several men standing there, and some women as well. He 
remembered a voice suggesting that he should be taken straight 
to the police. He could not remember the face of the man who 
had spoken, and he did not recognize him even now, but he 
clearly remembered turning towards him and making some 
answer . . .  
This, then, was what all the previous day's horror resolved 
itself into. The most terrible thing was the thought that he had 
almost come to grief, had almost destroyed himself, because of 
such an insignificant circumstance. For it followed that, except 
for the taking of the flat and the talk about blood, there was 
nothing that this man could tell. Consequently, Porfiry had 
nothing either, nothing but delirium, no kind of facts, only his 
psychology, which cut both ways, nothing definite. Consequently, 
if no further facts were revealed (and they must not be, they 
must not, must not !), then . . .  what could they do to him ? 
What could they definitely prove against him, even if they 
arrested him? And Porfiry could only just have learnt about 
the flat, only now; he could not have known about it before. 
'Did you tell Porfiry today . . .  that I went there?' he cried, 
struck by a sudden idea. 
'What Porfiry ?' 
'The magistrate in charge of the investigation.' 
'Yes, I told him. The porters didn't go to him, so I went.' 
'Today?' 
'I was only a minute before you. And I heard it all, the way 
he was tormenting you.' 
'Where? What? When?' 
'Why there, behind that partition. I was sitting there all the 
time. ' 
'What? So you were the surprise? But how did it all come 
about? Please tell me !' 
'Well,' began the man, 'when I saw the porters wouldn't 
go when I told them, because they said it was too late, and 
perhaps they would get into trouble for not going at once, I 
got annoyed, and I couldn't sleep, and then I began finding 
things out. I found out all I could yesterday, and today I went 
there. The first time I went, he wasn't there. I went back an 
hour afterwards, and I couidn't see him, but the third time 
they let me in. Well, I began to tell him everything just as it 
happened, and he began fussing round the room and hitting 
his chest with his fist, and he said, "What are you rogues doing 

344 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
to me? If I had known about this, I would have sent guards to 
fetch him !" Then he ran out and called somebody in and began 
talking to him in the corner, and then he came back to me 
asking me questions and cursing and swearing. And he blamed 
me for not going before; and I told him all about everything 
and I said you didn't dare answer what I said to you yesterday, 
and that you didn't recognize me. And then he began running 
round again, beating his breast all the time, and he got angry 
and ran about, and when they said you were there, he said to 
me, "Well, go into the next room, and sit there for a bit and 
don't stir, whatever you may hear," and he brought me a 
chair himself, and locked me in, and said, "Perhaps I'll ask 
you to come in." And when they brought Nikolay, he sent me 
away, after you'd gone. "I shall want you again," says he, "to 
ask you some more questions" . .  .' 
'Did he question Nikolay while you were there ?' 
'When he sent you out, he sent me out straight after, and 
then began to ask Nikolay questions.' 
He stopped, and suddenly bowed again, touching the floor 
with his finger. 
'Forgive me for slandering you, and for my spite.' 
'God will forgive you,' answered Raskolnikov. As soon as 
he had uttered the words, the man bowed to him again, not so 
deeply this time, but only from the waist, then turned and left 
the room. 'Everything cuts both ways ; now everything cuts 
both ways,' repeated Raskolnikov to himself again and again. 
Then, in better spirits than ever before, he too went out. 
'Now we shall fight again,' he said with a bitter smile, as 
he went down the stairs. But the bitterness was directed against 
himself; he remembered his own 'cowardice' with scorn and 
shame. 

PART F I V E  
C H A P T E R  I 
THE morning after his ill-fated interview with Dunechka and 
Pulkheria Alexandrovna had a sobering effect on Peter 
Petrovich. To his great displeasure he was compelled little 
by little to recognize as an accomplished and irrevocable fact 
what had yesterday appeared to him an almost fantastic 
occurrence, which still seemed impossible even after it had 
actually happened. The black snake of wounded self-esteem 
had preyed on his heart all night. As soon as he got up, Peter 
Petrovich examined himself in the mirror. He was afraid he 
might look bilious after the night. But for the time being all 
was well in that respect, and the inspection of his pale and 
distinguished face, which had of late grown rather fat, even 
consoled him momentarily, fully persuading him that he could 
find another bride, perhaps even a better one, elsewhere. His 
thoughts returned immediately to reality, and he spat vigor­
ously, a gesture which provoked his young friend and the 
sharer of his lodgings, Andrey Semenovich Lebezyatnikov, to 
a silent but sarcastic smile. Peter Petrovich saw the smile, 
and mentally set it down against his young friend's account. 
He had set a good many things down there recently. His 
annoyance redoubled when he suddenly realized that he ought 
never to have told Andrey Semenovich of the result of yester­
day's happenings. That was another mistake he had made 
yesterday, one made in the heat of the moment, when irritation 
had made him unduly expansive . . .  Throughout the morning, 
one unpleasantness followed another, as though on purpose to 
annoy him. Even in the Senate something went wrong with the 
case that was causing him so much trouble. He was particularly 
irritated with the landlord of the flat he had taken in anticipa­
tion of his imminent marriage and decorated at his own ex­
pense : the landlord, a prosperous German tradesman, refused 
to cancel the newly completed contract and insisted on all the 
penalties stipulated for in it, although Peter Petrovich was 
returning the flat to him almost entirely redecorated. Similarly, 
the furniture shop refused to return a single rouble of the 

346 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
deposit on the furniture which had been bought but not yet 
delivered to the flat. 'I'm not going to get married simply 
because I've got the furniture !' said Peter Petrovich to himself, 
grating his teeth, while the desperate hope flashed through his 
mind once more : 'Surely everything can't really be irrevocably 
over and done with. Surely it should be possible to make one 
more try !' The alluring image of Dunechka wrung his heart 
once more. He endured a moment of anguish, and, if the 
mere expression of a wish could have killed Raskolnikov, Peter 
Petrovich would assuredly have pronounced the wish in that 
instant. 
'Another mistake I made was in not giving them any money,' 
he thought gloomily, as he returned to Lebezyatnikov's little 
room; 'why the devil was I such a Jew? It isn't even as ifl were 
being careful of my money. I simply wanted to keep them as 
badly off as possible and so lead them to see me as their 
Providence, and now look ! . . .  Pah ! . . .  No, my position would 
have been much better . . .  and stronger, if only I had given 
them some fifteen hundred roubles, for example, for the trous­
seau, and little gifts, various fancy boxes, dressing-cases, orna­
ments, materials, and all that sort of rubbish from Knopp's 
or the English Stores ! They would not have cast me off so 
lightly now ! They are the sort of people who would have felt 
obliged to return both the money and the presents if they 
refused me, and they would have been sorry to have to do that ! 
Besides, their consciences would have been troubled : "How", 
they would have said, "can we suddenly drive away a man 
who has acted with such generosity and delicacy towards us?" 
. . 
Hm ! I've made a blunder !' And, grinding his teeth again, 
Peter Petrovich admitted-only to himself, of course-that he 
had been a fool. 
Having come to this conclusion, he reached home feeling 
twice as vicious and sore as when he had left. The preparations 
for the funeral dinner in Katerina Ivanovna's room aroused 
his curiosity. He had heard something about it the day before ; 
he even seemed to remember that he had been invited ; but his 
personal worries had distracted his attention from everything 
else. He made inquiries of Mrs. Lippewechsel, who was busying 
herself with the table in the absence of Katerina Ivanovna 
(who was at the cemetery), and learnt that the dinner would 
be a very fine one, that almost all the lodgers had been invited, 
including some who had not known the dead man, that even 

C RIME AND P UNISHMENT 
347 
Andrey Semenovich Lebezyatnikov, in spite of his former 
quarrel with Katerina Ivanovna, had been included in the 
invitations, and finally that he himself was not only invited but 
eagerly expected, since he was almost the most important of 
all the lodgers. Amalia Ivanovna herself had also been invited 
with the greatest courtesy, in spite of all past unpleasantness, 
and was therefore bustling about now, performing housewifely 
duties and almost enjoying hersel£ Moreover, she was dressed 
in her best new black silk, all frills and flounces, and was very 
proud of herself. All this information gave Peter Petrovich a 
certain idea, and he went off to his room, or rather to Andrey 
Semenovich Lebezyatnikov's, rather thoughtfully. The point 
was that he had also learnt that Raskolnikov was one of those 
who had been invited. 
For some reason, Andrey Semenovich had been at home all 
the morning. Peter Petrovich's attitude to this gentleman was 
rather strange, if natural : he had despised and hated him, 
practically from the day he came to stay with him, and yet he 
seemed a little afraid of him. His motive for coming here on his 
arrival in St. Petersburg was not purely niggardly economy. 
Although this was almost his principal reason, he had another 
as well. Before he left the provinces, he had heard that Andrey 
Semenovich, his former ward, was one of the most advanced of 
the young progressives, and that he even played a prominent 
part in certain curious and legendary circles. Peter Petrovich 
was impressed by all this. Those powerful and omniscient 
groups who despised and denounced everybody, had for a long 
time inspired him with a peculiar but undefined apprehension. 
Of course, while he was in the provinces he himself could 
not acquire even an approximately exact understanding of 
anything of that kind. He had heard, like everybody else, that 
there existed, especially in St. Petersburg, certain progressives, 
nihilists, 'denouncers',* and so on and so forth, but, like many 
others, absurdly exaggerated and distorted the idea and mean­
ing of these names. For several years what he had most feared 
had been denunciation, or exposure, and this was the principal 
cause of his constant, exaggerated uneasiness, especially at 
the thought of transferring his activities to St. Petersburg. In 
this connexion he was scared, as it is called, as little children are 
sometimes scared. Some years ago, in the provinces, while he 
was still at the beginning of his career, he had met with two 
cases of cruel 'exposure' of personages of some local importance, 

348 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
to whom he had attached himself, and who had been his 
patrons. One case had ended particularly scandalously for the 
personage exposed, and the other had very nearly resulted in 
the ruin of the person concerned. This was why, when he 
arrived in St. Petersburg, Peter Petrovich proposed to inves­
tigate these movements and if necessary to anticipate pos­
sible developments and ingratiate himself with 'our younger 
generation'. For this purpose he relied on Audrey Semenovich, 
and he had learned to trot out, after a fashion, current phrases 
borrowed with a view to interviews with, for example, Raskol­
nikov . . .  
Naturally, he had soon recognized in Audrey Semenovich 
a singularly commonplace and silly person. But this neither 
disabused nor encouraged Peter Petrovich. Even if he had been 
convinced that all progressives were just such simpletons, it 
would not have allayed his uneasiness. He was not particularly 
concerned with all the doctrines, ideas, and systems with which 
Audrey Semenovich bombarded him. He had his own purposes. 
He simply wanted to find out as quickly as possible what had 
happened here, and how. Had these people any power or not? 
Had he personally any reason to be afraid, or not? If he 
entered upon any enterprise, would he be denounced, or not? 
And if he were denounced, what would it be for? What were 
people denounced for now? Further, could he not ingratiate 
himself with these people and pull the wool over their eyes, 
if they really had any power? Ought he to try to do this, or 
not? Could he not, for example, use them to further his career? 
In short, there were hundreds of questions to answer. 
Audrey Semenovich was a short, thin-blooded, scrofulous 
creature, a clerk in some Ministry, with hair of an astonishingly 
pale colour and mutton-chop whiskers of which he was very 
proud; there was almost always something wrong with his eyes. 
His heart was soft enough, but his speech was extremely self­
assured and sometimes even insolently overbearing; the effect 
of this, coming from such a manikin, was nearly always comical. 
Amalia I vanovna, however, considered him one of her most 
respectable lodgers ; that is to say, he was not a heavy drinker 
and he paid his rent punctually. In spite of these good qualities, 
Audrey Semenovich really was rather stupid. He had joined 
the forces of progress and 'our younger generation' out of 
conviction. He was one of that countless and multifarious 
legion of nondescripts, putrescent abortions, and uninformed 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
349 
obstinate fools who instantly and infallibly attach themselves 
to the most fashionable current idea, with the immediate 
effect of vulgarizing it and of turning into a ridiculous carica­
ture any cause they serve, however sincerely. 
Lebezyatnikov, in spite of his great kindness of heart, was 
also finding it difficult to tolerate his fellow lodger and former 
guardian, Peter Petrovich. On both sides this state of affairs 
had come about unexpectedly. Simple though Andrey Seme­
novich might be, he had begun to think that Peter Petrovich 
was fooling him and secretly despised him, and that 'there was 
something wrong about the fellow'. He had tried to expound 
Fourier's system and Darwin's theory*to him, but Peter Petro­
vich, especially recently, had listened very sarcastically, and 
in the past few days had even begun to jeer. The fact was that 
he instinctively divined that Lebezyatnikov was not only a 
foolish and trivial person, but perhaps a fraud as well, and 
that he had no connexions of any importance even in his own 
group, but had only heard things at second hand; what was 
more, he was not very expert even in his own chosen task of 
propaganda, because he got too muddled ; and besides, how 
could he denounce anybody? It may be noted in passing that 
during those ten days (especially at first) Peter Petrovich had 
readily accepted some very strange commendations of himself; 
he had not objected, for example, but had sat silent, when 
Andrey Semenovich attributed to him a willingness to further 
the construction in the near future of a new 'commune'*some­
where in Meshchanskaya Street, or not to hinder Dunechka 
if she thought of taking a lover in the first month of their 
marriage, or not to have his future children christened, and 
so on-all in the same strain. Peter Petrovich, in his usual 
manner, did not object when such qualities were attributed 
to him, and even allowed himself to be praised for them, so 
pleasant to him was praise of any kind. 
Peter Petrovich, who had had occasion during that morning 
to change several five-per-cent. Government bonds, sat at the 
table counting packets ofbank-notes. Andrey Semenovich, who 
rarely had any money, wandered about the room and pre­
tended to himself that he regarded all those bundles with 
indifference, and even with contempt. Nothing could have 
persuaded Peter Petrovich that Andrey Semenovich could 
really see so much money with indifference; Andrey Semeno­
vich, in his turn, thought bitterly that Peter Petrovich might 

350 
C RIME AND P UNISHMENT 
be quite capable of holding such an opinion of him, and might, 
moreover, be glad of this chance to tease and irritate his young 
friend by displaying the packets of bank-notes and thus making 
him feel his insignificance and the great difference between 
them. 
He found him, on this occasion, more exasperatingly in­
attentive than ever, even though he, Andrey Semenovich, had 
begun to expound his favourite theme, the foundation of a 
special new 'commune'. The brief comments and replies which 
escaped from Peter Petrovich in the intervals between the 
clicks of the balls on the abacus*were open and intentionally 
rude jeers. But Audrey Semenovich 'humanely' ascribed Peter 
Petrovich's mood to the effect of his having broken with 
Dunechka, and burned with the desire to talk about this ; he 
had something progressive and proselytizing to say on this 
subject, which might comfort his esteemed friend and 'un­
doubtedly' assist his further development. 
'What is this funeral dinner they are preparing at that . . .  
at the widow's?' asked Peter Petrovich suddenly, interrupting 
Andrey Semenovich at the most interesting point. 
'As if you didn't know ! I am sure I discussed it with you 
yesterday, and told you my idea of all these rituals . . .  And 
surely I heard that she had invited you, as well. You were 
talking to her yourself yesterday . .  . '  
'I had no idea that that foolish woman, destitute as she is, 
would throw away on the funeral all the money she got from 
the other fool . . .  Raskolnikov. I was absolutely astonished, 
as I came past : such preparations, wine . . .  Quite a few people 
are coming. It's quite sickening ! . .  .' went on Peter Petrovich, 
enlarging on the subject as though with some purpose. 'What? 
Did you say that I was invited?' he added suddenly, raising 
his head. 'When was this ? I don't remember it. However, 
I shall not go. What should I do there? I only spoke a few 
words to her casually, yesterday, about the possibility of her 
receiving a grant of a year's salary, as the destitute widow 
of a civil servant. I suppose that must be why she invited me. 
He, he !' 
'I do not intend to go either,' said Lebezyatnikov. 
'I should think not ! You beat her black and blue with your 
own hands. I can understand your feeling ashamed. He, he, he !' 
'Who did? Beat whom?' cried Lebezyatnikov, alarmed and 
blushing. 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
35 1 
'You did. You beat Katerina Ivanovna a month ago, didn't 
you? I heard about it, you know, yesterday . . .  So much for 
your principles ! . . .  Even the woman's question hasn't worked 
out very successfully. He, he, he !' 
And Peter Petrovich, as though feeling more cheerful, went 
back to clicking his abacus. 
'That is all rubbish, and it is slanderous !' flared up Lebe­
zyatnikov, who always flinched from reminders of this incident. 
'It wasn't like that at all ! It was different . . .  You heard it 
wrong; all scandal ! I was only defending mysel£ She attacked 
me first with her finger-nails . . . She plucked out all my 
whiskers . . .  Everybody is allowed to defend himself, I hope. 
Besides, I don't allow anyone to use violence to me . . .  On 
principle. Because that is almost despotism. What was I to do : 
just stand there? I only pushed her away.' 
'He, he, he !' Luzhin went on laughing maliciously. 
'You're only trying to provoke me, because you're in a bad 
temper yourself . . .  And it 's all nonsense and has nothing at all, 
nothing at all, to do with the woman's question. You've got it 
wrong. I used to think that if it is accepted that woman is 
man's equal in everything, even physical strength (as some 
people maintain), there must consequently be equality in such 
things too. Of course, I decided later that the question ought 
not to arise, because there ought never to be any fighting ; 
fighting is unthinkable in the future society . . .  and of course 
it is strange to look for equality in fighting. I am not such a fool 
. . .  although fighting does occur . . .  I mean it won't occur in 
the future, but now it still does . . .  Bah ! The devil ! You get 
people all muddled ! It is not because of that unpleasant 
business that I am staying away from the funeral. My not 
going is a simple matter of principle, because I don't wish to 
take part in superstitious ceremonials, that 's why ! However, 
it might be possible to go just in order to laugh at it . . .  It's a 
pity there won't be any priests. If there were, I should certainly 
go.' 
'That is, you would accept hospitality and practically spit 
on it and on your hosts. Is that it?' 
'Not at all ; merely as a protest. I should go with the inten­
tion of being helpful. I might indirectly promote their devel­
opment and our propaganda. It is the duty of every man 
to develop others and disseminate propaganda, and perhaps 
the harsher one's methods the better. I might throw out an 

352 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
idea, a seed . . .  From that seed might grow something real. 
What is there in that to offend them? At first they will be 
offended, but then they will see that I have been of assistance 
to them. Look how people blamed Terebyeva (who is in the 
commune now) because when she left her family and . . .  took 
a lover, she wrote to her mother and father that she did 
not wish to live in a world of prejudice, and was going to 
contract a civil marriage, and because it was thought that she 
was too harsh with her parents, and could have spared them 
and written more gently. I think that's all nonsense; gentle­
ness is not called for; on the contrary, on the contrary, protest 
is what is wanted. Look at Varents, who had been married 
seven years, and abandoned her two children; she made a 
clean break with her husband, in a letter which said : "I have 
realized that I cannot be happy with you. I shall never forgive 
you for deceiving me by concealing that there exists another 
way of organizing society, in communes. I have recently learnt 
of this from a great-souled man, and I have given myself to 
him ; together we are founding a commune. I am putting it 
plainly, because I consider it dishonourable to pretend. Do 
as you think fit. Do not hope that I shall return to you ; it is 
too late. I wish you happiness." That 's how to write letters 
of that kind !' 
'This Terebyeva, isn't she the one you told me has contracted 
a third "civil marriage" ?' 
'No, only two, if you look at it in the right way ! But if it were 
four, or fifteen, all that means nothing ! And if ever I were sorry 
that my father and mother were dead, I am sorry now. I have 
even dreamed of how, if they were still living, I should sting 
them with my protests ! I should have deliberately created a 
situation . . .  Talk about a clean break ! I'd have shown them ! 
I'd have surprised them. It's really a pity that I haven't 
anybody !' 
'To surprise? He, he ! Well, let that be as you please,' 
interrupted Peter Petrovich, 'but now tell me this : I suppose 
you know the dead man's daughter, that sickly creature. Well, 
is what they say about her true, eh?' 
'What is that? In my opinion, that is, according to my 
personal conviction, it is the most normal condition for a 
woman. Why not? I mean to say, distinguons. In our present 
society it is not, of course, entirely normal, because it is forced 
on her, but in future it will be completely normal, because 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
353 
freely chosen. And even now she had the right to act as she did ; 
she was suffering, and that was her stock, so to speak, her 
capital, which she had a perfect right to dispose of. Of course, 
in the future society there will be no need of capital funds ; 
but her role will be given a different significance, under har­
monious and rational conditions. As for Sofya Semenovna 
herself, in present conditions I look upon her action as a 
spirited concrete protest against the organization of society and 
I deeply respect her for it; I rejoice to see her !' 
'But I was told that it was you who caused her to be driven 
away from here !' 
Lebezyatnikov became positively frenzied. 
'That is another slander !' he shouted. 'It was not like that 
at all, not at all ! More falsehood ! Katerina Ivanovna got it 
all wrong, because she did not understand anything ! I didn't 
try to force myself on Sofya Semenovna ! I was simply trying 
to educate her, quite disinterestedly, trying to rouse her to 
protest . . . All I needed was her protest, and besides, Sofya 
Semenovna was really unable to stay here any longer !' 
'Was she invited to enter the commune?' 
'You are still laughing at me, but allow me to tell you it has 
no effect at all. You don't understand anything ! There is no 
such role in the commune. The communes are founded in 
order to do away ·with such roles. In the communes her role 
will completely change its present character, and what is stupid 
here will become wise there, what is unnatural here, under 
present conditions, will become completely natural there. 
Everything depends on environment and circumstances. The 
environment is everything, and the man is nothing. I am very 
good friends with Sofya Semenovna even now, which may 
serve to prove to you that she never regarded me as her enemy 
and persecutor. Yes ! I am trying now to attract her into the 
commune, only on a quite different basis, quite different ! 
What do you find so funny? We want to found our own parti­
cular commune on a much wider basis than previous ones. We 
have progressed farther in our convictions. We reject more ! If 
Dobrolyubov rose from his grave I should quarrel with him. 
As for Belinsky; I should absolutely annihilate him ! Meanwhile 
I am continuing Sofya Semenovna's education. She has a 
beautiful nature, beautiful !' 
'And so you are taking advantage of her beautiful nature, 
eh ? He, he !' 

354 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'No, no ! Oh, no ! Just the opposite !' 
'Well, just the opposite, then. He, he, he ! What a thing 
to say !' 
'You must believe me ! What reason could I have for deceiv­
ing you, I should like to know? On the contrary, I myself find 
it strange that she is so intensely, even timidly, chaste and 
modest with me !' 
'And you of course are educating her . . .  he, he, he !-teach­
ing her that modesty is all nonsense? . .  .' 
'Not at all ! Not at all ! Oh, how crudely and stupidly­
excuse me-you understand the word education ! You don't 
understand anything at all ! Heavens, how . . .  unprepared you 
still are ! We are seeking the emancipation of women, but you 
have only one thing in your head . . .  Ignoring altogether the 
questions of chastity and female modesty as unprofitable in 
themselves, and even prejudicial, I fully acquiesce in her 
chastity with me, fully, because that is her right and a matter 
for her own free will. Of course, if she herself were to say to me : 
"I want you," I should consider myself very lucky, because 
I like the girl very much ; but as things are now, of course, 
nobody has ever treated her more politely and courteously 
than I do, or with more respect for her dignity . . .  I wait and 
hope . . .  that is all !' 
'It would be better for you to give her some sort of present. 
I bet you didn't even think of that.' 
'I told you you didn't understand anything ! Of course, she 
is in that position, but-this is a different question, quite 
different ! You simply despise her. Seeing a fact which you 
mistakenly consider deserving of scorn, you refuse to regard a 
human being in a humane light. You do not know yet what she 
is like ! I am very disappointed about one thing, that she seems 
lately to have stopped reading, and doesn't borrow any more 
books from me. She used to. I am sorry, too, that with all the 
energy and resolution which she showed once, in making her 
protest, she still has too little self-reliance and, so to speak, 
independence, too little capacity for rejection, to be able to 
free herself entirely from certain prejudices and . . .  stupidities. 
In spite of that, she has a wonderful understanding of some 
questions. For example, she understood the question of kissing 
hands* marvellously well. That is, that it is an insulting mark 
of inequality for a man to kiss a woman's hand. This was the 
subject of one of our discussions, and I gave her an account of 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
355 
it immediately afterwards. She listened very attentively to a 
description of the workers' associations in France, too. Now 
I am explaining to her the question of entering rooms* in the 
future society.' 
'Oh, and what is that?' 
'Recently we have been discussing whether a member of a 
commune has at all times the right to enter the room of another 
member, whether man or woman . . .  and it was decided that 
he has . .  .' 
'And what if he or she is occupied at that moment with the 
unavoidable demands of nature, he, he?' 
Audrey Semenovich was really angry. 
'You're always harping on the same string ! You keep on and 
on about those damned "demands of nature" !' he cried, with 
detestation. 'Pah, I am disgusted with myself for having men­
tioned those confounded demands, prematurely, when I was 
expounding the system to you. Damn it all ! It 's always a 
stumbling-block to people of your sort, and worse than that­
they get parrot-phrases by heart and go round repeating them 
before they know what it 's all about ! And as if they were in the 
right! As if they had something to be proud of! Pah ! I have 
insisted many times that it is not possible to explain this 
question to beginners before the very end, when they believe 
in the system and their ideas are properly developed along the 
right lines. And what, I should like to know, do you find so 
shameful and despicable even in cess-pits? I should be the 
first to be ready to clean out any cess-pit you like ! There isn't 
even any self-sacrifice about it ! It is simply work, an honour­
able, socially useful activity, which is worth as much as any 
other, and may even be worth more than the activities of some 
Raphael or Pushkin; because it is more useful !' 
'And more honourable, more honourable-he, he, he !' 
'What does honourable mean? I don't understand such 
expressions as used to define human activities. "More honour­
able", "nobler"-that 's all rubbish; those are absurdities, anti­
quated prejudices which I reject ! Everything that is usiful to 
humanity is honourable. I understand only one word, usiful ! * 
You may snigger if you like, but it is true !' 
Peter Petrovich was laughing heartily. He had finished his 
calculations and put away most of his money. However, for 
some reason he had left a part of it on the table. This 'cess-pit 
question' had already, in spite of its triviality, been the occasion 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
of several arguments and quarrels between Peter Petrovich 
and his young friend. The stupid part of it was that Andrey 
Semenovich had grown really angry. Luzhin was simply 
amusing himself, and just now he felt a great desire to tease 
Lebezyatnikov. 
'It 's because things went badly for you yesterday that you 
are so captious and spiteful,' burst out Lebezyatnikov at last. 
In spite of all his 'independence' and his 'protests' he was 
not generally bold enough to oppose Peter Petrovich, and still 
retained from former years his habit of deference towards him. 
'You would do better to tell me,' interrupted Peter Petro­
vich, in a tone of haughty displeasure, 'whether you can . . .  
or, rather, whether you are on sufficiently friendly terms with 
the young person just referred to, to ask her to come here for a 
few moments. I think they have all got back from the cemetery 
. . .  I can hear people moving about . . .  I wish to see her, that 
young person.' 
'What for?' asked Lebezyatnikov, surprised. 
'I just want to. I shall be leaving today or tomorrow, and 
therefore I should like to tell her . . . However, please be here 
yourself, when I explain. That will be best. Otherwise, you 
may imagine God knows what.' 
'I shan't imagine anything .
.
•
 I was only asking. If you have 
something to say to her, there is nothing easier than to ask her 
here. I will go at once. And be assured that I will not disturb 
you.' 
Five minutes later Lebezyatnikov returned with Sonechka. 
She came in feelingextremelysurprised, and, as usual, very shy. 
She was always shy in such circumstances; she had dreaded 
seeing new faces and making new acquaintances ever since her 
childhood, and she feared it now more than ever . . . Peter 
Petrovich greeted her 'nicely and politely', but with a shade of 
jovial familiarity which, in his opinion, was becoming to a 
respectable man of solid worth, like himself, in his dealings 
with a young and, in a special sense, interesting creature like 
Sonya. He hastened to 'reassure' her, and seated her at the 
table opposite him. Sonya sat down and looked about her-at 
Lebezyatnikov, at the money lying on the table, and back again 
at Peter Petrovich-and then her eyes remained glued to his 
face. Lebezyatnikov turned towards the door. Peter Petrovich 
got up, signed to Sonya to stay where she was, and stopped 
Lebezyatnikov on the threshold. 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
357 
'Is Raskolnikov there? Has he come?' he asked in a whisper. 
'Raskolnikov? Yes. Why? Yes, he's there . . .  I just saw him 
come in . . .  why?' 
'Then I particularly request you to remain here with us, 
and not to leave me alone with this .
•
.
 girl. My business is 
trifling, but God knows what conclusions will be drawn. I don't 
want Raskolnikov to tell them •
.
•
 Do you understand what I 
am talking about?' 
'Yes, I understand !' said Lebezyatnikov, suddenly realizing 
what he meant. 'Yes, you are right . . .  Of course, in my 
personal opinion you carry your anxiety too far but . . .  all 
the same, you are right. Certainly I will stay. I will remain here 
by the window, and not be in your way .
.
•
 I think you are 
right . . .  ' 
Peter Petrovich went back to the sofa, sat down opposite 
Sonya, and looked at her with a very dignified and rather 
severe expression, as much as to say, 'Don't get any ideas into 
your head, young lady.' This completed Sonya's confusion. 
'First of all, Sofya Semenovna, please apologize for me to 
your respected mama . . .  That is right, I think? Katerina 
I vanovna has taken the place of your own mother?' he began, 
still seriously, but quite pleasantly. He evidently had the most 
friendly intentions. 
'Yes, that is right, my mother's place,' answered Sonya 
hurriedly and timidly. 
'Well, then, give her my apologies for being obliged, because 
of circumstances not depending on me, to be absent from the 
dinner, in spite of your mama's kind invitation.' 
'Yes; I will tell her; at once,' and Sonya jumped up from her 
chair. 
'I have not finished yet,' said Peter Petrovich, stopping her 
with a smile at her simplicity and ignorance of the way to 
behave, 'and you know very little of me, Sofya Semenovna, if 
you thought I would disturb you by asking here in person 
someone like yourself for such an unimportant reason, con­
cerning nobody but me. I have another object.' 
Sonya hastily sat down again. The grey and rainbow­
coloured bank-notes which had been left on the table attracted 
her eyes again, but she quickly turned her face away and 
raised it towards Peter Petrovich; it suddenly seemed to her 
that it was very bad manners, especially for her, to look at 
somebody else's money. She fixed her eyes on the gold 

358 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
lorgnettes which Peter Petrovich held in his left hand, and on 
the thick, heavy, and very beautiful gold ring with a yellow 
stone on the middle finger of that hand, then she turned them 
away from that, too, and, not knowing what else to do, ended 
by looking straight into Peter Petrovich's eyes again. After a 
still more dignified pause, he went on : 
' I  chanced to exchange a few words in passing with the 
unhappy Katerina Ivanovna yesterday. That was enough to 
inform me that she was in an . . .  unnatural position, if I may 
so express it . . .  ' 
'Yes . . .  unnatural,' hastily agreed Sonya. 
'Or, to put it more simply and understandably, a painful 
position.' 
'Yes, more simply and underst- . . .  yes, painful.' 
'Quite so. Therefore, you see, from feelings of humanity 
a-a-and so to say, sympathy, I should have liked, for my part, 
to be of some service to her, foreseeing her inevitably unhappy 
fate. I believe that all that destitute family is now entirely 
dependent on you.' 
'Allow me to ask,' said Sonya, rising suddenly to her feet, 
'whether you spoke to her yesterday of the possibility of a 
pension. Because she told me that you had undertaken to pro­
cure a pension for her . . .  Is that true?' 
'Far from it. You might even call it ridiculous. I merely 
made some reference to temporary assistance for the widow of 
a clerk who has died while in government service-provided 
she has some influence-but it appears that your late father 
had not only not served the full term, but had not recently 
been employed in the civil service at all. In one word, though 
there might be some hope, it would be of a very flimsy charac­
ter, because, in fact, there is no right whatever to assistance 
in this case, quite the contrary . . .  And she was already think­
ing of a pension, he, he, he ! A lady who runs away with an idea !' 
'Yes, she was thinking of a pension . . .  Because she is credu­
lous and good, and her goodness makes her believe everything, 
and . . .  and •
.
.
 and •
.
.
 her mind works like that •
.
.
 Yes . . .  
excuse her,' said Sonya, and again got up to go. 
'Excuse me, you have not yet heard me out.' 
'No, not heard you out,' murmured Sonya. 
'Sit down, then.' 
Sonya, dreadfully confused, sat down for the third time. 
'In view of her position, and that of the unfortunate little 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
359 
children, I should like-as I said before-as far as lies in my 
power, to be of some help, that is, as far as lies in my power, 
as they say, and no more. Perhaps, for example, it would be 
possible to get up a subscription for her, or, so to say, a lottery 
. . 
• or something of that kind-as is always done in cases of 
this kind by friends, or even by strangers, but in any case by 
those desirous of helping people. That is what I intended to 
speak to you about. It could be done.' 
'Yes, very kind •
.
.
 God will repay . .  .' stammered Sonya, 
still gazing at Peter Petrovich. 
'It can be done, but •
•
•
 we will talk of it later •
•
•
 that is, we 
might begin today. We will meet in the evening, talk it over 
and lay, so to say, the foundation. Come here at about seven 
o'clock. Andrey Semenovich, I hope, will also make one of us 
. . . But . . . there is one circumstance which ought to be 
mentioned beforehand, with due care. It was for this, Sofya 
Semenovna, that I troubled you to come here. This is what I 
think: it is impossible to give money into Katerina lvanovna's 
own hands, it is dangerous; today's funeral dinner proves it. 
Not having, so to say, a crust of bread for tomorrow or .
•
.
 
well, or shoes, or anything, today she buys Jamaica rum, and 
even, I believe, Madeira, a-a-and coffee. I saw it as I came 
past. Tomorrow it will all come down on you again, everything 
to the last crust of bread; it is quite absurd. Therefore the 
subscription, in my personal view, ought to be organized in 
such a way that the unhappy widow, so to say, does not know 
about the money, but only you, for example, know. Am I 
right?' 
'I don't know. It is only just today that she . . .  it is only once 
in a lifetime . . .  she very much wanted to remember him, to do 
him honour, his memory . . .  but she is very sensible. However, 
as you please, sir, and I shall be very, very, very .
•
.
 they will all 
be . . .  God will bless you .
.
•
 and the orphans . .  .' 
Sonya burst into tears, unable to finish. 
'Quite so. Well, then, bear it in mind; and now be good 
enough to accept from me personally in the interests of your 
kinswoman, for immediate needs, what sum I can spare. I am 
completely and absolutely desirous that my name should not 
be mentioned in connexion with it. Here you are . . .  having, 
so to say, cares of my own, I am not in a position . .  .' 
And Peter Petrovich held out to Sonya a carefully unfolded 
ten-rouble bank-note. Sonya took it, blushed deeply, jumped 

g6o 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
up, murmured something, and hastily took her leave. Peter 
Petrovich ceremoniously escorted her to the door. She slipped 
out of the room at last, agitated and weary, and returned to 
Katerina I vanovna in a state of extraordinary confusion. 
Throughout this scene Audrey Semenovich had stood there 
by the window or moved about the room, trying not to inter­
rupt the conversation; when Sonya had gone, he went up to 
Peter Petrovich and solemnly offered him his hand. 
'I heard everything and I saw everything,' he said, laying 
special emphasis on the word saw. 'This was noble, I mean 
humane ! You wished to avoid her gratitude, I could see ! And 
although I confess I cannot, on principle, sympathize with 
private charity, because not only does it not radically destroy 
the evil, but it even nourishes it, nevertheless I am bound 
to admit that I saw your action with pleasure-yes, yes, I 
liked it.' 
'Oh, rubbish !' muttered Peter Petrovich, who seemed rather 
agitated, looking closely at Lebezyatnikov. 
'No, it 's not rubbish ! A man who has been insulted and 
annoyed as you were by yesterday's happenings, and who is at 
the same time capable of thinking of other unhappy creatures 
-such a man, sir .
•
.
 although his actions constitute a sociʨl 
mistake-all the same . . .  is worthy of respect! I did not expect 
it of you, Peter Petrovich, especially as according to your way 
of understanding things-oh ! how that still hinders you! How, 
for example, all the unfortunate events of yesterday upset you,' 
exclaimed good little Audrey Semenovich, feeling a renewed 
kindness for Peter Petrovich, 'and why, why do you think you 
must have this marriage, this legal marriage, my very dear, 
my most generous-minded Peter Petrovich? Why must you 
have this legality in marriage? Well, if you were to beat me for 
it, I must say that I am glad that it failed, that you are free, 
that you are not altogether lost for humanity, I am glad .
•
.
 
You see, I have spoken my mind !' 
'Because I don't want, in your civil marriage, to wear horns 
and bring up other men's children; that's why I want a legal 
marriage,' answered Luzhin, for the sake of saying something. 
He seemed thoughtful and preoccupied. 
'Children? You said children?' Audrey Semenovich started 
like a war-horse at the sound of the trumpet. 'Children are a 
social question, and one of the first importance, I agree; but 
the problem of the children is solved in another way. Some 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
people even reject children altogether, like every other kind 
of family life. We will talk about children later, but now let 
us consider horns ! I confess I have a weakness for the subject. 
That nasty Pushkinian guardee's expression is unthinkable 
in the lexicon of the future. Yes, and what are horns? Oh, what 
a fallacy ! What horns? Why horns? What nonsense! On the 
contrary, there will be none in civil marriage ! Horns are only 
the natural result of every legal marriage, the correction of it, 
so to speak, a protest, so that in this sense they are not in the 
least humiliating . . .  And ifl am ever-to assume an absurdity 
-legally married, I shall even be glad of your damned horns; 
then I shall say to my wife: "My dear, until this moment I 
only loved you, but now I respect you, because you have 
shown yourself capable of protesting!" You laugh? That is 
because you are not strong enough to free yourself from pre­
judice ! Confound it, I understand quite well where the un­
pleasantness lies when there is deception in legal marriage: 
but that is only the ignoble consequence of an ignoble state of 
affairs, in which both the one party and the other are degraded. 
But when horns are bestowed openly, as in civil marriage, 
then they don't exist any more, they are unthinkable, they 
cease even to be called horns. On the contrary, your wife 
would only be showing how much she respected you, by 
considering you incapable of opposing her happiness and 
advanced enough not to take your revenge on her because of 
her new husband. Confound it, I sometimes imagine that if I 
were given in marriage-bah, if I got married (irregularly or 
legally, it 's all the same), I might very well provide my wife 
with a lover, if she took too long about acquiring one for 
herself: "My dear," I should say to her, "I love you, but even 
more I wish you to respect me-here you are !" Am I not right 
in what I say?' 
Peter Petrovich sniggered as he listened, but he was not 
particularly amused. He did not even hear much of all this. 
He was really thinking of something else, and even Lebezyat­
nikov perceived this at length. Peter Petrovich seemed excited, 
and rubbed his hands as he considered something. Afterwards, 
Andrey Semenovich remembered this and understood it . . .  

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
C H A P T E R  I I  
I T  would have been difficult to say exactly what were the 
reasons which had raised the senseless idea of that funeral 
dinner in Katerina Ivanovna's disordered mind. She had 
actually squandered on it almost ten roubles out of the twenty 
Raskolnikov had given her for Marmeladov's funeral. Perhaps 
Katerina Ivanovna considered it her duty to the dead man to 
honour his memory 'properly', so that all the lodgers, and 
especially Amalia Ivanovna, might know that 'he was no worse 
than they, and probably much better', and that none of them 
had any right 'to look down his nose' at him. Perhaps the most 
potent influence on her was that special 'pride of the poor', which 
makes many poor people, in observing some of those social 
rites obligatory in our way oflife for all and sundry, exert their 
utmost efforts and spend the last penny of their savings, simply 
in order to make as good a showing as their neighbours and 
not be 'criticized' by them. But most probably Katerina 
Ivanovna wished, precisely on this occasion, just at this moment 
when she seemed to be abandoned by everyone on earth, to 
show all these 'nasty contemptible lodgers' not only that she 
'knew how things ought to be done, and how to entertain 
guests', but also that she had not been brought up for her 
present lot in life, but in the 'household of an officer and a 
gentleman, in what might almost be called aristocratic sur­
roundings', and had never been meant for sweeping floors, or 
washing her children's rags at night. Such fits of pride and 
vanity sometimes seize the poorest and most downtrodden of 
people, and may take the form of tormenting and uncon­
trollable desires. Katerina Ivanovna, moreover, was not down­
trodden: circumstances might kill her, but they could not 
crush her spirit, could not intimidate her or subdue her will. 
Besides, Sonechka had good grounds for saying that her mind 
was disturbed. It is true that she could not yet have been 
definitely and conclusively called deranged, but recently, for 
the whole of the past year, her poor brain had been too 
harassed to escape all damage. Doctors say that an advanced 
stage of consumption also tends to produce some impairment 
of the mental faculties. 
There was neither a great number nor a great variety of 
wines, nor any Madeira; that had been an exaggeration, but 
there was wine. There were vodka, rum, and port, all of very 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
poor quality, but all in fair quantity. Besides the traditional 
kurya*ofboiled rice and raisins, there were two or three varieties 
of eatables (including pancakes), all from Amalia Ivanovna's 
kitchen, and two samovars were going at once, so that both 
tea and punch might be made after dinner. Katerina I vanovna 
had bought the provisions herself, with the help of one of the 
lodgers, a pathetic little Pole, living there for God knows what 
reason, who had immediately volunteered to run Katerina 
I vanovna's errands, and had been dashing about with his 
tongue hanging out all the morning and all the previous day, 
apparently trying to make his activity as noticeable as possible. 
He was constantly consulting Katerina I vanovna over every 
trifle, and even went looking for her when she was shopping; 
he could be heard incessantly calling her 'honoured Pani', and 
at last she grew thoroughly sick of him, although at first she 
had said she would be quite lost without this 'obliging and 
generous-hearted' person. It was characteristic of Katerina 
Ivanovna to paint everybody she came into contact with in 
glowing colours at first, and to praise them so highly that it 
sometimes became embarrassing. She would invent circum­
stances to their credit that had never existed, and herself 
believed in them most sincerely and whole-heartedly, and 
then in a moment she would be disillusioned and break with 
them, repulsing with contempt and harshness the very people 
she had been almost literally idolizing only a few hours before. 
She was by nature of a humorous, cheerful, and peaceable 
disposition, but constant failure and unhappiness had brought 
her to the point of so furiously desiring and demanding that 
everybody should live in joy and harmony, and should not dare 
to live otherwise, that the slightest discord, the smallest set­
back, drove her at once almost to madness, and in an instant, 
from indulging the brightest hopes and fancies, she would fall 
to cursing fate, smashing and destroying anything that came to 
hand, and banging her head against the wall. Amalia I vanovna 
had also suddenly acquired unusual significance and impor­
tance in Katerina Ivanovna's eyes, perhaps only because 
preparations for this funeral dinner were under way and 
Amalia I vanovna had thrown herself whole-heartedly into 
helping with them; she had undertaken to lay the table, to 
procure linen and cutlery and so on, and to have the food 
cooked in her own kitchen. Katerina I vanovna left everything 
to her and herself went to the cemetery. Everything had in fact 

364 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
been done very nicely: the table looked quite neat, and al­
though the plates, forks, knives, glasses, cups, and so on, 
borrowed from different lodgers, did not match, but were of 
various shapes and sizes, all were set out by the appointed 
time, and Amalia Ivanovna, in a black dress and with new 
mourning ribbons in her cap, met the returning funeral party 
with a certain pride, conscious of work excellently done. This 
pride, though justified, did not please Katerina I vanovna : 
'Really, just as if the table couldn't have been laid without 
Amalia Ivanovna!' She disliked the cap with its new ribbons, 
too : 'Wasn't this stupid German woman giving herself airs 
because she was the landlady, and had consented to help her 
poor lodgers out of charity? It looked like it. Charity indeed ! 
Why, Katerina Ivanovna's papa, who was a colonel, and all 
but governor, sometimes had forty guests at table, and persons 
like Amalia Ivanovna, or rather Ludwigovna, would not even 
have been allowed into the kitchen . .  .' However, Katerina 
Ivanovna resolved not to give her feelings vent for the moment, 
although she decided in her own mind that Amalia I vanovna 
must be taken down a peg or two this very day and reminded 
of her proper place, or else she would be fancying God knows 
what about herself. Meanwhile, she merely treated her with 
coldness. Another unpleasant circumstance helped to increase 
Katerina Ivanovna's irritation: at the service, except for the 
little Pole, who had just managed to get to the cemetery, 
hardly any of the lodgers invited to the funeral had been 
present, but now all the poorest and most insignificant of them 
had appeared for the dinner, many of them not even quite 
sober, the disgusting wretches ! But the older and more solid 
citizens among them had all stayed away, as if they had 
agreed upon it among themselves. Peter Petrovich Luzhin, 
who might be called the most respectable of all the people in 
the flat, had not appeared, and yet, only the evening before, 
Katerina I vanovna had managed to tell the whole world, that 
is to say Amalia Ivanovna, Polechka, Sonya, and the little 
Pole, that he was a most noble and generous man, very well­
to-do and with enormous influence, who had been a friend of 
her first husband's and received in her father's house, and who 
had promised to do his utmost to obtain a considerable pension 
for her. We may remark here that if Katerina Ivanovna 
boasted of anybody's property and connexions, it was without 
any interested motive or personal calculation, but quite dis-

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
365 
interestedly, out of the fullness of her heart, so to speak, and 
from simple joy in giving praise and ascribing even more than 
his real worth to the person she extolled. Like Luzhin, and 
probably 'following his example', that 'miserable scoundrel 
Lebezyatnikov' also failed to appear. 'Who does he think he is? 
He was only invited out of kindness and because he shares a 
room with Luzhin and is a friend of his, so it would have been 
awkward not to ask him.' A stylish lady and her 'dried-up old 
maid' of a daughter were also absent; although they had been 
living only a week or two in one of Amalia Ivanovna's rooms, 
they had complained several times of the noise and shouting 
coming from the Marmeladovs' room, especially when Mar­
meladov came home drunk, and Katerina Ivanovna had of 
course been informed of this by Amalia I vanovna, when she 
was wrangling with her and threatening to turn out the whole 
family, shouting at the top of her voice that Katerina I vanovna 
was a nuisance to 'respectable lodgers whose shoes she was not 
fit to untie'. Now Katerina Ivanovna had made a special point 
of inviting this lady and her daughter 'whose shoes she was 
supposed not to be fit to untie', all the more determinedly 
because the lady had always turned haughtily away if they 
met by chance; Katerina Ivanovna meant to show them that 
'people here had nobler thoughts and feelings, and would 
issue invitations in token that they bore no ill will', and that 
she herself was not accustomed to living in such circumstances. 
She had meant to make this, and her late papa's Governorship, 
clear to them by the conversation at table, and to hint at the 
same time that there was no reason why they should turn away 
when they met her, and that it was an extremely stupid thing 
to do. The fat lieutenant-colonel (really a retired staff-captain) 
was, ʩlas, absent, but it appeared that he had been 'under the 
weather' since the morning of the previous day. In a word, the 
only ones who had appeared were the little Pole, a shabby 
silent little clerk with a spotty face and a greasy frock-coat, 
who had an unpleasant smell, and a deaf and almost completely 
blind old man, who had once worked in some post office and 
whom someone had been maintaining at Amalia I vanovna's, 
nobody knew why, from time immemorial. There was also a 
drunken retired lieutenant (really a clerk in the commissariat) 
with a very loud coarse laugh, who, 'just imagine!' had no 
waistcoat on. One guest sat straight down at the table without 
even greeting Katerina Ivanovna, and, finally, one person 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
who did not possess a suit would have come in a dressing-gown, 
but this was so gross an affront to propriety that he was thrust 
out by the combined efforts of Amalia Ivanovna and the little 
Pole. The Pole had brought with him two other Poles who had 
never even lived at Amalia Ivanovna's, and whom nobody 
had ever seen there before. All this was extremely exasperating 
to Katerina Ivanovna. 'After all, who were all these prepara­
tions made for?' To make more room the children had not even 
been put at the table, which filled the whole room as it was, 
but their places had been laid on a trunk in a corner, where the 
two youngest sat on a bench, and Polechka, as the biggest, 
was charged with looking after them, feeding them, and wiping 
their little noses 'like well-brought-up children's'. In short, 
Katerina I vanovna was perforce obliged to greet all her guests 
with redoubled dignity and even haughtiness. Some she eyed 
very sternly and asked to sit down with great condescension. 
For some reason she considered Amalia Ivanovna to be re­
sponsible for all those who were not present, and suddenly 
adopted a very off-hand manner with her, as Amalia Ivanovna 
immediately noticed with extreme resentment. Such a begin­
ning boded no good for the end. At last everybody was seated. 
Raskolnikov had arrived at almost the same time as they 
returned from the cemetery. Katerina Ivanovna was terribly 
glad to see him, first because he was the only 'educated person' 
among the guests and 'as everybody knew was preparing to 
occupy a professorial chair in the university in two years' 
time', and secondly because he immediately excused himself 
with great politeness for not having been able to be at the 
funeral in spite of his own wishes. She almost rushed at him, 
made him sit down on her left (Amalia Ivanovna was on her 
right) and in spite of her ceaseless fussing and anxiety that the 
food should be properly served and that there should be enough 
for everybody, in spite of the tormenting cough that constantly 
interrupted her and left her panting for breath, and that seemed 
to have grown more obstinate during the last two days, she kept 
up an incessant flow of conversation with Raskolnikov, pouring 
out in a half-whisper all her accumulated emotions and her 
justifiable indignation at the failure of the dinner; this indigna­
tion alternated with frequent fits of the gayest, most uncon­
trollable laughter at her guests, and especially at the landlady. 
'That cuckoo is to blame for everything. You know who I 
mean: her, her!' said Katerina Ivanovna, nodding towards 

CRIME A ND PUNISHMENT 
the landlady. 'Look at her: her eyes are popping out, she 
thinks we are talking about her, and she can't catch what 
we are saying. What an owl ! Ha, ha, ha !' Cough, cough, cough. 
'And what does she think she is proving with that cap?' Cough, 
cough, cough. 'Have you noticed that she wants everybody to 
think she is patronizing me and doing me an honour by being 
here? I asked her, as a decent respectable woman, to invite 
nice people, who had known my poor husband, and look at the 
clowns and sluts she has brought! Look at that one, whose 
face is not even clean; he's nothing but a lump of dirt on two 
legs ! And those queer little Poles . . .  ha, ha, ha!' Cough, cough, 
cough. 'Nobody has ever seen them here before; I haven't 
either; well, I ask you, why have they come? All sitting 
solemnly in a row. Hey, Pan,' she suddenly cried out to one of 
them, 'have you had some pancakes? Have some more ! Have 
some beer! Wouldn't you like some vodka? Look, he 's jumped 
up, he 's bowing, look, look ! They must be dreadfully hungry, 
poor things ! It doesn't matter, let them eat. They aren't 
making a noise, at any rate, only . . .  only, really, I am afraid 
for the landlady's silver spoons ! . . .  Amalia Ivanovna !' she said 
almost aloud, addressing her, 'if your spoons chance to get 
stolen, I warn you I won't take the responsibility ! . . .  Ha, ha, 
hal' and she roared with laughter, turning back to Raskol­
nikov, gesturing towards the landlady again and full of enjoy­
ment of her sally. 'She didn't understand, she didn't under­
stand again ! She 's sitting there with her mouth open, look: an 
owl, a real owl, a screech-owl in new cap-ribbons, ha, ha, hal' 
Again her laughter turned into intolerable coughing, which 
lasted for five minutes. Drops of sweat stood on her forehead, 
blood appeared on her handkerchief. Silently she showed it to 
Raskolnikov and then, with hardly a pause, began to whisper 
to him again with extraordinary animation, and a red flush 
staining her cheeks : 'Listen, I entrusted her with a most 
delicate commission, as you might say, that of inviting that 
lady and her daughter, you understand who I mean? It was 
necessary to proceed in the most delicate manner, to manage 
things very skilfully, and she went about it in such a way that 
that fool of a newcomer, that insolent creature, that provincial 
nonentity, simply because she is some major's widow and has 
come here to petition for a pension, and wear out her skirts 
on the floors of government offices, and at fifty-five years old 
she rouges and powders (it is well known) . . .  and not only 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
does this creature not condescend to put in an appearance, 
but she doesn't even send an excuse, as common courtesy 
demands, if she can't come. I can't understand, either, why 
Peter Petrovich hasn't come. But where is Sonya? Where has 
she gone? Ah, there she is at last! Why, Sonya, where have you 
been? It is strange that you can't be punctual even at your 
father's funeral. Rodion Romanovich, make room for her next 
to you. There is your place, Sonechka . . .  have what you like. 
Have some galantine, that is the best. The pancakes will be 
brought in a minute. Have the children been given some? 
Polechka, have you got everything there?' Cough, cough, 
cough. 'Good. Be a good girl, Lenya, and don't kick your feet, 
Kolya; sit still, like a nicely-brought-up little boy. What did 
you say, Sonechka?' 
Sonya hastened to give her Peter Petrovich's apologies at 
once, trying to speak loud enough for everybody to hear and 
using the most choicely respectful expressions, purposely com­
posed in the manner of Peter Petrovich and embellished by 
herself. She added that Peter Petrovich had urgently requested 
her to inform Katerina Ivanovna that, as soon as he was able, 
he would come himself to talk to her about business, and arrange 
what could be done for her and undertaken in the future. 
Sonya knew that this would soothe and appease Katerina 
Ivanovna, that she would be flattered, and, most important 
of all, her pride would be gratified. She sat down next to 
Raskolnikov, making him a hurried bow and casting at him 
a quick glance of curiosity. For the rest of the time, however, 
she avoided either looking at him or speaking to him. She 
seemed almost absent-minded, although she watched Katerina 
Ivanovna's face in order to anticipate her wishes. Neither she 
nor Katerina Ivanovna was in mourning, for want of suitable 
clothes; Sonya wore dark brown, and Katerina Ivanovna her 
only dress, a sober striped cotton print. The news about Peter 
Petrovich was very well received. Katerina I vanovna listened 
with an air of self-importance, and then, in the same conse­
quential manner, inquired after Peter Petrovich's health. Then 
she promptly whispered to Raskolnikov, almost aloud, that it 
would indeed be strange for a respectable man of solid worth, 
like Peter Petrovich, to find himself in such 'extraordinary 
company', in spite of his devotion to the family and his ancient 
friendship with her papa. 
'That is why I am particularly grateful to you, Rodion 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
Romanovich, for not disdaining my hospitality even in these 
surroundings,' she added almost aloud; 'but I am convinced 
that only your special friendship for my poor dear husband 
persuaded you to keep your word.' 
Then once more she surveyed her guests with pride and 
dignity, and suddenly, with great solicitude, inquired loudly 
across the table of the deaf old man whether 'he would not care 
for a little more roast meat, and had he been supplied with 
port?' The old man did not answer, and for a long time could 
not be made to understand what he was being asked about, 
although his neighbours even began to shake him, to amuse 
themselves. He only gazed about him with his mouth open, 
which increased the general merriment still more. 
'What a dolt! Look at him ! Why was he brought? As for 
Peter Petrovich, I always had full confidence in him,' went on 
Katerina Ivanovna to Raskolnikov. 'He, of course, is not like' 
-here she quite overwhelmed Amalia Ivanovna by address­
ing her loudly and cuttingly, with an expression of great 
severity-'not like your over-dressed riff-raff who would not 
even have been admitted as cooks into my papa's kitchen, 
and my late husband would certainly have done them too 
much honour if he had received them, even though it was 
only out of his inexhaustible kindness.' 
'Yes, he loved to drink; he loved it, and he certainly drank !' 
cried the retired commissariat clerk suddenly, as he drained 
his twelfth glass of vodka. 
'My late husband certainly had that weakness, and every­
body knows it.' Katerina I vanovna turned on him in a flash. 
'But he was a generous-hearted, good man, who loved and 
respected his family; his fault was that in the goodness of his 
heart he trusted all sorts of depraved creatures, and he would 
drink with God knows who, people who were far beneath him 
in every way! Just think, Rodion Romanovich, they found a 
gingerbread cock in his pocket; he was dead drunk, but he 
had remembered the children.' 
'Cock? Did you say a cock?' cried the commissariat clerk. 
Katerina I vanovna did not deign to answer him. She sighed 
thoughtfully. 
'Like everybody else, you probably think I was too harsh 
with him,' she went on to Raskolnikov. 'But I wasn't. He 
respected me very, very much. He was a good-hearted man ! 
And I was so sorry for him sometimes ! He would sit in a corner, 

370 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
watching me, and I would feel sorry for him; I wanted to be 
nice to him, but then I would think, "If you are nice to him, 
he will get drunk again." It was only by being severe that I 
could restrain him a little.' 
'Yes, he had his hair pulled more than once,' roared the 
commissariat clerk again, pouring another glass of vodka down 
his throat. 
'Some fools would be all the better, not only for having their 
hair pulled, but for a good drubbing. I am not speaking of my 
poor husband now!' retorted Katerina Ivanovna. 
The red patches on her cheeks glowed brighter and brighter, 
her breast heaved. Another moment, and she would have made 
a scene. People were sniggering and obviously enjoying them­
selves. They began to nudge the clerk and whisper to him, 
evidently hoping to get them both worked up. 
'A-llow me to ask what you are referring to,' he began, 'I 
mean, whose honourable name . . .  you were good enough to 
. . .  But that's enough ! It's nothing! Widow! I forgive you . . .  
I pass !' And he returned to his vodka. 
Raskolnikov sat and listened with disgust. He ate very little, 
barely, and only out of politeness and to avoid offending her, 
touching the food with which Katerina Ivanovna kept piling 
his plate. His eyes were fixed on Sonya. Sonya grew steadily 
more anxious and uneasy; she, too, foresaw that the dinner 
would not end peacefully, and fearfully watched Katerina 
Ivanovna's growing irritability. She knew that she herself was 
the principal reason why the two ladies had treated Katerina 
Ivanovna's invitation with such disdain. She had heard from 
Amalia Ivanovna that the mother had taken offence at the 
invitation and had asked 'how she could be expected to let her 
daughter sit down with that girl'. She was afraid that Katerina 
Ivanovna had somehow learnt of this, and an affront to her, 
Sonya, meant more to Katerina Ivanovna than offensiveness 
to herself personally, or to her children, or her papa; it was, in 
short, a mortal insult and Sonya knew that Katerina I vanovna 
would not rest 'until she had shown those two draggle-tails 
that they . . .  &c., &c.' As if on purpose to make matters worse, 
somebody passed down to her from the other end of the table a 
plate on which were two hearts pierced by an arrow, moulded 
from black bread. Katerina Ivanovna flared up at once and 
remarked across the table in a loud voice that the sender was 
of course 'a drunken ass'. Amalia Ivanovna, also apprehensive 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
37 1 
of something unpleasant, and deeply hurt by Katerina Ivan­
ovna's supercilious manner, tried to divert the nasty mood 
of the company to another object and at the same time to in­
crease her own importance, by beginning suddenly, apropos of 
nothing, to tell a story about an acquaintance of hers, 'Karl 
from the chemist's', who took a cab at night, and 'the cabby 
wished to kill him, and Karl very, very much begged and 
prayed him not to kill him and cried, and he was feared, and 
from fear his heart transfixed.' Although Katerina Ivanovna 
smiled, she immediately observed that Amalia I vanovna ought 
not to try to tell stories in Russian. Amalia Ivanovna was even 
more offended than before and answered that her ' Vater aus 
Berlin wass a very, very important man and always his hands 
in pockets put'. Katerina I vanovna was too heartily amused 
to restrain herself any longer, and burst into a fit of laughter 
that made Amalia Ivanovna begin to lose the last shreds of her 
patience and self-control. 
'Look at the screech-owl !' whispered Katerina Ivanovna, 
cheerful again, to Raskolnikov. 'She meant to say he kept his 
hands in his pockets, but it sounded as if he put his hands in 
other people's pockets.' Cough, cough. 'And have you noticed, 
Rodion Romanovich, how all these foreigners living in St. 
Petersburg, without exception, and especially the Germans 
who come here from all over the place, are stupider than us? 
You will agree, one simply can't say that "Karl from the 
chemist's from fear his heart transfixed" or that (snivelling 
fool !), instead of tying the cabman up, "he prayed and cried 
and very much begged". The silly creature !-and she thinks 
it is all very pathetic, and doesn't suspect how stupid she is. I 
think that drunken clerk is much cleverer than she is; at least 
you can see that he is a drunkard and has drunk his wits away; 
but they are all so prim and proper •
.
.
 Look at her sitting 
there with her eyes popping out. She's angry, she's angry! 
Ha, ha, ha !' Cough, cough, cough. 
With her spirits restored, Katerina Ivanovna allowed her 
attention to stray to all sorts of minor matters, and then be­
gan to describe how, with the help of the pension she would 
obtain, she would open a boarding-school for young ladies 
in T--, her native town. Raskolnikov had not been in­
formed of this scheme by Katerina I vanovna before, and she 
instantly went into all its fascinating details. In some unex­
plained fashion there suddenly appeared in her hand that same 

372 
C R IME AND PUNISHMENT 
'Certificate of Merit' of which the late Mr. Marmeladov had 
told Raskolnikov in the tavern, when he was explaining that 
his wife, Katerina Ivanovna, when she left school, had danced 
a shawl-dance 'before the Governor and other important 
personages'. The certificate was now evidently expected to 
serve as proof ofKaterina Ivanovna's right to conduct a school 
herself; but, more important, it had been kept in reserve for 
the purpose of finally discomfiting 'those two dressed-up 
draggle-tails', in case they came to the dinner, and of showing 
them quite clearly that Katerina I vanovna came from a very 
honourable, one might even say aristocratic, family, was the 
daughter of a colonel, and was very much better than certain 
adventuresses, who had recently multiplied so rapidly. The 
certificate immediately got into the hands of the drunken 
guests, and Katerina Ivanovna did not try to prevent this since 
it really stated, en toutes lettres; that she was the daughter of a 
man who had held some civil rank and been decorated, and 
could consequently almost be thought of as indeed a colonel. 
Warming to her subject, Katerina Ivanovna proceeded to 
enlarge on the details of this wonderful and peaceful future 
in T--, the teachers from the high school, whom she would 
invite to give lessons in her school, and the respectable old 
Frenchman, M. Maingot, who had taught her French and 
was now living out his time in T-- and would no doubt come 
to her for a very reasonable salary. Finally it came to the turn 
of Sonya, 'who would go to T-- with Katerina I vanovna and 
help her with everything'. Here somebody guffawed at the 
other end of the table. Katerina Ivanovna, although she in­
stantly tried to pretend that she disdained to notice the laughter, 
raised her voice and began to talk enthusiastically of Sofya 
Semenovna's undoubted qualifications to be her assistant, 'her 
gentleness, patience, self-denial, generosity, and good educa­
tion'. She tapped Sonya on the cheek and, rising, kissed her 
warmly twice. Sonya blushed, and Katerina I vanovna burst 
into tears, immediately observing that 'she was a silly, nervous 
creature, and had got too worked up, and it was time she 
stopped, and since dinner was over it was time to hand round 
tea'. At this moment, Amalia I vanovna, now thoroughly dis­
gruntled by the fact that she had not taken the least part in all 
this conversation, and that nobody was listening to her, risked 
a last attempt and, with secret misgivings, ventured to express 
to Katerina Ivanovna two very practical and profound ideas, 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
373 
first, that in the boarding-school to be, they must pay particular 
attention to the young ladies' clean linen (die Wasche) and that 
'they must have absolutely one such good Dame, that she 
should after the linen to care', and secondly, 'that the young 
ladies must not secretly by night any novels to read'. Katerina 
lvanovna, who was really very tired and upset, and who had 
had enough of this dinner, immediately 'snapped' at Amalia 
Ivanovna that she was 'talking nonsense', and didn't under­
stand anything; that die Wiische was the linen-maid's concern, 
not that of the directress of a superior boarding-school; and 
as for novel reading, that was a most indecorous suggestion, 
and she begged her to say no more. Amalia lvanovna flushed 
and, turning nasty, remarked that she only 'good meant', and 
'very much good meant' and that 'Geld for the room had not 
paid been'. Katerina lvanovna at once 'put her in her place', 
with the retort that she was lying when she said she 'meant 
good', because she had been badgering her, Katerina I vanovna, 
about the rent the day before, while the dead man was still 
lying there on the table. To this Amalia lvanovna answered, 
very logically, that 'those lady she inviting was, but those lady 
not coming were, because those lady were respectable lady, 
and to unrespectable ladies could not to come'. Katerina 
lvanovna 'scored off her' by observing that, as she was a slut, 
she was not in a position to judge what genuine respectability 
was. Amalia lvanovna was not to be put down, but instantly 
declared that her ' Vater aus Berlin a very, very important 
person wass, and went with both hands in pockets, and always 
went puff, puff!'; and in order to present a truer picture of her 
Vater, she jumped up from her chair, thrust both her hands into 
her pockets, inflated her cheeks and began making vague 
puffing noises to the accompaniment of loud guffaws from the 
lodgers, who were purposely encouraging her with their 
approval, in expectation of a fight. Katerina lvanovna could 
not brook this, and immediately 'rolled out', for everyone to 
hear, that perhaps Amalia lvanovna had never had a Vater, 
but was simply a drunken St. Petersburg Finn, who had prob­
ably been a cook somewhere or other, and possibly something 
worse. Amalia lvanovna, as red as a lobster, shrieked that 
perhaps Katerina lvanovna 'altogether without a Vater has 
been; but she had a Vater aus Berlin, and he wore a long frock­
coat and ever went puff, puff, puff!' Katerina lvanovna 
remarked disdainfully that everybody knew where she came 

374 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
from and that it was stated in print on her certificate of merit 
that her father was a colonel; and that Amalia Ivanovna's 
father (if she had one at all) was probably a Finnish milkman 
in St. Petersburg; but most likely she had had no father, 
because her patronymic was in doubt to this day: was she 
I vanovna or Ludwigovna? Here Amalia I vanovna, driven to 
frenzy at last, and thumping the table with her fist, began to 
scream that her Vater was called Johann, that he was a 
Burgmeister, and that Katerina I vanovna's Vater had 'quite never 
a Burgmeister been'. Katerina Ivanovna got up from her chair 
and in a severe and apparently calm voice (although she was 
very pale and her breathing was laboured) remarked that if 
Amalia Ivanovna had the effrontery 'to set her rubbishy little 
Vater on a level with her papa once more, she, Katerina 
I vanovna, would tear off her cap and trample it under her 
feet'. On this, Amalia Ivanovna began to run about the room, 
shouting at the top ofher voice that she was the mistress of the 
house and that :K,aterina Ivanovna 'must this instant from my 
flat to depart' ; then for some reason she began hastily collect­
ing her silver spoons from the table. Everything was din and 
uproar. The children began to cry. Sonya hurried to Katerina 
Ivanovna to restrain her, but when Amalia Ivanovna shouted 
something about a yellow card, Katerina Ivanovna pushed 
Sonya away and advanced upon her landlady with the inten­
tion of putting her threat about the cap into execution. At this 
moment the door opened and Peter Petrovich Luzhin appeared 
on the threshold. He stood there and let his stern and attentive 
glance travel over the whole company. Katerina Ivanovna 
hurried eagerly towards him. 
C H A P T E R  I I I  
'PETER PETROVICH!' she exclaimed, 'you, at least, will pro­
tect me! Tell this stupid creature that she must not dare to 
treat a respectable lady in misfortune in this manner, that 
there are courts of law ! . . .  I shall go to the Governor-general 
himself . . .  She shall answer for it . . .  Remember my father's 
hospitality, and protect my orphan children.' 
'Excuse me, madam . . .  Excuse me, excuse me, madam,' 
said Peter Petrovich, waving her away. 'As you are aware, 
I had not the honour of your papa's acquaintance . . .  allow 
me, madam!' (Somebody laughed loudly.) 'In your ceaseless 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
375 
disputes with Amalia Ivanovna I have no intention of taking 
part . . .  I have found it necessary to come here . . .  I wish to 
speak with your stepdaughter, Sofya . . .  I vanovna (I think) 
. . .  at once! Allow me to pass . .  .' 
Peter Petrovich sidled past Katerina I vanovna and walked 
towards the farther corner of the room, where Sonya was. 
Katerina I vanovna remained standing where she was, as if 
thunderstruck. She could not understand how Peter Petrovich 
could disown her papa's hospitality. Once she had invented 
that hospitality, she herself regarded it as gospel. She was 
impressed, too, by Peter Petrovich's dry, business-like tone, 
which seemed to convey some contemptuous threat. Everybody 
had gradually become silent since his entrance. Besides the 
fact that this 'solid citizen' was sharply out of harmony with 
all the guests, it was evident that he had come here on business 
of importance, since probably only an extraordinary reason 
could bring him into such company, and that, consequently, 
something was going to happen. Raskolnikov, standing by 
Sonya, moved aside to let him pass; Peter Petrovich seemed 
not to notice him. A moment later, Lebezyatnikov also ap­
peared on the threshold ; he did not come into the room, but 
stood there with an expression of peculiar curiosity and even of 
astonishment; he listened, but for a long time seemed unable to 
understand. 
'Excuse me if I am interrupting you, but the matter is rather 
important,' remarked Peter Petrovich to the company in 
general, without addressing himself to any one person. 'I am 
even glad that there should be people here. Amalia I vanovna, 
I humbly request you, as mistress of the flat, to give your 
attention to my conversation with Sofya Ivanovna.' He turned 
directly to Sonya, who seemed extraordinarily surprised and 
even apprehensive, and went on : 'Sofya Ivanovna, immediately 
after your visit, a banknote of the value of one hundred 
roubles disappeared from my table in my friend Audrey 
Semenovich Lebezyatnikov's room. If, in any way whatever, 
you know where it is now, and will tell us, then I assure you 
on my word of honour, which I take everybody here to witness, 
that that shall be the end of the matter. In the contrary event, 
I shall be obliged to have recourse to more serious measures, 
and then . . .  on your own head be it!' 
Complete silence reigned in the room. Even the crying 
children were quiet. Sonya stood, as pale as death, and looked 

376 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
at Luzhin without speaking. She seemed not to have under­
stood. A few seconds passed. 
'Well, what is it to be?' asked Luzhin, looking intently at her. 
'I don't know .
•
.
 I know nothing about it . . .  ' said Sonya 
at last, faintly. 
'No? You don't know?' repeated Luzhin, and then paused 
again for a few moments. 'Think, mademoiselle,' he began 
again sternly, but still as it were exhorting her. 'Think well. 
I am prepared to give you more time to reflect. Be good enough 
to realize that if I were not convinced, I, with my experience, 
would certainly not run the risk of accusing you so directly, 
since for so direct and public an accusation, if I were lying, 
or even mistaken, I should be held, in a certain sense, respon­
sible. I know this. 'This morning, for my own requirements, 
I changed some five-per-cent bills of the nominal value of 
three thousand roubles. I made a note of it in my pocketbook. 
When I came home, as Audrey Semenovich can bear witness, 
I began to count the money and when I had counted two 
thousand three hundred roubles I put that money in my pocket­
book, and put the pocketbook in my coat pocket. There re­
mained about five hundred roubles in bank-notes on the table, 
and among them were three one-hundred-rouble notes. Just 
then you came (at my request), and all the time you were with 
me you were very perturbed, and three times in the course of 
our conversation you hurriedly got up to go, although our con­
versation was not finished. Audrey Semenovich can testify to all 
this. You yourself, mademoiselle, will probably not refuse to 
confirm that I asked you to come, through Audrey Semenovich, 
for the sole purpose of discussing with you the bereaved and 
helpless position of your relative Katerina I vanovna (to whose 
dinner I was unable to come), and the possibility of helping 
her by organizing a subscription, or a lottery, or something of 
the sort. You expressed your gratitude, and even shed tears 
(I recount everything just as it happened, in the first place to 
remind you of it, and in the second to show you that my 
memory retains even the minutest details). Then I took from 
the table a ten-rouble note and gave it to you, as a contribu­
tion from myself for the assistance of your relative. Audrey 
Semenovich saw all this. Then I accompanied you to the door 
-still with the same confusion on your part-after which 
I remained alone with Audrey Semenovich, and, after a 
conversation with him lasting about ten minutes, Andrey 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
377 
Semenovich went out and I returned to the table where the 
money was lying, with the intention of counting it and laying 
it aside, as I had purposed to do before. To my surprise, one 
of the hundred-rouble notes was missing. Kindly consider, 
then : I cannot suspect Andrey Semenovich in any way; the 
very idea is shameful. Neither could I have made a mistake 
in my accounts, because a minute before your entrance I had 
finished my reckoning and found the total correct. You will 
agree that, recollecting your confusion and your haste to be 
gone, and the fact that you kept your hands on the table for 
some of the time, and, finally, taking into account your social 
position and its concomitant habits, I was, so to say, compelled, 
against my will and with horror, to adopt a suspicion which­
while of course, it is cruel-is-justifiable! I will add once 
more that, in spite of my just conviction, I know there is never­
theless in my present accusation some risk to mysel£ But, 
as you see, I did not let the matter rest, I acted, and I will tell 
you why; solely, miss, solely on account of your black in­
gratitude ! What? I invite you to visit me, in the interests of 
your destitute relative, I put into your hands the ten roubles 
which are all I am in a position to give you, and you immedi­
ately, on the spot, repay me for all this by such an action ! No, 
it is not right! You must be taught a lesson ! Think well then; 
nay, I implore you, as your true friend (for you cannot have a 
better friend than I am at this moment), to reconsider ! Other­
wise, I shall be inexorable ! Well?' 
'I did not take anything of yours,' whispered Sonya, terri­
fied. 'You gave me ten roubles; here, take them!' Sonya pulled 
her handkerchief from her pocket, untied the knot in it, took 
out the ten-rouble note and proffered it out to Luzhin. 
'And so you deny knowledge of the other hundred roubles?' 
he said insistently and reproachfully, not taking the note. 
Sonya looked round. They were all looking at her with 
terrible, stern, mocking, hateful faces. She glanced at Raskol­
nikov . . . he was standing by the wall with his arms folded, 
and looking at her with eyes full of fire. 
'Oh God !' burst from Sonya. 
'Amalia Ivanovna, the police must be informed, and mean­
while I humbly beg you to send for the porter,' said Luzhin 
quietly and even gently. 
'Gott der barmherzige !* I haf known that she a thief is !' ex­
claimed Amalia Ivanovna, throwing up her hands. 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'You knew?' Luzhin took her up. 'That means that even 
before this you had some sort of basis for coming to that 
conclusion. I beg you, respected Amalia Ivanovna, to remem­
ber your words, spoken, moreover, in the presence of witnesses.' 
There was a general stir and an outburst of loud conversa­
tion on all sides. 
'Wha-a-t?' shrieked Katerina Ivanovna, recovering her wits 
and flinging herself on Luzhin as though a spring had been 
released. 'What? You accuse her oftheft? Sonya? Oh, villains, 
villains !' She rushed to Sonya and hugged her with her wasted 
arms. 
'Sonya, how dared you take ten roubles from him? How 
silly ofyou ! Give it to me! Give me the ten roubles at once­
here!' 
And snatching the note from Sonya, Katerina Ivanovna 
crumpled it up and flung it with a backward sweep of her arm 
straight into Luzhin's face. The ball of paper hit him in the eye 
and fell to the floor. Amalia Ivanovna rushed to pick it up. 
Peter Petrovich lost his temper. 
'Restrain that madwoman !' he cried. 
At this moment several more people appeared in the door­
way beside Lebezyatnikov, among them the two recently 
arrived ladies. 
'What! Madwoman? I am mad, am I? Fool !' shrieked 
Katerina I vanovna. 'You are a fool, you rascally attorney, you 
vile creature! Sonya, Sonya taking money from him! Sonya a 
thief! Why, she would be more likely to give it to you, fool !' 
Katerina Ivanovna laughed hystericaiiy. 'Have you ever seen 
a fool?' and she turned rapidly from one to another, pointing 
to Luzhin. 'What? And you as well !' as she caught sight of the 
landlady. 'You too, you German sausage seller, you assert 
that "she a thief is", you filthy Prussian hen dressed up in a 
crinoline ! You ! You ! And she hasn't left the room, and when 
she came back from seeing you, you villain, she sat down 
straight away by me; everybody saw her. She sat next to 
Rodion Romanovich •
.
.
 Search her! Since she didn't go out 
at all, that means the money must be on her ! Search then, 
search, search! Only if you don't find it, then excuse me, my 
dear man, you shall answer for it ! I'll run to the Emperor, the 
Emperor, to our gracious Tsar himself, I will throw myself 
at his feet, at once, this very day! I am all alone in the world, 
they will let me in ! Do you think they won't? You are mis-

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
379 
taken, I shall get in ! I shall get in ! I suppose you were counting 
on her being so meek and gentle, weren't you? Is that what 
you relied on? But I, brother, am not meek! It will be the 
worse for you ! Search, then ! Search, search, go on, search !' 
And Katerina Ivanovna frenziedly tugged at Luzhin, trying 
to pull him towards Sonya. 
'I am ready, I will take the responsibility . . .  but calm down, 
madam, calm down ! I see only too well that you are not meek! 
. . .  This . . .  this . . .  what is to be done?' muttered Luzhin. 'The 
police ought to be present . . .  although as it is there are quite 
enough witnesses . . .  I am ready . . .  But in any case it is 
difficult for a man . . .  by reason of his sex . . .  If with Amalia 
Ivanovna's assistance . . .  although things ought not to be done 
like this . . .  what should we do?' 
'Anyone you like! Anybody who wants to may search her !' 
cried Katerina Ivanovna. 'Sonya, turn out your pockets ! See, 
see ! Look, you monster, it's empty, her handkerchief was here, 
and the pocket is empty! You see! Here's the other pocket, 
look! You see ! You see !' 
And Katerina Ivanovna did not so much turn as drag 
Sonya's pockets inside out, one after. the other. But from the 
second, the right-hand, pocket there flew out a piece of paper 
which described a parabola in the air and fell at Luzhin's feet. 
Everybody saw it, and there were many excited exclamations. 
Peter Petrovich stooped, picked up the paper from the floor 
with two fingers, raised it where everybody could see, and 
unfolded it. It was a hundred-rouble bank-note, folded into 
eight. Peter Petrovich turned round in a circle, holding up the 
note to show everybody. 
'Thief! Out of my flat! Police, police !' howled Amalia 
Ivanovna. 'They must in Siberia driven be ! Get out!' 
The air was full of exclamations. Raskolnikov said nothing, 
but kept his eyes on Sonya except when he occasionally glanced 
quickly at Luzhin. Sonya still stood in the same place, as 
though hardly conscious. She did not even seem very surprised. 
Suddenly her face was flooded with crimson, and she cried out 
and covered it with her hands. 
'No, it wasn't me ! I didn't take it! I don't know anything 
about it!' she cried in a heart-rending wail, and flung herself 
into the arms of Katerina I vanovna, who clasped her and held 
her close as though she would shield her with her body from all 
the world. 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'Sonya, Sonya! I don't believe it! You see, I don't believe 
it ! ' cried Ka terina I vanovna, in the face of the plain evidence, 
rocking her in her arms like a child. She kissed her repeatedly, 
caught up her hands and kissed them too, lingeringly. 'As if 
you could have taken it! How stupid these people are ! Oh 
Lord ! You are so stupid, stupid !' she cried, turning to them. 
'You don't know yet, you don't know her heart, you don't 
know what she is like! She take it, she! Why, she would strip 
off her last garment, and sell it, and go barefoot, and give you 
everything, if you were in need ; that's the kind of girl she is ! 
She went on the streets because my children were starving; 
she sold herself for us ! . . .  Ah, my poor dear husband ! Ah, my 
poor dear dead husband ! Do you see this, do you see it? Here 
is a funeral dinner for you ! Oh, heavens ! Why are you all 
standing still? Defend her! Rodion Romanovich, why don't 
you take her part? Do you believe it, too? Not one of you is 
worth her little finger, not one of you, not one, not one, not 
one. Oh God, defend her now!' 
The plaints of poor, consumptive, bereaved Katerina Ivan­
ovna seemed to have produced a marked effect on her hearers. 
There was so much suffering and pathos in the face twisted by 
pain and wasted by disease, in the parched lips flecked with 
blood, in the hoarse voice, in the sobs like a crying child's, in 
the childishly trustful and yet desperate prayer for help, that 
all of them pitied the unhappy woman. Peter Petrovich at 
least pitied her. 
'Madam, madam !' he exclaimed impressively. 'This matter 
does not involve you ! Nobody could accuse you of instigating 
the theft or of complicity in it, especially as it was you who 
made the discovery by turning out her pockets; that means 
that you had no idea of it before. I am completely and ab­
solutely willing to be compassionate if, so to say, destitution 
was Sofya Semenovna's motive, but why, mademoiselle, did 
you refuse to confess? Did you fear the disgrace? Was this your 
first step? You lost your head, perhaps? It is understandable, 
very understandable . . .  But how could you start on such 
courses? Ladies and gentlemen !'-he turned to the assembled 
company-'pitying and, so to say, sympathizing, I may be 
ready to forgive, even now, in spite of the personal insults I 
have received. And, mademoiselle, let your present disgrace 
be a lesson to you for the future,' he added to Sonya; 'I shall 
take no further steps. So be it; I have done. Enough!' 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
381 
Peter Petrovich cast a sidelong look at Raskolnikov. Their 
glances met. Raskolnikov's fiery eyes seemed ready to reduce 
him to ashes. Katerina lvanovna, meanwhile, appeared no 
longer to hear what was going on; she was hugging and kissing 
Sonya like a madwoman. The children had also put their little 
arms round Sonya, and Polechka, who, although she did not 
altogether understand what was happening, was drowned in 
tears and shaking with sobs, had hidden her pretty little face, 
swollen with crying, against Sonya's shoulder. 
'What a foul trick !' said a loud voice suddenly from the 
doorway. 
Peter Petrovich looked round quickly. 
'How despicable!' repeated Lebezyatnikov, staring fixedly 
at him. 
Peter Petrovich seemed startled, as everybody observed and 
remarked upon later. Lebezyatnikov advanced into the room. 
'And you dared to call on me as a witness !' he said, going 
up to Peter Petrovich. 
'What does this mean, Andrey Semenovich? What are you 
talking about?' muttered Luzhin. 
'It means that you are a •
.
.
 traducer ! That is what my 
words meant !' said Lebezyatnikov hotly, looking at him 
sternly with his short-sighted little eyes. He was terribly angry. 
Raskolnikov gazed at him with absorbed attention, as though 
seizing on and weighing every word. Once more silence 
rei&'led in the room. Peter Petrovich seemed at a loss, especially 
in the first moments. 
'If it is me you mean . .  .' he stammered. 'What is the matter 
with you? Are you sane?' 
'I am sane enough, and you are . . .  a scoundrel ! Oh, how 
vile the whole business is ! I listened, I waited to the end, on 
purpose to understand it all, because, I must confess, I still 
don't quite see the logic of it .
.
•
 I don't understand what 
your purpose was.' 
'But what did I do? Will you stop talking in these idiotic 
riddles? Or perhaps you have been drinking?' 
'You may perhaps drink, base creature, but I don't! I never 
touch vodka, because it is against my principles ! Just think, he 
himself gave that hundred-rouble :pote to Sofya Semenovna 
with his own hands ! I saw it, I can bear witness, I will take an 
oath on it ! He did it, he himself!' repeated Lebezyatnikov, 
looking at each of them in turn. 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'Have you gone out of your mind or something, puppy?' 
squeaked Luzhin. 'She herself, here in front of all of you, she 
herself asserted a moment ago that she received nothing from 
me but ten roubles. If that is so, how could I have given it 
to her?' 
'I saw you, I saw you !' asserted Lebezyatnikov in a shout, 
'and although it is against my principles, I am prepared to 
swear any oath you like in court immediately, because I saw 
how you put it surreptitiously into her pocket! Only I, like a 
fool, thought you were doing it out of kindness ! In the door­
way, as you parted from her, when she had turned and you 
were shaking her hand with one of yours, with the other, the 
left hand, you slipped the note into her pocket on the sly. 
I saw you ! I saw you !' 
Luzhin turned pale. 
'What is this nonsense?' he exclaimed haughtily. 'And how 
could you recognize a banknote, when you were standing by 
the window? With your short sight, you simply imagined you 
saw it. You are raving !' 
'No, I didn't imagine it. Although I was standing a good 
way off, I saw everything, and though it really is difficult to 
recognize a note from the window-you are right there-it so 
happens that I know for a certainty that it was indeed a 
hundred-rouble note, because when you were giving Sofya 
Semenovna the ten-rouble note-! saw you myself-you took 
a hundred-rouble note from the table at the same time (I saw 
this, because I was standing quite near you just then, and be­
cause of a certain idea that came to me, I did not forget that 
you had that note in your hand). You folded it and kept it in 
your hand all the time. Then I would have forgotten it again, 
but when you were getting up you transferred it from your 
right hand to your left and nearly dropped it; then I remem­
bered again because the same idea came back to me, the idea 
that you wanted to do her a kindness without letting me know. 
You may imagine that then I began to watch you-and I saw 
how you managed to thrust it into her pocket. I saw you, I saw 
you, I am prepared to swear to it!' 
Lebezyatnikov was almost breathless. Exclamations, ex­
pressing more astonishment than anything else, began to be 
heard on all sides; some of them, however, were taking on a 
menacing tone. Everybody crowded round Peter Petrovich. 
Katerina Ivanovna rushed up to Lebezyatnikov. 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
383 
'Andrey Semenovich ! I misjudged you ! Stand up for her! 
You are the only one on her side ! She is an orphan; God sent 
you to her ! Andrey Semenovich, our dear, kind friend !' And 
Katerina I vanovna, hardly realizing what she was doing, flung 
herself on her knees before him. 
'Stuff and nonsense!' shouted Luzhin, in a passion of rage. 
'You are talking rubbish, sir! "I forgot; I remembered, I 
remembered, I forgot"-what does it all mean? So I slipped 
it to her deliberately? What for? What was my purpose? What 
have I in common with this . .  .' 
'What for? That is what I cannot understand myself, but 
that I am speaking gospel truth is a fact! I am so far from being 
mistaken, you abominable scoundrel, that I remember clearly 
that that question occurred to me at once, just when I was 
thanking you and shaking hands with you. Why had you put it 
stealthily into her pocket? That is, just why did you do it by 
stealth? Was it only to hide it from me, because you knew I 
held contrary opinions and repudiated private charity which 
accomplishes no radical cure? Well, I decided that you really 
were ashamed to give away such large sums in front of me, and 
besides, I thought, "perhaps he means to give her a surprise, 
to astonish her, when she finds a whole hundred roubles in her 
pocket." (Because some charitable people don't like to make 
a parade of their good deeds, I know.) Then I thought you 
wanted to test her, that is, to see if she would come and thank 
you when she found it. Then, that you wanted to avoid all 
gratitude, and that . . .  how does it go ?-that the right hand 
(isn't it?) should not know .
•
.
 something like that, in short. 
Well, a lot of different ideas came into my heaq, so that I 
intended to think them over later, but all the same, I thought 
it would not be tactful to reveal that I knew your secret. 
However, yet another point occurred to me : that Sofya 
Semenovna might lose the money before she noticed it; that is 
why I decided to come here, call her outside, and inform her 
that a hundred-rouble note had been put in her pocket. And 
on the way I called at the Kobylyatnikovs' room to take them 
A General Deduction from the Positive Method: and specially 
recommend to them Piederit's article (and Wagner's as well) . 
Then I came here, and what a state of affairs I found here ! 
Now could I, could I, have had all those ideas and delibera­
tions, if I really had not seen you put a hundred roubles in 
her pocket?' 

384 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
When Andrey Semenovich had finished his lengthy argu­
ment, with the logical conclusion at the end of the speech, he 
was dreadfully tired, and sweat was pouring off his face. Un­
fortunately, he was not very skilful at expressing himself in 
Russian (although he knew no other language), so that he 
seemed suddenly quite exhausted, even wasted away, after this 
feat of advocacy. His speech, nevertheless, had produced a 
remarkable effect. He had spoken with such warmth of con­
viction that everybody obviously believed him. Peter Petrovich 
felt that things were going badly for him. 
'What concern is it of mine if such silly questions came 
into your head?' he cried. 'That is not proof. You may have 
dreamed the whole thing, that's all ! And I tell you that you are 
lying, sir! You are lying and slandering me out of spite against 
me, out of resentment because I refused to listen to your god­
less, free-thinking social theories, that's what it is !' 
But Peter Petrovich could not manage to twist things to his 
own advantage. On the contrary, murmurings arose on all 
sides. 
'Oh, so that's your line !' exclaimed Lebezyatnikov. 'Liar! 
Call the police, and let me be sworn ! There is only one thing 
I can't understand, and that is why he should risk such a vile 
trick. Wretched, despicable creature !' 
'I can explain why he risked it, and if necessary I will swear 
to it myself,' said Raskolnikov at last, firmly, and stepped 
forward. He seemed calm and resolute. Simply by looking 
at him everybody could clearly see that he really did know 
what all this was about, and that the time had come to unravel 
the knot. 
'Now I can see the complete explanation,' Raskolnikov went 
on, addressing Lebezyatnikov. 'From the very beginning I 
suspected some filthy trick; my suspicions were aroused by 
certain circumstances known only to me, which I will tell you 
of at once; they are the whole point ! Your invaluable evidence 
has made everything finally clear to me. I beg all of you 
to listen: This gentleman' (he pointed to Luzhin) 'recently 
became engaged to a young lady, my sister, Avdotya Roma­
novna Raskolnikov. But on his arrival in St. Petersburg, at our 
first meeting, the day before yesterday, he quarrelled with me 
and I threw him out, as I have two witnesses to prove. He 
has a very spiteful nature .
. . I did not know then that he was 
lodging here with you, Andrey Semenovich, and that con-

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
385 
sequently on the very day of our quarrel, that is, the day before 
yesterday, he saw me, as a friend of the late Mr. Marmeladov's, 
give some money to his widow, Katerina Ivanovna, for the 
funeral. He immediately wrote to my mother and informed 
her that I had given all my money not to Katerina Ivanovna 
but to Sofya Semenovna, and in addition he referred in the 
most despicable terms to . . .  to Sofya Semenovna's charac­
ter, that is, he made insinuations about the character of my 
relations with Sofya Semenovna. All this, you understand, 
with the idea of making mischief between me and my mother 
and sister by suggesting that I was squandering the money 
they had sent to help me, all they had, on unworthy objects. 
Yesterday, in his presence, and that of my mother and sister, 
I established the true facts, proving that I had given the money 
to Katerina I vanovna for the funeral, and not to Sofya Semen­
ovna, and that I had not even been acquainted with Sofya 
Semenovna the day before, nor so much as seen her. To 
that I added that with all his virtues he, Peter Petrovich 
Luzhin, was not worth the little finger of Sofya Semenovna, 
whom he had spoken so ill of. When he asked if I would let 
Sofya Semenovna sit down beside my sister, I answered that I 
had already done so, that day. He grew angry because my 
mother and sister refused to quarrel with me without a better 
reason than his calumnies, and gradually began to say the 
most unpardonably impertinent things io them. There was a 
final rupture and he was turned out of the house. All this was 
yesterday evening. Now I ask for your special attention; think: 
if he had contrived to show that Sofya Semenovna was a thief, 
then he would have proved to my mother and sister that he was 
almost right in his suspicions, that he was justified in being angry 
with mefor setting Sofya Semenovna on a level with my sister, 
and that in attacking me he had consequently been defending 
and protecting the honour of my sister and his future wife. In 
short, by all this he might even have managed to embroil me 
with my family once more, and of course he hoped to get into 
favour with them again. I don't speak of the revenge he was 
taking on me, because he had grounds for supposing that 
Sofya Semenovna's honour and happiness were dear to me. 
That is what he counted on doing! That is how I understand 
the matter. That is all his motive, and there can be no other!' 
With these words, or something like them, Raskolnikov 
ended his speech, which had frequently been interrupted by 

386 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
the exclamations of his audience, all of whom had listened very 
attentively. In spite of the interruptions he had spoken calmly, 
curtly, precisely, clearly, firmly. His incisive voice, his air of 
conviction, and his stern face produced an extraordinary effect. 
'That's it! You are right!' corroborated Lebezyatnikov 
delightedly. 'It must be so, because he did in fact ask me, as 
soon as Sofya Semenovna came into the room, whether you 
were here. Had I seen you amongst Katerina Ivanovna's 
guests? He called me over to the window and asked me 
secretly. That means he thought it essential that you should 
he here ! You are right! It is all true !' 
Luzhin smiled scornfully and said nothing. He had, however, 
turned very pale. He seemed to be considering how to get out 
of his fix. He might have been glad to drop the matter and 
leave, but this was hardly possible at the moment; it would 
have meant acknowledging the justice of the accusations 
levelled against him and the fact that he had indeed deliber­
ately slandered Sofya Semenovna. Besides, the guests, who had 
been drinking fairly heavily, were too excited to allow it. The 
commissariat clerk, although he did not understand all of it, 
was shouting loudest of them all, suggesting various measures 
which Luzhin thought extremely unpleasant. Some people 
who had not been drinking were also present; they had col­
lected here from every room in the flat. The three Poles were 
furiously angry and never stopped shouting in Polish, 'The 
Pan is a scoundrel' and muttering threats. Sonya had listened 
with strained attention, but as though she only partly under­
stood, and looked like a person recovering from a swoon. She 
had not once taken her eyes from Raskolnikov, feeling that he 
was her sole protection. Katerina lvanovna's breathing was 
harsh and laboured and she seemed in the last stages of 
exhaustion. More stupid with astonishment than all the rest of 
them, Amalia lvanovna stood there with her mouth open and 
without a thought in her head. She saw only that Peter 
Petrovich had somehow come to grief. Raskolnikov tried to 
say something more, but he was not allowed to finish: they 
were all shouting and crowding round Luzhin with oaths and 
threats. But Peter Petrovich did not flinch. Seeing that the 
attempt to incriminate Sonya had completely failed, he now 
called impudence to his assistance. 
'Allow me, ladies and gentlemen, allow me; do not crowd 
round; let me pass !' he said, pushing his way through them. 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'And do me the favour of uttering no threats; I assure you that 
nothing will come of them. You will accomplish nothing by 
them, not a jot, but, on the contrary, you, ladies and gentle­
men, will answer for trying to force me to conceal a criminal 
offence. The thief has been unmasked, and I shall prosecute. 
The law is less blind than you and . . .  and it is not drunk 
and will not believe two acknowledged atheists, agitators, and 
trouble-makers, when they accuse me for the sake of personal 
revenge, as they are fools enough to admit themselves . . .  Yes ! 
Allow me!' 
'I don't want a trace of you left in my room; be good enough 
to leave immediately! Everything is over between us ! And to 
think of the way I've put myself about, the way I've been 
explaining things to him . . .  for two whole weeks ! . . .  ' 
'You know I myself told you, Andrey Semenovich, that I 
was leaving, and you wished then to get me to stay. Now I will 
only add that you are a fool, sir! May you be cured of your 
feeble mind and your short-sightedness ! Allow me, ladies and 
gentlemen !' 
He thrust forward, but the commissariat clerk was not going 
to let him escape so easily; he seized a tumbler from the table, 
swung it, and launched it at Peter Petrovich, but it flew 
straight at Amalia Ivanovna. She shrieked and he, thrown off 
balance by his swing, rolled under the table. Peter Petrovich 
went back to his room, and within half an hour had quitted 
the house. Sonya, with her meek nature, had always been 
conscious that she was more vulnerable than other people, and 
could be insulted almost with impunity. She had, nevertheless, 
until this moment thought that she could somehow manage to 
avoid disaster-by caution, meekness, submissiveness to any­
body and everybody. Her disillusionment was too grievous. 
She was, of course, capable of bearing everything, even this, 
with patience and almost without murmuring. But at first she 
found this burden too heavy. In spite of her triumphant 
vindication, when the first terrified numbness had passed and 
she was able to realize and understand clearly what was 
happening, the consciousness of her helplessness in the face of 
insult and injury oppressed and wrung her heart. She gave 
way to hysteria and at last, unable to endure any longer, flung 
herself out of the room, almost immediately after Luzhin left it, 
and hurried home. Amalia I vanovna, when the glass struck 
her, amid roars of merriment, also found it unbearable to have 

388 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
to suffer for what was not her fault. Like a madwoman she 
rushed shrieking at Katerina Ivanovna, whom she held to 
blame for everything. 
'Away from my fiat! This instant! March !' And she began 
to seize everything of Katerina Ivanovna's that she could lay 
hands on and hurl them all to the floor. Already almost com­
pletely exhausted, nearly fainting, pale, and gasping for breath, 
Katerina Ivanovna started up from the bed on which she had 
collapsed, and flung herself on Amalia I vanovna. But the strug­
gle was too unequal, she was pushed away like a feather. 
'What! That godless slander was not enough-this slut 
must attack me now! What? She drives me out on the day of 
my poor husband's funeral, after she has eaten at my table, 
out into the street with my orphaned children ! And where can 
I go?' cried the poor woman, sobbing and panting. 'Oh God !' 
she exclaimed, with flashing eyes, 'is there no justice? Will you 
not protect me, widowed and fatherless? But we shall see. 
There is justice and truth on earth; they do exist, and I will 
find them! At once; only wait, godless, worthless creature ! 
Polechka, stay with the children until I come back. Wait for 
me, even if you have to wait in the street! We shall see whether 
there is justice in the world !' 
Throwing over her head the green shawl Marmeladov had 
spoken of, Katerina I vanovna made her way through the 
disorderly and drunken crowd oflodgers who still thronged the 
room and ran out into the street, wailing and weeping, with a 
vague intention of going somewhere at once, without delay, 
and finding justice, whatever the cost. Polechka, terrified, 
crouched with the children on the trunk in the corner, and 
waited, shivering, with her arms round the two little ones, for 
her mother's return. Amalia Ivanovna swept about the room, 
raging, shrieking, lamenting, and flinging everything she could 
lay hands on to the floor. The lodgers were all shouting and 
bawling in a disorderly way, some discussing, as well as they 
could, what had happened, others quarrelling and cursing one 
another, others again striking up a song . . .  
'Now it is time I went, too !' thought Raskolnikov. 'Well, 
Sofya Semenovna, let us see what you will have to say now!' 
And he set off towards Sonya's lodgings. 

C RIME AND P UNISHMENT 
C H A P T E R  I V  
RAsKOLNIKOV had been energetic and courageous in plead­
ing Sonya's cause against Luzhin, in spite of the burden of fear 
and suffering in his own soul. But after so harassing a morn­
ing he was glad of a chance to escape from the preoccupations 
that had become unbearable to him, apart altogether from the 
warm personal feelings involved in his defence of Sonya. 
Besides, he had already been contemplating, with an alarm 
that became terror at some moments, his forthcoming inter­
view with Sonya; he felt obliged to tell her who had killed 
Lizaveta, although he foresaw that it would cost him great 
anguish, which he tried, as it were, to push away from him. 
When, therefore, he exclaimed, as he left Katerina Ivanovna's :  
'Well, what will you have to say now, Sofya Semenovna?' it 
was probably because he was still wildly, if superficially, elated 
by his recent victory over Luzhin. But a strange thing happened. 
When he reached the Kapernaumovs' flat, he experienced a 
sudden sensation of impotence and fear. He stopped before the 
door, asking himself, 'Need I really tell her who killed Liza­
veta?' The question was a strange one, because at the very 
same moment he felt not only that he must tell her, but that he 
could not put it off even for a short time. He did not yet know 
why he could not, he only felt it, and the tormenting conscious­
ness of his helplessness before the inevitable almost crushed 
him. To escape from his anxious preoccupations, he quickly 
opened the door and paused on the threshold with his eyes on 
Sonya. She was sitting with her elbows on her little table and 
her face hidden in her hands, but when she saw Raskolnikov, 
she stood up at once and came to meet him, as though she had 
been expecting him. 
'What would have become of me without you?' she said 
rapidly, as they moved into the room together. Evidently she 
was in haste to say this one thing to him. Then she waited. 
Raskolnikov walked to the table and sat down on the chair 
from which she had just risen. She stood in front of him, two 
paces away, exactly as she had the day before. 
'Well, Sonya?' he said, suddenly aware that his voice was 
trembling. 'The whole affair hinged on your "social position and 
its concomitant habits". Did you understand that just now?' 
Sonya looked distressed. 

390 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'Please don't talk to me as you did yesterday,' she inter­
rupted. 'Please, don't even begin. There is enough suffering 
as it is . .  
.' 
She hastened to smile, fearing that he might not like the 
rebuke. 
'I was very foolish to come away. What is happening there 
now? I wanted to go back at once, but I kept on thinking that 
you . . .  would come here.' 
He told her that Amalia I vanovna was turning them out of 
their room, and that Katerina Ivanovna had gone off 'to look 
for justice'. 
'Oh God !' exclaimed Sonya. 'Let us go at once . .  .' 
And she seized her cape. 
'It's everlastingly the same thing!' cried Raskolnikov, exas­
perated. 'You have no thoughts except for them! Stay with me 
a little.' 
'But .
•
•
 Katerina Ivanovna?' 
'Katerina Ivanovna can wait. Since she has left the house, 
she will be sure to come here,' he added morosely. 'If you are 
not here, she will find fault with you . . .  ' 
Sonya sat down, in a torment of indecision. Raskolnikov 
remained silent, with his eyes on the ground, considering. 
'Assume that Luzhin did not want to do it just now,' he 
began, without looking at Sonya, 'but if he had wanted to, 
or if it had somehow been part of his plans, he would have 
shoved you into gaol, wouldn't he, if it hadn't been for me and 
Lebezyatnikov ?' 
'Yes,' she said faintly. 'Yes!' she repeated, distracted and 
alarmed. 
'But you know I might not have happened to be there. And 
Lebezyatnikov turned up quite by chance, too.' 
Sonya was silent. 
'Well, and if it had been prison for you, what then? Do you 
remember what I said to you yesterday?' 
Again she did not answer. He waited. 
'And I expected you to cry out again, "Oh, don't say it! 
Stop !" ' laughed Raskolnikov, in a rather strained way. 'What, 
still silent?' he asked after a pause. 'But surely we must talk 
about something. I should like to know how you would settle 
a certain "problem", as Lebezyatnikov would say, now.' (He 
seemed to falter a little.) 'No, I really am serious. Suppose, 
Sonya, you had known Luzhin's intentions beforehand, and 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
391 
known for a certainty that they meant the ruin of Katerina 
I vanovna and the children, and of yourself into the bargain 
(I put it that way, because you consider yourself of no account). 
Polechka as well . . .  because she is destined to take the same 
road. Well, then : suppose you were allowed to decide, that 
either one or the other should go on living, that is, either that 
Luzhin should live and go on doing evil, or that Katerina 
I vanovna should die. How would you decide? Which of them 
should die? That is my question.' 
Sonya looked at him anxiously. She could feel that there was 
something behind the uncertainty of this speech, which seemed 
to be approaching some point in a roundabout fashion. 
'I had a feeling that you would ask me something like that,' 
she said, looking at him searchingly. 
'Well, perhaps you had. But how would you decide?' 
'Why do you ask about what could not happen?' said Sonya 
distastefully. 
'That means that it would be better for Luzhin to go on 
living and doing mischief! Surely you dare not decide that 
way?' 
'But I can't know God's intentions . . .  And why do you ask 
questions that have no answer? Where is the point of such 
empty questions? How could it depend on my decision? Who 
made me a judge ofwho shall live and who shall not?' 
'Oh, if you are going to mix God up in it, we shall get 
nowhere,' grumbled Raskolnikov sullenly. 
'You had better say straight out what you mean,' cried 
Sonya in distress. 'You are leading up to something again . . .  
Did you come here only to torment me?' 
She could not restrain herself but burst into bitter weeping. 
He looked at her in black dejection. Five minutes went by. 
'You are right, Sonya,' he said quietly at last. He had 
changed suddenly; his artificially bold and weakly challenging 
manner had disappeared. Even his voice had grown suddenly 
feeble. 'I told you yesterday that I should not come to plead 
for pardon, and here I seem to have begun by doing just that 
. . .  What I said about Luzhin and about God was for myself . . .  
I was asking for your forgiveness, Sonya . .  .' 
He tried to smile, but there was something helpless and 
incomplete about that pale smile. He bent his head and covered 
his face with his hands. 
Suddenly and unexpectedly a bitter hatred for Sonya 

392 
C RIME AND P UNISHMENT 
seemed to flood his heart. Surprised and almost terrified by this 
feeling, he lifted his head and gazed at her, meeting her eyes 
fixed on him with a look of anxiety and anguished care. There 
was love in that look; his hatred vanished like a shadow. It 
had not been real; he had taken one feeling for another. All 
that it meant was that the moment had come. 
He hid his face in his hands again and bent his head. 
Suddenly he rose from the chair, his face pale, looked at Sonya, 
and, without a word, went and sat down mechanically on the 
bed. 
This moment felt to him terribly like that other, when he 
had stood behind the old woman, after he had freed the axe 
from its loop, and felt that 'there was not a moment to lose'. 
'What is the matter?' asked Sonya, intimidated. 
He could not speak. This was not at all, not at all, how he 
had meant to make his announcement, and he could not under­
stand what was happening to him. She went up to him slowly, 
sat down on the bed beside him, and waited, without taking 
her eyes off him. Her heart thumped irregularly. The silence 
became unendurable; he turned his deathly-pale face towards 
her; his lips moved impotently, striving to speak. Terror filled 
Sonya's heart. 
'What is the matter?' she repeated, drawing slightly away 
from him. 
'Nothing, Sonya. Don't be afraid . . .  It's all rubbish ! Really, 
when you come to think of it, it is rubbish,' he muttered, 
looking like a man wandering in delirium. 'Why did I choose 
to torture you with this?' he added suddenly, looking at her. 
'Really, why? I keep on asking myself that question, Sonya . . .  
' 
He had, indeed, been asking himself the question perhaps a 
quarter of an hour before, but now he was quite without 
strength, hardly conscious of what he was doing and trembling 
from head to foot. 
'Oh, how you are torturing yourself!' she said, full of distress. 
'It's all nonsense ! . . .  Listen, Sonya,' (for some reason he 
smiled suddenly, a pale and impotent smile that lasted for 
some two seconds) 'do you remember what I wanted to tell 
you yesterday?' 
Sonya waited uneasily. 
'I said, when I left, that I might perhaps be saying good-bye 
for ever, but that if I did come here today, I would tell you .
.
•
 
who killed Lizaveta.' 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
393 
She shuddered from head to foot. 
'Well, here I am, come to tell you.' 
'Then what you said yesterday was really .
•
 .' she whispered 
with difficulty. 'But how do you know?' she asked quickly, as 
if she had suddenly recollected herself. 
Sonya's breathing was beginning to labour. Her face grew 
paler and paler. 
'I do know.' 
She was silent for a minute. 
'Do you mean he has been found?' she asked timidly. 
'No, he's not been found.' 
'Then how do you know about it?' she asked, again almost 
inaudibly, and again after almost a minute's silence. 
He turned to her and steadily, steadily, looked at her. 
'Guess,' he said with the same distorted, feeble smile as 
before. 
A convulsive shudder shook her. 
'But you •
.
.
 I . . .  Why do you frighten me so?' she asked, 
smiling like a child. 
'I must be a great friend of his •
•
•
 if I know,' went on 
Raskolnikov, still continuing to keep his eyes fixed on her face, 
as though it were not in his power to turn them away. 'He 
did not want to . . .  kill Lizaveta. He .
•
.
 killed her by accident 
. . .  He meant to kill the old woman . . .  when she was alone .
•
.
 
and he went there . . .  But Lizaveta came in . . .  He was there 
. . .  and he killed her.' 
Another terrible minute went by. They still gazed at one 
another. 
'Can't you guess?' he asked suddenly, with the sensation of 
a man throwing himself from a tower. 
'N-no,' whispered Sonya, almost inaudibly. 
'Look well.' 
As soon as he had said this an old familiar sensation turned 
his heart to ice: he looked at her and suddenly in her face he 
seemed to see Lizaveta. He vividly recalled Lizaveta's expres­
sion as he advanced upon her with the axe and she retreated 
before him to the wall, with one hand stretched out and a 
childlike fear in her face, exactly like that of small children 
when they suddenly begin to be frightened, stare anxiously at 
the object of their fear, shrink back and stretch out their little 
hands, ready to burst into tears. It was almost the same now 
with Sonya; just as helpless, just as frightened, she stared at him 

394 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
for some time and then, stretching out her left hand, lightly, 
almost imperceptibly, rested her fingers on his breast and slowly 
raised herselffrom the bed, shrinking farther and farther back, 
still with her eyes fixed on his face. Her fear suddenly com­
municated itself to him: the same terror showed in his face 
and he gazed at her with the same fixity and almost with the 
same childish smile. 
'Have you guessed?' he whispered at last. 
'Oh God !' burst in a terrible wail from her breast. Power• 
lessly she fell back on the bed, with her face in the pillow. But 
after a moment she raised herself quickly, quickly approached 
him, seized both his hands, and squeezing them as tightly as a 
vice in her thin fingers, once more fixed her unmoving glance 
on his face, as though it were riveted there. With this last 
despairing look she was striving to find and somehow, anyhow, 
seize upon some last hope. But there was no hope; no doubt 
remained; it was true! Even much later, when she remembered 
this moment, it seemed strange and wonderful to her that she 
should have known at once that there was no longer any doubt. 
Surely she could not have said, for example, that she had 
foreseen something of the kind. And yet now, as soon as he 
said it, it suddenly seemed to her that she really had foreseen 
this very thing. 
'That's enough, Sonya ! Stop ! Don't torture me!' he begged 
pitifully. 
This was not at all, not at all, how he had thought of making 
his revelation, but it was the way things had happened. 
As if she did not know what she was doing, she jumped up 
and, wringing her hands, walked into the middle of the room, 
but quickly came back and sat down again beside him, so close 
that their shoulders almost touched. Suddenly, as if she had 
been stabbed, she started, cried out, and flung herself, without 
knowing why, on her knees in front of him. 
'What have you done, what have you done to yourself?' she 
said despairingly, and, starting up, threw herself on his neck, 
embraced him and held him tight. 
Raskolnikov recoiled and regarded her with a melancholy 
smile. 
'How strange you are, Sonya! You put your arms round me 
and kiss me, when I tell you that. You don't know what you 
are doing.' 
'There is no one, no one, unhappier than you in the whole 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
395 
world !' she exclaimed in a frenzy, not hearing what he said, 
and suddenly broke into hysterical sobbing. 
Long unfamiliar feelings poured like a flood into his heart 
and melted it in an instant. He did not withstand them; two 
tears sprang into his eyes and hung on his lashes. 
'Then you will not forsake me, Sonya?' he said, looking at 
her almost with hope. 
'No, no ! Never, nowhere !' cried Sonya. 'I will follow you 
wherever you go. Oh God ! •
.
.
 Oh, I am wretched ! . . .  Why, 
why didn't I know you before? Why did you not come before? 
Oh God !' 
'I have come now.' 
'Now ! Oh, what can be done now? .
•
.
 Together, together !' 
she repeated, as if beside herself, embracing him again. 'I will 
follow you to prison !' He felt a sudden shock and the old hostile, 
almost mocking smile played on his lips. 
'Perhaps, Sonya, I don't mean to go to prison yet,' he said. 
Sonya looked at him quickly. 
After her first passionate and poignant impulse of sympathy 
for this unhappy being, the terrible idea of murder seized her 
again. In his changed tone she now suddenly heard the voice 
of the murderer. She looked at him in bewilderment. She knew 
nothing yet of the why, the how, the wherefore, of it. Now all 
these questions sprang at once to her mind. Again she could 
not believe it. 'He, he a murderer? Can that be possible?' 
'What is this? Where am I?' she said in deep perplexity, as 
if still hardly conscious. 'And how could you, you, the man 
you are .
•
.
 bring yourself to this? . . .  It can't be true ! ' 
'But it is. It was to rob her! Stop, Sonya!' he answered 
wearily and almost with annoyance. 
Sonya stood as if stunned, then suddeniy cried out, 'You 
were hungry! You . . .  was it to help your mother? Was that it?' 
'No, Sonya, no,' he muttered, turning away and hanging his 
head. 'I was not very hungry . . .  I did want to help my mother, 
but . . .  but that wasn't quite it . . .  Don't torture me, Sonya !' 
Sonya threw up her hands. 
'But is this really, really true? Good God, what sort of truth 
is this? Who can believe it? . . .  How could you, how could 
you give away your last penny, and yet commit murder for 
gain? Oh ! . .  .' she exclaimed suddenly. 'That money you 
gave Katerina Ivanovna . . .  that money . . .  Good heavens, 
could that money be . . .  ?' 

396 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'No, Sonya,' he interrupted hastily. 'It was not that money. 
Calm yourself! My mother sent me the money, through a 
merchant, when I was ill, and I gave it away the same day . . .  
Razumikhin saw it . . .  he received it for me, indeed . . .  That 
money was mine, my own, really mine.' 
Sonya listened in bewilderment, trying with all her might 
to understand. 
'But that money . . .  I don't even know whether there was 
any money, though,' he added thoughtfully. 'I took a purse 
from her neck, a chamois-leather one . . .  it was full, tightly 
crammed •
•
.
 but I didn't look inside it; I can't have had time 
•
.
.
 Well, and the things, some sort of studs; and chains-! put 
them all with the purse, in a courtyard on the V oznesensky 
Prospect, buried under a stone, the next morning . . .  They are 
still lying there . .  .' 
Sonya listened with strained attention. 
'But then why . . .  why did you say it was for money, if you 
didn't take anything?' she asked quickly, clutching at straws. 
'I don't know . . .  I had not decided whether I should take 
the money or not,' he said, again apparently deep in thought, 
and then suddenly seemed to recollect himself with a brief, 
hurried smile. 'Oh, what nonsense I've been talking, haven't I ?' 
The thought occurred to Sonya, 'Is he mad?' But she 
suppressed it at once. No, it was ̕omething else. But she could 
understand nothing, nothing of all this. 
'You know, Sonya,' he said with sudden inspiration, 'I'll tell 
you what: if I'd killed simply because I was hungry,' he went 
on, emphasizing every word and looking at her mysteriously 
but frankly, 'then I should be •
•
.
 happy now ! I want you to 
understand that !' 
'And what would it matter to you,' he cried after a moment, 
almost in desperation, 'what could it matter to you if I con­
fessed now that I had done wrong? What could you find in 
such a meaningless triumph over me? Oh, Sonya, was it for 
that I came to you?' 
Sonya seemed about to say something, but remained silent. 
'That is why I wanted you to go with me yesterday, because 
you were all that was left to me !' 
'Where did you want me to go?' asked Sonya timidly. 
'Not to steal or commit murder. Don't be alarmed, it wasn't 
for that,' he smiled caustically. 'We are not alike . . .  And you 
know, Sonya, it is only now, only this moment that I realized 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
397 
where I was asking you to go yesterday. Yesterday, when I 
asked you, I didn't know myself where to. I asked you for one 
reason, I came here for one thing-that you should not leave 
me. You won't leave me, Sonya?' 
She pressed his hand. 
'And why, why did I tell her, why did I reveal it to her?' 
he exclaimed despairingly after a minute, looking at her with 
infinite pain. 'Now you are waiting for me to explain it, Sonya; 
you sit and wait, I see, but what shall I say to you? You will 
not understand a word of it, and will only wear yourself out 
with suffering . . .  because of me ! . . .  See, you are crying and 
embracing me again-why do you embrace me? Because 
I could not carry my burden myself, and have come here to 
put it on other shoulders : if you suffer it will be easier for me! 
And can you love such an infamous wretch?' 
'But don't you suffer too?' cried Sonya. 
Again a wave of the former feeling flooded his heart and 
for a moment softened him. 
'Sonya, I have an evil heart, note that; it explains many 
things. I came here because I am evil. There are people who 
would not have come. But I am a coward and .
•
.
 an infamous 
wretch. But . . .  let it go ! None of this is to the point .
•
.
 I must 
speak now, and I do not know how to begin . .  .' 
He stopped and considered. 
'Oh, we are such different people! . .  .' he cried again. 'We 
don't match. And why, why did I come? I shall never forgive 
myself that!' 
'No, no, it was right to come !' exclaimed Sonya. 'It is better 
that I should know, much better!' 
He looked at her with anguish. 'What if it really is . . . ?' 
he said, as if trying to make up his mind. 'You know, it was 
like this ! This was it: I wanted to make myself a Napoleon, 
and that is why I killed her . . .  Now do you understand?' 
'N-no,' whispered Sonya, na'ively and timidly; 'only . . .  
go on, go on ! I shall understand, I shall understand it all 
inside me !' she implored him. 
'You will understand? Good, we shall see !' 
He was silent, thinking, for a long time. 
'The point is this : on one occasion, I put this question to 
myself: what if, for example, Napoleon had found himself 
in my shoes, with no Toulon, no Egypt, no crossing of 
Mont Blanc, to give his career a start, but, instead of those 

398 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
monumental and glorious things, with simply one ridiculous old 
woman, who must be killed to get money from her trunk (for 
that career of his, you understand ?)-well, would he have 
made up his mind to do it if there was no other way? Would he 
have shrunk from it, because it was so un-monumental and . . .  
and so sinful? Well, I tell you I tormented myself over that 
"problem" for a terribly long time, and I was terribly ashamed 
when at last I realized (quite suddenly) that not only would 
he not shrink, but the idea would never even enter his head 
that it was not monumental •
•
.
 and he would be quite unable 
to understand what there was to shrink from. And if there had 
been no other way open to him, he would have strangled her, 
without giving her a chance to squeak, and without a moment's 
hesitation ! . . .  Well, I also .
•
.
 stopped hesitating .
•
.
 strangled 
her .
.
•
 following the example of my authority •
.
.
 And that is 
exactly how it was ! Does that amuse you? Yes, Sonya, perhaps 
the most amusing thing about all this, is that that is exactly 
how it happened . . .  
' 
Sonya was not at all amused. 
'You had better tell me straight out .
•
.
 without examples,' 
she said, even more timidly, and hardly audibly. 
He turned towards her, looked at her sadly, and took her 
hands. 
'You are right again, Sonya. Of course that's all nonsense, 
practically nothing but idle words ! Look: you know, I suppose, 
that my mother has almost nothing. It happens that my sister 
had a good education, and she found herself condemned to 
scrape up a living as a governess. I was their only hope. I was 
studying; but I could not keep myself at the university and was 
obliged to leave it for a time. Even if things could have dragged 
along like that, it would only have meant that in ten years' 
time, or twelve, I might (if all went well) hope to become a 
teacher or a clerk with a salary of a thousand roubles . .  .' (He 
sounded as though he were repeating a lesson.) 'Meanwhile, 
my mother would have withered away with care and grief, 
and I would never have been able to make her comfortable, 
and my sister •
.
.
 well, even worse things might have befallen 
my sister . . . And who would want to spend his whole life 
passing everything by, turning his back on everything, for­
getting his mother, and humbly resigned to the wrongs done 
to his sister? And for what? In order, having buried them, to 
acquire new responsibilities-a wife and children, and then to 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
399 
leave them also without a penny or a crust of bread? Well •
.
.
 
well, and so I decided, having got hold of the old woman's 
money, to use it for my first years, so that I need not worry my 
mother, to provide for myself at the university, and to launch 
myself after the university-and to do all this on a large scale, 
thoroughly, so as to make a completely new career for myself 
and set out on a new road of independence . . .  Well . . .  well, 
that's all .
.
•
 Well, killing the old woman, of course .
.
•
 that 
was wrong . . .  Well, that's enough !' 
He had dragged himself feebly to the end of his story and 
now hung his head. 
'Oh, you're wrong, you're wrong!' cried Sonya in anguish. 
'How could you . . .  ? No, things are not like that!' 
'You see yourself that it's all wrong! . . .  But I have told 
you the honest truth !' 
'What kind of truth is that? Oh God !' 
'I only killed a louse, Sonya, a useless, vile, pernicious 
louse.' 
'A human being a louse!' 
'Of course I know she wasn't a louse,' he answered with a 
strange look. 'But I am not telling the truth, Sonya,' he added. 
'It is a long time since I have told or known the truth . . .  This 
was all wrong; your judgement is sound there. There were 
quite, quite, quite different reasons ! . . .  I have not talked to 
anybody for a long time, Sonya . . .  Now my head aches 
badly . . .  ' 
His eyes shone with the fire of fever. He was almost beginning 
to wander; an uneasy smile was on his lips. His utter exhaus­
tion was apparent underneath his feverish excitement. Sonya 
could understand his weariness. Her head also was beginning 
to feel dizzy. And he spoke so strangely; some of it seemed clear 
enough, but still . . .  'But how? How? Oh God !' And she 
wrung her hands in despair. 
'No, Sonya, that's all wrong,' he began again, suddenly 
raising his head as though struck by a new turn of thought 
that had aroused him again. 'That's not it ! Rather . . .  sup­
pose (yes, it's much better this way), suppose I am ambitious, 
envious, malicious, vile, vindictive, well . . .  and have perhaps 
a tendency to madness. (Let's have it all at once! They've 
talked of madness before, I know.) I told you just now that 
I couldn't keep myself at the university. But do you know, I 
might perhaps have done it? My mother would have sent me 

400 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
enough to pay my fees and I could probably have earned 
money for boots and clothes and food. There was teaching to 
be got; I was offered half a rouble a lesson. Razumikhin works ! 
But I turned nasty and wouldn't do it. Yes, I turned nasty­
that's the right word ! Then I lurked in a corner like a spider. 
You've been in my wretched little hole, of course, you've seen 
it . . .  But do you know, Sonya, that low ceilings and cramped 
rooms crush the mind and the spirit? Oh, how I hated that 
hole. But all the same I would not leave it. I deliberately 
stayed in it! For days on end I didn't go out; I wouldn't work, 
I wouldn't even eat ; I just lay there. If Nastasya brought me 
food, I ate it; if not, I let the day go by without asking, on 
purpose, out of spite ! I had no light at night, and I lay in 
the dark, because I wouldn't earn the money for candles. 
I should have been studying, but I had sold my books, and the 
dust is still lying inches thick on the notebooks and papers on 
my table. I preferred to lie and think. I spent all the time think­
ing . . .  And all the time I had such dreams, all sorts of strange 
dreams; no need to tell you what they were ! But it was only 
then that I began to fancy that . . .  No, that's not it; I am 
getting it wrong again! You see, I kept on asking myself, "Why 
am I so stupid that when other people are stupid and I know 
for a certainty that they are, I don't even want to be cleverer 
than they?" Then I realized that if we have to wait for every­
body to become clever it will take too long. Then I saw that it 
will never happen, that people don't change, and nobody can 
change them, and it's not worth the trouble of trying! Yes, 
that's it ! That's the law of their nature . . .  The law of their 
nature, Sonya! That's it . . .  And I know now, Sonya, that the 
man of strong and powerful mind and spirit is their master ! 
The man who dares much is right in their eyes. The man who 
tramples on the greatest number of things is their law-giver, 
and whoever is most audacious is most certainly right. So 
things have always been, and so they will remain. Anyone who 
is not blind can see it !' 
Although Raskolnikov still watched Sonya as he said this, 
he had ceased to be concerned whether she understood or not. 
He was completely in the grip of his fever. He felt a sort of 
sombre ecstasy. (It really was a very long time since he had 
talked to anybody.) Sonya understood that this gloomy creed 
had become his faith and his law. 
'I realized then, Sonya,' he went on enthusiastically, 'that 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
401 
power is given only to the man who dares stoop and take it. 
There is only one thing needed, only one-to dare ! I had a 
thought then, for the first time in my life, that nobody had 
ever had before me ! Nobody ! It was suddenly as clear as 
daylight to me : how strange that not one single person passing 
through this nonsensical world has the courage, has ever had 
the courage, to seize it by the tail and fling it to the devil ! I . . .  
I wanted to have the courage, and I killed 
.
.
•
 I only wanted 
to dare, Sonya, that was the only reason !' 
'Oh, stop, stop !' cried Sonya, flinging up her hands, 'You 
have strayed away from God, and God has stricken you, and 
given you over to the devil ! . . .' 
'By the way, Sonya, when I used to lie there in the dark 
thinking of all this, was that the devil confounding me, 
eh?' 
'Be quiet ! Don't laugh, it is blasphemous ! You don't un­
derstand anything at all ! Oh God ! He will never understand 
anything !' 
'Hush, Sonya, I am not laughing. I know myself that it was 
the devil dragging me along. Hush, Sonya, hush !' he repeated 
with gloomy insistence. 'I know all that. I thought it all out 
and whispered it over to myself, while I lay there in the dark 
. . .  I argued it all out with myself, down to the last detail, and 
I know it all, all of it! And I got so tired, so tired, of all that 
rigmarole. I wanted to forget everything and start again, 
Sonya, without all the chatter. You don't think I was foolish 
enough to rush headlong into it, do you? No, I went along 
like a wise man, and that is just what brought me to destruc­
tion ! You don't think, either, that I didn't know, for example, 
that if I began questioning and cross-examining myself about 
whether I had the right to take power, that meant that I 
hadn't any such right? Or that, if I asked myself, "Is a man a 
louse?" it meant that for me he was not, although he might 
be one for a man to whom the question never even occurred, 
and who would march straight ahead without asking any 
questions at all? . . .  If I worried for so long about whether 
Napoleon would have done it or not, it must be because I felt 
clearly that I was not Napoleon . . .  I endured all the torment 
of this endless debating, Sonya, and I longed to shake it off; 
I longed to kill without casuistry, to kill for my own benefit, 
and for that alone ! I would not lie about it even to myself! 
I did not commit murder to help my mother-that 's rubbish ! 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
I did not commit murder in order to use the profit and power I 
gained to make myself a benefactor to humanity. Rubbish ! 
I simply murdered; I murdered for myself, for myself alone, 
and whether I became a benefactor to anybody else, or, like a 
spider, spent the rest of my life catching everybody in my web 
and sucking the life-blood out of them, should have been a 
matter of complete indifference to me at that moment ! 
.
.
•
 
And, most important, it was not money that I needed, Sonya, 
when I killed ; it was not money, so much as something else . . .  
I know all this now . . .  Understand me: perhaps, were I to 
pursue the same course, I should not commit murder again. 
I needed to experience something different, something else was 
pushing me along : what I needed to find out then, and find 
out as soon as possible, was whether I was a louse like every­
body else or a man, whether I was capable of stepping over 
the barriers or not. Dared I stoop and take power or not? 
Was I a trembling creature or had I the right . .  . ' 
'To kill? Had you the right to kill?' Sonya flung up her 
hands again. 
'0-oh, Sonya !' he cried irritably, and was about to retort, 
but then remained scornfully silent. 'Don't interrupt me, 
Sonya ! I wanted to prove only one thing to you, that the devil 
was pulling me along then, and that he made it clear to me 
after that that I had not the right to travel by that road, 
because I am just as much a louse as everybody else ! He 
flouted me, and now I have come to you ! Take me in ! If I 
were not a louse, would I have come to you? Listen : when I 
went to the old woman's that time, it was only to test myself •
•
• 
Understand that !' 
'And you committed murder, murder !' 
'But really, what kind of murder? Is that how murder is 
done? Do people go to murder as I went then? I will tell you 
sometime how I went . . .  Did I murder the old woman? 
I killed myself, not that old creature ! There and then I mur­
dered myself at one blow, for ever ! . . .  But it was the devil 
who killed the old hag, not I . . .  That 's enough, Sonya, 
enough, enough ! Leave me alone !' he exclaimed in a sudden 
convulsion of anguish. 'Leave me alone !' 
He propped his elbows on his knees, and clutched his head 
tightly in his hands. 
'How you are suffering !' broke in a tormented wail from 
Sonya. 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'Well, tell me what to do now,' he begged, raising his head 
and gazing at her with a face monstrously distorted with 
despair. 
'What to do?' she exclaimed, starting up, and her eyes, 
which had been full of tears, began to flash. 'Get up !' (She 
seized him by the shoulder, and he stood up, looking at her 
almost in consternation.) 'Go at once, this instant, stand at the 
cross-roads, first bow down and kiss the earth you have 
desecrated, then bow to the whole world, to the four corners 
of the earth, and say aloud to all the world : "I have done 
murder." Then God will send you life again. Will you go? Will 
you go?' she implored him, shaking all over as if in a fit, 
seizing both his hands and squeezing them tightly in her own, 
with her burning gaze fixed on him. 
He was amazed, thunderstruck, at her sudden exaltation. 
'You mean prison, don't you, Sonya? You think I must 
denounce myself?' he asked gloomily. 
'Accept suffering and achieve atonement through it-that 
is what you must do.' 
'No ! I shall not go to them, Sonya.' 
'But then how can you live? What will you live by?' ex­
claimed Sonya. 'Is it possible now? How can you speak to 
your mother? (Oh, what will become of them now?) But what 
am I saying? Mter all, you have already abandoned your 
mother and your sister. Yes, you have abandoned them already. 
Oh God !' she exclaimed. 'He knows all this himself! You will 
have ceased to be a human being, and how, how, can you live 
then? What will become ofyou?' 
'Don't be such a child, Sonya,' he said quietly. 'In what 
way have I wronged them? Why should I go? What could 
I say to them? All you have been saying is unreal . . .  They 
destroy millions of people themselves, and count it a virtue. 
They are rogues and scoundrels, Sonya ! . 
. 
• I shall not go. 
What should I say-that I committed a murder and dared not 
take the money, but hid it under a stone?' he added, with a 
bitter smile. 'You know they would laugh at me and say, "He 
was a fool not to take it." A fool and a coward ! They wouldn't 
understand anything, Sonya; they are not fit to understand. 
Why should I go? I won't go. Don't be a child, Sonya . .  . ' 
'You will destroy yourself, destroy yourself!' she repeated, 
stretching out her hands to him in desperate supplication. 
'Perhaps I am still misjudging myself,' he remarked sombrely, 

404 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
as though pondering something. 'Perhaps I am still a man and 
not a louse, and I was in too much of a hurry to condemn 
myself . . .  Perhaps I can still put up a fight !' 
There was a supercilious smile on his lips. 
'But to bear such torment ! And for your whole life long ! . .  .' 
'I shall get used to it . . .' he said, sullenly thoughtful. 
'Listen,' he began after a moment, 'Stop crying; it is time to 
come to the point. I came to tell you the police are after me, 
trying to catch me . .  . ' 
'Oh !' shrieked Sonya, terrified. 
''Veil, why do you scream? You wanted me to go to prison; 
why be frightened now? But this is the point: I will not give 
myself up. I will fight them again, and they won't be able to 
do anything. They have no real evidence. Yesterday I was in 
great danger, and I thought I was lost, but things are better 
today. All their evidence cuts both ways; I mean I can turn 
their accusations to my own advantage, do you understand? 
And I shall do it, because I have learnt my lesson now . . .  
But they are sure to put me in prison. If it had not been for 
one accidental circumstance they would certainly have put me 
there today, and perhaps they may still do so before the day 
is over . . .  But that doesn't matter, Sonya : I shall stay there 
for a little and then they will let me go . . .  because they haven't 
one real proof, and they won't have, I promise you. And it 's 
impossible to convict anybody with what they have. Well, 
that's enough •
.
.
 I only wanted you to know . . .  I will try to 
manage things with my mother and sister so as to reassure them 
and so that they won't be frightened. My sister, however, seems 
to be provided for now . . .  consequently my mother is, too .
.
•
 
Well, that's all. But be careful. Will you come and see me in 
prison, when they arrest me?' 
'Oh yes, yes !' 
They sat side by side, sad and weary, like shipwrecked 
sailors on a deserted shore. He looked at Sonya, and thought 
how much love she had for him, and suddenly it seemed 
strangely painful and burdensome to be so loved. Yes, that 
was a strange and terrible feeling ! Going to Sonya's, he had 
felt that she was his only hope, his only way out; he had thought 
he could lay down a part of his suffering, at least, but now, 
when her whole heart turned towards him, he was suddenly 
conscious that his unhappiness was immeasurably greater than 
before. 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'Sonya,' he said, 'better not come and see me when I am 
in prison.' 
Sonya did not answer; she was in tears. Several minutes 
passed. 
'Do you wear a cross?' she asked unexpectedly, as though 
suddenly remembering something. 
He did not understand the question at first. 
'No, I suppose you don't. Take this cypress-wood one. I 
have another, of brass, that was Lizaveta's. Lizaveta and 
I made an exchange : she gave me her cross and I gave her my 
ikon. Now I shall begin to wear Lizaveta's, and give this one 
to you. Take it . . .  it is mine ! It is my own, you know !' she 
urged him. 'We are going to suffer together, we will bear the 
cross together ! . . . ' 
'Give it to me,' said Raskolnikov. He did not want to 
distress her. But he drew back at once the hand he had 
extended for the cross. 
'Not now, Sonya. Better give it me afterwards,' he added 
to reassure her. 
'Yes, yes, that will be better, much better,' she took him up 
enthusiastically. 'When you accept your suffering, you shall 
put it on. You will come to me, and I will put it on you, we 
will pray, and then we will go.' 
At this moment somebody knocked three times at the door. 
:sofya Semenovna, may I come in?' politely asked a familiar 
VOICe. 
Sofya rushed to the door in terror. Mr. Lebezyatnikov's 
blonde head looked into the room. 
C H A P T E R  V 
LEBEZY A TN I K O V  looked very anxious. 
'I have come to you, Sofya Semenovna. Excuse me . . . I 
thought I should find you here' (he turned abruptly to Raskol­
nikov) ; 'that is, I didn 't think anything •
.
•
 like that . . .  but 
I thought •
.
.
 Katerina Ivanovna has gone out of her mind,' 
he blurted out to Sonya, turning away from Raskolnikov. 
Sonya screamed. 
'I mean, it looks like it, at any rate. However . . .  We don 't 
know what to do, that 's the point ! She came back . . .  I think 
she'd been turned out of somewhere, and perhaps beaten . . .  at 
least, I think so . . .  She had run to Semen Zakharovich's chief, 

C RIME AND PUNISHMENT 
but he wasn't at home; he was dining at some other general's 
. . .  Imagine, she rushed off at once to where they were dining 
.
•
.
 to this other general's, and, imagine, she insisted on having 
Semen Zakharovich's chief called out, though it seems he was 
actually at table. You can imagine what happened. She was 
turned out, of course, and she herself says that she abused him 
and threw something at him. One may very well imagine it 
. . .  and why she wasn't arrested . . .  I don't know. Now she is 
telling everybody about it, including Amalia Ivanovna, but 
it is hard to understand her because she is shouting and throw­
ing herself about violently . . .  Oh, yes, she is clamouring that 
since everybody has abandoned her now she will take the 
children and go out into the streets with a barrel-organ, and the 
children shall sing and dance, and she will as well, and collect 
money, and every day they will go under the general's window 
. . .  "Let them see well-born children, whose father was a civil 
servant, going about the streets as beggars," says she. She is 
beating all the children and making them cry. She is teaching 
Lenya to sing "The Little Hut", and the little boy to dance, and 
Polina Mikhaylovna as well. She is tearing all their clothes and 
making them little caps, like actors. She herself is going to carry 
a basin and beat it instead of music. She won't listen to any­
thing . . .  Imagine what it's like ! It is simply impossible !' 
Lebezyatnikov would have gone on even longer, but Sonya, 
who had been listening almost without drawing a breath, 
snatched up her cloak and hat and hurried out of the room, 
putting them on as she ran. Raskolnikov went out after her, 
and Lebezyatnikov followed him. 
'She has certainly gone mad !' he said to Raskolnikov, as they 
came out into the street, 'only I didn't want to frighten Sofya 
Semenovna, so I said "it looks like it", but there is no doubt 
about it. They say that in consumption there are tubercles that 
attack the brain ; unfortunately, I don't know anything about 
medicine. However, I tried to convince her, butshewon't listen 
to anything.' 
'You talked to her about tubercles ?' 
'Well, not exactly. Besides, she wouldn't have understood. 
But what I mean is this : if you convince a man logically that he 
has nothing to cry for, he will stop crying. That's clear. Or 
don't you think he will stop?' 
'That would make living too easy,' answered Raskolnikov. 
'No, excuse me, excuse me. Of course, it is rather hard for 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
Katerina Ivanovna to understand ; but do you know that in 
Paris they have been conducting serious experiments on the 
possibility of curing the mad by the use of nothing but logical 
persuasion ?  A professor there; who died recently, a serious scien­
tist, thought they could be cured in this way. His basic idea was 
that there is no specific organic disorder in lunatics, but that 
madness is, so to speak, a logical mistake, a mistake of judgement, 
an incorrect view of things. He would gradually prove the 
patient wrong, and, just imagine, they say he achieved results. 
But as he was using douches at the same time, the results of 
this form of treatment are, of course, subject to doubt . . .  At 
least, it would seem so . . .  ' 
Raskolnikov had not been listening for some time. As they 
came level with his house he nodded to Lebezyatnikov and 
turned in at the gate. Lebezyatnikov started, looked round, and 
hurried on. 
Raskolnikov went into his little room and stood in the middle 
of it. Why had he returned here? He looked around at the 
discoloured, tattered wallpaper, the dust, his narrow bed . . .  
From the courtyard came the sound of sharp continuous knock­
ing; somewhere something was being hammered in, a nail, 
perhaps . . .  He went to the window, stood on tiptoes and for a 
long time gazed into the yard with a look of extraordinary 
attentiveness. But the yard was empty and whoever was knock­
ing was invisible. In the wing on the left there were open win­
dows here and there; pots of sickly geraniums stood on the 
window-sills. Linen was hanging outside the windows . . .  He 
knew all this by heart. He turned away and sat down on the 
sofa. 
Never, never before, had he felt so terribly alone ! 
Yes, once more he felt that he really hated Sonya, especially 
now when he had made her more unhappy. Why had he gone 
to plead for her tears? Why did he feel he must spoil her life? 
How vile ! 
'I will remain alone !' he said with sudden decision. 'She 
shall not come to the prison ! ' 
Five minutes later he raised his head with a strange smile. 
The idea that had suddenly come to him was also strange : 
'Perhaps it really would be better to go to Siberia.' 
He never knew how long he sat in his room, with vague 
thoughts crowding into his head. Suddenly the door opened 
and Avdotya Romanovna came in. She stood still and looked 

408 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
at him from the threshold, as he had done not long before at 
Sonya, then she came right in and sat down facing him on the 
chair she had sat in the day before. He looked at her silently, 
almost vacantly. 
'Don't be angry, brother. I have only come for a moment,' 
said Dunya. She looked thoughtful but not stern. Her eyes were 
clear and tranquil. He saw that she too had come to him with 
love. 
'Brother, I know everything, everything, now that Dmitri 
Prokofich has told me all about it and explained it to me. You 
are being persecuted and harassed because of a stupid and 
infamous suspicion . . .  Dmitri Prokofich tells me that there is 
no danger at all, and that you are wrong to distress yourself so. 
I don't think so, and I fully understand that you are filled with 
indignation, and that this indignation may leave its mark on 
you for ever. I am afraid it may. I don't judge you, I dare not, 
for giving us up, and please forgive me for reproaching you 
before. I can feel myself that if I had had so great a trouble I 
should have wanted to leave everybody too. I shall not tell 
mother anything about this, but I shall keep talking to her about 
you, and I shall tell her from you that you will come to us very 
soon. Don't worry about her, I will make her mind easy, but 
you must not upset her again; you must come, even if only 
once. Remember, she is your mother ! Now I have only come 
to say' (Dunya began to get up) 'that if you should happen to 
need me, or need .
•
.
 all my life, or anything . . .  you must call 
me and I will come. Good-bye !' 
She turned abruptly and made for the door. 
'Dunya !' Raskolnikov stopped her, got up, and went to her. 
'Dmitri Prokofich Razumikhin is a very good chap.' 
Dunya blushed very slightly. 
'Well?' she asked after a moment's pause. 
'He is a practical and hard-working man, honest and capable 
of true love . . .  Good-bye, Dunya.' 
Dunya had flushed red ; then she became anxious. 
'What is this, brother? Are we really parting for ever, that 
you should make such . . .  testamentary dispositions?' 
'It doesn 't matter . . .  Good-bye.' 
He turned away from her and walked to the window. She 
stood there a little longer, looking at him uneasily, and went 
out full of alarm. 
No, he did not feel cold towards her. There had been one 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
409 
moment, at the very last, when he had longed to hold her close 
in his arms, say good-bye to her, and even tell her, but he could 
not make up his mind even to touch her hand. 
'Mterwards she would perhaps shudder to remember that I 
embraced her now, and say that I stole her kiss !' 
'And will she endure, or not?' he added to himself after some 
minutes. 'No, she won 't; people like her are not made for 
endurance ! They can never stand things . .  .' 
He thought of Sonya. 
Cooler air blew in through the window. The light outside 
was no longer so bright. He snatched up his cap and went out. 
Naturally, he could not now take any care of his health, nor 
did he wish to do so. But all this ceaseless terror and mental 
turmoil could not be without effect. And if he was not even 
now lying in a raging fever it was perhaps just because his 
ceaseless inner trouble kept him for the time being conscious 
and on his feet, as it were, artificially. 
He wandered aimlessly. The sun was going down. A particu­
lar sort of dejection had recently begun to show itself in him. 
There was nothing violent or poignant about it, but it carried 
with it a premonition of perpetuity, weary, endless years of 
cold deadening depression, a presage of an eternity on 'a hand 's­
breadth of ground'. This feeling usually began to distress him 
even more towards evening. 
'With such stupid, purely physical, infirmities, that seem to 
depend on the sunset or something, how can one help doing 
stupid things ? It was bad enough going to Sonya, but Dunya !' 
he muttered disgustedly. 
Somebody hailed him. He looked round; Lebezyatnikov 
rushed to him. 
'Imagine, I have been to your room. I have been looking 
for you. Imagine, she had carried out her intention and taken 
the children away! Sofya Semenovna and I had hard work 
finding them. She is banging a frying-pan and making the 
children sing and dance. The children are crying. They stop 
at crossings and in front of shops. A lot of stupid people are 
following them about. Come along.' 
'And Sonya?' asked Raskolnikov anxiously, as he hurried 
after Lebezyatnikov. 
'She's raving mad. Not Sofya Semenovna, I mean, but 
Katerina Ivanovna; however, Sofya Semenovna is in a frenzy 
too. But Katerina Ivanovna is quite beside herself. I tell you, 

410 
C R IM E  AND PUNISHMENT 
she is definitely mad. They will be taken to the police. You can 
imagine what effect that will have . . .  She is on the Canal now, 
near the Voznesensky Bridge, quite close to Sofya Semenovna's. 
It's not far.' 
On the Canal bank, not very far from the bridge, and not 
two houses away from where Sonya lived, there was a knot of 
people, mostly street urchins. Katerina lvanovna's hoarse 
broken voice could be heard from as far away as the bridge. 
And really it was a strange spectacle, calculated to excite the 
curiosity of a street crowd. Katerina lvanovna, in her old dress 
and the green shawl, wearing a battered straw hat with the 
brim bent out of shape at one side, really was in a state of abso­
lute frenzy. She was tired and gasping for breath. Her ex­
hausted, consumptive face looked more full of suffering than 
ever (indeed, in the open air and the sunshine a consumptive 
always appears worse and uglier than indoors) ; but she was 
still in the same excited state and growing more exasperated 
with every minute. She kept dashing at the children, shouting 
at them, urging them on, telling them in front of everybody 
how to dance and what to sing, beginning to explain why all 
this was necessary, growing desperate over their inability to 
understand, beating them . . .  Then, breaking off, she would 
rush back to the crowd; if she saw anybody slightly better­
dressed stopping to look, she would immediately begin to 
explain to him that this, in her words, was what 'children from 
a respectable, one might even say aristocratic, home' had been 
reduced to. If she heard laughter or a provocative witticism 
from among the crowd, she would immediately attack the 
offenders and begin to wrangle with them. Some of the crowd 
were laughing, others were shaking their heads, but they all 
looked anxiously at the madwoman with her terrified children. 
The frying-pan Lebezyatnikov had spoken of was not there, 
at least Raskolnikov did not see it; but instead of banging on 
a frying-pan Katerina Ivanovna beat time by clapping her 
wasted hands when she made Polechka sing or Lenya and Kolya 
dance; she even tried to join in the singing herself, but each 
time her torturing cough made her break off at the second note, 
and she would lapse into despair again, curse her cough, and 
even weep. The frightened wailing of Lenya and Kolya made 
her angrier than anything else. There had really been some 
attempt at dressing th.e children up like street-singers. The 
little boy had on a turban of some red and white material, to 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
41 I 
make him look like a Turk. There had not been a costume for 
Lenya, and she was only wearing a red knitted worsted cap (or 
rather night-cap) of the late Semen Zakharovich's, with a 
broken piece of white ostrich feather stuck in it which had be­
longed to Katerina I vanovna's grandmother and been kept 
until now in a trunk as a family treasure. Polechka was wearing 
her usual clothes. She was watching her mother timidly and 
with great embarrassment, not leaving her side, and trying to 
hide her own tears; she guessed at her mother's madness and 
kept looking uneasily about. The street and the crowd terrified 
her. Sonya was following Katerina Ivanovna about, crying 
and begging her to go home. But Katerina Ivanovna was not 
to be persuaded. 
'Stop it, Sonya, stop it !' she shouted in rapid, hurried tones, 
panting and coughing. 'You don't know what you are asking; 
you might be a child ! I have told you that I shan't go back to 
that drunken German woman's. Let everybody see, let all St. 
Petersburg see, how a gentleman's children have to beg, though 
their father served all his life in faithfulness and truth and, one 
might say, died in the service.' (Katerina Ivanovna had al­
ready managed to create this legend for herself and believed in 
it blindly.) 'Let that worthless little wretch of a general see. 
And you are being silly, Sonya; how are we to eat now, tell me 
that? We have been a trouble to you long enough ; I won't have 
any more of it! Oh, Rodion Romanovich, it's you !' she cried, 
catching sight of Raskolnikov and rushing towards him. 'Please 
explain to this silly girl that this is the best thing we could do ! 
Even organ-grinders get a living, and everybody can tell at once 
tl1at we are different. They will see that we are poor orphans of 
good family who have been reduced to beggary. And that little 
wretch of a general will lose his job, you '11 see ! We shall be 
under his windows every day, and when the Emperor drives 
past I shall fall on my knees, and put them all in front of me 
and point to them and say, 'Father, protect them.' He is the 
father of orphans, he is merciful, he will protect them, you 'll 
see, and that wretched little general . . .  Lenya, tenez-vous droite! 
Kolya, you must dance again at once. What are you snivelling 
for? Snivelling again ! But what on earth are you frightened of, 
little idiot? Oh God, what am I to do with them, Rodion 
Romanovich? If you knew how stupid they are ! What can you 
do with children like that? . .  .' 
And,almostcrying herself (which did not hinder her incessant, 

4! 2  
CRIME A N D  PUNISHMENT 
uninterrupted flood of words), she pointed to the whimper­
ing children. Raskolnikov tried to persuade her to go back, 
and even, thinking to work on her vanity, told her that it was 
not fitting for her to wander about the streets like an organ­
grinder, since she was planning to be the principal of a boarding­
school for young ladies . . .  
'Boarding-school ! Ha, ha, ha ! The far-away hills are blue !' 
cried Katerina Ivanovna, her laughter bringing on a fit of 
coughing. 'No, Rodion Romanovich, the day-dreams are over ! 
Everybody has abandoned us ! . . . And that wretched little 
general . . .  You know, Rodion Romanovich, I threw an ink­
well at him. It was standing by the visitors' book on the table 
in the ante-room. I signed my name, threw it at him and ran 
away. Oh, the vile scoundrels ! But I don't care; now I shall 
feed the children myself, I won't be beholden to anybody ! We 
have burdened her long enough !' (She pointed to Sonya.) 
'Polechka, how much have you got? Show me ! What, only two 
copecks? Mean creatures ! They won't give us anything, they 
only run after us with their tongues hanging out ! Well, what is 
that fool laughing at?' (pointing at one of the crowd) . 'It's all 
because Kolka is so stupid; he 's a nuisance ! What's the matter, 
Polechka? Speak French; parlez-moifranfais. Mter all, I have 
taught you some, you know a few sentences ! . . . Otherwise how 
is anyone to tell you are well-educated children of good family 
and not like all the other organ-grinders? We're not giving 
some sort of Punch andJudyshow in the street, but singing nice 
drawing-room songs . . .  Oh, yes, what are we going to sing? You 
keep on interrupting me, and we . . .  you see, Rodion Romano­
vich, we stopped here to choose what to sing-something Kolya 
can dance to as well . . . because, as you may imagine, we 
couldn't prepare any of this beforehand ; we must agree on 
something and rehearse it all thoroughly, and then we shall go 
to the N cvsky Prospect, where there are far more society people, 
and they will notice us at once. Lenya knows "The Little Hut" 
. . .  but it's always "The Little Hut"-everybody sings it ! We 
must sing something much more genteel •
.
.
 Well, what have 
you thought of, Polya? You might help your mother ! My 
memory, my memory has gone, or I should have remembered 
something ! At any rate don't let us sing "A Hussar leaning on 
his sword" ! Ah, let us sing "Cinq sous" in French ! I taught it you, 
you know. And the main thing is that it is in French, so people 
will see at once that you are a gentleman's children, and that 

C RIME AND P UNISHMENT 
will be much more pathetic . . .  We might even sing "Mal­
borough s'en va-t-en guerre", because that's a real children's song 
and it is used in all aristocratic houses as a lullaby : 
Nfalborough s' en va-t-en guerre 
Ne sait quand reviendra .
•
 . '  
she began singing . . .  'But no, "Cinqsous" would be better. Now, 
Kolya, hands on hips, quickly, and you, Lenya, must go round 
in the opposite direction, and Polechka and I will sing and clap 
our hands. 
Cinq sous, cinq sous 
Pour monter notre menage .
•
 . '  
(She went off into a fit of coughing.) 'Put your dress straight, 
Polechka, the shoulders have slipped down,' she observed be­
tween coughs, panting. 'It is specially necessary for you to look 
nice and tidy now, so that everybody can see you are a gentle­
man's children. I said at the time that the bodice ought to be cut 
longer, and made in two pieces. Then you had to put in your 
advice, Sonya, "Shorter, shorter still", till it has made the child 
look perfectly dreadful •
.
.
 Now you're all crying again ! What 
is wrong, you little sillies? Well, Kolya, begin, quickly ! Quickly, 
quickly-oh, what an impossible child . . .  
Cinq sous, cinq sous-
Another policeman ! Well, what do you want?' 
A policeman was in fact pushing his way through the crowd. 
But at the same time a gentleman in undress uniform and a 
long cloak, a highly respectable official with an order round 
his neck (which was very gratifying to Katerina Ivanovna and 
had some influence on the policeman), came up and silently 
gave Katerina Ivanovna a green three-rouble note. His face 
expressed sincere compassion. Katerina Ivanovna accepted the 
money and bowed politely, even ceremoniously. 
'I thank you, my dear sir,' she began, in a rather high-flown 
manner. 'The reasons which have prompted us .
•
.
 take the 
money, Polechka. You see, noble and generous people, who are 
ready to give immediate help to a poor gentlewoman fallen on 
evil days, do exist. You see before you, my dear sir, orphans of 
good family who, one might even say, have aristocratic con­
nexions . . .  And that wretched little general sat there eating 
grouse •
.
.
 and stamping with impatience because I was dis­
turbing him . . .  "Your excellency,'' I said, "protect the poor 
orphans, because you knew the late Semen Zakharovich very 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
well," I said, "and because his own daughter was basely ma­
ligned on the day of his death by the meanest of scoundrels . . .  " 
There's that policeman again ! Protect me !' she cried to the 
official. 'Why is that policeman creeping up to me? We have 
only just come here to escape one of them on Meshchanskaya 
Street . . .  Well, what do you ;want, fool?' 
'This is not allowed in the streets. Please don't create a 
disturbance.' 
'It 's you who are making the disturbance ! It is just the same 
as ifl were taking a barrel-organ ! What business is it of yours?' 
'For a barrel-organ you have to have a licence, and you are 
doing it on your own, and you are causing a crowd to collect. 
What is your address?' 
'What licence?' wailed Katerina lvanovna. 'I buried my 
husband today. Why should I need a licence?' 
'Madam, madam, compose yourself,' the official was begin­
ning. 'Come, I will accompany you . . .  you ought not to be here 
in the crowd . . .  you are ill . . .  ' 
'My dear sir, my dear sir, you don't know anything !' cried 
Katerina I vanovna. 'We will go to the N evsky Prospect. Sonya, 
Sonya ! Where is she? She's crying, too ! What is the matter with 
you all? Kolya, Lenya, where are you going?' she cried out in 
sudden fright. 'Silly children ! Kolya, Lenya ! Where are they 
. 
? 
' 
gomg . . . .  
Kolya and Lenya, already terrified out of their wits by the 
crowd and their mother's crazy tricks, had suddenly, when they 
saw that the policeman wanted to take them away somewhere, 
seized each other's little hands and, as if by agreement, run off 
together. Poor Katerina Ivanovna, weeping and wailing, set 
off in pursuit. It was an ugly and pitiful sight, as she ran weep­
ing and gasping for breath. Sonya and Polechka hurried after 
her. 
'Bring them back, Sonya, bring them back ! Oh, naughty un­
grateful children ! . . .  Polya ! Catch them . . .  It is for you I . . .  ' 
She stumbled as she ran, and fell. 
'She 's hurt ! She's bleeding ! Oh God !' cried Sonya, stooping 
over her. 
Everybody ran up and crowded round. Raskolnikov and 
Lebezyatnikov were among the first to reach her, and the 
official also hurried up, with the policeman behind him, mut­
tering, 'Oh dear !' with a despairing wave of his hand, as he 
foresaw that this would be a troublesome business. 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
415 
'Be off! Be off!' he said, trying to drive away the people 
crowding round. 
'She is dying !' shouted one. 
'She's gone mad !' said another. 
'Lord preserve us !' said a woman, crossing herself. 'Have they 
caught the little boy and the little girl? There they are; they 
are bringing them. The older one has got them . . .  Silly little 
things !' 
But when they looked more carefully at Katerina Ivanovna, 
they saw that she had not cut herself on a stone, as Sonya 
thought, but that the blood staining the roadway crimson had 
gushed out ofher throat. 
'I know this kind of thing, I've seen it before,' murmured the 
official to Raskolnikov and Lebezyatnikov. 'That 's consump­
tion; the blood flows out like that and chokes them. I saw it 
happen with one of my relatives not long ago-three-quarters 
of a pint of blood, all of a sudden . . .  But what shall we do? She 
is dying.' 
'This way, this way, to my room !' begged Sonya. 'I live 
here ! . . .  In that house there, the second from here . . .  Bring her 
there, quickly, quickly !' She rushed from one to another. 'Send 
for a doctor . . .  Oh God !' 
This was decided on, thanks to the efforts of the official, and 
even the policeman helped to carry Katerina Ivanovna. She 
was carried almost lifeless into Sonya's room and laid on the 
bed. The flow of blood had not stopped, but she had begun to 
come to herself. Besides Sonya, there came into the room 
Raskolnikov, Lebezyatnikov, the official-looking gentleman, 
and the policeman, · after he had driven away the rest of the 
crowd, several of whom had accompanied them to the very 
door. Kolya and Lenya, trembling and crying, were led in by 
Polechka. Some of the Kapernaumovs had come in as well : 
the tailor himself, a lame, crooked, odd-looking man with 
bristly hair and whiskers standing on end, his wife, with an 
eternally scared look, and several of their children with open 
mouths and faces set in expressions of perpetual astonishment. 
Among all these, Svidrigaylov suddenly made his appearance. 
Raskolnikov gazed at him in surprise, not understanding where 
he had come from and not remembering to have seen him in 
the crowd. 
There was talk of a doctor and a priest. The official gentle­
man, although he whispered to Raskolnikov that a doctor 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
could do nothing now, ordered one to be sent for. Kapernau­
mov went himself. 
Meanwhile Katerina Ivanovna had regained her breath and 
the bleeding had stopped for a time. Her sick eyes looked in­
tently and penetratingly at Sonya, who, pale and trembling, 
was wiping the drops of sweat from her forehead ; at last she 
asked them to raise her. They sat her up on the bed, supporting 
her on both sides. 
'Where are the children?' she asked faintly. 'Have you 
brought them, Polya? Oh, you silly children ! . . .  Why did you 
run away? . . .  oh !' 
Her parched lips were still flecked with blood. Her eyes 
moved, looking round the room. 
'So this is how you live, Sonya ! I have never once been here 
. . .  now fate has brought me . .  .' 
She looked at her in distress. 
'We have been a drain on you, Sonya . . . Polya, Lenya, 
Kolya, come here . . .  Well, here they are, Sonya, all of them; 
take them . . .  from my hands into yours . . .  I have had enough ! 
. . .  The ball is over !' Cough ! ' . . .  Put me down, let me at least 
die in peace . . .' 
They laid her down again on the pillow. 
'What? The priest? . . .  I don't want him . . .  you haven't 
got a rouble to spare for him . . .  I have no sins . . .  God ought 
to pardon me without the priest's help . . .  He knows how I 
have suffered ! . . .  And if He doesn't pardon me, so much the 
worse ! . .  .' 
An increasing delirium possessed her. At times she shud­
dered and moved her eyes, and recognized them all for a mo­
ment, but then the delirium seized her again. Her breathing 
was hoarse and laboured ; there was a sort of rattling in her 
throat. 
'I said to him, "Your excellency !" . .  .' she cried out, gasping 
after every word. 'That Amalia Ludwigovna . . .  Oh, Lenya, 
Kolya ! hands on hips, quickly, quickly ! Glissez, glissez, pas-de­
Basque! Stamp ! 
.
.
•
 Be graceful ! 
Du hast Diamanten und Perlen .
.
•
 
What comes next? That 's what we should sing . . .  
Du hast die schiinsten Augen. 
Miidchen, was willst du mehr? 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
41 7 
Well, what next ! Was willst du mehr?-the things he invents, the 
blockhead ! . . .  Ah, yes, here 's another: 
In the mid-day heat, in the Vale of Daghestan . . .  
Ah, how I loved it . . .  I used to worship that song, Polechka . . .  
You know, your father . . .  used to sing it before we were mar-
ried . . .  Oh, happy days ! . . .  That 's what we must sing ! Now, 
how, how does it .
•
.
 there, I've forgotten it .
.
•
 Remind me ! 
How does it go?' 
She was extremely agitated and struggling to raise herself. 
At last, in a terrible, hoarse, broken voice she began to sing, 
crying out and panting at every word with a look of growing 
terror : 
'In the mid-day heat ! . . .  in the Vale ! .
. . of Daghestan ! . . .  
With a bullet in my breast ! . . .  
Your excellency !' she shrieked suddenly, with a heart-rending 
wail and a gush of tears, 'protect the orphans ! You have known 
the hospitality of the late Semen Zakharovich •
•
.
 One might 
even say aristocratic ! . .  .' Cough ! She shuddered, coming sud­
denly to herself, and looked round at them all with a sort of 
terror, but at once recognized Sonya. 'Sonya, Sonya !' she said 
gently and tenderly, as though surprised to see her there. 'Sonya, 
dear, are you here, too?' 
They raised her up again. 
'Enough ! .
•
.
 The time has come ! Good-bye, poor wretch ! . . .  
This poor beast has been driven to death ! . . .  I am finished !' 
she cried, full of despair and hatred, and her head fell heavily 
back on the pillow. 
She had lost consciousness again, but this last phase did not 
last long. Her bloodless, yellow, wasted face dropped back, her 
mouth opened, her legs straightened convulsively. She drew 
a deep, heavy sigh and died. 
Sonya fell upon the body, with her arms about it and her 
head pressed against the wasted breast, and lay there motion­
less. Polechka fell at her mother's feet and kissed them, sobbing. 
Kolya and Lenya did not realize what had happened, but felt 
that it was something terrible. Each with both hands round the 
other's shoulders, they stared at one another and then, all at 
once, both together, opened their mouths and began to scream. 
They were still in their costumes, one in his turban, the other in 
the night-cap with the ostrich feather. 

41 8  
C R I M E  A N D  PUNISHMENT 
How could the 'Certificate of Merit' have made its appear­
ance on the bed, close to Katerina Ivanovna? It lay there by 
the pillow ; Raskolnikov saw it. 
He walked to the window. Lebezyatnikov hurried over to 
him. 
'She is dead !' he said. 
'Rodion Romanovich, I must say two words to you,' said 
Svidrigaylov, approaching. Lebezyatnikov instantly gave place 
to him and delicately effaced himself. Svidrigaylov drew the 
astonished Raskolnikov still farther into the corner. 
'I will take all the arrangements, that is for the funeral and 
the rest of it, on myself. You know, it takes money, and I told 
you I had more than enough. I will put these two little fledg­
lings and Polechka into some good institution for orphans, and 
settle fifteen hundred roubles on each of them for when they 
come of age, so that Sofya Semenovna may be quite easy about 
them. And I will pull her out of the mire, because she is a good 
girl, isn't she? Well, then, will you tell Avdotya Romanovna 
that this is how I am using her ten thousand ?' 
'What is the object of all this generosity ?' asked Raskolnikov. 
'Ah, you're a mistrustful person !' laughed Svidrigaylov. 
'You know I told you I had no use for that money. But will you 
not admit that it can be done simply out of humanity? Mter 
all, she wasn't a "louse" ' (he pointed with his finger towards 
the corner where the dead woman was), 'like some old money­
lender. Well, you will agree, "Is Luzhin indeed to go on 
living and doing mischief, or is she to die?" And if I don 't 
help, probably "Polechka will take the same path to the same 
end" . . .  
' 
He said all this with an expression of cheerful, insinuating 
slyness, and without taking his eyes from Raskolnikov. Raskol­
nikov paled and grew cold as he heard the very expressions he 
had used to Sonya. He recoiled and looked wildly at Svidri­
gaylov. 
'How . . . do you know?' he whispered, hardly daring to 
breathe. 
'Why, I'm staying at Madam Resslich's, just the other side 
of the wall here. The Kapernaumovs are here, and Madam 
Resslich, an old and most devoted friend of mine, is there. We 
are neighbours.' 
'You?' 
'Yes, me,' went on Svidrigaylov, shaking with laughter. 'And 

C RIME AND PUNISHMENT 
I can honestly assure you, my dear Rodion Romanovich, that 
you interested me strangely. You know I told you we should 
come together-! foretold it; well, now we have done so. And 
you shall see how easy-going I am. You shall see that it is 
possible to live with me •
. •
 
' 

PART S I X  
CHAPTER I 
A STRANGE time began for Raskolnikov; it was as if a mist had 
fallen round him and enclosed him in unescapable and dreary 
solitude. Remembering this time afterwards, when it had long 
gone by, he surmised that his consciousness had become, as it 
were, blunted, and that this state lasted, with some intermis­
sions, until the final catastrophe. He was firmly convinced 
thathehad beenmistaken aboutmanythings then ; for example, 
the time and sequence of several happenings. At least, remem­
bering afterwards, and trying to explain his recollections to 
himself, he learnt a good deal about himself, with the help of 
other people's testimony. He would confuse one event with 
another, for example; he would think of one thing as a conse­
quence of something else which had occurred only in his ima­
gination. At times he fell a prey to painful and tormenting 
anxiety, which sometimes grew to a panic fear. But he remem­
bered also that there were moments, hours, perhaps even days, 
of complete and overwhelming apathy, which formed, as it were, 
the reverse side of his previous terror, an apathy like the sick 
indifference of a dying man. In general, during these last days, 
he seemed to be trying to avoid a full and clear understanding 
of his position; there were some facts, urgently demanding 
immediate consideration, that he found particularly burden­
some; and how glad he would have been to get free from certain 
anxieties, although, had he succeeded in neglecting them, it 
would have threatened his complete and inevitable ruin. 
Svidrigaylov especially worried him; it might almost be said 
that he could not get past Svidrigaylov. From the time of those 
ominous and explicit words of Svidrigaylov's in Sonya's room, 
at the moment of Katerina Ivanovna's death, it was as if the 
normal flow of his thoughts had received a check. But although 
this new factor of the situation made him extremely uneasy, he 
was in no hurry to seek an explanation of it. At times, finding 
himself in a remote and solitary part of the town, alone at a 
table in some miserable public house, deep in thought, and 
hardly knowing how he came there, he would suddenly remem-

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
42 1  
her Svidrigaylov; i t  would become clearly and alarmingly evi­
dent to him that he must come to terms with this man as soon 
as possible, and settle with him finally, as far as he could. Once, 
walking outside the city, he even fancied that he was waiting 
for Svidrigaylov and that they had made an appointment to 
meet there. Another time he woke up before dawn and found 
himself lying on the ground among some bushes, hardly know­
ing how he had wandered there. In the few days after Katerina 
Ivanovna's death he actually did meet Svidrigaylov two or 
three times, for a very short time, and always in Sonya's room, 
where he had gone without any clear object. They had ex­
changed a few short words, never touching on the capital point, 
as though they had come to an agreement not to mention it for 
the time being. Katerina Ivanovna's body was still lying there 
in her coffin. Svidrigaylov was making the funeral arrange­
ments and was very busy. Sonya was also very busy. At their 
last meeting Svidrigaylov told Raskolnikov that he had brought 
the question of Katerina Ivanovna's children to a conclusion, 
and a successful one; that owing to his connexions he had been 
able to find people with whose help all three orphans could be 
placed at once in very suitable institutions; and that the money 
settled on them had also helped considerably, since it was much 
easier to find places for orphans who had some capital than for 
those who were destitute. He said something about Sonya as 
well, promised to call before long on Raskolnikov, and men­
tioned that 'he would like to ask his advice; he had something 
that he very much wanted to talk over . .  .' This conversation 
took place in the corridor, near the stairs. Svidrigaylov looked 
earnestly into Raskolnikov's eyes and suddenly, after a pause, 
lowered his voice and asked : 'Why, what is it, Rodion Romano­
vich? You aren't well ! Really ! You look and listen, but you 
don't seem to understand. Pull yourself together. Look, let us 
have a talk; but, unfortunately, I have so much business to 
attend to, both of my own and of other people's . . .  Ah, Rodion 
Romanovich,' he added suddenly, 'every man needs air, air, 
air ! . . .  More than anything !' 
He stood aside to allow a priest and a sacristan, who were 
coming up the stairs, to pass. They were coming to say prayers 
for the dead. This they did punctually twice a day, by Svidri­
gaylov's orders. Svidrigaylov went on his way. Raskolnikov 
stood and thought for a moment, then followed the priest to 
Sonya's room. 

CRIME AND P UN1SHMENT 
He stood at the door. The service began, quiet, decorous, 
melancholy. From his childhood, the idea of death and the 
consciousness of the presence of death had oppressed him and 
filled him with mystic awe; besides, it was a long time since he 
had heard the mass for the dead. There was something else 
here, also, something terrible and disquieting. He looked at 
the children; they were all kneeling by the coffin, and Polechka 
was crying. Behind them, weeping softly and almost timidly, 
Sonya was praying. 'These last few days she hasn't once 
looked at me or spoken a word to me,' thought Raskolnikov 
suddenly. The room was bright with sunlight, the incense rose 
in clouds ; the priest read the Requiem t£ternam. Raskolnikov 
stayed to the end. As he blessed them and took his leave, the 
priest looked round rather strangely. After the service Raskol­
nikov went up to Sonya. She grasped both his hands and leaned 
her head on his shoulder for a moment. The brief gesture 
bewildered Raskolnikov; it seemed strange. What? Not the 
slightest repugnance, no trace ofloathing for him, not the least 
tremor of her hands? It showed infinite self-humiliation ;  so, at 
least, he understood it. Sonya said nothing. Raskolnikov pressed 
her hand and went out. He felt terribly over-burdened. If it 
had been possible for him to go away at that moment and be 
quite alone, even if it were for the rest of his life, he would have 
counted himselffortunate. The fact was that although recently 
he had almost always been by himself, he could not feel that he 
was alone. He had more than once left the town behind, emerg­
ing on to a great highway, and on one occasion into a little 
wood, but the more solitary his surroundings, the more con­
scious he felt of the close and disturbing presence of something 
not so much terrifying as troublesome, so that he would return 
to the town as quickly as possible and mingle with the crowd, 
entering an eating-house or a tavern or walking in the Hay­
market or the Rag Market. Here he felt easier and more alone. 
In one tavern, towards evening, there was singing, and he sat 
listening for a whole hour, and afterwards remembered that he 
had even enjoyed it. But towards the end he suddenly became 
uneasy again, as though pangs of conscience had begun to tor­
ment him : 'Here I sit listening to songs, but surely that is not 
what I ought to be doing,' he thought. He realized at once, 
however, that it was not only this that was disturbing him; 
there was something that demanded an immediate decision, 
but he could not put it into words or even formulate it in his 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
423 
thoughts. It was all tangled up. 'No, some kind of struggle 
would be better than this ! Better Porfiry . . .  or Svidrigaylov! 
. . .  If there were another challenge of some sort, some attack to 
meet ! . . .  Yes, yes !' he thought. He came out of the tavern and 
set off, almost running. A sudden thought of Dunya and his 
mother for some reason induce<i something very like panic in 
him. It was during the night, before dawn, that he woke up 
among the bushes on Krestovsky Island, shaking all over with 
fever; he went home, arriving in the early morning. The fever 
passed after some hours' sleep, but it was late, two o'clock in 
the afternoon, when he woke up. 
He remembered that this was the day ofKaterina Ivanovna's 
funeral, and was glad that he had not been present. Nastasya 
brought him something to eat, and he ate and drank with a good 
appetite, indeed almost greedily. His head felt fresher, and he 
himself was less restless than for the past three days. He even 
wondered for a moment at his former fits of panic. The door 
opened, and Razumikhin came in. 
'Ah ! He can eat, so he's not ill !' said Razumikhin, and he took 
a chair and sat down at the table opposite Raskolnikov. He was 
upset and he did not try to hide it. He spoke with evident vexa­
tion but without hurrying or raising his voice much. 'Listen,' he 
began crisply, 'as far as I am concerned you can all go to the 
devil, but from what I see now, it is clear to me that I don't 
understand anything at all. Please don't imagine that I've 
come to cross-question you. I don't care a rap ! I don't want 
to know ! If you began to tell me all your secrets of your own 
accord, I probably shouldn't even listen to you, but simply spit 
and go away. I only came to find out for myself, once and for 
all, whether it is true that you are mad. You see, there is a 
conviction about you (here and there) that you are either mad 
or very much inclined that way. I admit I was strongly dis­
posed to support that opinion, judging first by your stupid and 
odious (and quite inexplicable) actions, and secondly by your 
recent conduct to your mother and sister. Only a monster and 
a scoundrel, if he were in his right mind, could behave to them 
as you have done; it follows that you are mad . . .  
' 
'Is it long since you last saw them?' 
'No, it was just now. Haven't you seen them since that time? 
Tell me, where have you been keeping yourself? I've already 
been here three times. Your mother has been ill since yesterday, 
seriously. She wanted to come here. Avdotya Romanovna tried 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
to prevent her, but she wouldn't hear a word : "If he's ill," she 
said, "if his mind is deranged, who should help him, if not his 
mother?" All three of us came, because we couldn't leave her 
to come alone. All the way to your door we kept begging her to 
compose herself. We came in, and you weren't here; she sat 
down just here. She sat here for ten minutes, while we stood 
saying nothing. Then she got up and said : "If he is well enough 
to go out, that means he has forgottɵn his mother, and it is un­
seemly and shameful for her to stand at his door and beg for his 
kindness as if it were charity." She went back home and went to 
bed, and now she is in a fever. "I see," she says, "that he has time 
forhisowngirl." She supposes thatyour owngirl is Sofya Semen­
ovna, your fiancee or your lover, I don't know which. I went 
immediately to Sofya Semenovna's because, brother, I wanted 
to look into the whole business ; I got there and looked in­
there was a coffin, and children crying. Sofya Semenovna was 
trying on their mourning. You weren't there. I saw all this, 
apologized, went away, and told Avdotya Romanovna. So all 
that was nonsense, you hadn't got your own girl, and so the most 
likely thing was that you were mad. But here you are sitting 
and devouring roast beef as though you hadn't eaten anything 
for three days. Well, let's suppose that madmen must eat, too, 
but although you haven't said so much as a word to me .
.
•
 
I'll swear you're not mad ! Whatever else, you're not mad. So 
to the devil with the lot of you, because there's some mystery 
here, some secret, and I don't propose to rack my brains over 
your secrets. I only came to relieve my feelings,' he concluded, 
getting up, 'by a few curses, and I know what I have to do now !' 
'What do you want to do now, then?' 
'What business is it of yours what I choose to do?' 
'Look, you're thinking of taking to drink !' 
'How . . .  how did you know that?' 
'Well, of course you are ! '  
Razumikhin said nothing for a minute. 
'You've always been a person of sound sense and you've 
never, never, been mad,' he declared suddenly, with some 
heat. 'It's true ; I am going to take to drink. Good-bye !' And he 
moved as if to go. 
'I was talking to my sister about you, Razumikhin, the day 
before yesterday, I think.' 
'About me? But •
.
.
 how could you have seen her the day 
before yesterday?' Razumikhin stopped suddenly and even 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
425 
turned a little pale. It was possible to guess that his heart was 
beating slowly and heavily. 
'She came here alone, and sat and talked to me.' 
'She did !' 
'Yes.' 
'What did you say . . .  about me, I mean?' 
'I told her you were a very good, honest, and hard-working 
person. I didn't tell her you love her, because she knows that 
herself.' 
'She knows it?' 
'Of course ! Whatever happens to me, wherever I go, you 
will stay and look after them. I entrust them to you, so to speak, 
Razumikhin. I say this because I know very well how much you 
love her, and I am sure your heart is pure. I know, too, that she 
could love you, and perhaps she already does. Now decide for 
yourself whether it is better for you to start drinking or not.' 
'Rodka . . .  you see . . .  Well .
•
.
 Oh, the devil ! And where 
are you thinking of going? You see, if it's all a secret, let it be ! 
But I . . .  I shall discover the secret . . .  And I 'm convinced it 's 
nothing but a lot of nonsense and awful rot, and that you've 
made it all up. All the same, you're a splendid chap ! A splen­
did chap •
•
 .' 
'But I was just going to say to you when you interrupted me, 
that you were quite right to decide not to try to unravel these 
secrets and mysteries. Leave it for a time, and don't worry. You 
shall know everything at the proper time, that is to say, when 
you need to. Yesterday somebody said to me that a man needs 
air, air, air ! I must go to him at once and find out what he 
means by that.' 
Razumikhin was excitedly considering an idea. 
'He's a political conspirator ! That's it ! And he is on the 
point of taking a decisive step-that's it ! It can't be anything 
else, and . . .  and Dunya knows . .  .' he thought. 
'So Avdotya Romanovna comes to see you,' he said, weigh­
ing his words, 'and you intend to see a man who says more air is 
needed, air, and . . .  and so that letter, too . . .  it's part of the 
same thing,' he ended, as if he were speaking to himself. 
'What letter?' 
'She received a letter today that upset her very much. Very 
much. Very much indeed. I began to talk about you, and she 
asked me to be quiet. Then . . .  then she said that perhaps we 
should very soon part, then she began to thank me very warmly 

426 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
for something, then she went into her room and locked the 
door.' 
'She had a letter?' inquired Raskolnikov thoughtfully. 
'Yes, didn't you know? Hm.' 
Both were silent for a short time. 
'Good-bye, Rodion. I, brother .
.
•
 there was a time . . .  how­
ever, good-bye. You see, there was a time . . .  Well, good-bye ! 
I must go, too. I'm not going to drink. I don't need to now .
.
•
 
Rubbish !' 
He hurried off, but, after he had already closed the door 
behind him, opened it again and said, looking away: 
'By the way ! Do you remember that murder, you know, that 
Porfiry was engaged on; that old woman? Well, the murderer 
has been found; he has confessed and himself produced all the 
evidence to prove it. Just think, he is one of those workmen, you 
remember, those painters that I was standing up for here. Would 
you believe it, he deliberately staged all that scene of scuffling 
and laughing on the stairs with his mate, while those people 
were going up, the porter and the two witnesses? It was all a 
blind ! The cunning and presence of mind of the young puppy! 
It's hard to credit it, but he gave that explanation himself, and 
he has confessed everything. And a fine fool I made of myself! 
Well, in my opinion he's an absolute genius of dissimulation 
and resourcefulness, a genius at misleading the law, so there 's 
nothing specially surprising about it, I suppose. Such people 
can exist, no doubt. But I find it much easier to believe in him 
because he couldn't keep it up, but confessed ; that makes him 
more credible . . .  But what a fool I made of myself, what a fool ! 
I was furious in their defence !' 
'Tell me where you learnt all this, and why it interests you 
so much,' asked Raskolnikov, in obvious agitation. 
'Well, what next? Why does it interest me? Can you ask? .
.
•
 
I heard of it from Porfiry and others beside. But it was he who 
told me most of it.' 
'Porfiry?' 
'Yes, Porfiry.' 
'What . . .  what did he say?' asked Raskolnikov fearfully. 
'He explained it extremely well. Explained it psychologi-
cally, in his usual way.' 
'Explained it? He explained it to you himself?' 
'Yes, yes. Good-bye ! I'll tell you more later, but now I have 
something to do. There . . .  there was a time when I thought .
.
•
 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
427 
Well, never mind; later ! . . .  Why should I drink now? You 
have made me drunk without it. I am drunk, you know, Rodka ! 
I am drunk without wine. Well, good-bye. I will come again, 
very soon.' 
He went out. 
'He's a political conspirator, yes, that 's certain, certain !' he 
concluded definitely as he went down the stairs. 'And he 's 
drawn his sister in; that is very, very likely, in view of Avdotya 
Romanovna's character. They've been seeing each other . . .  
Come to think of it, she has given me hints, too. From many of 
her words . . .  and allusions . . .  and half-hints, it all emerges 
quite clearly ! And how else can all this muddle be explained? 
Hm ! And I almost thought . . .  Oh Lord, what an idea I'd 
almost got into my head ! Yes, that was an eclipse of reasoning, 
and I ought to beg his pardon. It was that time when he was 
standing near the lamp in the corridor, that he misled me. 
Pah ! What a nasty, crude, vile idea mine was ! A splendid fel­
low, Nikolka, for confessing . . .  And how well this explains 
other, earlier things, too ! His illness, all his odd actions, and 
even before that, while he was still at the university, the way he 
was always gloomy and morose . . .  But what does that letter 
mean ? Perhaps there is something in that, too. Who was the 
letter from? I suspect . . .  Hm. No, I'm going to ferret it all out.' 
As he remembered and considered all that had been said 
about Dunya his heart seemed to stop. He dashed hastily away. 
Raskolnikov, as soon as Razumikhin had gone, got up and, 
as though forgetting how crowded his little room was, began 
to bump clumsily round it and . . .  sat down again on his sofa. 
He felt refreshed and renewed ; here was struggle again-that 
meant he had found a way out. 
Yes, it meant a way out had been found ! Until this, every­
thing had been too oppressive and confining, had crushed him 
with its overwhelming weight, and a sort of stupefaction had 
descended on him. From the moment of the scene with Mikolka 
at Porfiry's he had begun to feel suffocated and hemmed in, 
without escape. Mter the scene with Mikolka had come that at 
Sonya's, the same day; he had not conducted it at all as he 
might have imagined it beforehand and he had brought it to a 
very different conclusion . . .  his strength, that is to say, had 
been instantly and radically undermined ! At one blow ! Indeed, 
he had agreed with Sonya then, he had agreed in his heart that 
he could not live alone with such a deed on his tnind ! And 

428 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
Svidrigaylov ? Svidrigaylov was a riddle . . .  Svidrigaylov dis­
turbed him, that was true, but not from that point of view. 
There might be a struggle to come with Svidrigaylov also. 
Svidrigaylov, perhaps, might also offer a way out; but Porfiry 
was a different matter. 
'So Porfiry had explained things to Razumikhin, had ex­
plained them psychologically ! He had begun dragging in his 
damned psychology again. Porfiry? But how could Porfiry be­
lieve, even for a moment, that Mikolka was guilty, after what 
had passed between them, after that scene between the two 
of them before Mikolka arrived, which could not possibly be 
reasonably interpreted save in one way?' (During the past few 
days Raskolnikov had remembered all that scene with Porfiry 
in snatches ; he could not bear to remember it as a whole.) 
'During that interview such words had been pronounced, such 
gestures had been made, such glances had passed between them, 
things had been said in such a tone of voice, they had arrived 
at such a point, that it would take more than Mikolka (whom 
Porfiry had known through and through from the first word 
and the first question), more than Mikolka to shake the founda­
tions of his convictions.' 
'What wonder? Even Razumikhin had almost begun to sus­
pect ! The scene in the corridor, near the lamp, had not been 
without its effect. He had rushed off to Porfiry . . .  But what was 
Porfiry's idea in duping him like that? What was his purpose 
ip diverting Razumikhin's attention to Mikolka? No, he had 
certainly had some plan, there was some intention here, but 
what? It was true that a long time had gone by since that morn­
ing-much, much too long, and there had not been a word or 
a sign from Porfiry. Well, of course, that made matters worse . . .  ' 
Raskolnikov took his cap and went out, still lost in thought. For 
the first time in all these days, he felt at least sound and sane. 
'I must settle with Svidrigaylov,' he thought, 'and as quickly as 
possible, cost what it may; he, too, seems to be waiting for me 
to go to him myself.' At this moment such hatred welled up in 
his weary heart that he might easily have killed either Svidri­
gaylov or Porfiry. He felt, at least, that he was capable of this, 
if not now, then later. 'We shall see, we shall see,' he repeated 
to himself. 
But no sooner had he opened his inner door than he ran 
into Porfiry himself, coming to see him. Raskolnikov froze for a 
moment, but only for a moment. Strangely enough, he was not 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
429 
very surprised to see Porfiry, and hardly felt afraid of him. He 
was startled, but then quickly, in a flash, he was ready for him. 
'Perhaps this is the denouement ! But how could he have 
approached so quietly, like a cat? I didn't hear a sound. Has 
he been listening at the door?' 
'You weren't expecting a visitor, Rodion Romanovich,' cried 
Porfiry Petrovich, laughing. 'I've been meaning to drop in for 
a long time. I was passing, so I thought, "why not look in for 
five minutes?" Were you going somewhere? I won't keep 
you. Only just one cigarette, if you will allow me . .  . '  
'Sit down, Porfiry Petrovich, sit down.' Raskolnikov offered 
his guest a chair with such apparent pleasure and friendliness 
that he would have been quite amazed if he could have seen 
himself. This was the final encounter, the last trial of strength. 
In just such a way, a man may sometimes endure half an hour 
of deathly fear from a brigand and when at last the knife is laid 
to his throat, the fear has vanished. He sat down directly in 
front ofPorfiry and looked at him unflinchingly. Porfiry screwed 
up his eyes and lit his cigarette. 
'Well, speak, speak,' seemed almost ready to burst from Ras­
kolnikov's heart. 'Well? Why, why, why, don't you speak?' 
C H A P T E R  I I  
'Oh, these cigarettes !' said Porfiry at last, when he had 
lighted one and drawn a few breaths ; 'they're poison, absolute 
poison, but I can't give them up ! I have a cough, my throat is 
raw, and I have grown short-winded. I'm cowardly, you know, 
so not long ago I went to B.-he spends a minimum of half 
an hour examining each patient; he absolutely laughed when 
he looked at me : he sounded me and listened. "Tobacco", he 
said, ' 'is not good for you ; your lungs are inflamed.'' But how am 
I to give it up ? What can I put in its place? I don't drink, that 's 
the trouble. He, he, he ! Not drinking a trouble ! Everything is 
relative, you know, Rodion Romanovich, everything is relative !' 
'What is this? Is he going to play the same old game again?' 
thought Raskolnikov disgustedly. The whole of their last inter­
view suddenly came back to him, and the same feeling as before 
swept over him like a flood. 
'I have been here before, the day before yesterday, in the 
evening; did you know?' went on Porfiry Petrovich, looking 
round the room. 'I came in, right into the room itself. Just the 

430 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
same as today, I was going past and I thought, "Come, I'll 
return his call !" I came up and found the room open; I looked 
round-I waited a while. I went away without even telling the 
servant I had called. Don't you lock your door?' 
Raskolnikov's face had been growing more and more lower­
ing. Porfiry seemed to guess his thoughts. 
'I came to have it out with you, my dear Rodion Romano­
vich, to clear things up. I oweyou an explanation; I feel obliged 
to give it you,' he went on with a smile, and he even patted 
Raskolnikov's knee. But almost in the same moment his face 
took on a serious and troubled look; a veil of melancholy 
seemed to be drawn over it, to Raskolnikov's surprise. He had 
never seen him look so before, and had not suspected that he 
could do so. 'It was a strange scene that took place between us 
at our last meeting, Rodion Romanovich. Perhaps, indeed, it 
was a strange scene that we played at our first meeting, too, 
but at that time . . .  Well, my life now is just one damned thing 
after another ! This is the point : it turns out that perhaps I owe 
you an apology; I feel that I may. Do you remember how we 
parted ?-your nerves were on edge and your knees were shak­
ing ; my nerves were on edge and my knees were shaking. And 
you know, we treated each other in a way that might be thought 
neither seemly nor gentlemanly. And we are, after all, gentle­
men ; that is, we are gentlemen first of all, in any case; that 
must be understood. You remember, things got to such a point 
. . .  that it was quite indecent.' 
'Why is he saying this? What does he take me for?' Raskol­
nikov asked himself bewilderedly, raising his head and gazing 
hard at Porfiry. 
'I have come to the conclusion that it is best for us to be plain 
with one another,' went on Porfiry Petrovich, turning his head 
slightly and lowering his eyes, as if he did not wish his glance 
further to embarrass his former victim, and as if he now scorned 
to use his earlier tricks and stratagems. 'Yes, sir, such suspicions 
and such scenes cannot continue for long. Mikolka has solved 
our problem now, otherwise I don't know to what lengths we 
might have gone. That damned little tradesman was sitting 
there behind my partition that time-can you imagine that? 
You, of course, already know that; and indeed I am aware that 
he came to see you afterwards ;  but what you supposed then was 
not true, I had not sent for anybody, and I had not made any 
arrangements whatever. You will ask why not. How shall I put 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
431 
it? I was absolutely stunned. I had hardly taken steps even to 
send for the porters. (No doubt you saw them as you went past.) 
The idea came to me suddenly, in a flash; I was very strongly 
convinced of it, you see, Rodion Romanovich. Let me not, 
I thought-for although I may let one thing slip for a time, yet I 
seize another firmly by the tail-let me at least not allow my 
man to get away from me. You are very irritable and touchy, 
Rodion Romanovich, by nature; too much so, considering all 
the other fundamental traits of your character and heart, 
which I fondly hope I have understood to some extent. Well, of 
course, even then my judgement told me that it doesn't always 
happen that a man will simply get up and blurt out all the 
details for you. It does happen, especially when you keep on 
gnawing away at the last shreds of his patience, but only very 
rarely. Even I could see that it wasn't likely. No, I thought, 
I must have some small thing for a foundation. Even if it were 
only the tiniest detail, and only one, but one that you could take 
in your hands, a concrete thing, not just a piece of psychology. 
Because, I thought, if a man is guilty, of course it must be at any 
rate possible to get something actual and definite out of him 
and one may sometimes expect the most surprising results. 
I was relying on your character, Rodion Romanovich, on your 
character above all ! I had great hopes of you then.' 
'But you . . .  but why do you keep talking like that now?' 
muttered Raskolnikov at last, not fully understanding what 
all this was about. 'What is he talking about?' he wondered 
distractedly. 'Does he really suppose I am innocent?' 
'Why do I talk like that? I came to clear the matter up, so 
to speak. I consider it my bounden duty. I want to lay bare the 
whole thing down to the foundations, about what happened, 
the whole story of that, so to speak, darkening of counsel. I 
made you go through a great deal, Rodion Romanovich. I'm 
not a monster. I can understand what it must be for a man 
like you to have brought all this on himself-a man oppressed 
with cares, but proud, imperious, and, in particular, impatient 
of wrong ! In any case I look on you as a most honourable man 
and one, indeed, with elements of greatness in you, although I 
do not agree with all your opinions. I consider it my duty to 
warn you of this, sincerely and straightforwardly, because 
above all I have no wish to deceive you. I have felt attached to 
you since I first knew you. Perhaps you will laugh at such 
words, coming from me. That is your privilege. I know that 

432 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
you disliked me at sight, because, indeed, there is nothing to 
like me for. But think what you please, I for my part am anxious 
to efface your first impression of me by every means in my 
power, and to show you that I am a man with a heart and a 
conscience. I speak in all sincerity.' 
Porfiry Petrovich waited for a moment in dignified silence. 
Raskolnikov felt a new wave of terror sweep over him. The 
idea that Porfiry might consider him innocent suddenly began 
to frighten him. 
'I hardly need tell you in full detail how this all came about,' 
went on Porfiry Petrovich; 'I think it would be quite unneces­
sary. And indeed I doubt whether I could. Because how can it 
be explained circumstantially? First of all there were rumours. 
What sort of rumours they were, from whom they came, and 
when •
.
.
 and in what connexion your name was brought into 
the matter .
. . I think need not be considered either. As far as 
I personally am concerned, it all began by chance, by the most 
casual accident, which might just as easily not have happened 
at all. What was it? Hm, I don't think I need speak of that 
either. All this, the rumours and the accident, combined to give 
me a certain idea. I confess openly, because, if you are confess­
ing anything at all, it had better be everything-that it was 
I who was the first to light on you. Those jottings of the old 
woman's on the pledges, and so on and so forth-we may take 
it didn't amount to anything. You can always count such pieces 
ot evidence in hundreds. I also chanced to learn of the scene in 
the police office, not just casually mentioned, but discussed in 
all its details by an excellent witness, who had, without realiz­
ing it himself, absorbed the scene with remarkable complete­
ness. You know it was all just one thing added to another, my 
dear Rodion Romanovich, one thing after another. Well, how 
could I help turning my mind in a certain direction? Out of a 
hundred rabbits you'll never make a horse, and a hundred sus­
picions will never make a proof, as an English proverb says, but 
that is mere common sense, and we have to try to deal with 
the passions as well, the passions, because even an examining 
magistrate is a man. Then, too, I remembered your article in 
that magazine-you remember, we talked about it at some 
length on your first visit to me. I scoffed at it then, but that was 
only to lead you on. I repeat that you are very impatient and 
far from well, Rodion Romanovich. That you are daring, proud, 
in earnest, and . . .  have felt, have felt a great deal, I have long 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
433 
known. I am acquainted with all these feelings, and I read your 
article with a sense of familiarity. It was conceived in sleepless 
nights and in a state of ecstasy, with a lifting and thumping of 
the heart, with repressed enthusiasm. But that proud, repressed 
enthusiasm of youth is dangerous ! I mocked at you then, but 
now I tell you that I have an amateur's passion for such fiery, 
young, first literary efforts. Mist, haze, and a chord vibrating 
through the mist. Your article is absurd and fantastic, but it 
has flashes of real sincerity, a youthful and incorruptible pride, 
and the courage of despair; it is gloomy, that article, but that is 
a good point. I read it at the time and laid it aside and . . .  as 
I laid it aside, I thought, "Well, things will not go smoothly 
for that man." Well, tell me, after such a beginning how could 
I help being carried away by the sequel? Oh Lord, have I said 
something? I am not making any allegations now ! It is simply 
what struck me at the time. "What is there here?" I thought. 
There was nothing, that is, nothing positive, and perhaps abso­
lutely nothing. And to let myself, an examining magistrate, be 
carried away in that fashion is most unseemly : there I've got 
Mikolka on my hands, and with facts against him-think what 
you like of them, but they are facts ! And his psychology has been 
brought into it too; we must devote some attention to him; 
because this is a matter of life and death. Why am I telling you 
all this now? So that you may know, and, your mind and heart 
being what they are, not accuse me of behaving maliciously 
that time. It was not malicious, I say in all sincerity, he, he ! Do 
you think, I wonder, that I didn't come here at that time to 
conduct a search? I did, I did, he, he, I was here, when you 
were lying ill in bed. Not officially, and not in my own person, 
but I was here. Your room was searched down to the smallest 
thing, at the first breath of suspicion, but-umsonst ! I thought, 
"now this man will come to me, he will come to me of his own 
accord, and very soon ; if he is guilty, he will certainly come. 
Another might not come, but he will." Do you remember how 
Mr. Razumikhin began to let things slip out? We had arranged 
that, to get you agitated ; so we deliberately spread rumours, in 
order that Mr. Razumikhin should blab about them to you, 
and Mr. Razumikhin is a man who cannot restrain his indigna­
tion. Mr. Zametov found your anger and your open daring 
particularly striking: well, how could anyone blurt out in a 
tavern, "I killed her!" It was too daring, too audacious, and I 
thought, "If he is guilty, he's a bonny fighter !" That is what 

434 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
I thought then. I waited for you to come ! I waited with the great­
est impatience, but you simply crushed Zametov that time, 
and . . .  you know, the point is that all this damned psychology 
cuts both ways ! Well, so I was waiting for you, and I looked 
out, and my wish was granted-you were coming ! My heart 
absolutely thumped ! Ah ! Now, what made you come just then? 
Your laughter, that laughter of yours as you came in, do you 
remember?-why, I guessed everything then, I saw it all quite 
plainly, but if I hadn't been waiting for you so specially, I 
shouldn't have noticed anything in your laughter. That is 
what it means to be in the right frame of mind ! And Mr. 
Razumikhin-oh ! that stone, you remember, that stone, the 
one the things were hidden under? Why, I can almost see it, 
in a kitchen-garden somewhere-you did say a kitchen-garden 
to Zametov, and afterwards, for the second time, in my room? 
And when we began to examine your article, and you expound­
ed your meaning-every one of your words could be taken in 
two senses, as if there were another word hidden beneath it! 
Well, that, Rodion Romanovich, is how I came to run up 
against a blank wall, and only realized it when I bumped my 
head on it. "No," I said, "what am I doing? Why," I said, "all 
of this, down to the smallest detail, can be explained if you 
wish in an entirely different way, and it would sound even 
more natural." I had to admit to myself that it would indeed be 
more natural. It was agony ! "No," I thought, "it would be 
better if I could find just one small fact." And when I heard 
about those door-bells my heart stood still and a positive shud­
der ran through me. "Well," I thought, "there 's my little fact all 
right ! That 's it !" I didn't even stop to consider it, I simply 
would not. I would have given a thousand roubles at that 
moment, of my own money, to have seen you with my own eyes, 
when you walked a hundred yards side by side with that work­
man, after he had called you murderer to your face, without 
daring to ask him a single question all the way! . . .  Yes, and 
what about the cold shudder down your spine? And that ring­
ing of door-bells when you were ill and half delirious? So, 
Rodion Romanovich, how can you wonder, after all that, that 
I played a few tricks with you? And you, what made you come 
at just that moment? I'll swear something prompted you, and 
if Mikolka had not sent us off on a different track . . .  do you 
remember Mikolka just then? Do you remember him well? 
That was a thunder-clap, if you like ! It was a peal of thunder 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
435 
crashing from a cloud, a thunderbolt ! Well, and how did I 
meet it? I didn't believe in the thunderbolt in the least, you 
could see that yourself! Why should I ?  Even later, after you had 
gone, when he began giving me answers that chimed so well 
with the facts that I was quite surprised, even then I didn't 
believe a word he said ! I was what is called as firm as a rock. 
"No," thought I, "this is all my eye ! What has Mikolka to do 
with this?" ' 
'Razumikhin said just now that you believe Nikolay is guilty 
and that you told him so yourself . . .  
' 
His breath failed and he could not finish. He had listened 
with indescribable agitation while this man, who had seen 
right through him, repudiated his own judgement. He dared 
not, he could not, believe it. Eagerly he had scrutinized the still 
ambiguous words to find something more precise and definite. 
'Oh, Mr. Razumikhin !' cried Porfiry Petrovich, as if he 
were delighted to have drawn a question from the obstinately 
silent Raskolnikov. 'He, he, he ! Well, Mr. Razumikhin had to 
be got away somehow: two is company, three is none. Mr. 
Razumikhin, as an outsider, should not have come running to 
me all pale . . .  Well, never mind him; why bring him into this? 
As for Mikolka, would you care to know what sort of person he 
is, as I understand him, I mean? First of all, he is still a lad, not 
grown up yet, and he is confessing now not because he is scared 
but because he believes his own inventions, since in his own 
way he's an artist. Really, don't laugh at my explaining him 
like that. He is innocent, impressionable, and emotional, and 
his imagination runs away with him. He can sing and dance 
and he tells stories so well that, they say, people come from 
miles round to hear him. He has been to school, too, and he is 
ready to die oflaughing over nothing at all, and every now and 
then he drinks himself under the table, not really for the sake of 
getting drunk so much as because somebody plies him with 
drink-like a child again. And when he stole the jewel-case that 
time he didn't know it was stealing, because "if I pick it up from 
the ground, why is that stealing?" And did you know he was a 
schismatic;' and not only that, but one of those simple-minded 
religious zealots? Some members of his family have belonged to 
the sects that run away to settle out of the reach of all authority, 
and it is not long since he himself spent two years under the 
obedience of some elder in his village. I learnt all this from 
Mikolka himself and his friends from Zaraysk. And what's 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
more, he was once all for becoming a hermit himself! He was 
a regular zealot, used to get up in the night to pray, and read 
himself silly with old books, what they consider the "genuine" 
ones. St. Petersburg had a very powerful effect on him, especially 
the female sex-and the vodka, too. He is impressionable, and 
he forgot the village elder and everything else. I have been told 
that a painter here got quite attached to him and Mikolka used 
to go and see him sometimes, and then this affair came along ! 
Well, he felt afraid, he tried to hang himself! He tried to run 
away ! What can be done about the way the common people 
think of our justice? Some of them find the mere word "trial" 
terrifying. Whose fault is that? The new courts*may make some 
difference. God grant they may ! Well, apparently he has 
remembered the good elder now that he is in prison; the bible 
has made its appearance again, too. Do you, Rodion Romano­
vich, know what some of these people mean by "suffering" ?  It is 
not suffering for somebody' s sake, but simply "suffering is neces­
sary"-the acceptance of suffering, that means, and if it is at 
the hands of the authorities, so much the better. In my time 
there was a most submissive convict in the prison, who for a 
whole year lay on the stove at night reading his bible, and read 
and read until he was in such a state, you know, that suddenly, 
without rhyme or reason, he grabbed a brick and threw it 
at the governor without the slightest provocation. And how he 
threw it, too ! He deliberately pitched it a yard wide, so that it 
shouldn't injure him. Well, everybody knows what happens to 
a prisoner who attacks a prison officer with a weapon ; and so 
"he accepted his suffering". Well, this is thepoint : I suspect now 
that Mikolka desires to "accept suffering", or something of the 
sort. I have good grounds, supported by the facts, for believ­
ing this. But he doesn't know that I know it. What, can't you 
admit that such fantastic creatures are to be found among 
people of his kind? They often crop up. The elder's influence 
has begun to work again, espeGially since Mikolka thought of 
hanging himself. However, he will come to me ofhis own accord 
and tell me everything. You think he will hold out? Just wait, 
he'll recant yet ! I am expecting him at any moment to come 
to me to take back his statements. I have taken a fancy to 
Mikolka and I am investigating him thoroughly. And what do 
you suppose? He, he ! On some points he gave me very apt 
answers, and had evidently got hold of the necessary informa­
tion and prepared his answers cunningly; but on other points he 

C RIME AND P UNISHMENT 
437 
is simply at sea, and doesn't know the least thing about them; 
he doesn't know, and he doesn't even suspect that he doesn't 
know. No, Rodion Romanovich, my dear chap, Mikolka isn't 
in this at all ! This is an obscure and fantastic case, a contem­
porary case, something that could only happen in our day, 
when the heart of man has grown troubled, when people quote 
sayings about blood "refreshing":when the whole of life is dedi­
cated to comfort. There are bookish dreams here, and a heart 
troubled by theories ; there is resolution evident here, for the 
first step, but resolution of a special kind-a resolve like that of 
a man falling from a precipice or flinging himself off a tower; 
this is the work of a man carried along into crime, as it were, 
by some outside force. He forgot to shut the door behind him, 
but he murdered, and murdered two people, for a theory. He 
murdered, but he was not so successful when it came to taking 
the money, and what he did manage to snatch up he carried 
away and hid under a stone. The torment he suffered when he 
crouched behind the door and heard them battering at it and 
ringing the bell, was not enough for him; no, he must go back 
to the empty flat, half-delirious, to revive his memory of the 
bell; he felt compelled to experience once more that cold 
shiver down the spine . . .  Well, grant that he was il then, all 
the same there is this : he committed murder, yet he thinks of 
himself as an honourable man, despises other people and goes 
about like a martyred angel-no, what has Mikolka to do with 
all this, my dear Rodion Romanovich? There 's no Mikolka in 
it !' 
These last words, after all that had been said before, which 
had seemed like a recantation, were too unexpected a blow. 
Raskolnikov shuddered as though he had been stabbed. 
'Then . . .  who .
.
•
 was the murderer?' he could not help 
asking in a stifled voice. Porfiry Petrovich almost recoiled, as 
though startled by so unexpected a question. 
'Who was the murderer?' he repeated, as though he could 
not believe his own ears. 'But it was you, Rodion Romanovich ! 
You murdered them !' he went on, almost in a whisper, but his 
voice was full of conviction. 
Raskolnikov sprang up from the sofa, stood still for a few 
seconds, and sat down again without a word. His whole face 
twitched convulsively. 
'Your lip is trembling again, as it always does,' murmured 
Porfiry Petrovich almost sympatheticaUy. 'I don't think you 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
quite understand me, Rodion Romanovich,' he added after a 
short pause; 'that is why you are so thunderstruck. I came on 
purpose to tell you everything, and bring everything out into 
the open.' 
'It was not I who murdered her,' whispered Raskolnikov, 
like a frightened small child caught red-handed in some mis­
deed. 
'Yes, it was you, Rodion Romanovich, you and nobody else,' 
whispered Porfiry, with stern conviction. 
They were both silent, and the silence lasted for an un­
believably long time, almost ten minutes. Raskolnikov leaned 
his elbows on the table and ran his fingers through his hair, 
without speaking. Porfiry Petrovich sat quietly and waited. 
Suddenly Raskolnikov threw a scornful glance at Porfiry. 
'You are up to your old tricks again, Porfiry Petrovich ! The 
same old methods ! Really, don't you ever get tired of them?' 
'Oh, stop that ! What are methods to me now? It would be 
a different matter if there were witnesses here; but after all, 
here we are alone, quietly talking to nobody but each other. 
You can see for yourself that I didn't come here to start you 
and catch you like a hare. Confess, or don't confess-it's all the 
same to me now. I am convinced in my own mind, without 
that.' 
'Then why did you come?' asked Raskolnikov irritably. 'I 
will ask you my earlier question again : if you think I am guilty, 
why don't you take me to prison?' 
'Well, so that is your question ! I will answer you in due 
order : to begin with, it would be of no advantage to me to 
arrest you straight away.' 
'Why not? If you are convinced, you ought . .  .' 
'Oh, who says I am convinced? For the time being all this 
is just my dream. Besides, why should I put you there in peace? 
You know yourself, since you are asking me to do it. For ex­
ample, if I bring that tradesman to give evidence against you, 
you will say to him, "Were you drunk or weren't you? Who saw 
me with you? I simply took it for granted you were drunk, and 
so you were"-and what can I say to you then, especially as 
your story is much more plausible than his, which is purely a 
matter of psychology-something that doesn't go well with that 
mug of his? Besides, you would hit the mark, because the 
scoundrel is very well known to be a heavy drinker. Moreover, 
I have admitted to you several times already that psychology is 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
439 
a double-edged weapon, and its second edge is heavier and 
much sharper, and that exˉept for it I have nothing against 
you-yet. And although I mean to arrest you all the same, and 
(contrary to the usual custom) have come myself to explain 
everything to you beforehand, yet I tell you straight (and this is 
also contrary to custom) that it won't be any advantage to me. 
Well, I came here, in the second place . .  .' 
'Yes, well, in the second place?' (Raskolnikov was still pant­
ing). 
'Because, as I told you just now, I consider that I owe you an 
explanation. I don't want you to think of me as a monster, 
especially since I am genuinely well disposed towards you, 
believe it or not. Consequently, I have come here, in the third 
place, with a direct and open invitation to you to come for­
ward with a confession. It will be infinitely better for you, and 
it will be better for me too-because it will be a weight off my 
mind. Well, tell me, have I been open with you or not?' 
Raskolnikov thought for a minute. 
'Listen, Porfiry Petrovich; after all, you said yourself it was 
only psychology, but now you have gone over to mathematics. 
Well, what if you are mistaken yourself?' 
'No, Rodion Romanovich, I am not mistaken. I have my 
scrap of proof. I had found it even then; God sent it to me !' 
'What proof?' 
'I shall not tell you, Rodion Romanovich. But in any case 
I have no right to delay any longer; I shall arrest you. So use 
your judgement : it is all the same to me now, consequently I 
am acting solely for your sake. I swear it will be better for you, 
Rodion Romanovich !' 
Raskolnikov's smile was bitter. 
'This is not only amusing, it is positively impudent. Why, 
even if I were guilty (which I don't allow for one moment), 
why should I come to you with a voluntary confession when 
you tell me yourself that I shall be safer in prison?' 
'Oh, Rodion Romanovich, don't put too much trust in what 
I say; perhaps you won't be absolutely sqfe ! After all, it's only 
a theory, and one of mine besides, and what sort of authority 
am I for you? Perhaps I am hiding something from you even 
now. I can't simply come along and reveal everything to you, 
he, he ! Another thing : why should you ask what advantage it 
will be to you? Surely you know that a reduction of your 
sentence would follow from it? When would you be coming 

440 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
forward, after all, at what moment? Just think it over ! When 
another has taken the crime on himself and muddled everything 
up ! And I, I give you my solemn word, will so falsify and 
arrange matters there that your appearance shall seem utterly 
unexpected. We'll do away with all this psychology completely, 
and I will consign all my suspicions of you to oblivion, so that 
your crime will seem to have resulted from a clouding of your 
faculties, as indeed, in all conscience, it did. I am a man of 
honour, Rodion Romanovich, and I will keep my word.' 
Raskolnikov preserved a melancholy silence; he hung his 
head and remained thoughtful for a long time; finally, he 
smiled again, but this time his smile was meek and sad. 
'Oh, don't !' he said, as if he no longer could conceal any­
thing at all from Porfiry. 'It 's not worth while ! I don't want 
your reduction of sentence !' 
'Now, that's just what I was afraid of!' exclaimed Porfiry, 
warmly and almost involuntarily. 'I was afraid of just that, that 
you would have no use for it.' 
Raskolnikov looked at him with a sad and expressive gaze. 
'No, don't let yourself loathe life,' went on Porfiry; 'you 
have a lot before you still. How can you not want a reduction, 
how can you? You are too impatient !' 
'I have a lot of what before me?' 
'Of life ! How can you prophesy? How much do you know? 
Seek and ye shall find. Perhaps it is through this that God seeks 
to bring you to Himself. And the bonds are not eternal •
.
•
 ' 
'The sentence will be reduced . .  .' laughed Raskolnikov. 
'And you are not afraid of bourgeois scandal, are you? 
Perhaps, though, you have been afraid of it, but you didn't 
know it yourself. All the same, you are not a person who should 
be afraid of such things, or ashamed of volunteering a confes­
sion.' 
'0-oh, damn all that !' whispered Raskolnikov, with scorn 
and repulsion, as though reluctant to speak at all. He began to 
get up, as if he meant to go somewhere, but sank back in evident 
despair. 
'By all means ! You have lost faith and you think I am flatter­
ing you grossly; but have you lived much yet? Do you under­
stand much? You invented a theory, and you were ashamed 
because it went wrong and because it turned out to be not 
even very original ! It proved mean and base, it is true, but 
that does not make you hopelessly mean and base. You are not 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
441 
mean and base at all ! At least, you did not deceive yourselffor 
long, but in one leap reached the farthest extremity. Do you 
know how I regard you? As one of those who would allow 
themselves to be disembowelled, and stand and face their 
torturers with a smile-if they had found a faith, or found God. 
Well, find your faith, and you will live. To begin with, you have 
needed a change of air for a long time. Perhaps, also, suffering 
is a good thing. Suffer, then. Perhaps Mikolka is right to desire 
suffering. I know that you don't believe this-but don't philo­
sophize too subtly; plunge straight into life, without delibera­
tion ; don't be uneasy-it will carry you direct to the shore and 
set you on your feet. What shore? How should I know? I 
simply believe that there is still much life before you. I know 
that now you regard my words as a sermon learnt by heart, but 
perhaps later you will remember them at some time and they 
will stand you in good stead ; that is why I am talking. It 's a 
good thing that you only killed an old woman. If you had 
invented a different theory you might perhaps have done 
something a hundred million times as monstrous ! Perhaps you 
ought to thank God; how do you know that He is not sparing 
you just for that? Keep your heart high and don't be so fearful ! 
Do you flinch from the great fulfilment that confronts you ? No, 
that would be shameful. As you took such a terrible step, now 
you must take courage. That is justice. Do what justice de­
mands. I know you do not believe me, but it is the sacred truth 
that life will sustain you. Afterwards you will regain your self­
esteem. Now you need only air, air, air !' 
Raskolnikov started. 
'Who are you?' he cried. 'What sort of prophet are you? 
From what heights of lofty calm do you utter these all-wise 
exhortations?' 
'Who am I? I am a man who has developed as far as he is 
capable, that is all. A man, perhaps, of feeling and sympathy, 
of some knowledge perhaps, but no longer capable of further 
development. But you-that's another matter : the life God 
destines you for lies before you (but who knows, perhaps with 
you, too, it will pass away like a puff of smoke and nothing will 
come of it) . Well, what of it, if you are to pass into a different 
category of men? With your heart, you will not pine for com­
fort! What will it matter if nobody sees you perhaps for a very 
long time? It is not time that matters, but you yourself. Become 
a sun, and everybody will see you. The first duty of the sun is 

442 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
to be the sun. What are you smiling at again-because I am 
talking like Schiller? And I am willing to bet that you suppose 
I am trying now to cajole you by flattery. Well, perhaps that is 
just what I am doing, he, he, he ! Perhaps, Rodion Romano­
vich, you ought not to believe what I say, perhaps you should 
never believe me completely-I agree that my ways make it 
undesirable ; but I will add only this-I think you ought to be 
able to judge how far I am a trickster and how far an honest 
man !' 
'When do you think of arresting me?' 
'I can leave you at liberty for a day or two longer. Think it 
over, my dear chap, and pray. Honestly, it will be to your 
advantage.' 
'What ifl run away?' asked Raskolnikov, with a strange smile. 
'You won't run away. A peasant would run away, or a 
modern dissenter:!:_the lackey of another's ideas, because you 
need only show him the end of your finger and, like Mr. Mid­
shipman Easy; he will believe anything you like for the rest of 
his life. But you, after all, no longer believe even your own 
theory, why should you run away? What would you do in 
hiding? The fugitive's life is hard and hateful, and your first 
need is for a definite position and existence, and a suitable 
atmosphere, and what sort of atmosphere would you have? If 
you ran away, you would come back of yourself. You can't get on 
without us. But if I put you under lock and key-you'll stay 
there a month, perhaps two, perhaps three, and then, suddenly, 
you will remember what I say, you will volunteer a confession, 
perhaps quite unexpectedly even to yourself. An hour before­
hand you will not know that you are going to come forward 
with a confession. You see I am convinced that you will "re­
solve to accept your suffering" ; you don't believe my word now, 
but you will come to the same conclusion yourself. Because 
suffering, Rodion Romanovich, is a great thing; don't look at 
the fact that I am fat myself, that doesn't matter; I still know, 
and don't laugh at this, that there is an idea in suffering. 
Mikolka is right. No, you won't run away, Rodion Romano­
vich.' 
Raskolnikov got up and took his cap. Porfiry Petrovich rose 
as well. 
'Are you thinking of going for a walk? It will be a nice 
evening, if there isn't a storm. However, that might be better 
if it made it cooler . .  .' 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
443 
He also took up his cap. 
'Please don't take it into your head, Porfiry Petrovich,' said 
Raskolnikov, with grim insistence, 'that I have confessed ,to­
day. You are a strange man, and I have listened to you out 
of curiosity. But I haven 't confessed anything .
•
.
 Remember 
that.' 
'Oh, I know that, and I'll remember it. Look, I declare he 's 
trembling. Don't worry, my dear fellow; you shall have it 
your own way. Go for a little walk; only you mustn't go too far. 
In case of need, I have one little request to make of you,' he 
added, lowering his voice; 'it is rather a delicate one, but it is 
important; if, I mean, if anything happened (not that I think 
it will and I consider you quite incapable of it), if, by any 
chance-well, just in case-you should feel a desire during the 
next forty or fifty hours to put an end to the matter differently, 
in some fantastic way-by raising your hand against yourself 
(a ridiculous supposition, you must please forgive me for it), 
then-leave a short circumstantial note. Just a couple of lines, 
two little lines-and mention the stone; it would be very 
generous of you. Well, good-bye 
•
.
.
 Pleasant thoughts and 
happy new beginnings !' 
Porfiry stooped as he went out and seemed to avoid looking 
at Raskolnikov. Raskolnikov went to the window and waited, 
burning with impatience, until he judged Porfiry would have 
left the house and gone some little distance. Then he himself 
hurriedly left the room. 
C H A P T E R  I I I  
HE hurried to Svidrigaylov's. What he hoped for from him he 
did not know himself. But some power over him lay hidden in 
the man. Once he had recognized this, he could not be easy; 
besides, the time had come. 
One question particularly troubled him as he went : had 
Svidrigaylov been to see Porfiry? As far as he could judge, he 
was prepared to swear he had not. He thought it over again 
and again, remembered every detail of Porfiry's visit, and de­
cided : no, he hadn't, of course he hadn't !  
But if he had not been yet, would he go, or not? 
He was inclined to think, for the moment, that he would not 
go. Why? He could not have explained, but even if he could, 
he would not have troubled his head much with it just now. 

444 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
All this worried him, yet at the same time he could not be 
bothered with it. It was a strange thing, and perhaps nobody 
would have believed it, but he felt only feeble, almost absent­
minded, concern for the fate that now seemed imminent. 
Something different and much more important, something ex­
traordinary-which concerned himself, certainly, and no other 
person, but differently and more vitally-tormented him now. 
He felt, besides, an infinite moral weariness, although his reason 
was functioning better this morning than it had done for many 
days past. 
Was it indeed worth while, after all that had happened, to 
struggle to overcome all these trifling new difficulties? Was it 
worth while, for example, to try to devise a way of preventing 
Svidrigaylov from going to see Porfiry, to waste time studying 
and investigating a Svidrigaylov? 
Oh, how tired he was of it all ! 
Meanwhile he was still hurrying to see Svidrigaylov; could 
it mean that he expected something new from him, some in­
formation, some way of escape? A drowning man clutches at a 
straw ! Could destiny, or some instinct, be bringing them to­
gether? Perhaps it was only weariness and despair; perhaps he 
needed not Svidrigaylov but somebody else, and Svidrigaylov 
had merely happened to turn up. Sonya? But what should take 
him to Sonya now? Should he plead for her tears again? But 
the thought of Sonya was terrible to him now. She represented 
an irrevocable sentence, an unchangeable resolution. He must 
choose between her way and his own. Especially at this moment 
he was in no condition to see her. No, would it not be better to 
try Svidrigaylov, and find out what he meant? And he could 
not help acknowledging to himself that for a long time he 
really had felt a kind of need of Svidrigaylov for some reason. 
What, though, could they have in common? Even their 
wrongdoing could not be of the same degree. Moreover, the 
man was obviously a very unpleasant character, extraordinarily 
corrupt and depraved, undoubtedly cunning, deceitful, and 
perhaps malicious. Many tales were current about him. It was 
true that he was actively concerning himself with Katerina 
Ivanovna's children, but who could saywhatthatmeantorwhat 
his motives were? He was a man of endless schemes and designs. 
Another thought kept running through Raskolnikov's head 
now, and he found it terribly disturbing and made efforts to 
drive it away from him, so painful was it. The train of thought 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
445 
ran thus : Svidrigaylov had persistently put himself in his way, 
and was still doing so; Svidrigaylov had learnt his secret; 
Svidrigaylov had had designs upon Dunya. What if he still had? 
One might say almost with certainty that he had. And what if 
now, having learnt Raskolnikov's secret and thus got him into 
his power, he wished to use it as a weapon against Dunya? 
This idea had sometimes tortured him even in his dreams, 
but now, as he walked to Svidrigaylov's, was the first time it 
had been present to his conscious mind with such clarity. The 
mere idea filled him with black rage. To begin with, it would 
change everything, even in his own situation; he would have to 
reveal his secret at once to Dunechka. Perhaps he would have 
to give himself up, to save Dunechka from taking some in­
cautious step. That letter ! Dunya had received some letter 
this morning, and who in St. Petersburg could be sending 
her letters ? (Luzhin, perhaps?) True, Razumikhin was on his 
guard ; but Razumikhin did not know anything. Would he per­
haps have to disclose everything to Razumikhin, too? The 
thought was repugnant to Raskolnikov. 
In any case, he must see Svidrigaylov as soon as possible, he 
decided at last. Thank goodness, what he needed to deal with 
here was not so much details as the gist of the matter; but if, 
if he was indeed capable, if Svidrigaylov was plotting some­
thing against Dunya,-then . . . 
All this time, throughout the whole month, Raskolnikov 
had been so weary that now he could resolve a problem like 
this in only one way : 'Then I shall kill him,' he thought, 
with cold despair. A feeling of oppression weighed down his 
heart; he stopped in the middle of the street and looked round : 
where was he, and which way had he come? He found himself 
on the Obukhovsky Prospect, thirty or forty yards from the 
Haymarket, which he had just crossed. The whole first floor of 
the building on his left was occupied by a tavern. All the win­
dows were wide open, and the place, judging by the movement 
of the figures in the windows, was crowded with people. From 
inside the room came the sound of singing, the thin notes of 
clarinet and fiddle, the rattle of a Turkish drum. He could hear 
women's voices squealing. He was about to go back, at a loss to 
understand why he had turned into Obukhovsky Prospect, when 
through one of the further windows he suddenly caught sight of 
Svidrigaylov himself, sitting at a tea-table in the window, with 
a pipe in his mouth. This produced a strange, almost terrifying 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
impression on him. Svidrigaylov was watching him closely, 
without speaking, and-another thing which struck Raskolnikov 
forcibly-seemed about to get up so as to steal away before he 
was seen. Raskolnikov at once tried to look as though he had 
not seen him and were looking thoughtfully at something else, 
but continued to watch him out of the corner of his eye. His 
heart was hammering with alarm. He was right; Svidrigaylov 
was plainly very anxious not to be seen. He had taken the pipe 
out of his mouth and was trying to get out of sight, but appar­
ently, having risen and moved away his chair, he suddenly 
realized that Raskolnikov had seen him and was watching him. 
Something passed between them that resembled the moment 
of their first meeting, at Raskolnikov's, when he had been 
dreaming. A mischievous smile appeared on Svidrigaylov's 
face, growing steadily broader. They both knew that each 
was watching the other. At last Svidrigaylov broke into loud 
laughter. 
'Well, well ! Come in, if you like. I am here !' he called 
through the window. 
Raskolnikov went up into the restaurant. 
He found him in a very small room, with one window, 
adjoining the larger room where shopkeepers, clerks, and 
people of that sort were drinking tea at a score of small tables, 
to the screeching of choruses by a wretched group of singers. 
The click of billiard balls could be heard from somewhere. On 
the table in front ofSvidrigaylov stood an open bottle of cham­
pagne and a half-full glass. There was a boy in the room also, 
who held a little barrel-organ in his hands, and a healthy red­
cheeked girl of eighteen, with her striped skirt tucked up and 
a beribboned Tyrolean hat on her head. Paying no attention to 
the choruses in the next room, she was singing a popular song 
in a rather hoarse contralto, to the accompaniment of the 
organ . . .  
'Well, that's enough !' Svidrigaylov interrupted her as Ras­
kolnikov entered. 
The girl immediately broke off and stood waiting respectfully. 
The same expression of serious respect had been on her face as 
she sang her servants'-hall rhymes. 
'A glass, Philip !' shouted Svidrigaylov. 
'I won't have any wine,' said Raskolnikov. 
'As you please. This wasn't for you. Drink, Katya ! You won't 
be wanted any more today; be off with you !' He poured her a 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
447 
full glass of the wine and put down a yellow note. Katya tossed 
off the wine as women do, swallowing twenty times without 
pausing for breath. Then she picked up the note, kissed Svidri­
gaylov's hand, which he solemnly gave her for the purpose, 
and went out of the room, taking the boy with his organ in her 
wake. They had been brought in from the street. Svidrigaylov 
had not been a week in St. Petersburg, and already everything 
round him was established on a patriarchal footing. The waiter, 
Philip, was already an 'old friend' and cringed obsequiously. 
The door to the other room could be locked ; Svidrigaylov 
seemed quite at home in the little room and spent, perhaps, 
whole days in it. The tavern was dirty and greasy, and not even 
fifth-rate. 
'I was going to your place to look for you,' began Raskolni­
kov, 'but why did I suddenly turn into the Obukhovsky Pros­
pect just now from the Haymarket? I never come this way. I 
always turn right from the Haymarket. And this is not the way to 
your place. But I turned along here, and here you are ! Strange !' 
'Why don't you say straight out it 's a miracle?' 
'Because it may be only coincidence.' 
'Oh, all you people are the same !' laughed Svidrigaylov. 
'Even if you believe a miracle has occurred, you won't admit 
it. After all, yousayyourselfthat itonly "may be" a coincidence. 
And you can't imagine, Rodion Romanovich, how afraid every­
body here is of having his own opinions. I am not talking about 
you. You have your own opinion, and you have shown you 
were not afraid to hold it. That is what made me curious 
about you.' 
'Nothing else?' 
'Surely that is enough.' 
Svidrigaylov was obviously exalted, but only very slightly; he 
had drunk only half a glass of wine. 
'I think you came to see me before you discovered that I was 
capable of possessing what you call my own opinion,' remarked 
Raskolnikov. 
'Oh, that was different. Everyone has his own affairs. Talk­
ing of miracles, I must tell you that you seem to have been 
asleep this last two or three days. I told you the name of this 
tavern myself, and there is nothing miraculous in your having 
come straight here; I explained how to get here and told you 
where it was and the times when you could find me here. Don't 
you remember?' 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
'I had forgotten,' answered Raskolnikov, astonished. 
'I can well believe it. I told you twice. The address registered 
itself in your memory automatically; you turned down here 
automatically and unconsciously came the right way to this 
address. Even while I was speaking to you then, I didn 't think 
you were taking it in. You are very transparent, Rodion 
Romanovich. And another thing : I am sure lots of people in 
St. Petersburg talk to themselves as they walk about. It's a 
town of half-crazy people. If we had any science in this country, 
the doctors, lawyers, and philosophers could conduct very 
valuable researches in St. Petersburg, each in his own special 
sphere. There are few places which exercise such strange, harsh, 
and sombre influences on the human spirit as St. Petersburg. 
What can be accomplished by climate alone ! Besides, this is 
the administrative centre of all Russia and that character must 
be reflected in everything. That, however, is not the point now, 
but this is : I have several times observed you from a distance. 
You come out of the house with your head held high. After 
twenty paces it is beginning to droop and your hands are folded 
behind your back. Your eyes are open, but obviously you see 
nothing of what is in front of you or all round. At last your lips 
begin to move and you talk to yourself, sometimes unclasping 
your hands and flourishing them in the air, and then finally 
you stand still for quite a time in the middle of the road. This is 
very bad. Perhaps somebody else notices you, besides me, and 
it won't do you any good. It's really all one to me, and I don't 
want to cure you, but you, of course, understand me.' 
'Do you know that I am being followed?' asked Raskol­
nikov, looking searchingly at him. 
'No, I don't know anything about it,' answered Svidrigaylov, 
with apparent surprise. 
'Well, let us leave me alone,' frowningly muttered Raskol­
nikov. 
'Very well, we will leave you alone.' 
'Tell me, rather, if you come here to drink, and twice told 
me to come to you here, why, when I looked through the win­
dow from the street just now, you tried to hide yourself and to 
get away. I saw you very clearly.' 
'He, he ! Why, when I was standing on your threshold, did you 
lie on your sofa with your eyes closed and pretend you were 
asleep, when you weren't asleep at all? I saw you very clearly.' 
'I might have had . . .  my reasons . • .  you know that yourself.' 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
449 
'I might have my reasons, too, although you don't know 
them.' 
Raskolnikov leaned his right elbow on the table, rested his 
chin on the fingers of his right hand, and fixed his unwavering 
gaze on Svidrigaylov. For about a minute he studied his face, 
which he had always wondered at. It was a rather strange face, 
almost like a mask : red and white, with a very light-coloured 
beard and still quite abundant fair hair. The eyes seemed some­
how too blue, and their gaze too massive and unmoving. There 
was something terribly unpleasant in the handsome face, so 
extraordinarily young for its years. Svidrigaylov's light summer 
clothes were foppishly elegant, and his linen particularly so. 
There was a large ring, set with a valuable stone, on his finger. 
'Must I really still trouble about you as well ?' said Raskol­
nikov, coming with feverish impatience direct to the point. 
'Although you could perhaps be a most dangerous person if you 
chose to do me harm, I won't let myself be racked any more. 
I will show you that I don't value myself as highly as you seem 
to think. I have come to tell you straight out that if you still 
retain your former intentions with regard to my sister, and if 
to further them you think of making use of what you have 
recently found out, I will kill you before you can get me put in 
prison. You may take my word for this : you know that I am 
capable of keeping it. Secondly, if you wish to tell me anything 
-because all this time it has seemed to me that there was 
something you wanted to say to me-tell me quickly, because 
time is precious and very soon it may be too late.' 
'Where are you going in such a hurry?' asked Svidrigaylov, 
examining him curiously. 
'Everybody has his own affairs,' said Raskolnikov grimly 
and impatiently. 
'You, yourself, were demanding just now that we should be 
frank,' remarked Svidrigaylov, with a smile, 'but at the very 
first question you refuse to answer. You think all the time that 
I have some design, and so you regard me with suspicion. Well, 
that is quite understandable in your situation. But I shall not 
undertake the labour of convincing you of the contrary, how­
ever much I may wish to be friends with you. The game really 
isn't worth the candle. And I wasn't intending to say anything 
so very special to you.' 
'Then what did you want with me? You did seek me out 
persistently, didn't you ?' 

450 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'Simply as a curious subject for observation. I was pleased 
with the fantastic nature of your position, that's what it was. 
Besides, you are the brother of a person in whom I was greatly 
interested, and, finally, I had heard a dreadful amount about 
you froJ,ll that same person, from which I concluded that you 
had great influence with her; that's enough, isn't it? He, he, he ! 
However, I admit that your question is quite complicated and 
that it is difficult for me to answer. Well, for example, here you 
have come to me now, not only with a definite object, but for 
something new. That's true, isn't it? Isn't it?' insisted Svidri­
gaylov, with a mischievous smile. 'Well, then, imagine that I, 
while I was still on my way here, was counting on you too to 
tell me something new, and on managing to borrow something 
from you ! You see what we rich men are !' 
'Borrow what?' 
'How can I tell you? How should I know what? You see this 
wretched tavern I spend all my time in, and I enjoy it, or 
rather, I don't exactly enjoy it, but one must have somewhere 
to sit. Well, take that poor Katya--did you see her? .
.
•
 Well, 
if I, for example, were a gourmet or an epicurean clubman­
but as it is, look at what I can eat !' (He pointed to the corner, 
where a tin tray on a little table held the remains of an un­
appetizing beef-steak and potatoes.) 'By the way, have you 
had dinner? I've had a bite, and I don't want anything more. 
I don't drink wine, for example, at all. I never touch any kind 
but champagne, and of that one glass lasts me all the evening, 
:md even then I get a headache. I ordered this now to help me 
pull myself together, because I am getting ready to go some­
where, and you find me in a peculiar mood. That was why 
I tried to hide just now, like a schoolboy, because I thought you 
might hinder me; but I think' (he took out his watch) 'I can 
spend an hour with you ; it's half-past four now. Believe me, if 
only I were something-a landowner, say, or a father, an offi­
cer in the Lancers, a photographer, a journalist •
.
.
 but I'm 
nothing. I have no speciality. Sometimes it is almost boring. 
Honestly, I thought you would tell me something new.' 
'But who are you, then, and why have you come here?' 
'Who am I ?  You know : a gentleman, who served two years 
in the cavalry, then knocked about here in St. Petersburg, then 
married Marfa Petrovna and lived in the country. There's my 
biography for you !' 
'You are a gambler, I think?' 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
451 
'A gambler? No. A card-sharper is not a gambler.' 
'And you were a card-sharper?' 
'Yes, I have been that, too.' 
'And were you ever caught and thrashed ?' 
'It did happen. What then?' 
'Well, that means you might challenge someone to a duel .
.
•
 
and altogether it could be lively.' 
'I won't argue with you, and besides, I am no master of 
philosophy. I confess I came here as soon as I could more on 
account of women.' 
'As soon as Marfa Petrovna was buried?' 
'Yes,' smiled Svidrigaylov with winning frankness. 'What of 
that? You seem to find something wrong in my talking like 
that about women.' 
'You mean, do I approve or disapprove of debauchery?' 
'Debauchery? So that's what you think ! However, I will 
take things in order and answer you first about women in 
general; I am inclined to be talkative, you know. Tell me, why 
should I put any restraint on myself? Why should I give up 
women, if I have any inclination for them? It's something to 
do, at any rate.' 
'So all you hope for here is a spell of debauchery?' 
'Well, why not? Debauchery if you will ! You seem to like 
the word ! But I like a straight question, at any rate. In "de­
bauchery" there is at least something constant, based on nature, 
indeed, and not subject to fantasy, something that exists in the 
blood as an eternal flame, always ready to set one on fire, and 
not to be readily extinguished, for a long time to come, perhaps 
for many years. You will agree that in its way it is an occupa­
tion.' 
'Why be glad of that? It is a disease, and a dangerous one.' 
'Oh, so that 's what you think? I agree that it is a disease, 
like everything else that goes to extremes-and it is an essential 
part of it, that it goes to extremes-but, to begin with, it is one 
thing with one person andsomethingdifferentwithanother, and, 
in the second place, one must of course observe measure in all 
things, and make calculations, however mean; but then, what can 
one do after all? If it were not for it, one might have to shoot one­
self without more ado. I agree that a respectable man is morally 
obliged to put up with boredom, but you know, all the same . .  .' 
'And could you shoot yourself?' 
'Well, there it is !' Svidrigaylov parried, with an expression 

452 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
ofaversion. 'Do me a favour, and don't speak ofthat,' he added 
hastily, and without any of the swaggering tone of his earlier 
words. Even his face looked different. 'I confess to an unpardon­
able weakness, but I can't help it : I am afraid of death and 
don't like to hear it spoken of. Do you know that I am a bit of 
a mystic?' 
'Ah, Marfa Petrovna's ghost ! Why, does it still appear?' 
'Don 't mention that; I haven't seen it in St. Petersburg yet. 
The devil take it !' he cried, with an irritated look. 'No, we had 
better . . .  but . . .  Hm ! Unfortunately, time is getting short, and 
I can't stay with you long. I'm sorry. I could have told you some­
thing.' 
'What takes you away-a woman?' 
'Yes, a woman. A quite unforeseen chance .
•
.
 no, that's not 
what I want to talk about.' 
'Well, and the squalor, has the squalor of this no effect on 
you any longer? Have you already lost the strength to stop?' 
'And do you claim to have strength as well? He, he, he ! You 
surprise me, Rodion Romanovich, even though I knew before 
that it would be like this. You to talk about debauchery and 
aesthetics ! You a Schiller ! You an idealist !  It was bound to 
be like this, of course, and it would have been surprising if it 
had been otherwise, but all the same it does seem strange when 
it actually happens . . .  Oh, dear, I'm sorry that time is short, 
because you yourself are a very curious study ! By the way, do 
you like Schiller? I'm terribly fond of him.' 
'What a lot of boasting you do, though !' said Raskolnikov, 
with some distaste. 
'No, honestly I don't !' answered Svidrigaylov, guffawing. 
'But I won't argue, perhaps I do boast; but, after all, why not, 
if it's harmless? I lived in the country with Marfa Petrovna 
for seven years, and so now that I have got hold of an intelligent 
man like you-intelligent and in the highest degree interesting 
-I simply delight in letting myself run on. Besides, I have 
drunk this half-glass of wine, and it has gone to my head the 
least bit. And, most important of all, there is something that I 
am very worked up about, but I •
.
.
 won't speak about that. 
Where are you going?' he asked suddenly, in alarm. 
Raskolnikov was on the point of rising. He felt stifled and 
uncomfortable and it seemed to him that it had been a mistake 
to come here. He was convinced that Svidrigaylov was the 
most shallow and worthless scoundrel on the face of the earth. 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
453 
'Oh, sit still ! Stay a little longer !' begged Svidrigaylov. 
'Order yourself some tea, at least. Do stay a little, and I won't 
talk any more nonsense, about myself, I mean. I will tell you 
a story. Would you like me to tell you how a woman tried, as 
you would put it, to "save" me? It will answer your first question, 
even, since that person was-your sister. May I tell you? It will 
help to kill time.' 
'Very well, but I hope you . .  .' 
'Oh, don't worry ! Besides, Avdotya Romanovna can inspire 
only the deepest respect even in a thoroughly bad character 
like me.' 
C H A P T E R  I V  
'You know, perhaps (and indeed I told you so myself),' began 
Svidrigaylov, 'that I was in the debtor's prison here, with an 
enormous debt and not the slightest prospect of getting the 
means to pay it. There is no need to go into the details of how 
Marfa Petrovna bought me out. Do you know to what lengths 
of foolishness love can drive a woman? She was an honest 
creature, and not at all stupid (although completely unedu­
cated) . But just imagine, this same honest, jealous woman, 
after many scenes of frenzied reproach, actually stooped to a 
sort of bargain with me, which she kept all through our mar­
riage. The point was that she was considerably older than me, 
and besides she was always chewing a clove or something. I 
was sufficiently brutal, and honest enough in my own way, to 
tell her straight out that I could not be absolutely faithful to 
her. This admission drove her wild, and yet I think my brutal 
frankness pleased her in a way: "If he tells me this in advance," 
she said, "it means he doesn't want to deceive me,'' and that 
is of the first importance to a jealous woman. Mter a lot of 
weeping we made a verbal contract, like this : first, I was never 
to leave Marfa Petrovna, but always remain her husband ; 
second, I was never to be absent from her without her permis­
sion; third, I was never to set up a permanent mistress ; fourth, 
in return for this, Marfa Petrovna was to allow me to cast an 
eye occasionally at the house servants, but never without her 
secret knowledge; fifth, God preserve me from falling in love 
with a woman of our own class; sixth, if I fell a victim, which 
God forbid, to a great and serious passion, I was bound to 
disclose it to Marfa Petrovna. On this last point, however, 

454 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
Marfa Petrovna's mind was fairly easy all along; she was an 
intelligent woman and consequently could only regard me as a 
rake and a profligate, who was not capable of loving seriously. 
But an intelligent woman and a jealous woman are two different 
things, and that was where the disaster came from. To form 
an impartial judgement of some people, however, one must 
first discard some preconceived opinions and one's habitual 
attitude to the ordinary persons and objects surrounding us. I 
feel able to rely on your good sense, more than on anybody 
else's, indeed. You may perhaps have already heard a great 
many ridiculous and laughable things about Marfa Petrovna. 
She had certainly some absurdly funny ways, but, I tell you 
straight, I am sincerely sorry for all the innumerable griefs I 
caused her. Well, that's enough, I think, for a becoming 
oraison funebre on the tenderest of wives from the fondest of 
husbands. On the occasion of our quarrels, I mostly kept silent 
and didn't lose my temper, and this gentlemanly behaviour was 
almost always effective; it influenced and even pleased her; 
there were times when she was even proud of me. But all the 
same she could not bear your sister. How did it come about 
that she risked taking such a beauty into her house as a gover­
ness? I explain it by the fact that Marfa Petrovna was an 
ardent and impressionable woman and that she simply fell in 
love herself-literally fell in love-with your sister. Well, 
Avdotya Romanovna ! I knew very well, at the first glance, 
that it would be a bad business, and-what do you think?­
made up my mind not even to look her way. But Avdotya 
Romanovna herself took the first step-do you believe that, or 
not? Will you believe, too, that at first Marfa Petrovna went so 
far as to be angry with me for my constant silence about your 
sister, and for listening with such indifference to her own 
continual rapturous praises of Avdotya Romanovna? I can't 
understand what she wanted ! Well, of course, Marfa Petrovna 
told Avdotya Romanovna all about me in the greatest detail. 
She had an unfortunate trick of telling all our family secrets 
to absolutely everybody, and incessantly complaining to every­
body about me; so she was hardly likely to omit her wonderful 
new friend. I suppose that they never talked of anything else 
but me, certainly there is no doubt that Avdotya Romanovna 
learnt all those sombre and mysterious stories that are told 
about me .
. . I am willing to bet that you have heard some­
thing of the sort, too.' 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
455 
'Yes, I have. Luzhin accused you of being the cause of a 
child's death. Is that true?' 
'Do me the favour of leaving all that vulgar gossip alone,' 
replied Svidrigaylov impatiently and with distaste. 'If you are 
determined to hear about all that nonsense, I will tell you my­
self one day, but now . .  .' 
'There was talk of a servant of yours in the country, too, and 
how you were supposed to be the cause of what happened to him.' 
'Please, that's enough !' interrupted Svidrigaylov again, with 
manifest impatience. 
'I suppose that wasn't the servant who came and filled your 
pipe after he was . . .  dead . . .  that you told me about yourself?' 
asked Raskolnikov, with steadily increasing irritation. 
Svidrigaylov looked hard at Raskolnikov, and a hint of jeer­
ing spite seemed to gleam for an instant in his eyes like a flash 
of lightning, but he restrained himself and answered with great 
urbanity : 
'Yes, that was the one. I can see that you find all that extra­
ordinarily interesting, and I shall consider it a duty to satisfy 
your curiosity in every particular at the first favourable oppor­
tunity. Hang it, I can see that to some people I really might 
appear a romantic figure. You may judge then, after that, how 
grateful I was bound to feel to Marfa Petrovna for having told 
your sister so many mysterious and interesting things about me. 
I can't judge what impression they made on her, but in any 
case, it was all to my advantage. In spite of Avdotya Romanov­
na's real aversion for me, and my persistently gloomy and 
forbidding aspect, she grew sorry for me at last, sorry for a lost 
soul. And when a girl's heart begins to feel pity for a man, then 
of course she is in the greatest danger. She begins to want to 
"save" him, and make him see reason, and raise him up, and put 
before him nobler aims, and awaken him to a new life and new 
activities-well, everybody knows what can be dreamt of in 
such circumstances. I realized at once that the bird had flown 
into the net of its own accord, and I began to make preparations 
in my turn. You seem to be frowning, Rodion Romanovich. 
There is no need ; the affair, as you know, came to nothing. 
(Devil take it, what a lot of wine I'm drinking !) You know, 
from the very beginning I always thought it was a pity that your 
sister had not chanced to be born in the second or third cen­
tury of our era, as the daughter of a ruling prince somewhere, 
or some governor or pro-consul in Asia Minor. She would 

456 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
doubtless have been one of those who suffered martyrdom, and 
she would, of course, have smiled when they burnt her breast 
with red-hot pincers. She would have deliberately brought it on 
herself. And in the fourth or fifth century she would have gone 
into the Egyptian desert and lived for thirty years on roots, 
ecstasies, and visions. She is the kind of person who hungers 
and thirsts to be tortured for somebody, and if she does not 
achieve her martyrdom she is quite capable of jumping out of 
a window. I have heard something of a certain Mr. Razumi­
khin. They say he is a sensible young man ; I suppose he is a 
seminarist. Well, let him take care of your sister. In short, I 
think I understood her, and I consider that it does me credit. 
But at that time, at the beginning, that is, of an acquaintance, 
you know yourself that one is always somehow more frivolous 
and stupid than usual ; one makes mistakes and sees things in 
the wrong way. Hang it, why was she so pretty? It was not my 
fault. In one word, with me it began with an uncontrollable fit 
of sensual passion. Avdotya Romanovna is terribly chaste, to a 
positivelyunheard-ofdegree. (Notice this; I tell youitaboutyour 
sister as a fact. She is perhaps even morbidly chaste, in spite of 
the depth of her intelligence, and it will do her harm.) There 
happened to be a certain girl in the house, Parasha, black-eyed 
Parasha, who had just been brought from another estate as a 
maid-servant, and I had never seen her before. She was very 
pretty, but incredibly stupid : burst into tears, raised a yell 
that could be heard all over the place, and caused a scandal. 
Once, after dinner, Avdotya Romanovna deliberately sought 
me out when I was alone in the garden and with flashing eyes 
demanded that I should leave poor Parasha alone. It was almost 
our first private conversation. I, naturally, considered it an 
honour to fulfil her wish, and tried to pretend that I was em­
barrassed and discomfited, and, in short, played my part not 
too badly. Then began negotiations, secret conversations, moral 
lectures, sermons, entreaties, supplications, even tears-would 
you believe it, even tears ! That shows how far the passion for 
conversion will go in some girls ! Of course, I put the blame 
for everything on my destiny, made out that I was avid and 
greedy for light, and finally brought into play the greatest and 
most reliable means of subjugating a woman's heart, which 
never disappoints anybody and always produces a decisive 
effect on every single woman, without exception. I mean, of 
course, flattery. There is nothing in the world harder than 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
457 
straightforwardness, and nothing easier than 
flattery. In 
straightforward dealing, if there is one-hundredth part of a false 
note, the result is immediate dissonance and, in consequence, 
trouble. But in flattery every single note can be false and the 
effect will be agreeable, and it will be listened to with some 
pleasure ; the pleasure may indeed be somewhat crude, but it 
is still pleasure, for all that. And, however gross the flattery may 
be, at least half of it will certainly seem to be true. This holds 
for every stage of development and every social level. Even a 
vestal virgin can be seduced by flattery, not to mention ordinary 
people. I can't help laughing when I remember how I once 
seduced a lady who was devoted to her husband, to her chil­
dren, and to virtue. What fun it was, and how little trouble ! And 
the lady really was virtuous, in her own way at least. My whole 
strategy consisted in being crushed and prostrate before her 
chastity the whole time. I flattered her unconscionably, and no 
sooner did I obtain so much as a glance or a pressure of the 
hand than I reproached myself for having taken it by force, 
declaring that she had resisted me, and resisted me so strongly 
that I should certainly never have won any favours ifl had not 
been so depraved; that she, in her innocence, did not antici­
pate my cunning and yielded without intention or knowledge, 
unaware of what she did, and so on and so forth. In short, I 
attained my ends, and the lady remained convinced that she 
was innocent and chaste, that she was neglecting none of her 
duties or obligations, and that she had fallen quite by accident. 
And how angry she was with me when at long last I told her 
that in my honest opinion she had been seeking satisfaction 
just as much as I had. Poor Marfa Petrovna was also terribly 
susceptible to flattery and if I had only wanted I could have 
possessed myself of all her property while she was still alive. 
(But I am drinking an awful lot of wine and talking too much.) 
I hope you won't be angry if I say now that the same effect 
began to appear even with Avdotya Romanovna. But I was 
stupid and impatient and spoiled everything. More than once, 
even before this (and especially on one occasion) Avdotya 
Romanovna found the expression of my eyes terribly displeas­
ing, if you will believe me. To put it shortly, there was a flame 
in them that flared up more strongly and less guardedly all the 
time, and it frightened her and at last she came to hate it. There 
is no need to go into details, but we parted. Then I again acted 
stupidly. I allowed myself to turn all her moral propaganda to 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
the crudest mockery; Parasha appeared on the scene again, and 
she was not the only one-in short, we had a perfect pande­
monium. Ah, Rodion Romanovich, if you had only once in 
your life seen how your sister's eyes can flash fire ! It doesn't 
matter if I have drunk a whole glassful of wine and am tipsy 
now, I am telling the truth; I assure you, I dreamed of that 
look; in the end I couldn't bear even to hear the rustle of her 
dress. Really, I thought that I should have a fit or something; 
I had never imagined that I could get into such a frenzy. In 
one word, a reconciliation was essential to me; but it was quite 
impossible. And can you imagine what I did then? To what 
depths of stupidity a man can be reduced by frenzy ! Never 
undertake anything in a frenzy, Rodion Romanovich. I calcu­
lated that Avdotya Romanovna was a beggar, after all (oh, 
excuse me, I didn't mean to say that .
•
.
 but does it make any 
difference what word you use, if it means the same?), that, in 
short, she had to earn her own living, and that she had to help 
to keep both her mother and you ( oh, haˊg it, you are scowling 
again . . .  ) , so I decided to offer her all my money (I could 
have realized up to about thirty thousand at the time) on con­
dition that she would run away with me here, to St. Petersburg. 
Naturally, I would have sworn to give her eternal love, blissful 
happiness, and so on and so forth. Believe me, I was so en­
amoured that ifshe had said : "Cut Marfa Petrovna's throat or 
poison her and marry me"-I would have done it on the spot ! 
But the whole thing ended in the disaster that you already know 
about, and you can judge for yourself to what a pitch of fury I 
was driven when I heard that Marfa Petrovna had got hold of 
that rascally clerk, Luzhin, and all but succeeded in contriving a 
match between them-which in reality would have amounted 
to exactly the same thing as I had suggested. Wouldn't it? 
Wouldn't it? It would, wouldn't it? I notice that you have 
begun to listen very attentively . . .  an interesting young man . .  . ' 
Svidrigaylov impatiently thumped the table with his fist. He 
had become red in the face. Raskolnikov saw clearly that the 
glass or glass and a half of champagne he had drunk, without 
noticing, in constant small sips, had affected him for the worse, 
and he resolved to profit by the opportunity. He was very 
suspicious of Svidrigaylov. 
'Well, after all that, I am quite convinced that you came 
here with my sister in mind,' he said bluntly and openly to 
Svidrigaylov, so as to irritate him still more. 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
459 
'Oh, drop it !' Svidrigaylov seemed to pull himselfup sharply. 
'Why, I told you . . .  and besides your sister can't stand me.' 
'I am convinced of that, too, but that isn't the point.' 
'You are convinced of it?' (Svidrigaylov screwed up his eyes 
with a mocking smile.) 'You are right, she doesn't like me; 
but never try to answer for what is between a husband and his 
wife, or a lover and his mistress. There is always one little corner 
which remains hidden from all the world, and is known only 
to the two of them. Will you vouch for Avdotya Romanovna's 
having looked on me with aversion?' 
'From some words and hints you dropped while you were 
telling your story, I notice that you still have your own views, 
and your own urgent designs on Dunya-vicious ones, of 
course.' 
'What? Did I let words and hints of that kind escape me?' 
Svidrigaylov was naively startled, but paid not the slightest 
attention to the epithet applied to his designs. 
'You are still doing so. Well, for example, what are you so 
afraid of? Why were you so startled?' 
'I am afraid, am I? Mraid of you? You ought rather to be 
afraid of me, cher ami. All the same, what rot ! . . .  However, I'm 
drunk, I can see; I very nearly let things out again. Damn the 
wine ! Hi, there ! Water !' 
He seized the bottle and without more ado threw it out of 
the window. Philip brought some water. 
'That's all nonsense,' said Svidrigaylov, wetting a towel and 
applying it to his head. 'I can confound you with one word, 
and reduce all your suspicions to nothing. Do you know I'm 
getting married?' 
'So you have already told me.' 
'Did I ?  I'd forgotten. But I couldn't have spoken positively 
then, because I hadn't even seen my future wife ; I was only 
thinking of it. Well, now I am engaged, and the thing is done, 
and, if only I hadn't something urgent to do, I should certainly 
take you to see them at once-because I want to ask your 
advice. Oh, hang it ! I've only ten minutes left. Look at my 
watch. But all the same, I will tell you about it, because it's 
something very interesting, in its way, my marriage. Where 
are you off to? You're not going again?' 
'No, I won't go now.' 
'You won 't go away at all? We shall see ! I will take you 
there, truly, only not now; now it will soon be time for me to 

460 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
leave. You turn to the right, and I to the left. Do you know this 
Resslich? This same Resslich, in whose house I am living now, 
eh? Do you hear? No, what do you think? she is the same one 
they talk about, you know, about one of her girls in the water, 
in the winter . . .  well, are you listening? Do you hear me? Well, 
she was the one who cooked it all up for me; you're bored, she 
said, you must find something to amuse you. I'm a moody, 
gloomy person, you know. Do you think I've a cheerful dis­
position? No, it's moody: I don't do any harm, but I sit in a 
corner, and sometimes I haven't a word to say for three days 
on end. This Resslich is a tricky piece of work, I can tell you, 
and this is what she has in mind : I shall get tired of my wife 
and leave her, and my wife will fall into her hands, and be put 
into circulation by her, among our own class, that is, and 
higher ones. There is, she says, an invalid father, a retired 
official, who sits in his arm-chair and has not been able to move 
his legs for three years. There is, she says, a mother as well-a 
very sensible lady, mama. The son is serving somewhere in the 
provinces, and doesn't help them. The married daughter never 
goes to see them, and they have two little nephews on their 
hands (as though their own weren't enough), and they took 
their younger daughter away from school before she finished 
her education. She will be just sixteen in a month's time, that 
is, she will be marriageable in a month. She is the one meant for 
me. We went there; it was very funny. I introduced myself:-a 
landowner, a widower, bearing a well-known name, with such­
and-such connexions, and with money-what does it matter 
that I am fifty and she is not yet sixteen? Who will consider 
that? Well, but it 's tempting, eh? It's tempting, you know ! 
Ha, ha ! If you could have seen me talking to papa and mama ! 
It would have been worth paying to get in, simply to see me 
then. She came in, dropped a curtsy-still in short skirts, 
imagine ! An unopened bud. She coloured up, blushing like the 
dawn (she had been told, of course) . I don't know what you 
think about women's faces, but to my mind these sixteen years, 
these still childish eyes, this modesty and tearful shyness-to 
my mind, they are better than beauty. But in addition to all 
this, she was a little picture ! Fair hair in tight little ringlets like 
a lamb's coat, pouting rosy little lips, tiny feet-charming ! . . .  
Well, we had made each other's acquaintance, and I explained 
that for domestic reasons I was in a hurry, and so the next day, 
the day before yesterday, that is, we were betrothed. Since 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
then, whenever I go, I take her on my knee at once, and don't 
let her go . . .  Well, she blushes like the dawn, and I kiss her 
every minute; mama, of course, impresses on her that "this" (so 
she says) "is your husband, and things must be so" -and, in one 
word, it suits me down to the ground. This present condition, 
of being betrothed, is perhaps really better than marriage. 
There is in it what is called la nature et la verite.* Ha, ha ! I have 
had one or two talks with her-she is far from stupid; some­
times she will steal a look at me that positively burns through 
me. And you know, she has a little face like a Raphael Madon­
na's. Has it ever struck you that the Sistine Madonna really 
has a fantastic face, a face of melancholy and almost simple­
minded piety? Well, hers is something like that. The day after 
we received her parents' blessing I took with me fifteen hundred 
roubles' worth of things : a parure of diamonds and another of 
pearls, a silver dressing-case-as big as this-with all sorts of 
fittings, so that even that little Madonna face of hers flushed 
with pleasure. Yesterday I took her on my knee-very uncere­
moniously, no doubt-she blushed crimson and tears started to 
her eyes, but she did not want to betray how deeply stirred she 
was. Everybody was out of the room for a moment, and we 
were left quite alone, and suddenly she threw herself on my 
neck (it was the first time she had done so of her own accord), 
put both her little arms round me, kissed me, and swore to be 
a good, true, and obedient wife to me and make me happy, to 
spend her whole life, every minute of her life, for me, and to 
sacrifice everything else, and in return all she wished was to 
have my respect; beyond that, she said, "I want nothing, nothing, 
nothing-no more gifts." You will agree that to hear such an 
avowal, alone, from a little sixteen-year-old angel in a muslin 
dress, with a mass of little curls, blushing with maidenly shame 
and with tears of enthusiasm in her eyes-you will agree 
that it is rather a temptation. It is, is'nt it? It is worth some­
thing, eh? Isn't it? Well . . .  well, listen .
•
.
 well, let us go and 
see my fiancee . . .  only not just now !' 
'In short, this monstrous difference in years and knowledge 
oflife whets your sensual appetite ! But surely you will not really 
marry like that !' 
'Why not? Certainly I shall. Every man considers himself, 
and that man has the gayest life who is most successful in de­
ceiving himself. Ha, ha ! But why are you standing up so stoutly 
for virtue? Spare me, I am only a sinful man ! He, he, he ! 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'And yet you have settled Katerina Ivanovna's children. 
However . . .  however, you had your own reasons for that . . .  I 
understand it all now.' 
'I like all children. I like them very much,' laughed Svidri· 
gaylov. 'Apropos of that, I could tell you a very curious story, 
that is not finished yet. On the first day I arrived here I visited 
various resorts, absolutely plunging into filth after those seven 
years. You have probably noticed that I have not been in a 
hurry to rejoin my old set, the friends and acquaintances of 
former times. Indeed, I intend to get on without them as long 
as I can. You know, in the country with Marfa Petrovna the 
memory of those places was an endless torment to me, those 
mysterious places in which a man who knows how can find 
many things. But hang it ! The common folk get drunk; edu· 
cated young people with nothing to do consume themselves 
with unrealizable dreams and fancies, and stultify themselves 
with theories ; Jews have flocked here and are hoarding up 
money; all the rest lead lives of debauchery. I found the 
town fairly reeking with its familiar odours from the first 
moment. I chanced one evening on a so·called dance-it 
was in a horrible den (but I like my sewers filthy), and, of 
course, there was a cancan of an unheard ·of kind, such as there 
never was in my day. Yes, sir, there has been progress there. 
Suddenly, I looked and saw a little girl of about thirteen, very 
nicely dressed, dancing with an expert, and with another 
vis·d·vis. Her mother was sitting in a chair by the wall. Well, 
you can imagine what that cancan was like ! The little girl was 
confused and blushing, and at last, feeling herself insulted, she 
began to cry. The expert seized her and began to spin her 
round and posture in front of her, and everybody laughed and 
-at these moments I love our public, even our cancan public­
they laughed and shouted, "That's right, serves them right ! 
Children shouldn't be brought here !" Well, I didn't care, and 
it wasn't any business of mine, whether they were logical or 
not in soothing their consciences in that way. I had at once 
made up my mind on my own position, and I went and sat 
down by the mother, and began talking to her about my being 
also newly arrived, and what ignorant boors these were, who 
could not distinguish genuine worth or give it proper respect; 
I gave her to understand that I had plenty of money, and 
offered to take them home in my carriage. I took them home 
and got acquainted with them; they were staying in poky little 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
463 
lodgings and had only just come to St. Petersburg. The mother 
declared that she and her daughter could only take my ac­
quaintance as an honour. I learned that they possessed neither 
stick nor stone of their own, and had come here on business 
connected with a petition to some Minister. I offered them my 
services and money; I learned that they had gone to the dance 
by mistake, thinking that it really was a dancing class; I offered 
to assist the young lady's education with lessons in French and 
dancing. They were delighted to accept, taking it for an honour, 
and our acquaintanceship has continued till now .
.
•
 If you 
like, we will go and see them-only not just now.' 
'That's enough. No more of your wicked, base stories, you 
vile, disgusting, salacious creature !' 
'A Schiller, a Russian Schiller, an absolute Schiller ! Oit 
va-t-elle la vertu se nicher?*You know, I shall go on telling you 
things like this, on purpose to hear your outcries. Delightfully 
amusing !' 
'Of course ! Don't I seem ludicrous even to myself just now?' 
muttered Raskolnikov bitterly. 
Svidrigaylov laughed uproariously; then at last he sum­
moned Philip, settled his bill, and got up to go. 
'Well, I'm quite drunk, asse;;, cause!'* he said. 'A great 
pleasure !' 
'Of course,you would find it a pleasure !' exclaimed Ras­
kolnikov, as he also rose. 'Naturally an accomplished rake 
like you, with some monstrous scheme of the same sort 
in his mind, enjoys talking of such adventures, especially in 
circumstances like these and to a man like me . . .  It excites 
him.' 
'Well, if it's like that,' answered Svidrigaylov, with some 
astonishment, 'if it's like that, you're a pretty fair cynic your­
self. At any rate, you have all the makings of a very consider­
able one. There are many things you know how to recognize, 
many . . .  and, indeed, you are capable of doing many things, 
too. Well, but that's enough. I am sincerely sorry to have had 
so little conversation with you, but I shall not lose touch with 
you . . .  Only wait a little . . .  ' 
Svidrigaylov left the tavern, and Raskolnikov followed him. 
Svidrigaylov was not very drunk; the wine had gone to his 
head for a moment, but the effect was passing with every 
minute. He was preoccupied with something, something very 
important, and his brows were knitted. He was plainly 

464 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
disturbed and excited by the expectation of something. In the 
past few minutes his tone to Raskolnikov seemed to have 
changed, becoming ruder and more mocking. Raskolnikov 
had perceived this and was also disturbed. He had become very 
suspicious of Svidrigaylov and resolved to follow him. 
They came out on to the street. 
'Your way lies to the right and mine to the left, or perhaps 
the other way round, only-adieu mon plaisir. Good-bye for the 
present.' 
He turned right, towards the Haymarket. 
C H A P T E R  V 
RASKOLNIKOV followed him. 
'What does this mean?' exclaimed Svidrigaylov, turning 
round. 'Surely I said . .  .' 
'It means that I will not part from you now.' 
'Wha-a-t?' 
They both stopped, and stood for a minute, measuring each 
other with their eyes. 
'From all your half-drunken talk,' said Raskolnikov abruptly 
and harshly, 'I have come to the positive conclusion that you 
not only have not given up your vile designs on my sister, but 
are pursuing them more actively than ever. I know that my 
sister received a letter this morning. You have been in a fever 
of impatience all this time •
.
.
 Suppose you have managed to 
dig up a wife on the way; that doesn't mean anything. I want 
to satisfy myself personally . .  .' 
Raskolnikov could hardly have defined exactly what he 
wanted at that moment, or just what it was of which he wished 
to satisfy himself personally. 
'So that's it ! Do you want me to call the police?' 
'Call them !' 
Again they stood face to face for a minute. At last, Svidri­
gaylov's expression suddenly changed. Satisfied that Raskol­
nikov was not to be frightened by threats, he assumed a cheer­
ful and friendly air. 
'What a man ! I didn't mention your affair, on purpose, 
although of course I am itching with curiosity. A fantastic 
business. I nearly put off speaking of it till another time, but 
really, you would provoke a dead man • 
. 
• Well, let us go, 
only let me tell you first that I am only going home for a 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
465 
moment now, to get some money; after that I shall lock up my 
room, take a cab, and go out to the Islands for the evening. 
Well, what good will it do you to follow me?' 
'I shall go to your lodgings, all the same, but to see Sofya 
Semenovna, not you, to apologize for not going to the funeral.' 
'As you please, but Sofya Semenovna is not at home. She 
has taken the children to a lady, an elderly lady of high rank, 
whom I used to know a very long time ago, and who is the 
patroness of some orphanages. This lady was enchanted when 
I took her the money for all three of Katerina Ivanovna's 
nestlings, and gave her more money for the orphanages as well. 
I finally told her all Sofya Semenovna's story, without any 
concealment or disguise. It produced an indescribable effect. 
That is why Sofya Semenovna has been summoned to appear 
this very day at the hotel where my titled lady, who has 
come up for a time from the country, is staying.' 
'It doesn't matter. I will call all the same.' 
'As you like, only I am not going with you; but what does 
it matter to me? Here we are at home. Tell me, aren't you­
I am sure you are--suspicious of me just because I have been so 
delicate and not worried you with questions up to now . . .  you 
understand? It seemed extraordinary to you, I'll bet! Well, 
that shows what you get for being delicate !' 
'And listening at doors !' 
'Oh, that's what you're after?' laughed Svidrigaylov. 'Yes, 
I should have been surprised if you had let that pass, after all. 
Ha, ha ! I did understand a little, if not much, of what you 
had been up to, that time . . .  there . . .  and were telling Sofya 
Semenovna about, but, all the same, what is it all about? 
Perhaps I am quite out of date, and can't understand anything 
any more. Explain it to me, my dear fellow, for God's sake ! 
Instruct me in the latest ideas.' 
'You couldn't hear anything. It's all lies !' 
'But I'm not talking about that, not about that at all 
(although I did hear something) ; no, I was talking about the 
way you keep on sighing all the time. The Schiller in you is 
always getting into a muddle. Now it seems one mustn't listen 
at doors. If that is so, go and explain to the authorities how 
"this extraordinary thing," you must say, "happened to me in 
such-and-such a way: a slight mistake revealed itself in my 
theory". If you are so sure that one can't listen at doors, but 
any old woman you like can be knocked on the head, then 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
you'd better be off at once to America somewhere. Run away, 
young man ! Perhaps there is still time. I am speaking in all 
sincerity. You haven't any money, is that it? I'll give you 
enough for your journey.' 
'I am not thinking of that at all,' interrupted Raskolnikov 
disgustedly. 
'I understand (but don't trouble yourself: you needn't say 
anything unless you want) ; I understand what questions are 
occupying your mind-moral ones, aren't they? Questions 
appropriate to a man and a citizen? But let them be; why 
should they concern you now? He, he ! Because you are still 
a man and a citizen? But if so, you shouldn't have got yourself 
into this; don't thrust yourself into other people's affairs. Well, 
shoot yourself; or don't you want to?' 
'You seem to be deliberately trying to annoy me, so that I 
shall leave you . .  .' 
'What an odd creature you are ! But here we are; do come in. 
You see, that is Sofya Semenovna's door; look, there is nobody 
in. Don't you believe me? Ask the Kapernaumovs; she leaves 
her key with them. Here is Madame de Kapernaumov herself, 
eh? What? (She is a trifle deaf.) Has she gone out? Where to? 
Well, did you hear that? She isn't here, and she won't be back, 
perhaps, until very late tonight. Well, now let us go to my 
rooms. I believe you wanted to call there, too, didn't you? 
Well, here we are. Madam Resslich is not at home. She is a 
woman who is always on the go, but she is a very good woman, 
I assure you . . .  and perhaps she might have been of use to 
you, if you had been a little more sensible. Well, now please 
observe: I take this five-per-cent bond from the bureau (look 
what a lot of them I still have !), but this one is destined for the 
bureau de change today. Well, did you see? I have no more time 
to lose. The bureau is locked, the door is locked, and we are 
on the staircase again. Well, let us take a cab, shall we? I really 
am going to the Islands. Wouldn't you like a drive? Look, I'll 
take this carriage to Elagin Island, shall I ?  Do you refuse ?  
Can't you stand it any longer? I t  doesn't matter, come for a 
drive ! I think it may be going to rain; but never mind, we'll 
have the top down •
.
 .' 
Svidrigaylov was already sitting in the carriage. Raskol­
nikov had decided that his suspicions were not justified, at 
least for the moment. Without a word in reply, he turned and 
walked back towards the Haymarket. If he had looked round 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
467 
even once as he walked, he might have seen that Svidrigaylov, 
after no more than a hundred yards, had paid off the cab and 
was once again on the pavement. But it was too late now to see 
anything; he had turned the corner. Intense loathing drove 
him away from Svidrigaylov's neighbourhood. 'How could I, 
even for one instant, hope for anything from that hardened 
scoundrel, that debauched, licentious brute?' he could not 
help exclaiming. In fact, however, the judgement Raskolnikov 
had pronounced was too hasty and ill-considered. There was 
something about Svidrigaylov that was at least out of the 
ordinary, if not mysterious. As far as his sister was concerned, 
Raskolnikov remained convinced that Svidrigaylov would not 
leave her in peace. But the constant turning of everything over 
and over in his mind was becoming intolerably burdensome 
to him. 
In his usual way, once he was alone, he fell into deep thought 
before he had gone twenty yards. Coming up on to the bridge, 
he stopped by the parapet and gazed down at the water. Close 
beside him as he stood there was Avdotya Romanovna. 
He had met her at the entrance to the bridge but had walked 
past without seeing her. Dunechka had never before encoun­
tered him in this state in the street, and she was struck with 
dismay. She stopped, uncertain whether to call out to him. 
Suddenly she saw Svidrigaylov approaching hurriedly from 
the direction of the Haymarket. 
His movements seemed secretive and cautious. He did not 
come on to the bridge, but stood to one side on the pavement, 
taking every care to prevent Raskolnikov's seeing him. He 
had noticed Dunya some time before, and he began to make 
signs to her. They seemed to be meant to ask her not to call or 
disturb her brother, but to come to him. 
This Dunya did. She went quietly past her brother and up 
to Svidrigaylov. 
'Let us go quickly,' he whispered. 'I do not wish Rodion 
Romanovich to know of our meeting. I must tell you that I 
have been sitting with him, not far from here, in a tavern 
where he had sought me out, and it was only with difficulty 
that I got away from him. He has learnt somehow of my letter 
to you and suspects something. Surely it wasn't you who told 
him? But if not, who was it?' 
'Now we have turned the corner,' interrupted Dunya, 'and 
my brother will not see us. Let me make it clear that I shall 

468 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
go no farther with you. Tell me what you have to say here; it 
can all be said in the street.' 
'In the first place, it is quite impossible to say it in the street; 
in the second place, you ought to hear Sofya Semenovna as 
well ; in the third place, I have some papers to show you 
•
.
•
 
Well, and finally, if you will not agree to come to my room, 
I refuse to enter into further explanations, and I shall leave 
you immediately. Further, I beg you to remember that I am 
completely possessed of your beloved brother's very extra­
ordinary secret.' Dunya paused irresolutely, turning her search­
ing gaze on Svidrigaylov. 
'What are you afraid of?' he observed quietly. 'The town is 
not the country. And even in the country you did me more 
harm than I did you, and here . .  .' 
'Has Sofya Semenovna been told?' 
'No, I haven't said a word to her, and I am not even sure 
that she is at home now. She probably is, however. She buried 
her stepmother today; it is not the sort of day on which she is 
likely to go out visiting. I don't want to say anything about this 
to anybody until the time comes, and I am even a little sorry 
that I have told you. In this matter the slightest indiscretion 
amounts to a complete betrayal. Here is where I live, in this 
house here that we are coming to. Look, there is our porter; 
he knows me very well ; see, he is bowing to us. He sees that I 
have a lady with me, and has certainly taken note of your face ; 
that will please you if you are very afraid and suspicious of me. 
Excuse me ifl am putting it too crudely. I am in lodgings here. 
Sofya Semenovna, who is also in lodgings, has the adjoining 
room. The whole floor is let out in rooms. But why are you 
frightened, like a child? Am I so very terrible?' 
Svidrigaylov twisted his features into a condescending smile, 
but he was no longer in a mood for smiling. His heart was 
thumping and his breath caught in his throat. He deliberately 
raised his voice, to conceal his mounting excitement. Dunya, 
however, was so irritated by his saying that she was childishly 
frightened of him and thought him terrible, that she failed to 
notice this peculiar excitement. 
'Although I know that you are a man . . .  without honour, 
I am not in the least afraid of you. Lead the way,' she said with 
apparent calm, although her face was very pale. 
Svidrigaylov stopped at Sonya's door. 
'With your permission I will inquire whether she is at home. 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
No. That is unfortunate. But I know she may come very soon. 
If she has gone out, it can only have been to see a certain lady 
about those orphan children. Their mother is dead. I have 
interested myself in the case and made arrangements for them. 
If Sofya Semenovna doesn't return in ten minutes, I will send 
her to see you this very day, if you wish. Well, here is·where 
I live. These are my two rooms. My landlady, Mrs. Resslich, is 
through that door. Now please look here, and I will show you 
my most important proofs : this door leads from my bedroom 
into two empty rooms, which are to let. Here they are . . .  you 
must please look at them rather carefully . . .  
' 
Svidrigaylov rented two fairly large furnished rooms. Dun­
echka looked round mistrustfully, but she could see nothing 
out of the ordinary in the furnishings or arrangement of the 
rooms, although there was something to see, that Svidrigay­
lov's apartment, for example, was between two others that 
were almost unoccupied. His door did not open straight off the 
corridor, but was reached through two rooms belonging to 
his landlady, which were almost empty. From his bedroom 
Svidrigaylov, opening a locked door, had shown Dunechka 
another apartment, this one to let and also empty. Dunechka 
stopped on the threshold, not understanding why she was 
requested to look, but Svidrigaylov hastened to explain. 
'Look here, in this large second room. Notice that door; 
it is locked. Near the door stands a chair, and there is only 
that chair in the two rooms. I brought it from my own room, 
so that I could listen more comfortably. Here, immediately 
behind the door, is Sofya Semenovna's table; she was sitting 
there talking to Rodion Romanovich. And I listened here, 
sitting on the chair, on two successive evenings, each time for 
about two hours-and of course I was able to learn something, 
don't you think?' 
'You listened?' 
'Yes, I listened. Now let us go into my rooms; there is 
nowhere to sit here.' 
He led Avdotya Romanovna back into the first of his rooms, 
which he used as a sitting-room, and asked her to sit down. 
He himself sat down at the other end of the table, at least two 
yards from her, but his eyes seemed to glitter with the same 
flame that had once so frightened Dunechka. She shuddered 
and again looked mistrustfully round. The gesture was in­
voluntary; she plainly did not wish to reveal her mistrust, 

470 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
but the isolated situation of Svidrigaylov's rooms had at last 
impressed her. She would have liked to ask whether his 
landlady, at least, was at home. but, out of pride, she did not 
put the question. She was, besides, suffering an incomparably 
greater anguish than fear for herself. Her distress was unen­
durable. 
'Here is your letter,' she began, laying it on the table. 'Can 
what you write possibly be true? You hint at a crime com­
mitted by my brother. The hint is too plain for you to dare to 
retract it now. I must tell you that I had heard this stupid 
story before and that I do not believe a word of it. The 
suspicion is ridiculous and vile. I know the story, and how and 
why it was invented. You cannot have any kind of proof. You 
promised to prove it : speak then ! But I tell you beforehand 
that I do not believe you ! I don't believe you ! . .  .' 
Dunechka had spoken rapidly and hurriedly, and colour 
flooded her face for a moment. 
'If you didn't believe me, how could you have taken the 
risk of coming to see me alone? Why did you come? Simply 
from curiosity?' 
'Don't torment me, speak, speak !' 
'One thing is certain, that you are a brave young woman. 
I swear I thought you would ask Mr. Razumikhin to accom­
pany you here. But he was not with you, or anywhere about; 
I looked. That was courageous ; it means that you wished to 
protect Rodion Romanovich. But everything about you is god­
like . . .  As for your brother, what shall I say? You yourself 
saw him just now. What did he look like?' 
'Is that all you have to go on?' 
'No. I have his own words. He came here to see Sofya 
Semenovna on two evenings in succession. I have shown you 
where they sat. He made a full confession to her. He is a 
murderer. He killed an old woman, a moneylender, with 
whom he had pawned things; he killed her sister as well, a 
dealer called Lizaveta, who arrived unexpectedly during her 
sister's murder. He killed them both with an axe he had taken 
with him. He killed them in order to steal, and he did steal; 
he took money and some things . . .  He himself told all this, 
word for word, to Sofya Semenovna, who is the only one who 
knows his secret, but who had no part in the murder either in 
word or deed. On the contrary, she was just as frightened as 
you are now. Don't be uneasy, she will not betray him.' 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
471 
'This cannot be true !' murmured Dunechka, with pale stiff 
lips ; she felt suffocated. 'It cannot be. There was not the 
slightest reason, no cause .
.
•
 It is a lie ! A lie ! ' 
'He robbed her, that was the only reason. He took money 
and things. It is true that, by his own confession, he made 
no use of either the things or the money, but hid them some­
where under a stone, where they still are. But that was because 
he did not dare use them.' 
'But is it likely that he could rob and plunder? Or that he 
could even dream of it?' cried Dunya, starting up from her chair. 
'You know him, you have seen him. Could he be a thief?' 
She was almost imploring Svidrigaylov; she had forgotten 
all her fear. 
'There are thousands, millions, of possible combinations and 
arrangements, Avdotya Romanovna. A thief steals, but then 
he knows himself to be a scoundrel; but I have heard of a man 
of good family who robbed the mail, and who knows, perhaps 
he thought he was doing something respectable ! Of course 
I should not have believed this, any more than you do, if I 
had heard it at second hand. But I believed my own ears. He 
explained his reasons, too, to Sofya Semenovna, but at first 
she could not believe her own ears, although at last she had to 
believe her own eyes. Mter all, he himself told her.' 
'But what . . .  reasons?' 
'It is a long story, Avdotya Romanovna. Here you have . . .  
how can I put it? .
•
•
 a kind of theory, the same sort of thing 
which makes me, for example, consider that a single piece of 
wrongdoing is allowable, if the chief aim is good. One single 
evil and a hundred good deeds ! Besides, it galls a young man 
of merit and exorbitant ambition to know that if only he had, 
for example, some three thousand roubles, it would make all 
the difference to his whole career, the whole future course of 
his life, but that the three thousand is lacking. Add to this the 
irritations of hunger, cramped quarters, rags, and a clear 
consciousness of the full beauty of his social position, and that 
of his mother and sister. And above all vanity, vanity and 
pride, though God only knows there might be good qualities 
too 
.
•
.
 I don't blame him, please don't think I do ; it's no 
business of mine. Then there was this particular little theory 
of his-a theory of sorts-according to which people are 
divided, do you see, into the common mass and the special 
people, those, that is to say, for whom, because of their 

472 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
elevated position, laws are not written, but who, on the con­
trary, frame laws for the others, the common mass, the rabble. 
Well, as a theory it may pass, it's une thiorie comme une autre. 
Napoleon had a terrible fascination for him, or rather, what 
particularly attracted him was the fact that so many men of 
genius had not heeded the isolated misdeed but marched 
straight over it, without reflection. He seems to have per­
suaded himself that he too was a man of genius, that is to say, 
he was convinced of it for a period. He suffered, and still suffers, 
greatly from the thought that, although he was capable of 
conceiving the theory, it was not in his nature to overstep the 
bounds of the law, without pausing to reflect, and that it 
follows that he is not a man of genius. Well, that, for a young 
man with a due share of self-esteem, is humiliating, especially 
in our day . . .  
' 
'And the pangs of conscience? So you would deny him any 
moral feeling? Is he really like that?' 
'Ah, Avdotya Romanovna, everything is mixed up now, 
though that is not to say that it was ever particularly straight­
forward. The minds of the Russian people in general are broad, 
Avdotya Romanovna, like their country, and extraordinarily 
inclined to the fantastic and the chaotic; but it is disastrous 
to have a broad mind without special genius. Do you remember 
how often we two discussed this theme, and in this strain, 
sitting on the terrace in the garden, in the evening after supper? 
You were always reproaching me with that breadth of mind. 
Who knows, perhaps at the very time we were talking he was 
lying here and making his plans. In our educated Russian 
society, Avdotya Romanovna, there are no sacred traditions : 
at most someone may possibly frame some for himself out of 
books . . .  or deduce something from old chronicles. But such 
people are the more learned sort, and, you know, all more or 
less simpletons, so that a man of the world would think their 
procedures quite unbecoming to himself. However, you know 
my general opinions; I make it a rule to condemn absolutely 
nobody, since I never do anything myself and don't intend to. 
But we have spoken of this more than once before. I was even 
fortunate enough to gain your interest in my opinions 
You are very pale, Avdotya Romanovna.' 
'I know that theory of his. I have read his article, in a 
magazine, about people to whom everything is permitted •
.
.
 
Razumikhin brought it to me •
•
•
 ' 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
473 
'Mr. Razumikhin? An article by your brother? In a maga­
zine? Is there one? I didn't know. It must be interesting. But 
where are you going, Avdotya Romanovna?' 
'I want to see Sofya Semenovna,' said Dunya faintly. 'Which 
way does one go? She may have come in, and I must see her 
at once. Let her .
•
 .' 
Avdotya Romanovna could not finish what she was saying; 
her breath literally failed her. 
'Sofya Semenovna will not return before night, I suppose. 
She should have been here very soon, and if she was not, it 
means she will be very late . . .  ' 
'Ah, so you have been lying to me ! I see . . .  you lied . . .  
you were lying all the time ! . . .  I don't believe you ! I don't 
believe you !' cried Dunechka frenziedly, quite losing her head. 
Almost fainting, she sank on to a chair hastily placed for her 
by Svidrigaylov. 
'Avdotya Romanovna, what is the matter? Don't faint !  
Here is some water. Take a sip . .  .' 
He sprinkled her with water. Dunechka shuddered and 
came to herself. 
'The effect was too violent !' muttered Svidrigaylov to him­
self, frowning. 'Avdotya Romanovna, calm yourself! I tell you, 
he has friends. We will save him, rescue him. Would you like 
me to take him abroad? I have money; I can get a ticket in 
three days. As for his having killed, he may yet accomplish 
much good in expiation. Calm yourself. He may yet be a great 
man. Now how are you? How do you feel?' 
'An evil man ! He is still sneering. Let me go . .  .' 
'Where? Where do you want to go?' 
'To him. Where is he? Do you know? Why is this door 
locked? We came in by it, and now it is locked. When did you 
contrive to lock it?' 
'After all, we couldn't shout the subject of our conversation 
all over the place. I am not sneering at all, only I was tired of 
talking in that strain. Where are you going in such a state? 
Do you want to betray him? You will drive him to madness 
and he will give himself away. I tell you they are already on his 
trail, they have hit the scent. You will only give him away. 
Wait a little; I saw him and talked to him just now; he can 
still be saved. Wait. Sit down and we will consider it together. 
That was why I asked you to come here, so that we could talk 
about it in private and consider it wisely. Please sit down !' 

474 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'How can you save him? Can he possibly be saved?' 
Dunya sat down, and Svidrigaylov sat beside her. 
'It all depends on you, on you and on you alone,' he began, 
with flashing eyes, almost in a whisper, stumbling, and hardly 
articulating some words from excitement. 
Dunya recoiled from him in fear. He also was trembling 
violently. 
'You . . .  one word from you and he is saved ! I •
•
.
 I will save 
him. I have money, friends. I will get him away at once, and I 
will get a passport, two passports. One for him, the other for 
me. I have friends; practical people .
•
.
 Would you like me to 
get another passport for you . . .  for your mother? . . .  What 
need have you of Razumikhin? I love you so . . .  I love you 
infinitely. Let me kiss the hem of your dress, let me ! Let me ! 
It is more than I can bear to hear it rustle. Say to me, "Do 
this !" and I will do it. I will do anything. I will do the im­
possible. Whatever you believe in, I will believe in too. I will 
do anything, anything. Don't look at me like that, don't !  I tell 
you, you are killing me . .  .' 
He was almost raving. It was as if something in his mind had 
suddenly given way. Dunya sprang up and flung herself 
towards the door. 
'Open the door, open the door !' she called through the door 
to anybody who might be outside, and shook it. 'Please open 
it ! Is there nobody there?' 
Svidrigaylov controlled himself and got up. A smile of mali­
cious mockery forced itself on to his still trembling lips. 
'There is nobody at home there,' he said slowly and deliber­
ately; 'my landlady has gone out and you are wasting your 
breath shouting like that. You are only getting needlessly 
worked up.' 
'Where is the key? Open the door at once, at once, wretch !' 
'I have lost the key and I shall not be able to find it.' 
'Oh? Then you are using force !' cried Dunya, as pale as 
death, and rushed to the corner of the room, where she 
barricaded herself with a little table that happened to stand 
near. She did not scream; but she fixed her eyes on her 
tormentor and followed his every movement. Svidrigaylov 
remained standing in his place, facing her from the opposite 
side of the room. He had succeeded in regaining control of 
himself, at least outwardly. But his face was still pale and the 
mocking smile had not left it. 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
475 
'You spoke just now of "force", Avdotya Romanovna. If I 
do intend force, you can judge for yourself whether I have taken 
suitable measures. Sofya Semenovna is not at home and it is a 
long way to the Kapernaumovs, through five locked rooms. 
Finally, I am at least twice as strong as you and, besides, I have 
nothing to fear because you will not be able to complain 
afterwards. You will not want to betray your brother, will you? 
Besides, nobody will believe you : for what purpose should a 
young girl have visited a single man in his rooms? So, even if 
you sacrifice your brother, you won't prove anything; "force" 
is very difficult to prove, Avdotya Romanovna.' 
'Scoundrel !' whispered Dunya indignantly. 
'As you please, but note that I was speaking only of a 
supposition. In my personal belief you are quite right: violence 
is an abomination. I was simply showing you that your con­
science would have nothing to reproach you with if you were 
. . .  if you wished to save your brother voluntarily, in the way 
I have suggested. I mean you would simply be yielding to 
circumstances, or even to force, if we can't manage without 
that word. Think of this : your brother's fate, and your 
mother's as well, are in your hands. I will be your slave .
•
.
 all 
my life . . .  I will wait here .
•
 .' 
Svidrigaylov sat down on the sofa, some yards away from 
Dunya. She had no longer the slightest doubt of his unshakeable 
determination. Besides, she knew him .
•
.
 
Suddenly she took a revolver out of her pocket, cocked it, 
and rested the hand that held it on the little table. Svidrigaylov 
sprang up. 
'Aha ! So that's it !' he exclaimed in astonishment, but still 
smiling maliciously. 'Well, that entirely changes matters ! You 
yourself are making things very much easier for me, Avdotya 
Romanovna. Where did you get that revolver, though? Not 
from Mr. Razumikhin? Why ! That revolver is mine! An old 
friend ! And I looked all over for it! . . .  The lessons in shooting, 
which I had the honour to give you in the country, were not 
entirely wasted, then.' 
'The revolver did not belong to you, but to Marfa Petrovna, 
whom you killed, wretch! There was nothing of yours in her 
house. I took it when I began to suspect what you were capable 
of. Dare to move one step forward, and I swear I will kill 
you !' 
Dunya was in a frenzy. She kept the revolver cocked. 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'Well, and what about your brother? I ask out of curiosity,' 
said Svidrigaylov, still standing in the same place. 
'Denounce him, if you will ! Don't stir ! Not a step ! I will 
shoot ! You poisoned your wife, I know you did. You are a 
murderer yourself! . .  .' 
'Are you quite certain that I poisoned Marfa Petrovna ?' 
'Yes ! You hinted as much to me; you spoke to me about 
poison . . .  I know you went for some . . .  you had it ready . . .  
It was you ! It was certainly you . . .  wretch !' 
'Even if that were true, it would have been because of you 
. . .  you would have been the cause of it.' 
'You are lying ! I always hated you, always . .  .' 
'Ah, Avdotya Romanovna ! You seem to have forgotten how 
you softened towards me in the heat of propaganda and grew 
tender . . .  I could see it in your eyes ; do you remember the 
evening, and the moonlight, and a nightingale singing?' 
'Lies !' (Dunya's eyes flashed with furious rage.) 'Lies and 
vile slander !' 
'Lies ? Well, perhaps so. I lied. Women should not be 
reminded of such things.' (He smiled.) 'I know you will shoot 
me, you pretty little wild creature. Well, shoot then !' 
Dunya raised the revolver and looked at him with her great 
black eyes flashing fire in her white face. Her lower lip was pale 
and quivering, but her resolve was firm and she estimated the 
distance between them and waited for the first move on his 
part. He had never seen her look so beautiful. The flame that 
shone in her eyes as she raised the revolver seemed to set him 
on fire, and his heart contracted with pain. He took a step 
forward and a shot rang out. The bullet grazed his scalp and 
lodged in the wall behind him. He stood still and laughed softly: 
'The wasp has stung me ! She aims straight at the head .
•
.
 
What's this? Blood !' He took out his handkerchief to wipe 
away the blood which flowed in a thin trickle down his right 
temple. The bullet seemed barely to have grazed the skin. 
Dunya lowered the revolver and stared at Svidrigaylov not so 
much in terror as in a sort of wild perplexity. It was as though 
she did not understand what she had done or what was 
happening. 
'Well, you missed ! Fire again, I will wait,' said Svidrigaylov 
softly, still laughing, if rather sourly. 'If you behave like this, 
I shall have time to seize you before you have got the revolver 
cocked !' 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
477 
Dunechka shuddered, hastily cocked the gun, and again 
levelled it. 
'Leave me alone !' she said desperately. 'I swear I will shoot 
again . . . I . . . will kill you ! . . . ' 
'Well . . .  at three paces it is impossible not to kill. But if 
you don't kill me . . .  then •
•
 .' His eyes gleamed, and he took 
two more paces forward. 
Dunechka pulled the trigger, and the gun misfired. 
'You didn't load properly. It doesn't matter ! You have 
another cap there. Put it right. I'll wait.' 
He stood in front of her, two steps away, waiting and gazing 
at her with wild determination in his sombre eyes, inflamed 
with passion. Dunya realized that he would rather die than 
let her go. And . . .  she would certainly kill him now, at two 
paces ! . . .  
Suddenly she flung down the revolver. 
'She has given up !' said Svidrigaylov in amazement, and 
drew a deep breath. Some burden seemed to have lifted sud­
denly from his heart, and it was perhaps not only the fear of 
death, which, indeed, it is doubtful if he had felt in that 
moment. The relief he felt was from another emotion, gloomier 
and more melancholy, which he could not have defined in all 
its force. 
He went up to Dunya and gently laid his arm round her 
waist. She did not resist, but her whole body shook like a leaf 
and she looked at him with imploring eyes. He tried to say 
something but, although his lips moved, he could not speak. 
'Let me go !' implored Dunya. Svidrigaylov started, struck 
by the sudden difference in her tone. 
'So you do not love me?' he asked softly. 
Dunya shook her head. 
'And . . .  you cannot? . . .  Not ever?' he whispered in despair. 
'Never !' whispered Dunya. 
In Svidrigaylov's soul there was an instant of terrible, silent 
struggle. He gazed at Dunya with an indescribable expression. 
Suddenly he took away his arm, turned round, and walked 
quickly away to the window, where he stood for a moment 
in silence. 'Here is the key !' (He had taken it from the left­
hand pocket of his overcoat and laid it behind him on the 
table, without looking or turning round.) 'Take it; leave 
quickly ! . .  .' 
He still gazed fixedly out of the window. 

478 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
Dunya approached the table to take the key. 
'Quickly ! Quickly!' repeated Svidrigaylov, still without 
moving or turning round. But the sound of his voice had 
something terrible in it. 
Dunya understood, seized the key, hurried to the door, 
unlocked it hastily, and rushed from the room. A minute later 
she was running like a mad woman along the canal towards 
Voznesensky Bridge. 
Svidrigaylov stayed some three minutes longer by the 
window; at last he turned round, looked about him, and slowly 
passed his hand over his forehead. There was a strange smile 
on his face, the weak, pitiful, mournful smile of despair. The 
blood, which was already almost dry, smeared his palm; he 
looked at it bitterly, then wetted a towel and washed his temple. 
The revolver Dunya had flung away from her caught his eye 
as it lay near the door. He picked it up and looked at it. It was 
a small old-fashioned weapon which fired three shots; there 
were still two charges and one percussion cap in it. It could be 
fired once more. He stood and thought for a moment, then 
thrust it into his pocket, took his hat, and went out. 
C H A P T E R  V I  
ALL that evening until ten o'clock he spent in wandering 
between various taverns and brothels. He picked up Katya 
again somewhere, and she sang another of her servants' -hall 
songs, about a certain 'villain and tyrant' who 'kissed Katya'. 
Svidrigaylov bought drinks for Katya, the organ-grinder, 
some singers and servants, and two little clerks. He had drawn 
these clerks into the company because they both had crooked 
noses, one twisted to the right and the other to the left. Svidri­
gaylov was much struck with this circumstance. Finally, they 
persuaded him to go to a pleasure-garden, where he paid for 
all of them to go in. This garden contained one frail three­
year-old fir tree and three bushes. A 'V ˋux_ha(l', really a 
_
bar 
which served tea as well, had been bmlt m 1t, and bes1des 
there were a few green tables and chairs. The public was enter­
tained by a chorus of very poor singers and some drunken 
German from Munich as a red-nosed, but extremely melan­
choly clown. The clerks got into an argument with some other 
clerk; and almost came to blows. They asked Svidrigaylov to 
settle the dispute. He listened to them for about a quarter of 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
479 
an hour, but they shouted so loud that there was not the 
slightest hope of discovering what it was all about. What 
seemed to be the most firmly established was that one of them 
had stolen something and even managed to sell it then and 
there to a Jew who happened along, but then he had refused 
to share the proceeds with his companion. It turned out that 
the object he had sold was a teaspoon belonging to the 'Vaux­
hall'. The loss was discovered and the affair began to take on a 
troublesome aspect. Svidrigaylov paid for the spoon, got up 
and left the garden. It was about ten o'clock. During all this 
time he had drunk nothing at all, and in the 'Vauxhall' had 
ordered for himself only tea, and that merely for the sake 
of appearances. The evening had been sultry and overcast. 
Towards ten o'clock heavy clouds began to pile up overhead, 
there was a clap of thunder, and rain swept down in a deluge. 
It fell not in drops but in streams that beat upon the ground 
like a waterfall. The lightning flashed incessantly, and the 
flashes lasted while one might count five. Wet through to the 
skin, Svidrigaylov went home, locked his door, opened his 
bureau, took out all his money, and tore up some papers. Then, 
thrusting the money into his pocket, he was about to change his 
clothes, but when he looked out of the window and heard the 
thunder and the rain he shrugged his shoulders, took his hat 
and went out, leaving the door unlocked. He went straight to 
Sonya. She was at home. 
She was not alone ; Kapernaumov's four little children were 
with her. Sofya Semenovna was giving them tea. She greeted 
Svidrigaylov silently and politely, looked in surprise at his wet 
clothes, but said nothing. The children fled in unaccountable 
terror. 
Svidrigaylov sat down at the table and asked Sonya to sit 
beside him. She timidly prepared to listen to him. 
'Sofya Semenovna,' he said, 'I may, perhaps, be going to 
America, and as this is probably the last time we shall see each 
other, I have come to complete some arrangements. Well, did 
you see the lady today? I know what she told you, you need 
not repeat it.' (Sonya, blushing, had made some slight move­
ment.) 'People like that always follow the same old lines. As 
far as your little brother and sisters are concerned, they are 
definitely provided for and I have paid over the money destined 
for each of them into trustworthy hands and taken receipts 
for it. You had better keep the receipts, in case they are needed. 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
Here you are. Well, now that is done. Here are three five-per­
cent bonds, worth three thousand roubles altogether. Take 
these for yourself, for yourself personally, and let this be 
between ourselves. Nobody is to know of it, whatever you may 
hear. You will need them, because, Sofya Semenovna, to live 
as you have been doing is wrong and now you will have no 
further need to do so.' 
'You have been so very good to me, and those orphaned 
children, and their poor mother,' said Sonya hurriedly, 'that 
if I have given you so little thanks up to now, .
.
•
 I don't want 
you to think . . . ' 
'Stop. Say no more.' 
'But this money, Arkady Ivanovich, I am very grateful to 
you; but I really don't need it now. I have only myself to keep. 
Please don't think I am ungrateful, but if you want to do good 
with this money, then . .  .' 
'It is for you, for you, Sofya Semenovna, and, please, without 
any discussion, because I really have no time. And you will 
need it. Rodion Romanovich has two ways open to him : a 
bullet through the brain, or Siberia.' (Sonya looked at him 
wildly and began to tremble.) 'Don't be disturbed ; I know 
everything, and from his own lips, but I am not a talker. I shall 
not tell anybody. You did right to tell him that he should go 
and confess everything of his own accord. It would be much 
better for him. Well, if it is to be Siberia-he will go, and I 
suppose you will follow him. That is so, isn't it? Isn't it? Well, 
if so, that means you will need the money. You will need it for 
him, do you understand ? If I give it to you it is all the same 
as if I gave it to him. Besides, you promised to pay Amalia 
lvanovna, as well ; I heard you. Why is it, Sofya Semenovna, 
that you take all these debts and obligations on yourself so 
recklessly? It was Katerina lvanovna who was in debt to the 
German woman, not you, so you should let the German go 
hang. That 's not the way to live in this world. Well, if ever 
anybody asks you-tomorrow, say, or the day after-about me 
or anything to do with me (and you will be asked), don't 
mention my having been to see you now, and don't show 
anybody the money or tell them anything about my having 
given it to you. Well, now good-bye.' He stood up. 'My kind 
regards to Rodion Romanovich. By the way: until the time 
comes keep the money with Mr. Razumikhin. Do you know 
him? Oh, of course you do. He is all right. Take it to him 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
481 
tomorrow or .
•
.
 when the time comes. Until then hide it 
carefully.' 
Sonya had also jumped up and was gazing fearfully at him. 
She was longing to say something, to ask questions, but at first 
she did not dare, and indeed did not know how to begin. 
'How can you . . .  how can you go now, in such rain?' 
'What, mean to go to America and be afraid of the rain ! 
He, he ! Good-bye, Sofya Semenovna, my dear. May you live 
long to be a blessing to others. By the way . . .  tell Mr. Razu­
mikhin that I sent him my greetings. Say it in those words : 
Arkady, you must say, Ivanovich Svidrigaylov sends you his 
greetings. Don't fail.' 
· 
He went, leaving Sonya bewildered and frightened, and filled 
with vague and distressing forebodings. 
It appeared later that at some time after eleven o'clock that 
same evening he made another extremely odd and unexpected 
visit. It was still raining. He was wet through when, at twenty 
minutes to twelve, he entered the crowded little flat of his 
fiancee's parents, at the corner of the Maly Prospect and the 
Third Line, on Vasilyevsky Island. He had some difficulty in 
gaining admittance, and at first his presence caused consterna­
tion; but, when he wished, Arkady Ivanovich had extremely 
charming manners and he immediately succeeded in dispelling 
the first (and very intelligent) suspicion of his bride's prudent 
and sensible parents, that he had got so drunk somewhere or 
other that he did not know what he was doing. The sensible 
and soft-hearted mother wheeled out her invalid husband in 
his arm-chair to Arkady Ivanovich and then, in her usual way, 
proceeded to discuss subjects remote from all that concerned 
her. (She was a woman who never attacked questions directly, 
but, if it were absolutely necessary for her to get accurate 
information about something, such as what day Arkady Ivano­
vich would be pleased to appoint for the wedding, she always 
first brought into play various little smiles and rubbings of her 
hands, and then began to ask curious and even eager questions 
about Paris and the life of the court there, in due course bring­
ing the subject round by slow degrees to the Third Line on 
Vasilyevsky Island.) At any other time, of course, all this 
was received with respect, but on this occasion Arkady Ivano­
vich proved somehow peculiarly impatient, and brusquely ex­
pressed a wish to see his fiancee, although he had been 
informed at the very beginning that she had already gone to 

482 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
bed. Naturally, she made her appearance. Arkady Ivanovich 
at once told her that he was obliged to leave St. Petersburg for 
a time on very important business, and had therefore brought 
her various notes to the value of fifteen thousand roubles in 
silver, which he asked her to accept from him as a gift, since 
he had long meant to make her this trifling present before their 
marriage. The particular logical connexion of the gift with his 
imminent departure, and with the absolute necessity of arriv­
ing in pouring rain at midnight, was not, of course, made at 
all clear by these explanations, but things went off very well, 
nevertheless. Even the inevitable ohs and ahs, questions and 
wondering exclamations were unusually restrained and sub­
dued; on the other hand, there were ardent expressions of 
gratitude, reinforced by tears from the very sensible mother. 
Arkady I vanovich rose, laughing, kissed his fiancee, tapped 
her cheek, reaffirmed his intention of returning soon, and, 
seeing in her eyes, as well as childish curiosity, a silent, serious 
question, thought for a moment and kissed her again. At the 
same time he experienced a moment of real vexation that his 
present would immediately be locked away in the care of the 
most sensible of mothers. He went out, leaving them all in a 
state of extraordinary excitement. But the tender marna, in a 
rapid undertone, at once began to resolve some of their more 
pressing doubts, declaring that Arkady Ivanovich was a great 
man, a man of affairs, with great connexions, a rich man­
God only knew what he might have in his mind ; he might 
take it into his head to go away, or to give away money, and 
consequently there was no reason to be surprised. Of course, 
it was strange that he was wet through, but Englishmen, for 
example, were even more eccentric than that, and besides, 
none of these worldly and fashionable people cared what might 
be said of them, and they did not stand on ceremony. Perhaps 
he even carne like that on purpose, to show that he was not 
afraid of anybody. But the most important thing was not to 
say a word about this to anybody, because nobody knew what 
might be the consequences, and the money must be put under 
lock and key at once, and, of course, the best thing about all 
this was that Fedosya was still in the kitchen, and, above all, 
above all, nothing must be confided to that sly vixen Resslich, 
and so on, and so on. They sat and whispered until almost two 
o'clock. The young lady, however, had gone to bed much 
earlier, full of wonder and rather melancholy. 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
483 
Meanwhile, just at midnight, Svidrigaylov crossed the Tuch­
kov Bridge towards Petersburgsky Island. The rain had ceased, 
but a blustering wind had risen. He was beginning to shiver. 
For a minute he gazed with peculiar interest, and even with 
a questioning look, at the black water of the Little Neva, but he 
soon found it very cold standing near the water, and he turned 
and walked along the Bolshoy Prospect. He walked steadily 
down the endless avenue for almost half an hour, stumbling 
sometimes in the darkness on the wooden pavement, but 
always intently scanning the right-hand side of the avenue in 
search of something. Somewhere there, nearly at the end of the 
Prospect, he had recently noticed as he went past a fairly large 
hotel, built of wood ; its name, as far as he could remember, 
was something like 'The Adrianople.' He was not mistaken ; in 
that remote spot the hotel was so conspicuous that it was 
impossible to miss it, even in the dark. It was a long wooden 
building, black with age, and in spite of the lateness of the 
hour there were still lights and signs of life about it. He went 
in and asked the ragged waiter who met him in the corridor for 
a room. The waiter looked him over, pulled himself together, 
and led him to a cramped and stuffy room, somewhere at the 
farthest end of the corridor, in a corner under the stairs. But 
there was no other; all the rest were occupied. The ragged 
waiter looked inquiringly at Svidrigaylov. 
'Is there any tea?' asked Svidrigaylov. 
'There might be, sir.' 
'Is there anything else?' 
'Veal, vodka, hors d'reuvre.' 
'Bring me tea and some veal.' 
'Don't you want anything else?' asked the waiter, appar-
ently somewhat puzzled. 
'No, nothing.' 
The ragged waiter retreated, quite disillusioned. 
'A marvellous place this is!' thought Svidrigaylov. 'Why 
didn't I know that? I, too, probably look as if I were coming 
back from some cafe-chantant, and had had some adventures 
on the way. I wonder, though, who stays here.' 
He lit a candle and looked more closely at the room. It was 
a tiny hutch of a place, hardly big enough to hold him, with 
one window; a filthy bed, a stained deal table, and a chair 
occupied almost all the floor-space. The walls looked as though 
they had been roughly knocked together from boards, and the 

484 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
wall-paper was dirty and faded, and so dusty and torn that, 
although its original colour (yellow) could still be guessed at, 
it was quite impossible to make out its pattern. At one place, 
where the stairs went up, the wall and ceiling sloped obliquely 
like those of an attic. Svidrigaylov put down his candle, sat 
on the bed, and fell into thought. But after some time his 
attention was distracted by a strange incessant whispering, 
which sometimes rose almost to a shriek, coming from the 
adjoining hutch. This sound had never ceased since he went in. 
He listened ; somebody was almost tearfully scolding and up­
braiding somebody else, but he could hear only one voice. 
Svidrigaylov got up a:nd shaded the candle with his hand ; 
light at once shone through a crack in the wall. He went up 
and looked through it. In the room, which was slightly larger 
than his own, were two guests. One, in his shirt-sleeves, a man 
with extraordinarily curly hair and an inflamed red face, stood 
in the pose of a public speaker, with his legs wide apart to 
preserve his balance, and pathetically, beating his breast, 
reproached the other for his beggary and lack of social standing, 
and reminded him that he had plucked him out of the gutter 
and could drive him back there when he would, and that only the 
finger of God sees everything. The object of the tirade sat on the 
chair with the expression of a man with an irresistible desire to 
sneeze which he cannot gratify. He glanced occasionally at the 
orator with a dull and sheepish eye, but he plainly had no idea 
what the trouble was and it was even doubtful whether he 
heard anything that was said. On the table, where the candle 
had nearly burned down, stood an almost empty decanter of 
vodka, glasses, bread, cucumbers, tumblers, and a long-emptied 
tea service. Svidrigaylov studied this picture carefully, and 
then indifferently moved away from the crack and sat down 
again on the bed. 
The seedy waiter, returning with the tea and veal, could 
not refrain from asking again whether he did not want some­
thing more ; receiving a negative answer once more, he finally 
took himself off. Svidrigaylov pounced on the tea, to warm 
himself, and drank a glassful, but his appetite was quite gone 
and he could not eat anything. He was evidently beginning to 
be feverish. He took off his overcoat and jacket, rolled himself 
in a blanket and lay down on the bed. He felt annoyed : 'I ought 
to have been well for this occasion,' he thought, and laughed 
shortly. The room felt stuffy, the candle burnt dimly, the 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
wind howled outside, a mouse scratched somewhere in a 
corner, and the whole room smelt of mice and some kind of 
leather. He lay in a half-dream, with the ideas chasing each 
other through his mind. He would have liked to find some 
object on which his thoughts could fix themselves. 'There 
must be a garden of some sort outside the window', he thought; 
'I can hear the trees rustling. How I dislike the sound of trees 
at night in storm and darkness ! A nasty sensation !' And he 
remembered how repulsive he had found it just now, when he 
was passing the Petrovsky Park. This reminded him of the 
Tuchkov Bridge and the Little Neva and he seemed to feel 
cold again, as he had then, standing above the water. 'I have 
never liked water, even in landscapes,' he thought again, and 
once more laughed shortly at a certain strange idea : 'You 
would think I ought to be quite indifferent to all these ques­
tions of aesthetics and comfort now, and here I have grown as 
particular as a wild animal fastidiously choosing a place . . .  in 
similar circumstances. I ought just to have turned into Petrov­
sky Park. I suppose I thought it was too dark, or too cold. 
He, he ! Are pleasant sensations so nearly essential to me? . . .  
By the way, why not put out the candle?' (He blew it out.) 
'My neighbours have gone to bed,' he thought, no longer 
seeing the light through the crack. 'Now, Marfa Petrovna, 
now you would do very well to pay me a visit; it is dark, the 
place is apt, and the choice of time would be original. But of 
course, it is just now that you will not come . .  .' 
For some reason he suddenly remembered how, an hour 
before he carried his design against Dunechka into effect, he 
recommended Raskolnikov to entrust her to Razumikhin's 
care. 'The fact is that I said that mostly to torment myself, 
as Raskolnikov guessed. What a rascal that Raskolnikov is, 
though ! He has brought a lot on himself. He may become a 
great rogue in time, when the nonsense has left him, but now 
he wants to live too much! In that particular people like him are 
wretches. Well, the devil take him; let him do as he likes, it 's 
nothing to me.' 
He could not sleep. Little by little the image of Dunechka 
as he had last seen her began to glimmer before him, and a 
sudden tremor shook him. 'No, now I must throw this off,' 
he thought, rousing himself; 'I must think of something else. 
It is strange and laughable : I never greatly hated anybody, 
I never even felt particularly revengeful, and that is a bad sign, 

486 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
a bad sign ! I didn't like quarrelling either, and never got heated 
-another bad sign ! And how much I promised her ! Oh, the 
devil ! But she might indeed have re-moulded me somehow . . .  ' 
He fell silent, and clenched his teeth; again Dunya's image 
rose before him, exactly as she had been when, after firing 
once, she became terribly frightened and lowered the revolver, 
gazing at him, half-stunned, so that he might have seized her 
twice over and she would not have raised a hand to defend 
herself, if he had not reminded her himself. He remembered 
how at that moment his heart had contracted with pity for 
her .
•
.
 'Oh, to the devil with it ! These thoughts again ! I must 
throw them all off, throw them off! . .  .' 
He was slipping into forgetfulness; his feverish trembling 
had ceased ; suddenly he seemed to feel something running over 
his arm and leg under the blanket. He jumped : 'Damn it, I'm 
hanged if it isn't a mouse !' he thought. 'It's the veal I left on 
the table . . .' He felt extremely reluctant to unroll himself 
from the blanket and get up in the shivering cold, but again 
something unpleasant touched his leg; he tore off the blanket 
and lit the candle. Shaking with feverish chill he stooped down 
to look at the bed-there was nothing there; he shook out the 
blanket and a mouse darted out on the sheet. He tried to 
catch it, but the mouse, without jumping down from the bed, 
ran to and fro in zigzags, slipped from between his fingers, ran 
over his hand, and disappeared under the pillow; he flung the 
pillow aside, but instantly felt something jump under his shirt 
and run over his body and down his back. He shuddered with 
nerves and woke up. The room was dark, he was lying on the 
bed, still wrapped in the blanket, and the wind howled outside 
the window. 'How horrible !' he thought with disgust. 
He got up and sat on the edge of the bed with his back to 
the window. 'I should do better not to sleep at all,' he decided. 
But it blew cold and damp from the window; without getting 
up, he pulled the blanket towards him and wrapped himself 
in it. He did not light the candle. He did not think of anything, 
and did not wish to think; but dreams and fragmentary ideas 
without beginning or end, or any coherence, rose before 
him one after another. He fell into a kind of half doze. The 
cold or the darkness, the dampness or the wind whistling 
outside the window and shaking the trees, one of these perhaps 
aroused in him a stubborn fanciful mood and longing-at any 
rate, his mind began to dwell persistently on flowers. He 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
imagined a charming landscape; a bright, warm, almost hot 
day, a holiday-Whit Sunday. A rich luxurious country cottage 
in the English style, overgrown with sweet-scented flowering 
plants and with flower-borders all round it; a porch twined 
with climbing plants and surrounded by beds of roses ; a light, 
cool staircase, richly carpeted and banked with rare flowers 
in Chinese vases. He particularly noticed great bunches of 
delicate white narcissi in jars in the windows, with their heavy 
aromatic fragrance, hanging their heads on their long thick 
stalks of clear green. He was reluctant to leave them, but he 
went on up the stairs and into a large, high-ceilinged drawing­
room, and again, everywhere, in the windows, round the doors 
standing wide open to the balcony, on the balcony itself, every­
where there were flowers. The floor was strewn with fragrant 
freshly cut hay, the windows were open, a cool, fresh, gentle 
breeze blew into the room, birds were chirping under the 
windows, and in the middle of the room, on tables shrouded 
in white satin, stood a coffin. It was lined with heavy white 
silk, bordered with thick white frilling, and surrounded on all 
sides by wreaths of flowers. Among the flowers lay a young girl 
in a white tulle dress, and the hands closely folded over her 
breast were like marble. But her loosened hair, her bright fair 
hair, was wet; there was a garland of roses on her head. Her 
stern, set profile looked as though it too were carved in marble, 
but the smile on her. pale lips was full of infinite, unchildlike 
grief and immense bitterness. Svidrigaylov knew her. There 
were no lighted candles, no holy icons, beside the coffin, and 
no prayers were heard ; she was a suicide, drowned. She was 
no more than fourteen, but that heart had been broken, and 
had destroyed itself, savagely wounded by the outrage that 
had amazed and horrified her young childish conscience, over­
whelmed her soul, pure as an angel's, with unmerited shame, 
and torn from her a last cry of despair, unregarded, but 
defiantly shrieked into the dark night, into the blackness, the 
cold, the torrents of spring, while the wind howled . . .  
Svidrigaylov roused himself, got up from the bed, and 
reached the window in one stride. The wind whipped furiously 
into his crowded little room and clung coldly, like hoar-frost, 
round his face and his breast, covered only by his shirt. Under 
the window there must indeed be a garden of sorts, a pleasure­
garden, it seemed; probably there was music and singing 
there in the daytime, and tea was carried out to be drunk at 

488 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
little tables. Now rain spattered in at the window from the 
trees and bushes, and it was as dark as a cellar, so that it was 
barely possible to distinguish objects as faintly darker patches 
in the blackness. Svidrigaylov, stooping down and leaning with 
his elbows on the sill, stared into the obscurity for a full five 
minutes. Through the gloom of the night sounded a cannon shot, 
then another. 
'Ah, the signal ! The water is rising,' he thought; 'towards 
morning, in the lower parts of the town, it will swirl through 
the streets and flood the basements and cellars, the sewer-rats 
will come up to the surface, and amid the rain and the wind 
people will begin, dripping wet and cursing, to drag their 
rubbish to the upper floors •
.
•
 What time is it now?' No sooner 
had the thought crossed his mind, than a clock somewhere 
near, ticking away in a great hurry, struck three. 'Aha, in an 
hour it will be light ! Why wait for that? I will go at once, I will 
go straight across to Petrovsky Island and pick out somewhere 
a tall bush, dripping with rain, so that the slightest touch will 
bring a million rivulets splashing down all over my head . . . ' 
He fastened the window, lit the candle, pulled on his waistcoat 
and overcoat, put his hat on his head and went out with his 
candle in to the corridor to look for the tattered waiter (sleeping 
in some corner among candle-ends and all sorts of trash), pay 
for his room, and leave the hotel. 'This is the very best time, 
I could not choose a better !' 
It took a long time to walk the whole length of the narrow 
corridor; he found nobody, and was just about to shout when 
in a shadowy corner, between an old cupboard and a door, 
something caught his eye, something that seemed to be alive. 
He stooped down with the candle and saw a child-a little 
girl, no more than five years old, shivering and crying, her 
clothes dripping like a wet dish-cloth. She did not seem afraid 
of Svidrigaylov but looked at him with dull wonder in her big 
black eyes. Now and then she caught her breath sobbingly, as 
children do when they have stopped crying after a long time 
and are beginning to be comforted, but still from time to time 
break into sobs again. The child's little face looked pale and 
exhausted, and she was stiff with cold. 'How did she come here? 
She must have hidden herself and stayed here all night.' He 
began to question her. The little girl became lively all at once 
and began to babble in her childish way. There was something 
about 'mummy', 'mummy will be cwoss', about a cup that was 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
'bwoke'. The little girl chattered without ceasing, and it was 
possible to make out from what she said that she was the 
neglected child of some drunken cook, probably in that ho­
tel, and that her mother bullied and thrashed her; that she 
had broken 'mummy's' cup the evening before and been so 
frightened that she had run away, and after cowering outside 
in the rain for a long time had crept in here and hidden behind 
the cupboard. She had crouched all night in the corner, crying 
and shivering from the damp, the darkness, and the fear that she 
would be severely thrashed. He carried her into his room, set her 
on the bed, and began to undress her. The torn shoes on her bare 
feet were as wet as though they had lain in a puddle all night. 
When he had undressed her, he laid her on the bed and swathed 
her from head to foot in the blanket. She fell asleep at once. 
When he had finished, he relapsed again into moody thoughts. 
'Well ! Here I am, getting myself involved !' he thought 
suddenly, with heavy anger. 'How absurd !' Irritated, he took 
up his candle, to go and find the waiter at all costs, and leave 
as quickly as possible. 'Oh, the little girl !' he thought with an 
oath, as he was opening the door, but he turned back once 
more to see whether she was asleep, and how she was sleeping. 
Carefully he lifted the blanket. The little girl was sound and 
peacefully asleep. She had grown warm under the blanket, 
and there was colour in her pale cheeks. But it was strange, the 
colour seemed brighter and stronger than the usual rosiness of 
childhood. 'It is the flush offever,' thought Svidrigaylov, but it 
looked almost more like the flush of wine-as though she had 
been given a whole glassful to drink. Her scarlet lips seemed to 
burn and glow, but what was this? Suddenly it seemed to him 
that the long black lashes stirred and fluttered, as though they 
were about to lift, and from under them looked, with an un­
childlike wink, a sly, sharp eye, as though the child were not 
asleep, but only pretending. Yes, it was true; her lips parted 
in a smile; the corners of the mouth quivered, as if she were 
still restraining herself. But now she had ceased to control 
herself at all, and it was a laugh, a downright laugh; an 
impudent invitation gleamed from that unchildlike face; it 
was corruption, it was the face of a courtesan, the brazen face 
of a mercenary French harlot. Now, without further conceal­
ment, both eyes were open, enveloping him with their shame­
less, burning glance, inviting him, laughing . . . There was 
something monstrous and infinitely offensive in that laugh, in 

490 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
those eyes, in all that nastiness in the face of a child. 'What! 
A five-year-old !' whispered Svidrigaylov in real horror. 'This 
•
.
•
 what is this?' But now she turned to him, all her little face 
glowing, and stretched out her arms •
.
.
 'Accursed creature!' 
cried Svidrigaylov in horror, raising his arm to strike her . . .  
But at that moment he awoke. 
He was still on the bed, rolled as before in the blanket; the 
candle had not been lighted, and daylight was already whiten­
ing the windows. 
'Nightmares all night long !' He raised himself, feeling jaded 
and angry; his bones ached. There was a thick mist out­
side, and nothing could be seen through it. It was nearly five 
o'clock; he had overslept !  He got up and put on his still damp 
jacket and overcoat. He felt in his pocket for the revolver, 
took it out and correctly replaced the percussion cap ; then 
he sat down, took out a notebook and wrote a few lines in large 
letters on the front page, where they must be seen, read them 
over and sat pondering with his elbows on the table. The 
revolver and the notebook lay by his elbow. Newly awakened 
flies clustered on the untouched veal, which also stood on the 
table. He watched them for some time and at last began trying 
to catch one of them with his free right hand. He tried for a long 
time, until he was tired with his efforts, but quite unsuccess­
fully. Finally, catching himself in this interesting occupâion, 
he roused himself with a start, got up, and resolutely walked 
out of the room. A minute later he was in the street. 
A thick milky mist covered the city. Svidrigaylov walked 
along slippery, greasy, wooden pavements towards the Little 
Neva. His mind still held the illusory vision of its waters rising 
in flood during the night, and pictured Petrovsky Island, the 
wet paths, the soaking grass, the dripping trees and bushes and 
at last that one bush . . .  In an effort to think of something else, 
he looked disapprovingly at the houses. The avenue was empty 
of cabs and passers-by. The little bright-yellow wooden houses, 
with their closed shutters, looked dirty and dejected. The cold 
and damp were penetrating his whole body and making him 
shiver. Occasionally he came across signs outside little shops 
and market-gardens, and he conscientiously read each one. 
The wooden pavement had come to an end, and he was passing 
a large stone building. A dirty, shivering cur, with its tail 
between its legs, crossed his path. A man in a greatcoat lay, 
dead-drunk, face down on the pavement; he passed him and 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
491 
went on. A tall watch-tower caught his eye on the left. 'Bah !' 
he thought. 'This is a good enough place; why go to Petrovsky? 
At least there will be an official witness . .  .' He almost smiled 
at this new idea and turned into Syezhinskaya Street. Here 
stood the large building with the watch-tower. Near the big 
closed gates a little man, wrapped in a soldier's grey greatcoat 
and wearing a copper helmet that made him look like Achilles, 
was leaning his shoulder against the wall. He looked with sleepy 
indifference at Svidrigaylov as he approached. His face had 
the eternal expression of resentful affliction which is so sharply 
etched on every Jewish face, without exception. For a short 
time the two, Svidrigaylov and Achilles, stood contemplating 
one another in silence. At length Achilles decided that it was 
out of order for a man who was not drunk to be :;:tanding two 
yards away and staring at him without a word. 
'Vell, vot do you vant here already?' he asked, without 
moving or changing his position. 
'Nothing, brother. Good morning to you !' answered Svidri-
gaylov. 
'So go somevere else.' 
'I am going to foreign parts, brother.' 
'Foreign parts?' 
'To America.' 
'America?' 
Svidrigaylov took out the revolver and cocked it. Achilles 
raised his eyebrows. 
'Vot now, this is not the place for jokes !' 
'Why shouldn't it be the place?' 
'Because it isn't.' 
'Well, brother, it doesn't matter. It's a good place . . .  If you 
are asked, say I said I was off to America.' 
He lifted the revolver to his right temple. 
'But you can't do that here ! This is not the proper place !' 
Achilles, whose eyes had been growing rounder and rounder, 
started forward. 
Svidrigaylov pulled the trigger .
•
•
 
C HA P T E R  V I I  
THAT same day, but towards seven o'clock in the even­
ing, Raskolnikov was making his way towards his mother's 
and sister's flat in Bakaleev's house, where Razumikhin had 

492 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
installed them. The entrance to the staircase was on the street. 
As Raskolnikov approached, he seemed to hang back as though 
he were in two minds whether to go in or not. But he had 
made up his mind ; nothing would have made him turn back. 
'Besides, it makes no difference. They don't know anything 
yet,' he thought, 'and they have got used to finding me un­
accountable . . .' His clothes were dreadful, dirty, thread­
bare, torn and wrinkled after a whole night in the rain. His 
face was almost distorted with exhaustion, the result of physical 
fatigue, foul weather, and an inward strife prolonged for almost 
twenty-four hours. All night he had been alone, God knows 
where. But at least he had made up his mind. 
He knocked at the door; his mother opened it. Dunechka 
was not there. The maid also happened to be out for the 
moment. At first Pulkheria Alexandrovna was dumb with joy­
ful amazement; then she seized his hand and drew him into 
the room. 
'Well, here you are !' she began, stammering with joy. 'Don't 
be angry, Rodya, because my welcome was so foolish and 
tearful; I am laughing really, not crying. Do you think I am 
crying? No, I am happy, but it is a foolish way I have; the 
tears come. It has been like this since your father's death; 
I cry for everything. Sit down, my darling, you must be tired ; 
I can see you are. Oh dear, you have got yourself into a sadly 
dirty state.' 
'I was out in the rain yesterday, mama .
•
 . ' Raskolnikov was 
beginning. 
'Oh no, no !' burst out Pulkheria I vanovna, interrupting him. 
'You thought I was beginning to ask you questions straight 
away, like a foolish old woman, as I used to ; don't be alarmed. 
Really I understand, I understand everything; now I have 
learnt how things are done here and really it is more sen­
sible, I can see that for myself. I have come to the con­
clusion, once for all, that I mustn't expect to understand the 
considerations that decide your actions, or demand an account 
of them from you. You may have God knows what plans and 
business in your mind, or all sorts of ideas may have sprung 
up in you ; am I to be always jogging your elbow to ask you 
what you are thinking about? You see I . . .  Oh Lord, why 
am I dashing about like a scalded cat? • . . Look, Rodya, I 
have been reading your article in the magazine for the third 
time; Dmitry Prokofich brought it for me. Well, I sighed when 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
493 
I saw it. "See how foolish you are," I thought to myself; "this 
is what he is busy with, this is the answer to the riddle ! Clever 
people are always like that. He has new ideas, perhaps, in his 
head just now; he is thinking about them, and I worry and 
disturb him." I am reading it, my dear, and of course there is a 
lot that I don't understand ; but that must be so : how could I ?' 
'Show me, mama.' 
Raskolnikov took the paper and glanced for a moment at 
his article. Inconsistent as the feeling might be with his mood 
and circumstances, he experienced the strange and painfully 
sweet sensations of the author who sees himself in print for the 
first time; but then, he was only twenty-three. It lasted only 
for a moment. After reading a few lines, he frowned and a 
terrible anguish squeezed his heart. All his inward strife of the 
past months returned to him in an instant. Annoyed and dis­
gusted, he flung his article down on the table. 
'But, Rodya, however foolish I may be, all the same I can 
tell that in a very short time you will be one of the first, if not 
the very first, among our men oflearning. And people dared to 
think you were mad ! Ha, ha, ha l You don't know, but they 
really did think that. Wretched crawling worms, how can they 
understand what true intellect is? And you know, Dunechka, 
Dunechka too almost believed they were right-as if they 
could be ! Your poor father twice sent something to a magazine 
-first a poem (I have the manuscript still, I will show it to 
you some time), and then a whole novel (I copied it out for 
him, at my own request), and how we both prayed that they 
would be accepted-but they weren't ! A few days ago, Rodya, 
I was terribly grieved to think of your clothes, the way you 
live, and what you have to eat. But now I see that I was just 
being foolish again, because you could get anything you wanted 
tomorrow, with your brains and talents. It is just that for the 
moment you have more important things to occupy you and 
don't want . .  . ' 
'Isn't Dunya at home, mama?' 
'No, Rodya. I very often don't see her; she leaves me by 
myself. I am grateful to Dmitry Prokofich; he comes to sit with 
me, and talks about you all the time. He is very fond of you 
and he respects you, my dear. I am not saying that your sister 
is not very considerate. I really am not complaining. She has 
her own character, and I have mine; she has acquired some 
secrets of her own, too; well, I have no secrets from either of 

494 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
you. Of course, I am firmly convinced that Dunya is too wise, 
and besides, she loves both me and you •
•
.
 but I really don't 
know what it is all leading to. Here you have made me so 
happy now, Rodya, by coming, and she has gone out some­
where; when she comes, I shall say, "Your brother has been 
while you weren't here, and where have you been spending 
your time?" You mustn't spoil me too much, Rodya : if you 
can, come, if not, it can't be helped ; I shall wait. Whatever 
happens, I shall know you love me, and I can be content with 
that. I shall read your writings, I shall hear about you from 
everybody, and from time to time you will come to see me­
what could be better? You have come now, haven't you, to 
comfort your mother? I can see •
.
 .' 
Here Pulkheria Alexandrovna suddenly burst into tears. 
'There I go again ! Don't look at your foolish mother ! Oh 
Lord, why do I go on sitting here?' she cried, jumping up. 
'There is some coffee, and I don't even offer you some ! You see 
what an old woman's selfishness means. I'll get it at once!' 
'Mama, don't bother. I am going at once. That is not what 
I came for. Please listen to me.' 
Pulkheria Alexandrovna timidly came to him. 
'Mama, whatever happens, whatever you hear about me, 
whatever anybody says about me, will you love me just as you 
do now?' he asked with a full heart, seeming not to think of 
his words or weigh them. 
'Rodya, Rodya, what is wrong? How can you ask such a 
thing? Who will say anything to me about you? And I 
shouldn't believe anybody, no matter who it was ; I should 
simply send them packing.' 
'I came to assure you that I have always loved you, and now 
I am glad that we are alone, glad even that Dunya is not here,' 
he went on in the same impulsive way. 'I came to tell you 
plainly that, although you will be unhappy, you must be sure 
that your son loves you more now than himself, and that all 
you have been thinking about my being cruel and not loving 
you is false. I shall never cease to love you •
.
.
 Well, that 's 
enough; I thought that I must do this, begin with this . .  .' 
Pulkheria Alexandrovna silently embraced him, pressing 
him close to her and weeping softly. 
'I don't know what is the matter with you, Rodya,' she said 
at last. 'I have been thinking all this time that you were simply 
bored with us, but now I see from all this that there is some 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
495 
great misfortune in store for you, and that is why you are sad. 
I foresaw it long ago, Rodya. Forgive me for talking about it. 
I think about it all the time, and I can't sleep at night. Last 
night your sister was talking in her sleep all night, and all 
about you. I made some of it out, but I couldn't understand it. 
I've been going about all day as if I were under sentence of 
death, waiting for something and full of foreboding, and now 
it has come ! Rodya, Rodya, where are you going? Are you 
going away somewhere?' 
'Yes.' 
'I thought so ! But you know I can go with you, if you need 
me. And Dunya ; she loves you, she loves you dearly, and 
perhaps Sofya Semenovna could come with us, if you want her; 
you see, I am even willing to accept her as a daughter. Dmitri 
Prokofich will help us to make our plans to go together . . . 
but . . .  where . . .  are you going?' 
'Good-bye, mama.' 
'What? This very day?' she cried out, as though losing him 
for ever. 
'I can't . . .  It is time. I must •. 
.' 
'But can't I go with you?' 
'No, but kneel down and pray to God for me. Your prayers 
perhaps will reach him.' 
'Let me make the sign of the cross over you, and bless you ! 
Yes, that is right, that is right. Oh God, what are we doing?' 
Yes, he was glad, very glad that nobody else was there, and 
that he was alone with his mother. It was as though, after all 
those dreadful months, his heart was all at once softened. He 
fell down before her and kissed her feet, and they wept, with 
their arms about one another. And she was not surprised; this 
time she did not question him. Indeed, she had understood for 
a long time that something terrible was happening to her son, 
and now a dreadful moment had come for him. 
'Rodya, my dear, my first-born,' she said, sobbing 'now 
you are just like the little boy you used to be; you would come 
to me just like this, and put your arms round me and kiss me. 
When your father was still alive and we were poor, it was a 
comfort to have you with us, and when I buried your father, 
how often we used to weep over his grave with our arms round 
each other, like this. And if I have wept for a long time now, 
it is because my mother's heart had a presentiment of disaster. 
As soon as I saw you the first time, in the evening, you remember, 

496 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
when we had only just arrived here, I guessed everything 
simply from the way you looked at me, and my heart failed 
me; then today, when I opened the door, and looked at you, 
"Well," I thought, "the fatal moment has come". Rodya, 
Rodya, surely you are not going away immediately?' 
'No.' 
'You will come here again?' 
'Yes . . . I will come.' 
'Rodya, don't be angry, I can't even venture to ask ques­
tions. I know that I mustn't dare, but all the same, just tell me 
in two little words : are you going a long way?' 
'A very long way.' 
'What is there there? Some work, a career for you?' 
'What God sends . . .  only pray for me . .  . ' 
Raskolnikov went to the door, but she caught at him and 
looked into his eyes with an expression of despair. Her face 
was disfigured with fear. 
'That's enough, mama,' said Raskolnikov, bitterly regretting 
that he had ever thought of coming. 
'It's not for ever? Surely it's not good-bye for ever? You will 
really come, come tomorrow?' 
'Yes, yes, I will come. Good-bye.' 
At last he tore himself away. 
The evening was fresh, warm, and bright; the weather 
had begun to clear early in the morning. Raskolnikov went 
home; he was in a hurry. He wanted to finish all he had to do 
before sunset. Meanwhile he didn't wish to encounter anybody. 
As he went up to his flat he noticed that Nastasya left her 
samovar and attentively followed his progress with her eyes. 
'Can there be somebody in my room?' he thought. The idea 
that it might be Porfiry filled him with repulsion. But when he 
reached his room and opened the door he saw Dunechka. She 
was sitting all alone, lost in thought, and seemed to have been 
waiting for a long time. He stopped on the threshold and she 
got up, startled, from the sofa and stood before him, her eyes 
fixed on his face with a look of terror and unfathomable sorrow. 
From that .look he realized at once that she knew everything. 
'Shall I come in or go away again?' he asked mistrustfully. 
'I have been with Sofya Semenovna all day; we were both 
waiting for you. We thought you would be sure to go there.' 
Raskolnikov went in and wearily sat down. 
'I feel rather weak, Dunya, and I am very tired. And yet 

C R IME AND PUNISHMENT 
497 
I should have liked to be in full control of myself, at any rate 
just now.' 
Warily he raised his eyes to her. 
'Where were you all night?' 
'I don't remember very well ; you see, sister, I wanted to 
reach a definite decision and I found myself walking near the 
Neva many times ; I do remember that. I should have liked to 
end things there, but . . .  I decided against it . .  .' he whispered, 
again looking mistrustfully at Dunya. 
'Thank God ! We were so afraid of that very thing, Sonya 
Semenovna and I. So you still believe in life ; thank God, 
thank God !' 
Raskolnikov smiled bitterly. 
'I did not believe in it, but just now, as I stood with my 
mother's arms round me, we both wept; I do not believe, but 
I have asked her to pray for me. God knows how that comes 
about, Dunechka ; even I don't understand any of it.' 
'You have been to see mother? Have you told her?' cried 
Dunya, horrified. 'Could you really bring yourself to tell 
her?' 
'No, I didn't tell her .
•
.
 in so many words; but she under­
stood a great deal. She has heard you talking in your sleep. 
I am sure she half-knows already. Perhaps I did wrong to go 
and see her. I don't even remember myself why I went. I am a 
despicable creature, Dunya.' 
'Despicable, when you are prepared to go to meet your 
suffering? You are going to meet it, aren't you?' 
'Yes. Now. And it was to escape the shame that I wanted to 
drown myself, Dunya, but the thought came to me, when I was 
already standing on the bank, that if I had hitherto considered 
myself strong, then the shame should not frighten me now, ' 
he said, hastening on. 'Is that pride, Dunya?' 
'Yes, Rodya, it is pride.' 
The almost extinct fire flared up again in his lustreless eyes; 
it was as though he were pleased that he could still be proud. 
'And you don't think, sister, that I was simply afraid of the 
water?' he asked, with an ugly smile, looking into her face. 
'Oh, stop, Rodya !' exclaimed Dunya bitterly. 
There was a silence that lasted for some two minutes. He sat 
with his eyes on the floor; Dunechka was standing at the other 
end of the table and watching him in anguish. Suddenly he 
got up. 

•}98 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'It is late, I must go. I am going to give myself up imme-
diately.' 
Big tears rolled down her cheeks. 
'You are crying, sister, but can you give me your hand?' 
'Did you doubt it?' 
She clasped him fiercely. 
'Surely, by advancing to meet your punishment, you are 
half atoning for your crime?' she cried, pressing him close and 
kissing him. 
'Crime? What crime?' he cried, in a sudden access of rage. 
'Killing a foul, noxious louse, that old moneylender, no good 
to anybody, who sucked the life-blood of the poor, so vile that 
killing her ought to bring absolution for forty sins-was that 
a crime? That is not what I am thinking of, and I do not think 
of atoning for it. And why are you all pressing in on me from 
all sides with your "crime, crime !"? It is only now that I 
clearly realize the full absurdity of my faint-heartedness, now 
when I have made up my mind to face this unnecessary shame ! 
It was simply my own baseness and incompetence that made 
me reach my decision, and perhaps the thought of benefit to 
myself, as that . . .  Porfiry •
.
.
 suggested ! .
•
 .' 
'Brother, brother, why are you saying this? You really did 
spill blood !' cried Dunya, in despair. 
'Which everybody sheds,' he put in almost frantically, 
'which flows and has always flowed on this earth in torrents, 
which is poured out like champagne, and for which men are 
crowned in the Capitol and afterwards called benefactors of 
mankind. Look a little more closely and consider it carefully. 
I myself wanted to benefit men, and I would have done hun­
dreds, thousands, of good deeds, to make up for that one piece 
of stupidity-not even stupidity, but simple clumsiness, since 
the whole idea was not nearly as stupid as it seems now, when 
it has failed . . .  (failure makes anything seem stupid !). By that 
stupidity I meant only to put myself in an independent posi­
tion, to take the first step, to acquire means, and then every­
thing would have been expiated by immeasurably greater good 
. . .  But I, I failed even to accomplish the first step, because 
I am a miserable wretch ! That 's what it all amounts to ! All 
the same, I shan't look at it with your eyes : if I had succeeded, 
I should have been crowned, but now I shall fall into the trap !' 
'No, that's wrong, that's quite wrong ! Brother, why do you 
say these things?' 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
499 
'Ah, it's the form that 's wrong, the form is not aesthetically 
satisfactory ! Well, I definitely don't understand why smashing 
people with bombs in a regular siege is formally more respect­
able ! Regard for aesthetic considerations is the first sign of 
inability to act ! . . .  Never, never have I recognized this more 
clearly than now, and I understand less than ever why what 
I did is a crime ! Never have I been stronger, never have I held 
my convictions more firmly, than now ! . .  .' 
His white, exhausted face was flushed with colour. But, as 
he uttered the last exclamation, his eyes unexpectedly met 
Dunya's, and he read so much anguished feeling for him in her 
look that he involuntarily stopped short. He felt that, whatever 
else, he had made two poor women unhappy, that he was, in 
any case, responsible for that. 
'Dunya, my dear ! If I am guilty, forgive me (although, if 
I am guilty, I cannot be forgiven) .  Good-bye ! Don't let us 
quarrel. It is time, it is quite time I went. Don't follow me, 
I beg you. I have to go somewhere else . . .  But go at once and 
stay near mother. I beg you to do that ! This is my last and 
mosturgentrequest toyou. Don't leave her, all the time; I left her 
in a state of agitation that I am afraid she will not be able to bear: 
she will die or go out of her mind. Be with her ! Razumikhin 
will be with you; I have told him .
.
•
 Don't cry for me : I shall 
try to be honourable and manly all my life, although I am a 
murderer. Perhaps one day you will hear me spoken of. I shall 
not disgrace you, you will see; I may yet prove . . .  But now, 
good-bye for the moment,' he finished hastily, again noticing a 
strange expression come into Dunya's eyes at the promises in 
his last words. 'Why are you crying so? Don't cry, don't cry; 
we are not parting for ever ! .
.
•
 Oh, yes ! Stop a minute ! I had 
forgotten . . .' 
He went to the table, picked up a thick dusty book, opened 
it, and took out from between two pages a small water-colour 
portrait on ivory. It was a picture of his landlady's daughter, 
his former fiancee, who had died of fever. This was the 
strange girl who had wanted to enter a nunnery. He gazed for 
a minute at the expressive, delicate little face, kissed the por­
trait, and gave it to Dunechka. 
'I talked to her a good deal about that, and to her alone,' 
he said thoughtfully. 'I confided to her heart a great deal of 
what afterwards turned out so monstrously. Don't distress 
yourself,' he went on, turning to Dunya; 'she did not agree 

soo 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
with me, any more than you do, and I am glad she is not here 
now. The main thing is that now everything is going to be 
different. My whole life will be snapped in two,' he cried out 
suddenly, returning again to his own torments, 'everything, 
everything, and am I prepared for that? Do I want it? They 
say it is a necessary part of my ordeal. But what purpose is 
served by all these senseless trials? Shall I be better able to 
recognize that purpose then, when I am crushed with suffering 
and idiocy, and senilely impotent after twenty years of prison, 
than I am now? What shall I have to live for then? Why do I 
now acquiesce in such a life? Oh, I knew I was a miserable 
wretch when I stood at dawn today on the bank of the Neva !' 
Together they went out at last. It was hard for Dunya, but 
she loved him. She walked away, but when she had gone fifty 
yards she turned round again and looked at him. He was still in 
sight. When he reached the corner he too turned round ; their 
eyes met for the last time; when he saw that she was watching 
him he impatiently, even irritably, waved her on, and himself 
turned sharp round the corner. 
'I am cruel, I know,' he thought, beginning to be ashamed 
of his irritated gesture. 'But why should they love me so much, 
when I am not worthy of it? Oh, if only I were alone and 
nobody loved me, and if I had never loved anyone ! All this 
would never have happened! I wonder if my spirit will really grow 
so humble in the next fifteen or twenty years that I shall whine 
and whimper before people, branding myself a criminal with 
every word I utter. Yes, exactly, exactly ! That is just why they 
are deporting me now, that is what they want . . .  Look at all 
these scurrying about the streets, and every one of them is a 
scoundrel and a criminal by his very nature, and worse still, 
an idiot ! But try to save me from exile and they would all go 
mad with righteous indignation ! Oh, how I hate them all !' 
He began to consider earnestly 'by what process it might 
come about that he would finally humble himself before all of 
them instinctively, out of conviction. And yet why not? Of 
course, it must be so. Would not twenty years of unrelieved 
oppression crush him in the end ? Water wears away a stone. 
And why, why live after this? Why am I going there now, 
when I know that it will all happen according to the book, 
and not otherwise?' 
He had already asked himself that question a hundred times 
since the previous evening, but all the same he went. 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
501 
C HA P T E R  V I I I  
I T  was already dusk when he entered Sonya's room. She had 
been waiting for him all day in terrible agitation. She and 
Dunya had waited together for much of the time. Dunya, 
remembering how Svidrigaylov had said the evening before 
that Sonya 'knew about it', had gone to her in the morning. 
We shall not repeat all the details of the women's talk and their 
tears, or of what close friends they became. Dunya carried 
away at least one comfort from their interview, that her brother 
would not be alone; he had gone to Sonya first with his con­
fession; when he felt the need of another human being, he 
had gone to her; and she would follow wherever fate sent him. 
Dunya did not even need to ask questions, she knew it was so. 
She regarded Sonya almost with awe and at first embarrassed 
her by treating her with such reverence. Sonya was almost 
ready to burst into tears ; she thought ofherself, on the contrary, 
as unfit even to look at Dunya. The lovely image of Dunya, 
when she bowed to her with such gracious politeness at their 
first meeting at Raskolnikov's, had remained with her ever 
since as one of the most beautiful and unattainable visions of 
her life. 
Dunya at last grew impatient and left Sonya, in order to 
wait for her brother in his own room; she had thought all the 
time that he would go there first. Sonya immediately began 
torturing herself with the fear that he might really commit 
suicide. Dunya felt the same fear. But they had each been 
trying ceaselessly all day to persuade the other by every sort 
of argument that it could not happen, and they had felt less 
anxious while they were together. Now that they had parted, 
however, neither could think of anything else. Sonya remem­
bered how Svidrigaylov had told her the day before that 
two courses were open to Raskolnikov-Siberia or . . . She 
knew, besides, his vanity, his arrogance, his self-esteem, his 
want of faith. Could it be that only a faint heart and the fear 
of death had kept him alive, she wondered desperately. The 
sun was setting. She stood by the window, looking out sadly 
and fixedly, but nothing could be seen from it but one blank 
unwhitewashed wall of the next house. At last, when she was 
completely convinced that the unhappy Raskolnikov was dead, 
he came into the room. 

502 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
A joyful cry escaped her. But when she looked attentively at 
his face she grew pale. 
'Yes,' he said, smiling. 'I have come for your crosses, Sonya. 
It was you who sent me to the cross-roads; why, now that it has 
come to the point, do you shrink back?' 
Sonya looked at him in amazement. His tone seemed to her 
strange, and a cold shudder ran through her, but after a minute 
she realized that the tone and the words were both artificial. 
While he spoke to her his eyes were turned away, as if he 
wanted to avoid looking directly at her. 
'You see, Sonya, I have decided that perhaps it will be better 
this way. There is one circumstance . . .  Well, it would take too 
long to tell, and there is no need. Do you know what annoys 
me, though? It makes me angry that all those stupid, bestial 
faces will soon be crowding round me, gaping and goggling 
at me, asking stupid questions I shall be forced to answer, 
pointing their fingers at me . . .  Pah ! You know, I am not going 
to Porfiry; I am sick of him. I would rather go to my friend the 
Squib. How I shall surprise him, what a sensation I shall 
produce ! But I ought to be cooler; I have been getting too full 
of bile lately. Would you believe that I all but shook my fist 
at my sister just now, simply because she turned round to look 
at me for the last time? What a filthy state of mind to be in ! 
Ah, that is what I have come to ! Well, where are the crosses?' 
He seemed not to be himself. He was unable to stay in any 
one place for more than a moment or concentrate his attention 
on any one object; his thoughts cut across one another; he 
talked incoherently; his hands trembled slightly. 
Silently Sonya took the two crosses, of cypress-wood and 
copper, from the drawer, made the sign of the cross over her­
self and over him, and hung the little cypress-wood cross on his 
breast. 
'This, then, is a symbol that I am taking up my cross. He, he ! 
As if my earlier sufferings had been mere trifles ! The wooden 
one, that's the peasant one; the copper one, Lizaveta's, you 
take for yourself. Show me; was she wearing it . . .  then? I know 
of two things like these, a silver cross and a little ikon; I threw 
them back on the old woman's breast. They would be truly 
appropriate now; I ought to put them on . . .  But I am talking 
nonsense and forgetting the real point; I am scatter-brained, 
somehow ! . . .  You see, Sonya, I came specially to warn you, 
so that you should know . . .  Well, that 's all •
.
.
 I really only 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
503 
came for that. (Hm. I thought all the same that I should have 
more to say.) Well, you wanted me to go, and here I shall be in 
prison and your wish will be fulfilled; so why are you crying? 
You, too? Stop, that's enough ! How difficult you are making 
it for me !' 
But feeling had been awakened in him; his heart contracted 
as he looked at her. 'She, why should she be concerned?' he 
thought to himself. 'What am I to her? Why should she weep, 
why should she try to look after me, as if she were my mother 
or Dunya? She's determined to be a nursemaid to me !' 
'Make the sign of the cross, and pray, once at least,' Sonya 
begged in a timid shaking voice. 
'Oh, if you wish : just as you like. And with all my heart, 
Sonya, with all my heart . .  . ' 
But he wanted to say something different. 
He made the sign of the cross several times. Sonya seized 
her shawl and put it over her head. It was a green woollen 
shawl, probably the one Marmeladov had spoken of, the 
'family shawl'. Raskolnikov thought of that for a moment, but 
he did not ask about it. He had begun to feel very conscious 
that his mind was wandering wildly and that he was painfully 
agitated. This alarmed him. It suddenly struck him, too, that 
Sonya meant to go with him. 
'What are you doing? Where are you going ! Stay here, stay 
here ! I shall go alone,' he cried in petty annoyance, and went 
to the door, almost seething with malice. 'What need is there 
for a regular procession?' he grumbled as he went out. 
Sonya was left standing in the middle of the room. He had 
not even said good-bye to her; he had already forgotten her; a 
mutinous and poignant doubt had welled up in his breast. 
'But am I doing right, is all this the right thing?' he won­
dered again, as he went down the stairs. 'Is it really impossible 
to stop now and revise all my intentions again . . .  and not go?' 
All the same, he went. Suddenly he felt conclusively that he 
need ask himself no more questions. As he went out into the 
street, he remembered that he had not said good-bye to Sonya, 
he had left her standing there in the room, in her green shawl, 
not daring to stir because of his outburst. He hesitated for a 
moment. In that moment an idea flashed on him with great 
Clarity, as though it had been lying in wait to strike him at last. 
'Why and for what purpose did I go to her now? I told her 
I had some business with her, but what business was it? I had 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
absolutely no business at all ! To announce that I was going? 
What of that? There 's something to call necessary! Do I love 
her? No, surely I don't? Why, I drove her away just now like 
a dog. Well, did I, in fact, need to get the crosses from her? 
Oh, how low I have fallen ! No-I wanted her tears, I wanted 
to see her terror, and watch her heart being torn and tor­
mented ! I wanted something, anything, to cling to, some 
excuse for delay, some human being to look at ! I, who had 
such confidence in myself, such visions of what I would do ! 
I am a beggarly, worthless scoundrel, I am a miserable wretch !' 
He was walking along the canal bank, and had not much 
farther to go. But when he came to the bridge he stopped, 
turned across it, and walked towards the Haymarket. 
He looked eagerly right and left, gazing intently at every­
thing he saw, but unable to concentrate his attention on any : 
everything slipped away from him. 'In a week, or a month, I 
suppose I may be taken somewhere in a prison van over this 
bridge, and look down at this canal-shall I remember this?' 
came into his mind. 'This sign here, shall I read these same 
letters then? Look, Association is written here; well, I must 
remember that a, the letter a, and look at it again in a month's 
time, at that same a; how shall I look at it then? What shall 
I be feeling or thinking then? . . .  Oh God, how petty all this 
must be, all these present . . .  preoccupations of mine ! Of 
course, it must all be very curious . . .  in its way . . .  (ha, ha, ha ! 
the things I think of!). I am becoming childish, posing to 
myself; why am I disgracing myself? Pah, how people jostle ! 
Look at that fat man-he must be a German-who elbowed 
me; does he know who it was he was pushing? There is a 
peasant-woman with a baby, begging; odd that she should 
consider me more fortunate than herself. I must give her 
something just for the joke of it ! Ha, there 's a five-copeck piece 
still left in my pocket; where did it come from? Here you are 
. . .  take it, little mother !' 
'God bless you !' whined the beggar. 
He entered the Haymarket. He found it distasteful, very 
distasteful, to rub elbows with the crowd, but he went just 
where the crowd seemed thickest. He would have given the 
whole world to be alone ; but he himself felt that he would not 
have remained alone for a single minute. There was a drunken 
man making a disgusting spectacle of himself; he kept trying 
to dance, but he could not keep his balance. The people were 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
505 
pressing round him. Raskolnikov pushed through them and 
stood watching the drunken man for several minutes ; then he 
laughed shortly and abruptly. A moment later he had quite 
forgotten the man and did not even see him, although he was 
looking at him. He walked away at last, not even conscious 
of where he was, but when he came to the centre of the square 
a sudden sensation came over him, a feeling that mastered him 
all at once, seized him body and soul. 
He had suddenly remembered Sonya's words : 'Go to the 
cross-roads ; bow down before the people, and kiss the ground, 
because you are guilty before them, and say aloud to all the 
world, "I am a murderer !'" A shudder shook his whole body at 
the remembrance. He was so crushed by the weight of all the 
unescapable misery and anxiety of all this time, and especially 
of these last hours, that he almost flung himself on the possi­
bility of this new, complete, integral sensation. It had come 
down on him like a clap of thunder; a single spark was kindled 
in his spirit and suddenly, like a fire, enveloped his whole being. 
Everything in him softened on the instant and the tears gushed 
out. He fell to the ground where he stood . . .  
He knelt in the middle of the square, bowed to the ground, 
and kissed its filth with pleasure and joy. He raised himself 
and then bowed down a second time. 
'Look, here 's a chap who 's had a drop too much,' remarked 
a youth near him. 
Laughter answered him. 
'It's because he 's going to Jerusalem, lads, and he 's saying 
good-bye to his family and his country. He's bowing down to 
the whole world and kissing the famous city of St. Petersburg 
and the soil it stands on,' added a workman who was slightly 
drunk. 
'He's still quite a young lad !' put in a third. 
'Respectable, too !' said someone else soberly. 
'Nowadays you can't tell who is respectable and who isn't.' 
All these exclamations and observations acted as a check 
on Raskolnikov and stilled the words 'I am a murderer', 
which had perhaps been on the tip of his tongue. He endured 
the remarks calmly, however, and without looking round 
walked straight down the street leading in the direction of the 
police office. As he went he caught a glimpse of something 
that did not, however, surprise him; his feelings had fore­
warned him that it was bound to happen. While he was 

so6 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
bowing down to the ground for the second time, in the Hay­
market, he saw Sonya standing fifty yards away from him on 
his left. She was trying to hide from him behind one of the 
wooden booths standing in the square, and it was plain that 
she had accompanied him all along his distressful way. In 
that moment Raskolnikov knew in his heart, once and for all, 
that Sonya would be with him for always, and would follow 
him to the ends of the earth, wherever destiny might send him. 
His heart contracted •
.
.
 but-now he had come to the fatal 
place . . .  
He entered the courtyard briskly enough. He must go up 
to the third floor. 'I'll go up, anyhow,' he thought. He had 
a general feeling that it was still a long way to the fatal moment, 
that he had a great deal of time left and could still reconsider 
many things. 
The spiral staircase was as dirty and littered as ever, the 
doors of the tenements still stood open, the same kitchens 
emitted the same reeking fumes. Raskolnikov had not been 
back since that first time. His legs felt numb and ready to give 
way but they still carried him. He stopped for a moment to 
regain his breath and pull himself together, so that he might 
go in like a man. 'But why? What for?' he thought, when he 
suddenly became conscious of his action. 'If I must drink this 
cup does it make any difference? The viler the better.' The 
figure of Ilya Petrovich, the Squib, flashed in that instant 
before his inward eye. Must he really go to him? Could he not 
go to some other? To Nikodim Fomich, perhaps? Turn back 
at once and go straight to the superintendent's flat? At least 
things would go off in a less official atmosphere . . .  'No, no ! 
To the Squib, the Squib. Ifl must drink, let it be all at once .
•
 .' 
Feeling cold and barely conscious, he opened the office door. 
This time there were very few people there, only a house­
porter and a peasant. The doorman did not even trouble to 
look out from behind his partition. Raskolnikov went through 
into the next room. 'Perhaps even yet I need not say anything,' 
flashed through his mind. In this room one of the clerks, in a 
frock-coat, not a uniform, was arranging himself at a desk to 
write something. Another clerk was settling down in a corner. 
Zametov was not there. Neither, of course, was Nikodim 
Fomich. 
'Is nobody in?' asked Raskolnikov, turning to the personage 
at the desk. 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
'Who is it you want to see?' 
'Aha ! Fee, fi, fo, fum, I smell the blood .
.
•
 how does it go? 
.
•
•
 I've forgotten! Your humble servant, sir !' suddenly ex­
claimed a familiar voice. 
Raskolnikov started. The Squib stood before him; he had 
emerged from the third room. 'It is fate,' thought Raskolnikov. 
'Why is he here?' 
'Have you come to see us? On what business?' cried Ilya 
Petrovich. (He was apparently in an excellent temper, and 
even a trifle exalted with drink.) 'You are too early, if you 
come on business. I am only here by chance . . .  However, any-
thing I can do . . .  I confess, Mr . . . .  Mr . . . .  Excuse me . .  .' 
'Raskolnikov.' 
'Of course, Raskolnikov ! You surely couldn't suppose I had 
forgotten ! Please don't think me that sort of person . . .  Rodion 
Ro . . .  Ro . . .  Rodionovich, isn't it?' 
'Rodion Romanovich.' 
'Yes, yes, yes ! Rodion Romanovich, Rodion Romanovich ! 
I had it on the tip of my tongue. I have even asked about you 
many times. I confess that I have been sincerely sorry ever 
since that you and I . . .  I was told afterwards that you were a 
young author and a scholar besides, and, so to speak, the first 
steps •
•
•
 Oh Lord ! How many young scholars an9. men of 
letters have not been distinguished by some unconventionality 
to begin with? My wife and 1-we both have the highest 
respect for literature, and my wife is passionately fond of it . . .  
Literature and art ! Let a man be a gentleman and he can 
acquire everything else by his talents, knowledge, intelligence, 
and genius. The hat-well, what does a hat signify, after all? 
Hats are as common as blackberries ; I can go and buy one at 
Zimmermann's, but what is under the hat, what is covered by 
the hat, that I can't buy . . .  I confess I even thought of calling 
on you to put myself right with you, but I thought perhaps 
you 
•
.
•
 However, I haven't even asked you : do you really 
want something? They tell me your family has come here.' 
'Yes, my mother and sister.' 
'I have already had the honour and pleasure of meeting 
your sister . . .  a person of great charm and culture. I confess 
I was sorry we got so heated with one another that time. A 
queer thing ! And if, on account of your fainting-fit, I eyed you 
in a certain way-well, that was brilliantly explained later ! 
Fanaticism and bigotry ! I can understand your indignation. 

508 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
Perhaps you are changing your address because of your 
family's arrival?' 
'N-no, I only . . .  I came to ask . . .  I thought I should find 
Zametov here.' 
'Oh, yes ! Of course you have become friends; I heard of it. 
Well, Zametov isn't here-you've missed him. Yes, we have lost 
Alexander Grigoryevich ! We've been deprived of his presence 
since yesterday; he 's been transferred .
•
•
 and when he left he 
quarrelled with everybody . . .  most discourteously . . .  He is a 
giddy-pated fellow, nothing more : he might even be thought 
promising; but you can have all our brilliant youngsters ! It 
appears he wants to take some examination or other, but really 
it 's all for the sake of talking about it here and showing off, 
that 's all the examination amounts to. It's not at all like, for 
example, you or that Mr. Razumikhin, your friend. You have 
chosen a learned career and you are not to be turned aside 
by failures ! To you all the beauty of life, one might say, nihil 
est;*you are an ascetic, a monk, a hermit ! . . .  For you a book, 
a pen behind your ear, learned researches-that's what makes 
your spirit soar ! I myself am a little . . .  Have you read Living­
stone's Journals?'* 
'No.' 
'I have. But there are such a lot of nihilists now, all over 
the place; and indeed it is easy to understand why; what times 
these are, I ask you ! You and I, however . . .  of course, you 
aren't a nihilist, are you? Tell me frankly, frankly !' 
'N-no.' 
'No. You know, you can be open with me, you needn't 
hesitate, any more than if you were talking to yourself. Duty 
is one thing, but . . .  you thought I was going to say friendship 
is quite another. No, you were wrong ! Not friendship, but the 
sentiments of a citizen and a human being, the feeling of 
humanity and of love for the Supreme Being. I may be an 
official and obliged to do my duty, but I am always bound to 
feel the man and the citizen inside, and to be answerable for 
him . . .  You were speaking of Zametov. Zametov will get 
involved in some French sort of scandal over a glass of cham­
pagne or Russian wine in a disreputable establishment-that's 
your Zametov for you ! And I, perhaps, am consumed, so to 
speak, by devotion to duty and the loftiest feelings, and besides 
I have importance, rank, status ! I am married and have a 
family. I am doing my duty as a man and a citizen, and who is 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
509 
he, I should like to know? I ask you, as a gentleman by educa­
tion. Then there are an extraordinary number of midwives 
cropping up all over the place.' 
Raskolnikov raised his eyebrows questioningly. Ilya Petro­
vich had evidently been dining, and his words seemed to come 
rattling and scattering out for the most part as empty noises. 
But part of them he did understand ; his look was inquiring, 
since he did not know where all this was leading. 
'I am talking of those short-haired females,'* went on the 
garrulous Ilya Petrovich. 'It is my own idea to call them 
midwives and I think the name is very satisfactory. He, he ! 
They push themselves into the Academy and study anatomy; 
well, tell me, if I fall ill am I going to call in a girl to cure me? 
He, he !' 
Ilya Petrovich laughed, delighted with his own wit. 
'It is, let us suppose, that his thirst for education is insatiable; 
but he is educated and that 's enough. Why abuse it then? 
Why insult decent people as that scoundrel Zametov does? 
Why did he insult me, I ask you? Then again, look what a lot 
of these suicides there are ; you can't imagine. All these people 
who get through their last few shillings and then kill themselves 
. . .  Why, only this morning we had the case reported to us of a 
gentleman newly arrived in St. Petersburg. Nil Pavlovich ! Nil 
Pavlovich, what was his name, that gentleman we have just 
heard shot himself on Peterburgsky Island?' 
'Svidrigaylov,' answered a hoarse voice indifferently from 
the other room. 
Raskolnikov started. 
'Svidrigaylov ! Svidrigaylov has shot himself!' he cried. 
'What? Do you know Svidrigaylov?' 
'Yes . . .  I know him . . .  He has not been here long . . .  ' 
'Yes. He arrived recently. He had lost his wife, he was a 
man of dissolute conduct, and suddenly he shot himself, in 
a way too shocking to be imagined . . .  He left a few words in a 
notebook to say that he died in his right mind and to ask that 
nobody should be blamed for his death. This one, they say, 
had money. How well did you know him?' 
'I . . .  had met him . . .  My sister used to be their governess . . .  ' 
'Ah, ah, ah ! . . .  So then you can tell us something about 
him. Did you suspect anything?' 
'I saw him yesterday . . .  He .
•
.
 was drinking . . .  I didn't 
know anything.' 

5 10 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
Raskolnikov felt as though a crushing weight had descended 
on him. 
'You look pale again. The atmosphere here is so close . . .  ' 
'Yes, it is time I went,' murmured Raskolnikov. 'Excuse me 
for troubling you •
.
 .' 
'Not at all. Whenever you like ! It has been a pleasure, and 
I am glad to say so . .  .' 
Ilya Petrovich even held out his hand. 
'I only wanted . . .  I came to see Zametov . .  .' 
'I understand, I understand. It has been a pleasure.' 
'I . . .  am very glad . . .  Good-bye . .  .' smiled 
Raskol­
nikov. 
He went out; he swayed. His head was reeling and he seemed 
to have no feeling in his legs. He began to go downstairs, 
leaning his right hand against the wall. He thought that a 
porter with a book in his hand pushed past him on his way 
upstairs to the office, that a dog began to bark furiously some­
where lower down, and that a woman shouted and threw a 
rolling-pin at it. He reached the foot of the staircase and went 
out into the courtyard. There, not far from the entrance, stood 
Sonya, deadly pale ; she looked at him wildly, desperately. He 
stopped befo.t;'e her. Her face expressed pain, weariness, and 
despair. She threw up her hands. He forced himself to smile, 
a lost, hideous smile. He stood there for a moment, smiled 
again, and turned back to the office. 
Ilya Petrovich had sat down and was rummaging among 
some papers. Before him stood the peasant who had jostled 
against Raskolnikov as he passed him on the stairs. 
'A-a-ah ! You again ! Have you left something? . . .  But what 
is the matter?' 
Raskolnikov, white to the lips, walked slowly forward with a 
fixed stare until he reached the table, leaned his hand upon 
it, and tried vainly to speak; there emerged only incoherent 
sounds. 
'You are ill. A chair ! Here, sit down, sit on that chair. 
Water !' 
Raskolnikov let himself fall on the chair without taking his 
eyes from Ilya Petrovich's face, which was full of unpleasant 
surprise. They looked at one another and waited. Somebody 
brought water. 
'It was I •
.
 .' began Raskolnikov. 
'Drink some water.' 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
5 1  I 
Raskolnikov waved aside the water and spoke quietly and 
brokenly, but distinctly. 
'It was I who killed the old woman and her sister, Li;:;aveta, with an 
axe, and robbed them.' 
Ilya Petrovich opened his mouth. People ran in from all 
sides. 
Raskolnikov repeated his statement . . .  

E P I L O G U E  
C H A P T E R  I 
SIBERIA. On the bank of a wide remote river stands a town, 
one of the administrative centres of Russia; in the town is a 
fortress, in the fortress is a prison. In the prison Rodion Raskol­
nikov, second-class convict, had been confined for nine months. 
It was almost eighteen since the day of the murder. 
The legal proceedings had passed off without any great 
difficulty. The criminal had firmly, exactly, and clearly re­
affirmed his statement, neither confusing the circumstances nor 
extenuating them in his own interest, neither misrepresenting 
the facts nor forgetting the smallest particular. He described 
the murder in minute detail, explained the mystery of the pledge 
(the piece of wood with its strip of metal) which was found in 
the dead woman's hand, told how he had taken the keys from 
the body, and gave a description of the keys, the trunk, and its 
contents; he even enumerated some of the objects which were 
lying in it. He cleared up the mystery of Lizaveta's murder, 
and related how Koch arrived and knocked at the door, and 
how the student came after him, and repeated everything that 
had passed between them. He told how he afterwards ran 
downstairs and heard the shouts ofMikolka and Mitka, how he 
hid in the empty flat and how he then went home. Finally, he 
directed them to the stone near the gates of the courtyard in 
V oznesensky Prospect, and the purse and the other things were 
found under it. In a word, everything was made perfectly clear. 
The examining magistrates and the judges found it very sur­
prising, among other things, that he had hidden the purse and 
the other property under the stone without making any use of 
them, and were most astonished of all that not only did he not 
remember all the details of the objects he had himself stolen, 
but he was even uncertain of their number. In particular, the 
circumstance that he had never once opened the purse and did 
not know exactly how much it contained seemed incredible. 
(There were, in fact, three hundred and seventy roubles and 
sixty copecks in it; from long lying under the stone some of the 
biggest notes, at the top, had almost perished.) They spent a 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
51 3 
long time trying to discover why the accused should be lying in 
this one particular, when he so freely and accurately acknow­
ledged his guilt in ̅tvery other respect. In the end some of them 
(especially some who were psychologists) even admitted the 
possibility that he really did not know what was in the purse 
because he had hidden it under the stone without looking in­
side it, but from this they concluded that the crime itself could 
have been committed only in a state of temporary mental 
derangement, so to speak, as the result of homicidal mania 
expressed in murder and robbery for their own sakes, without 
motive or calculation. This conclusion coincided happily with 
the latest fashionable theory of temporary insanity, which our 
contemporaries so often try to apply to various criminals. 
Besides, Raskolnikov's long-standing hypochondria was testi­
fied to by many witnesses, including Dr. Zosimov, his former 
fellow students, his landlady, and the servant. All this power­
fully assisted the conclusion that Raskolnikov was not quite 
like the ordinary murderer and robber, but that something dif­
ferent was involved here. To the extreme annoyance of those 
who upheld this opinion, the criminal hardly tried to defend 
himself; to the crucial questions, what had made him commit 
murder, and what had prompted him to rob, he replied 
plainly, with the bluntest accuracy, that the motive of the 
whole thing lay in his wretched position, his poverty and help­
lessness, his desire to furnish for the first steps of his career the 
security of the three thousand roubles, at least, that he counted 
on finding in his victim's possession. His resolve to murder was 
the consequence of his unstable and cowardly nature, which 
was moreover exasperated by privation and failure. When he 
was asked what had induced him to volunteer a confession, he 
answered that it was sincere remorse. All this was said almost 
callously . . .  
The sentence, however, was more merciful than might have 
been expected in view of the nature of the crime, perhaps just 
because the criminal not only did not try to exculpate himself, 
but even betrayed a desire to magnify his guilt. All the strange 
and peculiar circumstances were taken into account. The pri­
soner's illness and poverty up to the time of the crime did not 
admit of the slightest doubt. The fact that he made no use of the 
things he stole was accounted for as the effect partly of newly 
awakened remorse, partly of the criminal's incomplete com­
mand of his mental powers at the time. The circumstance of 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
Lizaveta's unpremeditated murder served to strengthen this 
last assumption : a man commits two murders and yet forgets 
that the door is open ! Finally, his coming forward with a con­
fession, at the very time when the whole matter had been 
inextricably entangled by the false self-accusation of a melan­
cholic and fanatic (Nikolay), and when not only was there 
no clear evidence against the real criminal but there was even 
practically no suspicion of him (Porfiry Petrovich had fully 
kept his word)-all this contributed to the mitigation of the 
defendant's sentence. 
Other circumstances, besides, strongly favouring the pri­
soner, were quite unexpectedly brought to light. Razumikhin 
unearthed somewhere and put forward testimony that Raskol­
nikov, while he was at the university, had helped a poor con­
sumptive fellow student with his last resources and almost 
entirely supported him for six months. When the student died, 
Raskolnikov looked after the old and ailing father who survived 
him (and whom the son had maintained by his own efforts 
almost since his fourteenth year), eventually found a place for 
him in the hospital, and, when he too died, buried him. All this 
information had a favourable influence on Raskolnikov's fate. 
His former landlady, the mother of his dead fiancee, the widow 
Zarnitsyna, gave evidence that while they were living in an­
other house, near Five Corners, Raskolnikov had, during a 
fire, rescued two little children from a burning room, and had 
himself been irtiured in doing so. This evidence was carefully 
investigated and sufficiently well authenticated by many wit­
nesses. In short, the prisoner was condemned to penal servitude 
in the second class for a term of no more than eight years, in 
consideration of his voluntary confession and various extenu­
ating circumstances. 
At the very beginning of the legal proceedings Raskolnikov's 
mother fell ill. Dunya and Razumikhin had found means to 
remove her from St. Petersburg for the whole time of the trial. 
Razumikhin had picked out a town on a railway line, not far 
from St. Petersburg, so that he could closely follow the course 
of the trial and at the same time see Avdotya Romanovna as 
often as possible. Pulkheria Alexandrovna's illness was of a 
rather strange nervous kind, accompanied by at least partial, 
if not complete, mental derangement. Dunya, returning from 
her last interview with her brother, found her mother ill, 
feverish, and delirious. That evening she and Razumikhin 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
agreed on the answers they would give to her mother's questions 
about her brother, and even worked out together a complete 
story of Raskolnikov's having gone away to a distant place on 
the Russian frontier on a private mission which would bring 
him in the end both money and fame. But they were surprised 
to find that neither then nor later did Pulkheria Alexandrovna 
ask them anything about this. On the contrary, she herself pro­
duced a complete account of her son's sudden departure; she 
told them with tears how he had come to say good-bye to her 
and gave them to understand by hints that she alone knew 
many very important and mysterious facts, and that Rodya 
had many powerful enemies and therefore must hide himself. 
As for his future career, it seemed it was certain to be brilliant 
when some hostile circumstances were overcome; she assured 
Razumikhin that her son would in time be a great political 
figure, as was proved by his article and his literary brilliance. 
She was incessantly reading the article, sometimes even aloud ; 
she all but slept with it. Nevertheless, she hardly even asked 
exactly where Rodya was, in spite of the fact that they avoided 
talking to her about it, which might have been enough in itself 
to arouse her mistrust. They began at last to be frightened by 
Pulkheria Alexandrovna's strange silence on some points. She 
did not complain, for instance, that there were no letters from 
him, although earlier, in her little provincial town, she had 
lived only in the hope and expectation of soon receiving a letter 
from her beloved Rodya. This circumstance was so inexplicable 
that it greatly worried Dunya; the idea came to her that per­
haps her mother had a foreboding of something terrible in her 
son's fate, and was afraid to ask lest she should learn of some­
thing even more terrible. At all events, Dunya saw clearly that 
her mother's reason was impaired. 
Once or twice, however, it happened that she led the con­
versation in such a way that it was impossible to answer her 
without mentioning exactly where Rodion now was; but when 
the answers were perforce unsatisfactory and suspicious, she 
fell at once into a sad, gloomy, and silent mood which lasted 
for a considerable time. Dunya realized at last that it was too 
difficult to lie and invent, and came to the definite conclusion 
that it was better to preserve complete silence on certain points; 
but it became more and more clearly evident that the poor 
mother suspected something terrible. Dunya recalled among 
others those words of her brother's, about how their mother had 

5 16 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
overheard her talking in her sleep on the night before that last 
fatal day, after her scene with Svidrigaylov; had she learnt 
anything then? Often, sometimes after several days or even 
weeks of dismal brooding silence and speechless tears, the sick 
woman roused herself almost hysterically and began to talk, 
hardly pausing for breath, of her son, of her hopes, of the future 
. . .  Her fancies were sometimes very strange. They humoured 
her, assenting to everything she said (and perhaps she saw 
dearly that they were only humouring her), but still she 
talked . . .  
Five months after the criminal had volunteered his confes­
sion, his sentence followed. Razumikhin saw him in prison 
whenever it was possible ; so did Sonya. Finally came the 
separation; Dunya swore to her brother that their parting was 
not for ever; Razumikhin did the same. Firmly lodged in Razu­
mikhin's young and ardent brain was a plan to lay, during the 
next two or three years, at any rate the foundations of his future 
livelihood as well as he could, to accumulate at least a little 
money, and to emigrate to Siberia, where the soil was rich in 
every sense, but there were too few inhabitants, too little labour, 
and too little capital ; then he would settle in the town where 
Rodya was and . . .  they would all begin a new life together. 
They all wept when they said good-bye. During the past few 
days Raskolnikov had been very thoughtful ; he asked about his 
mother a great deal, and was constantly uneasy about her. His 
tormented anxiety about her worried Dunya. When he learned 
the details of his mother's illness he became very depressed. 
For some reason he was extremely silent with Sonya during all 
this time. She had long since made all her preparations, with 
the help of the money Svidrigaylov had left with her, to follow 
the party of convicts in which he was included. She and Raskol­
nikov had never made the slightest allusion to this, but both 
knew that it would be so. At their very last parting, he smiled 
strangely at his sister's and Razumikhin's passionate assurances 
of a happy future when he came out of prison, and predicted 
that his mother's illness would soon end disastrously. At last he 
and Sonya set off. 
Two months later Dunechka and Razumikhin were married. 
It was a quiet and sorrowful wedding. Porfiry Petrovich and 
Zosimov were among those who were invited to it. For some 
time Razumikhin had looked like a man whose mind is firmly 
made up. Dunya believed blindly that he would carry out all 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
5 1 7 
his plans; she could not, indeed, do otherwise, for he revealed 
an iron determination. He began attending university lectures 
again, among other things, so as to complete his studies. They 
were always framing plans for the future; both resolutely 
counted on emigrating to Siberia in five years' time. Until then, 
they relied on Sonya . . .  
Pulkheria Alexandrovna joyfully blessed her daughter's mar­
riage to Razumikhin, but after it she became still more melan­
choly and troubled. In order to give her a moment of pleasure, 
Razumikhin told her about the student and his infirm old 
father, and about how Rodya had suffered from burns in 
saving the lives of two little children a year ago. These stories 
brought Pulkheria Alexandrovna's already disordered mind to 
a pitch of feverish exaltation. She was always talking about 
them and even beginning conversations in the street (although 
Dunya always accompanied her) . In public vehicles or in 
shops, wherever she could find a hearer, she led the conversa­
tion round to her son, his article, his helping of the student, his 
being injured in a fire, and so on. Dunechka did not know how 
to stop her. Besides the danger of this morbidly exalted state of 
mind, there always threatened the disastrous possibility that 
somebody might remember Raskolnikov's name from the trial 
and speak of it. Pulkheria Alexandrovna had learned the ad­
dress of the mother of the two little children saved from the 
fire, and was determined to go and see her. Her agitation in­
creased at length beyond all measure. Sometimes she would 
suddenly begin to cry, and she often fell ill, her mind wandering 
feverishly. One morning she roundly declared that by her 
reckoning Rodya ought soon to be with them, and that she 
remembered his telling her, when he said good-bye, that they 
must expect him in nine months. She began to put the flat in 
order and prepare for their reunion, arranging the room she 
intended for him (her own), cleaning the furniture, washing 
curtains and hanging up new ones, and so on. Dunya was 
worried but she said nothing, and even helped her to arrange 
the room for her brother's arrival. Mter an anxious day, filled 
with incessant fancies, happy dreams, and tears, she became ill 
in the night and by the morning was delirious. She developed 
a burning fever and two weeks later she died. In her wanderings 
words escaped her from which it could be concluded that she sus­
pected far more of her son's terrible fate than they had supposed. 
It was a long time before Raskolnikov learnt of his mother's 

5 18 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
death, although a correspondence with St. Petersburg had been 
established at the very beginning of his exile in Siberia. It was 
carried on through Sonya, who wrote punctually every month 
to Razumikhin and punctually every month received a reply 
from St. Petersburg. At first Sonya's letters seemed to Dunya 
and Razumikhin somewhat dry and unsatisfactory, but in the 
end they both found that they could not have been better 
written, since from these letters there finally emerged a most 
complete and accurate picture of their unhappy brother's lot. 
Sonya's ]etters were full of the most prosaic actuality, the sim­
plest and clearest description of every circumstance of Raskol­
nikov's life as a convict. They contained neither statements of 
her own hopes, nor speculations about the future, nor descrip­
tions of her feelings. Instead of attempts to explain his psycho­
logical condition and his inner life generally, there were only 
facts, his own words, that is, and detailed reports of his health, 
of what he expressed a wish for at their interviews, the questions 
he asked her or the commissions he entrusted to her. All this she 
communicated with extraordinary minuteness. In the end, the 
picture of their unhappy brother stood out in relief, exactly and 
clearly drawn in his own words ; there could be nothing mis­
leading about it, because it consisted wholly of factual reports. 
Dunya and her husband could derive little ̃onsolation from 
these reports, however, especially in the beginning. Sonya in­
variably informed them that he was sullen and uncommunica­
tive, and almost completely uninterested in the news she always 
carried to him from her letters. He sometimes asked about his 
mother, and when at last, seeing that he had already divined 
the truth, she told him of Pulkheria Alexandrovna's death, she 
saw to her amazement that even this did not touch him very 
deeply, so far, at least, as she could judge from his outward 
appearance. She told them, among other things, that although 
he seemed so wrapped up in himself and so wilfully remote 
from everybody else, his attitude to his new life was very direct 
and simple; he had a clear understanding of his position, did 
not expect any immediate improvement in it, cherished none- of 
the frivolous hopes so natural in his situation, and showed al­
most no surprise at anything in his new surroundings, so little 
resembling all he had known before. She told them that his 
health was satisfactory. His work he performed without either 
reluctance or eagerness. He was almost indifferent to what he 
ate, but the food was so bad, except on Sundays and holidays, 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
5 19 
that in the end he was glad to take a little money from her in 
order to procure his own tea every day; about everything else 
he asked her not to trouble herself, asserting that all this con­
cern for him only irritated him. Sonya told them besides that 
all the accommodation in the prison was shared in common, 
that although she had not seen the inside of their barracks she 
inferred that they were crowded, hideous, and insanitary, that 
he slept on a piece of felt stretched over bare boards and that 
he had no desire to arrange things differently for himself, but 
that he lived so poorly and roughly not out of any preconceived 
plan or purpose but simply from inattention and outward in­
difference to his lot. Sonya's letters did not disguise that not 
only was he not interested in her visits but, especially at first, he 
was irritated by her presence and monosyllabic or even rude to 
her; but in the end he became used to their interviews and 
found they had grown necessary to him, so that he sadly missed 
them when for a few days she was ill and unable to visit him. 
On holidays she saw him at the prison gates or in the guard­
room, to which he would be summoned for a few minutes, but 
on week-days she visited him at work, making her way to the 
workshops, the brick-works, or the warehouses on the banks of 
the Irtysh: Sonya informed them that she herself had been 
fortunate enough to acquire some acquaintances and patrons 
in the town, and that she did sewing and, since there was no 
dressmaker in the town, had become indispensable in many 
houses; but she did not mention that through her Raskolnikov 
had also come under the protection of the authorities, or that 
his labours were lightened, and so on. At last the news came 
(Dunya had noticed signs of alarm and anxiety in the most 
recent letters) that he was shunning everybody, that the other 
convicts had begun to dislike him, that for days together he did 
not speak, and that he was becoming very pale. Suddenly, in 
her last letter, Sonya wrote that he was seriously ill in the 
prison ward of the military hospital . . .  
C H A P T E R  I I  
HE had been ill for a long time, but it was not the horrors of a 
convict's life, nor the heavy work, nor the food, nor his shaven 
head and ragged clothing that had broken him : what did all 
that hardship and suffering matter to him? He was even glad of 
the hard work; physical exhaustion at least brought him a few 

520 
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
hours of peaceful sleep. And what did he care for the food­
that thin cabbage soup with cockroaches in it? In his former 
life, when he was a student, he had often not had even that. His 
clothes were warm and appropriate to his way of life. The fet­
ters he did not even feel. Was he to be ashamed of his shaven 
head and parti-coloured coat? But before whom? Before Sonya? 
Sonya feared him, and was he to feel ashamed before her? 
What was it then? He did, in fact, feel ashamed even before 
Sonya, whom he tortured because of this by his rough and 
contemptuous manner. But he was not ashamed of his shaven 
head or his fetters ; his pride was deeply wounded, and it was 
the wound to his pride that made him fall ill. How happy he 
would have been if he could have put the blame on himself! 
Then he could have borne anything, even shame and infamy. 
But although he judged himself severely, his lively conscience 
could find no particularly terrible guilt in his past, except a 
simple blunder, that might have happened to anybody. He was 
ashamed precisely because he, Raskolnikov, had perished so 
blindly and hopelessly, with such dumb stupidity, by some 
decree of blind fate, and must humble himself and submit to 
the ̄absurdity' of that decree, if he wished to find any degree 
of peace. 
An objectless and undirected anxiety in the present, and end­
less sacrifice, by which nothing would be gained, in the future, 
was all the world held for him. And what did it signify that in 
eight years he would be only thirty-two and still able to begin 
a new life? What would he have to live for? What could be his 
aim? What should he strive for? To live in order to exist? But 
he had been ready a thousand times before to sacrifice his 
existence for an idea, a hope, even for a fancy. Mere existence 
had always meant little to him ; he had always desired more. 
Perhaps it was just because of the strength of his desires that he 
had considered himself a man to whom more was permitted 
than to others. 
If only fate had granted him remorse, scalding remorse, har­
rowing the heart and driving sleep away, such remorse as tor­
tured men into dreaming of the rope or deep still water ! Oh, he 
would have welcomed it gladly ! Tears and suffering-they, 
after all, are also life. But he did not feel remorse for his crime. 
He might at least have raged at his own stupidity, as before 
he had raged at the monstrous and infinitely stupid actions that 
had brought him to prison. But now when he was in prison, 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
521 
and free, he had reconsidered and reweighed all his former 
actions, and found it completely impossible to think them as 
stupid and monstrous as they had seemed to him before, at that 
fatal time. 
'How,' he thought, 'how was my idea more stupid than any of 
the other ideas and theories that have spnmg up and multi­
plied like weeds all over the world, ever since the world existed? 
One need only look at the matter with a broad and completely 
independent mind, free from all the common influences, for 
my ideas not to seem so very . . .  strange. Oh, you tuppenny­
ha 'penny prophets of denial, why do you stop half-way?' 
'What makes what I have done seem to them so monstrous?' 
he asked himself. 'The fact that it was a . . .  crime? What does 
the word mean? My conscience is easy. Of course, an illegal 
action has been committed ; of course, the letter of the law has 
been broken and blood has been spilt; well, take my head to 
satisfy the letter of the law . . .  and let that be all ! Of course, if 
that were the case, many benefactors of mankind who did not 
inherit power but seized it for themselves, should have been 
punished at their very first steps. But the first steps of those men 
were successfully carried out, and therefore they were right, while 
mine failed, which means I had no right to permit myself that 
step.' 
This was the sole sense in which he acknowledged his crime, 
that he had not succeeded and that he had confessed. 
Another thought added to his suffering : why had he not 
killed himself? Why, when he stood on the bank of the river, 
had he chosen rather to confess ? Was there really such strength 
in the will to live, and was it so difficult to overcome it? Had 
not Svidrigaylov, who feared death, overcome it? 
He tortured himself with these questions, unable to realize 
that perhaps even while he stood by the river he already felt in 
his heart that there was something profoundly false in himself 
and his beliefs. He did not understand that that feeling might 
have been the herald of a coming crisis in his life, of his coming 
resurrection, of a future new outlook on life. 
He preferred to see in all this only the dull bondage of in­
stinct, which he could not shake off, and which he was still not 
strong enough to break (because of his weakness and worthless­
ness) . He looked at his fellow convicts and marvelled : how all 
of them, also, loved life and cherished it ! It seemed to him, 
indeed, that it was more loved and prized, more highly valued, 

522 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
in prison than in freedom. What terrible sufferings and hard­
ships some of them had borne, the tramps, for example ! How 
could one ray of sunlight mean so much to them, or the virgin 
forest, or a cool spring in some remote and hidden solitude 
seen once years before, that the tramp dreams of and longs for 
like a lovers' meeting, with the green grass all round it and a 
bird singing in the bushes? When he looked round him he saw 
even stranger things. 
There was much in his prison surroundings, of course, that 
he did not and would not see. He lived, as it were, with his 
eyes cast down ; he could not bear to look at the loathsome 
spectacle. But in course of time he began to find many things 
surprising and, almost against his will, to notice what he had 
not previously suspected. The most surprising thing of all, in 
general, was that terrible unbridgeable chasm which lay be­
tween him and all the others. It was as if he and they belonged 
to different races. They regarded him, and he them, with mis­
trust and hostility. He knew and understood the general 
reasons of his separateness, but he would never have admitted 
that these causes would be in fact so deep-rooted and strong. 
The prison contained some Polish exiles, who were political 
prisoners. These simply looked on all the rest as ignorant serfs 
and despised them; but Raskolnikov could not take that view; 
it was clear to him that in many ways, though ignorant, they 
were wiser than the Poles. There were Russians, also, who 
looked down on them-a former officer and two seminarists ; 
Raskolnikov clearly saw their mistake. 
He himself was disliked and avoided by everybody. In time 
they even began to hate him. Why, he did not know. Men who 
were far more culpable than he despised him and laughed at 
his crime. 
'You are a gentleman !' they said. 'You shouldn't have gone 
to work with an axe; it's not at all the thing for a gentleman.' 
In the second week of Lent it was his turn, with the rest of 
his barrack, to prepare for the sacrament. He went to church 
and prayed with the others. Out of this, he himself did not know 
why, a quarrel arose one day; they all turned on him in fury : 
'You're an atheist ! You don't believe in God !' they shouted. 
'We must kill you.' 
He had never spoken to them about God or religious beliefs, 
but they wanted to kill him as an atheist; he did not reply to 
them, but was silent. One of the convicts rushed at him in a 

CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
523 
perfect frenzy. Raskolnikov awaited him calmly and silently; 
not a muscle of his face quivered. The guard managed to get 
between him and his attacker in time, or blood would have 
been shed. 
There was a question which he could not answer : why was 
Sonya so well liked by everybody? She did not try to ingratiate 
herself with them; they rarely met her, except occasionally at 
work, when she came to see him for a minute. Nevertheless, they 
all knew her, knew besides that she had followed him, and knew 
how and where she lived. She did not give them money or per­
form any particular services for them. Once only, at Christmas, 
she brought a gift of pies and loaves for the whole prison. But 
little by little closer connexions developed between Sonya and 
them : she wrote letters for them to their families and posted 
them. When their relatives came to the town, the convicts told 
them to leave goods and even money for them in Sonya's care. 
Their wives and sweethearts knew her and visited her. And 
when she appeared where they were working, to visit Raskol­
nikov, or when she met a party of prisoners on their way to 
work, they would all take off their caps and bow to her. 'Little 
mother, Sofya Semenovna, you are our kind, affectionate 
mother,' these coarse, branded criminals would say to the 
slight little creature. She would smile and bow to them; they 
were all pleased when she smiled at them. They liked even the 
way she walked, turning round to watch her, and praising her; 
they praised her even for being so small; they could not find 
enough to say in her praise. They even went to her when they 
were ill. 
Raskolnikov was in hospital all through the latter part of 
Lent and Easter. When he began to recover he remembered 
the dreams that had visited him while he lay in his fever and 
delirium. He had dreamt in his illness that the whole world was 
condemned to fall victim to a terrible, unknown pestilence 
which was moving on Europe out of the depths of Asia. All 
were destined to perish, except a chosen few, a very few. There 
had appeared a new strain of trichinae; microscopic creatures 
parasitic in men's bodies. But these creatures were endowed 
with intelligence and will. People who were infected immedi­
ately became like men possessed and out of their minds. But 
never, never, had any men thought themselves so wise and so 
unshakable in the truth as tho3e who were attacked. Never had 
they considered their judgements, their scientific deductions, 

524 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
or their moral convictions and creeds more infallible. Whole 
communities, whole cities and nations, were infected and went 
mad. All were full of anxiety, and none could understand any 
other; each thought he was the sole repository of truth and was 
tormented when he looked at the others, beat his breast, wrung 
his hands, and wept. They did not know how or whom to judge 
and could not agree what was evil and what good. They did not 
know whom to condemn or whom to acquit. Men killed one 
another in senseless rage. They banded together against one 
another in great armies, but when the armies were already on 
the march they began to fight among themselves, the ranks 
disintegrated, the soldiers fell on their neighbours, they thrust 
and cut, they killed and ate one another. In the towns, the toc­
sin sounded all day long, and called out all the people, but who 
had summoned them and why nobody knew, and everybody 
was filled with alarm. The most ordinary callings were aban­
doned, because every man put forward his own ideas, his own 
improvements, and there was no agreement; the labourers for­
sook the land. In places men congregated in groups, agreed 
together on some action, swore not to disband-and immedi­
ately began to do something quite different from what they 
themselves had proposed, accused one another, fought and 
killed each other. Conflagrations were started, famine set in. 
All things and all men were perishing. The plague grew and 
spread wider and wider. In the whole world only a few could 
save themselves, a chosen handful of the pure, who were des­
tined to found a new race of men and a new life, and to renew 
and cleanse the earth ; but nobody had ever seen them any­
where, nobody had heard their voices or their words. 
It distressed Raskolnikov that this ridiculous fantasy lingered 
so painfully and sadly in his memory, and that he could not 
shake off for so long the impressions of his delirious dreaming. 
The second week after Easter was passing in a succession of 
warm, clear, spring days; in the prison ward the windows were 
opened (they were barred and guarded by a sentry) . Sonya had 
been able to visit him in the ward only twice during the whole 
course of his illness ; each time she had to beg for permission and 
it was hard to get. But she often went into the yard, under the 
hospital windows, especially in the evening, sometimes only to 
stand and look for a moment at the windows of the ward from 
a distance. One evening Raskolnikov, who had almost com­
pletely recovered, had fallen asleep ; when he woke up, he went 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
525 
by chance to the window and caught sight of Sonya in the 
distance, standing by the gates of the hospital; she seemed to be 
waiting for something. It was as if something pierced his heart 
at that moment ; he shuddered, and moved hastily away from 
the window. The next day Sonya did not come, nor the next 
after that ; he realized that he was waiting anxiously for her. 
At length he was discharged. When he reached the prison he 
learnt from the other convicts that Sofya Semenovna had been 
taken ill and was in bed and not able to go out. 
He was very disturbed and sent to inquire after her; he soon 
heard that her illness was not dangerous. When she in her turn 
heard that he was anxious and worried about her, Sonya sent 
him a note, written in pencil, informing him that she was much 
better, that she had simply had a slight cold, and that she 
would soon, very soon, come to see him at his work. As he read 
the note, his heart beat heavily and painfully. 
The day was again bright and warm. Early in the morning, 
at about six o 'clock, he went off to his work on the river-bank, 
where gypsum was calcined in a kiln set up in a shed, and after­
wards crushed. Three convicts altogether had been sent there. 
One of them, with the guard, had gone to the fortress for a tool, 
the other began splitting wood and putting it in the kiln. 
Raskolnikov went out of the shed on to the bank, sat down on 
a pile of logs and looked at the wide, solitary river. From the 
high bank a broad landscape was revealed. From the other 
bank, far away, was faintly borne the sound of singing. There, 
in the immensity of the steppe, flooded with sunlight, the black 
tents of the nomads were barely visible dots. Freedom was 
there, there other people lived, so utterly unlike those on this 
side of the river that it seemed as though with them time had 
stood still, and the age of Abraham and his flocks was still the 
present. Raskolnikov sat on and his unwavering gaze remained 
fixed on the farther bank; his mind had wandered into day­
dreams; he thought of nothing, but an anguished longing dis­
turbed and tormented him. 
Suddenly Sonya appeared at his side. She had come up 
almost soundlessly and sat down beside him. It was early; the 
chill of the morning still lingered. She wore her shabby old 
pelisse and the green shawl. Her face still bore traces of her ill­
ness; it was thinner and paler and hollow-cheeked. She gave 
him a joyful welcoming smile, but she held out her hand as 
timidly as ever. 

526 
CRIME AND P UNISHMENT 
She always stretched out her hand to him timidly, sometimes 
even half withdrawing it, as if she feared he would repulse her. 
He always grasped it reluctantly, always greeted her with a 
kind of irritation, sometimes remained obstinately silent all 
through her visit. There had been occasions when she had 
quailed before him and gone away deeply hurt. But this time 
their hands remained joined ; he gave her a rapid glance, but 
said nothing and turned his eyes to the ground. They were 
alone; there was nobody to see them. The guard had turned 
away. 
How it happened he himself did not know, but suddenly he 
seemed to be seized and cast at her feet. He clasped her knees 
and wept. For a moment she was terribly frightened, and her 
face grew white. She sprang up and looked down at him, 
trembling. But at once, in that instant, she understood. Infinite 
happiness shone in her eyes ; she had understood, and she no 
longer doubted that he loved her, loved her for ever, and that 
now at last the moment had come .
.
•
 
They tried to speak, but they could not. Tears stood in their 
eyes. They were both pale and thin, but in their white sick faces 
there glowed the dawn of a new future, a perfect resurrection 
into a new life. Love had raised them from the dead, and the 
heart of each held endless springs of life for the heart of the 
other. 
They knew they must wait and be patient. They had seven 
more years before them, and what unbearable sufferings and 
infinite happiness those years would hold ! But he was restored 
to life and he knew it and felt to the full all his renewed being, 
and she-she lived only in his life ! 
The same evening, after the barrack was locked, Raskol­
nikov lay on his plank-bed and thought. Today it had even 
seemed to him that the other convicts, formerly so hostile, were 
already looking at him differently. He had even spoken to them 
and been answered pleasantly. He remembered this now, but 
after all, that was how it must be : ought not everything to be 
changed now? 
He was thinking of her. He remembered how ceaselessly he 
had tormented her and harrowed her heart; he remembered her 
pale thin little face ; but those memories now hardly troubled 
him : he knew with what infinite love he would now expiate all 
her sufferings. 
And what were all, all the torments of the past? Everything, 

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 
even his crime, even his sentence and his exile, seemed to him 
now, in the first rush of emotion, to be something external and 
strange, as if it had not happened to him at all. But this evening 
he could not think long or coherently of anything or concen­
trate his attention on any idea, and indeed he was not con­
sciously reasoning at all; he could only feel. Life had taken the 
place of logic and something quite different must be worked 
out in his mind. 
There was a New Testament under his pillow. Mechanically 
he took it out. It was hers, the very one from which she had 
read to him the raising of Lazarus. At the beginning ofhis pri­
son life he had been afraid that she would pester him with reli­
gion, talk about the gospels and press books on him. But to his 
great astonishment she did not once speak of it, and never even 
offered him a New Testament. He himself had asked her for it 
not long before his illness and she had brought it to him with­
out a word. He had not yet opened it. 
He did not open it even now, but an idea flashed through his 
mind : 'Could not her beliefs become my beliefs now? Her 
feelings, her aspirations, at least . .  . '  
She also had been full of agitation all day, and at night she 
even became feverish again. But she was so happy, and her 
happiness was so unexpected, that it almost frightened her. 
Seven years, only seven years ! At the dawn of their happiness, 
both had been ready, for some few moments, to think of those 
seven years as if they were no more than seven days. He did not 
even know that the new life would not be his for nothing, that 
it must be dearly bought, and paid for with great and heroic 
struggles yet to come . . .  
But that is the beginning of a new story, the story of the 
gradual renewal of a man, of his gradual regeneration, of his 
slow progress from one world to another, of how he learned to 
know a hitherto undreamed-of reality. All that might be the 
subject of a new tale, but our present one is ended. 


T H E  C H A RA C T E R S  O F  
C R I M E  A N D  P U N I S H M E N T  
THE following list, which includes all persons mentioned 
more than once or twice in the novel, may be of assistance to 
English readers who find Russian personal names puzzling and 
difficult to remember. The usual polite form of address among 
equals was by the Christian name and patronymic (the 'middle' 
name, derived from the father's Christian name) ; surnames 
were rarely used. The Christian name, used among intimates, 
had usually several diminutive forms ; as these have sometimes 
no more obvious connexion with the name they are derived 
from than, say, English 'Polly' with 'Mary', the diminutives 
used in the novel are given in brackets after the name of the 
character. 
Pronunciation. If the reader will remember (i) to give strong 
stress to the syllable marked with an accent in this list, (ii) to 
give the vowels their 'continental' value and pronounce 
the consonants as in English, a rough approximation to the 
Russian pronunciation will be obtained. The consonant trans­
literated 'kh' sounds rather like Scottish 'ch' in 'loch' ; 'zh' 
represents a sound like 's' in 'measure' ; 'e' (always stressed) 
is pronounced roughly 'yo' ; 'y' as a vowel is like English 
'short i' ; and the final '-v' is pronounced '-f'. 
RAsK6LNIKov, Rodion Romanovich (Rodya, Rodenka, Rodka), a former 
student 
, 
Pulkheria Alexandrovna, his mother 
, 
Avdotya Romanovna (Dunya, Dunechka), his sister 
RAzuMfKHIN, Dmitri Prokofi.ch, his friend 
Alena I vanovna, a moneylender 
Lizaveta Ivanovna, her sister 
MARMELADOV, Semen Zakharovich, a dismissed government clerk 
, 
Katerfna Ivfmovna, his wife 
Sofya Semenovna (Sonya, Sonechka), his daughter 
Lenya (Lfda, Lfdochka)I 
K'!terzna lvanovna s 
Pot'lna Mikhaylovna (Polya, Polenka, Polechka)} 
. 
, 
K61ya (Kolka) 
chzldren 
SvmRIGAYLov, Arkady Ivanovich, Dunya's.former employer 
1 There seems to be some confusion about the little girl's name; Lenya is 
a diminutive of Elena, Lfda of Lydia. 

530 
C HA RAC TERS 
SviDRIGAYLOV, Marfa Petr6vna, his wife 
LuzHIN, Peter Petr6vich, betrothed to Dunya 
LEBEZYATNIKOV, Andrey Semenovich, his friend 
ZARNiTSYNA, Prask6vya Pavlovna (Pashenka), Raskolnikov's landlady 
, 
Natalya Eg6revna, her daughter 
Nastasya Petr6vna (Nastenka, Nastasyushka), her servant 
LIPPEwECHSEL, Anialia Ivanovna,I Marmeladov's landlady 
KAPERNAUMOV, Sonya's landlord 
ZosfMov, a doctor 
ZAMiTov, Alexander Grig6ryevich, chief clerk in the police office 
Nikodim Fomich, chief qf police 
Ilya Petr6vich ('the Squib'), his assistant 
Porfiry Petr6vich, examining magistrate 
DEMiNTYEv, Nikolay (Mikolay, Mik6lka, Nik6lka, Nikblashka)} 
. 
Dmitri (Mitrey, Mftka) 
painters 
1 This is the patronymic Mrs. Lippewechsel herself lays claim to; Marme­
ladov refers to her as Amalia Fedorovna, and Katerina Ivanovna always 
annoys her by saying Amalia Ludwigovna. 

EXPLANATORY NOTES 
Note on money. As money plays an important role in Crime and Punish­
ment, it may be helpful to establish that the Russian rouble in the 
novel is roughly equivalent to £2 sterling (or $3) in today's money 
1 2 England, where they have political economy: a reference to the 
laissezfaire economic theories of Victorian Britain, and in par­
ticular to the well-known work of John Stuart Mill, Principles of 
Political Economy ( 1 848) . 
15 Cyrus the Persian (599-?529 BC) :  founder of the ancient Persian 
empire, and liberator of the Jews from Babylon. 
Lewes's 'Physiology': The Physiology of Everyday Life by George 
Henry Lewes ( 18 1 7-78) had been translated into Russian in 
1 86 1 ,  and was seen as a key ideological text by the younger 
'nihilistic' generation of the 186os. It is another example of 
the influence of English thought on contemporary Russian 
attitudes 
17 The Little Hut: i.e. Khutorok (perhaps, more literally, a 'small­
holding') A popular ballad about love and revenge to words by 
the 'peasant' poet A. V. Kol'tsov. See also p 406. 
40 Order of St Anna: a decoration which could be given for civil as 
well as military service It had four grades Most notably the 
decoration figures as the title and theme of a Chekhov short 
story, 'An Anna Round the Neck'. 
Schleswig-Holstein: territory disputed between Prussia and Den­
mark, which in 1 864 led to conflict between them and resulted 
in the Austro-Prussian war of 1 866 
48 Such and such a percentage: the statistical approach to sociologi­
cal questions was much discussed in the Russian press at the 
time, following the translation in 1865 of Man and the Develop­
ment of his Faculties: An Experiment in Social Physics by the Belgian 
mathematician Adolphe Quetelet ( 1 796-1 874) . His follower, 
A Wagner, is also mentioned (see p. 383) . 
95 a big satire: a reference to the fashionable 'denuciatory litera­
ture' (oblichitel'naya literatura) of the time 
100 yellowish water: St Petersburg had no system of piped water. 
Wells were infrequent, and water came principally from the 

532 
EXPLANATORY NOTES 
rivers and canals. Apart from the realism of this detail, it should 
be noted that the frequent repetition of the colour 'yellow' 
takes on a symbolic significance throughout the novel, and is 
associated with madness-i.e. 'yellow house' (zholtyy dom is a 
lunatic asylum) .  
106 the Movement: the radical movement of the young people of the 
1 86os. 
the Woman question: female emancipation and female education 
were burning issues for the young radicals of the 1 86os. See 
also p. 35 1 .  
107 Rnusseau is 
a sort of Radishchev: Jean:Jacques Rousseau, 
whose Confessions are referred to earlier. A. N. Radishchev 
( 1 7  49-1802) is often regarded as the father of the Russian 
intelligentsia He was exiled to Siberia for his work A Journey 
from St Peterslmrg to Moscow, in which he raised the plight of 
the peasants. He had been compared to Rousseau by 
Chernyshevsky among others 
First Line: the first of a series of parallel streets on Vasilyevsky 
Island. See map 
108 It's a well-known trick: the law allowed for payments to be made 
to those who had suffered insult, on a scale according to rank. 
It was seen by the unscrupulous as a way of making money. 
Thus a civil servant in the unfinished novel Brother and Sister 
( 1 864) by N G. Pomyalovsky seeks to live by this means. 
1 1 2 Vrazumikhin, not Razumikhin: Razumikhin' s name is derived 
from the word for reason razum, but by introducing himself in 
this way, he is implying that his role is that of 'knocker-in of 
sense' (cf. vrazumit, 'to make understand'). See also note to p 
290. 
140 Senate: an institution founded by Peter the Great in 1 7 1 1, as 
the highest legal instance in the country. 
145 When the great hour struck: a reference to the Act of Emancipa­
tion of the Serfs, promulgated on 1 7  March 1 86 1 ,  which was 
destined to place the country on a new economic footing. See 
note to p 273 
1 50 princesses: i.e. prostitutes. 
1 53 Fire in Peterlmrgsky Quarter: fires broke out in St Petersburg in 
1 862, and their nature and origin became a focal point for 
political dissension On the one hand they were blamed on the 
'nihilists', but this was hotly disputed by the defenders of the 

EXPLANATORY NOTES 
533 
younger generation who saw the fires as police provocation 
2 11 That queen: Marie Antoinette ( 1755-93) ,  wife of Louis XVI 
Imprisoned and executed in the French Revolution 
2 18 'Crevez, chiens': 'Die, dogs, if you are not happy'. 
245 not such a thing as crime?: the idea that crime was merely a 
product of social conditions was advanced by Chernyshevsky 
both in his novel What is to be done? and in articles. Again, such 
intellectual positions had an English precursor in the philan­
thropist Robert Owen, whose reforming ideas were much dis­
cussed by Chernyshevsky. Owen's ideas on crime are outlined 
in A New View of Society (London, 18 13) . 
246 The phalanstery is ready: the ideal social organization advocated 
by the French Utopian socialist Charles Fourier ( 1772-1837) . 
Dostoevsky himself had been interested in Fourier at the time 
of his arrest in 1849. See also note to p. 349· 
24 7 an article of yours: 'Concerning Crime': another possible English 
source for Raskolnikov's ideas is De Quincey's 'On Murder 
Considered as One of the Fine Arts'. 
251 the New Jerusalem: the term of the French Utopian socialist Saint­
Simon ( 1 760-1825), in whom Dostoevsky had been interested 
as a young man. For the 'Christian' socialism of Saint-Simon 
the building of 'the New Jerusalem' was the attainment of the 
perfect society on earth. 
252 new people: the term for the young radical generation of the 
186os 
2 53 Lycurgus: the legendary lawgiver of Sparta, credited with estab-
lishing its military regime in the seventh century BC. 
263 Toulon 
Egypt: turning-points in the career of Napoleon I. 
264 the Prophet, on horseback: Mohammed (cf p. 253). 
269 et nihil humanum: the version of this quotation ascribed to the 
Roman playwright Terence (c. 1 95-159 BC) is: 'Homo sum, 
humani nil a me alienum puto' (I am a man and reckon nothing 
human alien to me)-a statement taken to be an out-and-out 
expression of humanism. 
271 a nobleman 
. publicly held up to shame: the reference is to a 
certain Kozlyainov who attacked a female passenger in a train. 
The attention this attracted in the press is an example of the 
themes treated by the so-called 'denunciatory literature' of the 
186os See note to p. 95 

534 
EXPLANATORY NOTES 
271 the 'Egyptian Nights': at a literary and musical evening held in 
Perm, a certain Mrs Tolmachova had given a reading of 
Pushkin's slightly salacious poem 'Egyptian Nights'. An article 
in tile Century (Vek) had strongly criticized Tolmachova for her 
impropriety, and its autilor had been censured in his turn by 
the ardent champion of female causes M L. Mikhaylov. The 
'black eyes' refer to the way Tolmacheva herself was presented 
in tile article in Century. 
273 the abolition of seifdom: by tile Act of 1861 many landowners 
suffered a distinct decline in their fortunes, particularly if their 
wealth, before 1861, had relied heavily on serf labour See note 
to p 145. 
all kinds of seminarists: in the 186os the word 'seminarist' be­
came almost synonymous with 'nihilist', and it is a curious fact 
that these training-schools for priests actually turned out rev­
olutionaries Chernyshevsky, Dobrolyubov, and Pomyalovsky 
were all products of the seminary, as later was Joseph Stalin. Cf. 
also p. 456 
these Dussauts: Dussaut was the owner of a fashionable St 
Petersburg restaurant 
274 j'ai le vin mauvais: 'Wine does not agree with me' 
Berg: an entrepreneur who organized trips in hot-air balloons 
in St Petersburg. 
290 Mr 
Rassudkin: 
another 
'meaningful' 
distortion 
of 
Razumikhin's name (see note to p. 112). Rassudok in Russian 
means 'reason', 'intellect'. 
325 Sebastopol . Alma: during tile Crimean War ( 1853-6) , the 
Battle of the Alma on 8 September 1854 was followed by 
an eleven-month siege of Sebastopol by British and French 
troops. 
328 General Mack: field marshal of the Austrian army who in 1 805 
found himself unexpectedly surrounded by the French army at 
Ulm, and was defeated and captured by Napoleon 
347 'denouncers': see notes to pp 95 and 271. 
349 Fourier's system and Darwin's theory: fashionable intellectual 
theories particularly attractive to the 'nihilists' of the younger 
generation. See note to p 246. 
a new 'commune': Chernyshevsky's influential novel What is to be 
done? advocated the setting-up of communes One was actually 

EXPLANATORY NOTES 
535 
established in Middle Meshchanskaya Street The question of 
the desirability of wives taking lovers is also a contentious issue 
raised in Chernyshevsky's novel. 
350 the abacus: an ancient bead calculator still to be seen in Russian 
shops. 
353 Dobrolyubov 
. Belinsky: by the mid-1 86os the radical reputa­
tion of V. G. Belinsky ( 1 8 1 1-49) and even of N 
A 
Dobrolyubov ( 1 836-61 )  suffered something of an eclipse, 
given the ascendancy of more extreme views voiced by D I. 
Pisarev ( 1 84o-68) . Lebezyatnikov is revealing his adherence to 
the very latest radical opinions. See note to p 355 
354 the question of kissing hands: a reference to a famous passage 
in What is to be done? which deplored the practice of kissing 
women's hands as demeaning. 
355 the question of entering rooms: a key issue concerning the right to 
individual privacy in marriage raised in What is to be done? 
cess-pits . . Pushkin: this is a paraphrase of the extreme views on 
art held by Pisarev See note to p 353· 
only one word, 'useful': a parody of the ideas of English Utili­
tarianism, made fashionable in the writings of Chernyshevsky 
and Pisarev 
363 the traditional 'kutya': a dish traditionally associated with funeral 
feasts in Russia. 
372 en toutes lettres: i.e 'quite clearly' 
377 Gott der barmherz.ige: 'Merciful God! ' 
383 'A General Deduction from the Positive Method' .  
Piederit's article 
(and Wagner's as well): in 1 866 a collection of translations from 
the works of Claude Bernard, Molleschott, Piederit, and Adolf 
Wagner was published under the title A General Deduction from 
the Positive Method 
407 A professor there: possibly a reference to Claude Bernard ( 1 8 13-
78), an eminent French experimental physician, much deni­
grated by Dostoevsky for his materialist view of life. He is 
referred to in The Karamazov Brothers 
435 And did you know he was a schismatic: the Russian schismatics or 
raskol'niki, while ostensibly taking their origins from the schism 
in the Russian Church in the seventeenth century, were in fact 
composed of many sects, reflecting a wide diversity of popular 
religion The sect here referred to is the beguny, the 'runners' 

EXPLANATORY NOTES 
It was not unknown for such sectarians to wish to take on 
suffering, even if it meant confessing to crimes which they had 
not committed. There is a substratum of sectarian imagery in 
all Dostoevsky's novels, and it is not without significance that in 
Crime and Punishment Raskolnikov's very name is derived from 
the word for sectarian, raskol'nik, and that Mikolka, who is a sort 
of 'double' figure for Raskolnikov in that he confesses to his 
crime, should be introduced by Porfiry with the words 'On iz 
raskol'nikov' (literally, 'He is from the raskol'niki') . 
436 The new courts: these were set up as a result of the legal reforms 
of 1 863-4, and introduced trial by jury. 
437 sayings about blood 'refreshing': a theory that Napoleon I suffered 
from abnormally low blood pressure and needed the excite­
ment of battle to make him feel normal was being discussed in 
the Russian press 
442 a modern dissenter: i.e. a sectarian (see note to p. 435) .  In 1 865 
certain Old Believers asked Napoleon III to find refuge for 
them abroad 
Mr Midshipman Easy: the translation substitutes Marryat's hero 
for Gogol's Midshipman Dyrka, who is mentioned in the play 
Marriage But there is confusion on Porfiry's part; for the 
character he obviously has in mind is another midshipman 
referred to in the same play-Petukh 
461 la nature et la vente: 'nature and truth', a mocking reference to 
the philosophy of Jean:Jacques Rousseau. The phrase is a key 
refrain in Dostoevsky's Notes from the Underground. 
463 Oil va-t-elle la vertu se nicker?: 'Where will virtue find a nest?' 
assez cause: 'enough of talking'. 
508 nihil est: 
'is nothing'. The phrase appears to identity 
Raskolnikov with 'nihilism'. Pisarev, in particular, rejected 
mere 'beauty' See note to p. 355· 
Livingstone's Journals. David Livingstone ( 1 8 1 3-73) published 
his Narrative of an Expedition to the Zambesi and its Tributaries and 
the discovery of the Lakes of Shirwa and Nyassa in 1 86 5. 
509 extraordinary number of midwives . short-haired females: female 
'nihilists' of the younger generation often turned to midwifery 
as a practical step in their campaign to help the cause of 
women. They also wore their hair short and often affected blue­
tinted glasses. 

EXPLANATORY NOTES 
537 
5 1 9  the banks of the lrtysh: Dostoevsky himself had spent his penal 
servitude on the banks of the Irtysh in Siberia. 
523 a new strain of trichinae: in 1 865-6 the existence of microbes 
called trichinae, and epidemics caused by them, were topics of 
concern in the Russian press Trichinae infect pigs, and the 
symbolic use here of an epidemic caused by them suggests the 
biblical parable of the Gadarene swine, which Dostoevsky 
would later project as a metaphor for the madness of nihilism 
in his novel The Devils 


