
Notes from
Underground
Fyodor Dostoevsky
Translated from the Russian by:
Richard Pevear
Larissa Volokhonsky
With an introduction by:
Richard Pevear
Everyman’s Library


Contents
Introduction
iii
1 
Part One:
Underground
3
2 
Part Two:
Apropos of the Wet Snow
37
Notes
115
i


i n t r o d u c t i o n
The ellipsis after the opening sentence of Notes from Underground
is like a window aﬀording us a ﬁrst glimpse of one of the most re-
markable characters in literature, one who has been placed among the
bearers of modern consciousness alongside Don Quixote, Hamlet,
and Faust. What we see is a man glancing at us out of the corner of
his eye, very much aware of us as he speaks, very much concerned
with the impression his words are making. In fact, we do not really
see him, we only hear him, and not through anything so respectable
as a window, but through a crack in the ﬂoorboards. He addresses
the world from that crack; he has also spent a lifetime listening at it.
Everything that can be said about him, and more particularly against
him, he already knows; he has, as he says in a typical paradox, over-
heard it all, anticipated it all, invented it all. ”I am a sick man … I am
a wicked man.” In the space of that pause Dostoevsky introduces the
unifying idea of his tale: the instability, the perpetual ”dialectic” of
isolated consciousness. The nameless hero – nameless ”because I is
all of us,” the critic Viktor Shklovsky suggested — is, like so many of
Dostoevsky’s heroes, a writer. Not a professional man of letters (none
of Dostoevsky’s ”writers” is that), but one whom circumstances have
led or forced to take up the pen, to try to ﬁx something in words, for
his own sake ﬁrst of all, but also with an eye for some indeterminate
others — readers, critics, judges, fellow creatures. He is a passionate
amateur, a condition that marks the style and structure as well as the
content of the book. Where the master practitioner would present us
with a seamless and harmonious verbal construction, the man from
underground, who literally cannot contain himself, breaks decorum
all the time, interrupts himself, comments on his own intentions,
deﬁes his readers, polemicizes with other writers. The literariness of
his ”notes” and the unliterariness of his style are both results of his
”heightened consciousness,” his hostility to and dependence upon the

i n t r o d u c t i o n
words of others. Thus the unifying idea of Notes from Underground,
embodied in the person of its narrator, is dramatized in the process
of its writing. The controlling art of Dostoevsky remains at a second
remove.
This man who may be trying to write his way out of the under-
ground, originally read his way into it. ”At home,” he says, ”I mainly
used to read. I wished to stiﬂe with external sensations all that was
ceaselessly boiling up inside me. And among external sensations the
only one possible for me was reading. Reading was, of course, a great
help – it stirred, delighted, and tormented me.” That was during his
youth, in the 1840s. He read, he dreamed, and he engaged in ”little
debauches.” These were his three diversions, and it is interesting that
he puts them together. What did he read? At various points in his
account he compares himself with Byron’s Manfred, with characters
from Pushkin and Lermontov — all romantic ﬁgures. He refers more
than once to Rousseau. Farther in the background, but looming large,
stand Kant and Schiller, representing German philosophical and po-
etic idealism, summoned up in the phrase ”the beautiful and lofty,”
which had become a commonplace of Russian liberal criticism of the
1840s. His reading was, in other words, that of the typical educated
Russian of the time. Reading nourished his dreaming, and even found
its way into his little debauches ”in exactly the proportion required
for a good sauce.” And so it was that he evaded the petty squalor and
inner anguish of his daily life; so it was, as he confesses sixteen years
later, that he ”defaulted on his life through moral corruption in a
corner.” One main thematic strand of the book is the underground
man’s denunciation of the estranging and vitiating inﬂuence of books,
so that from his perspective of the 1860s, when he begins to write,
the word ”literary” has become one of the most sarcastic he can utter.
To all the features for an antihero purposely collected in Notes from
Underground there are added all the features for an antibook.
That book is the underground man’s book, not Dostoevsky’s,
though the two coincide almost word for word. Indeed, the sharp
personality of the underground man, the intensity of his attacks and
confessions, the apparent lack of critical distance in the ﬁrst person
narrative, have given many readers the impression that they have to do
iv

N o t e s f r o m U n d e r g r o u n d
here with a direct statement of Dostoevsky’s own ideological position,
and much commentary has been written on the book in that light.
Much has also been said about the tragic (or at least ”terribly sad”)
essence of its vision. Both notions seem to overlook the humor –
stylistic, situational, polemical, parodic – that pervades Notes from
Underground. Dostoevsky certainly put a lot of himself into the situa-
tions and emotions of his narrator; what distinguishes his book from
the narrator’s is an extra dimension of laughter. Laughter creates the
distance that allows for recognition, without which the book might
be a tract, a case history, a cry of despair, anything you like, but not a
work of art. Notes from Underground has been called the prelude to
the great novels of Dostoevsky’s last period, and it is so partly because
here Dostoevsky ﬁrst perfected the method of tonal distancing that
enabled him to present characters and events simultaneously from
diﬀerent points of view, to counter empathy with intellection.
The underground man’s book is a personal outpouring – harsh,
self-accusatory, deﬁant, negligently written, loosely structured – a
long diatribe, followed by some avowedly random recollections (”I
will not introduce any order or system. Whatever I recall, I will
write down.”) It claims to be genuine, if artistically crude. ”No longer
literature, but corrective punishment,” the narrator ﬁnally decides.
Nietzsche thought he could hear ”the voice of the blood” in it.
Dostoevsky’s novel is something quite diﬀerent. It is a tragicom-
edy of ideas, admirable for the dramatic expressiveness of its prose,
which gives subtle life to this voice from under the ﬂoorboards with all
its withholdings, second thoughts, loopholes, special pleadings; and
admirable, too, for the dynamics of its composition, the interplay of
its two parts, which represent two historical moments, two ”climates
of opinion,” as well as two images of the man from underground,
revealed by diﬀerent means and with very diﬀerent tonalities.
The two parts of Notes from Underground were ﬁrst published
in 1864, in the January and April issues of Epoch, a magazine edited
by Dostoevsky’s brother Mikhail, the successor to their magazine
Time, which had been suppressed by the censors in 1863. The note
Dostoevsky added to the ﬁrst part insists on the social and typical,
as opposed to personal and psychological, aspects of the man from
v

i n t r o d u c t i o n
underground: ”such persons as the writer of such notes not only
may but even must exist in our society, taking into consideration the
circumstances under which our society has generally been formed.”
Hisviewofthosecircumstanceswouldhavebeenfamiliartoreadersof
his articles in Time over the previous few years, particularly ”Winter
Notes on Summer Impressions,” an account of his ﬁrst trip to Europe
in 1862, which had appeared in the February and March issues of
Time for 1863. There he discussed Russia’s ”captivation” with the
West:
Why, everything, unquestionably almost everything that
we have – of development, science, art, civic-mindedness, hu-
manity, everything, everything comes from there – from that
same land of holy wonders! Why, our entire life, even from
very childhood itself, has been set up along European lines.
Russian society had been formed by decades of imported ”develop-
ment” and ”enlightenment,” words that acquire a sharply ironic in-
ﬂection in Dostoevsky’s later work. Some sources of this ideology
have already been mentioned – Rousseau, Schiller, Kant. To this list
may be added the names of such French social romantics as Victor
Hugo, Eugene Sue, George Sand, and the Utopian socialists Fourier
and Saint-Simon. In Dostoevsky: The Stir of Liberation, Joseph Frank
points to the presence of these ”inﬂuences” in the theme of the re-
deemed prostitute, which was a favorite among Russian liberals of
the 1840s (the poet Nikolai Nekrasov, for example), and which Dos-
toevsky parodies brilliantly in the second part of Notes from Under-
ground. The parody is, of course, Dostoevsky’s, not the underground
man’s. The latter, on the contrary, had taken all these inﬂuences to
heart; they had made him into a ”developed man of the nineteenth
century,” a man of ”heightened consciousness.” It was the attempt to
live by them that drove him ”underground.” In the social displace-
ment of an imported culture, Dostoevsky perceived a more profound
human displacement, a spiritual void ﬁlled with foreign content.
A second theme from ”Winter Notes” reappears in Notes from
Underground – that of the ”crystal palace,” which is as central to the
polemics of the novel’s ﬁrst part as the redeemed prostitute is to the
vi

N o t e s f r o m U n d e r g r o u n d
parody of the second. The crystal palace in the travel article is the
cast-iron and glass exhibition hall built in London in 1851 for the
Great Exhibition. It appeared to Dostoevsky as a terrifying structure,
a symbol of false unity, of ”the full triumph of Baal, the ultimate
organization of an anthill.” The tones in which he speaks of it will
be echoed almost twenty years later by the Grand Inquisitor in The
Brothers Karamazov:
But if you saw how proud is that mighty spirit who created
this colossal setting and how proudly convinced this spirit is
of its victory and of its triumph, then you would shudder for
its pride, obstinacy, and blindness, but you would shudder also
for those over whom this proud spirit hovers and reigns.
This mighty spirit is the spirit of industrial capitalism, and the crystal
palace is its temple. In Notes from Underground the same structure
comes to stand for the future organization of socialism. It remains an
image of false unity, but is denounced in rather diﬀerent terms: the
underground man puts his tongue out at it, calls it a tenement house
and a chicken coop.
The two time periods of the novel represent two stages in the
evolution of the Russian intelligentsia: the sentimental, literary 1840s
and the rational and utilitarian 1860s; the time of the liberals and the
time of the nihilists. One of Dostoevsky’s constant preoccupations
in his later work was the responsibility of the liberal generation for
the emergence of the nihilists, an idea he embodied literally in the
novel Demons (1871-72) in the ﬁgures of the dreamy individualist
Stepan Verkhovensky and his deadly utilitarian son Pyotr. In Notes
from Underground the same evolution is reﬂected in the mind of one
man: the polemicist of the ﬁrst part grew out of the defeated dreamer
of the second. The inverted time sequence of the two parts seems to
lead us to this discovery.
However, the underground man is hardly a typical ”rational ego-
ist,” any more than he had been a typical romantic. There is a quality
in him that sets him apart, which he himself deﬁnes on the last page
of the book: ”Excuse me, gentlemen, but I am not justifying myself
with this allishness. As far as I myself am concerned, I have merely
vii

i n t r o d u c t i o n
carried to an extreme in my life what you have not dared to carry even
halfway.” Submitted to the testing of full acceptance, the testing of
this irreducible human existence, the ”heightened consciousness” of
the rationalist, like the sentimental impulses of the romantic, runs
into disastrous and comic reversals. Hence the paradoxically deﬁant
double-mindedness of the underground man, and his intransitive
dilemma.
The ”gentlemen” he addresses throughout his notes, when they
are not a more indeterminate ”you,” are typical intellectuals of the
1860s. More speciﬁcally, they are presumed to be followers of the
writer Nikolai Gavrilovich Chernyshevsky, the chief spokesman and
ideologist of the young radicals. N. G. Chernyshevsky was the author
of a number of critical works, notably The Anthropological Principle
in Philosophy (1860), in which he propounded the abovementioned
doctrine of ”rational egoism,” an adaptation of the ”enlightened self-
interest” of the English utilitarians. His programmatic Utopian novel
What Is to Be Done?, written in prison following his arrest in 1862 for
revolutionary activities and published in 1863, immediately became
a manual for social activists. Several decades later, V. I. Lenin, who
dubbed Dostoevsky a ”superlatively bad” writer, could testify that
What Is to Be Done? had made him into a conﬁrmed revolutionary.
The nature of Chernyshevsky’s hero and his ideas may be deduced
from the following passage:
Yes, I will always do what I want. I will never sacriﬁce
anything, not even a whim, for the sake of something I do not
desire. What I want, with all my heart, is to make people happy.
In this lies my happiness. Mine! Can you hear that, you, in
your underground hole?
This is the voice of the healthy rational egoist, the ingenuous man of
action. Dostoevsky took up the challenge.
Though Chernyshevsky is not mentioned by name in Notes from
Underground, his theories, and in particular his novel, are the most
immediate targets both of the underground man’s diatribes and of
Dostoevsky’s subtler, more penetrating parody. Dostoevsky had in-
tended originally to write a critical review of What Is to Be Done?
viii

N o t e s f r o m U n d e r g r o u n d
for the ﬁrst issue of Epoch, but was unable to produce anything. The
strained conditions of his personal life at that time and the problems
of starting the new magazine do not explain the diﬃculty he faced. Ev-
idently it was not enough for him simply to counter Chernyshevsky’s
arguments; more was at stake than a conﬂict of ideas — there was
a question of the very nature of the human being who was to be so
forcibly made happy. Dostoevsky’s response had to take artistic form.
Hewaschallengedtoreveal”themaninman,”preciselyinandthrough
the ideas of the new radicals themselves. The counterarguments of
the ”gentlemen” in the later chapters of the ﬁrst part, for example, are
clearly Chernyshevskian, based on his notions of normal interests,
natural law, and the denial of free will. The crystal palace, too, in its
reappearance here, has been transmuted by its passage through ”The
Fourth Dream of Vera Pavlovna,” the section of What Is to Be Done?
that presents Chernyshevsky’s vision of mankind made happy. The
pseudoscientiﬁc terms and even a certain clumsy use of parentheses,
as Joseph Frank has shown, are the narrator’s deliberate mockery of
Chernyshevsky’s writing. Frank has also shown that the attack is not
limited to Part One: two of the three main episodes in the second
part of Notes – the episode of the bumped oﬃcer and the episode with
the prostitute Liza – are in fact parodic developments of episodes
from Chernyshevsky’s novel. The latter episode, which is the climac-
tic episode of the novel as a whole, gives fullest play to Dostoevsky’s
criticism through comic reversal. But the reversal is not a simple con-
trary; it is the puncturing of a literary cliché by a truth drawn from
a diﬀerent source, from what the narrator comes in the end to call
”living life.”
Dostoevsky’s reply to Chernyshevsky is both ideological and
artistic, the implication being that the two are inseparable, and the
further implication being that the indispensable unity of artistic form
reﬂects a more primordial unity of the living person. Those who fa-
vored Chernyshevsky’s ideas, however, were able to separate them
from the form of their expression. Even the conscientious old radical
Alexander Herzen, though he found Chernyshevsky’s novel ”vilely
written” and could not help noting that it ends with ”a phalanstery
in a brothel,” immediately added: ”On the other hand there is much
ix

i n t r o d u c t i o n
that is good and healthy.” (An interesting pair of adjectives when one
recalls the opening lines of Notes.) These remarks of Herzen’s are
passed on to us by Fyodor Godunov-Cherdyntsev, the narrator of
Vladimir Nabokov’s The Gift (1938), whose monograph on the life
of Chernyshevsky makes up the fourth of the novel’s ﬁve chapters.
Godunov-Cherdyntsev notes a certain ”fatal inner contradiction” in
Chernyshevsky’s own reﬂections on art, what he describes as the du-
alism of the monist Chernyshevsky’s aesthetics – where ”form” and
”content” are distinct, with ”content” preeminent – or, more exactly,
with ”form” playing the role of the soul and ”content” the role of the
body; andthemuddleisaugmentedbythefactthatthis”soul”consists
of mechanical components, since Chernyshevsky believed that the
value of a work was not a qualitative but a quantitative concept, and
that ”if someone were to take some miserable, forgotten novel and
carefully cull all its ﬂashes of observation, he would collect a fair num-
berofsentencesthatwouldnotdiﬀerinworthfromthoseconstituting
the pages of works we admire.” Indeed, there could hardly be a more
thorough denial of artistic unity than this last quoted passage. The
naive blitheness of its expression is characteristic of Chernyshevsky
and thinkers like him (utilitarians, nihilists; then Lenin, Lunacharsky,
the theorists of ”socialist realism”). It is deﬁned by Nabokov’s narrator
in terms of a decomposition of the human person. The metaphor
comes quite naturally; the aesthetic question immediately brings with
it the human question – or, rather, they are the same.
As a writer and thinker, Chernyshevsky was the embodiment of
what in Russian is called bezdarnost’ – giftlessness – and was thus
the perfect foil for that minutely observant, wondering, grateful, and
form-revealing intelligence that Nabokov celebrates in The Gift. Gift-
lessness, as Dostoevsky feared and Nabokov knew, became the domi-
nant style in Russia; it eventually seized power, and in the process of
”making people happy” destroyed them by millions, leaving its vast
motherland broken and desolate.”The triumph of materialism has
abolished matter,” the poet Andrei Bely said in the famine-ridden
1920s. Godunov-Cherdyntsev gives a more detailed formulation:
Our overall impression is that materialists of this type fell
x

N o t e s f r o m U n d e r g r o u n d
into a fatal error: neglecting the nature of the thing itself, they
kept applying their most materialistic method merely to the
relations between objects, to the void between objects and not
to the objects themselves; i.e. they were the naivest metaphysi-
cians precisely at that point where they most wanted to be
standing on the ground.
A fatal error, a fatal contradiction. In this respect the greatest fore-
sight was shown by long-eared Shigalyov, the radical theoretician
in Dostoevsky’s Demons: ”I got entangled in my own data, and my
conclusion directly contradicts the original idea I start from. Starting
from unlimited freedom, I conclude with unlimited despotism. I
will add, however, that apart from my solution to the social formula,
there is no other.” A direct line leads from metaphysical naivety to
murder; a direct line leads from the anti-unity of utilitarian aesthetics
to the false unity of the crystal palace. Dostoevsky perceived these
relations more clearly than anyone else of his time. The perception
coincided with, and in fact constituted, the maturity of his genius.
He recognized that his opposition to the ”Chernyshevskians” could
not be a struggle for domination, that what was in question was the
complex reality of the human being, the whole person, the ”thing
itself,” and that a true articulation of that reality could only come as
the ﬁnal ”gift” of an artistic image. Mikhail Bakhtin noted in his study
of Dostoevsky’s poetics: ”Artistic form, correctly understood, does
not shape already prepared and found content, but rather permits
content to be found and seen for the ﬁrst time.”
Hence the formal inventiveness of Notes from Underground: its
striking language, unlike any literary prose ever written; its multiple
and conﬂicting tonalities; the oddity of its reversed structure, which
seems random but all at once reveals its deeper coherence – ”chatter
… resolved by an unexpected catastrophe,” as Dostoevsky described it
to his brother. (”All Dostoevsky’s novels were written for the sake of
the catastrophe,” the critic Konstantin Mochulsky observed, ”This is
the law of the new ’expressive art’ that he created. Only upon arriving
at the ﬁnale do we understand the composition’s perfection and the
inexhaustible depth of its design.”) The catastrophe that resolves Notes
xi

i n t r o d u c t i o n
from Underground, with its resoundingly symbolic slamming door,
is at the same time the moment of its origin. There, in a sudden
confusion of tenses, the narrator cries out from the past into the
future: ”and never, never will I recall this moment with indiﬀerence.”
It is a ﬂeeting moment, but it has determined the narrator’s life and
gives the edge of passion to his attack, his outburst, after all his years
”underground.” Coming at the end of the book, it sends us back to
the beginning; thus the round of the underground man’s ruminations
is given form, and this whole ”image” Dostoevsky holds up to us as a
sign.
There may, however, have been a more directly opposing idea
in the book as Dostoevsky originally wrote it, a sort of ideological
climax in Part One to match the narrative climax in Part Two. When
the ﬁrst part appeared in Epoch, Dostoevsky complained in a letter to
his brother that the tenth chapter – ”the most important one, where
the essential thought is expressed” – had been drastically cut by the
censors.”Where I mocked at everything and sometimes blasphemed
for form’s sake – that is let pass; but where from all this I deduced the
need of faith and Christ – that is suppressed.”
The published version of the chapter, according to its author, was
left ”full of self-contradictions.” Indeed, the reader will notice that in
the third paragraph the ”crystal ediﬁce” ceases all at once to represent
the ideas of the narrator’s opponents and becomes instead something
that he himself has possibly invented ”as a result of certain old non-
rational habits of our generation,” something, he says, that ”exists in
my desires, or, better, exists as long as my desires exist.” Obviously
there have been major cuts here, removing the transition from one
crystal ediﬁce to the other – the word ”mansion” being left us as a clue
to its nature. We must try to imagine what would have transformed
the ”chicken coop” into a mansion, what would have made it more
than ”a phalanstery in a brothel,” what would have turned it from
an embodiment of the ”laws of nature” into a contradiction of those
very laws, and how from all this ”the need of faith and Christ” was
deduced. Dostoevsky never restored the cuts, as he never restored
similarly drastic cuts in Crime and Punishment and Demons. Various
explanations have been oﬀered for this circumstance, some practical
xii

N o t e s f r o m U n d e r g r o u n d
(lack of time, reluctance to confront the censors), others aesthetic (a
recognition that the cuts were improvements). We do not know. But
if we look at Dostoevsky’s outlines of his ideas for novels in his note-
books and letters and then at the novels themselves, we will realize at
least that the scheme barely hints at the surprises of its development.
However it was that Dostoevsky ”deduced the need for faith and
Christ” in this chapter, we may be sure that he did not add it on as an
external ”ideological” precept, but drew it from the materials of the
work itself.
The man from underground refutes his opponents with the re-
sults of having carried their own ideas to an extreme in his life. These
results are himself. This self, however, as the reader discovers at once,
is not a monolithic personality, but an inner plurality in constant
motion. The plurality of the person, without any ideological addi-
tions, is already a refutation of l’homme de la nature et de la vérité,
the healthy, undivided man of action who was both the instrument
and the object of radical social theory. Unity is not singularity but
wholeness, a holding together, a harmony, all of which imply plurality.
What the principle of this harmony is, the underground man cannot
say; he has never found it. But he knows he has not found it; he knows,
because his inner disharmony, his dividedness, which is the source
of his suﬀering, is also the source of consciousness. Here we come
upon one of the deep springs of Dostoevsky’s later work – not his
thinking (Dostoevsky was not a thinker, or, rather, he was a plurality
of thinkers), but his artistic embodiment of reality. The one quality
his negative characters share, and almost the only negative his world
view allows, is inner ﬁxity, a sort of death-in-life, which can take many
forms and tonalities, from the broadly comic to the tragic, from the
mechanical to the corpselike, from Pyotr Petrovich Luzhin to Nikolai
Stavrogin. Inner movement, on the other hand, is always a condition
of spiritual good, though it may also be a source of suﬀering, division,
disharmony, in this life. What moves may always rise. Dostoevsky
never portrays the completion of this movement; it extends beyond
the end of the given book. We see it in characters like Raskolnikov
and Mitya Karamazov, but ﬁrst of all in the man from underground.
xiii

i n t r o d u c t i o n
How much the mere tone of Notes
from Underground is worth!
Lev Shestov
The philosopher Shestov, the critic Mochulsky, and most Russian
readers agree that the style of Notes from Underground is, in Shestov’s
words, ”very strange.” Bakhtin describes it as ”deliberately clumsy,”
though ”subject to a certain artistic logic.” A detailed discussion of
the matter is not possible here, but we can oﬀer a few comments on
the style of our translation, pointing to qualities in the original that
we have sought to keep in English for the sake of ”mere tone,” where
they have been lost in earlier translations.
Though he likes to philosophize, the underground man has no
use for philosophical terminology. When he picks up such words, it
is to make fun of them; otherwise he couches his thought in the most
blunt and even crude terms. An example is his use of the rare word
khoteniye, a verbal noun formed from khotet’, ”to want.” It is a simple,
elemental word, with an almost physical, appetitive immediacy. The
English equivalent is ”wanting,” which is how we have translated it.
The primitive quality of the word appears to have alarmed our pre-
decessors, who translate it as ”wishing,” ”desire,” ”will,” ”intention,”
”choice,” ”volition,” and render it variously at various times. The under-
ground man invariably says ”wanting” and ”to want.” He plays on the
diﬀerent uses of the word (”Who wants to want according to a little
table?”); there is one passage running from the end of Chapter VII to
the start of Chapter VIII in the ﬁrst part where ”want” and ”wanting”
appear eighteen times in two paragraphs – the stylistic point of which
is blunted when other words are used.
Another of the underground man’s words is vygoda, which means
”proﬁt” (gain, beneﬁt), and only secondarily ”advantage,” as it is most
often translated. ”Proﬁt” has very nearly the same range of uses in
English as vygoda has in Russian. It is also a direct, unambiguous
word, with an almost tactile quality: you have an advantage, but you
get a proﬁt. And like vygoda, with its strongly accented ﬁrst syllable,
”proﬁt” leaps from the mouth almost with the force of an expletive,
quite unlike the more unctuous ”advantage” or its Russian equivalent
xiv

N o t e s f r o m U n d e r g r o u n d
preimushchestvo. Again, the narrator insists on his word and plays
with it. Thus we arrive at the full music of this underground oratorio:
And where did all these sages get the idea that man needs
some normal, some virtuous wanting? What made them neces-
sarily imagine that what man needs is necessarily a reasonably
proﬁtable wanting? Man needs only independent wanting,
whatever this independence may cost and wherever it may lead.
Repetition is of the essence here. When the underground man speaks
of consciousness and heightened consciousness, it is always the same
word: ”consciousness,” not ”intellectual activity” as one translator
has it, not ”awareness” as another oﬀers, and never some mixture of
the three. The editorial precept of avoiding repetitions, of gracefully
varying one’s vocabulary, cannot be applied to this writer. His writing
is emphatic, heavy-handed, rude: ”This is my wanting, this is my
desire. You will scrape it out of me only when you change my desires.”
To translate the scullery verb vyskoblit’ (”to scrape out”) as ”eradicate”
or ”expunge,” as has been done, to exchange the ”collar of lard” the
narrator bestows on the wretched clerk in Part Two for one that is
merely ”greasy,” is to chasten and thus distort the voice of this man
who is nothing but a voice.
There is, however, one tradition of mistranslation attached to
Notes from Underground that raises something more than a question
of ”mere tone.” The second sentence of the book, Ya zloy chelovek, has
most often been rendered as ”I am a spiteful man.” Zloy is indeed at
the root of the Russian word for ”spiteful” (zlobnyi), but it is a much
broader and deeper word, meaning ”wicked,” ”bad,” ”evil.” The wicked
witch in Russian folktales is zlaya ved’ma (zlaya being the feminine
of zloy). The opposite of zloy is dobryi, ”good,” as in ”good fairy”
(dobraya feya). This opposition is of great importance for Notes from
Underground; indeed it frames the book, from ”I am a wicked man” at
the start to the outburst close to the end: ”They won’t let me … I can’t
be … good!” We can talk forever about the inevitable loss of nuances
in translating from Russian into English (or from any language into
any other), but the translation of zloy as ”spiteful” instead of ”wicked”
is not inevitable, nor is it a matter of nuance. It speaks for that habit of
xv

i n t r o d u c t i o n
substituting the psychological for the moral, of interpreting a spiritual
condition as a kind of behavior, which has so bedeviled our century,
not least in its eﬀorts to understand Dostoevsky. Besides, ”wicked”
has the lucky gift of picking up the internal rhyme in the ﬁrst two
sentences of the original.
Richard Pevear
xvi

Notes From
Underground


Part One:
Underground


I1
i am a sick man … I am a wicked man. An unattractive man. I think
my liver hurts. However, I don’t know a ﬁg about my sickness, and am
not sure what it is that hurts me. I am not being treated and never have
been, though I respect medicine and doctors. What’s more, I am also
superstitious in the extreme; well, at least enough to respect medicine.
(I’m suﬃciently educated not to be superstitious, but I am.) No, sir, I
refuse to be treated out of wickedness. Now, you will certainly not
be so good as to understand this. Well, sir, but I understand it. I
will not, of course, be able to explain to you who is going to suﬀer in
this case from my wickedness; I know perfectly well that I will in no
way ”muck things up” for the doctors by not taking their treatment;
I know better than anyone that by all this I am harming only myself
and no one else. But still, if I don’t get treated, it is out of wickedness.
My liver hurts; well, then let it hurt even worse!
I’ve been living like this for a long time – about twenty years. I’m
forty now. I used to be in the civil service; I no longer am. I was a
wicked oﬃcial. I was rude, and took pleasure in it. After all, I didn’t
accept bribes, so I had to reward myself at least with that. (A bad
witticism, but I won’t cross it out. I wrote it thinking it would come
1Both the author of the notes and the Notes themselves are, of course, ﬁctional.
Nevertheless, such persons as the writer of such notes not only may but even must
exist in our society, taking into consideration the circumstances under which our
society has generally been formed. I wished to bring before the face of the public, a
bit more conspicuously than usual, one of the characters of a time recently passed.
Heis onerepresentativeof a generationthatis still livingoutitslife. Inthis fragment,
entitled ”Underground,” this person introduces himself, his outlook, and seeks, as
it were, to elucidate the reasons why he appeared and had to appear among us. In
the subsequent fragment will come this person’s actual ”notes” about certain events
in his life.–Fyodor Dostoevsky

6
Underground
out very witty; but now, seeing for myself that I simply had a vile
wish to swagger – I purposely won’t cross it out!) When petitioners
would come for information to the desk where I sat – I’d gnash my
teeth at them, and felt an inexhaustible delight when I managed to
upset someone. I almost always managed. They were timid people
for the most part: petitioners, you know. But among the fops there
was one oﬃcer I especially could not stand. He simply refused to
submit and kept rattling his sabre disgustingly. I was at war with
him over that sabre for a year and a half. In the end, I prevailed. He
stopped rattling. However, that was still in my youth. But do you
know, gentlemen, what was the main point about my wickedness?
The whole thing precisely was, the greatest nastiness precisely lay in
my being shamefully conscious every moment, even in moments of
the greatest bile, that I was not only not a wicked but was not even an
embittered man, that I was simply frightening sparrows in vain, and
pleasing myself with it. I’m foaming at the mouth, but bring me some
little doll, give me some tea with a bit of sugar, and maybe I’ll calm
down. I’ll even wax tenderhearted, though afterwards I’ll certainly
gnash my teeth at myself and suﬀer from insomnia for a few months
out of shame. Such is my custom.
And I lied about myself just now when I said I was a wicked
oﬃcial. I lied out of wickedness. I was simply playing around both
with the petitioners and with the oﬃcer, but as a matter of fact I was
never able tobecomewicked. I was consciousevery momentof so very
many elements in myself most opposite to that. I felt them simply
swarming in me, those opposite elements. I knew they had been
swarming in me all my life, asking to be let go out of me, but I would
not let them, I would not, I purposely would not let them out. They
tormented me to the point of shame; they drove me to convulsions,
and – ﬁnally I got sick of them, oh, how sick I got! But do you not
perhaps think, gentlemen, that I am now repenting of something
before you, that I am asking your forgiveness for something? … I’m
sure you think so … However, I assure you that it is all the same to me
even if you do …
Not just wicked, no, I never even managed to become anything:
neither wicked nor good, neither a scoundrel nor an honest man,

Notes from Underground
7
neither a hero nor an insect. And now I am living out my life in my
corner, taunting myself with the spiteful and utterly futile consolation
that it is even impossible for an intelligent man seriously to become
anything, and only fools become something. Yes, sir, an intelligent
man of the nineteenth century must be and is morally obliged to
be primarily a characterless being; and a man of character, an active
ﬁgure – primarily a limited being. This is my forty-year-old convic-
tion. I am now forty years old, and, after all, forty years – is a whole
lifetime; after all, it’s the most extreme old age. To live beyond forty
is indecent, banal, immoral! Who lives beyond forty – answer me
sincerely, honestly? I’ll tell you who does: fools and scoundrels do.
I’ll say it in the faces of all the elders, all these venerable elders, all
these silver-haired and sweet-smelling elders! I’ll say it in the whole
world’s face! I have the right to speak this way, because I myself will
live to be sixty. I’ll live to be seventy! I’ll live to be eighty! … Wait!
let me catch my breath …
You no doubt think, gentlemen, that I want to make you laugh?
Here, too, you’re mistaken. I am not at all such a jolly man as you
think, or as you possibly think; if, however, irritated by all this chatter
(and I already feel you are irritated), you decide to ask me: what
precisely am I? – then I will answer you: I am one collegiate assessor.1
I served so as to have something to eat (but solely for that), and when
last year one of my distant relations left me six thousand roubles in his
will, I resigned at once and settled into my corner. I lived in this corner
before as well, but now I’ve settled into it. My room is wretched, bad,
on the edge of the city. My servant is a village woman, old, wicked
from stupidity, and always bad-smelling besides. I’m told that the
Petersburg climate is beginning to do me harm, and that with my
negligible means life in Petersburg is very expensive. I know all that, I
know it better than all these experienced and most wise counsellors
and waggers of heads.2 But I am staying in Petersburg; I will not leave
Petersburg! I will not leave because … Eh! but it’s all completely the
same whether I leave or not.
But anyhow: what can a decent man speak about with the most
pleasure?
Answer: about himself.

8
Underground
So then I, too, will speak about myself.
II
I WOULD NOW LIKE to tell you, gentlemen, whether you do or
do not wish to hear it, why I never managed to become even an insect.
I’ll tell you solemnly that I wanted many times to become an insect.
But I was not deemed worthy even of that. I swear to you, gentlemen,
that to be overly conscious is a sickness, a real, thorough sickness. For
man’s everyday use, ordinary human consciousness would be more
than enough; that is, a half, a quarter of the portion that falls to the
lot of a developed man in our unfortunate nineteenth century, who,
on top of that, has the added misfortune of residing in Petersburg, the
most abstract and intentional city on the entire globe. (Cities can be
intentional or unintentional.) As much consciousness, for example,
as that by which all so-called ingenuous people and active ﬁgures live
would be quite enough. I’ll bet you think I’m writing all this out of
swagger, to be witty at the expense of active ﬁgures, and swagger of
a bad tone besides, rattling my sabre like my oﬃcer. But, gentlemen,
who can take pride in his sicknesses, and swagger about them besides?
Though – what am I saying? – everyone does it; it’s their sick-
nesses that everyone takes pride in, and I, perhaps, more than anyone.
Let us not argue; my objection was absurd. But all the same I am
strongly convinced that not only too much consciousness but even
any consciousness at all is a sickness. I stand upon it. But let us also
leave that for a moment. Tell me this: why was it that, as if by design,
in those same, yes, in those very same moments when I was most
capable of being conscious of all the reﬁnements of ”everything beau-
tiful and lofty,”3 as we once used to say, it happened that instead of
being conscious I did such unseemly deeds, such deeds as … well, in
short, as everyone does, perhaps, but which with me occurred, as if
by design, precisely when I was most conscious that I ought not to
be doing them at all? The more conscious I was of the good and of
all this ”beautiful and lofty,” the deeper I kept sinking into my mire,

Notes from Underground
9
and the more capable I was of getting completely stuck in it. But the
main feature was that this was all in me not as if by chance, but as if
it had to be so. As if it were my most normal condition and in no
way a sickness or a blight, so that ﬁnally I lost any wish to struggle
against this blight. I ended up almost believing (and maybe indeed
believing) that this perhaps was my normal condition. But at ﬁrst,
in the beginning, how much torment I endured in this struggle! I
did not believe that such things happened to others, and therefore
kept it to myself all my life as a secret. I was ashamed (maybe I am
ashamed even now); it reached the point with me where I would feel
some secret, abnormal, mean little pleasure in returning to my corner
on some most nasty Petersburg night and being highly conscious of
having once again done a nasty thing that day, and again that what
had been done could in no way be undone, and I would gnaw, gnaw
at myself with my teeth, inwardly, secretly, tear and suck at myself
until the bitterness ﬁnally turned into some shameful, accursed sweet-
ness, and ﬁnally – into a decided, serious pleasure! Yes, a pleasure,
a pleasure! I stand upon it. The reason I’ve begun to speak is that
I keep wanting to ﬁnd out for certain: do other people have such
pleasures? I’ll explain to you: the pleasure here lay precisely in the too
vivid consciousness of one’s own humiliation; in feeling that one had
reached the ultimate wall; that, bad as it is, it cannot be otherwise;
that there is no way out for you, that you will never change into a
diﬀerent person; that even if you had enough time and faith left to
change yourself into something diﬀerent, you probably would not
wish to change; and even if you did wish it, you would still not do
anything, because in fact there is perhaps nothing to change into.
And chieﬂy, and ﬁnally, all this occurs according to the normal and
basic laws of heightened consciousness and the inertia that follows
directly from these laws, and consequently there is not only nothing
you can do to change yourself, but there is simply nothing to do at all.
So it turns out, for example, as a result of heightened consciousness:
right, you’re a scoundrel – as if it were a consolation for the scoundrel
himself to feel that he is indeed a scoundrel. But enough … Eh, I’ve
poured all that out, and what have I explained? … How explain this
pleasure? But I will explain myself! I will carry through to the end!

10
Underground
That is why I took a pen in my hands …
I have, for example, a terrible amour propre. I am as insecure
and touchy as a hunchback or a dwarf, yet there have indeed been
moments when if I had happened to be slapped, I might even have
been glad of it. I say it seriously: surely I’d have managed to discover
some sort of pleasure in that as well – the pleasure of despair, of
course, but it is in despair that the most burning pleasures occur,
especially when one is all too highly conscious of the hopelessness of
one’s position. And here, with this slap – you’ll simply be crushed
by the consciousness of what sort of slime you’ve been reduced to.
But chieﬂy, however you shuﬄe, it still comes out that I always come
out as the ﬁrst to blame for everything and, what’s most oﬀensive,
blamelessly to blame, according to the laws of nature, so to speak. I’m
to blame, ﬁrst, because I’m more intelligent than everyone around me.
(I’ve always considered myself more intelligent than everyone around
me, and, would you believe, have even felt slightly ashamed of it. At
least I’ve somehow averted my eyes all my life, and never could look
people straight in the face.) I’m to blame, ﬁnally, because even if there
were any magnanimity in me, I would be the one most tormented
by the consciousness of its utter futility. For I would surely be able
to do nothing with my magnanimity: neither to forgive, because my
oﬀender might have hit me according to the laws of nature, and the
laws of nature cannot be forgiven; nor to forget, because even though
it’s the laws of nature, it’s still oﬀensive. Finally, even if I should want
to be altogether unmagnanimous, if, on the contrary, I should wish
to take revenge on my oﬀender, I wouldn’t be able to take revenge
on anyone in any way, because I surely wouldn’t dare to do anything
even if I could. Why wouldn’t I dare? About that I would like to say
a couple of words in particular.
III
WHAT HAPPENS, for example, with people who know how to
take revenge and generally how to stand up for themselves? Once

Notes from Underground
11
they are overcome, say, by vengeful feeling, then for the time there
is simply nothing left in their whole being but this feeling. Such a
gentleman just lunges straight for his goal like an enraged bull, horns
lowered, and maybe only a wall can stop him. (Incidentally: before a
wall, these gentlemen – that is, ingenuous people and active ﬁgures
– quite sincerely fold. For them a wall is not a deﬂection, as it is, for
example, for us, people who think and consequently do nothing; it
is not a pretext for turning back, a pretext which our sort usually
doesn’t believe in but is always very glad to have. No, they fold in
all sincerity. For them a wall possesses something soothing, morally
resolving and ﬁnal, perhaps even something mystical … But of the wall
later.) Well, sirs, it is just such an ingenuous man that I regard as the
real, normal man, the way his tender mother – nature – herself wished
to see him when she so kindly conceived him on earth. I envy such a
man to the point of extreme bile. He is stupid, I won’t argue with you
about that, but perhaps a normal man ought to be stupid, how do you
know? Perhaps it’s even very beautiful. And I am the more convinced
of this, so to speak, suspicion, seeing that if, for example, one takes
the antithesis of the normal man, that is, the man of heightened
consciousness, who came, of course, not from the bosom of nature
but from a retort (this is almost mysticism, gentlemen, but I suspect
that, too), this retort man sometimes folds before his antithesis so far
thathehonestlyregardshimself, withallhisheightenedconsciousness,
as a mouse and not a man. A highly conscious mouse, perhaps, but a
mouse all the same, whereas here we have a man, and consequently …
and so on … And, above all, it is he, he himself, who regards himself
as a mouse; no one asks him to; and that is an important point.
Let us now have a look at this mouse in action. Suppose, for exam-
ple, that it, too, is oﬀended (and it is almost always oﬀended), and it,
too, wishes to take revenge. For it may have stored up even more spite
than l’homme de la nature et de la verité4 . The nasty, base little desire
to pay the oﬀender back with the same evil may scratch still more nas-
tily in it than in l’homme de la nature et de la verité, because l’homme
de le nature et de la verité, with his innate stupidity, regards his revenge
quite simply as justice; whereas the mouse, as a result of its heightened
consciousness, denies it any justice. Things ﬁnally come down to the

12
Underground
business itself, to the act of revenge itself. The wretched mouse, in
addition to the one original nastiness, has already managed to fence
itself about with so many other nastinesses in the form of questions
and doubts; it has padded out the one question with so many unre-
solved questions that, willy-nilly, some fatal slops have accumulated
around it, some stinking ﬁlth consisting of its dubieties, anxieties, and,
ﬁnally, of the spit raining on it from the ingenuous ﬁgures who stand
solemnly around it like judges and dictators, guﬀawing at it from all
their healthy gullets. Of course, nothing remains for it but to wave
the whole thing aside with its little paw and, with a smile of feigned
contempt, in which it does not believe itself, slip back shamefacedly
into its crack. There, in its loathsome, stinking underground, our
oﬀended, beaten-down, and derided mouse at once immerses itself
in cold, venomous, and, above all, everlasting spite. For forty years
on end it will recall its oﬀense to the last, most shameful details, each
time adding even more shameful details of its own, spitefully taunting
and chaﬁng itself with its fantasies. It will be ashamed of its fantasies,
but all the same it will recall everything, go over everything, heap all
sorts of ﬁgments on itself, under the pretext that they, too, could have
happened, and forgive nothing. It may even begin to take revenge, but
somehow in snatches, with piddling things, from behind the stove,
incognito, believing neither in its right to revenge itself nor in the
success of its vengeance, and knowing beforehand that it will suﬀer
a hundred times more from all its attempts at revenge than will the
object of its vengeance, who will perhaps not even scratch at the bite.
On its deathbed it will again recall everything, adding the interest
accumulated over all that time, and … But it is precisely in this cold,
loathsome half-despair, half-belief, in this conscious burying oneself
alive from grief for forty years in the underground, in this assiduously
produced and yet somewhat dubious hopelessness of one’s position,
in all this poison of unsatisﬁed desires penetrating inward, in all this
fever of hesitations, of decisions taken forever, and repentances com-
ing again a moment later, that the very sap of that strange pleasure I
was talking about consists. It is so subtle, sometimes so elusive of con-
sciousness, that people who are even the slightest bit narrow-minded,
or who simply have strong nerves, will not understand a single trace

Notes from Underground
13
of it.”Perhaps,” you will add, grinning, ”those who have never been
slapped will also not understand” – thereby politely hinting that I,
too, may have experienced a slap in my life, and am therefore speaking
as a connoisseur. I’ll bet that’s what you think. But calm yourselves,
gentlemen, I have not received any slaps, though it’s all quite the same
to me whatever you may think about it. Perhaps I myself am sorry
for having dealt out too few slaps in my life. But enough, not another
word on this subject which you ﬁnd so extremely interesting.
I calmly continue about people with strong nerves, who do not
understand a certain reﬁnement of pleasure. In the face of some
mishaps, for example, these gentlemen may bellow at the top of their
lungs like bulls, and let’s suppose this brings them the greatest honor,
but still, as I’ve already said, they instantly resign themselves before
impossibility. Impossibility – meaning a stone wall? What stone
wall? Well, of course, the laws of nature, the conclusions of natural
science, mathematics. Once it’s proved to you, for example, that you
descendedfromanape, there’snousemakingawryface, justtakeitfor
what it is. Once it’s proved to you that, essentially speaking, one little
drop of your own fat should be dearer to you than a hundred thousand
of your fellow men, and that in this result all so-called virtues and
obligations and other ravings and prejudices will ﬁnally be resolved,
go ahead and accept it, there’s nothing to be done, because two times
two is – mathematics. Try objecting to that.5
”For pity’s sake,” they’ll shout at you, ”you can’t rebel: it’s two
times two is four! Nature doesn’t ask your permission; it doesn’t care
about your wishes, or whether you like its laws or not. You’re obliged
to accept it as it is, and consequently all its results as well. And so a
wall is indeed a wall … etc., etc.” My God, but what do I care about
the laws of nature and arithmetic if for some reason these laws and
two times two is four are not to my liking? To be sure, I won’t break
through such a wall with my forehead if I really have not got strength
enough to do it, but neither will I be reconciled with it simply because
I have a stone wall here and have not got strength enough.
As if such a stone wall were truly soothing and truly contained
in itself at least some word on the world, solely by being two times
two is four. Oh, absurdity of absurdities! Quite another thing is to

14
Underground
understand all, to be conscious of all, all impossibilities and stone
walls; not to be reconciled with a single one of these impossibilities
andstonewallsifyouareloathtobereconciled; toreach, bywayofthe
most inevitable logical combinations, the most revolting conclusions
on the eternal theme that you yourself seem somehow to blame even
for the stone wall, though once again it is obviously clear that you
are in no way to blame; and in consequence of that, silently and
impotently gnashing your teeth, to come to a voluptuous standstill
in inertia, fancying that, as it turns out, there isn’t even anyone to be
angry with; that there is no object to be found, and maybe never will
be; that it’s all a sleight-of-hand, a stacked deck, a cheat, that it’s all
just slops – nobody knows what and nobody knows who, but in spite
of all the uncertainties and stacked decks, it still hurts, and the more
uncertain you are, the more it hurts!
IV
HA, HA, HA! Next you’ll be ﬁnding pleasure in a toothache!” you
will exclaim, laughing.”And why not? There is also pleasure in a
toothache,” I will answer. I had a toothache for a whole month; I
know there is. Here, of course, one does not remain silently angry,
one moans; but these are not straightforward moans, they are crafty
moans, and the craftiness is the whole point. These moans express
the pleasure of the one who is suﬀering; if they did not give him
pleasure, he wouldn’t bother moaning. It’s a good example, gentle-
men, and I shall develop it. In these moans there is expressed, ﬁrst,
all the futility of our pain, so humiliating for our consciousness, and
all the lawfulness of nature, on which, to be sure, you spit, but from
which you suﬀer all the same, while it does not. There is expressed the
consciousness that your enemy is nowhere to be found, and yet there
is pain; the consciousness that, despite all possible Wagenheims,6
you are wholly the slave of your teeth; that if someone wishes, your
teeth will stop aching, and if not, they will go on aching for another
three months; and that, ﬁnally, if you still do not agree, and protest

Notes from Underground
15
even so, then the only consolation you have left is to whip yourself, or
give your wall a painful beating with your ﬁst, and decidedly nothing
else. Well, sir, it is with these bloody oﬀenses, with these mockeries
from no one knows whom, that the pleasure ﬁnally begins, sometimes
reaching the highest sensuality. I ask you, gentlemen: listen sometime
to the moaning of an educated man of the nineteenth century who
is suﬀering from a toothache – say, on the second or third day of his
ailment, when he’s beginning to moan not as he did on the ﬁrst day,
that is, not simply because he has a toothache, not like some coarse
peasant, but like a man touched by development and European civi-
lization, like a man who has ”renounced the soil and popular roots,”
as they say nowadays.7 His moans somehow turn bad, nastily wicked,
and continue for whole days and nights. Yet he himself knows that
his moans will be of no use to him; he knows better than anyone
that he is only straining and irritating himself and others in vain; he
knows that even the public before whom he is exerting himself, and
his whole family, are already listening to him with loathing, do not
believe even a pennyworth of it, and understand in themselves that he
could moan diﬀerently, more simply, without roulades and ﬂourishes,
and that it’s just from spite and craftiness that he is playing around
like that. Now, it is in all these consciousnesses and disgraces that the
sensuality consists.”So I’m bothering you, straining your hearts, not
letting anyone in the house sleep. Don’t sleep, then; you, too, should
feel every moment that I have a toothache. For you I’m no longer
a hero, as I once wished to appear, but simply a vile little fellow, a
chenapan.8 Well, so be it! I’m very glad you’ve gotten to the bottom
of me. It’s nasty for you listening to my mean little moans? Let it be
nasty, then; here’s an even nastier roulade for you …” You still don’t
understand, gentlemen? No, evidently one must attain a profundity
of development and consciousness to understand all the curves of
this sensuality! You’re laughing? I’m very glad. To be sure, gentle-
men, my jokes are in bad tone – uneven, confused, self-mistrustful.
But that is simply because I don’t respect myself. How can a man of
consciousness have the slightest respect for himself?

16
Underground
V
NO, HOW IS IT POSSIBLE, how is it at all possible for a man
to have the slightest respect for himself, if he has presumed to ﬁnd
pleasure even in the very sense of his own humiliation? I am not
speaking this way now out of some cloying repentance. And, generally,
I hated saying: ”Forgive me, papa, I won’t do it again” – not because
I was incapable of saying it, but, on the contrary, perhaps precisely
because I was all too capable of it. And how! As if on purpose, I used
to bumble into it on occasions when I’d never thought or dreamed
of doing anything wrong. That was the nastiest thing of all. And
there I’d be again, waxing tenderhearted, repenting, shedding tears,
and certainly hoodwinking myself, though I wasn’t pretending in
the least. It was my heart that somehow kept mucking things up …
Here even the laws of nature could no longer be blamed, though still,
throughout my life, the laws of nature have oﬀended me constantly
and more than anything else. It’s nasty to look back on it all, and it was
nasty then as well. For a minute or so later I’d be reasoning spitefully
that it was all a lie, a lie, a loathsome, aﬀected lie – that is, all these
repentances, tenderheartednesses, all these vows of regeneration. And
you ask why I twisted and tormented myself so? Answer: because
it was just too boring to sit there with folded arms, that’s why I’d
get into such ﬂourishes. Really, it was so. Observe yourselves more
closely, gentlemen, and you’ll understand that it is so. I made up
adventures and devised a life for myself so as to live, at least somehow,
a little. How many times it happened to me – well, say, for example,
to feel oﬀended, just so, for no reason, on purpose; and I’d know
very well that I felt oﬀended for no reason, that I was aﬀecting it, but
you can drive yourself so far that in the end, really, you do indeed get
oﬀended. Somehow all my life I’ve had an urge to pull such stunts,
so that in the end I could no longer control myself. Another time,
twice even, I decided to force myself to fall in love. And I did suﬀer,
gentlemen, I assure you. Deep in one’s soul it’s hard to believe one is
suﬀering, mockery is stirring there, but all the same I suﬀer, and in a
real, honest-to-god way; I get jealous, lose my temper … And all that

Notes from Underground
17
from boredom, gentlemen, all from boredom; crushed by inertia. For
the direct, lawful, immediate fruit of consciousness is inertia – that
is, a conscious sitting with folded arms. I’ve already mentioned this
above. I repeat, I emphatically repeat: ingenuous people and active
ﬁgures are all active simply because they are dull and narrow-minded.
How to explain it? Here’s how: as a consequence of their narrow-
mindedness, they take the most immediate and secondary causes for
the primary ones, and thus become convinced more quickly and easily
than others that they have found an indisputable basis for their doings,
and so they feel at ease; and that, after all, is the main thing. For in
order to begin to act, one must ﬁrst be completely at ease, so that no
more doubts remain. Well, and how am I, for example, to set myself
at ease? Where are the primary causes on which I can rest, where are
my bases? Where am I going to get them? I exercise thinking, and,
consequently, for me every primary cause immediately drags with it
yet another, still more primary one, and so on ad inﬁnitum. Such
is precisely the essence of all consciousness and thought. So, once
again it’s the laws of nature. And what, ﬁnally, is the result? The
same old thing. Remember: I was speaking just now about revenge.
(You probably didn’t grasp it.) I said: a man takes revenge because he
ﬁnds justice in it. That means he has found a primary cause, a basis
– namely, justice. So he is set at ease on all sides and, consequently,
takes his revenge calmly and successfully, being convinced that he
is doing an honest and just thing. Whereas I do not see any justice
here, nor do I ﬁnd any virtue in it, and, consequently, if I set about
taking revenge, it will be solely out of wickedness. Wickedness could,
of course, overcome everything, all my doubts, and thus could serve
quite successfully in place of a primary cause, precisely in that it is
not a cause. But what’s to be done if there is also no wickedness
in me? (I did begin with that just now.) The spite in me, again as
a consequence of those cursed laws of consciousness, undergoes a
chemicalbreakdown. Beforeyoureyestheobjectvanishes, thereasons
evaporate, the culprit is not to be found, the oﬀense becomes not an
oﬀense but a fatum, something like a toothache, for which no one is
to blame, and, consequently, what remains is again the same way out –
that is, to give the wall a painful beating. And so you just wave it aside,

18
Underground
because you haven’t found the primary cause. But try getting blindly
carried away by your feelings, without reasoning, without a primary
cause,drivingconsciousnessawayatleastforatime; starthating,orfall
in love, only so as not to sit with folded arms. The day after tomorrow,
at the very latest, you’ll begin to despise yourself for having knowingly
hoodwinked yourself. The result: a soap bubble, and inertia. Oh,
gentlemen, perhaps I really regard myself as an intelligent man only
because throughout my entire life I’ve never been able to start or ﬁnish
anything. Granted, grantedI’mababbler, aharmless, irksomebabbler,
as we all are. But what’s to be done if the sole and express purpose of
every intelligent man is babble – that is, a deliberate pouring from
empty into void.
VI
OH, IF I WERE doing nothing only out of laziness. Lord, how I’d
respect myself then. Respect myself precisely because I’d at least be
capable of havinglazinessin me; therewould be inme atleastone, as it
were, positive quality, which I myself could be sure of. Question: who
is he? Answer: a lazybones. Now, it would be most agreeable to hear
that about myself. It means I’m positively deﬁned; it means there’s
something to say about me.”Lazybones!” – now, that is a title and a
mission, it’s a career, sirs. No joking, it really is. By rights I’m then a
member of the foremost club, and my sole occupation is ceaselessly
respecting myself. I knew a gentleman who prided himself all his life
on being a ﬁne judge of Laﬁte. He regarded it as his positive merit and
never doubted himself. He died not merely with a serene but with a
triumphant conscience, and he was perfectly right. And so I would
choose a career for myself: I would be a lazybones and a glutton, and
not just an ordinary one, but, for example, one sympathizing with
everything beautiful and lofty. How do you like that? I’ve long been
fancying it. This ”beautiful and lofty” has indeed weighed heavy on
my head in my forty years; but that’s my forty years, while then –
oh, then it would be diﬀerent! I would at once ﬁnd an appropriate

Notes from Underground
19
activity for myself – namely, drinking the health of all that is beautiful
and lofty. I would seize every occasion, ﬁrst to shed a tear into my
glass, and then to drink it for all that is beautiful and lofty. I would
then turn everything in the world into the beautiful and lofty; in the
vilest, most unquestionable trash I would discover the beautiful and
lofty. I’d become as tearful as a sodden sponge. An artist, for example,
has painted a Ge picture.9 I immediately drink the health of the artist
who has painted the Ge picture, because I love all that is beautiful and
lofty. An author has written ”as anyone pleases”;10 I immediately drink
the health of ”anyone who pleases,” because I love all that is ”beautiful
and lofty.” For this I’ll demand to be respected, I’ll persecute whoever
does not show me respect. I live peacefully, I die solemnly – why, this
is charming, utterly charming! And I’d grow myself such a belly then,
I’d fashion such a triple chin for myself, I’d ﬁx myself up such a ruby
nose that whoever came along would say, looking at me: ”Now, there’s
a plus! There’s a real positive!” And, think what you will, it’s most
agreeable to hear such comments in our negative age, gentlemen.
VII
BUT THESE ARE ALL golden dreams. Oh, tell me, who ﬁrst an-
nounced, who was the ﬁrst to proclaim that man does dirty only
because he doesn’t know his real interests; and that were he to be
enlightened, were his eyes to be opened to his real, normal interests,
man would immediately stop doing dirty, would immediately become
good and noble, because, being enlightened and understanding his
real proﬁt, he would see his real proﬁt precisely in the good, and it’s
common knowledge that no man can act knowingly against his own
proﬁt, consequently, out of necessity, so to speak, he would start do-
ing good? Oh, the babe! Oh, the pure, innocent child! And when
was it, to begin with, in all these thousands of years, that man acted
solely for his own proﬁt? What is to be done with the millions of
facts testifying to how people knowingly, that is, fully understanding
their real proﬁt, would put it in second place and throw themselves

20
Underground
onto another path, a risk, a perchance, not compelled by anyone or
anything, but precisely as if they simply did not want the designated
path, and stubbornly, willfully pushed oﬀonto another one, diﬃcult,
absurd, searching for it all but in the dark. So, then, this stubbornness
and willfulness were really more agreeable to them than any proﬁt …
Proﬁt! What is proﬁt? And will you take it upon yourself to deﬁne
with perfect exactitude precisely what man’s proﬁt consists in? And
what if it so happens that on occasion man’s proﬁt not only may but
precisely must consist in sometimes wishing what is bad for himself,
and not what is proﬁtable? And if so, if there can be such a case, then
the whole rule goes up in smoke. What do you think, can such a case
occur? You’re laughing; laugh then, gentlemen, only answer me: has
man’s proﬁt been calculated quite correctly? Isn’t there something
that not only has not been but even cannot be ﬁtted into any classiﬁca-
tion? Because, gentlemen, as far as I know, you have taken your whole
inventory of human proﬁts from an average of statistical ﬁgures and
scientiﬁco-economic formulas. Because proﬁt for you is prosperity,
wealth, freedom, peace, and so on and so forth; so that a man who,
for example, openly and knowingly went against this whole inventory
would, in your opinion – well, and also in mine, of course – be an
obscurantist or a complete madman, right? But here is the surprising
thing: how does it happen that all these statisticians, sages, and lovers
of mankind, in calculating human proﬁts, constantly omit one proﬁt?
They don’t even take it into account in the way it ought to be taken,
and yet the whole account depends on that. It’s no great trouble just
to take it, this proﬁt, and include it in the list. But that’s the whole
bane of it, that this tricky proﬁt doesn’t fall into any classiﬁcation,
doesn’t ﬁt into any list. I, for instance, have a friend … Eh, gentlemen!
but he’s your friend as well; and whose friend is he not! Preparing
to do something, this gentleman will at once expound to you, with
great eloquence and clarity, precisely how he must needs act in accor-
dance with the laws of reason and truth. Moreover: with passion and
excitement he will talk to you of real, normal human interests; with
mockery he will reproach those shortsighted fools who understand
neither their own proﬁt nor the true meaning of virtue; and then, ex-
actly a quarter of an hour later, without any sudden, extraneous cause,

Notes from Underground
21
but precisely because of something within him that is stronger than
all his interests, he’ll cut quite a diﬀerent caper, that is, go obviously
against what he himself was just saying: against the laws of reason,
against his own proﬁt; well, in short, against everything … I warn
you that my friend is a collective person, and therefore it is somehow
diﬃcult to blame him alone. That’s just the thing, gentlemen, that
there may well exist something that is dearer for almost every man
than his very best proﬁt, or (so as not to violate logic) that there is
this one most proﬁtable proﬁt (precisely the omitted one, the one we
were just talking about), which is chiefer and more proﬁtable than all
other proﬁts, and for which a man is ready, if need be, to go against
all laws, that is, against reason, honor, peace, prosperity – in short,
against all these beautiful and useful things – only so as to attain this
primary, most proﬁtable proﬁt which is dearer to him than anything
else.
”Well, but it is a proﬁt, after all,” you will interrupt me. I beg your
pardon, sirs, but we shall speak further of it, and the point is not in a
play on words, but in the fact that this proﬁt is remarkable precisely
because it destroys all our classiﬁcations and constantly shatters all the
systems elaborated by lovers of mankind for the happiness of mankind.
Interferes with everything, in short. But before naming this proﬁt for
you, I want to compromise myself personally, and therefore I boldly
declare that all these beautiful systems, all these theories that explain
to mankind its true, normal interests, so that, striving necessarily to
attain these interests, it would at once become good and noble – all
this, in my opinion, is so far only logistics! Yes, sirs, logistics! For
merely to assert this theory of the renewal of all mankind by means
of a system of its own proﬁts – this, to my mind, is almost the same
as … well, let’s say, for example, the same as asserting, with Buckle,
that man gets softer from civilization and, consequently, becomes
less bloodthirsty and less capable of war.11 Logically, it seems, that’s
what he comes up with. But man is so partial to systems and abstract
conclusions that he is ready intentionally to distort the truth, to turn
a blind eye and a deaf ear, only so as to justify his logic.
That’s why I’ve chosen this example, because it is an all too vivid
one. Why, look around you: blood is ﬂowing in rivers, and in such a

22
Underground
jolly way besides, like champagne. Take this whole nineteenth century
of ours, in which Buckle also lived. Take Napoleon – both the great
oneandthepresentone. TakeNorthAmerica–thateverlastingunion.
Take, ﬁnally, this caricature of a Schleswig-Holstein …12 What is it
that civilization softens in us? Civilization cultivates only a versatility
of sensations in man, and … decidedly nothing else. And through
the development of this versatility, man may even reach the point of
ﬁnding pleasure in blood. Indeed, this has already happened to him.
Have you noticed that the most reﬁned blood-shedders have almost
all been the most civilized gentlemen, to whom the various Attilas
and Stenka Razins13 sometimes could not hold a candle? And if they
don’t strike one as sharply as Attila or Stenka Razin, it is precisely
because they occur too frequently, they are too ordinary, too familiar
a sight. If man has not become more bloodthirsty from civilization,
at any rate he has certainly become bloodthirsty in a worse, a viler
way than formerly. Formerly, he saw justice in bloodshed and with a
quiet conscience exterminated whoever he had to; while now, though
we do regard bloodshed as vile, we still occupy ourselves with this
vileness, and even more than formerly. Which is worse? — decide
for yourselves. They say that Cleopatra (excuse this example from
Roman history) liked to stick golden pins into her slave girls’ breasts,
and took pleasure in their screaming and writhing. You’ll say that this
was, relatively speaking, in barbarous times; that now, too, the times
are barbarous because (again relatively speaking) now, too, pins get
stuck in; that now, too, though man has learned to see more clearly
on occasion than in barbarous times, he is still far from having grown
accustomed to acting as reason and science dictate. But even so you
are perfectly conﬁdent that he will not fail to grow accustomed once
one or two old bad habits have passed and once common sense and
science have thoroughly re-educated and given a normal direction to
human nature. You are conﬁdent that man will then voluntarily cease
making mistakes and, willy-nilly, so to speak, refuse to set his will at
variance with his normal interests. Moreover: then, you say, science
itself will teach man (though this is really a luxury in my opinion)
that in fact he has neither will nor caprice, and never did have any,
and that he himself is nothing but a sort of piano key or a sprig in

Notes from Underground
23
an organ;14 and that, furthermore, there also exist in the world the
laws of nature; so that whatever he does is done not at all according
to his own wanting, but of itself, according to the laws of nature.
Consequently, these laws of nature need only be discovered, and then
man will no longer be answerable for his actions, and his life will
become extremely easy. Needless to say, all human actions will then
be calculated according to these laws, mathematically, like a table of
logarithms, up to 108,000, and entered into a calendar; or, better
still, some well-meaning publications will appear, like the present-day
encyclopaedic dictionaries, in which everything will be so precisely
calculated and designated that there will no longer be any actions or
adventures in the world.
And it is then – this is still you speaking – that new economic
relations will come, quite ready-made, and also calculated with math-
ematical precision, so that all possible questions will vanish in an
instant, essentially because they will have been given all possible an-
swers. Then the crystal palace will get built.15 Then … well, in short,
then the bird Kagan will come ﬂying.16 Of course, there’s no guaran-
teeing (this is me speaking now) that it won’t, for example, be terribly
boring then (because what is there to do if everything’s calculated
according to some little table?), but, on the other hand, it will all be
extremely reasonable. Of course, what inventions can boredom not
lead to! Golden pins also get stuck in from boredom, but all that
would be nothing. The bad thing is (this is me speaking again) that,
for all I know, they may be glad of the golden pins then. Man really is
stupid, phenomenally stupid. That is, he’s by no means stupid, but
rather he’s so ungrateful that it would be hard to ﬁnd the likes of him.
I, for example, would not be the least bit surprised if suddenly, out of
the blue, amid the universal future reasonableness, some gentleman
of ignoble, or, better, of retrograde and jeering physiognomy, should
emerge, set his arms akimbo, and say to us all: ”Well, gentlemen, why
don’t we reduce all this reasonableness to dust with one good kick, for
the sole purpose of sending all these logarithms to the devil and living
once more according to our own stupid will!” That would still be noth-
ing, but what is oﬀensive is that he’d be sure to ﬁnd followers: that’s
how man is arranged. And all this for the emptiest of reasons, which

24
Underground
would seem not even worth mentioning: namely, that man, whoever
he might be, has always and everywhere liked to act as he wants, and
not at all as reason and proﬁt dictate; and one can want even against
one’s own proﬁt, and one sometimes even positively must (this is my
idea now). One’s own free and voluntary wanting, one’s own caprice,
however wild, one’s own fancy, though chafed sometimes to the point
of madness – all this is that same most proﬁtable proﬁt, the omitted
one, which does not ﬁt into any classiﬁcation, and because of which
all systems and theories are constantly blown to the devil. And where
did all these sages get the idea that man needs some normal, some
virtuous wanting? What made them necessarily imagine that what
man needs is necessarily a reasonably proﬁtable wanting? Man needs
only independent wanting, whatever this independence may cost and
wherever it may lead. Well, and this wanting, the devil knows …
VIII
HA, HA, HA! but in fact, if you want to know, there isn’t any want-
ing!” you interrupt with a guﬀaw.”Today’s science has even so suc-
ceeded in anatomizing man up that we now know that wanting and
so-called free will are nothing else but …”
Wait, gentlemen, I myself wanted to begin that way. I confess, I
even got scared. I just wanted to cry out that wanting depends on the
devilknowswhat, andthankGod, perhaps, forthat, butIremembered
about this science and … backed oﬀ. And just then you started talking.
And indeed, well, if one day they really ﬁnd the formula for all our
wantings and caprices – that is, what they depend on, by precisely
what laws they occur, precisely how they spread, what they strive for
in such-and-such a case, and so on and so forth; a real, mathematical
formula, that is – then perhaps man will immediately stop wanting;
what’s more, perhaps he will certainly stop. Who wants to want
according to a little table? Moreover: he will immediately turn from
a man into a sprig in an organ or something of the sort; because what
is man without desires, without will, and without wantings, if not a

Notes from Underground
25
sprig in an organ barrel? What do you think? – let’s reckon up the
probabilities – can it happen or not?
”Hm …” you decide, ”our wantings are for the most part mistaken
owing to a mistaken view of our proﬁt. We sometimes want pure
rubbish precisely because, in our stupidity, we see this rubbish as the
easiest path to the attainment of some preconceived proﬁt. Well, but
when it’s all explained, worked out on a piece of paper (which is quite
possible because, after all, it’s vile and senseless to believe beforehand
that there are certain laws of nature which man will never learn) –
then, to be sure, there will be no more so-called desires. For if wanting
someday gets completely in cahoots with reason, then essentially we
shall be reasoning and not wanting, because it really is impossible,
for example, while preserving reason, to want senselessness and thus
knowingly go against reason and wish yourself harm … And since all
wantings and reasonings can indeed be calculated – because, after all,
they will someday discover the laws of our so-called free will – then
consequently, and joking aside, something like a little table can be
arranged, so that we shall indeed want according to this little table.
For if it should someday be worked out and proved to me that when I
made a ﬁg at such-and-such a person, it was precisely because I could
not do otherwise, and that I was bound to do it with such-and-such
a ﬁnger, then what is left so free in me, especially if I am a learned
man and have completed a course of studies somewhere? No, then I
can calculate my life for thirty years ahead; in short, if this does get
arranged, then we really will have no choice; we’ll have to accept it in
any case. And, generally, we ought tirelessly to repeat to ourselves that,
precisely at such-and-such a moment, in such-and-such circumstances,
nature does not ask our permission; that it must be accepted as it is,
and not as we fancy, and if we are really aiming at a little table and
a calendar, and … well, and even at a retort, then there’s no help for
it, we must accept the retort! Or else it will get accepted of itself,
without you …”
Yes, sirs, but for me that’s just where the hitch comes! You will
forgive me, gentlemen, for philosophizing away; it’s a matter of forty
years underground! Allow me to indulge my fancy a bit. You see:
reason, gentlemen, is a ﬁne thing, that is unquestionable, but reason is

26
Underground
only reason and satisﬁes only man’s reasoning capacity, while wanting
is a manifestation of the whole of life – that is, the whole of human
life, including reason and various little itches. And though our life
in this manifestation often turns out to be a bit of trash, still it is life
and not just the extraction of a square root. I, for example, quite
naturally want to live so as to satisfy my whole capacity for living, and
not so as to satisfy just my reasoning capacity alone, which is some
twentieth part of my whole capacity for living. What does reason
know? Reason knows only what it has managed to learn (some things,
perhaps, it will never learn; this is no consolation, but why not say it
anyway?), whilehumannatureactsasanentirewhole, witheverything
that is in it, consciously and unconsciously, and though it lies, still it
lives. I suspect, gentlemen, that you are looking at me with pity; you
repeat to me that an enlightened and developed man, such, in short,
as the future man will be, simply cannot knowingly want anything
unproﬁtable for himself, that this is mathematics. I agree completely,
it is indeed mathematics. But I repeat to you for the hundredth time,
there is only one case, one only, when man may purposely, consciously
wish for himself even the harmful, the stupid, even what is stupidest
of all: namely, so as to have the right to wish for himself even what
is stupidest of all and not be bound by an obligation to wish for
himself only what is intelligent. For this stupidest of all, this caprice
of ours, gentlemen, may in fact be the most proﬁtable of anything
on earth for our sort, especially in certain cases. And in particular it
may be more proﬁtable than all other proﬁts even in the case when it
is obviously harmful and contradicts the most sensible conclusions
of our reason concerning proﬁts – because in any event it preserves
for us the chiefest and dearest thing, that is, our personality and our
individuality. Now, some insist that this is indeed the dearest of all
things for man; wanting may, of course, converge with reason, if it
wants, especially if this is not abused but is done with moderation; it
is both useful and sometimes even praiseworthy. But wanting is very
often, and even for the most part, completely and stubbornly at odds
with reason, and … and … and, do you know, this, too, is useful and
sometimes even quite praiseworthy? Suppose, gentlemen, that man
is not stupid. (Really, it is quite impossible to say he is, for the sole

Notes from Underground
27
reason that if he is stupid, who then is intelligent?) But even if he
isn’t stupid, all the same he’s monstrously ungrateful! Phenomenally
ungrateful. I even think the best deﬁnition of man is: a being that
goes on two legs and is ungrateful. But that’s still not all; that’s still
not his chief defect; his chiefest defect is his constant lack of good
behavior – constant from the great ﬂood to the Schleswig-Holstein
period of man’s destiny. Lack of good behavior and, consequently,
lack of good sense; for it has long been known that lack of good sense
comes from nothing else but the lack of good behavior. Try casting a
glance at the history of mankind; well, what will you see? Majestic?
Maybe it is majestic; the Colossus of Rhodes alone, for example, is
worth something! Not without reason did Mr Anaevsky17 testify
that while some say it was the work of human hands, others insist it
was created by nature itself. Colorful? Maybe it is colorful; one need
only sort through the full-dress military and civil uniforms of all times
and all peoples – that alone is worth something, and if you were to
add the uniforms of the lower civil ranks, you could really break a leg;
no historian would be left standing. Monotonous? Well, maybe also
monotonous: they ﬁght and ﬁght, they ﬁght now, and fought before,
and fought afterwards – you’ll agree it’s even all too monotonous. In
short, anything can be said about world history, anything that might
just enter the head of the most disturbed imagination. Only one thing
cannot be said – that it is sensible. You’d choke on the ﬁrst word. And
one even comes upon this sort of thing all the time: there constantly
appear in life people of such good behavior and good sense, such sages
and lovers of mankind, as precisely make it their goal to spend their
entire lives in the best-behaved and most sensible way possible, to
become, so to speak, a light for their neighbors, essentially in order
to prove to them that one can indeed live in the world as a person
of good behavior and good sense. And what then? It is known that
sooner or later, towards the end of their lives, many of these lovers
have betrayed themselves, producing some anecdote, sometimes even
of the most indecent sort. Now I ask you: what can be expected of
man as a being endowed with such strange qualities? Shower him
with all earthly blessings, drown him in happiness completely, over
his head, so that only bubbles pop up on the surface of happiness,

28
Underground
as on water; give him such economic satisfaction that he no longer
has anything left to do at all except sleep, eat gingerbread, and worry
about the noncessation of world history – and it is here, just here, that
he, this man, out of sheer ingratitude, out of sheer lampoonery, will
do something nasty. He will even risk his gingerbread, and wish on
purpose for the most pernicious nonsense, the most noneconomical
meaninglessness, solely in order to mix into all this positive good sense
his own pernicious, fantastical element. It is precisely his fantastic
dreams, his most banal stupidity, that he will wish to keep hold of,
with the sole purpose of conﬁrming to himself (as if it were so very
necessary) that human beings are still human beings and not piano
keys, which, though played upon with their own hands by the laws of
nature themselves, are in danger of being played so much that outside
the calendar it will be impossible to want anything. And more than
that: even if it should indeed turn out that he is a piano key, if it were
even proved to him mathematically and by natural science, he would
still not come to reason, but would do something contrary on purpose,
solely out of ingratitude alone; essentially to have his own way. And
if he ﬁnds himself without means – he will invent destruction and
chaos, he will invent all kinds of suﬀering, and still have his own way!
He will launch a curse upon the world, and since man alone is able
to curse (that being his privilege, which chieﬂy distinguishes him
from other animals), he may achieve his end by the curse alone – that
is, indeed satisfy himself that he is a man and not a piano key! If
you say that all this, the chaos and darkness and cursing, can also be
calculated according to a little table, so that the mere possibility of a
prior calculation will put a stop to it all and reason will claim its own –
then he will deliberately go mad for the occasion, so as to do without
reason and still have his own way! I believe in this, I will answer for
this, because the whole human enterprise seems indeed to consist in
man’s proving to himself every moment that he is a man and not a
sprig! With his own skin if need be, but proving it; by troglodytism
if need be, but proving it. And how not sin after that, how not boast
that this has still not come about, and that wanting so far still depends
on the devil knows what …
You shout at me (if you do still honor me with your shouts) that

Notes from Underground
29
no one is taking my will from me here; that all they’re doing here is
busily arranging it somehow so that my will, of its own will, coincides
with my normal interests, with the laws of nature, and with arithmetic.
Eh, gentlemen, what sort of will of one’s own can there be if it
comes to tables and arithmetic, and the only thing going is two times
two is four? Two times two will be four even without my will. As if
that were any will of one’s own!
IX
GENTLEMEN, I am joking, of course, and I myself know that I am
not joking very successfully, but one really cannot take everything
as a joke. Maybe I’m grinding my teeth as I joke… Gentlemen, I
am tormented by questions; resolve them for me. You, for example,
want to make man unlearn his old habits, and to correct his will in
conformity with the demands of science and common sense. But how
doyouknowthatmannotonlycanbebutmust beremadeinthisway?
What makes you conclude that man’s wanting so necessarily needs to
be corrected? In short, how do you know that such a correction will
indeed be proﬁtable for man? And, if we’re to say everything, why are
you so certainly convinced that not to go against real, normal proﬁts,
guaranteed by the arguments of reason and arithmetic, is indeed
always proﬁtable for man and is a law for the whole of mankind? So
far, it’s still just your supposition. Suppose it is a law of logic, but
perhaps not of mankind at all. Perhaps you think, gentlemen, that I
am mad? Allow me an observation. I agree: man is predominantly a
creating animal, doomed to strive consciously towards a goal and to
occupy himself with the art of engineering – that is, to eternally and
ceaselessly make a road for himself that at least goes somewhere or other.
But sometimes he may wish to swerve aside, precisely because he is
doomed to open this road, and also perhaps because, stupid though
the ingenuous ﬁgure generally is, it still sometimes occurs to him that
this road almost always turns out to go somewhere or other, and the
main thing is not where it goes, but that it should simply be going,

30
Underground
and that the well-behaved child, by neglecting the art of engineering,
not give himself up to pernicious idleness, which, as is known, is the
mother of all vice. Man loves creating and the making of roads, that
is indisputable. But why does he so passionately love destruction and
chaos as well? Tell me that! But of this I wish specially to say a couple
of words myself. Can it be that he has such a love of destruction and
chaos (it’s indisputable that he sometimes loves them very much; that
is a fact) because he is instinctively afraid of achieving the goal and
completing the ediﬁce he is creating? How do you know, maybe he
likes the ediﬁce only from far oﬀ, and by no means up close; maybe
he only likes creating it, and not living in it, leaving it afterwards aux
animaux domestiques,18 such as ants, sheep, and so on and so forth.
Now, ants have totally diﬀerent tastes. They have a remarkable ediﬁce
of the same sort, forever indestructible – the anthill.
With the anthill the most reverend ants began, and with the
anthill they will doubtless end as well, which does great credit to
their constancy and positiveness. But man is a frivolous and unseemly
being, and perhaps, similar to a chess player, likes only the process of
achieving the goal, but not the goal itself. And who knows (one can-
not vouch for it), perhaps the whole goal mankind strives for on earth
consists just in this cease-lessness of the process of achievement alone,
that is to say, in life itself, and not essentially in the goal, which, of
course, is bound to be nothing other than two times two is four – that
is, a formula; and two times two is four is no longer life, gentlemen,
but the beginning of death. At least man has always somehow feared
this two times two is four, and I fear it even now. Suppose all man
ever does is search for this two times two is four; he crosses oceans,
he sacriﬁces his life in the search; but to search it out, actually to ﬁnd
it – by God, he’s somehow afraid. For he senses that once he ﬁnds
it, there will be nothing to search for. Workers, when they’re done
working, at least get their pay, go to a pot-house, then wind up with
the police – so it keeps them busy for a week. But where is man to
go? Something awkward, at any rate, can be noticed in him each time
he achieves some such goal. Achieving he likes, but having achieved
he does not quite like, and that, of course, is terribly funny. In short,
man is comically arranged; there is apparently a joke in all this. But

Notes from Underground
31
still, two times two is four is a most obnoxious thing. Two times two
is four – why, in my opinion, it’s sheer impudence, sirs. Two times
two is four has a cocky look; it stands across your path, arms akimbo,
and spits. I agree that two times two is four is an excellent thing; but
if we’re going to start praising everything, then two times two is ﬁve
is sometimes also a most charming little thing.
And why are you so ﬁrmly, so solemnly convinced that only the
normal and the positive, in short, that only well-being, is proﬁtable
for man? Is reason not perhaps mistaken as to proﬁts? Maybe man
does not love well-being only? Maybe he loves suﬀering just as much?
Maybe suﬀering is just as proﬁtable for him as well-being? For man
sometimes loves suﬀering terribly much, to the point of passion, and
that is a fact. Here there’s not even any need to consult world history;
justaskyourself, ifyou’reahumanbeingandhavehadanylifeatall. As
for my personal opinion, to love just well-being alone is even somehow
indecent. Whether it’s good or bad, it’s sometimes also very pleasant
to break something. I, as a matter of fact, take my stand here neither
with suﬀering nor with well-being. I stand … for my own caprice, and
that it be guaranteed me when necessary. Suﬀering, for example, is
inadmissible in vaudevilles, I know that. In a crystal palace it is even
unthinkable: suﬀering is doubt, it is negation, and what good is a
crystal palace in which one can have doubts? And yet I’m certain
that man will never renounce real suﬀering, that is, destruction and
chaos. Suﬀering – why, this is the sole cause of consciousness. Though
I did declare at the beginning that consciousness, in my opinion,
is man’s greatest misfortune, still I know that man loves it and will
not exchange it for any satisfactions. Consciousness, for example, is
inﬁnitelyhigherthantwotimestwo. Aftertwotimestwotherewould,
of course, be nothing left – not only to do, but even to learn. The
only possible thing to do then would be to stop up our ﬁve senses and
immerse ourselves in contemplation. Well, but with consciousness,
though the result comes out the same – that is, again there’s nothing
to do – at least one can occasionally whip oneself, and, after all, that
livens things up a bit. It may be retrograde, but still it’s better than
nothing.

32
Underground
X
YOU BELIEVE in a crystal ediﬁce, forever indestructible; that is, in
an ediﬁce at which one can neither put out one’s tongue on the sly
nor make a ﬁg in the pocket.19 Well, and perhaps I’m afraid of this
ediﬁce precisely because it is crystal and forever indestructible, and it
will be impossible to put out one’s tongue at it even on the sly.
Now look: if instead of a palace there is a chicken coop, and
it starts to rain, I will perhaps get into the chicken coop to avoid a
wetting, but all the same I will not take the chicken coop for a palace
out of gratitude for its having kept me from the rain. You laugh, you
even say that in that case it makes no diﬀerence – chicken coop or
mansion. Yes, say I, if one were to live only so as not to get wet.
But what’s to be done if I’ve taken it into my head that one does
not live only for that, and that if one is to live, it had better be in a
mansion? This is my wanting, this is my desire. You will scrape it out
of me only when you change my desires. So, change them, seduce me
with something else, give me a diﬀerent ideal. But meanwhile I will
not take a chicken coop for a palace. Let it even be so that the crystal
ediﬁce is a bluﬀ, that by the laws of nature it should not even be, and
that I’ve invented it only as a result of my own stupidity, as a result
of certain old nonrational habits of our generation. But what do I
care if it should not be? What diﬀerence does it make, since it exists
in my desires, or, better, exists as long as my desires exist? Perhaps
you’re laughing again? Laugh, if you please; I will accept all mockery,
but still I won’t say I’m full when I’m hungry; still I know that I will
not rest with a compromise, with a ceaseless, recurring zero, simply
because according to the laws of nature it exists, and exists really. I
will not take a tenement house, with apartments for the poor, and a
thousand-year lease, and the dentist Wagenheim’s shingle for good
measure, as the crown of my desires. Destroy my desires, wipe out
my ideals, show me something better, and I will follow you. Perhaps
you’ll say it’s not worth getting involved; but in that case I can answer
you the same way. Our discussion is serious; if you do not deign to
give me your attention, I am not going to bow and scrape before you.

Notes from Underground
33
I have the underground.
But so long as I live and desire – let my hand wither20 if I bring
even one little brick for such a tenement house! Never mind that I
myself have just rejected the crystal ediﬁce, for the sole reason that one
cannot taunt it with one’s tongue. I said that not because I have such
a love of putting out my tongue. Perhaps I was angry simply because
such an ediﬁce, at which it is possible not to put out one’s tongue,
has never yet been found among all your ediﬁces. On the contrary,
I would let my tongue be cut oﬀaltogether, from sheer gratitude, if
only it could be so arranged that I myself never felt like sticking it
out again. What do I care that it’s impossible to arrange it so, and
one must content oneself with apartments? Why, then, have I been
arranged with such desires? Can it be that I’ve been arranged simply
so as to come to the conclusion that my entire arrangement is a hoax?
Can that be the whole purpose? I don’t believe it. You know what,
though: I’m convinced that our sort, the underground ones, ought
to be kept on a tether. Though we’re capable of sitting silently in the
underground for forty years, once we do come out and let loose, we
talk, talk, talk …
XI
THE FINAL END, gentlemen: better to do nothing! Better con-
scious inertia! And so, long live the underground! Though I did say
that I envy the normal man to the point of uttermost bile, still I do
not want to be him on those conditions in which I see him (though,
all the same, I shall not stop envying him. No, no, the underground is
in any case more proﬁtable!). There one can at least … Eh! but here,
too, I’m lying! Lying, because I myself know, like two times two, that
it is not at all the underground that is better, but something diﬀerent,
completely diﬀerent, which I thirst for but cannot ever ﬁnd! Devil
take the underground!
Even this would be better here: if I myself believed at least some-
thing of all I’ve just written. For I swear to you, gentlemen, that I do

34
Underground
not believe a word, not one little word, of all I’ve just scribbled! That
is, I do believe, perhaps, but at the same time, who knows why, I sense
and suspect that I’m lying like a cobbler.
”Then why did you write it all?” you say to me.
And what if I put you away for some forty years with nothing
to do, and then come to you in the underground after forty years
to see how you’ve turned out? One cannot leave a man alone and
unoccupied for forty years, can one?
”But is this not shameful, is it not humiliating!” you will perhaps
say to me, contemptuously shaking your heads.”You thirst for life, yet
you yourself resolve life’s questions with a logical tangle. And how
importunate, how impudent your escapades, yet at the same time how
frightened you are! You talk nonsense, and are pleased with it; you say
impudent things, yet you keep being afraid and asking forgiveness for
them. You insist that you are not afraid of anything, and at the same
time you court our opinion. You insist that you are gnashing your
teeth, and at the same time you exert your wit to make us laugh. You
know that your witticisms are not witty, but you are apparently quite
pleased with their literary merits. You may indeed have happened to
suﬀer, but you do not have the least respect for your suﬀering. There
is truth in you, too, but no integrity; out of the pettiest vanity you
take your truth and display it, disgrace it, in the marketplace … You
do indeed want to say something, but you conceal your ﬁnal word
out of fear, because you lack the resolve to speak it out, you have only
cowardly insolence. You boast about consciousness, yet all you do is
vacillate, because, though your mind works, your heart is darkened
by depravity, and without a pure heart there can be no full, right
consciousness. And how importunate you are, how you foist yourself,
how you mug! Lies, lies, lies!”
To be sure, I myself have just made up all these words of yours.
This, too, is from underground. I’ve spent forty years on end there
listening to these words of yours through a crack. I thought them up
myself, since this was all that would get thought up. No wonder they
got learned by heart and assumed a literary form …
But can it be, can it be that you are indeed so gullible as to imag-
ine I will publish all this and, what’s more, give it to you to read? And

Notes from Underground
35
here’s another puzzle for me: why indeed do I call you ”gentlemen,”
why do I address you as if you were actually my readers? Such con-
fessions as I intend to begin setting forth here are not published and
given to others to read. At least I do not have so much ﬁrmness in
myself, and do not consider it necessary to have it. But you see: a
certain fancy has come into my head, and I want at all costs to realize
it. Here’s what it is.
In every man’s memories there are such things as he will reveal
not to everyone, but perhaps only to friends. There are also such as
he will reveal not even to friends, but only to himself, and that in
secret. Then, ﬁnally, there are such as a man is afraid to reveal even
to himself, and every decent man will have accumulated quite a few
things of this sort. That is, one might even say: the more decent a man
is, the more of them he will have. At least I myself have only recently
resolved to recall some of my former adventures, which till now I have
always avoided, even with a certain uneasiness. Now, however, when
I not only recall them but am even resolved to write them down, now
I want precisely to make a test: is it possible to be perfectly candid
with oneself and not be afraid of the whole truth? I will observe
incidentally: Heine insists that faithful autobiographies are almost
impossible, and that a man is sure to tell a pack of lies about himself.
In his opinion, Rousseau, for example, most certainly told a pack of
lies about himself in his confessions, and even did so intentionally, out
of vanity.21 I’m sure Heine is right; I understand very well how one
can sometimes slap whole crimes on oneself solely out of vanity, and I
even perceive quite well what sort of vanity it might be. But Heine’s
opinion concerned a man who was confessing before the public. I,
however, am writing only for myself, and I declare once and for all
that even if I write as if I were addressing readers, that is merely a front,
because it’s easier for me to write that way. It’s a form, just an empty
form, and I shall never have any readers. I have already declared as
much…
I do not want to hamper myself with anything in preparing my
notes. I will not introduce any order or system. Whatever I recall, I
will write down.
Now, for example, someone might seize upon a word and ask me:

36
Underground
if you really are not counting on any readers, why then do you make
such agreements with yourself, and on paper besides, that you will
introduce no order or system, that you will write down whatever you
recall, etc., etc.? Why these explanations? Why these apologies?
”Well, so it goes,” I reply.
There is, however, a whole psychology here. Maybe it’s also that
I’m simply a coward. And maybe also that I’m purposely imagining a
public before me so as to behave more decently while I write. There
may be a thousand reasons.
But here is another thing: for what and to what end, in fact, do
I want to write? If not for the public, then why not simply recall
everything mentally, without transferring it to paper?
Right, sir; but on paper it will somehow come out more solemnly.
There’s something imposing in it, there will be more of a judgment
on oneself, it will gain in style. Besides: maybe I will indeed get relief
from the writing. Today, for example, I’m particularly oppressed by
one distant recollection. I recalled it clearly the other day, and it has
since stayed with me like a nagging musical tune that refuses to be
gotten rid of. And yet one must get rid of it. I have hundreds of such
recollections; but some one out of a hundred emerges every now and
then and oppresses me. I believe for some reason that if I write it
down, I shall then be rid of it. So why not try?
Finally: I’m bored, and I constantly do nothing. And writing
things down really seems like work. They say work makes a man good
and honest. Well, here’s a chance, at least.
Snow is falling today, almost wet, yellow, dull. And it was falling
yesterday, anditwasfallingtheotherdayaswell. Ithinkitwasapropos
of the wet snow that I recalled this anecdote that now refuses to be
gotten rid of. And so, let this be a story apropos of the wet snow.22

Part Two:
Apropos of the Wet Snow


When from out of error’s darkness
With a word both sure and ardent
I had drawn the fallen soul,
And you, ﬁlled with deepest torment,
Cursed the vice that had ensnared you
And so doing wrung your hands;
When, punishing with recollection
Forgetful conscience, you then told
The tale of all that went before me,
And suddenly you hid your face
In trembling hands and, ﬁlled with horror,
Filled with shame, dissolved in tears,
Indignant as you were, and shaken … Etc., etc., etc.
From the poetry of N. A. Nekrasov23
I
AT THAT TIME I was only twenty-four years old. My life then was
already gloomy, disorderly, and solitary to the point of savagery. I did
not associate with anyone, even avoided speaking, and shrank more
and more into my corner. At work, in the oﬃce, I even tried not to
look at anyone, and I noticed very well that my colleagues not only
considered me an odd man, but – as I also kept fancying – seemed to
look at me with a certain loathing. It used to occur to me: why does
no one except me fancy that people look at him with loathing? There
was one in our oﬃce who had a disgusting and most pockmarked
face, even somehow like a bandit’s. With such an indecent face, I
think I wouldn’t even have dared to glance at anyone. Another hadn’t
changed his uniform for so long that there was a bad smell in his

40
Apropos of the Wet Snow
vicinity. And yet neither of these gentlemen was embarrassed – either
with regard to his clothes or his face, or somehow morally. Neither
the one nor the other imagined that he was looked at with loathing;
and even if they had imagined it, it would have been all the same to
them, so long as their superiors did not deign to pay heed. It’s perfectly
clear to me now that it was I who, owing to my boundless vanity, and
hence also my exactingness towards myself, very often looked upon
myself with furious dissatisfaction, reaching the point of loathing, and
therefore mentally attributed my view to everyone else. I hated my
face, for example, found it odious, and even suspected that there was
some mean expression in it, and therefore every time I came to work I
made a painful eﬀort to carry myself as independently as possible, so
as not to be suspected of meanness, and to express as much nobility as
possible with my face.”Let it not be a beautiful face,” I thought, ”but,
to make up for that, let it be a noble, an expressive, and, above all, an
extremely intelligent one.” Yet I knew, with certainty and suﬀering,
that I would never be able to express all those perfections with the
face I had. The most terrible thing was that I found it positively stupid.
And I would have been quite satisﬁed with intelligence. Let’s even say
I would even have agreed to a mean expression, provided only that at
the same time my face be found terribly intelligent.
Of course, I hated them all in our oﬃce, from ﬁrst to last, and
despised them all, but at the same time I was also as if afraid of them.
It happened that I would suddenly set them above myself. Things
were somehow sudden with me in those days: now I despised them,
now I set them above me. A developed and decent man cannot be
vain without a boundless exactingness towards himself and without
despising himself at moments to the point of hatred. But whether I
despised them or set them above me, I used to drop my eyes before
almost everyone I met. I even made experiments: will I be able to
endure so-and-so’s glance on me? – and I was always the ﬁrst to drop
my eyes. This tormented me to the point of fury.
I was also afraid to the point of illness of being ridiculous, and
therefore slavishly worshiped routine in everything to do with exter-
nals; I loved falling into the common rut, and feared any eccentricity
in myself with all my soul. But how could I hold out? I was morbidly

Notes from Underground
41
developed, as a man of our time ought to be developed. And they were
all dull-witted and as like one another as a ﬂock of sheep. Perhaps to
me alone in the whole oﬃce did it constantly seem that I was a coward
and a slave; it seemed so to me precisely because I was developed. But
it not only seemed, in fact it really was so: I was a coward and a slave.
I say it without any embarrassment. Every decent man of our time is
and must be a coward and a slave. That is his normal condition. I am
deeply convinced of it. He’s made that way, and arranged for it. And
not in the present time, owing to some sort of chance circumstances,
but generally in all times a decent man must be a coward and a slave.
That is the natural law of all decent people on earth. If one of them
does happen to get up a bit of pluck in something, let him not be
eased or pleased by that: he’ll still quail before something else. Such
is the sole and everlasting outcome. Only asses and their mongrels
show pluck, and even then only up to that certain wall. It’s not worth
paying any attention to them, because they mean precisely nothing.
One other circumstance tormented me then: namely, that no
one else was like me, and I was like no one else.”I am one, and they
are all,” thought I, and – I’d fall to thinking.
Which shows what a young pup I still was.
Contraries also occurred. It was sometimes so disgusting to go
to the oﬃce: it reached the point that I would often come home
from work sick. Then suddenly, for no reason at all, comes a spell
of skepticism and indiﬀerence (everything came in spells with me),
and here I am laughing at my own intolerance and fastidiousness,
reproaching myself with romanticism. One moment I don’t even
want to speak with anyone, and the next I go so far that I’m not only
chatting away, but am even deciding to become close with them. All
fastidiousness would suddenly disappear at once, for no reason at all.
Who knows, maybe I never had any, maybe it was just an aﬀectation,
out of books? To this day I haven’t resolved this question. Once I even
became quite friendly with them, began visiting their homes, playing
preference, drinking vodka, discussing promotions … But allow me a
digression here.
WeRussians,generallyspeaking,haveneverhadanystupid,translu-
nary German, and more especially French, romantics, who are not

42
Apropos of the Wet Snow
aﬀected by anything; let the earth crumble under them, let the whole
of France perish on the barricades – they are what they are, they won’t
change even for the sake of decency, and they’ll go on singing their
translunary songs till their dying day, so to speak, because they’re fools.
But we, in our Russian land, have no fools; that is a known fact; that’s
what makes us diﬀerent from all those other German lands. Conse-
quently, we have no translunary natures in a pure state. It was our
”positive” publicists and critics of the time, hunting after Kostanzhog-
los and Uncle Pyotr Ivanoviches,24 and being foolish enough to take
them for our ideal, who heaped it all on our romantics, holding them
to be of the same translunary sort as in Germany or France. On the
contrary, the properties of our romantic are utterly and directly op-
posite to those of the translunary European, and no little European
yardstick will ﬁt here. (Do permit me the use of this word ”roman-
tic” – a venerable word, respectable, worthy, and familiar to all.) The
properties of our romantic are to understand everything, to see every-
thing, and to see often incomparably more clearly than our very most
positive minds do; not to be reconciled with anyone or anything, but
at the same time not to spurn anything; to get around everything, to
yield to everything, to be politic with everyone; never to lose sight
of the useful, practical goal (some nice little government apartment,
a little pension, a little decoration or two) – to keep an eye on this
goal through all enthusiasms and little volumes of lyrical verses, and
at the same time also to preserve ”the beautiful and lofty” inviolate in
himself till his dying day, and incidentally to preserve himself quite
successfully as well, somehow in cotton wool, like some little piece
of jewelry, if only, shall we say, for the beneﬁt of that same ”beautiful
and lofty.” He’s a broad man, our romantic, and the foremost knave
of all our knaves, I can assure you of that … even from experience.
Naturally, all this is so if the romantic is intelligent. That is – what
am I saying! – the romantic is always intelligent; I merely wished to
observe that, while we do happen to have had some fool romantics,
that doesn’t count, for the sole reason that while still in the bloom of
life they regenerated deﬁnitively into Germans and, to preserve their
little piece of jewelry more comfortably, settled somewhere rather
in Weimar or the Schwarzwald.25 I, for example, sincerely despised

Notes from Underground
43
my service employment, and if I didn’t go around spitting, it was
only out of necessity, because I was sitting there getting money for
it. The result being – you will note – that I still didn’t go around
spitting. Our romantic would sooner lose his mind (which, however,
happens very seldom) than start spitting, unless he’s got his eye on
some other career, and he will never be kicked out, except perhaps
that he might be carted oﬀto the madhouse as ”the king of Spain,”26
and that only if he loses his mind very much. But among us only
the weaklings and towheads lose their minds. While the countless
number of romantics go on to achieve considerable rank. Remark-
able versatility! And what capacity for the very most contradictory
feelings! I took comfort in that even then, and am of the same mind
now. That is why we have so many ”broad natures” who even with the
ultimate fall never lose their ideal; and though they wouldn’t lift a
ﬁnger for their ideal, though they are inveterate bandits and thieves,
all the same they respect their original ideal to the point of tears and
are remarkably honest in their souls. Yes, sirs, only among us can the
most inveterate scoundrel be perfectly and even loftily honest in his
soul, while not ceasing in the least to be a scoundrel. Time and again,
I repeat, such practical rogues come out of our romantics (I use the
word ”rogue” lovingly); they suddenly display such a sense of reality
and such knowledge of the positive that the amazed authorities and
public can only stand dumbfounded, clucking their tongues at them.
The versatility is indeed amazing, and God knows what it will
turnanddevelopintoinsubsequentcircumstances,andwhatitpromises
us for our times to come. It’s not bad material, sirs! I don’t say this
out of any ridiculous or home-brewed patriotism. However, I’m sure
you again think I’m laughing. Or, who knows, maybe contrariwise
– that is, you’re quite sure I really think so. In any event, gentlemen,
I shall regard both your opinions as an honor and a special pleasure.
And do forgive me my digression.
Ofcourse,Icouldnotsustainthisfriendlinesswithmycolleagues;
I’d spit in their eyes and, as a result of my still youthful inexperience,
evenstopgreetingthem, asifI’dcutthemoﬀ. However, thishappened
to me only once. Generally, I was always alone.
At home, to begin with, I mainly used to read. I wished to stiﬂe

44
Apropos of the Wet Snow
with external sensations all that was ceaselessly boiling up inside me.
And among external sensations the only one possible for me was
reading. Reading was, of course, a great help – it stirred, delighted,
and tormented me. But at times it bored me terribly. I still wanted to
move about, and so I’d suddenly sink into some murky, subterranean,
vile debauch – not a great, but a measly little debauch. There were
measly little passions in me, sharp, burning, because of my permanent,
morbid irritability. I was given to hysterical outbursts, with tears and
convulsions. Apart from reading I had nowhere to turn – that is,
there was nothing I could then respect in my surroundings, nothing I
would be drawn to. What’s more, anguish kept boiling up; a hysterical
thirst for contradictions, contrasts, would appear, and so I’d set out
on debauchery. It is not at all to justify myself that I’ve been doing all
this talking … But no! that’s a lie! I precisely wanted to justify myself.
I make this little note for myself, gentlemen. I don’t want to lie. I’ve
given my word.
My debauchery I undertook solitarily, by night, covertly, fear-
fully, ﬁlthily, with a shame that would not abandon me at the most
loathsome moments, and at such moments even went so far as a curse.
I was then already bearing the underground in my soul. I was terribly
afraid of somehow being seen, met, recognized. I used to frequent
various rather murky places.
Once, passing at night by some wretched little tavern, I saw
through the lighted window some gentlemen ﬁghting with their cues
around the billiard table and one of them being chucked out the win-
dow. At another time I would have been ﬁlled with loathing; but one
of those moments suddenly came over me, and I envied this chucked-
out gentleman, envied him so much that I even went into the tavern,
into the billiard room: ”Perhaps I, too, will have a ﬁght,” I thought,
”and get chucked out the window myself.”
I was not drunk, but what do you want of me – anguish can eat a
man into such hysterics! But it came to nothing. I proved incapable
even of jumping out the window and left without having had any
ﬁght.
From the very ﬁrst I was brought up short there by a certain
oﬃcer.

Notes from Underground
45
I was standing beside the billiard table, blocking the way unwit-
tingly, and he wanted to pass; he took me by the shoulders and silently
– with no warning or explanation – moved me from where I stood to
another place, and then passed by as if without noticing. I could even
have forgiven a beating, but I simply could not forgive his moving me
and in the end just not noticing me.
Devil knows what I’d have given then for a real, more regular
quarrel, more decent, more, so to speak, literary! I had been treated
like a ﬂy. This oﬃcer was a good six feet tall; and I am a short and
skinny man. The quarrel, however, was up to me: all I had to do was
protest a bit and, of course, I’d be chucked out the window. But I
changed my mind and preferred … to eﬀace myself spitefully.
I left the tavern confused and agitated, went straight home, and
the next day continued my little debauch still more timidly, down-
troddenly, and sadly than before, as if with a tear in my eye – yet I
did continue it. Do not think, however, that I turned coward before
the oﬃcer out of cowardice: in my soul I have never been a cow-
ard, though I constantly turned coward in reality, but – don’t laugh
too quickly, there’s an explanation for that; rest assured, I have an
explanation for everything.
Oh, if this oﬃcer had been one of those who would agree to ﬁght
a duel! But no, he was precisely one of those gentlemen (alas, long
since vanished) who preferred to set about it with billiard cues, or,
like Lieutenant Pirogov in Gogol27 – by means of the authorities.
But they would not ﬁght a duel, and in any case would regard a duel
with our sort, the pencil-pushers, as indecent – and they generally
regarded dueling as something inconceivable, freethinking, French,
while giving ample oﬀense themselves, especially in cases of six-foot-
tallness.
I turned coward not from cowardice, but from the most bound-
less vanity. I was afraid, not of six-foot-tallness, nor of being badly
beaten and chucked out the window; I really would have had physical
courage enough; what I lacked was suﬃcient moral courage. I was
afraid that none of those present – from the insolent marker to the
last putrid and blackhead-covered clerk with a collar of lard who was
hanging about there – would understand, and that they would all de-

46
Apropos of the Wet Snow
ride me if I started protesting and talking to them in literary language.
Because among us to this day it is impossible to speak of a point of
honor – that is, not honor, but a point of honor (point d’honneur) —
otherwise than in literary language. In ordinary language there is no
mention of a ”point of honor.” I was quite sure (what a sense of reality,
despite all romanticism!) that they would all simply burst with laugh-
ter, and the oﬃcer would beat me, not simply, that is, inoﬀensively,
but would certainly start kicking me with his knee, driving me in this
manner around the billiard table, and only then perhaps have mercy
and chuck me out the window. Of course, for me this measly story
could not end there. Later I often met this oﬃcer in the street and
made good note of him. Only I don’t know whether he recognized
me. Probably not; I conclude that from certain signs. I, however,
I – looked at him with spite and hatred, and so it continued … for
several years, sirs! My spite even kept strengthening and burgeoning
with the years. First I quietly began ﬁnding things out about this
oﬃcer. This was not easy for me, because I had no acquaintances.
But once someone called him by his surname in the street while I
was following him at a distance, as if tied to him, and so I learned
his surname. Another time I trailed him all the way home, and for
ten kopecks found out from the caretaker where he lived, on what
ﬂoor, alone or with someone, and so on – in short, everything that
can be learned from a caretaker. Then one morning, though I had
never literaturized, it suddenly came into my head to describe this
oﬃcer in the manner of an espose, as a caricature, in a story. It was a
delight to me to write this story. I esposed him, even slandered him a
bit; at ﬁrst I distorted his surname in a way that made it immediately
recognizable, but then, on riper reﬂection, I changed it and sent the
story to Fatherland Notes. But there were no esposes yet, and my story
wasn’t published.28 I found this quite vexing. There were times when
I was simply choking with spite. In the end I decided to challenge my
adversary to a duel. I composed a beautiful, attractive letter to him,
entreating him to apologize to me; and hinted quite strongly at a duel
in case of refusal. The letter was composed in such a way that if the
oﬃcer had even the slightest notion of ”the beautiful and lofty,” he
could not fail to come running to me, to throw himself on my neck

Notes from Underground
47
and oﬀer me his friendship. And that would be so nice! What a life
we would have, what a life! He would protect me with his dignity;
I would ennoble him with my development and, well … ideas, and
there could be so much of this or that! Imagine, by then it was already
two years since he had oﬀended me, and my challenge was a most
outrageous anachronism, in spite of all the cleverness of my letter in
explaining away and concealing the anachronism. But, thank God
(to this day I thank the Almighty with tears), I did not send my letter.
I go cold all over when I recall what might have happened if I had
sent it. And suddenly … suddenly I got my revenge in the simplest,
the most brilliant way! The brightest idea suddenly dawned on me.
Sometimes on holidays I would go to Nevsky Prospect between three
and four, and stroll along the sunny side. That is, I by no means went
strolling there, but experienced countless torments, humiliations, and
risings of bile; that must have been just what I needed. I darted like
an eel among the passers-by, in a most uncomely fashion, ceaselessly
giving way now to generals, now to cavalry oﬃcers and hussars, now
to ladies; in those moments I felt convulsive pains in my heart and a
hotness in my spine at the mere thought of the measliness of my attire
and the measliness and triteness of my darting little ﬁgure. This was
a torment of torments, a ceaseless, unbearable humiliation from the
thought, which would turn into a ceaseless and immediate sensation,
of my being a ﬂy before that whole world, a foul, obscene ﬂy – more
intelligent, more developed, more noble than everyone else – that
went without saying – but a ﬂy, ceaselessly giving way to everyone,
humiliated by everyone, insulted by everyone. Why I gathered this
torment onto myself, why I went to Nevsky – I don’t know, I was
simply drawn there at every opportunity.
I was then already beginning to experience the inﬂuxes of those
pleasures of which I have already spoken in the ﬁrst chapter. And
after the story with the oﬃcer, I began to be drawn there even more
strongly: it was on Nevsky that I met him most often, it was there that
I admired him. He, too, used mostly to go there on holidays. And he,
too, swerved out of the way before generals and persons of dignity,
and he, too, slipped among them like an eel, but those of our sort, or
even better than our sort, he simply crushed; he went straight at them

48
Apropos of the Wet Snow
as if there were an empty space before him, and on no occasion gave
way to them. I reveled in my spite as I watched him, and … each time
spitefully swerved out of his way. It tormented me that even in the
street I simply could not be on an equal footing with him.”Why is it
invariably you who swerve ﬁrst?” I kept nagging at myself, in furious
hysterics, sometimes waking up, say, between two and three in the
morning.”Why precisely you and not him? There’s no law that says so,
it’s not written anywhere? Well, then let it be equal, as is usual when
men of delicacy meet: he can yield by half, and you by half, and so
you will pass mutually respecting each other.” But it was never so, and
I still kept swerving, and he did not even notice that I was giving way
to him. And then a most astonishing thought suddenly dawned on
me.”What,” I fancied, ”what if I meet him and … do not step aside?
Deliberately do not step aside, even if I have to shove him – eh? how
will that be?” This bold thought gradually took such possession of
me that it left me no peace. I dreamed of it ceaselessly, terribly, and
deliberately went more often to Nevsky, to picture more clearly how I
was going to do it when I did it. I was in ecstasy. The intention seemed
more and more probable and possible to me.”Not really to shove him,
of course,” I thought, growing kinder in advance from joy, ”but just
so, simply not to give way, to bump into him, not so very painfully,
but so, shoulder against shoulder, only as much as decency warrants,
so that exactly as much as he bumps me, I will also bump him.” I was,
ﬁnally, completely decided on it. But the preparations took a very
long time. First of all, at the time of the performance one had to look
as decent as possible and see to one’s attire.”Just in case, supposing, for
example,thatapublicincidentshouldgetstarted(andthepublicthere
is superflu:29 a countess goes, Prince D. goes, the whole of literature
goes), one must be well dressed; this makes an impression, and in
some sense will put us straightaway on an equal footing in the eyes
of high society.” To that end I asked for an advance on my salary and
bought black gloves and a respectable hat at Churkin’s. Black gloves,
it seemed to me, were both more imposing and more in bon ton than
the lemon-colored ones I had ﬁrst presumed upon.”The color is too
striking, it’s too much as if a man wants to make a show of himself,”
and I did not buy the lemon ones. I had long since prepared a good

Notes from Underground
49
shirt with white bone cuﬄinks; but I was very much detained by the
overcoat. My overcoat was not bad at all in itself, it kept me warm; but
it had a quilted cotton lining, and the collar was of raccoon, which
constituted the height of lackeydom. It was necessary to change the
collar at any cost and to acquire a beaver, something like what oﬃcers
wore. For that I began walking about the Gostiny Arcade30 and, after
several attempts, set my sights on a cheap German beaver. Though
these German beavers wear outvery quickly and acquire a most measly
look, at ﬁrst, when new, they even seem quite decent; and I needed it
for only one time. I asked the price: it was expensive even so. After
some solid reﬂection I decided to sell my raccoon collar. And the
remaining and for me quite considerable sum I decided to try and
borrow from Anton Antonych Setochkin, my department chief, a
humble but serious and positive man, who never loaned money to
anyone, but to whom I had once, on entering my post, been especially
recommended by the important personage who had placed me in
the civil service. I was terribly tormented. To ask money of Anton
Antonych seemed to me monstrous and shameful. I even could not
sleep for two or three nights, but then I generally slept little at that
time, I was in a fever; my heart was somehow vaguely sinking, or
else it would suddenly start to go thump, thump, thump! … Anton
Antonych was surprised at ﬁrst, then he frowned, then he considered,
and after all he gave me the loan, having me sign an authorization
for him to take the loaned money from my salary two weeks later.
Thus everything was ﬁnally ready; a handsome beaver came to reign
in place of the squalid raccoon, and I gradually began to get down
to business. I really couldn’t just decide it straight oﬀ, slapdash; the
thing had to be handled deftly, precisely gradually. But I confess that
after many attempts I even began to despair: we simply couldn’t bump
into each other – and that was that! After all my preparations, after all
my premeditations – it would look as if we were just about to bump
into each other, and then – again I’d give way, and he would pass
by without noticing me. I even recited prayers while approaching
him, asking God to inspire me with decisiveness. One time I was
already quite decided, but it just ended with me getting under his
feet, because in the very last moment, at some two inches away, I

50
Apropos of the Wet Snow
lost courage. He quite calmly walked over me, and I bounced aside
like a ball. That night I was sick again, feverish and delirious. And
suddenly everything ended in the best possible way. The night before,
I resolved ﬁnally not to carry out my pernicious intention and to let
it all go for naught, and with that purpose in mind I went to Nevsky
for the last time, just to see how I was going to let it all go for naught.
Suddenly, within three steps of my enemy, I unexpectedly decided,
closed my eyes, and – we bumped solidly shoulder against shoulder!
I did not yield an inch and passed by on a perfectly equal footing!
He did not even look back and pretended not to notice: but he only
pretended, I’m sure of that. To this day I’m sure of it! Of course, I got
the worst of if, he was stronger, but that was not the point. The point
was that I had achieved my purpose, preserved my dignity, yielded not
a step, and placed myself publicly on an equal social footing with him.
I returned home perfectly avenged for everything. I was in ecstasy.
I exulted and sang Italian arias. Of course, I shall not describe for
you what happened to me three days later; if you’ve read my ﬁrst
chapter, ”Underground,” you can guess for yourself. The oﬃcer was
later transferred somewhere. I haven’t seen him for about fourteen
years. What’s the sweet fellow doing these days? Whom does he crush
now?
II
THEN THE SPELL of my little debauch would end, and I’d feel
terribly nauseated. Repentance would come; I’d drive it away – it was
too nauseating. Little by little, however, I’d get used to that as well. I
could get used to anything – that is, not really get used, but somehow
voluntarily consent to endure it. But I had a way out that reconciled
everything, which was – to escape into ”everything beautiful and
lofty,” in dreams, of course. I dreamed terribly, I would dream for
three months at a time, shrinking into my corner, and, believe me, in
those moments I bore no resemblance to that gentleman who, in the
panic of his chicken heart, sat sewing a German beaver to the collar of

Notes from Underground
51
his overcoat. I’d suddenly become a hero. And then I wouldn’t even
have let the six-foot lieutenant into the house. I couldn’t even imagine
him then. What these dreams of mine were, and how I could have
been satisﬁed with them – is diﬃcult to say now, but I was satisﬁed
with them then. However, I’m somewhat satisﬁed with them even
now. Dreams came to me with a particular sweetness and intensity
after a little debauch, they came with repentance and tears, with curses
and raptures. There were moments of such positive ecstasy, such hap-
piness, that not even the slightest mockery could be felt in me, by
God. There was faith, hope, love. This was the point, that I blindly
believed then that through some miracle, some external circumstance,
all this would suddenly extend, expand; suddenly a horizon of appro-
priate activity would present itself, beneﬁcent, beautiful, and, above
all, quite ready-made (precisely what, I never knew, but above all –
quite ready-made), and thus I would suddenly step forth under God’s
heaven all but on a white horse and wreathed in laurels. A secondary
role was incomprehensible to me, and that was precisely why, in re-
ality, I so calmly ﬁlled the last. Either hero or mud, there was no in
between. And that is what ruined me, because in the mud I comforted
myself with being a hero at other times, and the hero covered up the
mud: for an ordinary man, say, it’s shameful to be muddied, but a
hero is too lofty to be completely muddied, consequently one can get
muddied. Remarkably, these inﬂuxes of ”everything beautiful and
lofty” used also to come to me during my little debauches; precisely
when I was already at the very bottom, they would come just so, in
isolated little ﬂashes, as if reminding me of themselves, and yet they
did not annihilate the little debauch with their appearance; on the
contrary, it was as if they enlivened it by contrast and came in exactly
the proportion required for a good sauce. The sauce here consisted
of contradiction and suﬀering, of tormenting inner analysis, and all
these torments and tormenticules lent my little debauch a certain
piquancy, even meaning – in short, they fully fulﬁlled the function
of a good sauce. All this was even not without some profundity. For
how could I consent to a simple, direct, trite little scrivener’s debauch,
and to bearing all this mud on myself! What was there in it that
could seduce me and lure me into the streets at night? No, sir, I had

52
Apropos of the Wet Snow
a noble loophole for everything … But how much love, Lord, how
much love I used to experience in those dreams of mine, in those
”escapes into everything beautiful and lofty”: though it was a fantas-
tical love, though it was never in reality applied to anything human,
there was so much of it, this love, that afterwards, in reality, I never
even felt any need to apply it; that would have been an unnecessary
luxury. Everything, however, would always end most happily with
a lazy and rapturous transition to art — that is, to beautiful forms
of being, quite ready-made, highly stolen from poets and novelists,
and adapted to every possible service or demand. For example, I tri-
umph over everyone; everyone, of course, is lying in the dust and is
forced to voluntarily acknowledge all my perfections, and I forgive
them all. I fall in love, being a famous poet and court chamberlain; I
receive countless millions and donate them immediately to mankind,
and then and there confess before all the world my disgraces, which,
of course, are not mere disgraces, but contain an exceeding amount
of ”the beautiful and lofty,” of something manfredian.31 Everyone
weeps and kisses me (what blockheads they’d be otherwise), and I go
barefoot and hungry to preach new ideas and crush the retrograde
under Austerlitz.32 Then a march is struck up, an amnesty is granted,
the Pope agrees to quit Rome for Brazil; then a ball is given for the
whole of Italy at the Villa Borghese, now on the shores of Lake Como,
since Lake Como has been transferred to Rome especially for the
occasion;33 then comes a scene in the bushes, etc., etc. – you know
what I mean! You will say that it’s vulgar and vile to bring all this out
into the marketplace now, after so many raptures and tears, to which
I myself have confessed. But why is it vile, sirs? Can you really think
I’m ashamed of it all, or that it’s all any stupider than whatever there
may have been, gentlemen, in your own lives? And besides, believe me,
some of it was by no means badly composed … And not all of it took
place on Lake Como. However, you’re right, it is indeed both vulgar
and vile. And what’s vilest is that I’ve now started justifying myself be-
fore you. And viler still is that I’m now making this remark. Enough,
however; otherwise there will be no end to it: things will go on getting
viler and viler … I was simply incapable of dreaming for longer than
three months at a time, and would begin to feel an irresistible need

Notes from Underground
53
to rush into society. To rush into society in my case meant to go and
visit my department chief, Anton Antonych Setochkin. He was the
only permanent acquaintance I’ve had in my whole life, and I’m even
surprised now at this circumstance. But even to him I used to go only
when such a spell came, and my dreams had reached such happiness
that I needed, instantly and infallibly, to embrace people and the
whole of mankind – for which I had to have available at least one
really existing person. Anton Antonych, however, could be visited
only on Tuesdays (his day), and consequently my need to embrace the
whole of mankind always had to be adusted to a Tuesday. This Anton
Antonych was located near the Five Corners,34 on the fourth ﬂoor
and in four little rooms, low-ceilinged, each one smaller than the last,
of a most economical and yellow appearance. There were two daugh-
ters and their aunt, who poured tea. The daughters, one thirteen and
the other fourteen, were both pug-nosed, and I was terribly abashed
before them, because they constantly whispered together and giggled.
The host usually sat in the study, on a leather sofa in front of the desk,
along with some gray-haired guest, an oﬃcial from our own or even
some other department. I never saw more than two or three guests
there, always the same ones. They talked about excise, negotiations
in the Senate, salaries, promotions, His Excellency, ways of making
oneself liked, and so on and so forth. I had patience enough to sit it
out by these people like a fool for four hours on end, listening to them,
myself not daring or knowing how to begin talking with them about
anything. My mind would grow dull, I’d break into a sweat several
times, paralysis hovered over me; but this was good and beneﬁcial.
On returning home, I’d put oﬀfor a while my desire to embrace the
whole of mankind.
I had, however, another acquaintance as it were – Simonov, a
former schoolfellow. No doubt there were many of my schoolfellows
in Petersburg, but I did not associate with them, and had even stopped
nodding to them in the street. I perhaps got myself transferred to
another department so as not to be together with them and to cut
oﬀall at once the whole of that hateful childhood of mine. Curses
on that school, on those terrible years of penal servitude! In short, I
parted ways with my fellows as soon as I was set free. There were two

54
Apropos of the Wet Snow
or three people left whom I still greeted when we met. Among them
was Simonov, who had not been distinguished for anything in our
school, was quiet and equable, but in whom I distinguished a certain
independence of character and even honesty. I do not even think
he was so very narrow-minded. I had once had some rather bright
moments with him, but they did not last long and somehow suddenly
clouded over. These recollections were apparently burdensome for
him, and it seemed he kept being afraid I would lapse into the former
tone. I suspected that he found me quite disgusting, but I kept going
to him all the same, having no sure assurance of it.
And so once, on a Thursday, unable to endure my solitude, and
knowing that on Thursdays Anton Antonych’s door was closed, I
remembered about Simonov. On the way up to his fourth-ﬂoor apart-
ment, I was precisely thinking that I was a burden to this gentleman
and that I shouldn’t be going to him. But since in the end such con-
siderations, as if by design, always egged me on further into some
ambiguous situation, I did go in. It was almost a year since I had last
seen Simonov.
III
I FOUND TWO MORE of my schoolfellows with him. They were
apparently discussing an important matter. None of them paid more
than the slightest attention to my coming, which was even strange,
because I hadn’t seen them for years. Obviously they regarded me
as something like a quite ordinary ﬂy. I had not been treated that
way even at school, though everyone there hated me. Of course,
I understood that they must scorn me now for the unsuccess of my
career in the service and for my having gone too much to seed, walking
around badly dressed, and so on – which in their eyes constituted a
signboard of my incapacity and slight signiﬁcance. But all the same I
did not expect such a degree of scorn. Simonov was even surprised
at my coming. Before, too, he had always seemed surprised at my
coming. All this took me aback; I sat down in some anguish and

Notes from Underground
55
began to listen to what they were talking about.
The conversation, a serious and even heated one, was about a
farewell dinner which these gentlemen wanted to organize jointly
on the very next day for their schoolfellow Zverkov, an oﬃcer in the
army, who was leaving for a province far away. M’sieur Zverkov had
also been my schoolfellow all the while. I had begun especially to
hate him starting in the higher grades. In the lower grades he had
been just a pretty, frisky boy whom everybody liked. I, however, had
hated him in the lower grades as well, precisely for being a pretty and
frisky boy. He was always a bad student, and got worse as he went on.
Nevertheless, he graduated successfully, because he had his protectors.
In his last year at school he received an inheritance, two hundred
souls,35 and since we were almost all of us poor, he even began to
swagger before us. He was a vulgarian in the highest degree, but a nice
fellow nonetheless, even while swaggering. And despite the external,
fantastic, and highfalutin forms of honor and glory in our school,
everyone, apart from a very few, minced around Zverkov, the more so
the more he swaggered. They minced not for the sake of some sort
of proﬁt, but just so, because he was a man favored with the gifts of
nature. Besides, it was somehow an accepted thing among us to regard
Zverkov as an expert in the line of adroitness and good manners. This
last particularly infuriated me. I hated the sharp, un-self-doubting
tone of his voice, his admiration of his own witticisms, which came
out terribly stupid, though he did have a bold tongue; I hated his
handsome but silly face (for which, by the way, I’d gladly have traded
my intelligent one) and his free and easy oﬃcer-of-the-forties airs. I
hated the things he used to say about his future successes with women
(he hadn’t ventured to start up with women, not having his oﬃcer’s
epaulettes yet, and was looking forward to them impatiently) and
about how he’d be ﬁghting duels all the time. I remember myself,
always taciturn, suddenly lighting into Zverkov when he was talking
with some friends about his future gallantries once during a recess,
got quite playful in the end, like a puppy in the sun, and suddenly
declared that he wouldn’t leave a single village maiden on his estate
without his attentions, that this was his droit de seigneur,36 and if the
peasants dared to protest, he’d give them all a whipping and heap a

56
Apropos of the Wet Snow
double quitrent on the bearded canaille. Our oafs applauded, but I
lit into him, and not at all out of pity for maidens or their fathers,
but simply because such a little snot was being so applauded. I got
the best of him that time, but Zverkov, though stupid, was gay and
impudent, and therefore laughed it oﬀ, and even in such a way that, in
truth, I did not quite get the best of him: the laughter remained on his
side. Later he got the best of me several more times, though not with
spite, but just somehow jokingly, in passing, with a laugh. I spitefully
and contemptuously refused to reply. Upon graduation he tried to
make a step towards me, I did not resist too much, because it ﬂattered
me, but we quickly and naturally parted ways. Later I heard about
his barracksy lieutenanty successes, about his carousing. Later other
rumors went around – that he was succeeding in the service. Now he
no longer greeted me in the street, and I suspected he was afraid of
compromising himself by greeting a person as insigniﬁcant as I was.
I also saw him in the theater once, in the third circle, now wearing
aiguillettes. He was mincing and twining around the daughters of
some ancient general. In three short years he had gone very much to
seed, though he was still quite handsome and adroit; he had become
somehow puﬀy and was beginning to grow fat; one could see that by
the age of thirty he would be completely ﬂabby. It was for this ﬁnally
departing Zverkov that our fellows wanted to give a dinner. They had
constantly associated with him all those three years, though inwardly
they did not consider themselves on an equal footing with him, I’m
sure of that.
Of Simonov’s two guests, one was Ferﬁchkin, from Russian-
German stock – short, monkey-faced, a fool who comically mimicked
everyone, my bitterest enemy even in the lower grades — a mean, im-
pudent little fanfaron who played at being most ticklishly ambitious,
though of course he was a coward at heart. He was one of those ad-
mirers of Zverkov who ﬂirted with him for his own ends, and often
borrowed money from him. Simonov’s other guest, Trudolyubov,
was an unremarkable person, a military type, tall, with a cold physiog-
nomy, honest enough, but worshiping any success, and capable only
of discussing promotions. He was some sort of distant relation of
Zverkov’s, and that, silly though it was, endowed him with a certain

Notes from Underground
57
signiﬁcance among us. He had always regarded me as nothing, but
treated me, if not quite politely, at least passably.
”Well,so,ifit’ssevenroubleseach,”Trudolyubovsaid,”thatmakes
twenty-one for the three of us – we can have a nice dinner. Zverkov
doesn’t pay, of course.”
”Naturally not, since we’re inviting him,” Simonov decided.
”Do you really think,” Ferﬁchkin broke in presumptuously and
fervently, like an impudent lackey boasting of his master’s, the gen-
eral’s, decorations, ”do you really think Zverkov will let us pay for it
all? He’ll accept out of delicacy, but he’ll stand us to a half-dozen
himself.”
”And what are the four of us going to do with a half-dozen,”
Trudolyubov remarked, having paid attention only to the half-dozen.
”So, it’s the three of us, four with Zverkov, twenty-one roubles,
the Hotel de Paris, tomorrow at ﬁve o’clock,” Simonov, who had been
elected manager, ﬁnally concluded.
”Why twenty-one?” I said, somewhat agitated, apparently even
oﬀended.”If you count me, it’s twenty-eight roubles, not twenty-one.”
It seemed to me that to oﬀer myself suddenly and so unexpectedly
would even be a most handsome thing, and they would all be won
over at once and look upon me with respect.
”You want to come, too?” Simonov remarked with displeasure,
somehow avoiding my eyes. He knew me by heart.
It infuriated me that he knew me by heart.
”What of it, sir? I would seem to be a schoolfellow, too, and I
confess I’m even oﬀended at being left out,” I began seething again.
”And where does one go looking for you?” Ferﬁchkin rudely
butted in.
”You were never on good terms with Zverkov,” Trudolyubov
added, frowning. But once I had fastened on, I would not let go.
”It seems to me that no one has any right to judge about that,” I re-
torted,inatremblingvoice,asifGodknowswhathadhappened.”Maybe
that’s precisely why I want to now, because we weren’t on good terms
before.”
”Well, who can understand you … and these sublimities …” Tru-
dolyubov smirked.

58
Apropos of the Wet Snow
”You’ll be put on the list,” Simonov decided, turning to me.”To-
morrow, ﬁve o’clock, the Hotel de Paris; make no mistake.”
”And the money!” Ferﬁchkin tried to begin, in a half-whisper,
nodding towards me to Simonov, but he stopped short, because even
Simonov became embarrassed.
”Enough,” said Trudolyubov, rising.”Let him come, if he wants
to so much.”
”But we have our own circle, we’re friends,” Ferﬁchkin, angry,
was also reaching for his hat.”This isn’t an oﬃcial meeting. Maybe we
don’t want you at all …”
They left; Ferﬁchkin did not even bow to me as he went out;
Trudolyubov barely nodded, without looking. Simonov, with whom
I was left face to face, was in some sort of annoyed perplexity and gave
me a strange glance. He did not sit down, nor did he invite me to sit
down.
”Hm … yes … tomorrow, then. And will you give me the money
now? Just to know for certain,” he muttered in embarrassment.
I ﬂushed, but as I ﬂushed I recalled that I had owed Simonov
ﬁfteen roubles from time immemorial, which, however, I had never
forgotten, though I also had never repaid it.
”You must see, Simonov, that I couldn’t have known on coming
here … and I’m very annoyed with myself for forgetting …”
”All right, all right, never mind. You can pay tomorrow at dinner.
I just wanted to know … Please don’t …”
He stopped short and began pacing the room with even greater
annoyance. As he paced, he started planting his heels and stomping
still more heavily.
”I’m not keeping you, am I?” I asked, after a two-minute silence.
”Oh, no!” he suddenly roused himself, ”that is, to tell the truth
– yes. You see, I’ve also got to stop by at … Not far from here …” he
added, in a sort of apologetic voice, and somewhat ashamedly.
”Ah, my God! Why didn’t you say so!” I exclaimed, grabbing my
cap, but with an appearance of remarkable nonchalance, which ﬂew
down to me from God knows where.
”It’s not far, really.. .Just a couple of steps …” Simonov kept saying
as he saw me to the entryway with a bustling air that did not become

Notes from Underground
59
him at all.”Tomorrow, then, at ﬁve o’clock sharp!” he called out as I
went down the stairs: he was so pleased I was leaving. I, however, was
furious.
”What possessed me, what possessed me to pop up like that!” I
gnashed my teeth, striding along the street.”And for that scoundrel,
that little pig of a Zverkov! I mustn’t go, of course; just spit on it, of
course; I’m not bound, am I? Tomorrow I’ll send Simonov a note …”
But what made me furious was that I knew I would certainly go;
I would go on purpose; and the more tactless, the more improper it
was for me to go, the sooner I would go.
And there was even a positive obstacle to my going: I had no
money. All I had lying there was nine roubles. But of that, seven had
to go the next day for the wages of Apollon, my servant, who lived
with me for seven roubles a month, grub not included.
And not to pay him his wages was impossible, given Apollon’s
character. But of this dog, this thorn in my side, I will speak some
other time.
Nevertheless, I knew that even so I would not pay him, but would
certainly go.
That night I had the most hideous dreams. No wonder: all
evening I was oppressed by recollections of the penal servitude of
my school years, and I could not get rid of them. I had been tucked
away in that school by distant relations whose dependent I was and of
whom I had no notion thereafter – tucked away, orphaned, already
beaten down by their reproaches, already pensive, taciturn, gazing
wildly about at everything. My school fellows met me with spiteful
and merciless derision, because I was not like any of them. But I could
not endure derision; I could not get along so cheaply as they got
along with each other. I immediately began to hate them, and shut
myself away from everyone in timorous, wounded, and inordinate
pride. Their crudeness outraged me. They laughed cynically at my
face, my ungainly ﬁgure; and yet how stupid their own faces were! In
our school facial expressions degenerated and would become some-
how especially stupid. So many beautiful children came to us. A few
years later it was disgusting even to look at them. Already at the age
of sixteen I gloomily marveled at them; even then I was amazed at

60
Apropos of the Wet Snow
the pettiness of their thinking, the stupidity of their pastimes, games,
conversations. They had so little understanding of the most essential
things, so little interest in the most impressive, startling subjects, that
I began, willy-nilly, to regard them as beneath me. It was not injured
vanity that prompted me to do so, and for God’s sake don’t come
creeping at me with those banal objections that one is sick of to the
point of nausea – ”that I was only dreaming, while they already un-
derstood real life.” They understood nothing, no real life, and I swear
it was this in them that outraged me most of all. On the contrary,
they took the most obvious, glaring reality in a fantastically stupid
way, and were already accustomed to worshiping success alone. Every-
thing that was just, but humiliated and downtrodden, they laughed at
disgracefully and hardheartedly. They regarded rank as intelligence;
at the age of sixteen they were already talking about cushy billets. Of
course, much of this came from stupidity, from the bad examples that
had ceaselessly surrounded their childhood and adolescence. They
were depraved to the point of monstrosity. To be sure, here, too, there
was more of the external, more of an assumed cynicism; to be sure,
youthfulness and a certain freshness could be glimpsed in them even
through the depravity; but even this freshness was unattractive in
them and showed itself as a sort of knavery. I hated them terribly,
though I was perhaps worse than they were. They paid me back in
kind and did not conceal their loathing for me. But I no longer had
any wish for their love; on the contrary, I constantly thirsted for their
humiliation. To rid myself of their derision, I purposely began to
study as hard as I could and worked my way into the number of the
best. This made an impression. Besides, they began little by little
to realize that I had by then read such books as they were unable to
read, and understood such things (not part of our special course) as
they had never even heard of. This they regarded wildly and deri-
sively, but morally they submitted, the more so as even the teachers
paid attention to me in this respect. The derision stopped, but the
animosity remained, and cold, strained relations set in. Towards the
end I myself could not stand it: as I grew older, a need for people,
for friends, developed. I tried to start getting closer with some; but
the attempt always came out unnaturally and would simply end of

Notes from Underground
61
itself. I also once had a friend. But I was already a despot in my soul;
I wanted to have unlimited power over his soul; I wanted to instill
in him a contempt for his surrounding milieu; I demanded of him a
haughty and ﬁnal break with that milieu. I frightened him with my
passionate friendship; I drove him to tears, to convulsions; he was a
naive, self-giving soul; but once he had given himself wholly to me, I
immediately started to hate him and pushed him away – as if I had
needed him only to gain a victory over him, only to bring him into
subjection. But I could not be victorious over everyone; my friend
was also not like any of them, and represented the rarest exception.
The ﬁrst thing I did upon leaving school was quit the special service
for which I had been intended, in order to break all ties, to curse the
past and bury it in the dust … And the devil knows why, after that, I
dragged myself to this Simonov! …
In the morning I roused myself early, I jumped out of bed in agi-
tation, as if all this was going to start happening right away. But then
I did believe that some radical break in my life was coming and could
not fail to come that very day. It may have been lack of habit or some-
thing, but all my life, when faced with any external event, be it ever so
small, I always thought that right then some radical break in my life
was going to come. Nevertheless, I went to work as usual, but slipped
away two hours early to go home and get ready. The main thing, I
thought, is that I mustn’t be the ﬁrst to arrive, or they’ll think I’m all
too delighted. But there were thousands of such main things, and they
all agitated me to the point of impotence. I polished my boots a sec-
ond time with my own hands; for the life of him Apollon would not
have polished them twice in one day, ﬁnding it inordinate. I polished
them, therefore, having stolen the brushes from the entryway so that
he would not somehow notice and afterwards begin to despise me.
Then I carefully inspected my clothes and found that everything was
old, shabby, worn out. I had indeed become too slovenly. My uniform
was perhaps in good condition, but I really couldn’t go to dinner in
my uniform. And the main thing was that on my trousers, right on the
knee, there was a huge yellow spot. I could sense already that this spot
alone would rob me of nine-tenths of my dignity. I also knew that
it was very mean to think so.”But I can’t be bothered with thinking

62
Apropos of the Wet Snow
now; now comes reality,” I thought, and my heart sank. I also knew
perfectly well, even then, that I was monstrously exaggerating all these
facts; but there was nothing to be done: I could no longer control
myself, I was shaking with fever. In despair I pictured how coldly and
condescendingly that ”scoundrel” Zverkov would meet me; with what
dull, all-invincible contempt the dullard Trudolyubov would look
at me; how nastily and impudently that little snot Ferﬁchkin would
titter at my expense, sucking up to Zverkov; how perfectly Simonov
would understand it all in himself, and how he would despise me for
the meanness of my vanity and faintheartedness; and, the main thing
– how measly, non-literary, commonplace it was all going to be. Of
course, it would be best not to go at all. But that was more impossible
than anything else: once I began to be drawn, I used to be drawn in
all the way, over my head. Afterwards I’d have been taunting myself
for the rest of my life: ”So you turned coward, turned coward before
reality, that’s what you did, you turned coward!” On the contrary,
I passionately wanted to prove to all that ”riﬀraﬀ” that I was by no
means the coward I made myself out to be. More than that: in the
strongest paroxysm of cowardly fever, I dreamed of getting the best
of them, winning them over, carrying them away, making them love
me – if only for my ”lofty mind and indubitable wit.” They would
drop Zverkov, he would sit on the sidelines, silent and ashamed, and
I would crush him. Afterwards I would perhaps make peace with
him, and we would pledge eternal friendship, yet the most bitter and
oﬀensive thing for me was that I knew even then, knew fully and
certainly, that in fact I needed none of that, and in fact I had no wish
to crush, subject, or attract them, and would be the ﬁrst not to give a
penny for the whole outcome, even if I achieved it. Oh, how I prayed
to God for that day to pass more quickly! In inexpressible anguish
I kept going to the window, opening the vent, and peering into the
dull darkness of thickly falling wet snow …
At last my wretched little wall clock hissed ﬁve. I grabbed my hat
and, trying not to glance at Apollon – who since morning had been
waiting to receive his wages from me, but in his pride refused to speak
ﬁrst – slipped past him out the door, and in a coach hired for the
purpose with my last ﬁfty kopecks, drove up like a grand gentleman

Notes from Underground
63
to the Hotel de Paris.
IV
I HAD ALREADY KNOWN the evening before that I would be
the ﬁrst to arrive. But primacy was no longer the point. Not only
were none of them there, but I even had diﬃculty ﬁnding our room.
The table was not quite laid yet. What did it mean? After much
questioning, I ﬁnally got out of the waiters that the dinner had been
ordered for six o’clock, not ﬁve. This was conﬁrmed in the bar. I was
even ashamed to be asking. It was only ﬁve twenty-ﬁve. If they had
changed the time, they ought in any case to have informed me; that’s
what the city mail is for; and not to have subjected me to ”disgrace”
both in my own and … be it only the waiters’ eyes. I sat down; a
waiter began laying the table; in his presence it felt somehow still more
oﬀensive. By six o’clock, in addition to the lighted lamps, candles were
brought into the room. It had not occurred to the waiter, however, to
bring them when I arrived. In the next room two customers, gloomy,
angry-looking, and silent, were having dinner at separate tables. In
one of the farther rooms it was very noisy; there was even shouting;
the guﬀaws of a whole bunch of people could be heard; some nasty
French squeals could be heard: it was a dinner with ladies. Quite
nauseating, in short. Rarely have I spent a nastier moment, so that
when, at exactly six o’clock, they all came in together, I was glad of
them for the ﬁrst moment as of some sort of deliverers, and almost
forgot that I ought to look oﬀended.
Zverkov came at the head of them, obviously the leader. Both he
and they were laughing; but on seeing me Zverkov assumed a digni-
ﬁed air, approached unhurriedly, bending slightly, as if coquettishly, at
the waist, and gave me his hand benignly, but not very, with a certain
cautious, almost senatorial politeness, as if by oﬀering me his hand
he were protecting himself from something. I had been imagining,
on the contrary, that as soon as he walked in he would start laughing
his former laugh, shrill, punctuated by little shrieks, and from the

64
Apropos of the Wet Snow
ﬁrst there would be his ﬂat jokes and witticisms. I had been prepar-
ing myself for them since the previous evening, but I by no means
expected such down-the-nose, such excellential benignity. So he now
fully considered himself immeasurably superior to me in all respects?
If he simply wanted to oﬀend me with this senatorial air, it was not
so bad, I thought; I’d be able to get back at him somehow. But what
if indeed, without any wish to oﬀend me, the little idea had seriously
crept into his sheep’s noddle that he was immeasurably superior to
me, and could look at me in no other way than patronizingly? The
supposition alone left me breathless.
”I learned with surprise of your wish to participate with us,” he
began, lisping and simpering and drawing the words out, something
that had never happened with him before.”We somehow keep missing
each other. You shy away from us.
More’s the pity. We’re not so terrible as you think. Well, sir, in
any case I’m gla-a-ad to rene-e-ew …”
And he casually turned to place his hat on the windowsill.
”Have you been waiting long?” asked Trudolyubov.
”I arrived at exactly ﬁve o’clock, as I was appointed yesterday,” I
answered loudly and with an irritation that promised an imminent
explosion.
”Didn’t you inform him that the time had been changed?” Tru-
dolyubov turned to Simonov.
”I didn’t. I forgot,” the latter answered, but without any repen-
tance, and, not even apologizing to me, went to make arrangements
for the hors d’oeuvres.
”Soyou’vebeenhereforanhouralready,ah,poorfellow!”Zverkov
exclaimed derisively, because according to his notions it must indeed
have been terribly funny. Following him, the scoundrel Ferﬁchkin
broke up, in his scoundrelly voice, yelping like a little mutt. He, too,
thought my situation terribly funny and embarrassing.
”It’s not funny in the least!” I cried to Ferﬁchkin, growing more
and more irritated.”It’s other people’s fault, not mine. They neglected
to inform me. It – it – it’s … simply absurd.”
”Not only absurd, but something else as well,” Trudolyubov grum-
bled, naively interceding for me.”You’re too mild. Sheer discourtesy.

Notes from Underground
65
Not deliberate, of course. But how is it that Simonov … hm!”
”If that had been played on me,” observed Ferﬁchkin, ”I’d …”
”But you should have ordered yourself something,” Zverkov in-
terrupted, ”or just asked to have dinner without waiting.”
”You must agree that I could have done so without any permis-
sion,” I snapped.”If I waited, it was …”
”Let’s be seated, gentlemen,” cried the entering Simonov, ”every-
thing’s ready; I can answer for the champagne, it’s perfectly chilled..
.I didn’t know your address, how was one to ﬁnd you?” he suddenly
turned to me, but again somehow without looking at me. He obvi-
ously had something against me. He must have changed his mind
since yesterday.
Everyone sat down; I, too, sat down. The table was round. Tru-
dolyubov ended up on my left, Simonov on my right. Zverkov sat
down across the table, and Ferﬁchkin next to him, between him and
Trudolyubov.
”So-o-o, you’re … in the department?” Zverkov continued to
occupy himself with me. Seeing that I was embarrassed, he seri-
ously imagined I must be treated benignly and, so to speak, encour-
aged.”What, does he want me to throw a bottle at him or something?”
I thought, furious. From lack of habit, I was becoming irritated with
a somehow unnatural rapidity.
”In the —y oﬃce,” I answered curtly, staring at my plate.
”And … you ﬀﬁnd it proﬀﬁtable? Tell me, ple-e-ease, what wa-a-
as it that made you leave your former position?”
”It wa-a-a-as that I felt like leaving my former position,” I drawled
three times longer, now losing almost all control of myself. Ferﬁchkin
snorted. Simonov looked at me ironically; Trudolyubov stopped
eating and began studying me with curiosity.
Zverkov winced, but declined to notice.
”We-e-ell, and how’s your keep?”
”What keep?”
”Your sssalary, that is.”
”Quite the examiner, aren’t you!”
However, I told him straight out what my salary was. I was
blushing terribly.

66
Apropos of the Wet Snow
”Not a fortune,” Zverkov observed pompously.
”No, sir, can’t go dining in cafe-restaurants!” Ferﬁchkin added
impudently.
”In my opinion, it’s even downright poor,” Trudolyubov observed
seriously.
”And how thin you’ve grown, how changed … since …” Zverkov
added, not without venom now, studying me and my attire with a
sort of insolent regret.
”Oh, come, stop embarrassing him,” Ferﬁchkin exclaimed, titter-
ing.
”My dear sir, I’ll have you know that I am not embarrassed,” I
ﬁnally exploded, ”do you hear, sir! I am having dinner here, in a ’cafe-
restaurant,’ at my own expense, my own and no one else’s, make a note
of that, Monsieur Ferﬁchkin.”
”Wha-a-at? And who here is not dining at his own expense? If
you mean to …” Ferﬁchkin fastened on, turning red as a lobster and
staring me furiously in the face.
”We-e-ell,” I replied, feeling that I had gone too far, ”I suppose
we’d better occupy ourselves with more intelligent conversation.”
”So you intend to display your intelligence?”
”Don’t worry, that would be quite superﬂuous here.”
”You just keep cackling away, eh, my dear sir? Haven’t lost your
mind, by any chance, in that depotment of yours?”
”Enough, gentlemen, enough!” Zverkov cried almightily.
”How stupid this is!” growled Simonov.
”Stupid indeed; we gathered as a company of friends to see a
good school chum oﬀon his journey, and you go keeping score,”
Trudolyubov began to speak, rudely addressing me alone.”You invited
yourself yesterday, so don’t disrupt the general harmony …”
”Enough, enough,” Zverkov shouted.”Stop, gentlemen, this won’t
do. Better let me tell you how I almost got married two days ago …”
And there followed some lampoon about how the gentleman
almost got married two days before. There was, however, not a word
in it about marriage, but generals, colonels, and even court dignitaries
kept ﬂitting through the story, with Zverkov among them and all but

Notes from Underground
67
at their head. Approving laughter began; Ferﬁchkin even let out little
squeals.
They all dropped me, and I sat crushed and annihilated.
”Lord, is this any company for me!” I thought.”And what a fool
I made of myself before them! However, I let Ferﬁchkin go too far.
These oafs think they’ve done me an honor by giving me a place at
their table; they don’t realize that it’s I, I, who am doing them an
honor, and not they me! ’How thin! Such clothes!’ Oh, cursed
trousers! Zverkov has already noticed the yellow spot on the knee …
But what’s the point! Get up from the table, now, this minute, take
your hat, and simply leave without saying a word … Out of scorn!
And tomorrow, if they like, a duel. Scoundrels. Am I going to be
sorry about seven roubles? Maybe they’ll think … Devil take it! I’m
not sorry about the seven roubles! I’m leaving this minute! …”
Of course, I stayed.
I drank Laﬁte and sherry by the glassful in my grief. From lack of
habit I was quickly getting drunk, and as my drunkenness increased,
so did my vexation. I suddenly wanted to insult them all in the boldest
fashion, and only then leave. To seize the right moment and show
myself; let them say: he’s funny, but no dummy … and … and … in
short, devil take them.
I insolently looked around at them all with bleary eyes. But it
was as if they had already forgotten me entirely … They were having
a noisy, loud, merry time for themselves. Zverkov kept on talking. I
began to listen. Zverkov was telling about some magniﬁcent lady
whom he had ﬁnally driven to a declaration (naturally he was lying
like a horse), and that he had been especially helped in this matter by
his intimate friend, some princeling named Kolya, a hussar, owner of
three thousand souls.
”And yet there’s no sign of this Kolya, owner of three thousand
souls, at your farewell party,” I suddenly butted in to the conversation.
For a moment everyone fell silent.
”So, now you’re drunk,” Trudolyubov ﬁnally consented to notice
me, casting a sidelong, contemptuous glance in my direction. Zverkov
silently studied me as if I were a little bug. I lowered my eyes. Simonov
hurriedly began pouring champagne.

68
Apropos of the Wet Snow
Trudolyubov raised his glass; everyone did the same, except for
me.
”Your health, and a good journey!” he cried to Zverkov.”To those
old years, gentlemen, to our future! Hurrah!”
Everyone drank and fell to kissing Zverkov. I did not budge; the
full glass stood untouched before me.
”You’renotgoingtodrink?”Trudolyubov,havinglostallpatience,
roared, turning to me threateningly.
”I wish to make a speech on my own part, separately … and then
I will drink, Mr Trudolyubov.”
”Disgusting little stinker,” Simonov growled.
Istraighteneduponmychairandfeverishlytookmyglass, prepar-
ingforsomethingextraordinary, andstillnotknowingmyselfprecisely
what I was going to say.
”Silence!” Ferﬁchkin called out in French.”Here comes all kinds
of intelligence!” Zverkov listened very seriously, realizing what was
going on.
”Lieutenant Zverkov, sir,” I began, ”let it be known to you that I
hate phrases, phrase-mongers, and tight-ﬁtting waists … That is the
ﬁrst point, and the second will follow forthwith.”
Everyone stirred greatly.
”Second point: I hate gallantry and gallantizers. Especially gal-
lantizers!
”Third point: I love truth, sincerity, and honesty,” I went on
almost mechanically, because I was already beginning to go numb
with horror, unable to understand how I could be speaking this way
…”I love thought, M’sieur Zverkov; I love true friendship, on an equal
footing, and not … hm … I love … However, why not? I, too, shall
drink to your health, M’sieur Zverkov. Charm the Circassian girls,
shoot the enemies of the fatherland, and … and … To your health,
M’sieur Zverkov!”
Zverkov rose from his chair, bowed to me, and said: ”Much
obliged to you.”
He was terribly oﬀended, and even turned pale.
”Devil take it,” roared Trudolyubov, banging his ﬁst on the table.
”No, sir, it’s a punch in the mug for that!” Ferﬁchkin shrieked.

Notes from Underground
69
”He ought to be thrown out!” Simonov growled.
”Not a word, gentlemen, not a move!” Zverkov cried solemnly,
checking the general indignation.”I thank you all, but I myself am
quite capable of proving to him how much I value his words.”
”Mr Ferﬁchkin, tomorrow you will give me satisfaction for your
present words!” I said loudly, pompously addressing Ferﬁchkin.
”You mean a duel, sir? At your pleasure,” the man answered, but I
musthavebeensoridiculouswithmychallenge, anditwassounsuited
to my ﬁgure, that everyone, and ﬁnally even Ferﬁchkin, simply fell
over laughing.
”Yes, drop him, of course! He’s completely drunk now!” Tru-
dolyubov said with loathing.
”I’ll never forgive myself for putting him on the list!” Simonov
growled again.
”Now’s the time to up and hurl a bottle at them all,” I thought,
took the bottle, and … poured myself a full glass.
” … No, I’d better sit it out to the end!” I went on thinking.”You’d
be glad, gentlemen, if I left. No chance of that. I’ll purposely sit and
drink to the end, as a sign that I attach not the slightest importance
to you. I’ll sit and drink, because this is a pot-house, and I paid good
money to get in. I’ll sit and drink, because I regard you as pawns,
nonexistent pawns. I’ll sit and drink … and sing, if I like, yes, sirs, and
sing, because I have the right … to sing … hm.”
But I did not sing. I simply tried not to look at any of them; I
assumed the most independent attitudes and waited impatiently for
them to start talking to me first. But, alas, they didn’t. And, oh, how
I wished, how I wished at that moment to make peace with them!
It struck eight o’clock, and ﬁnally nine. They moved from the table
to the sofa. Zverkov sprawled on the couch, placing one foot on a
little round table. The wine was also transferred there. Indeed, he did
stand them to three bottles of his own. He did not oﬀer me any, of
course. Everyone sat clustered around him on the sofa. They listened
to him with all but reverence. One could see he was loved.”But why?
Why?” I kept thinking to myself. From time to time they would
get into drunken raptures and kiss each other. They talked about
the Caucasus, about what true passion is, about gambling, about

70
Apropos of the Wet Snow
proﬁtable posts in the service; about how big was the income of the
hussar Podkharzhevsky, whom none of them knew personally, and
rejoiced that it was very big; about the remarkable beauty and grace
of Princess D—, whom none of them had ever even seen; ﬁnally it
came to Shakespeare being immortal.
I was smiling contemptuously and pacing the other side of the
room, directly opposite the sofa, along the wall, from the table to the
stove and back. I wished with all my might to show that I could do
without them; and yet I purposely clumped with my boots, coming
down hard on the heels. But all in vain. They paid no attention. I
had patience enough to pace like that, right in front of them, from
eight o’clock to eleven, in one and the same space, from the table to
the stove, and from the stove back to the table.”I’m just pacing, and
no one can tell me not to.” A waiter who kept coming into the room
paused several times to look at me; my head was spinning from so
much turning; at moments I thought I was delirious. I sweated and
dried out three times in those three hours. Every once in a while a
thought pierced my heart with the deepest, most poisonous pain:
that ten years, twenty years, forty years would pass, and even after
forty years I would still recall with revulsion and humiliation these
dirtiest, most ridiculous, and most terrible minutes of my entire life.
For a man to humiliate himself more shamelessly and more volun-
tarily was really impossible, I fully, fully understood that, and still I
went on pacing from the table to the stove and back.”Oh, if you only
knew what feelings and thoughts I’m capable of, and how developed
I am!” I thought at moments, mentally addressing the sofa where my
enemies were sitting. But my enemies behaved as if I were not even
in the room. Once, once only, they turned to me – namely, when
Zverkov began talking about Shakespeare, and I suddenly guﬀawed
contemptuously. I snorted so aﬀectedly and nastily that they all broke
oﬀthe conversation at once and silently watched me for about two
minutes, seriously, without laughing, as I paced along the wall from
table to stove and paid no attention to them. But nothing came of it;
they did not start talking to me, and after two minutes dropped me
again. It struck eleven.
”Gentlemen,” cried Zverkov, rising from the sofa, ”now let us all

Notes from Underground
71
go there.”
”Right, right!” the others began to say.
I turned sharply to Zverkov. I was so worn out, so broken, that I
had to ﬁnish it even if it killed me! I was in a fever; my hair, wet with
sweat, stuck to my forehead and temples.
”Zverkov! I ask your forgiveness,” I said, abruptly and resolutely,
”yours too, Ferﬁchkin, and everyone’s, everyone’s, I’ve oﬀended every-
one!”
”Aha! So dueling’s not your sport!” Ferﬁchkin hissed venomously.
A sharp pain went through my heart.
”No, I’m not afraid of a duel, Ferﬁchkin! I’m ready to ﬁght you
tomorrow, even after a reconciliation. I even insist on it, and you
cannot refuse me. I want to prove to you that I’m not afraid of a duel.
You’ll have the ﬁrst shot, and I’ll shoot into the air.”
”He’s indulging himself,” remarked Simonov.
”Downright crackbrained!” echoed Trudolyubov.
”Let us pass, why’re you standing in the way! … What do you
want?” Zverkov responded contemptuously. Their faces were red;
their eyes were shiny: they had drunk a lot.
”I ask your friendship, Zverkov, I oﬀended you, but …”
”Y-y-you? Oﬀended m-m-me? I’ll have you know, my dear sir,
that you could never under any circumstances oﬀend me!”
”That’s enough out of you. Step aside!” Trudolyubov clinched.
Lets go.
”Olympia’s mine, gentlemen, it’s agreed!” cried Zverkov.
”No objections! No objections!” they answered, laughing.
I stood there spat upon. The bunch noisily left the room. Tru-
dolyubov struck up some stupid song. Simonov stayed behind for a
tiny moment to tip the waiters. I suddenly went over to him.
”Simonov! Give me six roubles!” I said, resolutely and desper-
ately.
He looked at me in extreme astonishment, his eyes somehow dull.
He, too, was drunk.
”You want to go there with us, too?”
”Yes!”

72
Apropos of the Wet Snow
”I have no money!” he snapped, grinned scornfully, and started
out of the room.
I seized him by his overcoat. It was a nightmare.
”Simonov! I saw you had money, why do you refuse me? Am I a
scoundrel? Beware of refusing me: if you knew, if you knew why I’m
asking! Everything depends on it, my whole future, all my plans …”
Simonov took out the money and almost ﬂung it at me.
”Take it, if you’re so shameless!” he said pitilessly, and ran to catch
up with them.
I remained alone for a moment. Disorder, leftovers, a broken
wine glass on the ﬂoor, spilt wine, cigarette butts, drunkenness and
delirium in my head, tormenting anguish in my heart, and, ﬁnally,
the servant, who had seen everything and heard everything, and kept
peeking curiously into my eyes.
”There!” I cried out.”Either they’ll all fall on their knees, embrace
my legs, and beg for my friendship, or … or I’ll slap Zverkov’s face!”
V
HERE IT is, here it is at last, the encounter with reality,” I muttered,
rushing headlong down the stairs.”This is no longer the Pope leaving
Rome and going to Brazil; this is no longer a ball on Lake Como!”
”What a scoundrel you are,” raced through my head, ”to laugh at
that now!”
”What of it!” I cried, answering myself.”All is lost now!”
Their trail was already cold; but no matter: I knew where they
had gone.
By the porch stood a lonely jack, a night coachman, in a home-
spun coat all dusted with the still-falling wet and as if warm snow.
It was steamy and stuﬀy. His shaggy little piebald nag was also all
dusted with snow, and was coughing – I very much remember that. I
rushed to the bast-covered sled; but as I raised my foot to get in, the
recollection of the way Simonov had just given me the six roubles cut
me down, and I dropped into the sled like a sack.

Notes from Underground
73
”No! Much must be done to redeem it all!” I cried out, ”but I
will redeem it, or perish on the spot this very night! Drive!”
We set oﬀ. A whole whirlwind was spinning in my head.
”Beg for my friendship on their knees – that they won’t do. It’s a
mirage, a vulgar mirage, revolting, romantic, and fantastic; another
ball on Lake Como. And therefore I must slap Zverkov’s face! It’s my
duty. And so, it’s decided; I’m ﬂying now to slap his face.”
”Faster!”
The jack started snapping the reins.
”I’ll do it as soon as I walk in. Ought I to say a few words ﬁrst, as
a preface to the slap? No! I’ll just walk in and slap him. They’ll all be
sitting in the drawing room, and he’ll be on the sofa with Olympia.
Cursed Olympia! She laughed at my face once and refused me. I’ll
pull Olympia by the hair, and Zverkov by the ears! No, better by
one ear, and by that ear I’ll lead him around the whole room. They’ll
probably all start beating me and kick me out. It’s even certain. Let
them! Still, I slapped’ him ﬁrst: it was my initiative; and by the code
of honor – that’s everything; he’s branded now, and no beating can
wash away that slap, but only a duel. He’ll have to ﬁght. Yes, and
let them beat me now. Let them, ignoble as they are! Trudolyubov
especially will do the beating – he’s so strong; Ferﬁchkin will fasten
on from the side, and certainly grab my hair, that’s sure. But let them,
let them! I’m ready for it. Their sheep’s noddles will ﬁnally be forced
to grasp the tragic in it all! As they’re dragging me to the door I’ll cry
out to them that in fact they’re not worth my little ﬁnger.”
”Faster, coachman, faster!” I shouted to the jack. He even jumped
and swung his whip. For I shouted quite wildly.
”We’ll ﬁght at dawn, that’s settled. It’s all over with the depart-
ment. Ferﬁchkin said depotment earlier instead of department. But
where to get the pistols? Nonsense! I’ll take an advance on my salary
and buy them. And the powder, and the bullets? That’s the second’s
aﬀair. But how will I manage it all before dawn? And where will I ﬁnd
a second? I have no acquaintances … Nonsense!” I cried, whirling
myself up even more, ”nonsense! The ﬁrst passer-by I speak to in the
street is duty-bound to be my second, just like pulling a drowning man
from the water. The most eccentric situations must be allowed for.

74
Apropos of the Wet Snow
Were I to ask even the director himself to be my second tomorrow,
he, too, would have to agree out of knightly feelings alone, and keep
the secret! Anton Antonych …”
The thing was that at the same moment I could see, more clearly
and vividly than anyone else in the entire world, the whole, most
odious absurdity of my suppositions, and the whole other side of the
coin, but . .
”Faster, coachman, faster, you rogue!”
”Eh, master!” said the backbone of the nation.
I suddenly felt cold all over.
”And wouldn’t it be better … better … to go straight home now?
Oh, my God! Why, why did I invite myself to this dinner yesterday!
But no, impossible! And that three-hour stroll from table to stove?
No, they, they and no one else, must pay me for that stroll! They must
wash away that dishonor!”
”Faster!”
”Andwhatiftheytakemetothepolice? Wouldtheydare? They’d
be afraid of a scandal. And what if Zverkov should refuse the duel
out of contempt? That’s even certain; but then I’ll prove to them …
Then I’ll rush to the posting-house as he’s leaving tomorrow, I’ll grab
him by the leg, I’ll tear his overcoat oﬀas he’s getting into the coach.
I’ll fasten my teeth on his hand, I’ll bite him. ’See, all of you, what a
desperate man can be driven to!’ Let him beat me on the head, and
the rest of them from behind. I’ll cry out to all the public: ’See, here’s
a young pup going oﬀto charm the Circassian girls with my spit on
his face!’
”After that, of course, everything’s over! The department has
vanished from the face of the earth. I’ll be seized, I’ll be taken to
court, I’ll be thrown out of work, put in prison, sent to Siberia, exiled.
Who cares! Fifteen years later I’ll drag myself after him, in rags, a
beggar, when I’m let out of prison. I’ll ﬁnd him somewhere in a
provincial capital. He’ll be married and happy. He’ll have a grown-up
daughter … I’ll say: ’Look, monster, look at my sunken cheeks and
my rags! I lost everything – career, happiness, art, science, a beloved
woman – and all because of you. Here are the pistols. I’ve come to

Notes from Underground
75
discharge my pistol, and … and I forgive you.’ Here I’ll ﬁre into the
air, and — no more will be heard of me …”
I even began to weep, though I knew perfectly well at the same
moment that all this came from Silvio and from Lermontov’s Mas-
querade.37 And suddenly I felt terribly ashamed, so ashamed that
I stopped the horse, got out of the sled, and stood in the snow in
the middle of the street. The jack watched me with amazement and
sighed.
What was to be done? To go there was impossible – the result
would be nonsense; to leave things as they were was also impossi-
ble, because the result would then be …”Lord! How can I leave it!
After such oﬀenses! No!” I exclaimed, rushing back to the sled, ”it’s
predestined, it’s fate! Drive on, drive on – there!”
And in my impatience I hit the coachman in the neck with my
ﬁst.
”What’s with you? Why’re you punching?” the little peasant
cried, lashing the nag, however, so that she started kicking with her
hind legs.
Wet snow was falling in thick ﬂakes; I uncovered myself, I didn’t
care about it. I forgot everything else, because I had ﬁnally resolved
on the slap and felt with horror that it would happen without fail
now, presently, and that no power could stop it. Desolate street-lamps
ﬂashed sullenly in the snowy haze, like torches at a funeral. Snow got
under my overcoat, my jacket, my necktie, and melted there; I didn’t
cover myself; all was lost in any case! We drove up at last. I jumped
out, almost unconscious, ran up the steps, and began knocking at
the door with my hands and feet. My legs especially were growing
weak, at the knees. The door was opened somehow quickly; as if
they knew I was coming. (Indeed, Simonov had forewarned them
that there might be one more, and they had to be forewarned there
and generally to take precautions. This was one of those ”fashion
shops” of the time, which have long since been done away with by the
police. During the day it was actually a shop; and in the evening those
who had references could come and visit.) I walked with quick steps
through the dark store into the familiar drawing room, where only
one candle was burning, and stopped in perplexity: no one was there.

76
Apropos of the Wet Snow
”Where are they?” I asked someone.
But, of course, they had already had time to disperse …
In front of me stood a person with a stupid smile, the hostess
herself, who knew me slightly. A moment later the door opened, and
another person came in.
Paying no attention to anything, I was pacing the room and, I
think, talking to myself. It was as if I had been saved from death, and
I joyfully sensed it with my whole being: for I would have slapped
him, I would certainly, certainly have slapped him! But now they’re
not here and … everything’s vanished, everything’s changed! … I kept
looking over my shoulder. I still could not grasp it. Mechanically, I
glanced at the girl who had come in: before me ﬂashed a fresh, young,
somewhat pale face, with straight dark eyebrows and serious, as if
somewhat astonished, eyes. I liked it at once; I would have hated
her if she’d been smiling. I began to study her more attentively and
as if with eﬀort: my thoughts were not all collected yet. There was
something simple-hearted and kind in that face, yet somehow serious
to the point of strangeness. I was certain that it was a disadvantage to
her there, and that none of those fools had noticed her. However, she
could not have been called a beauty, though she was tall, strong, well
built. She was dressed extremely simply. Something nasty stung me; I
went straight up to her …
By chance I looked in a mirror. My agitated face seemed to me
repulsiveintheextreme: pale, wicked, mean, withdisheveledhair.”Let
it be; I’m glad of it,” I thought, ”I’m precisely glad that I’ll seem
repulsive to her; I like it …”
VI
… SOMEWHERE BEHIND a partition, as if under some strong
pressure, as if someone were strangling it, a clock wheezed.
After an unnaturally prolonged wheeze, there followed a thin,
vile, and somehow unexpectedly rapid chiming – as if someone had
suddenly jumped forward. It struck two. I came to my senses, though

Notes from Underground
77
I had not been asleep, but only lying there half-oblivious.
Theroom–narrow,small,andlow,encumberedbyahugewardrobe,
and littered with cartons, rags, and all sorts of castoﬀclothing – was
almost totally dark. The candle-butt burning on the table at the other
end of the room was about to go out, barely ﬂickering every now and
then. In a few moments it would be quite dark.
It did not take me long to recover myself; everything came back
to me at once, without eﬀort, instantly, as if it had just been lying
in wait to pounce on me again. And even in my oblivion there had
still constantly remained some point, as it were, in my memory that
simply refused to be forgotten, around which my drowsy reveries
turned heavily. Yet it was strange: everything that had happened to
me that day seemed to me now, on awakening, to have happened long,
long ago, as if I had long, long ago outlived it all.
There were fumes in my head. Something was as if hovering over
me, brushing against me, agitating and troubling me. Anguish and
bile were again boiling up in me and seeking a way out. Suddenly I
saw two open eyes beside me, peering at me curiously and obstinately.
Their expression was coldly indiﬀerent, sullen, as if utterly alien; it
gave one a heavy feeling.
A sullen thought was born in my brain and passed through my
whole body like some vile sensation, similar to what one feels on
entering an underground cellar, damp and musty. It was somehow
unnatural that these two eyes had only decided precisely now to begin
peering at me. It also occurred to me that in the course of two hours I
had not exchanged a single word with this being and had not consid-
ered it at all necessary; I had even liked it for some reason. But now,
all of a sudden, there appeared before me the absurd, loathsomely
spiderish notion of debauchery, which, without love, crudely and
shamelessly begins straight oﬀwith that which is the crown of true
love. We looked at each other like that for a long time, but she did
not lower her eyes before mine, nor did she change their expression,
and in the end, for some reason, this made me feel eerie.
”What’s your name?” I asked curtly, so as to put a quick end to it.
”Liza,” she replied, almost in a whisper, but somehow quite un-
pleasantly, and looked away.

78
Apropos of the Wet Snow
I paused.
”The weather today … the snow … nasty!” I said, almost to myself,
wearily putting my hand behind my head and looking at the ceiling.
She did not reply. The whole thing was hideous.
”Do you come from around here?” I asked after a minute, almost
exasperated, turning my head slightly towards her.
”No.”
”Where, then?”
”From Riga,” she said reluctantly.
”German?”
”Russian.”
”Been here long?”
”Where?”
”In this house.”
”Two weeks.” She spoke more and more curtly. The candle went
out altogether; I could no longer make out her face.
”Do you have a father and mother?”
”Yes … no … I do.”
”Where are they?”
”There … in Riga.”
”What are they?”
”Just …”
”Just what? What are they, socially?”
”Tradespeople.”
”You were living with them?”
”Yes.”
”How old are you?”
”Twenty.”
”Why did you leave them?”
”Just …”
This ”just” meant: let me alone, this is sickening. We fell silent.
God knows why I wouldn’t leave. I myself felt more and more
sickened and anguished. Images of the whole past day began to pass
confusedly through my memory, somehow of themselves, without
my will. I suddenly recalled a scene I had witnessed that morning in
the street, as I was trotting along, preoccupied, to work.

Notes from Underground
79
”They were carrying a coﬃn out today and almost dropped it,”
I suddenly said aloud, not at all wishing to start a conversation, but
just so, almost accidentally.
”A coﬃn?”
”Yes, in the Haymarket; they were carrying it out of a basement.”
”Out of a basement?”
”Not a basement, but the basement ﬂoor … you know … down un-
der … from a bad house … There was such ﬁlth all around … Eggshells,
trash … stink … it was vile.”
Silence.
”A bad day for a burial!” I began again, just not to be silent.
”Why bad?”
”Snow, slush …” (I yawned.)
”Makes no diﬀerence,” she said suddenly, after some silence.
”No, it’s nasty …” (I yawned again.) ”The gravediggers must have
been swearing because the snow was making it wet. And there must
have been water in the grave.”
”Why water in the grave?” she asked with a certain curiosity,
but speaking even more rudely and curtly than before. Something
suddenly began egging me on.
”There’d be water in the bottom for sure, about half a foot. Here
in the Volkovo you can never dig a dry grave.”
”Why not?”
”Why not? Such a watery place. It’s swamp all around here. They
just get put down in the water. I’ve seen it myself … many times …”
(I had never once seen it, and had never been in the Volkovo
cemetery, but had only heard people talk.)
”It makes no diﬀerence to you how you die?”
”But why should I die?” she answered, as if defending herself.
”You’ll die someday, and just the same way as that one today. She
was also … a girl … She died of consumption.”
”A jill would have died in the hospital …” (She already knows
about that, I thought, and she said jill, not girl.)
”She owed money to the madam,” I objected, egged on more and
more by the argument, ”and worked for her almost to the end, even
though she had consumption. The cabbies around there were talking

80
Apropos of the Wet Snow
with the soldiers and told them about it. Probably her old acquain-
tances. They were laughing. They wanted to go and commemorate
her in a pot-house.” (Here, too, I was laying it on thick.)
Silence, deep silence. She did not even stir.
”So it’s better to die in a hospital, is it?”
”What’s the diﬀerence … Anyway, who says I’m going to die?”
she added irritably.
”If not now, then later?”
”Well, and later …”
”That’s easy to say! You’re young now, good-looking, fresh – so
you’re worth the price. But after a year of this life you won’t be the
same, you’ll fade.”
”In a year?”
”At any rate, in a year you’ll be worth less,” I went on, gloat-
ingly.”So you’ll go from here to somewhere lower, another house.
A year later – to a third house, always lower and lower, and in about
seven years you’ll reach the Haymarket and the basement. That’s still
not so bad. Worse luck will be if on top of that some sickness comes
along, say, some weakness of the chest … or you catch cold, or some-
thing. Sickness doesn’t go away easily in such a life. Once it gets into
you, it may not get out. And so you’ll die.”
”Well, so I’ll die,” she answered, very spitefully now, and stirred
quickly.
”Still, it’s a pity.”
”For who?”
”A pity about life.”
Silence.
”Did you have a ﬁance? Eh?”
”What’s it to you!”
”But I’m not questioning you. It’s nothing to me. Why get angry?
Of course, you may have had your own troubles. What’s that to me?
It’s just a pity.”
”For who?” ”For you.”
”Don’t bother …” she whispered, barely audibly, and stirred again.
This immediately fueled my anger even more. What! I was trying
to be so gentle, and she …

Notes from Underground
81
”But what do you think? Is it a good path you’re on, eh?”
”I don’t think anything.”
”And that’s what’s bad, that you don’t think. Wake up while you
have time. And you do have time. You’re still young, good-looking;
you could ﬁnd love, marry, be happy …”
”Not all the married ones are happy,” she snapped, in the same
rude patter.
”Not all, of course – but even so it’s much better than here. A
whole lot better. And with love one can live even without happiness.
Life is good even in sorrow, it’s good to live in the world, no matter
how. And what is there here except … stench. Phew!”
I turned to her with loathing; I was no longer reasoning coldly. I
myself began to feel what I was saying, and became excited. I already
thirsted to expound my cherished ”little ideas,” lived out in my corner.
Something in me suddenly lit up, some goal ”appeared.”
”Never mind my being here, I’m no example for you. Maybe I’m
even worse than you. Anyway, I was drunk when I stopped here,” I
still hastened to justify myself.”Besides, a man is no sort of example
for a woman. It’s a diﬀerent thing; I may dirty and befoul myself, but
all the same I’m nobody’s slave; I’m here, then I’m gone, and that’s all.
I’ve shaken it oﬀ, and it’s no longer me. But let’s admit that you’re a
slave from the ﬁrst beginning. Yes, a slave! You give up everything, all
your will. Later you may want to break these chains, but no: they’ll
ensnare you more and more strongly. That’s how this cursed chain is. I
know it. I won’t even speak about other things, you perhaps wouldn’t
understand me, but just tell me: no doubt you’re already in debt to
the madam? So, you see!” I added, though she did not answer me,
but only listened silently, with her whole being; ”there’s a chain for
you! Now you’ll never get it paid oﬀ. That’s how they do it. The same
as selling your soul to the devil …
… Besides, I … how do you know, maybe I’m just as unfortunate
as you are, and so I get into the muck on purpose, from misery. People
do drink from grief: well, so I’m here – from grief. Now tell me,
where’s the good in it: here you and I … came together … tonight, and
we didn’t say a word to each other all the while, and only afterwards
you started peering at me like a wild thing, and I at you. Is that any

82
Apropos of the Wet Snow
way to love? Is that any way for two human beings to come together?
It’s simply an outrage, that’s what!”
”Yes!” she agreed, abruptly and hastily. I was even surprised by
the hastiness of this ”yes.” So perhaps the same thought was wandering
through her mind as she was peering at me just now? So she, too, is
already capable of certain thoughts? …”Devil take it, that’s curious,
it’s – akin” I reﬂected, almost rubbing my hands.”No, how can I fail
to get the better of such a young soul? …”
It was the game that fascinated me most of all.
She turned her head closer to me and, it seemed to me in the
darkness, propped it with her hand. Perhaps she was peering at me.
How sorry I was that I couldn’t make out her eyes. I heard her deep
breathing.
”Why did you come here?” I began, now with a sense of power.
”I just …”
”And how good it would be to be living in your father’s house!
Warm, free; your own nest.”
”And what if it’s worse than that?”
A thought ﬂashed in me: ”I must ﬁnd the right tone; sentimen-
tality may not get me far.”
However, it merely ﬂashed. I swear she really did interest me.
Besides, I was somehow unnerved and susceptible. And knavery goes
so easily with feeling.
”Who can say!” I hastened to reply.”All sorts of things happen.
Now, I’m sure someone wronged you, and it’s rather they who are
guilty before you than you before them. I know nothing of your story,
but a girl of your sort certainly wouldn’t come here of her own liking
…”
”What sort of girl am I?” she whispered, barely audibly; but I
heard it.
”Devil take it,” I thought, ”I’m ﬂattering her. This is vile. Or
maybe it’s good …” She was silent.
”You see, Liza – I’ll speak about myself! If I’d had a family in my
childhood, I wouldn’t be the same as I am now. I often think about
it. No matter how bad things are in a family, still it’s your father and
mother, not enemies, not strangers. At least once a year they’ll show

Notes from Underground
83
love for you. Still you know you belong there. I grew up without a
family: that must be why I turned out this way … unfeeling.”
I bided my time again.
”Maybe she just doesn’t understand,” I thought, ”and anyway it’s
ridiculous – this moralizing.”
”If I were a father and had a daughter, I think I’d love my daugh-
ter more than my sons, really,” I began obliquely, as if talking about
something else, to divert her. I confess I was blushing.
”Why is that?” she asked.
Ah, so she’s listening!
”I just would; I don’t know, Liza. You see: I knew a father who
was a stern, severe man, but he was forever on his knees before his
daughter, kept kissing her hands and feet, couldn’t have enough of
admiring her, really. She’d be dancing at a party, and he’d stand for
ﬁve hours in the same spot, unable to take his eyes oﬀher. He was
mad about her; I can understand that. She’d get tired at night and go
to sleep, and he would wake up and start kissing her and making the
sign of the cross over her while she slept. He himself went around in
a greasy jacket, was niggardly with everybody, but for her he’d have
spent his last kopeck, he kept giving her rich presents, and what a
joy it was for him if she liked the present. A father always loves his
daughters more than a mother does. It’s a delight for some girls to live
at home! And I don’t think I’d even give my daughter in marriage.”
”Why not?” she said, with a slight chuckle.
”I’d be jealous, by God. How could she kiss another man? Or
love a stranger more than her father? It’s even painful to imagine
it. Of course, that’s all nonsense; of course, everyone will ﬁnally see
reason. But I think, before giving her away, I’d wear myself out just
withworry: I’drejectonesuitorafteranother. ButintheendI’dmarry
her to the one she herself loved. To a father, the man his daughter falls
in love with herself always seems the worst. That’s how it is. Much
harm is done in families because of it.”
”Some are glad to sell their daughter, and not give her away hon-
orably,” she suddenly said.
Ah! That’s what it is!

84
Apropos of the Wet Snow
”That happens, Liza, in those cursed families where there is nei-
ther God nor love,” I picked up heatedly, ”and where there is no love,
there is no reason. Such families do exist, it’s true, but I’m not talking
about them. Evidently you saw no goodness in your family, since you
talk that way. You’re one of the truly unfortunate ones. Hm … It all
comes mainly from poverty.”
”And is it any better with the masters? Honest people have good
lives even in poverty.”
”Hm … yes. Perhaps. Then there’s this, Liza: man only likes
counting his grief, he doesn’t count his happiness. But if he were
to count properly, he’d see that there’s enough of both lots for him.
Well, and what if everything goes right in the family, God blesses it,
your husband turns out to be a good man, who loves you, pampers
you, never leaves your side! It’s good in this family! Oftentimes
even half mixed with grief it’s still good; and where is there no grief?
Perhaps, once you get married, you’ll find out for yourself. But take just
the beginning, after you’ve married someone you love: there’s such
happiness at times, so much happiness! I mean, day in and day out. In
the beginning, even quarrels with a husband end well. Some women,
the more they love, the more they pick quarrels with their husbands.
It’s true; I knew such a woman: ’You see,’ she all but said, ’I love you
very much, and torment you out of love, and you ought to feel it.’
Do you know that one can deliberately torment a person out of love?
Women, mainly. And she thinks to herself: ’But afterwards I’ll love
him so much for it, I’ll caress him so, that it’s no sin to torment him
a bit now.’ And at home everyone rejoices over you, and it’s good,
and cheery, and peaceful, and honest … Then, too, there’s the jealous
sort. He goes out somewhere – I knew one like this – she can’t help
herself, she jumps out at night and runs on the sly to see: is he there,
is he in that house, is he with that woman? Now, that is bad. And she
knows herself that it’s bad, and her heart is sinking, and she blames
herself, and yet she loves him; it’s all from love. And how good to
make peace after a quarrel, to own up to him, or to forgive! And how
good, how good they both suddenly feel – as if they were meeting
anew, getting married anew, beginning to love anew. And no one, no
one ought to know what goes on between a husband and wife if they

Notes from Underground
85
love each other. And whatever quarrel they may have – they shouldn’t
call even their mother to be their judge or hear them tell about each
other. They are their own judges. Love – is God’s mystery, and should
be hidden from all other eyes, whatever happens. It’s holier that way,
and better. They respect each other more, and so much is founded on
respect. And if there was love once, if they were married out of love,
why should love pass? Can’t it be sustained? It rarely happens that
it can’t be. Well, and if the husband proves to be a kind and honest
man, how can love pass? The ﬁrst married love will pass, true, but
then an even better love will come. Then their souls will grow close;
they’ll decide all their doings together; they’ll have no secrets from
each other. And when children arrive, then all of it, even the hardest
times, will look like happiness; one need only love and have courage.
Now even work brings joy, now even if you must occasionally deny
yourself bread for the children’s sake, still there is joy. For they will
love you for it later; so you’re laying aside for yourself. The children
are growing – you feel you’re an example to them, a support for them;
that even when you die, they’ll bear your thoughts and feelings upon
themselves as they received them from you, they’ll take on your image
and likeness.38 So it is a great duty. How can a father and mother fail
to grow closer? People say it’s hard having children. Who says so? It’s
a heavenly happiness! Do you love little children, Liza? I love them
terribly. You know – there’s this rosy little boy sucking at your breast,
now what husband’s heart could turn against his wife, looking at her
sitting with his child! The baby is rosy, plump, pampered, sprawling;
his little hands and feet are pudgy; his nails are so clean and small, so
small it’s funny to see; his eyes seem to understand everything already.
He’s sucking and clutching at your breast with his little hand, playing.
The father comes up – he’ll tear himself away from the breast, bend
back, look at his father, laughing – as if it really were God knows how
funny – and then again, again start sucking. Or else he’ll up and bite
his mother’s breast, if he’s already cutting teeth, while giving her a
sidelong look: ’See how I bit you!’ Isn’t this the whole of happiness,
when they’re all three together, husband, wife, and child? A lot can
be forgiven for those moments. No, Liza, one must ﬁrst learn how to
live, and only then accuse others!”

86
Apropos of the Wet Snow
”With pictures,” I thought to myself, ”I’ll get you with these
pictures!” – though, byGod, I hadspokenwithfeeling– andsuddenly
blushed.”What if she suddenly bursts out laughing, what will I do
with myself then?” The idea infuriated me. I had indeed become
excited towards the end of my speech, and now my vanity somehow
suﬀered. The silence continued. I even wanted to nudge her.
”It’s like you …” she began suddenly, and stopped.
But I already understood everything: something diﬀerent was
trembling in her voice now, not sharp, not rude, not unyielding as
before, but something soft and bashful, so bashful that I myself felt
abashed, felt guilty before her.
”What?” I asked, with tender curiosity.
”But you …”
”What?”
”It’s as if you … as if it’s from a book,” she said, and again some-
thing like mockery suddenly sounded in her voice.
I was painfully twinged by this remark. It was not what I was
expecting.
I did not even understand that she was purposely assuming a
mask of mockery, that this is the usual last device of a bashful and
chaste-hearted person whose soul is being rudely and importunately
pried into, and who will not surrender till the last minute out of pride,
and is afraid of showing any feeling before you. I should have guessed
it from the very timidity with which she ventured, haltingly, upon her
mockery, before she ﬁnally brought herself to express it. But I did not
guess, and a wicked feeling took hold of me.”You just wait,” I thought.
VII
EH, COME NOW, Liza, what have books got to do with it, if I
myself feel vile for your sake. And not only for your sake. It all just
rose up in my soul … Can it be, can it be that you don’t ﬁnd it vile
here? No, habit evidently counts for a lot! Devil knows what habit
can’t make of a person. But can it be that you seriously think you’ll

Notes from Underground
87
never get old, that you’ll be forever good-looking, and they’ll keep
you here forever and ever? It’s foul enough even here, needless to say
… However, this is what I can tell you about that, I mean, about your
present life: granted you’re young, attractive, nice, with a soul, with
feelings; well, but do you know that when I came to my senses just
now, I immediately felt vile for being here with you! One has to be
drunk to end up here. But if you were in a diﬀerent place, living as
good people live, I might not just dangle after you, but simply fall in
love with you, and be glad if you merely glanced at me, let alone spoke.
I’d watch for you by the gate, I’d stay forever on my knees before you;
I’d look upon you as my ﬁancee, and regard it as an honor. I wouldn’t
dare even think anything impure about you. While here I know I just
have to whistle and, like it or not, you’ll go with me, and it’s no longer
I who ask your will, but you mine. The merest peasant hires himself
out to work – yet his bondage isn’t total; besides, he knows there’s
a term to it. But where is your term? Just think: what is it you’re
giving up here? What are you putting in bondage? It’s your soul, your
soul, over which you have no power, that you put in bondage along
with your body! You give your love to be profaned by any drunkard!
Love! – but this is everything, it’s a diamond, a maiden’s treasure,
this love! To deserve this love a man would be ready to lay down his
soul, to face death. And what is the value of your love now? You’re
all bought, bought outright, and why try to obtain love if everything
is possible without love? There’s no worse oﬀense for a girl, do you
understand that? Now, I’ve heard that they humor you, fools that you
are – they allow you to have lovers here. That’s only an indulgence,
only a deception, only a mockery of you, yet you believe it. What,
does he really love you, this lover? I don’t believe it. How can he love
you, when he knows that you’ll be called away from him any moment.
He’s a rotter in that case! Does he have even a drop of respect for
you? What do you have in common with him? He’s laughing at you
while he steals from you – that’s what his love amounts to! You can
be thankful if he doesn’t beat you. But maybe he does. Ask yours, if
you have one: will he marry you? He’ll burst out laughing in your
face, if he doesn’t spit, or give you a beating – and meanwhile his total
worth is maybe two broken kopecks. And for the sake of what, one

88
Apropos of the Wet Snow
wonders, have you ruined your life here? For having coﬀee to drink,
and being well fed? But what do they feed you for? Another woman,
an honest one, would choke on it, because she’d know what they’re
feeding her for. You’re in debt here, so you’ll stay in debt, and you’ll be
in debt till the ﬁnal end, till the time when the clients start spurning
you. And that will come soon, don’t count on your youth. It all ﬂies
by posthaste here. So they’ll kick you out. And not simply kick you
out, but ﬁrst start picking on you long beforehand, reproaching you,
abusing you – as if it wasn’t you who gave her your health, destroyed
your youth and soul for her in vain, but as if it was you who ruined her,
beggared her, robbed her. And don’t look for any support: the other
girls will also attack you, to get in good with her, because everyone
here is a slave and has long since lost all conscience and compassion.
They’re sunk in meanness, and no abuse in the world is more foul,
mean, or oﬀensive than that. And you’ll lay down everything here,
everything without stint – health, and youth, and beauty, and hopes
– and at twenty-two you’ll look like you’re thirty-ﬁve, and you’ll be
lucky if you’re not sick, pray to God for that. You must be thinking
now that it’s a picnic and not work at all! But there is not and never
has been any harder or harsher work in the world than this. One
would think your heart alone would simply pour itself out in tears.
And you won’t dare say a word, not half a word, when they throw
you out of here; you’ll go as if you were the one to blame. You’ll go
to another place, then to a third, then somewhere else, and ﬁnally
you’ll reach the Haymarket. And there they’ll give you the routine
beating; it’s a courtesy of the place; there a client can’t even be nice
to a girl without beating her ﬁrst. You don’t believe it’s so disgusting
there? Go and look someday, maybe you’ll see with your own eyes.
I once saw a girl there, alone, by the door, on New Year’s day. Her
own people had kicked her out for the fun of it, to cool her oﬀa bit,
because she was howling too much, and locked the door behind her.
At nine o’clock in the morning she was already completely drunk,
disheveled, half-naked, all beaten up. Her face was powdered white,
and her eyes were black-and-blue; blood was ﬂowing from her nose
and teeth: some coachman had just given her a pasting. She sat down
on the stone stairs, holding some kind of salted ﬁsh; she was howling

Notes from Underground
89
and wailing something about her ’miserble lot,’ beating her ﬁsh against
the steps. And coachmen and drunken soldiers crowded around the
steps, teasing her. You don’t believe you’ll be the same? I wouldn’t
want to believe it either, but how do you know, maybe this same girl,
the one with the salted ﬁsh, came here from somewhere ten or, say,
eight years ago, fresh as a little cherub, innocent, pure, knowing no
evil, and blushing at every word. Maybe she was just like you – proud,
touchy, diﬀerent from the rest; she had the look of a princess, and
knew that complete happiness awaited the one who would love her,
and whom she would love. See where it ended up? And what if at the
same moment as she sat there, drunk and disheveled, beating her ﬁsh
on the dirty steps, what if at that moment she recalled all her former
pure years in her father’s house, when she was still going to school, and
the neighbor’s son used to watch for her on the way, assured her he
would love her all his life, that he would make his fate hers, and they
made a vow together to love each other forever and to be married as
soon as they got bigger! No, Liza, it will be lucky, lucky for you if you
die quickly of consumption, someplace in a corner, in a basement, like
that girl. In a hospital, you say? If they take you there, ﬁne, but what
if your madam still needs you? Consumption is that sort of illness; it’s
not a fever. A person goes on hoping till the last moment, saying he’s
well. It’s just self-indulgence. But there’s proﬁt in it for the madam.
Don’t worry, it’s true; you’ve sold your soul, you owe money besides,
so you don’t dare make a peep. And when you’re dying, they’ll all
abandon you, they’ll all turn away from you – because what good are
you then? They’ll even reproach you for uselessly taking up space and
not dying quickly enough. You’ll have a hard time getting a drink of
water, they’ll give it to you with a curse: ’Hurry up and croak, you
slut; you’re moaning, people can’t sleep, the clients are disgusted.’ It’s
true; I’ve overheard such words myself. They’ll shove you, on the
point of croaking, into the stinkingest corner of the basement – dark,
damp; what will you go over in your mind then, lying there alone?
You’ll die – they’ll lay you out hurriedly, strangers’ hands, grumblingly,
impatiently – and no one will bless you, no one will sigh over you, all
they’ll think is how to get you oﬀtheir backs quickly. They’ll buy a
pine box, take you out as they did that poor girl today, and go to a

90
Apropos of the Wet Snow
pot-house to commemorate you. There’s slush, muck, wet snow in
the grave — they won’t go to any trouble over you. ’Lower her in,
Vanyukha; look at this ”miserable lot” going legs up even here – the
so-and-so. Shorten the ropes, you rascal.’ ’It’ll do as it is.’ ’What’ll
do? She’s lying on her side. You got a human being here, don’t you?
Well, that’ll do, ﬁll it in.’ They won’t even want to argue long because
of you. They’ll cover you up quickly with wet blue clay and go to the
pothouse … That’s the end of your memory on earth; other people’s
graves are visited by children, fathers, husbands, but at yours – not a
tear, not a sigh, not a prayer, and no one, no one in the whole world
will ever come to you; your name will disappear from the face of the
earth – as if you’d never existed, as if you’d never been born! Mud and
swamp, go ahead and knock on your coﬃn lid at night, when dead
men rise: ’Let me out, good people, to live in the world! I lived – but
saw nothing of life, my life was used up like an old rag; it got drunk
up in a pothouse on the Haymarket; let me out, good people, to live
in the world one more time!
I waxed pathetic, so much so that I myself was about to have
a spasm in my throat, when … suddenly I stopped, raised myself in
alarm, and, inclining my head fearfully, with pounding heart, began
to listen. I indeed had reason to be troubled.
For a long time already I’d sensed that I had turned her whole
soul over and broken her heart and the more convinced of it I was, the
more I wished to reach my goal quickly and as forcefully as possible. It
was the game, the game that fascinated me; not just the game, however
…
I knew I’d been speaking stiﬄy, aﬀectedly, even bookishly; in
short, I couldn’t speak any other way than ”as if from a book.” But
that didn’t trouble me; I knew, I sensed that I’d be understood, and
that this very bookishness might even help things along. But now,
having achieved my eﬀect, I suddenly turned coward. No, never, never
before had I witnessed such despair! She was lying prone, her face
buried deep in her pillow, which she embraced with both arms. Her
breast was bursting. Her whole young body was shuddering as in
convulsions. Suppressed sobs were straining, tearing her breast, and
would suddenly burst out in wails and cries. Then she’d cling to her

Notes from Underground
91
pillow even more: she did not want anyone there, not a living soul,
to learn of her torment and tears. She bit the pillow, she bit into her
hand till it bled (I saw it later), or, clutching her loosened braids, she
would go stiﬀwith eﬀort, holding her breath and clenching her teeth.
I started to say something to her, to beg her to calm down, but felt I
didn’t dare, and suddenly, all in a sort of fever myself, almost horriﬁed,
I rushed gropingly, in haphazard haste, to get myself ready to go. It
was dark: no matter how I tried, I couldn’t ﬁnish quickly. Suddenly
I touched a box of matches and a candlestick with a whole, unused
candle. As soon as light shone in the room, Liza suddenly rose, sat up,
and looked at me almost senselessly, with a somehow distorted face
and a half-crazed smile. I sat down next to her and took her hands;
she recovered herself, made a quick move as if to embrace me, but did
not dare, and quietly bowed her head before me.
”Liza, my friend, I shouldn’t have … forgive me,” I tried to begin,
butshesqueezedmyhandsinherﬁngerswithsuchforcethatIrealized
I was saying the wrong thing and stopped.
”Here’s my address, Liza, come to me.”
”I will …” she whispered resolutely, still without raising her head.
”And now I’ll go, good-bye … till then.”
I got up, she got up as well, and suddenly blushed all over, gave
a start, grabbed a shawl that was lying on a chair, and wrapped her
shoulders in it all the way to the chin. Having done so, she again
smiled somehow painfully, blushed, and glanced at me strangely. I
felt pained; I was in a hurry to leave, to eﬀace myself.
”Wait,” she said suddenly, already in the entryway and right at
the door, stopping me with a hand on my overcoat, and in a ﬂurry
she set down the candle and ran oﬀ– she must have remembered
something or wanted to bring something to show me. As she ran oﬀ,
she blushed all over, her eyes shone, a smile appeared on her lips –
what could it mean? Like it or nor, I had to wait; she came back in a
minute, her eyes as if apologizing for something. Generally, this was
no longer the same face, the same look as before – sullen, mistrustful,
and obstinate. Now her eyes were soft, pleading, and at the same time
trustful, tender, timid. Children look that way at someone they love
very much, when they’re asking for something. She had light brown

92
Apropos of the Wet Snow
eyes, beautiful eyes, alive, capable of reﬂecting both love and sullen
hatred.
Without explaining anything – as if, like some higher being, I
must know everything without explanations – she handed me a piece
of paper. Her whole face simply lit up at that moment with the most
naive, childlike triumph. I unfolded it. It was a letter to her from
some medical student or the like – a very grandiloquent, ﬂowery,
but extremely respectful declaration of love. I don’t remember the
expressions now, but I remember very well that through the high-
ﬂown style one caught glimpses of true feeling, which cannot be
feigned. When I ﬁnished reading, I met her ardent, curious, and
childishly impatient gaze on me. Her eyes were riveted to my face,
and she waited impatiently – what would I say? In a few words,
haphazardly, but somehow joyfully and as if proudly, she explained
to me that she had been at a dancing party somewhere, in a family
home, the home of some ”very, very nice people, family people, and
where they still know nothing, nothing at all,” because she’s still quite
new here and just … and hasn’t at all decided to stay yet, and will
certainly leave as soon as she’s paid her debt …”Well, and there was
this student, dancing and talking with her all evening, and it turned
out he had known her still in Riga, still as a child, they had played
together, only very long ago – and he knew her parents, but he knows
nothing, nothing, nothing about this and doesn’t even suspect! And
so, the next day after the dance (three days ago), he sent her this letter
through a girlfriend with whom she’d gone to the party … and … well,
that’s all.”
She lowered her ﬂashing eyes somehow shyly as she ﬁnished
telling me.
Poor little thing, she was keeping this student’s letter as a treasure,
andhadruntofetchheronlytreasure, notwishingmetoleavewithout
knowing that she, too, was loved honestly and sincerely, that she, too,
was spoken to respectfully. Most likely the letter was doomed simply
to lie in a box without consequences. But what matter; I’m sure she
would keep it all her life as a treasure, as her pride and justiﬁcation,
and now, at such a moment, she remembered the letter and brought it
out to take naive pride before me, to restore herself in my eyes, so that

Notes from Underground
93
I, too, should see, and I, too, should praise. I said nothing, pressed
her hand, and walked out. I wanted so much to leave … I went the
whole way on foot, in spite of the wet snow still falling in thick ﬂakes.
I was worn out, crushed, perplexed. But the truth was already shining
through my perplexity. The nasty truth!
VIII
IT TOOK ME a while, however, to consent to recognize this truth.
Having awakened in the morning after several hours of deep, leaden
sleep, and having come at once to a realization of the whole day yester-
day, I was even amazed at my yesterday’s sentimentality with Liza, at all
of ”yesterday’s horrors and pities.” ”Now there’s a real ﬁt of womanish
nerves, pah!” I decided.”And why on earth did I shove my address
at her? What if she comes? However, why not, let her come; it’s no
matter …” But, obviously, that was not the main and most important
thing now: I had to make haste and, whatever the cost, quickly save
my reputation in the eyes of Zverkov and Simonov. That was the main
thing. And I even quite forgot about Liza that morning, what with
all the bustle.
First of all, I had immediately to return yesterday’s debt to Si-
monov. I resolved on a desperate measure: borrowing a whole ﬁfteen
roubles from Anton Antonovich. As luck would have it, he was in the
most wonderful spirits that day, and handed me the money at once,
at my ﬁrst request. I was so glad that, as I signed the receipt, with a
sort of bravado, I casually told him that yesterday I had done ”a bit of
carousing with some friends at the Hotel de Paris; a farewell party for
a schoolmate, even, one might say, a childhood friend – a big carouser,
you know, a spoiled fellow – well, naturally, from a good family, a con-
siderable fortune, a brilliant career, witty, charming, intrigues with all
those ladies, you understand; we drank a ’half-dozen’ too many, and
…” And nothing to it; it was all spoken very lightly, easily, and smugly.
Having come home, I wrote at once to Simonov.
To this day I’m ﬁlled with admiration as I recall the truly gentle-

94
Apropos of the Wet Snow
manly, good-natured, frank tone of my letter. Adroitly, nobly, and,
above all, with not a word too many – I blamed myself for everything.
I excused myself, ”if I may still be permitted to excuse myself,” with
being quite unaccustomed to wine, and thus becoming drunk at the
ﬁrst glass, which I (supposedly) drank before them, while waiting for
them from ﬁve to six in the Hotel de Paris. I mainly begged pardon of
Simonov; and I asked him to convey my explanations to all the others,
especially Zverkov, whom, ”I recall as in a dream,” I seemed to have
insulted. I added that I would have gone to them all myself, but I had
a headache and, above all, was ashamed. I remained especially pleased
with the ”certain lightness,” even all but casual (though perfectly de-
cent), that suddenly reﬂected itself in my pen and at once gave them
to understand, better than any possible reasons, that I looked upon
”all that nastiness yesterday” quite independently; in no way, by no
means, was I killed on the spot, as you good sirs probably think, but
on the contrary I looked upon it as beﬁts a calmly self-respecting
gentleman.”The errors of youth are soon forgotten,” as they say.
”Andthatcertainmarquisianplayfulness,even?”Iadmired,reread-
ing the note.”And all because I’m a developed and educated man!
Others in my place wouldn’t know how to extricate themselves, and
here I’ve wriggled out of it and can go on carousing, and all because
I’m ’an educated and developed man of our times.’ Besides, maybe it
really did all come from the wine yesterday. Hm … well, no, not from
the wine. And I didn’t drink any vodka between ﬁve and six, while I
was waiting for them. I lied to Simonov; lied shamelessly; and even
now I’m not ashamed …
”Ah, spit on it, however! I’m out of it, that’s the main thing.”
I put six roubles into the letter, sealed it, and prevailed upon
Apollon to take it to Simonov. On learning that there was money
inside, Apollon became more respectful and agreed to go. Towards
evening I went out for a stroll. Myhead was still aching anddizzy from
yesterday. But the more evening advanced and the twilight thickened,
the more my impressions and, after them, my thoughts as well, kept
changing and tangling. Something within me, deep in my heart and
conscience, would not die, refused to die, and betrayed itself in a burn-
ing anguish. I loitered about mainly on the most crowded business

Notes from Underground
95
streets – Meshchanskaya, Sadovaya, around the Yusupov Garden. I
had always liked especially to stroll along those streets at twilight, pre-
cisely when the crowd thickens with all sorts of passers-by, merchants,
and tradesmen, their faces preoccupied to the point of anger, going
home from their daily work. I precisely liked this twopenny bustle,
this insolent prosiness. But now all this street jostling only irritated
me the more. I simply could not get hold of myself, could not ﬁnd
the loose ends. Something in my soul was rising, rising, ceaselessly,
painfully, and refused to be still. I returned home thoroughly upset.
Like as if some crime lay on my soul.
I was constantly tormented by the thought that Liza would come.
What I found strange was that, of all those memories from yesterday,
the memory of her tormented me somehow specially, somehow quite
separately. By evening I had already quite successfully forgotten all
the rest, brushed it aside, and I was still perfectly pleased with my
letter to Simonov. But with this I was somehow not so pleased. It
was like as if I were tormented over Liza alone.”What if she comes?” I
thought ceaselessly.”Well, no matter, let her come. Hm. The only bad
thing is that she’ll see, for example, how I live. Yesterday I showed
myself to her as such a … hero … and now, hm! It’s bad, however, that
I’ve gone so much to seed. Sheer poverty in the apartment. And I
dared go to dinner yesterday in such clothes! And this oilcloth sofa
of mine, with the stuﬃng hanging out of it! And this dressing gown
that doesn’t even cover me! Such tatters … And she’ll see all this; and
she’ll see Apollon. The brute is sure to insult her. He’ll pick on her
in order to be rude to me. And I, of course, as is my custom, will
turn coward, start mincing before her, covering myself with the skirts
of my dressing gown, start smiling, start lying. Ohh, vileness! And
that’s not even the chief vileness! There’s something chiefer in it, viler,
meaner! Yes, meaner! And again, again to put on that dishonorable,
lying mask! …”
Having arrived at this thought, I simply ﬂared up: ”Why dishon-
orable? What’s dishonorable? I spoke sincerely yesterday. I remember
there was also true feeling in me. I precisely wanted to evoke noble
feelings in her … if she cried a bit, that’s good, it’ll have a good eﬀect
…”

96
Apropos of the Wet Snow
But all the same I just could not calm down. That whole evening,
when I’d already returned home, when it was already past nine and
by my reckoning Liza simply could not come, I still kept imagining
her, and I recalled her, mostly, in one and the same position. Namely,
of all that had happened yesterday, I pictured one moment especially
vividly: it was when I lighted up the room with a match and saw her
pale, distorted face with its tormented eyes. And how pathetic, how
unnatural, how twisted her smile was at that moment! But I did not
know then that even after ﬁfteen years I would still be picturing Liza
precisely with the pathetic, twisted, needless smile she had at that
moment.
The next day I was again prepared to regard it all as nonsense,
frazzled nerves, and, above all – exaggeration. I was always aware of
this weak link in me, and at times was very afraid of it: ”I’m forever
exaggerating; that’s where I’m lame,” I repeated to myself at all hours.
But nevertheless, ”nevertheless, Liza may still come” – this was the
refrain with which all my reasonings at that time concluded. I worried
so much that I sometimes became furious.”She’ll come! She’s sure
to come!” I’d exclaim, running up and down my room.”If not today,
then tomorrow, but she’ll ﬁnd me! That’s the cursed romanticism
of all these pure hearts! Oh, the vileness, oh, the stupidity, oh, the
narrowness of these ’rotten, sentimental souls’! How can one not
understand, how indeed can one not understand …” But here I myself
would stop, and even in great confusion.
And it took so little, so little talk,” I thought in passing, ”such a
little idyll (an aﬀected idyll besides, a contrived, a bookish one), to
succeed in turning a whole human soul the way I wanted. There’s
virginity for you! There’s the freshness of the soil!”
At times the thought occurred to me of going to her myself, ”to
tell her everything” and prevail upon her not to come to me. But
here, at this thought, such spite rose up in me that I think I would
simply have squashed this ”cursed” Liza if she’d suddenly happened
to be there, insulted her, spat upon her, driven her out, struck her!
A day passed, however, then another, then a third – she did not
come, and I began to calm down. I especially took heart and let myself
go after nine o’clock, I sometimes even began to dream, and that quite

Notes from Underground
97
sweetly: ”I save Liza,” for example, ”precisely through her coming to
me, and my telling her … I develop her, educate her. I ﬁnally notice
that she loves me, loves me passionately. I pretend not to understand
(I don’t know, however, why I pretend; probably just for the beauty of
it). At last, all confused, beautiful, trembling and weeping, she throws
herself at my feet and says that I am her savior, and that she loves me
more than anything in the world. I am amazed, but … ’Liza,’ I say,
’can you really think I haven’t noticed your love? I saw everything,
I guessed, but I dared not presume ﬁrst upon your heart, because I
had inﬂuence over you and feared lest you, out of gratitude, might
deliberately make yourself return my love, might call up by force a
feeling that perhaps is not there, and I did not want that, because that
is … despotism … It is indelicate’” (well, in short, here I let my tongue
run away with me in some such European, George-Sandian, ineﬀably
noble reﬁnement … ).39 ”’But now, now – you are mine, you are my
creation, you are pure, beautiful, you are – my beautiful wife.’”
’And now, full mistress of the place,
Come bold and free into my house.’40
”And then we begin living happily ever after, go abroad, etc., etc.” In
short, I felt vile and would end by sticking my tongue out at myself.
”They won’t even let the ’slut’ come!” I thought. ”They don’t
seem to allow them out much, especially in the evening” (for some
reason it seemed certain to me that she must come in the evening,
and precisely at seven o’clock). ”Though she said she’s not completely
bound to them yet, she has some special privileges there; so – hm!
Devil take it, she’ll come, she’s sure to come!”
It was a good thing Apollon diverted me at that time with his
rudeness. Drove me out of all patience! He was my thorn, a scourge
visited upon me by Providence. He and I had been in constant al-
tercation for several years on end, and I hated him. My God, how I
hated him! I think I’ve never in my life hated anyone as I did him,
especially at certain moments. He was an elderly, imposing man, who
occupied himself part of the time with tailoring. I don’t know why,
but he despised me even beyond all measure and looked at me with
an insuﬀerable haughtiness. But then he looked at everyone with

98
Apropos of the Wet Snow
haughtiness. One glance at that pale-haired, slicked-down head, at
the quiﬀhe ﬂuﬀed up on his forehead and oiled with vegetable oil,
at that serious mouth forever pursed in a V – and you immediately
sensed before you a being who never doubted himself. He was in
the highest degree a pedant, and the most enormous pedant of any
I’ve ever met on earth; and this was accompanied by a vanity perhaps
beﬁtting only Alexander of Macedon. He was in love with his ev-
ery button, his every ﬁngernail – absolutely in love, and he looked
it! He treated me quite despotically, spoke extremely little with me,
and if he chanced to let his eyes rest on me, he did so with a ﬁrm,
majestically self-conﬁdent, and permanently mocking look, which
sometimes drove me to fury. He fulﬁlled his duties with such an air
as if he were bestowing the highest favor upon me. However, he did
almost exactly nothing for me, and did not even consider himself
obliged to do anything. There was no doubting that he considered
me the most complete fool in the whole world, and if he ”kept me
around,” it was solely because he could get his wages from me every
month. He agreed to ”do nothing” in my service for seven roubles a
month. Many sins will be forgiven me for him. It sometimes reached
such hatred that I’d be all but thrown into convulsions by his gait
alone. But I loathed his lisp especially. His tongue was a bit longer
than it should have been, or something like that, which caused him to
be forever lisping and sissing, and he was apparently terribly proud of
it, imagining that it lent him a great deal of dignity. He spoke softly,
measuredly, placing his hands behind his back and looking down. He
especially infuriated me when he’d start reading the Psalter behind
his partition. I endured many a battle on account of that reading. But
he liked terribly much to read in the evenings, in a soft, even voice,
chanting as over a dead body. Curiously, that’s how he ended up:
he now hires himself out to read the Psalter over the deceased, and
along with that he exterminates rats and makes shoe polish. But at
the time I was unable to throw him out, as though he had combined
chemically with my existence. Besides, he would not have agreed to
leave me for anything. It was impossible for me to live in chambres
garnies:41 my apartment was my mansion, my shell, my case, in which
I hid from all mankind, and Apollon, it seemed to me – devil knows

Notes from Underground
99
why – belonged to that apartment, and for a whole seven years I was
unable to throw him out.
To withhold his wages, for example, for as little as two or three
days, was impossible. He’d make such a to-do that I wouldn’t even
know where to hide. But in those days I was so embittered against ev-
eryone that I resolved, who knows why or what for, to punish Apollon
and not give him his wages for another two weeks. I had long been
intending to do this, for two years or so – solely to prove to him that
he dared not get so puﬀed up over me, and that if I wished I could
always not give him his wages. I decided not to tell him about it and
even to maintain a deliberate silence, in order to vanquish his pride
and make him be the ﬁrst to speak of his wages. Then I would take all
seven roubles from the drawer, to show him that I had them and had
deliberately set them aside, but that I ”did not, did not, simply did
not want to give him his wages, did not want to because that’s how
I wanted it, because such was ’my will as the master,’ because he was
irreverent, because he was a boor; but that if he asked reverently, per-
haps I would relent and pay him; otherwise he’d have to wait another
two weeks, wait three weeks, wait a whole month …”
But, angry though I was, the victory still went to him. I didn’t
even hold out for four days. He began with what he always began
with on such occasions – for there had already been such occasions,
or attempts (and, I will note, I knew it all beforehand, I knew his
mean tactics by heart) – that is, he usually began by ﬁxing me with an
extremely stern look, not taking it oﬀme for several minutes at a time,
following me with his eyes especially when I came in or was leaving
the house. If, for example, I held out and pretended not to notice
these looks, he would proceed, silently as ever, to further tortures.
Suddenly, for no reason at all, he would come softly and smoothly
into my room while I was pacing about or reading, stop by the door,
put one arm behind his back, thrust out one hip, and ﬁx me with
his eyes, no longer so much stern as altogether contemptuous. If I
suddenly asked him what he wanted, he would make no reply, and go
on staring at me point-blank for several seconds more; then, pressing
his lips together in some special way, with a signiﬁcant air, he would
turn slowly on his heel and suddenly go to his room. About two hours

100
Apropos of the Wet Snow
later he would suddenly emerge again, and again appear before me
in the same way. Sometimes, in my fury, I would no longer ask what
he wanted, but simply raise my head abruptly and imperiously, and
also begin staring point-blank at him. And so we’d stare at each other
like that for about two minutes; ﬁnally, he would turn, slowly and
pompously, and go away for another two hours.
If I refused to be brought to reason by all this and continued my
rebellion, he would suddenly begin to sigh as he looked at me, sigh
long and deeply, as if measuring with each sigh the full depth of my
moral fall, and, of course, it would end at last with him overcoming
me completely: I’d get furious, I’d shout, but with that which had
been the whole point I’d be forced to comply.
This time, however, as soon as the usual ”stern look” manoeuvres
began, I immediately lost my temper and fell on him in a fury. I was
all too irritated to begin with.
”Stop!” I yelled in a frenzy, as he was turning, slowly and silently,
one arm behind his back, to go to his room.”Stop! Come back! Come
back, I tell you!” And I must have bellowed so unnaturally that he
turned and began to study me even with a certain surprise. However,
he still did not say a word, and it was this that infuriated me.
”How dare you come in here without permission and stare at me
like that! Answer!”
But he, having looked at me calmly for about half a minute, again
began to turn around.”Stop!” I roared, running up to him, ”don’t
move! So. Now answer: what did you come in here and stare for?”
”If there’s something you want done directly, it’s my duty to see to
it,” he replied, again after some silence, lisping softly and measuredly,
raising his eyebrows, and calmly shifting his head from one side to
the other – and all that with horrifying composure.
”That’snotit,that’snotwhatI’maskingyou,hangman!”Ishouted,
shaking with anger.”I’ll tell you myself, hangman, why you keep com-
ing here: you see I’m not giving you your wages, in your pride you
don’t want to bow and beg, and for that you come with your stupid
staring to punish me, to torture me, and you don’t even r-r-realize,
hangman, how stupid it is, stupid, stupid, stupid, stupid!”
He again began to turn silently, but I grabbed him.

Notes from Underground
101
”Listen,” I was shouting at him.”Here’s the money, see, here it is!”
(I took it out of the drawer.) ”All seven roubles, but you won’t get it,
you will not get it, until such time as you come respectfully, with a
guilty head, to ask my forgiveness. Do you hear!”
”That can never be!” he replied, with a sort of unnatural self-
assurance.
”It will be!” I was shouting.”I give you my word of honor, it will
be!”
”And there’s nothing for me to ask your forgiveness about,” he
went on, as if not noticing my shouts at all, ”seeing as you yourself
have abused me with ’hangman,’ on which oﬀense I can always apply
against you at the precinct.”
”Go! Apply!” I roared.”Go now, this minute, this second! And
you’re still a hangman! hangman! hangman!” But he just looked at
me, thenturnedand, nolongerlisteningtomyappeals, wentsmoothly
to his place without a backward glance.
”There wouldn’t be any of this if it weren’t for Liza!” I decided
to myself. Then, after a moment’s pause, pompously and solemnly,
but slowly and with a pounding heart, I myself proceeded behind his
screen.
”Apollon!” I said softly and measuredly, though I was suﬀocating,
”go for the police chief at once, without the slightest delay!”
He had managed meanwhile to sit down at his table, put on his
spectacles, and begin some sewing. But hearing my order, he suddenly
snorted with laughter.
”Go now, this minute! Go, or you can’t even imagine what will
happen!”
”Truly, you’re not in your right senses,” he observed, without even
raising his head, with the same slow lisp, and continuing to thread his
needle.”Who’s ever seen a man go to the authorities against himself?
And as to scaring me – you’re exerting yourself in vain, because –
nothing will happen.”
”Go!” I shrieked, grabbing him by the shoulder. I felt I was about
to strike him.
And I did not even hear how the outer door opened at that
moment, softly and slowly, and some ﬁgure entered, stopped, and

102
Apropos of the Wet Snow
began gazing at us in perplexity. I looked, died of shame, and rushed
to my room. There, clutching my hair with both hands, I leaned my
head against the wall and stood frozen in that position.
About two minutes later I heard the slow steps of Apollon.
”Some … one is asking for you out there,” he said, looking at me
with particular sternness, then stepped aside and let in — Liza. He
did not want to leave, and stared at us mockingly.
”Get out! Get out!” I ordered repeatedly, quite lost. At that
moment my clock strained, hissed, and struck seven.
IX
And now, full mistress of the place, Come bold and free
into my house.
From the same poetry
I STOOD BEFORE HER, destroyed, branded, disgustingly embar-
rassed, and, I think, smiling, trying as hard as I could to wrap myself in
my ragged old quilted dressing gown – well, exactly as I had pictured
to myself recently in fallen spirits. Apollon hovered around us for
about two minutes and then left, but that made it no easier for me.
Worst of all was that she, too, suddenly became embarrassed, much
more so than I would even have expected. From looking at me, of
course.
”Sit down,” I said mechanically, and moved a chair out for her
at the table, while I myself sat on the sofa. She sat down at once and
obediently, staring at me all eyes, apparently expecting something
from me right then. The naivety of this expectation infuriated me,
but I restrained myself.
The thing to do here would have been to try not to notice any-
thing, as if it were all quite ordinary, but she … And I sensed vaguely
that she was going to pay dearly for it all …” You ﬁnd me in an odd situ-
ation, Liza,” I began, stammering, and knowing that this was precisely
not how I should have begun.

Notes from Underground
103
”No, no, don’t think anything of the sort!” I cried, seeing her
suddenly blush.”I’m not ashamed of my poverty … On the contrary, I
look upon my poverty with pride. I’m poor, but noble … One can be
poor and noble,” I went on mumbling.”However … would you like
some tea?”
”No …” she tried to begin.
”Wait!”
I jumped up and ran to Apollon. I really had to vanish some-
where.
”Apollon,” I whispered in a feverish patter, ﬂinging down before
him the seven roubles, which had remained in my ﬁst all the while,
”here’s your wages; see, I’m giving it to you; but for that you must save
me: go at once and bring some tea and ten rusks from the tavern. If
you refuse to go, you’ll ruin a man’s happiness. You don’t know what
this woman is … This is – everything. You’re perhaps having certain
thoughts … But you don’t know what this woman is! …”
Apollon, who had already sat down to work, and had already put
his spectacles back on, at ﬁrst, without abandoning his needle, silently
cast a sidelong glance at the money; then, paying no attention to me
and not answering me at all, he went on fussing with his thread, which
he was still trying to put through the needle. I waited for about three
minutes, standing before him, my arms folded a la Napoleon. My
temples were damp with sweat; I was pale, I could sense it. But, thank
God, he must have felt sorry looking at me. Having ﬁnished with
his needle, he slowly rose from his seat, slowly moved the chair aside,
slowly took oﬀhis spectacles, slowly counted the money, and at last,
having asked me over his shoulder: should he get a full portion? –
slowly walked out of the room. As I was returning to Liza, it occurred
to me on the way: why don’t I ﬂee, just as I am, in my wretched old
dressing gown, wherever my feet take me, and come what may?
I sat down again. She looked at me anxiously. For several minutes
we said nothing.
”I’ll kill him!” I suddenly cried, banging my ﬁst so hard on the
table that the ink splashed out of the inkstand.
”Ah! What is it!” she cried with a start.

104
Apropos of the Wet Snow
”I’ll kill him, I’ll kill him!” I was shrieking, pounding on the table,
in a perfect frenzy, and at the same time with a perfect understanding
of how stupid it was to be in such a frenzy.
”You don’t know, Liza, what this hangman is for me. He’s my
hangman … He’s just gone to get some rusks; he …”
And I suddenly broke down in tears. It was a ﬁt. Oh, how
ashamed I was between sobs; but I could no longer hold them back.
She was frightened.”What is it! What’s the matter!” she kept
crying out, bustling around me.
”Water, give me water, over there!” I murmured in a weak voice,
conscious, however, within myself, that I was quite well able to do
without water and not to murmur in a weak voice. But I was putting
on a show, as they say, to preserve decency, though the ﬁt was a real
one.
She gave me water, looking at me as if lost. At that moment Apol-
lon brought in the tea. It suddenly seemed to me that this ordinary
and prosaic tea was terribly indecent and measly after all that had
happened, and I blushed. Liza looked at Apollon even fearfully. He
went out without glancing at us.
”Liza, do you despise me?” I said, looking at her point-blank,
trembling with impatience to ﬁnd out what she thought.
She became embarrassed, and was unable to reply.
”Drink your tea!” I said spitefully. I was angry with myself, but,
naturally, she was going to bear the brunt of it. A terrible spite against
her suddenly boiled up in my heart; I think I could simply have killed
her. To be revenged on her, I swore mentally not to speak even one
word to her from then on.”It’s she who caused it all,” I thought.
Our silence had already lasted some ﬁve minutes. The tea sat on
the table; we didn’t touch it: it went so far that I purposely refused to
begin drinking, so as to make it still harder for her; and it would have
been awkward for her to begin. Several times she glanced at me in sad
perplexity. I was stubbornly silent. The chief martyr, of course, was
myself, because I was fully conscious of all the loathsome baseness of
my spiteful stupidity, and at the same time I simply could not restrain
myself.

Notes from Underground
105
”I want … to get out of there … for good,” she tried to begin, in
order to break the silence somehow, but, poor thing! she precisely
ought not to have started with that at such a moment, stupid as it
was to begin with, or to such a man, stupid as I was to begin with.
Even my heart ached from pity for her ineptness and unnecessary
candor. But something ugly immediately suppressed all pity in me; it
even egged me on still more: perish the whole world! Another ﬁve
minutes passed.
”Perhaps I’ve disturbed you?” she began timidly, in a barely audi-
ble voice, and started to get up.
But as soon as I saw this ﬁrst ﬂash of injured dignity I simply
trembled with anger and at once burst out.
”What did you come to me for, do tell me, please?” I began,
suﬀocating, and not even considering the logical order of my words.
I wanted to speak everything out at once, in one shot; I didn’t even
care where I began.
”Why did you come? Answer! Answer!” I kept exclaiming, all
but beside myself.”I’ll tell you why you came, my dear. You came
because of the pathetic words I used with you then. So you went all
soft, and you wanted more ’pathetic words.’ Know, then, know that I
was laughing at you that time. And I’m laughing now. Why do you
tremble? Yes, laughing! I’d been insulted earlier, at dinner, by the
ones who came there ahead of me. I came there to give a thrashing
to one of them, the oﬃcer; but I didn’t succeed, he wasn’t there; I
needed to unload my oﬀense on someone, to get my own back, and
you turned up, so I poured out my spite and laughed at you. I’d been
humiliated, so I, too, wanted to humiliate; they’d ground me down
like a rag, so I, too, wanted to show my power … That’s what it was,
and you thought I came then on purpose to save you, right? That’s
what you thought? That’s what you thought?”
I knew she might perhaps get confused and not understand the
details; but I also knew she’d understand the essence perfectly well.
And so it happened. She turned white as a sheet, tried to utter some-
thing, her mouth twisted painfully; but, as if cut down with an axe,
she sank onto the chair. And all the rest of the time she listened to
me with open mouth, with wide open eyes, and trembling in terrible

106
Apropos of the Wet Snow
fear. The cynicism, the cynicism of my words crushed her …
”To save you!” I went on, jumping up from my chair and running
back and forth in front of her, ”to save you from what! But maybe
I’m worse than you are. Why didn’t you ﬂing it in my mug when I
started reading you my oration: And you, what did you come here
for? To teach us morals, or what?’ Power, power, that’s what I wanted
then, the game was what I wanted, I wanted to achieve your tears,
your humiliation, your hysterics – that’s what I wanted then! But I
couldn’t stand it myself, because I’m trash, I got all scared and, like
a fool, gave you my address, devil knows why. And afterwards, even
before I got home, I was already cursing you up and down for that
address. I already hated you, because I’d lied to you then. Because I
only talk a good game, I only dream in my head, but do you know
what I want in reality? That you all go to hell, that’s what! I want
peace. I’d sell the whole world for a kopeck this minute, just not to be
bothered. Shalltheworldgotohell, orshallInothavemytea? Isaylet
the world go to hell, but I should always have my tea. Did you know
that or not? Well, and I do know that I’m a blackguard, a scoundrel,
a self-lover, a lazybones. I spent these past three days trembling for
fear you might come. And do you know what particularly bothered
me all these three days? That I had presented myself to you as such a
hero then, and now you’d suddenly see me in this torn old dressing
gown, abject, vile. I just told you I was not ashamed of my poverty,
know, then, that I am ashamed, I’m ashamed of it most of all, afraid
of it more than anything, more than of being a thief, because I’m so
vain it’s as if I’d been ﬂayed and the very air hurts me. But can you
possibly not have realized even now that I will never forgive you for
having found me in this wretched dressing gown, as I was hurling
myself like a vicious little cur at Apollon? The resurrector, the former
hero, ﬂinging himself like a mangy, shaggy mutt at his lackey, who
just laughs at him! And those tears a moment ago, which, like an
ashamed woman, I couldn’t hold back before you, I will never forgive
you! And what I’m confessing to you now, I will also never forgive
you! Yes – you, you alone must answer for all this, because you turned
up here, because I’m a scoundrel, because I’m the most vile, the most
ridiculous, the most petty, the most stupid, the most envious of all

Notes from Underground
107
worms on earth, who are in no way better than I, but who, devil knows
why, are never embarrassed; while I will just go on being ﬂicked all
my life by every nit – that’s my trait! Besides, what do I care if you
won’t understand a word of it! And what, tell me, what, what do I
care about you and whether you’re perishing there or not? Do you
understand, now that I’ve spoken it all out to you, how I’m going to
hate you for being here and listening? Because a man speaks out like
this only once in his life, and then only in hysterics! … What more
do you want? Why, after all this, do you still stick there in front of
me, tormenting me, refusing to leave?”
But here a strange circumstance suddenly occurred.
I was so used to thinking and imagining everything from books,
and to picturing everything in the world to myself as I had devised
it beforehand in my dreams, that at ﬁrst I didn’t even understand
this strange circumstance. What occurred was this: Liza, whom I
had insulted and crushed, understood far more than I imagined. She
understood from it all what a woman, if she loves sincerely, always
understands before anything else – namely, that I myself was unhappy.
The frightened and insulted feeling in her face ﬁrst gave way to
rueful amazement. And when I began calling myself a scoundrel and
a blackguard, and my tears poured down (I had spoken the entire
tirade in tears), her whole face twisted in a sort of convulsion. She
wanted to get up, to stop me; and when I came to the end, she paid
no attention to my cries: ”Why are you here, why don’t you leave!”
but only to how very hard it must have been for me to speak it all
out. Besides, she was so downtrodden, poor thing; she considered
herself inﬁnitely beneath me; how could she be angry or oﬀended?
She suddenly jumped from her chair on some irrepressible impulse,
and, all yearning towards me, but still timidly, not daring to move
from the spot, stretched out her arms to me … Here my heart, too,
turned over in me. Then she suddenly rushed to me, threw her arms
about my neck, and burst into tears. I, too, could not help myself and
broke into such sobbing as had never happened to me before …”They
won’t let me … I can’t be … good!” I barely articulated, then went to
the sofa, fell face down, and sobbed for a quarter of an hour in real
hysterics. She leaned towards me, embraced me, and remained as if

108
Apropos of the Wet Snow
frozen in that embrace.
But still, the hitch was that the hysterics did have to end. And
so (I am writing the loathsome truth), lying prone on the sofa, my
face buried hard in the wretched leather cushion, I began little by
little, remotely, involuntarily, but irresistibly, to feel that it would
be awkward now to raise my head and look straight into Liza’s eyes.
What was I ashamed of? I don’t know, but I was ashamed. It also came
into my agitated head that the roles were now ﬁnally reversed, that
she was now the heroine, and I was the same crushed and humiliated
creature as she had been before me that night – four days ago … And
all this came to me during those minutes when I was still lying prone
on the sofa!
My God! but can it be that I envied her then?
I don’t know, to this day I cannot decide, and then, of course,
I was even less able to understand it than now. For without power
and tyranny over someone, I really cannot live … But … but reasoning
explains nothing, and consequently there’s no point in reasoning.
I mastered myself, however, and raised my head; indeed, I had
to raise it sometime … And then – I am convinced of it even to this
day – precisely because I was ashamed to look at her, another feeling
suddenly kindled and ﬂared up in my heart … the feeling of domina-
tion and possession. My eyes gleamed with passion, and I squeezed
her hands hard. How I hated her and how drawn I was to her at
that moment! One feeling intensiﬁed the other. This was almost like
revenge! … At ﬁrst, a look as if of perplexity, even as if of fear, came to
her face, but only for a moment. She embraced me rapturously and
ardently.
X
A QUARTER OF AN HOUR later I was running up and down my
room in furious impatience, going to the screen every other minute
and peeking at Liza through a crack. She was sitting on the ﬂoor,
her head leaning against the bed, and was probably crying. But she

Notes from Underground
109
wouldn’t leave, and that was what irritated me. This time she knew
everything. I had given her the ﬁnal insult, but … no use talking about
it. She guessed that my burst of passion was precisely revenge, a new
humiliation for her, and that to my previous, almost pointless hatred
there had now been added a personal, envious hatred of her … I do not
insist, by the way, that she understood it all clearly; but on the other
hand she fully understood that I was a loathsome man and, above all,
incapable of loving her.
I know I shall be told that all this is inconceivable, that it is
inconceivable to be as wicked, as stupid, as I was; perhaps it will also
be added that it was inconceivable not to love her, or at least not to
appreciate her love. But why inconceivable? First, I was no longer
able to love, because, I repeat, for me to love meant to tyrannize and to
preponderize morally All my life I’ve been incapable even of picturing
any other love, and I’ve reached the point now of sometimes thinking
that love consists precisely in the right, voluntarily granted by the
beloved object, to be tyrannized over. In my underground dreams as
well, I never pictured love to myself otherwise than as a struggle; for
me it always started from hatred and ended with moral subjugation,
and afterwards I couldn’t even picture to myself what to do with the
subjugated object. And how is it inconceivable, if I had managed so
to corrupt myself morally, had grown so unaccustomed to ”living life,”
that I had dared just before to reproach and shame her for coming to
me to hear ”pathetic words”; and I myself never guessed that she had
come to me not at all to hear pathetic words, but to love me, because
for a woman it is in love that all resurrection, all salvation from ruin
of whatever sort, and all regeneration consists, nor can it reveal itself
in anything else but this. However, I did not hate her all that much as
I was running about my room and peeking behind the screen through
a crack. I simply felt it unbearably burdensome that she was there. I
wanted her to disappear. I longed for ”peace,” I longed to be left alone
in the underground.”Living life” so crushed me, unaccustomed to it
as I was, that it even became diﬃcult for me to breathe.
But several more minutes passed and she still did not get up, as
if she were oblivious. I was shameless enough to tap softly on the
screen to remind her … She suddenly roused herself, started up from

110
Apropos of the Wet Snow
her place, and rushed to look for her scarf, her hat, her fur coat, as if
to escape from me somewhere … Two minutes later she came slowly
from behind the screen and gave me a heavy look. I grinned spitefully,
though forcedly, for decency’s sake, and turned away from her look.
”Good-bye,” she said, making for the door.
I suddenly ran to her, seized her hand, opened it, put … and
closed it again. Then I turned at once and quickly sprang away to the
opposite corner, so as at least not to see …
I was going to lie right now – to write that I did it accidentally, in
distraction, at a loss, out of foolishness. But I don’t want to lie, and so
I’ll say directly that I opened her hand and put … in it out of malice.
The thought of doing it occurred to me while I was running up and
down my room and she was sitting behind the screen. But this much
I can say with certainty: although I did this cruelty on purpose, it
came not from my heart, but from my stupid head. This cruelty was
so aﬀected, so much from the head, so purposely contrived, so bookish,
that I myself could not bear it even for a minute – ﬁrst I sprang away
to the corner so as not to see, then in shame and despair I rushed after
Liza. I opened the door to the landing and began to listen.
”Liza! Liza!” I called out to the stairway, but timidly, in a low
voice . .
There was no answer; I thought I could hear her footsteps down
below.
”Liza!” I called more loudly.
No answer. But at that moment I heard from below the tight
glass outer door to the street creak open heavily and slam tightly shut
again. The bang echoed up the stairway.
She was gone. I went back to my room, pondering. I felt terribly
heavy.
I stopped by the table next to the chair on which she had been
sitting, and stared senselessly before me. About a minute passed;
suddenly I gave a great start: there before me, on the table, I saw …
in short, I saw a crumpled blue ﬁve-rouble bill, the very one I had
pressed into her hand a moment before. It was that bill; it couldn’t
have been any other; there wasn’t any other in the house. So she had

Notes from Underground
111
managed to ﬂing it from her hand onto the table just as I jumped away
to the opposite corner.
Well, then? I could have expected her to do that. Could have
expected? No. I was so great an egoist, I had in fact so little respect
for people, that I could scarcely imagine she, too, would do that. I
couldn’t bear it. A second later I rushed like a madman to get dressed,
threw on in a ﬂurry whatever I could ﬁnd, and raced headlong after
her. She couldn’t have gone more than two hundred steps before I
ran out to the street.
It was still, and the snow was falling heavily, almost perpendic-
ularly, laying a pillow over the sidewalk and the deserted roadway.
Not a single passer-by, not a sound to be heard. The street-lamps
ﬂickered glumly and uselessly. I ran about two hundred steps to the
intersection and stopped.
”Where did she go? And why am I running after her? Why? To
fall down before her, to weep in repentance, to kiss her feet, to beg
forgiveness! I wanted it; my whole breast was tearing apart, and never,
never will I recall this moment with indiﬀerence. But – why?” came
the thought.”Won’t I hate her, maybe tomorrow even, precisely for
kissing her feet today? Will I bring her happiness? Haven’t I learned
again today, for the hundredth time, just how much I’m worth? Won’t
I torment her to death!”
I stood in the snow, peering into the dull darkness, and thought
about that.
”And won’t it be better, yes, better,” I fancied later, back at home,
stiﬂing the living pain in my heart with fantasies, ”won’t it be better
if she now carries an insult away with her forever? An insult – but
this is puriﬁcation; it’s the most stinging and painful consciousness!
By tomorrow I’d have already dirtied her soul with myself and worn
out her heart. But now the insult will never die in her, and however
vile the dirt that awaits her – the insult will elevate and purify her …
through hatred … hm … maybe also forgiveness … Though, by the way,
will all that make it any easier for her?” And in fact I’m now asking an
idle question of my own: which is better – cheap happiness, or lofty
suﬀering? Well, which is better?
Such were my reveries as I sat at home that evening, barely alive

112
Apropos of the Wet Snow
from the pain in my soul. Never before had I endured so much suﬀer-
ing and repentance; but could there have been even the slightest
doubt, as I went running out of the apartment, that I would turn back
halfway? Never have I met Liza again, or heard anything about her. I
will also add that for a long time I remained pleased with the phrase
about the usefulness of insult and hatred, even though I myself almost
became sick then from anguish.
Even now, after so many years, all this comes out somehow none
too well in my recollection. Many things come out none too well now
in my recollections, but … shouldn’t I just end my Notes here? I think
it was a mistake to begin writing them. At least I’ve felt ashamed
all the while I’ve been writing this story: so it’s no longer literature,
but corrective punishment. Because, for example, to tell long stories
of how I defaulted on my life through moral corruption in a corner,
through an insuﬃciency of milieu, through unaccustomed to what
is alive, and through vainglorious spite in the underground – is not
interesting, by God; a novel needs a hero, and here there are purposely
collected all the features for an anti-hero, and, in the ﬁrst place, all this
will produce a most unpleasant impression, because we’ve all grown
unaccustomed to life, we’re all lame, each of us more or less. We’ve
evengrownsounaccustomedthatattimeswefeelasortofloathingfor
real ”living life,” and therefore cannot bear to be reminded of it. For
we’ve reached a point where we regard real ”living life” almost as labor,
almost as service, and we all agree in ourselves that it’s better from
a book. And why do we sometimes fuss about, why these caprices,
these demands of ours? We ourselves don’t know why. It would be
the worse for us if our capricious demands were fulﬁlled. Go on, try
giving us more independence, for example, unbind the hands of any
one of us, broaden our range of activity, relax the tutelage, and we
… but I assure you: we will immediately beg to be taken back under
tutelage. I know you’ll probably get angry with me for that, shout,
stamp your feet: ”Speak just for yourself and your miseries in the
underground, and don’t go saying ’we all’”.
Excuse me, gentlemen, but I am not justifying myself with this
allishness. As far as I myself am concerned, I have merely carried to an
extreme in my life what you have not dared to carry even halfway, and,

Notes from Underground
113
what’s more, you’ve taken your cowardice for good sense, and found
comfort in thus deceiving yourselves. So that I, perhaps, come out
even more ”living” than you. Take a closer look! We don’t even know
where the living lives now, or what it is, or what it’s called! Leave us to
ourselves, without a book, and we’ll immediately get confused, lost –
we won’t know what to join, what to hold to, what to love and what to
hate, what to respect and what to despise. It’s a burden for us even to
be men – men with real, our own bodies and blood; we’re ashamed of
it, we consider it a disgrace, and keep trying to be some unprecedented
omni-men. We’re stillborn, and have long ceased to be born of living
fathers, and we like this more and more. We’re acquiring a taste for it.
Soon we’ll contrive to be born somehow from an idea. But enough; I
don’t want to write any more ”from Underground” …
HOWEVER, the ”notes” of this paradoxalist do not end here.
He could not help himself and went on. But it also seems to us that
this may be a good place to stop.


Notes
1 CollegiateassessorwastheeighthofthefourteenranksintheImperial
Russian civil service, equivalent to the military rank of major. The
narrator had attained this rank by the time he quit the service, a year
before writing his ”notes” (1864), not at the time of the episodes he
describes in Part Two (1848-50).
2 The language here is biblical, reminiscent of many passages in the
Psalms, the Book of Job, and the Gospels in which the righteous man
is confronted by skeptical critics. Isaiah 19:11 refers speciﬁcally to
the ”wise counsellors” of Pharaoh; ”waggers of heads” are mentioned
in Matthew 27:39 and Mark 15:29.
3 This combination of terms goes back to such eighteenth-century trea-
tises as A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of Our Ideas of the
Sublime and Beautiful (1757), by the Anglo-Irish writer and states-
man Edmund Burke (1729-97), and Observations on the Feeling of the
Beautiful and the Sublime (1764), by the German philosopher Im-
manuel Kant (1724-1804). The Russian phrase, replacing ”sublime”
with the less rhetorical ”lofty,” became a critical commonplace in the
1840s, but acquired an ironic tone in the utilitarian and anti-aesthetic
1860s.
4 ”The man of nature and truth” (French), Dostoevsky’s mocking dis-
tortion of a sentence from the prefatory note of Confessions by the
French philosopher and novelist Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712-78):
”Here is the only portrait of a man, painted exactly from nature and
in all its truth, that exists and probably ever will exist.”
5 Glancing references are made here to ”Darwinism” and to the theory
of ”enlightened self-interest” put forward by the English utilitarians in
the 1830s and -40s. Darwin avoided the question of human evolution
from other animals in his Origin of Species (1859); not so T. H. Huxley
(1825-95), whose book Man’s Place in Nature (1863) openly stated
the case. A Russian translation of this book was published early in

116
Notes
1864, just as Dostoevsky was writing Notes from Underground.
6 According to the General Address Book of Petersburg, there were
eight dentists named Wagenheim practicing in the city at the time.
7 In fact, the phrase was characteristic of articles published in Time and
Epoch, magazines edited by Dostoevsky and his brother Mikhail in
1861-65.
8 A ”no-account” or ”rascal” (French), from the German Schnapphahn,
a pilferer.
9 The Russian genre painter N. N. Ge (1831-94) exhibited a painting
entitled The Last Supper at the Academy of Art in 1863. Dostoevsky
detested the painting, and here takes advantage of the fact that the
artist’s name (pronounced almost like the English word ”gay”) sounds
the same as the ﬁrst letter – often used as a genteel euphemism – of the
Russian word govno, ”shit.” Hence the odd structure of the sentence.
10 Dostoevsky’s ideological opponent M. E. Saltykov-Shchedrin (1826-
89) published an article with this title in the liberal monthly The
Contemporary (1863, no. 7). Dostoevsky pokes fun at him by taking
the title literally. Saltykov-Shchedrin had written an article praising
Ge’s Last Supper for the same journal (1863, no. 11).
11 The English historian Henry Thomas Buckle (1821-62), in his History
of Civilization in England (1807-61), formulated the idea that the
development of civilization leads to the cessation of war between
nations.
12 The wars of the ”great” Napoleon (1769-1821) are well known. His
nephew Napoleon III (1808-73; emperor 1852—70) started the
CrimeanWaragainstRussia(1854-56),tookCochinChinaforFrance
(1859-62), intervened in Mexico on the losing side of the emperor
Maximilian, and ﬁnally declared war on Prussia (1870), which led
to his capitulation and removal from power. At the time that Dos-
toevsky was writing Notes from Underground, the North American
union was enduring the test of the Civil War, and Prussia was at war
with Denmark over possession of the province of Schleswig-Holstein,
which had been under Danish hegemony since 1773.
13 Attila (406?-53), ”the Scourge of God,” king of the Huns, led devas-
tating military campaigns against the Eastern Roman Empire, Persia,
and Gaul, before he was defeated near Chalons in 451 and driven back

Notes from Underground
117
across the Danube. Stepan Timofeevich (”Stenka”) Razin (?-1671),
a Don Cossack, led a peasant uprising in Russia (1667-71), which
made him a popular hero.
14 The metaphor of the piano key may go back to the French materi-
alist philosopher and writer Denis Diderot (1713-84), who wrote
in his Conversation Between D’Alembert and Diderot (1769): ”We
are instruments endowed with sense and memory. Our senses are
piano keys upon which surrounding nature plays, and which often
play upon themselves.”
15 The ”crystal palace” is an allusion to ”The Fourth Dream of Vera
Pavlovna” from the novel What Is to Be Done? (1863), by N. G.
Chernyshevsky (1828-89), one of Dostoevsky’s main ideological ene-
mies and the target of much of the satire in Notes from Underground.
Chernyshevsky’s thought combined the humanitarian socialism of
the 1840s with the utilitarianism of the 1860s. This chapter of Notes
attacks the theory of ”rational egoism” set forth in Chernyshevsky’s
The Anthropological Principle in Philosophy (1860); the episodes of
the ”bumped oﬃcer” and the ”rescued prostitute” in Part Two of
Notes are to some extent reversed parodies of episodes from What
Is to Be Done? Chernyshevsky’s ”crystal palace,” a vision of the ideal
living space for the future Utopian communist society, based on the
”phalanstery” deﬁned by the French Utopian socialist Charles Fourier
(1772-1837), drew its physical details from the cast-iron and glass
pavilion designed by Sir Joseph Paxton for the London Exposition of
1851.
16 Dostoevsky ﬁrst heard of the bird Kagan, a folkloric bringer of happi-
ness, during his imprisonment in Omsk (1849-53).
17 The Colossus of Rhodes, a 100-foot-high statue of Helios, the sun
god, made in 280 B.C., stood in the harbor of the Greek island of
Rhodes; it was one of the seven wonders of the ancient world. A. E.
Anaevsky (1788-1866), a hackwriter, was the object of much mockery
in the press of the 1840S-60S.
18 ”To domestic animals”
19 The ”ﬁg” (referred to in chapter VIII by the narrator’s supposed lis-
teners) is a rude gesture made by inserting the thumb between the
closed ﬁngers of the ﬁst. The ”ﬁg in the pocket” is a covert form of the

118
Notes
same gesture, widely used in Russia, especially by intellectuals during
the Soviet period, as an expression of dissent.
20 See Psalm 137:5: ”If I forget you, O Jerusalem, let my right hand
wither!” (Revised Standard Version).
21 In his book On Germany, the German poet Heinrich Heine (1797-
1856) wrote: ”The composition of one’s own character description
would be not only an awkward task but quite simply impossible …
However strong his wish to be sincere, no man is capable of telling the
truth about himself.” In the same book, Heine insists that Rousseau,
in his Confessions, ”makes false avowals, in order to hide his real doings
behind them.”
22 In his Dostoevsky: The Stir of Liberation, 1860-1865, Joseph Frank,
drawing attention to an 1849 article in which the Russian critic P. V.
Annenkov points to ”wet snow” as a common meteorological con-
dition in descriptions of Petersburg by writers of the natural school,
suggests that Dostoevsky uses the same ”wet snow” here to evoke
both the atmosphere of the period he is going to write about (the late
1840s) and the naive assumptions of its literature, which he himself
had shared.
23 Dostoevsky’s relations with N. A. Nekrasov (1821—78), poet, liberal
social critic, and editor of The Contemporary, wererespectful butoften
strained. The poem quoted here, written in 1845, tells the story of a
rescued prostitute.
24 Kostanzhoglo, an exemplary manager and landowner, appears in the
unﬁnished second part of Dead Souls by Nikolai Gogol (1809-52).
Pyotr Ivanovich Aduyev, from the novel An Ordinary Story (1847)
by Ivan Goncharov (1812-91), is distinguished by his common sense
and practicality.
25 Weimar, in the German province of Thuringia, became an important
intellectualcenterinthelateeighteenthandearlynineteenthcenturies
owing to the inﬂuence of its most famous citizen, the poet Johann
Wolfgang von Goethe (1749-183 2). The Schwarzwald, or Black
Forest, in southwestern Germany, is a ”romantic” region of hills and
woodlands separated from France by the Rhine valley.
26 Poprishchin, hero of Gogol’s Diary of a Madman (1835), is a petty
clerk who ﬁnally goes mad and imagines he is the king of Spain.

Notes from Underground
119
27 Lieutenant Pirogov, one of the heroes of Gogol’s Nevsky Prospect
(1835), after being whipped by an irate German husband, wants to
complain against him to the authorities.
28 The expose (Dostoevsky ironically distorts the spelling here) became
a common journalistic phenomenon only in the 1860s; thus the nar-
rator was somewhat precocious in his wish to ”expose” his oﬃcer.
Fatherland Notes, a liberal monthly founded in Petersburg in 1818,
published during the sixty-six years of its existence some of the most
important writers of the age, including Lermontov, Nekrasov, Ostro-
vsky, and Dostoevsky himself.
29 The French superfu, meaning ”in excess,” ”unnecessary,” or ”useless,” is
here taken to mean ”ultra-reﬁned.” Nozdryov in Gogol’s Dead Souls
uses the word in the same sense.
30 A covered shopping area in the center of Petersburg, still in existence
and still so called.
31 That is, suggestive of the gloomy, proud, world-weary hero of the verse
drama Manfred (1817) by George Gordon, Lord Byron (1788-1824).
32 In 1805, Napoleon defeated a joint Austrian-Russian army at Auster-
litz in Moravia. However, in Voyage to Icaria (1840), a Utopian com-
munist novel by the French publicist Etienne Cabet (1788-1856), a
philanthropic reformer also defeats a coalition of retrograde kings at
Austerlitz.
33 The narrator’s further imaginings also have Napoleonic touches: Pope
PiusVII excommunicated Napoleonin 1809, afterwhich theemperor
held him virtually captive until 1814; the Villa Borghese, built by Sci-
pione Borghese in 1615 as a summer house on the outskirts of Rome,
belonged in 1806 to Camillo Borghese, who married Napoleon’s sister
Paulina. Lake Como is normally situated in the Italian Alps, near the
Swiss border.
34 An intersection in Petersburg, still so called, where four streets come
together to form ﬁve corners.
35 Before the emancipation of the serfs in 1861, Russian estates were
evaluated in terms of the number of ”souls” (adult male serfs) living
on them.
36 ”Right as a lord” (French), referring to the right of the feudal lord,
when one of his serfs married, to spend the ﬁrst night with the bride.

120
Notes
37 Silvio, hero of ”The Shot” (1830), a short story by the poet Alexander
Pushkin(1799-1837), devoteshislifetotheideaofrevengeandﬁnally
triumphs over his adversary. A similar role is played by the character
Incognito in Masquerade, a drama by Mikhail Lermontov (1814-41).
38 In his enthusiasm, the narrator begins to speak in the words of the
biblical Creator: ”Then God said, ’Let us make man in our image,
after our likeness’” (Genesis 1:26).
39 In the 1840s, the French novelist George Sand (1804-76) was partic-
ularly admired in Russia for her social and humanitarian concerns.
40 The last lines of the Nekrasov poem quoted as epigraph to Part Two.
41 ’Furnished rooms” (French), which, while making a servant unneces-
sary, would expose the narrator to the presence of other lodgers.

