
In the summer of 1862 Dostoyevsky travelled to 
Western Europe, discovering France and paying 
his one and only visit to Britain. On his return he 
published his impressions of the voyage, trans· 
lated here for the first time. 
In part these notes are intended to reveal the 
French and English to the Russians. France is 
depicted as a nation of hypocritical shopkeepers, 
where police informers abound, and freedoms 
are limited. England is portrayed with sharply 
observed detail reminiscent of Hogarth: a land 
of licentiousness where the london masses, gin· 
sodden and immoral, remain colourful an!· 
unforgettable. 
Yet the book has a greater interest still, for in it 
Dostoyevsky reveals himself for the first time. 
Here are the ideas which were to preoccupy him 
in many of his masterpieces: the effect of Euro· 
pean civilization on the Russian character, the 
influence of individualism on the West, the 
hollowness of nineteenth-century material pro· 
gress and political achievements, the inevitability 
of the proletarian revolution. Winter Notes on 
Summer Impressions is an important book, whose 
neglect is both surprising and undeserved. 

Kyril Fitzlyon is the distinguished translator 
of many Russian classics, including works by 
, Tolstoy and modern Soviet authors, including 
':Paustovsky and Sinyavsky. 
ISBN 0 7043 2542 X 
Quartet Books limited 
A member of the Namara Group 
27/29 Goodge Street 
london Wl P 1 FD 
Designed by Namara Design 
Printed and bound in Great Britain 

Winter Notes on Summer Impressions 


Winter Notes on Summer 
Impressions 
FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
Translated and introduced by 
Kyril FitzLyon 
Q 
Quartet Books 
London 
Melbourne 
New York 

This edition first published by 
Quartet Books Limited 19HS 
A member of the Namara Group 
27/29 Goodge Street, London W1 P 1 FD 
Copyright© by K yril FitzLyon 1955 
and with revisions 1 <JHS 
The first edition was published under the title 
Sllmll!cr lmprt•ssiolls by John Calder 1955 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
Dostoycvsky, F. M. 
 
Winter notes on summer impressions. 
1.1 Europe-Description and travcl-1800-191 H 
I .  
Title 
II. 
Zimniye zametkio letnikh 
vpechatleniykh. E11glislt 
914'.042H6 
D919 
ISBN 0-7043-2542-X 
Typset by MC Typeset, Chatham, Kent 
Printed and bound in Great Britain 

Preface to this edition 
When the first edition of this translation (with the title 
shortened to Summer Impressicms) can1e out precisely thirty 
years ago, Dostoyevsky's Wi11ter Notes 011 Summer Impress­
ions had never been rendered into English before. I do not 
know whether another translation has appeared since then, 
but I do not think it has: certainly I have not been able to 
find it in the British Library Catalogue. By now n1y 
translation has been out of print for a nurnber of years, 
which is probably \vhy the author of the rnost recent study 
of Dostoyevsky in this country, \Vas rnislcd into assuring 
his readers that Winter Notes had never been translated into 
English at any tin1e - a sad cornrncnt on the success of rny 
efforts in that direction, but sadder still the fact that to 
rnost adrnirers of Dostoyevsky in the English-speaking 
world the work has rernained totally unknown. And yet 
the history of the origin and devclopn1ent of son1e of 
Dostoyevsky's n1ost cherished ideas, and of his attitude to 
Russia and the West cannot be either properly traced or 
even perhaps fully understood without reference to his 
Winter Notes. That little essay, as I have tried to show in 
n1y Introduction, has an irnportance out of all proportion 
to its n1odest size. 
My translation is now being repub1ished in the hope, if 
not the conviction, that J)ostoycvskian studies in Great 
Britain have sufficiently progressed in the last thirty years 
for Winter Notes to be appreciated by n1any n1orc readers 
than \Vas the case a generation ago. 

For the presellt edition I have son1ewhat expanded the 
Introduction while cutting out what novv seen1s to n1e 
unnecessary comment and n1ade son1e stylistic alterations, 
but left the main body of it intact. I have likewise 
introduced a few changes and additions to the con1n1ents 
that accompany the text of the translation. Translators are 
seldom· entirely satisfied with the results of their work. 
Being no exception to this general rule, I could not refrain 
from introducing what I consider to be improvements in 
n1y translation. However, I have restricted n1yself to the 
barest minimum and the translation has remained substan­
tially the same. 
My rendering of, and changes in, the transliteration of 
Russian names (Dostoyevsky instead of Dostoievsky, 
Belinsky for Belin ski, etc.) reflect n1y own wavering 
attitude to the n1atter and, perhaps, a fundatnental, if 
unjustified, lack of interest in it. Certainly 'ye' as in 'yet' is, 
in English, a tnore familiar rendering of that sound than 
'ie'. The '-sky' ending for Russian natnes is phonetically 
less correct than '-ski', but it has become traditional for 
then1 and distinguishes then1 from Polish names. Of 
course, the combination of the two ('-skiy') represents the 
n1ost accurate rendering, but it is too pedantic for use 
outside a learned journal. Poten1kin (recalling battleships 
to cinema fans and villages to an1ateurs of historical 
legends) would, I think, become unrecognizable to most 
readers in the phonetically more correct guise of 'Potyom­
kin' ('yo' as in 'yonder') . I have, therefore, left it without 
change. 
K. F. 

INTROJ) UCTION 
I 
IT IS USUAL to divide ])ostoycvsky's literary activity into 
two distinct periods. The first opens with the publication 
in I 846 of a sotnewhat sentitnen tal novel, Poor Folk, which 
brought hitn in1n1cdiate literary renown, popular cstcen1 
and the enthusiastic blessing of the great critic Belinsky. It 
closes with what in effect arc his retniniscenccs of life as a 
political convict (The House of the Dead), serialized in 
I 861-2 in his newly founded periodical Vrcmya (Time). 
The second period, we are invariably told, is ushered in in 
I 864, with that oddly strident con fession of personal guilt 
and inadequacy, entitled Notes from Ulldcl:f?rOulld, and 
finishes with the Pushkill Collllncmoration Address delivered 
a few n1onths before his death. 
To state that Dostoycvsky's writings fall into two fairly 
definite periods is, of course, to state the obvious; the 
author's attitude to the world, his choice of subject n1atter 
and his treatn1ent of plot undergo in the '6os of the last 
century profound change. His earlier novels ain1 n1ainly at 
the entertainn1ent of the reader; undeterred by considera­
tions of verisimilitude or psychological insight, they lack 
the later Dostoyevskian eagerness to reconcile the actions 
of men with their consciences, conceived in tcrn1s of 
spiritual anguish. 
The opening of the second and tnore characteristic phase 
of Dostoyevsky's literary activity was introduced not, it 
seen1s to n1e, by Notes from Underground, but in the 

previous yeaݕ, by a short work - no n1ore than an essay­
very little con1 n1ented on hitherto. The significance of the 
essay, to which he gavݖ the nan1e Winter Notes 011 Summer 
. 
. 
Impressions, is quite disproportionate to its length for the 
light it throws on the origin and devdoptnent of Dos­
toyevsky's n1ost cherished ideas. 
l)ostoyevsky, fresh frotn his first contact with Western 
Europe (which included a week in London and three in 
Paris) , published in his periodical his in1pressions of that 
new and alien world using then1 as a peg on which to hang 
a ren1arkable nun1 ber of the ideas which henceforth 
entered in varying degrees into everything he wrote, often 
expressed in phrases lifted textually frotn the present 
book. It is hardly an exaggeration to say that he never 
again wrote anything which contained so tnany of his 
thoughts on so n1any subjects in so few pages. It was as if, 
on the threshold of an entirely new epoch in his writing, 
he had decided to present his readers with a profession of 
faith and a synopsis of his ideas. In fact, Winter Notes on 
Summer Impressio11s, far fro111 deserving their Cinderella­
like treatn1ent, ought to be regarded as a chrysalis out of 
which developed such n1asterpieces as The DeZJi!s, Crime 
and Prmishme11t and The Brothers KaramazoZJ, as well as the 
Journal of an Author and the figures of Father Zosin1a and 
the Grand Inquisitor. Even the Pushkin Commemoration 
Address, which was probably received with greater im­
tnediate acclatnation than anything l)ostoyevsky had ever 
written, contains little that is not adun1brated in the 
present book. 
The neglect from which Wi11ter Notes have suffered at 
the hands of literary critics is due to a variety of reasons. 
One of then1, no doubt, is that it is generally regarded as a 
piece of journalistic reportage with no bearing on the great 
novels on which l)ostoyevsky's reputation rests, rather 
than as a link in his whole systen1 of thought. Another 
reason n1ay be the style of writing l)ostoyevsky adopted 

for his Winter Notes in which repetitiveness, excessive 
colloquialism, forced breeziness and waggish luunour tend 
to predotninatc to the irritation of the reader. The reader 
n1ust make up his Blind to disregard these things. If he 
does, he will be atnply rewarded. 
II 
THE CENTRE of Dostoyevsky's ideas harbours a vision of 
the world as a moral and spiritual unity, a 'brotherly 
fellowship', which Blust 'exist in nature', but cannot be 
artificially created (as both Winter Notes and Father Zosin1a 
phrase it) and which expects, but n1ost definitely docs not 
demand, of its n1ctnbers a total responsibility for each 
other and for the connnunity as a whole. It is a unity 
which makes each one of us into a link in the infinite chain 
of causation and which, though· it tnay relieve each 
individual n1c1nber of the luunan race of total responsibil­
ity and therefore total guilt, yet thrusts upon each of us the 
burden of a world conscience. It is this thcn1e which 
Dostoyevsky later expanded into an analytical novel 
(Crime and Punishment) and which later still he n1adc both 
his Grand lnquisi tor and Father Zositna ( Tlze Brothers 
Karmnazov) develop each in his o\vn way. 
The fundan1ental tragedy of n1cn, according to Dos­
toyevsky, con1es fron1 two kinds of actions: actions that 
shatter world unity (and every critne connnittcd against 
one's fellow B1en is an attcrnpt to shatter it, as Raskolnikov 
in Crime and Punishment finds out to his cost) and actions 
which attempt to attain a synthetic unity by artificial 
means. The latter he considers particularly dangerous; for 
n1en, consciously or subconsciously aware of the dangers 
of 'isolation', all clatnour for unity, and, in default of 
genuine brotherhood, arc all too eager to accept a 

counterfeit mo.del in the shape of socialism or the Catholic 
Church, which can offer nothing but · the brotherhood of 
an 'ant-hill' . But, says_ Dostoyevsky, both in his Winter 
. 
. 
Notes on Summer Impressions and in his capacity of Grand 
Inquisitor (The Brothers Karamazov), even this men will 
gladly accept, for the alternative to an ant-hill is a struggle 
of all against all, ending in 'cannibalisn1 ', when n1en will 
devour each other. Catholicism and socialisn1 Dostoyevs­
ky regarded as being basically the san1e, both of them 
ultimately emanations of the Ron1an hnperial idea, which 
insisted on a purely n1echanical, external unification of 
n1en, in the hope (at least on the part of the Catholic 
Church) that such a unification would in time give birth to 
true spiritual fellowship. 1 This, thought Dostoyevsky, 
was putting the cart before the horse, a tnistake never 
con11nitted by the Orthodox Church. In his interpretation, 
the Orthodox Church expected unity to cotne of itself, 
spontaneously and with no assistance from external 
lnnnan agencies; and when it can1c, true brotherhood 
would be established vvith no need for any rules or 
constitutions. 
In essence, of course, this is tnerely the Slavophil 
version of Russian anarchisn1, which was conceived as a 
blend of Freedon1 and Love, the fonner without the latter 
leading to anarchy, as distinct frotn anarchism, or to 
'isolation' in the Dostoyevskian sense, the latter without 
the fonner not, in fact, able to exist. Fron1 Dostoyevsky 's 
point of view, the itnportance of this attitude on the part of 
the Orthodox Church was that the Church, after being 
adopted by the Russian people, made _Russia (or ever 
1The identity of Catholicism and socialism is an idea which clearly had 
not yet taken its final shape in Dostoyevsky's mind at the time of 
writing Wi11ter Notes. He was convinced then that 'socialism [was] 
possible anywhere but in France'. Yet, later on, in hisjouma/, he argues 
that France is socialist already hecausc she has a Catholic tradition, 
however much she may repudiate that tradition. 

different fron1 the West. And it is just because the West is 
regarded by hin1 as the true abode of 'individualist 
isolation' in contrast to Russia's strivings after a spiritual 
synthesis of the con11nunity, that the then1e of Europe and 
her civilization recurs so frequently in Dostoyevsky's 
writings after his return to Russia. 
His analysis of Western Europe, first outlined in l¥inter 
Notes and thereafter relentlessly pursued through the pages 
of n1ost of his books and particularly of his Journal, 
presents a strange an1algan1 of Slavophil prejudice and 
Fourierist ideals, of religious utopianisn1 and historical 
n1aterialism, of traditionalist concepts expressed in tenns 
reminiscent of the Con1n1unist Manifesto. His earlier 
enthusiasn1 for Fourier - the cause, indeed, of his sojourn 
in the 'House of the Dead' - and his acute awareness of 
those social and econotnic forces that lie at the botton1 of 
our cultural edifice, lead hin1 to give certain historical 
events an interpretation rendered fatniliar to us by Marxist 
writings. Thus he regards the French Revolution as a n1cre 
shan1, benefiting no one but the tniddlc-classes, the 
bourgeoisie, at once the etnanation and the creator of 
capitalism, whon1 the Revolution enabled to obtain a firn1 
grip on the proletariat in order to exploit it. The 
hollowness of the Revolution, he says significantly enough 
in his Journal, was exposed by the execution of l3abeuf, the 
apostle of early con1n1unisn1. 
This attitude colours the \vhole of his approach to 
France with which n1ost of the present book is concerned. 
Like Marx, he refuses to sec in the Revolution's and, later, 
the Republic's, slogan - Liberty, Equality, Fraternity -
anything but a piece of bourgeois hypocrisy, a gigantic 
bluff; considers, like Marx, that there can be no real 
freedon1 in Western Europe \Vithout the transference of 
econotnic power to the proletariat; like Marx, believes that 
proletarians are bound to unite - 'fonn their own heap' -
in defence of their own interests without the fraudulent 

pretence of speaking for hunlanity as a whole; has the true 
Marxist (and Slavophil) contetnpt for Western liberalisn1 
and for all forn1s of pݎrlian1entary governn1ent, and, like 
Marx again, sees in the whole network of European sociaJ 
policy and behaviour nothing but the bourgeoisie's frantic 
attempt to retain the status quo. But the proletariat, he 
says, is knocking at the door and one day will force it 
open. Repudiated by the bourgeoisie and kept away fron1 
this world's goods it is ready to join in the class struggle 
and eager to repudiate the repudiators. 
It is obviously a then1e that haunted Dostoyevsky, for 
having dealt with it in son1e detail in his Winter Notes, he 
returned to it and repeated it with exasperating frequency 
in his jounw/n1any years later. No doubt his insistence on 
the dire fate awaiting the Western capitalist world, though 
often expresse  in quasi-Marxist tenns, was due to highly 
un-Marxist causes. It was due, in fact, to the wishful 
thinking of a Russian nationalist obsessed by the fear of 
Western su pretnacy, and suffering, like so n1any Russians, 
fron1 an acute inferiority con1plex vis-a-vis the West. 
As a result J)ostoyevsky fails to apply his sen1i-Marxist 
analysis to his own country, but, on the contrary, clain1s 
that no proletarian revolution is possible in Russia for the 
sitn pic reason that the Russian pro leta ria t is not only 
contented but is becotning increasingly so. He does, 
ho\vever, in his f;flilltcr Notes and later in his other works, 
raise one point- one of the n1ost interesting in the present 
book because touching upon perhaps the n1ost fateful of all 
Russian nineteenth-century weaknesses, n1ore objection­
able in J)ostoyevsky's view than son1e of the worst 
excesses of serfdan1 and tnore destabilizing in its effect 
than inequalities of incotne: the inequalities of culture, 
which split the country in two and resulted in the loss of 
contact between the educated classes and the peasantry. It 
\Vas, he felt, this loss of contact which led to laݏk of 
understanding on both sides, to an attitude of supercilious 

superiority or guilty fawning on the part of the educated 
classes and a half-sullen, half-conteinptuous withdrawal 
into their own con1n1unity by the peasants, to the 
treatn1cnt of the latter by the fanner as if, to quote 
Dostoyevsky, they were 'enetny tribes'; it led to the 
rootlessness of the intelligentsia, it led to the Slavophil 
n1oven1ent which had l)ostoyevsky's full and active 
syn1pathy, but whose ridiculous sides (like the wearing of 
bogus national dress to placate the 'cnen1y tribes') he was 
quick to perceive, and it led to the phenon1enon of 
'Westernizing expatriates' - Russians who felt n1ore at 
hon1e in Western Europe than they did in their own 
country where they found no congenial occupation for 
then1sclves, stayed out of Russia as tnuch as they could and 
were a constant butt for l)ostoyevsky's rather heavy­
handed sarcasn1. In the following century it tnay have been 
a contributary cause of the Russian Revolution. 
III 
THE MARQUIS DE CusTINE whose very brief stay in Russia 
preceded l)ostoyevsky's visit to Paris by a whole genera­
tion and resulted in a book perhaps tnore often quoted 
than read, was shocked by the lack of freedon1 in Russia, 
the ubiquity of police infonners, the arbitrariness of 
govenunent and the slavish adulation of the En1peror. He 
ascribed it all either expressly or by itnplication to national 
character as well as to the country's ren1oteness fron1 the 
civilizing influence of Western Europe in general and of 
France in particular. When a quarter of a century later, in 
the su1nn1er of 1862, l)ostoyevsky catne to Paris, he too, 
was shocked, and, what shocked hin1, so he confesses or 
in1plies in his Winter Notes, was lack of freedon1 in France, 
the ubiquity of police infonners, the arbitrariness of 

governn1ent and the slavish adulation of the En1peror. He 
ascribes it all to national character which produced the 
French bourgeois with.his servile n1entality. 
'• 
The impact made on Dostoyevsky by this country was 
strikingly different. For the n1on1ent (for he vacillated in 
this) he despised the French, and Paris, he \vrote to a 
friend, bored hin1 to death. But London overwhehned 
him. True, the picture he draws of it and of the British 
social scene is son1ehow ren1iniscent of Gustave Dore's 
illustrations for Dante's It!fcnto, and he is driven to 
describe it in apocalyptic tenns, but at least there is no 
roon1 in it for the meanness and pettiness which he found 
across the Channel . It is curious too, that his judgement of 
the two countries con1pletcly reverses the 111ore usual 
view, accepted as axion1atic by the world at large. It is 
France, not England, in his estiination, that is a nation of 
shopkeepers, and it is France that is hypocritical when it 
con1es to n1oral standards, for she tries to slur over and, if 
possible, hide certain distasteful facts of life such, for 
instance, as irregularity of sexual behayiour, commercial 
dishonesty and the presence of poverty in the midst of 
plenty. J)ostoyevsky's England has her share of social 
vices, but they are there for everyone to see: no atten1pt is 
n1ade to conceal then1 .  In fact, if France's outstanding trait 
is hypocrisy, England's is pride. 
It is clear, of course, that Dostoyevsky did not form his 
in1pressions of England unaided. A week's stay in London 
could not have either supplied him with the necessary 
n1aterial or given hin1 a sufficient insight into the British 
character, particularly as he knew no English. (He admits 
to his ignorance of the language in one passage of the 
present book, yet in another claims to base certain of his 
conclusions on English newspaper reports.) The only man 
Dostoyevsky is known to have visited in England was 
Alexander Herzen, the exiled Russian journalist of radical 
views, a sparkling personality and a brilliant talker, whose 

opinion of the Russian governn1ent l)ostoyevsky did not 
share, but whose views of the English character and 
custon1s he evidently found congenial. It is Herzen's 
views, therefore, that, n1ore likely than not, fonn the basis 
of Dostoyevsky's analysis of the English character and of 
life in this country. 
But quite apart fron1 his influence on l)ostoyevsky's 
views about this country, Herzen is responsible for much 
of the contents of Winter Notes as well as for the fonn in 
which they were cast; the perusal of his Letters from France 
and Italy rnakes this abundantly clear. For these Letters have 
suggested to Dostoyevsky tnany of his reflections on 
Russia and his few retnarks on Gcrn1an y, and provided 
hin1 with son1e of the n1ore biting itnages which ݐ.ݑused in 
order to illustrate his con11nents on the French contetnpor­
ary social scene and the bourgeois' nle'ltality and habits. 
In g .. ݒneral, l)ostoyevsky was readily influenced by 
contetnporary thinkers, and the gan1e of tracing his ideas 
back to their original sources is not hard to play. Thus, 
Petrashevsky inspired hin1 with his early enthusiasn1 for 
Fourier, which, for all his later scoffing, continued to 
colour his vision; his concept of universality as the n1ost 
typical attribute of the Russian character was probably first 
suggested to hin1 by Belinsky who h5tnself owed it to 
Odoyevsky; his notion of true brotherhood, realizable 
through a spontaneous integration of society and the 
individual, is sitnilar to Constantine Aksakov's and to 
Khomyakov's; Sarnarin is partly responsible for his view 
of the Orthodox Church a:s the synthesis of the Rornan 
Catholic principle of unity and the Protestant principle of 
freedom; the two alternatives of 'ant-hill' and 'cannibal­
ism' are derived fron1 Herzen; so is n1uch of the language 
he uses to express his social and political philosophy, 
though there Petrashevsky's contribution looms large 
indeed; while, in so far as it differs fron1 Herzen 's, his view 
of the West - its individualistn, 1naterialisn1 and itnpend-

ing calan1itol1S decline - and of Russia's special place in the 
con1ity of nations and aln1ost in the U niversc - her 
self-contained civilization and n1essianic destiny - can be 
found in all essentials ·in early Slavophil literature. 
l)ostoyevsky's failure entirely to fuse all these disparate 
elen1ents into one pro peri y integrated whole till very late 
in life, resulted in an an1bivalence of attitude to the 
problen1s of his day which would have been fatal to a 
lesser n1an. That it did not prove fatal is due to a 
cotnbination of qualities \vhich include sincerity, psycho­
logical insight and in11nense literary gifts. 

CHAPTER I 
I NSTEAI) OF A PREFAC E 
FoR MONTHS NOW, n1y friends, you have been urging n1e 
to give you a description of n1y in1pressions while 
travelling in foreign lands, never suspecting that you are 
thereby placing n1e in a quandary. \X' hat shall I tell you? 
What shall I say that is new, that has not been told before? 
Who of us Russians (those, at least, that read periodicals) 
does not know Europe twice as well as he knows Russia? I 
have put down 'twice' n1erely out of politeness. I should 
probably have said 'ten tin1es better'. Besides apart fron1 
these general considerations you arc well aware that I, of 
all people, have nothing to tell and least of all can I give a 
n1ethodical account of anything, because there was no 
n1ethod in . n1y sight-seeing, and even when I did see 
anything I did not have tin1e to cxarnine it very closely. I 
visited Berlin, l)resden, Wiesbaden, Baden-Baden, Col­
ogne, Paris, London, Lucerne, Geneva, Genoa, Florence, 
Milan, Venice, Vienna and a few other places (to which I 
went twice) , and the whole tour took n1e precisely two 
and a half n1onths! Now, I ask you, is it possible to see 
anything thoroughly while travelling over so rnany roads 
in the course of two and a half n1onths? 
You will ren1en1ber that I con1posed n1y itinerary while 
still in St Petersburg. I had never been abroad, but I longed 
to go there even as a srnall child, when, still unable to read, 
I listened agape, enthralled and terror-struck in turn, to 
n1y parents' bed-tin1e reading of Mrs Radcliffe's novels 
1 

which put me ih a fever and kept me awake at night. When 
at last I wrenched myself away from n1y preoccupations 
and went abroad I was forty years of age and, naturally 
enough, I was not contݓnt with seeing as much as possible, 
I wanted to see everything - yes, everything - despite the 
time limit. Besides, I was quite incapable of coolly 
choosing places to visit. Heavens, how much I expected 
from my tour! 'It doesn't matter if I don't l<?ok at things in 
great detail, '  I thought. 'I shall, at least have seen 
everything and been everywhere, and all I have seen will 
have fused itself into one whole and made up a kind of 
general panorama. I shall, at one fell swoop, have had a 
bird' s eye view of the entire "land of hoi y n1iracles" like 
the Promised Land fron1 the n1ountain - in perspective. 1 In 
fact, I shall experience a new, wonderful and mighty 
impression . '  After all, what do I regret most now, sitting 
at hon1e and recalling my summer tin1e wanderings? Not 
that I saw nothing in great detail, but that although I have 
been aln1ost everywhere, I have not, for example, been in 
Ron1e. And in Rome I n1ight, perhaps, have missed the 
Pope . . . . In fact, I was overwheln1ed by an unquenchable 
thirst for sotnething new, for a constant change of place, 
for general, synthetic, panoran1ic, perspective in1press­
tons. 
Now what do you expect from me after such a 
confession? What shall I tell you? What shall I depict? A 
panoran1a? A perspective? A bird's eye view of something? 
But you will probably be the first to tell n1e that I have 
flown too high. Besides, I consider myself to be a 
conscientious man, and I should not at all like to tell lies, 
or even travellers' tales. But even should I limit myself to 
depicting and describing the panoramic view, I could not 
fail to tell lies and not even because I an1 a traveller, but 
1 'Land of holy miracles' - name given to Western Europe by the 
Slavophil poet A. Khomyakov (I 804-60) in his poem 'A Dream' 
(I 834). Tr. note. 
2 

simply because in such circumstances as mine it is 
impossible not to lie. Reason it out for yourselves. Berlin, 
for instance, n1ade a very sour in1pression on me and I 
stayed only twenty-four hours in it. But I know now that I 
have wronged Berlin, that I have no right to my assertion 
that it makes a sour impression. There is a dash of 
sweetness in it, at the very least. And what was the cause 
of that fatal mistake of mine? Sin1ply the fact that though a 
sick man, suffering from an attack of liver, I sped along 
through rain and fog to Berlin for two whole days and 
nights and when I arrived after a sleepless journey, yellow, 
tired and broken, I noticed suddenly and at the very first 
glance that Berlin was incredibly like St Petersburg. The 
same monotonously straight streets, the san1e sn1ells, the 
same . . .  (but I cannot enun1erate all the things they have 
in common)! Blow me, I thought to n1yself, it was really 
hardly worth while spending a back-breaking forty-eight 
hours in a railway carriage only to ݔee the replica of what I 
had just left. I did not even like the lirne-trees, to preserve 
which a Berliner will sacrifice all he holds n1ost dear, even 
his constitution; and what can be dearer to a Berliner than 
his constitution? Besides, all Berliners, all of then1 without 
exception, looked so Gennan that ( oh, horror!) without so 
much as an attempt to see Kaulbach's frescoes I slipped 
away to Dresden as fast as I could, deeply convinced in n1y 
heart of hearts that it needed a special knack to get used to 
a German and that at first he was very difficult to bear in 
large masses. 
In Dresden I was unfair even to Gern1an won1en. I 
decided immediately I stepped out into the street, that no 
sight was more horrible than a typical I)resden won1an, 
and that even V sevolod K restovsk y, that poet of love and 
the most inveterately gay of all Russian poets, n1ight 
despair and come to doubt his vocation. 1 Of course I felt 
1V. Krestovsky ( 184o-95) a very minor poetaster, and third-rate 
novelist. Tr. note. 
3 

the very san1e n1inute that I was talking nonsense and that 
under no circumstances whatever could he possibly come 
to doubt his vocation. ':A couple of hours later I realized 
what it was: back in my hotel bedroon1 I put out my 
tongue in front of a n1irror and had to confess that my 
opinion of the ladies of Dresden was in the highest degree 
slanderous. My tongue was yellow and unpleasant . . .  
'Can it really be true, ' thought I, 'that mai1, that lord of 
creation, is so dependent on his own liver? How low!' 
With these cotnforting thoughts I went off to Cologne. I 
adn1it to having expected a lot fron1 the Cathedral of 
which I reverently made drawings in my youth when I 
studied architecture. On tny way back through Cologne a 
n1onth later, when I saw the Cathedral a second time on 
tny return frorn Paris, I ahnost 'asked its forgiveness on 
n1y knees' for not having fully grasped its beauty, just like 
Karatnzin fell on his knees in front of a Rhine water-fall. 1 
But all the san1e, that first tin1e I did not like the Cathedral 
at all; it seen1ed to tne to be nothing but a piece of lace, lace 
and lace again, a bit of f.1ncy goods, son1ething like a 
paper-weight, son1e 500 feet high. 
'Not very n1ajestic, ' I decided, just as our grandfathers 
concluded about Push kin: 'His writings are too light, ' they 
used to say, 'not enough of the lofty style in then1.' 
I suspect that this first opinion of tnine was influenced 
by two circun1stanccs, the first of them being eau-de­
Cologne. Jean-Maria-Farina is situated next to the Cathed­
ral, and no n1atter at which hotel you stay, whatever your 
n1ood, however hard you rna y be trying to hide fron1 your 
enetnies and particularly frotn Jean-Maria-Farina, his 
1 N. Karamzin (I 766--I 826) - historian, poet and novelist, strongly 
influenced by eighteenth-century British writers, such as Sterne and 
Richardson. His Poor Liz a ( 1 792), a lachrymose and sentimental little 
talc, had an enormous success and is generally considered to be the first 
Russian novel. The sentence quoted in this context comes out of his 
Swiss letters (dated l4 August 1789) . Tr. note. 
4 

clients are sure to find you, and then it is the case of 
'eau-de-Cologne ou la vie' - one of the two, there is no 
other choice. I cannot assert too definitely that these are 
the very words people shout: 'eau-de-Cologne ou la vie', 
but who knows, perhaps they are? I ren1ember at that time 
I kept in1agining I could hear them. 
The second circumstance which irritated me and made 
me unfair in my judgments was the new Cologne bridge. 
The bridge is excellent, of course, and the town is justly 
proud of it, but I thought it was too proud of it. Naturally 
this made n1e angry. Besides the collector of pennies at the 
entrance to the tnarvellous bridge should not have made 
me pay that reasonable tax with an air of fining n1e for 
son1e n1isdemeanour of which I tnyself was not aware. I 
don't know, but it struck n1e that the Gennan was trying 
to bully n1e. 'He has probably guessed, '  I thought, 'that I 
am a foreigner, and a Russian at that. ' Anyway, his eyes 
aln1ost as good as said: 'You see our bridge, you tniserable 
Russian? Well, you are a tnere wonn in con1 pari son with 
our bridge and with every Chennan n1an because you 
haven't got a bridge like that. ' You n1ust agree this is 
enough to make one take offence. The Gern1an never said 
it, of course, and never even harboured it in his thoughts 
perhaps, but it does not n1atter. I was so convinced that 
that was just what he wanted to say, that I con1pletely lost 
n1y ten1per. 'Dan1n it all, ' I thought, 'we have son1ething 
to be proud of too, the san1ovar for instance . . .  We've got 
n1agazines . . .  We n1ake first-class things . . .  We have . . .  ' 
In short, I lost my tetnper, and, after buying a bottle of 
eau-de-Cologne which I could not avoid, I in11nediatcly 
rushed off to Paris in the hope that the French would be a 
great deal nicer and n1ore entertaining. 
Now you reason it out for yourselves: if only I had 
n1ade an effort and stayed a week in Berlin instead of one 
day, the san1e in Dresden and say about three days, or two 
at the very least, in Cologne, I should n1ost probably have 
5 

had another or even a third glimpse of the same things, but 
with a different eye and should have obtained a n1ore 
favourable impression: of them. Even a ray of sunshine, 
just an ordinary ray of sunshine, would have had a lot to 
do with it; if only the sun had shone over the Cathedral as 
it in fact did shine when I arrived in the city of Cologne for 
the second time, the whole building would have appeared 
to me in its true light and not as it did that bleak and even 
somewhat rainy morning, fit only to provoke an outburst 
of wounded patriotisn1. It by no n1eans follows, however, 
that patriotisn1 is only born in bad weather. 
And so you see, n1y friends, you cannot look at 
everything in two and a half 111onths and never n1ake a 
n1istake, and I an1 unable to give you the n1ost accurate 
inforn1ation. I n1ust willy-nilly be untruthful occasionally, 
and therefore . . .  
But here you interrupt n1e. You tell n1e that this time 
you do not, in fact, want accurate inforn1ation, that if need 
be you will find it in Reichard's guidebook, and that, on 
the contrary, it would not be at all a bad thing if travellers 
ain1ed not so tnuch at absolute truth (which they are 
altnost never able to attain) as at sincerity, if son1etimes 
they were not afraid to reveal son1e personal in1pression or 
adventure, even of the kind that did not redound much to 
their credit, and if they did not look up well-known 
authorities in order to che<:k up on their own conclusions. 
You tell n1e, in short, that all you want are my own 
in1 pressions, provided they are sincere. 
Ah! say I, so what you want is just gossip, light 
sketches, fleeting personal in1pressions. That certainly 
suits me and I shall imn1ediately consult my diary. And I 
shall try to be as sin1ple and frank as possible. I only ask 
you to bear in mind that I shall often be wrong in the 
things I write about. Not wrong about everything, of 
course. One cannot be wrong about such facts·, for 
Instance, as that the Cathedral of Notre Dame is in Paris 
6 

and so is the Bal Mabille. The latter fact in particular has 
been so thoroughly recorded by all Russians writing about 
Paris that it is aln1ost in1possible to doubt it. Even I shall 
not perhaps make a n1istake about this, though strictly 
speaking, I cannot guarantee even this. Now, for exan1ple, 
they say that it is in1possible to go to Ron1e and not see St 
Peter's. But just think: I have been in London, but never 
saw St Paul 's. Honestly, I did not. Never saw St Paul's 
Cathedral . True enough, there is quite a difference 
between St Peter's and St Paul's, but all the san1e, it is 
son1ehow hardly decent for a traveller not to have seen it. 
There's my first adventure for you, which does not 
redound much to n1y credit (that is to say, I did in fact see 
it perhaps, at a distance of son1e 500 yards, but I was in a 
hurry to get to Penton ville, did not bother and ignored it). 
But let us be more to the point. And do you know - I did 
not just travel about and enjoy a bird's-cye-view of things 
(enjoying a bird's-eye-view of things docs not n1ean 
looking down on then1. It is an architectural tern1, you 
know.) I stayed in Paris for a whole n1onth less the eight 
days I spent in London. And so I shall now write 
son1ething about Paris for you, because I have, after all, 
had a n1uch better look at it than I had at St Paul's 
Cathedral or at the 1adies of Dresden. Well, here goes. 
7 

CHAPTER II 
IN A RAILWAY CA RRIAGE 
'FRENCHMEN ARE not rational and would consider thein­
selves 1nost unfortunate if they were. ' This phrase was 
written by Fonvizin as far back as the last century, and, 
Heavens, how cheerfully he nn1st have written it. 1 I bet the 
sheer joy of it wanned the cockles of his heart when he 
was thinking it up. and who knows, perhaps all of us 
coining after Fonvizin, three or four generations at a 
stretch, read it not without pleasure. All such phrases, 
which put foreigners in their place, contain, even if we 
con1e across thcn1 now, son1ething irresistibly pleasant for 
us Russians. We keep this very secret, son1etin1es, even 
secret fron1 ourselves. For there are in this certain 
overtones of revenge for an evil past. Maybe this is a bad 
feeling, but so1nchow I an1 convinced it exists in almost 
every one of us. Naturally enough, we kick up a fuss if we 
arc suspected of it, and arc not one bit insincere, and yet I 
should i1naginc Bclinsky2 hin1sclf was in this sense a 
1 Denis Fonvizin (I 744-92)- 'the Father of Russian Comedy', author of 
The Br(eadier (I 766). The present quotation comes from Letter XLIV, 
written from Aachen on 29 September I 778, and addressed to General 
P. Panin. The rest of the sentence is as follows: ' ... for it would force 
them to think instead of enjoying themselves.' Tr. 11ote. 
2Vissarion Belinsky (18I I-48)- the most famous of all Russian literary 
critics at a time when literary criticism performed also the function of 
social and political criticism. He was a radical and a 'Westerne( in his 
sympathies. Tr. 110te. 
8 

Slavophil. I ren1en1ber about fifteen years ago, when I 
knew Belinsky, how reverently (son1etimes even oddly 
so) all that set used to bow down and worship the West, 
n1ostly France that is. France was all the fashion then- this 
was in 'forty-six. And it is not that people adored such 
nan1es as Georges Sand, Proudhon, etc. and felt respect for 
those of Louis Blanc, Ledru-Rollin and others. Oh no! 
People thought highly even of little pip-squeaks, bearing 
the most wretched names, who sin1ply collapsed when 
they were put on their n1ettle later on. Even those were 
expected to perform great deeds in the future service to 
humanity. Son1e of then1 were talked about in a special 
reverent whisper. . .  And what do you think? In all my life 
I have never seen a man n1ore passionately Russian than 
was Belinsky, though before hin1 only Chaadayev perhaps 
spoke with such bold and son1etin1es blind indignation 
about much in our native land and apparently despised 
everything Russian . 1 There are certain reasons why I 
should ren1en1ber and think of it now. But who knows, 
maybe Belinsky hin1self did not always consider that mot 
of Fonvizin's particularly scandalous. Surely there are 
moments when people fail to appreciate the n1ost seen1ly 
and indeed legitin1ate tutelage. Oh, but for Heaven's sake, 
don't run away with the idea that to lo-ve one's country 
means to revile the foreigner or that I think it does. I don't 
think so at all and have no intention of thinking so, on the 
contrary even. . . Only it is a pity I have no time to 
explain n1 yself son1ewhat n1ore clearly. 
By the way, please don't think that I have forgotten 
Paris and launched n1yself into Russian literature instead, 
or that I am writing an article of literary criticisn1. It's only 
because I have nothing else to do. 
1Peter Chaadayev (1 794-18 56) - author of Lettres PlzilosophiqHes, in 
which the value of all Russian cultural achievements is vehemently 
denied, and Western Europe is proclaimed to be the only source of 
light. Tr. tzote. 
9 

My diary tells n1e that I atn now sitting in a railway 
carriage and am getting ready to see Eydtkuhnen tomor­
row, to receive, that: is, n1y first impression of a foreign 
country, and n1y heart even n1isses a beat occasionally. 
Shall I really see Europe at last, I who have vainly dreamt 
of it for almost forty years, I who when still only sixteen, 
in dead earnest and like Nekrasov's Belopyatkin, 1 'wished 
to flee to Switzerland', but did not flee arid an1 now about 
to enter 'the land of holy n1iracles', 2 the land for which I 
have yearned so long and fron1 which I expected so n1uch, 
and in which I believed so in1plicitly. 
'Good heavens, '  I kept thinking as I sat in the railway 
carriage, 'how can we be called Russians? Are we really 
Russians in fact? Why does Europe n1ake such a powerful 
and n1agic in1pression on all of us whoever we are? Why 
does it appeal to us so n1uch ?' I don't n1ean to those 
Russians who stay at hon1e, those ordinary Russians 
whose nan1e is Fifty Million, on whon1 we, all the one 
hundred thousand of us, look with disdain and whon1 our 
profound satirical journals n1ake fun of, because they do 
not shave their beards. No, I n1ean our privileged and 
patented little group. 
After all, everything, literally ahnost everything we can 
show which n1ay be called progress, science, art, 
citizenship, hun1anity, everything, everything sten1s fron1 
there, fron1 that land of holy n1iracles. The whole of our 
life, frotn earliest childhood, is shaped by the European 
n1ould. Could any one of us have withstood this influence, 
appeal, pressure? How is it that we have still not been 
finally n1etan1orphosed into Europeans? And I think 
everyone will agree that we have not been n1etan1orphosed 
- son1e with pleasure, others, of course, with fury because 
we have not yet reached metan1orphosis. But that is 
1 Nikolai Nckrasov (1821-7H)- Russian poet. llclopyatkin is the hero of 
one of his early poems. Tr. 11otc. 
") -Sec note 1, page 2. 
1 0  

another matter. I am merely speaking about the fact that 
we have not been metamorphosed even after being 
subjected to such an overwhelming influence, and am at a 
loss to account for it. It could surely not have been our 
nannies and mammies that have preserved us from 
metamorphosis. It is sad and absurd, really, to think that 
but for Arina Rodionovna, Pushkin's nurse, we should, 
perhaps, have had no Pushkin. That is nonsense, is it not? 
Of course it is. and what if in fact it is not nonsense? Many 
Russian children are now being brought up in France; 
what if another Pushkin has been taken there to be 
deprived fron1 his cradle upwards both of an Arina 
Rodionovna and of Russian speech? 
No one could have been more Russian than Pushkin. 
Though hin1self of gentle birth, he yet understood 
Pugachev and penetrated right into his innennost being at 
a tin1e when nobody penetrated anywhere. 1 An aristocrat, 
he yet carried Belkin within his soul. 2 By the force of his 
artistry he renounced his class and in One,gi11 judged it with 
stern judgen1ent fron1 the standpoint of the nation as a 
whole. 3 He is a prophet and a forerunner. 
Is there really a chen1ical bond between the hun1an spirit 
and a n1an's · native land which tnakes it in1possible to 
break away fron1 one's country and even if one does break 
away fron1 it, n1akes one con1e back to it in the end? After 
all, Slavophilisn1 did not fall in our tnidst straight out of 
the clear sky, and though it did afterwards becon1e a 
Moscovite fad, the basis of this fad is considerably broader 
1 Pugachev - an eighteenth-century leader, of a peasant revolt, depicted 
by Pushkin in his history of the revolt and in a short novel The Captain's 
DmiJ?hter. Tr. note. 
2In I 83 I Pushkin published a collection of five short stories supposedly 
written by a retired officer of modest means 'the late Ivan Petrovich 
Belkin'. Tr. note. 
30ncgin - the hero of Pushkin's most famous poem E11.tUe11e 011£'.{!ill 
(r824-28). Tr. note. 
11 

than allowed for by Moscow's fon݌1ula and lies possibly 
much deeper in son1c people's hearts than seems likely at 
first sight. In fact, eyen in Moscow this basis is perhaps 
broader than Moscow's own forn1ub. It is at first so 
terribly difficult to express oneself clearly even to oneself. 
Some ideas, though powerful and full of vitality, take 
over three generations fully to n1anifcst thetnselves so that 
their final end docs not resctnblc their beginnings in the 
very slightest . . .  
Thus did all these idle thoughts assail me in my railway 
carriage on the way to Europe, partly in spite of tnysclf 
and partly because I was bored and had nothing to do. To 
be frank, only those of us who have nothing to do have 
hitherto given thought to this sort of thing. Oh, how 
boring it is to sit idly in a railway carriage! In fact, just as 
boring as it is to li ve in Russia without having anything 
specific to do. You tnay be taken along and cared for, you 
n1a y even be I ullcd to sleep son1cti n1cs, indeed your every 
wish n1ay be anticipated, but you arc bored, bored all the 
san1c, and precisely because you arc being cared for and all 
you have to do is to sit and wait till you arc brought to 
your destination. Honestly, one son1ctin1es feels like 
jutnping out of the carriage and running along by the side 
of the engine on one's own flat feet. The results tnay be 
worse, lack of practice tnay soon tire one out, but at least 
one would be using one's own legs and doing a job one has 
found oneself, and were the carriage to collide and turn 
sotnersaults one would not be sitting shut in and twirling 
one's thutnbs and one would not be answerable for 
son1cone else's blunder. 
What extraordinary ideas one gets when one has 
nothing to do! 
In the tneantin1e, night was drawing on. Lights were 
being lit in the carriages. I had a husband and wife sitting 
opposite tne, elderly people, landowners and pr.obably 
respectable. They were in a hurry to get to London for the 
12 

Exhibition, but only for a few days and they had left their 
fan1ily at home. 1 Sitting next to me on my right was a 
Russian who had been working in an office in London for 
the last ten years, who had con1e to St Petersburg on 
business for just a fortnight and who seen1ed to have lost 
all sense of longing for his native land. On my left sat a 
clean, pure-bred Englishman, intensely serious and with 
his red hair parted in the English way. Throughout the 
journey he never said a single word in any language to any 
of us; he read all day without lifting his head a book of that 
very sn1all English print which only English people can 
tolerate and even praise for its convenience, and at 
precisely ten o'clock at night he took off his boots and put 
on slippers. He was probably used to doing this all his life 
and had no desire to change his habits even in a raihvay 
carnage. 
Soon everyone was dozing; the whistling and knocking 
sounds of the train n1ade one terribly sleepy. I sat and 
thought and thought and son1ehow - I do not know how ­
catne to the conclusion that 'Frenchn1en were not rational', 
which served as the beginning of this chapter. And, do 
you know, I atn in1pelled by sotnething or other, while we 
are making our way to Paris, to let you know of tny 
carriage thoughts, just like that, for the sake of hutnan 
sytnpathy: after all I was bored enough, sitting in that 
carriage, so you n1ight as \vell be bored now. However, 
other readers should be protected, and I shall, therefore, 
deliberately include all these thoughts in one chapter 
which I shall call supcąfluous. It will bore you a little, but as 
it is superfluous other people can sitnp!y leave it out. The 
reader n1ust be treated carefully and conscientiously, but 
friends can be dealt with a little tnore cavalierly. 
Well, now . . .  
1The reference is to the World Exhibition of 186.2. Though historically 
not as famous as its predecessor, the Great Exhibition of 18 51, it, in 
fact, exceeded it in extent, cost, attendance, and number of exhibitors. 
Tr. 11otc. 
13 

CHAPTER III 
WHICH IS QUITE SUPERFLUOUS 
As A MATTER OF FACT, these were not thoughts, but a sort 
of conten1plation, arbitrary notions, day-drean1s even, 'of 
this and that, and nothing else'. To begin with, I n1ade a 
n1ental jouney back into olden tin1es and let my thoughts 
wander, particularly on the subject of the n1an who had 
n1ade the above aphorisn1 about the rationality of French­
nlen. It was, in £1ct, the aphorisn1 that gave rise to these 
otherwise ain1less thoughts. For his day that n1an held 
very progressive ideas. But though he did go about all his 
life bedecked in the dress of a French gentlen1an, pow­
dered wig and a little sword to show his knightly descent 
(which was entirely foreign to us) and to defend his 
personal honour in Potetnkin's waiting roon1, no sooner 
did he poke his nose abroad than the very nan1e of Paris 
becan1e anathen1a to hin1 and he decided · that 'Frenchn1en 
were not rational' and that they would even consider it 
n1ost unfortunate if they were.1 By the way, you do not by 
any chance in1agine, do you, that I n1entioned the sword 
and the velvet coat as a reproach to Fonvizin? Because I 
certainly did not. He could not, after all, put on a Russian 
peasant coat, particularly at that tin1e, when even now 
certain persons, in order to be Russian and n1erge with the 
people do not put on a peasant coat, but have instead 
1Gregory Potemkin (1 735-91): Russian general and statesman;- one of 
the most powerful of Catherine II's favourites. 
14 

invented a ballet dress for themselves little different fron1 
the type worn in Russian national operas by the various 
Ouslads 
in 
love 
with 
their 
Ludmillas 
wearing 
kokoshniks. 1 At least. a French coat was nearer to the 
people's understanding of things: 'You can see he's a 
gentleman, ' they would say. 'What else should a gentle­
man wear - a peasant's coat or something?' 
I heard a short time ago that one modern landowner in 
order to n1erge with the people also took to wearing 
Russian dress and even going to village n1eetings in it; but 
the peasants as soon as they saw hin1 coming would say to 
each other: 'What's this fellow in fancy dress barging in 
here. for?' So that landowner had no success in merging 
with the people. 
'I shall certainly not 1nakc any concessions, ' a friend said 
to me. 'I certainly shan't - not n1e! I will n1ake a point of 
not wearing a beard, and I'll go about in white tie and tails 
if necessary. I'll do all the work that n1ust be done, but I 
shall not so n1uch as hint at friendly relations, I'll be the 
boss, stingy and thrifty, I'll be a shark and a leech if need 
be. They'll respect me all the more. And this, surely, is the 
main thing - real respect. ' 
'Damn it ݍll, ' I said to n1yself. 'It all sounds as if they 
were getting ready to n1arch against enen1y tribes. A sort 
of war council, that is. ' 
'Well, '  said a third man - a charn1ing n1an, as a n1atter of 
fact - to me: 'Suppose I n1ade n1yself a member of some 
peasant organization, and the village council ordered me to 
be flogged or something or other. What then?' 
'And even if it did, ' I wanted suddenly to say, but did 
not, because I was afraid to. (What is this? Why are we still 
sometimes afraid to express son1e of our thoughts?) 'Even 
if the council did give that order, ' I thought to myself, 'and 
1 Kokoshnik - head-dress traditionally worn by Russian women. Tr. 
tJote. 
15 

they did flog you, what of it? Professors of aesthetics call 
such a turn of events the tragic side of life - and that is all 
there is to it. Surely a little thing like that docs not warrant 
a whole life spent aldof fro1n everyone else? Oh no, if we 
want to be all together let us really all be together, and if 
we want to be aloof let us be con1plctely aloof. Elsewhere 
people had been through a good deal worse - won1en and 
children, too. 
'Cotnc, con1e now, won1en and children indeed! '  n1y 
opponent would cxclain1, 'the village council might have 
me flogged just like that, for no reason at all, because of 
another n1an 's cow, perhaps, that had crashed into 
son1eonc's else's vegetable garden, and you- you set it out 
as a general proposition. '  
It sounds funny, of course, and, besides, it is a funny 
business altogether, a dirty business. I don't want to soil 
n1y hands with it. It's hardly decent even to talk of it. To 
hell with then1 all; let thcn1 all be whipped so far as I am 
concerned. It has nothing to do with n1e. As a matter of 
fact, so far as I an1 concerned, I can absolutely answer for 
the village council. My channing controversialist would 
not get so n1uch as one little whack if it were possible to 
deal with hin1 according to the council's decision. 'Let's 
take a tnoncy fine off hin1, fellows. He's gentry after all ­
not used to this sort of thing. Now, we arc a different 
n1attcr; our backsides are tnade for flogging. '  That is how 
the council would decide, in the words of the village 
n1ayor in one of Stchedrin 's provincial sketches . .
. 1 
'Reaction!' son1cone will cry on reading this. 'Fancy 
putting up a defence of flogging!' (Honest to God, 
son1conc will deduce fron1 this that I an1 standing up for 
1 N. Stchc:drin, litc:rary psc:udonym of Michad Saltykov (1 826-89), 
proba bly the: most famous of .all Russian satirists after Gogol. His 
Prol'illcial Sketches wc:rc: published in 
I 8 s6/7 and gained for him an 
immc:diatc: and widc:sprc:ad popularity among the more liberal c:1ements 
of the: Russian rc:ading public. Tr. llOfc. 
16 

flogging. ) 
'Con1c now, ' another 111an n1ay say. 'What arc you 
talking about? You wanted to tell us about Paris and now 
you have gone right off the track to tell us about flogging. 
What has Paris got to do with it?' 
'What's all this?' a third man n1ight add. 'You adn1it 
yourself that you heard about these things quite recently, 
yet you were travelling in the summer. How then could 
you have thought about all this in your railway carriage?' 
'Quite right, '  I would reply, 'this really is a problem. 
But let me see now, these are winter reminiscences of 
sun1mer impressions. And son1c winter in1prcssions got 
n1ixcd up with the winter ren1iniscences. Besides as the 
train was approaching Eydtkuhncn 1ny thoughts were 
particularly concentrated on all things Russian which I was 
abandoning for the sake of seeing Europe, and I rcn1cmbcr 
meditating in that strain. The thcn1c of n1y reflections was 
in fact the following: What kind of itnprint did Europe 
leave on us at different tin1cs? Why did it constantly try to 
gatccrash upon us with its civilization? How civilized have 
we become and precisely how n1any of us have so £1r 
become civilized? I can now sec that all this is son1chow 
unnecessary. !3ut then I did warn you beforehand that the 
whole chapter was unnecessary. But anyway, where did I 
stop? Oh, yes! Discussing a French coat! That is what it all 
started with. 
Well now, one of these French coats at the tin1e wrote 
The Brigadier. 1 The Brigadier was a n1arvcllous thing by the 
standards then prevailing, and created an extraordinary 
effect. Potemkin hin1self said: 'You 1nay as well die now, 
Denis, never will you write anything better. '2 People 
began to stir as if roused fron1 sleep. I wonder, I 
continued, letting n1y thoughts take their own course, 
1 Scc note I, page 8. 
2Potcmkin is supposed to have said this to Fonvizin at the first night of 
the play ( 1 766). Tr. tfote. 
1 7  

were people even then tired of doing nothing, tired of a li fe 
in leading strings? I do not n1can n1crel y the French leading 
strings of the tin1e, and would anyway like to add that we 
are a very crcdulous.- nation and that it all co1ncs of o·ur 
being so good-natured. We 111ight, for instance, be all 
sitting idly round doing nothing and then suddenly take it 
into our heads that son1ebody had said or done son1cthing 
worthwhile. We n1ight in1aginc that w݉, too, could be 
original and that \VC have found son1cthing to do, and then 
we \Votlld all get excited in the absolute conviction that 
now it is all going to begin. A fly n1ight buzz past, and we 
arc quite ready to take it for an elephant. It is of course due 
to youthful inexperience and dearth of native tradition. In 
Russia that sort of behaviou r can be traced ahnost further 
back than The Brigadier, though it was then naturally only 
in its rudin1cntary stages, but it continues to the present 
day: we find son1cthing to do and then give squeals of 
delight. Squealing and bursting fron1 sheer delight - that's 
what \Ve really ݊݋o in for. And yet, a couple of years later 
\Ve slink off again, looking sheepish . But we never get 
tired and arc always ready to begin again. 
As to other leading strings, practically no one in 
Fonvizin 's tin1c had the slightest doubt that these were the 
n1ost sacred, the n1ost European of leading strings and the 
best of all possible tutelage. Of course, there arc few 
doubters, even no\v. The whole of our ultra-progressive 
party is frantically in favour of foreign leading strings. But 
then, oh then it was a tin1e of such tlith in all kinds of 
leading strings that it is a wonder we did not n1ovc 
n1ountains then; it is odd indeed that all these Alaun downs 
and Pargolovo heights and Valdai peaks of ours still stand 
\vherc they have ahvays stood. True enough , a poet of the 
tin1c did say about one of his characters that 
Mountains groaned when he lay on then1 
l R  

and that 
He cast towers high over clouds. 
But that, it secn1s, was n1ercly a n1etaphor. 1 
By the way, 1ny dear sirs, I have only one type of 
literature in n1ind at the n1on1ent - the type known as belles 
lettres. It is through literature that I want to trace Europe's 
gradual and beneficial influence on our country. Just what 
books were then (before, and at the san1e tin1e as, Tltc 
Br({?adicr) published and read \Ve cannot even conceive 
without feeling rather pleasantly superior! We no\v have a 
n1ost ren1arkable writer, the pride of our tin1e, a certain 
Kozn1a Prutkov. 2 His only defect consists in a n1odesty 
that passeth all understanding: he has not yet published his 
co tnplete works. Well now, a long tin1e ago he \Vrote 
Sketches by Ill}' Grandfather, which appeared in a tniscellany 
published by Tlte Contemporary. Just itnagine the sort of 
thing that could have been written at the titne by this 
debonair septuagenarian , who had lived in the reign of 
Catherine the Great, who had seen a thing or t\vo in his 
life, who had been at court, who had fought at Ochakov 
and who had t10\V retired to his ancestral farn1 and taken to 
\Vriting his n1en1oirs. 3 He certainly had son1cthing to write 
about, that 1nan - all the things he had 'Nitnesscd in his life! 
1 These two lines occur in Dcrzha vin 
· s ode 011 Stll'<>r<>l' 's Viaorics ( 1 794) 
celebrating the taking of Warsaw by the Russian troops. Gabriel 
Derzhavin ( 1 743-1 R 16) 
- statesman and Grand Old Man of Russian 
eighteenth-century poetry. Tr. 11otc. 
2Kozma Prutkov - i maginary civil servant and author of bogus 
aphorisms, comic verse, f:.tblcs, anecdotes, etc. The pseudonym was 
used by the poet Alcxey Tolstoy ( 1 X I 7-7 1 )  and his cousins Zhemchuzh­
nikov. Tr. 11otc. 
-'Ochakov - a fortress (now town) on the north shore of the Black Sea, 
ca ptured by Potemkin from the Turks in 1 7XX. Tr. 11otc. 
1 9  

Yet his book is cotnposed entirely of such little stories as 
the following: 
. .  
' 
THE WITTY ANSWER OF THE CHEV ALlER DE MONTBAZON 
A very attractive young lady once coolly asked the 
Chevalier de Montbazon in the King's presence: 'Can 
you tell n1e, n1y lord, whether a dog is attached to its tail 
or the tail to the dog?' To which the Chevalier, being 
quick at repartee and therefore not in the slightest 
confused, replied in an even tone of voice: 'There is no 
rule, Madan1, forbidding a tnan to catch a dog either by 
its tail or by its head. '  This reply gave the King tnuch 
pleasure and the Chevalier did not go unrewarded. 
You think that all this is stuff and nonsense, and that an old 
n1an like that never really existed in this world. But I 
protnise you that \Vhen I was ten years old, I tnyself and 
\Vith tny own eyes read a book written in the Great 
Catherine's tin1e which contained the following story: 
T i l E  \VITTY ANSWEH OF Ti l E  CHEVALIER DE RO HAN 
It is a well known fact that the Chevalier de Rohan 
suffered frotn very bad breath. One day when he was 
present at a levee of the Prince de Conde, the latter said 
to hitn: 'J)o not stand quite so ncar, Chevalier, for you 
stnell n1ost un plcasant1y. ' To which the Chevalier 
inuncdiatcly gave ans\ver: 'Not I, your n1ost gracious 
Highness, but rather you, for you have just cotnc out of 
bed. ' 
Novv, just try and itnaginc that old n1an living on his land, 
a seasoned warrior who had lost an ann perhaps, 
surrounded by his old wife, his country-butnpkin children 
and a hundred servants, stcatning hitnsclf every Saturday 
in his Russian bath till he is purp1e in the face. There he is 
20 

with his glasses on his nose, gravely and enthusiastically 
reading this kind of story and in1agining it to be the very 
essence of culture into the bargain; indeed, thinking 
hin1self almost in duty bound to read it. What a nai"ve faith 
they then had in the utility of such news fron1 Europe and 
the necessity of it. 'It is, '  they said, 'a well-known fact that 
the Chevalier de Rohan suffered frotn bad breath. '  To 
whon1 was it well known? Why was it well known? What 
bun1pkins sotnewhere in the backwoods of Russia knew it 
so well? And anyway who would want to know it? But 
such revolutionary thoughts never disturbed the old n1an. 
With the n1ost childlike faith he would decide that this 
'collection of witty stories' was well known at court, and 
that would be quite sufficient so far as he was concerned. 
Oh, certainly we found it easy to assitnilate Europe then 
- in the physical sense, of course. It was difficult to avoid 
using the whip when it can1e to n1oral assin1ilation. People 
would put on silk stockings and wigs, attach swords to 
then1selves - and look for all the world like Europeans. 
And not only was it not felt as an encutnbrance, but it was. 
in fact, liked. And yet in practice everything retnained as 
before: once Rohan (of whon1 all that was known was that 
he had very had breath) was laid aside and spectacles \Vere 
taken off, people still dealt with their servants - as before, 
their attitude to their fan1ily was still as patriarchal - as 
before, they still had the neighbouring farn1er thrashed in 
the stables - as before - if he was poorer than they and 
happened to say son1ething rude, still detneaned thenl­
selves in the presence of their superiors - as before. Even 
the peasant understood it all better: his tnasters despised 
hin1 less, held his custon1s and habits in less contetnpt, 
knew n1ore about hin1, were not strangers to hin1 to 
the san1e extent, not foreigners quite as n1uch. And as to 
then1 throwing their weight about in his presence, what 
else could you expect? That's what they were the n1asters 
for. 
They 
tnay 
have 
thrashed 
their 
peasants 
to 
21 

death, 
but the people liked thetn 
better all the 
san1e, because they were nearer to then1 son1ehow. In fact 
all these fellows ܿ.ere sitnple, sturdy folk, never in 
anything tried to go to the root of the n1atter, grabbed, 
thrashed, stole, fondly sweated their peasants, and went 
through life peacefully in fat contentlnent and 'in con­
scientious and childish debauch'. 1 
l even suspect that 
all those grandfathers 
of ours 
were not all that 
innocent, even in that little n1atter of the Rohans and 
the Montbazons. 
Son1e of thetn were great rogues even, and knew their 
O\Vn worth when it can1e to all these European influences 
fron1 above. All that fantastic Inake-bclieve, all that 
tnasquerading, all those French coats, cuffs, wigs, swords, 
all those fat, ch11nsy legs, thrust into silk stockings, those 
little soldiers in Gern1an wigs and boots, all this, it seen1s 
to tne, \vas a great swindle, so that even the sin1ple people 
son1eti1nes noticed it and understood. Of course one can 
be a clerk or a s\vindler or a brigadier and yet be innocently 
and touchingly convinced that the Chevalier de Rohan is 
in fact the very ernboditnent of the tnost exquisite 
refinen1e11t. But then this did not prevent anyone frotn 
behaving as they always did: the Gvozdilovs bullied as 
they had always done. 2 Our Poten1kin and others of his ilk 
very nearly had our Rohans thrashed in ·their stables, our 
Montbazons fleeced the qbick and the dead, boxed 
people's ears with lace-cuffed fists and kicked their 
backsides with silk-stockinged feet, and our n1arquises at 
court levees rolled about on the floor, 
1 Quotation from the poem Mcditaticm by Lermontov ( 18 14-4 1) . Tr. 
II of C. 
2Gvozdilov - one of the characters in Fonvizin 's play Tire Bri,(!adicr (sec 
note 
1 ,  page 8). According to the conventions of the time, his 
personality is revealed by his name, which is derived from t.he word 
.l!vozdit, to beat or bully. Tr . 11ote. 
22 

In valiant disregard of bun1 ps on their heads . 1 
In short all this Europe, bespoke and to order, tnanagcd 
surprisingly well to achieve a hannonious co-existence 
atnong us, beginning with St Petersburg - the tnost 
fantastic town with the n1ost fantastic history of all towns 
on this planet. 
But nowadays it is no longer the san1c, and St 
Petersburg has triutnphcd. Nowadays we have con1e up to 
standard and arc fully fledged Europeans. Nowadays 
Gvozdilov hitnsclf uses skill when doing his bullying, 
keeps up appearances, is bccotning a French bourgeois and 
before long will take to quoting texts to defend the slave trade 
like any Atncrican fron1 the Southern States of the USA. 
As a n1atter of fact, the habit of quoting texts in 
self-defence is now increasingly reaching Europe fron1 the 
United States. When I get there, I said to tnysclf, I shall sec 
it with tny own eyes. You can never learn fron1 books as 
n1uch as you can sec with your own · eyes. 
By the way, talking of Gvozdilov: Wh y did Fon viz in 
put one of the n1ost rctnarkablc phrases in his Br(Ąadicr not 
into the n1outh of Sophia, who in that con1cdy represents 
the idea of noble, hun1anc and European progress, but into 
the n1outh of the brigadier's inane wife; whon1 he n1adc 
into such a fool (and a reactionary fool at that, not just a 
fool) that all the threads arc there for everyone to sec and 
all the inanities she says scctn to be said not by her, but by 
someone else hiding behind her back? But when the truth 
had to be said, it was not Sophia who said it, but the 
brigadier's wife. After all, he n1ade her not only into a 
perfect fool, but into a bad \Votnan as well; and yet he 
sccn1cd afraid, and even considered it artistically in1 possi­
ble, that such a phrase should pop out of the n1outh of 
1 Quotation from Griboyedov's comedy of manners 3Voe frot/1 Wit 
(1 824). Tr. 11ote. 
23 

Sophia, wi'tl1 her hot-house plant upbringing. Instead, he 
apparently considered it n1orc natural that it should have 
been uttered by a s_jtnplc, stupid won1an. Here is the 
passage, it is worth recalling. It is very curious and is n1adc 
so by the fact that it was written with no end in view, not 
even tongue in check, naively and perhaps even accidental­
ly. The brigadier's wife says to Sophia: 
. . .  W c had a captain in our rcgitnent who con11nandcd 
No. 1 Cotnpany. His nan1c was Gvozdilov and he had 
such a pretty little wife. Well now, would you believe it, 
n1y dear, whenever he lost his tcn1per or was drunk 
rather, he used to bully her within an inch of her life and 
would never tell her what for. It was none of n1 y 
business, of course, but I used to weep tny eyes out 
son1ctin1cs, looking at her. 
SoPHIA: Pray, Madan1 , stop telling us things so revolt­
ing to hutnanity. 
BRIGADIER's WIFE: There you arc, tn y dear, you don't 
even want to hear about it. and how do you think the 
captain's wife felt, who had to bear it? 
Thus, for all her good tnanncrs and sensibility Sophia is 
tnadc to look a fool by the side of a sin1plc and con1n1on 
wotnan. This is one of Fonvizin's rctnarkablc repartees (or 
retorts), and he has nothing neater, n1ore hutnan, and . . .  
tnore accidental. And we still have a countless nutnber of 
such hot-house progressives atnong the n1ost advanced of 
our public n1cn, who are very well satisified with their 
hot-houses and dctnand nothing better. But the n1ost 
retnarkable thing of all is that Gvozdilov still bullies his 
wife and does it aln1ost in greater con1fort than before. He 
does, really. They say it used to be done in greater an1ity 
and with n1ore kindness! To love is to thrash, s݀ys the 
proverb. Wives, they say, becatne quite worried if they 
24 

were not beaten: 'he doesn 't beat n1e, n1eans he doesn't 
love 111e, ' they said. 
But all this is pri1nitive and ele1nental, harking back to 
the ti1nes of our ancestors. Nowadays even this is subject 
to progress. Nowadays Gvozdilov bullies ahnost out of 
principle, and then only because he is still a fool, that is an 
old-fashioned n1an who has failed to keep up with the 
tin1es. The reason why I expatiate on the then1e of 
Gvozdilov is that people in this country still write 
paragraphs about hin1 full of profound n1eaning and 
hu1nan understanding. And they write so n1uch that the 
public is tired of then1 . Gvozdilov is sufficiently tenacious 
of life to be aln1ost in1n1ortal. Oh, yes, he is alive and 
kicking, drunk and replete. Now he has only one ann and 
one leg left and, like Captain Kopeykin, 'had shed his 
blood, in a 1nanner of speaking'. 1 His wife has long ago 
ceased to be the 'pretty young thing' she used to be. She 
has grown old, and her face is pale, haggard and furrowed 
by wrinkles and suffering. But when her husband, the 
captain, lay ill after the loss of his ann, she never left his 
bedside, spent sleepless nights watching over hin1, con1-
forted him, wept bitter tears over hin1, and called hin1 her 
dear, her vali݂nt knight, the darling of her heart, her own 
soldier bold and brave. It n1ay, oh it n1ay, arouse our 
indignation fron1 one point of view. But fron1 another -
long live the Russian wo1nan! There is nothing better in 
our Russian world than her li1nitlessly forgiving love. For 
that is so, is it not? Particularly as nowadays Gvozdilov, 
too, when he is sober, does not always beat his wife, or 
rather beats her less frequently, keeps up a se1nblance of 
decency and even has an occasional tender word for her. 
For he has become aware in his old age that he cannot do 
without her; he is thrifty and bourgeois, and if he does 
give her a beating even now, it is only when he is drunk or 
1 Kopcykin - a character in Gogol's Dead Souls ( 1 R42). Tr. 11otc. 
25 

else out of ha'bit, when he feels bored. And this certainly is 
progress, whatever you say; which is a cotnfort. And we 
love so much being ݃omfortcd. 
Oh yes, we arc quite comforted now and we ha݄c 
succeeded in comforting ourselves. It n1ay be that reality 
around us looks none too lovely even yet; but then we are 
so wonderful ourselves, so civilized, so European that the 
con1mon people feel sick at the very sight of us. We have 
now reached the point when the common people regard us 
as con1plete foreigners, and do not understand a single 
word of ours, a single look of ours, a single thought of 
ours - and this certainly is progress, whatever you say. We 
have now reached the point where our contempt for the 
con1n1on people and the basic principles of its being, is so 
profound that even our attitude to it is stan1pcd with a 
new, unprecedented and kind of supercilious disdain 
which did not exist even at the tin1e of our Montbazons and 
Rohans, and this certainly is progress, whatever you say. 
And then how self-confident we now are in our civilizing 
n1ission, with what an air of superiority we solve all 
problcn1s, and what problen1s! There is no soil, we say, and 
no people, nationality is nothing hilt a certain systen1 of 
taxation, the soul is a tabula rasa, a sn1all piece of wax out 
of which you can readily n1ould a real n1an, a world n1an 
or a htununculus - all that nn1st be done is to apply the 
fruits of European civilization and read two or three books. 1 
And then how serene, how tnajcstically serene we arc, 
because we have solved all problems and written them off. 
1This passage is one of Dostoyevsky's earliest allusions to the version of 
Slavophilism to which his periodical Vremya was dedicated. Known as 
pochl'l'llllichcstl'o (from pocht'a, soil), it aimed at reconciling Slavophil 
and Westernizing tendencies in Russian thought. Overladen though it is 
by foreign Western influences, Russia, argued Dostoyevsky, must 
nevertheless strive to evolve its own indigenous cultural expression of 
'idea', derived from its native soil. Far from repudiating the West, this 
'Russian idea', according to Dostoyevsky, 'will perhaps be the synthesis 
of all the ideas developed in I Western ! Europe'. Tr. note. 
26 

With what sn1ug self-satisfaction, for instance, we have 
trounced Turgenev for his refusal to n1ake his peace with 
the world together with us, for his refusal to be satisfied 
with our n1ajestic personalities and accept then1 as his 
ideal, and for having sought son1cthing better than us. 
Better than us, good God! But what can be lovelier and 
n1ore faultless than us in this sublunar world? He certainly 
got into hot water over Bazarov, Bazarov restless and 
troubled (sign of a great heart) despite all his nihilisn1. W c 
have even trounced hin1 for his Kukshina, for that 
progressive louse which Turgenev had co1nbcd out of 
Russian reality for us to look at, and we accused hin1 of 
opposing the en1ancipation of won1cn into the bargain. 1 
All this is certainly progress, whatever you say. 
Now we stand over the co1nn1on people with the 
self-assurance of corporals or sergeant-n1ajors of civiliza­
tion. It is a delight to look at us: arn1s aki1nbo and glance 
defiant, we look really cocky, and we say to the peasant 
with all the conten1pt we can n1uster: ' Nationality and 
national con1n1unity all boil down to political reaction and 
the assess1nent of taxes, so what have you to teach us, you 
old lout?' For really we cannot be expected to pander to 
prejudice. 
Oh Goodness n1e . . .  Let us assun1e for a tninutc, n1y 
dear sirs, that rn y travels arc over and I an1 back in Russia, 
and let n1e tell you a story. One day this autun1n, as I was 
reading a newspaper - one of the tnost progressive ones - I 
noticed the following news fro111 Mosco\v. Heading: 
'More relics of barbarisn1' (or son1ething like this, very 
1 Bazarov - a character in Turgenev's Fathers a/1(1 So11s ( 1Xo 1) represent­
ing extreme materialism and opposition to accepted prejudices and 
opinions. He is the Russian literary symbol of nihilism, a term 
popularized by Turgenev though not, as is sometimes said, coined by 
him. 
Kukshina, another character in the same novel, is meant to represent 
the prototype of the mid-nineteenth-century 'emancipated woman', 
with ideas similar to those of Bazarov. Tr. 11<>fc • .  
27 

sharply worded. Unfortunately, however, I haven't got 
the newspaper in front of Inc now). Well anyway, the 
story as told there w݅-as that one n1orning this autumn an 
open carriage, was espied in the streets of Moscow. A 
drunken won1an - a profcssional tnatch-tnaker by occupa­
tion - was sitting in the carriage all beribboned and singing 
a song. The coachn1an was also bedecked in son1c sort of 
ribbons, was also drunk and was also caterwauling as best 
he could. Even the horse was adorned with ribbons. I 
don't know, though, whether it was drunk. It probably 
was. The won1an was holding a bundle, the contents of 
which she was going to exhibit and which belonged to a 
newly 1narried couple who had obviously passed a happy 
night together. The bundle, of course, contained a certain 
light ganncnt which, atnong the lower classes, is usually 
sho\vn the follovving day to the bride's parents. People 
laughed at the sight of the tnatch-tnaker won1an and a gay 
sight it \Vas . Indignantly, forcefully and contctnptuously 
the newspaper related this unheard of barbarisn1 'which 
has survived to this day in spite of the progress of 
civilization ! '  
I adrnit that I burst out laughing. Oh please, do not 
think that I an1 trying to defend pri1n itive canni balisn1, 
light garnH.nts, veils, etc. It is bad, it is unchaste, it is 
uncivilized, it is Slav. I know all that and ! agree; though of 
course it \vas not done with evil intent, but tnerely as part 
of 1narriage celebrations and out of natural si1nplicity and 
ignorance of anything better, loftier, n1ore European . Oh 
no, I laughed at son1ething else. I laughed because I 
suddenly ren1e1nbercd our ladies and our fashionable dress 
shops. ()f course civilized ladies no longer send their light 
ganncnts to their parents, but when it con1es to ordering a 
dress at a dressn1aker's, how cunningly and efficiently they 
knovv how to pad certain parts of their channing Eu݆opcan 
dress vvith cotton-wool . What is the cotton-wool for? 
Naturally for the sake of elegance and aesthetic effect, pour 
2R 

paraftre . . . Not only that: their daughters too, these 
innocent, seventeen-year-old young things just out of 
school, even they know about the cotton-wool. They 
know everything: the purpose of that cotton-wool and 
where precisely, in which parts to apply the cotton-wool, 
and they know, too, why - that is, with what end in vievv 
- all this is being used . . .  Well now, I chuckled itnvardl y, 
all the care and trouble that is being taken , conscious care 
about these cotton-wool additions, is it really purer, n1ore 
n1oral and n1ore chaste than the wretched light gannent 
taken with such na1ve certainty to the parent, the certainty 
that that is precisely what is called for, precisely the n1oral 
thing to do? 
For Heaven's sake, n1y friends, do not think I now \Vant 
to read you a lecture to the effect that civilization is not 
progress and that latterly in Europe it has on the contra ry 
always threatened all progress \Vith \vhip and prison. IJo 
not think that I shall try to prove that in our country vve 
barbarously confuse civilization with the laws of nonnal 
and true progress, or that civilization has long ago been 
condetnned even in the West, and that its one and only 
advocate over there is the capitalist (though everyone there 
is a capitalist or wants to be one) because he \vants to save 
his n1oney. 
I)o not think that I shall try to prove that the hun1an 
soul is not a tabula rasa, a piece of wax to be nlotdded in to a 
pan-honn1nculus; that the pritnary need is for nature, then 
for science, then for independent unrestricted life deeply 
rooted in the soil, and finally for faith in one's o\vn 
national powers. 
Do not think I shall pretend to be ignorant of the fact 
that our progressively tninded n1en (though by no n1cans 
all of thcn1) arc no defenders of cotton-wool and, in fact, 
brand it as they brand light gannents. 
All I want to say now is that the article had an ulterior 
n1otive for censuring and condctnning the light ganncnts; 
29 

tt did not state sitnply that it was barbarisn1, but was 
exposing eletnental, national, working-class barbarisn1 , in 
opposition to the European civilization of our aristocratic 
upper classes. The article swaggered, the article pretended 
not to know that those who were thus exposing this 
barbaristn were thetnsclves guilty of things perhaps a 
thousand tin1es worse and filthier or that all we had done 
was to exchange one kind of prejudice and nastiness for 
another, worse kind of prejudice and nastiness. The article 
pretended not to notice our own prejudice and nastiness. 
Why then, why should we look so cocky as we stand over 
the con1n1on people, arn1s akin1bo, breathing con­
tctnpt . . .  For this faith in infallibility and in the right to 
tnake these exposures is absurd, laughably absurd. This 
faith is either sitnply swagger to in1press the people or else 
an unreasoning, slavish worship of the European forn1s of 
civilization; and this, surely, is even tnorc absurd. 
But what's the usc! Thousands of such facts could be 
found every day. Forgive n1e tny little story. 
Ho\vever, mea culpa. For I lwl'c con1n1itted a fault. The 
reason is that I have jtnnped too hastily frotn grandfathers 
to grandsons. There were other facts in between . Ren1en1-
ber Chatsky. 1 He was neither an artlessly wily grandfather 
nor a self-satisfied grandson; cocky and sure of hin1self, 
Chatsky was quite a special type of our Russian Europe, a 
pleasant, enthusiastic, suffering type, appealing to Russia 
1 Chatsky - the main character of Griboycdov's play Woe from Wit, 
probably modelled on Chaadaycv (sec note I ,  page 9). He represents 
honesty and common-sense with disastrous consequences to himself. 
Treated as insane by his former friends at a ball given by Famusov, he 
shakes off the dust of Moscow and makes his exit with a speech in 
which occurs the phrase about 'wounded pride' quoted below. 
Famusov, Skalozub, Rcpctilov, Molchalin, Countess Khlcstov, Natalia 
Dmitriycvna (a slip on Dostoyevsky's part - it should be . Natalia 
Yuriycvna) - names mentioned in this chapter - arc all characters out of 
the same play. Tr. 11ote. 
30 

and to firn1 foundations, and yet go1ng back to Europe 
again when he had to find 
A place of refuge for tnan's wounded pride . 
in fact a type which is useless now, but which was terribly 
useful in the past. He vvas a phrase-n1onger, a chatterbox, 
but a kind phrase-n1onger, sincerely sorry for his useless­
ness. Now in the new generation he is reborn and, we 
believe, in youthful vigour. We trust that he will appear 
once again, but this ti1ne not suffering fro1n hysteria as at 
Fan1usov's ball, but as a conqueror, proud, tnighty, n1eek 
and loving. Besides, he will have realized by then that the 
place of refuge for wounded pride is to be found not in 
Europe, but perhaps under his very nose, and he will find 
son1ething to do and will do it. 
And do you know what? I ,  for one, a1n convinced we 
haven't only got sergeants of civilization and European 
fadists; I an1 convinced, I insist, that the ne\v n1an is born 
already . . .  but n1ore of this later. Now I \vant to say a bit 
n1ore about Chatsky. There is one thing I cannot 
understand. Chatsky was surely a very intelligent tnan. 
How is it that such an intelligent n1an f.1ilcd to find hi1nself 
a job of work. to do? As a n1atter of fact, none of thetn had 
ever found then1selves jobs of vvork to do, they failed to 
find then1 for twenty-three generations running. This is a 
fact, and it is surely no use arguing against facts, but one 
n1ay always ask a question out of curiosity. Well now, I 
cannot understand how an intelligent 1nan can fail, at any 
tin1e and in any circun1stances, to find hin1self a job of 
work to do. This, I an1 told, is arguable, but in n1y heart of 
hearts I do not believe it is. We are given intelligence in 
order to achieve our ain1s. If you cannot walk a 1nile, then 
walk at least a hundred steps; it would anyway be better 
than nothing, or at least nearer your object if you have an 
object to go to. But if you insist on reaching your object 
step by step this is not, in n1y esti1nation, intelligence. You 
3 1  

could evet݇ he called work-shy in that case. We do not like 
toil, are not used to take one step at a tin1e and prefer to 
reach our object or becon1c a second Regulus in one flying 
leap. But this is precisely to be work-shy. 
However, Chatsky was perfectly right at the tin1e to slip 
avvay abroad again; a little delay would have sent hin1 
Eastwards instead of Westwards. People love the West in 
this country; they love it and when it con1es to a certain 
point they all go there. I an1 going there too, as you see. 
Mais moi, c'est autre chose. I saw then1 all there, n1any of 
then1 that is; there is no keeping count of then1 all, and all 
of then1 sccn1 to be seeking a refuge for wounded pride. In 
any case they are seeking son1ething. 
The generation of Chatskys of both sexes after Famu­
sov's ball, and generally speaking when the ball was over, 
increased and n1ultiplicd till they were as nun1erous out 
there as the sands of the sea. And not even the Chatskys 
alone: for everyone left Moscow to go abroad. There are 
Goodness knows how n1any Repctilovs and Skalozubs 
there, retired by now and despatched to a \Vatering place as 
unfit for further work. Natalia f)nlitriyevna and her 
husband arc life n1e1nbers of these institutions. Even 
Countess Khlestov is taken there every year. All these 
people arc tired even of Moscovv. Molchalin alone is not 
an1ong thetn; he has tnade other arrangetnents and 
retnained at hon1e, the only one to have done so. He has, 
so to say, dedicated hitnself to his country, to his 
fatherland. . . .  l-Ie is unattainable now and wouldn't let 
Fan1usov inside his door: 'Country neighbours, the 
Fan1usovs, not the people to greet in town'. He is in 
business and has found himself a job of work to do. He 
lives in St Petersburg and . . .  and has been successful. 'He 
knows Russia and Russia knows him. ' Oh yes, knows him 
well and will not forget him in a hurry. He is not even 
silent now; on the contrary, he is the only one to speak. He 
32 

is the expert . . .  
But enough of him! I tnentioned then1 all, saying that 
they were trying to find a happy spot in Europe, and really 
I thought they prefet red it there. But in fact their faces 
register such bored melancholy . . . Poor things! How 
restless they all are, how n1orbidly and sadly always on the 
move! They all walk about with guide-books and rush 
greedily in every town to see the sights, do it, indeed, as if 
in duty bound or as if they were still perforn1ing their State 
service: they would never n1iss a single palace - be it only 
three-window size - if only it is n1cntioned in the 
guide-book, not a single town-tnayor's residence, very 
sin1ilar to the n1ost ordinary Moscovv or Petersburg house; 
they stare at Rubens' n1eaty carcasses and believe that they 
represent the three graces because their guide-books bid 
then1 believe it; they rush at the Sistine tv1adonna and stand 
in front of her in bovine expectation, the expectation that 
something will happen any tninute . now, that son1ebody 
will crawl out frotn underneath the floor and dispel their 
aimless, bored tnelancholy and fatigue. And then they go 
off surprised because nothing has happened. This is not the 
self-satisfied and perfectly tnechanical curiosity of British 
tourists - men and won1en - who look n1ore into their 
guide-books than at the sights, do not expect anything 
either new or extraordinary and tnerely check to see what 
the guide-book has to say and precisely hovv n1any feet or 
pounds any particular object tneasures or weighs. Our 
own curiosity is somehow savage, nervous, frantically 
eager, yet secretly convinced in advance that nothing will 
ever happen - of course, till the very next fly that happens 
to buzz past when it all begins again. 
And I am now talking of intelligent people only. It is no 
use worrying about the others - God always looks after 
them - or about those who have n1ade their hon1e there, 
who are gradually forgetting their mother-tongue and 
33 

begin to listci1 to catholic priests. 1 However, there is only 
one thing to be said about the whole lot of them: as soon as 
we get beyond Eyd݈kuhncn we all of us in1mediatdy 
become startingly similar to those wretched little dogs 
which run about when they loose their master. 
You don 't imagine, do you, that I an1 sneering at 
anyone, or blan1ing son1ebody because 'at the present time 
when etc. you retnain abroad! The peasant problem is in 
full swing, and you rcinain abroad!' and so on and so 
forth? Oh not at all, not in the slightest. Besides, who an1 I 
to blan1e anyone? Whom should I blan1c and for what? 
'We would like to do son1c useful work, but there is no 
work, and what there is of it is being done without us 
anyway. All the jobs have been taken and there are no 
vacancies in view. It's no usc trying to barge in where 
there is no call for you. ' That's their whole excuse and not 
a very iinprcssivc one at that. Besides, we know that 
excuse by heart. 
But what is this? Where did I get to? How have I had 
tiine to sec the Russians abroad? W c arc only coining into 
Eydtkuhnen . . .  Or have passed it by now. In fact we 
have; Berlin and l)resden and Cologne - we have passed 
thcn1 all . It is true I an1 still sitting in a railway carriage, 
but before us is Erquelines, and not Eydtkuhncn and we 
arc entering France. Paris, it's Paris I wanted to talk about 
- and forgot. That's because I let IllY thoughts wander on 
the subject of our Russian Europe; which is forgivable in a 
n1an who is hitnsclf on the way to visiting European 
Europe. But anyway, there is not need to insist on being 
forgiven. rfhis chapter of Inine is superfluous, as you will 
ren1en1 ber. 
1 No doubt an oblique reference to Prince Ivan Gagarin who left Russia 
in 1 X43 and made his home in France, where he was converted to 
Catholicism and joined the Jesuit Order. His conversion made.' a great 
impression on Dostoyevsky, who refers to it in later works. Tr. 110tc. 
34 

CHAPTER IV 
WHICH IS NOT SUPERFLUOUS FOR 
TRAVELLERS 
FINAL VERI)ICT ON TH E IRRATIONALITY 
OF FRENCHMEN 
'BuT WHY IS IT, after all, that Frenchn1en are not rational?' 
I asked n1ysclf this question as I was exatnining four 
new passengers, Frenchn1en, who had just con1e into our 
carriage. They were the first Frenchn1en I n1et on their 
native soil if I discount the custon1s officials in Erquclines 
which we had just left. The custon1s officials had been 
exceedingly polite, did their job quickly and I entered tny 
carriage very pleased with tny debut in France. 
As far as Erquclines, though our cotnparttncnt had eight 
scats, there were only two of us: 111 ysclf and a Swiss, a 
n1iddle-agcd tnan , sitnple and reserved, and a pleasant 
conversationalist at that, so that we chatted all the titne for 
about two hours on end. But now there were six of us, and 
to tny astonishment tn y Swiss at the sight of our four new 
cotnpanions fell, all of a sudden, altnost cotnpletcly silent. 
I tnade an attetnpt to continue our conversation, but he 
was obviously eager to change the subject, gave short 
non-con11nital answers, turned a vva y frotn n1e with an air 
aln1ost of annoyance, gazed at the vievv out of the window 
for a bit and then, taking out his c;ennan guide-book, was 
soon entirely absorbed in it. I abandoned hin1 at once and 
without saying a word concentrated tny attention on our 
new cotnpantons. 
They were odd folk , son1chow. They carried no 
luggage and bore not the slightest rescn1 blancc to 
tra vcllcrs. They did not have so tnuch as a bundle between 
35 

then1 nor were they dressed in a way calculated to make 
them look like travellers. They all wore a thin sort of 
frock-coat, terribly shabby and threadbare, little better 
than those worn by our officers' batn1en or by servants in 
the house of a not very well-off country squire. Their 
shirts \vere dirty, their neck-ties very bright and also very 
dirty; one of then1 wore the remnants of a silk kerchief, of 
the kind which are constantly worn and becon1e stiff with 
grease after fifteen years' contact with the wearer's neck. 
The n1an also had studs \vith itnitation dian1onds the size 
of a hazel nut. However, there was a certain smartness and 
even dash about then1. All four appeared to be of the satne 
age - thirty-five or thereabout - and though their faces 
\vere dissitnilar, they thetnselves were very n1uch alike. 
Their faces, sotnewhat haggard in appearance, had the 
usual little French beards which also looked very n1uch 
alike. They \vere obvious I y people with a large and varied 
experience behind then1, who had acquired a pern1anently 
business-like, if sour, expression. Also, I got the in1press­
ion that they kne\v each other but I do not ren1en1ber then1 
exchanging a single word. It was fairly obvious that they 
did not \Van t to look at us - that is, at the Swiss and at n1e ­
they sat and stnoked \Vith a sotnewhat nonchalant air and 
affected cotnplete indifference, as they riveted their gaze 
on the \Vindo\vs of the cotnpartnlent. 
I lit a cigarette and began to exatnine then1 for lack of 
anything better to do. True enough, the question did flit 
through tny tnind - what sort of people can they possibly 
be? Not quite workn1en, but not quite bourgeois either. 
Could they possibly be ex-soldiers? Son1ething a demi-soldc 
perhaps? Ho\vever, I did not worry about then1 too n1uch. 
Ten tninutes later, as soon as we reached the next station, 
all four of then1 jutnped out of the train one after another, 
the door slan1n1cd and we sped on. Along this route the 
train hardly waits at the stations: about two tninutes,' three 
at the n1ost, and on it rushes. The transport is excellent, in 
36 

other words - very quick. 
As soon as we remained alone the Swiss immediately 
shut his guide-book, put it aside and looked at n1e with an 
air of satisfaction, obviously keen to renew our conversa­
tion. 
'Those fellows did not stay long, ' I began, looking at 
hin1 with some curiosity. 
'But they only intended to travel till the next station . '  
'Do you know them?' 
'Them? . . .  Why, they are the police . . .  ' 
'How do you n1ean? What police?' I asked \Vith surprise. 
'There now .
. . I noticed at once you had no idea who 
they were. ' 
'And . . .  are they really police spies?' (I still could not 
bring n1yself to believe it. ) 
'Of course; they can1e in here because of us. ' 
'You know it for certain?' 
'Oh, there's no doubt about it. I have travelled this way 
several tin1es before. We were pointed out to then1 back in 
the custon1s house while our passports were being 
exan1ined, our nan1es were told to then1 and so on and so 
forth. So they can1e and sat down here in order to 
' 
accon1pany us. 
'But why should they, after all, \Vant to accon1pany us if 
they have seen us already? You said, didn't you, that we 
were pointed out to then1 at that other station ?' 
'We were indeed, and our nan1es given. but that's not 
enough. Now they have studied us in detail: face, dress, 
suitcases, in fact our whole appearance. They have tnade a 
In ental note of your studs; you took out your cigar-case, if 
you ren1en1ber - well now, they've tnadc a note of that 
cigar-case, too; all these little trifles, you kno\v, and 
distinguishing n1arks, particularly distinguishing n1arks ­
as tnany of then1 as possible. You could lose yourself in 
Paris, or change your nan1c (if you arc a suspicious 
character, that is). Those trifles would then help the 
37 

search. All this is in11nediately telegraphed to Paris fron1 
the very san1e station. And there it's kept in the proper 
place, in case of need. Besides, hotel keepers n1ust supply 
the n1ost detailed infonnation about foreigners, and must 
include trifles as well! '  
'But why, ' I \Vent on asking, still feeling a bit puzzled, 
'were there so tnany of thetn? There were four of then1, 
after all !' 
'Oh, they are very tn1n1erous here. Probably this tin1e 
there are few foreigners, but if there were tnore they 
would have distributed thetnselves atnong different 
coaches. '  
'Con1e now, they did not even look at us. They were 
looking out of the windows . '  
'Oh, don't you worry, they saw everything . . .  It was 
because of us they sat down here. ' 
Well , well, I thought, there you are, you and you r 
'irrational Frenchn1en', and I threw (shatnefacedly, I 
adtnit) a sotnewhat tnistrustful glance at the Swiss, as the 
thought flitted through 111 y n1ind: you wouldn't be one of 
those yoursel f, tny boy, would . you now, and just 
pretending not to be? But I did not think that for n1ore 
than a split second, I assure you. Absurd, but what can one 
do? Such thoughts arc bound to arise . . . .  
The Swiss had told n1e the truth. As soon as I arrived at 
tny hotel a full description of tn y person down to the most 
intitnate detail was in1n1ediately tnade and sent to the 
appropriate authorities. The thoroughness and tninuteness 
with which you arc exan1ined in order to describe all 
particulars concerning you lead one to conclude that your 
entire life in the hotel, your every step, so to speak, is 
being scrupulously observed and counted. However, in 
tny first hotel I, personally, was not bothered and n1y 
description was drawn up on the quiet, except, of c.ourse, 
for the questions which you are asked in the book in·which 
you n1ake your full confession: Who are you, how did you 
38 

arrive and whence and with what intentions in n1ind? etc. 
But in the second hotel to which I went, having failed to 
find a roon1 in tny first - the Hotel des Coquillicrcs - after 
n1y eight-day trip to London, I was treated with far greater 
frankness. In general this second hotel - Hotel des 
Ernpcrcurs - sccn1cd to be run tnuch n1orc on fan1ily lines 
in every respect. The owner and his wife were very good 
people and very considerate, rather elderly and extraordi­
narily attentive to the needs of their guests. In the evening 
of the very day on which I arrived the landlady caught n1c 
in the hall and asked n1e to con1e into the roon1 which 
served as an office. The husband was there too, but the 
landlady apparently ran the whole adtninistrative side. 
'I an1 sorry, ' she began politely, 'we need all your 
particulars. '  
'But I've given then1 to you . . .  you have tny passport. ' 
'Yes, but votre Ctat?' 
This 'votre Ctat?' is an extretnely confusing thing and I 
never liked it. What can one put down? Traveller is too 
abstract. Homme de lettres earns no respect. 
'W c' d better put down propriCtaire. What do you think?' 
asked the landlady. 'That would be best of all. ' 
'Oh yes, t11at would be best of all, ' confinned her 
spouse. 
' All right. Well now, your reason for visiting Paris?' 
'As a traveller, in transit. ' 
'Mn1 . . .  yes, pour voir Paris. Now, n1onsieur, your 
height?' 
'How do you n1can - height?' 
'How tall arc you, in fact?' 
'Average height - as you can sec. ' 
'That's so, n1onsieur . . .  But \Ve should like to know a 
bit n1ore precisely . . . .  I should think, I should think . . .  ' 
she went on, looking questioningly at her husband. 
'I should think so lziglz, '  decided the husband, stating n1y 
height in n1ctrcs as a rough estin1ate. 
39 

'But what do you want it for?' I asked. 
'Oh, it is es-sential, ' replied the landlady with a polite 
drawl on the worq 'essential', but at the san1e tin1c 
entering n1y height in the book. 'Now, n1ons1cur, your 
hair? Fair . . .  c-cr . . .  very fair, really . . .  straight . . .  ' 
She n1adc a note of the hair as well. 
'Would you n1ind, n1onsicur, ' she went on as she put 
down her pen, left her scat and can1c up to n1c with all the 
politeness she could n1uster, 'over here, a step or two 
nearer the window. I n1ust ha vc a look at the colour of 
your eyes. Hn1 . . . light colour . . .  ' 
And again she glanced questioningly at her husband. 
They were obviously very fond of each other. 
'A bit greyish, ' rctnarked the husband with a particuarly 
business-like, even worried expression. 'Voila, ' he said 
and gave his wife a wink, pointing at son1ething over one 
of his eyebrows, but I understood perfectly well what it 
was he was pointing at. I have a stnall scar on n1y forehead 
and he wanted his wife to take note of this distinguishing 
tnark, too. 
' Pennit tne to ask you now, ' I said to the landlady when 
the whole cxan1ination was over, 'arc you really required 
to present such a detailed account?' 
'Oh, tnonsieur, it is es-sential! . . .  ' 
'Monsieur! ' repeated the husband after her, with a 
sotnehow particularly itnpressive air. 
'But they didn't ask n1e in the Hotel de Coquillicres. '  
'In1possible, ' retorted the landlady pron1ptly. 'They 
could get into serious trouble for that. They probably 
exan1ined you without saying a word about it, but they 
certainly, certainly exan1ined you . But we arc simpler and 
n1orc frank with our guests. W c treat thcn1 as n1en1bcrs of 
the farnil y. You will be satisfied with us. You ']] see . . .  ' 
'Oh, n1onsicur! . . . ' confirn1cd the husband solen1nly 
and a look of tenderness even can1e over his face . .  
And this was a very honest and a very pleasant couple, 
40 

anyway as far as I got to know them afterwards. But the 
word 'es-sential' was pronounced by no means apologet­
ically or in a tone of voice which pleaded extenuating 
circumstances, but rather in the sense of absolute necessity 
which almost coincided with their personal convictions. 
And so I am in Paris. 
41 

CHAPTER v 
BAAL 
AND so I AM I N  PARIS . . . .  l)on 't think, however, that I 
shall tell you a lot about Paris itself. I should think you 
have already read so n1uch about it in Russian that you arc 
tired of reading about it by now. Besides you have been 
there yourselves and have probably seen it all better than I 
have. I never could abide, when I was abroad, looking at 
things in the proper way as approved by the guide-books, 
as every good traveller should. 
I an1 now ashatned to own up to the things I have 
son1etin1cs tnissed in consequence. In Paris, too, I have 
tnisscd seeing certain things. I shall not say what they 
were, but I will say one thing: I have found a definition for 
Paris, ha vc selected an epithet for it and shall stand by this 
epithet. It is this: it is the n1ost n1oral and the n1ost 
virtuous town in the whole world. What order! What 
sweet reasonableness! What definite and finnly established 
relationships! How buttoned up and secure everything is! 
How perfectly pleased and happy they all arc! And how 
hard they have all tried! - so hard that they have really 
convinced thctnselves that they arc pleased and perfectly 
happy, and, and . . .  have stopped there. There can be no 
further advance. You will never believe that they have 
stopped there; you will say that I exaggerate, that this is all 
a libel invented by a bilious patriot, that things could not 
in fact have stopped dead. But, n1 y friends, I have :varned 
you as far back as the first chapter of these notes, you 
42 

know, that I n1ay tell dreadful lies. So don't stand in the 
way. You surely know too, that if I tell lies I shall tell them 
in the conviction that I an1 not telling thcn1. Personally I 
think this should an1p!y suffice you, and you had better 
give n1e full frecdon1 . 
Oh indeed, Paris is a rcn1arkablc town. And how n1uch 
con1fort and convenience is put at the disposal of those 
who have a right to con1 fort and convenience! And again, 
what order, what stillness of order, so to speak! I keep 
harking back to order. Indeed, a little longer and Paris with 
its one and a half million inhabitants will become like son1e 
stnall Gcrn1an university town, fossilized in stillness and 
order, son1ething like Heidelberg, for exatnple. It secn1s to 
be tending that way. And why shouldn't there be a 
Heidelberg on a colossal scale? And what rcgin1entation! 
Don't tnisundcrstand tnc: I don't tncan, so n1uch, external 
rcgitncntation, which is insignificant (relatively, of course) 
but a colossal internal, spiritual regitnentation having its 
sources in the very depths of the soul . Paris tries to 
contract, willingly, lovingly sotnchow tries to n1akc itself 
stnaller than it really is, tries to shrink within itself, 
sn1iling benignly as it docs so. 
Now London is in this respect son1ething entirely 
different. I only spent eight days altogether in London and 
the impression it left upon tny n1ind - superficially at least 
- was of son1ething on a grand scale, of vivid planning, 
original and not forced into a con1n1on tnould. Everything 
there is so vast and so harsh in its originality. This 
originality is even a bit deceptive. Every harshness and 
every inconsistency is able to live in harn1ony with its 
antithesis and persist in walking hand-in-hand with it, 
continuing to be inconsistent, but apparently by no tncans 
excluding its antithesis. Each part stoutly upholds its ovvn 
way and apparently docs not interfere with the other parts 
of the whole. And yet there too the san1e stubborn, silent 
and by now chronic struggle is carried on, the struggle to 
43 

the death of the typically Western principle of individual 
isolation with the necessity to live in son1e sort of 
harmony with each 9ther, to create so1ne sort of conlmun­
ity and to settle down in the satne ant-hill; even turning 
into an ant-hill seems desirable - anything to be able to 
settle down without having to devour each other - the 
alternative is to turn into cannibals. 
In this connection, however, both Paris and London 
have one thing in con1n1on: the san1e desperate yearning, 
born of despair, to retain the status quo, to tear out by the 
roots all desires and hopes they tnight harbour within 
then1, to dan1n the future in which perhaps even the very 
leaders of progress lack faith, and to bow down in worship 
of Baal. 
But please do not get carried away by this lofty 
language: all this can be consciously felt only in the tninds 
of the n1ore advanced and clear-headed individuals, and 
unconsciously and by instinct in the living, everyday 
actions of the In asses. But the ordinary n1an, the bourgeois 
in Paris, for instance, is abnost consciously well satisfied 
and convinced that everything is as it should be and 111ay 
even beat you up if you express a doubt on that score. But 
he will do so because he is still a little nervous in spite of all 
his self-confidence. 
In that way London is 1nuch the satne, but what an 
overwheltning spectacle it presents, painted on a vast 
canvas. Even superficially, how different it is fron1 Paris! 
The i n1n1ense town, forever bustling by night and by day, 
as vast as an ocean, the screech and howl of Inachinery, the 
raihvays built above the houses (and soon to be built under 
then1) the daring of enterprise, the apparent disorder 
which in actual fact is the highest fonn of bourgeois order, 
the polluted Than1es, the coal-saturated air, the nlagnifi­
cent squares and parks, the town's terrifying districts such 
as Whitechapel with its half-naked, savage and .'hungry 
population, the City with its 1nillions and its world-wide 
44 

trade, the Crystal Palace, the World Exhibition 
.
.
.
 
1 
The Exhibition is indeed an1azing. You feel the terrible 
force which has brought these innun1erable people, who 
have con1e fron1 the ends of the earth, all together into one 
fold; you realize the grandeur of the idea; you feel that 
son1ething has been achieved here, that here is victory and 
triun1ph. And you feel nervous. However great your 
independence of mind , a feeling of fear son1ehow creeps 
over you. Can this, you think, in fact be the final 
accon1plishn1ent of an ideal state of things? Is this the end, 
by any chance? Perhaps this really is the 'one fold'?2 
Perhaps we shall really have to accept this as the whole 
truth and cease fron1 all n1oven1ent thereafter? It is all so 
solen1n, triu1nphant and proud that you are left breathless. 
You look at those hundreds of thousands, at those n1illions 
of people obediently trooping into this place frotn all parts 
of the earth - people who have con1e with only one 
thought in n1ind, quieti y, stubbornly .and silently 1nilling 
round in this colossal pabce, and you feel that soinething 
final has been accon1plished here - accon1plished and 
cornpleted. It is a Biblical sight, son1ething to do with 
Babylon, son1e prophecy out of the Apocalypse being 
fulfilled before your very eyes. You feel that a rich and 
ancient tradition of denial and protest is ·i1eeded in order 
not to yield, not to succu1nb to itnpression, not to bovv 
down in worship of fact, and not to idolize Baal, that is, 
not to take the actual for the ideal. . .  
But this, you will say, is nonsense, 111orbid nonsense, 
nerves, exaggeration. No one will halt there and no one 
will take this for his ideal. Besides, hunger and slavery are 
no friends to anyone and will - no one better - suggest 
denial and give rise to scepticisnl. But dilettantes, replete 
and satisfied and strolling about for their own delectation 
1 Sce note I ,  page I 3 ·  
2St John x ,  I 6. 
45 

can, of course, conjure up pictures. out of the Apocalypse 
and excite their nervous systen1s by exaggeration and by 
extorting powerful sensations out of every fact for the sake 
of auto-stin1 ulation . . . .  
All right, I reply, let us adn1it I had been carried away by 
the decor; I n1ay have been. But if you had seen how proud 
the n1ighty spirit is which created that colossal decor and 
how convinced it is of its victory and its triun1ph, you 
would have shuddered at its pride, its obstinacy, its 
blindness, and you would have shuddered, too, at the 
thought of those over whon1 that proud spirit hovers and 
reigns supren1e. In the presence of such in1n1ensity, in the 
presence of the unbounded pride of the don1inating spirit, 
and of the triun1phant finality of the world created by that 
spirit, the hungry soul often quails, yields and subtnits, 
seeks its salvation in gin and debauchery and succun1bs to 
a belief in the rightness of the existing order. Reality 
oppresses, the n1asses becon1e insensitive and acquire 
oriental passivity, while the n1ore sceptical an1ong then1 
curse their fate and glootnily look for salvation to 
Monnonisn1 and such like. And in London the n1asses can 
be seen on a scale and in conditions not to be seen 
anywhere else in the world. 
I have been told, for exatnplc, that on Saturday nights 
half a n1 illion working n1en and won1en and their children 
spread like the ocean all over town, clustering particularly 
in certain districts, and celebrate their sabbath all night 
long until five o'clock in the n1orning, in other words 
guzzle and drink like beasts to tnake up for a whole week. 
They bring with then1 their weekly savings, all that was 
earned by hard work and with n1any a curse. Great jets of 
gas burn in n1eat and food shops, brightly lighting up the 
streets. It is as if a grand reception were being held for 
those white negroes. Crowds throng the open taverns and 
the streets. There they eat and drink. The beer houses are 
decorated like palaces . Everyone is drunk, but drunk 
46 

joyless} y, glootnil y and he a vii y, and everyone is son1ehow 
strangely silent. Only curses and bloody brawls occa­
sionally break that suspicious and oppressively sad 
silence . . . .  Everyone is in a hurry to drink hin1sclf into 
insensibility . . . wives in no way lag behind their 
husbands and all get drunk together, while children era wl 
and run about an1ong thcn1. 
One such night - it was getting on for two o'clock in the 
n1orning - I lost tny way and for a long tin1c trudged the 
streets in the n1idst of a vast crowd of glootny people, 
asking n1y way aln1ost by gestures, because I do not know 
a word of English. I found 111 y way, but the itnpression of 
what I had seen tonnented n1c for three days afterwards. 
The populace is n1uch the san1e any'vvhcre, but there all 
was so vast, so vivid that you ahnost physically felt things 
which up till then you had only itnagined. In London you 
no longer sec the populace. Instead, you sec a loss of 
sensibility, systcn1atic, resigned and encouraged. And you 
feel, as you look at all those social pariahs, that it will be a 
long tin1e before the prophecy is fulfilled for then1, a long 
titne before they arc given pahn branches and white robes, 
and that for a long tin1c yet they will continue to appeal to 
the Throne of the Ahnighty, crying: "How long, oh 
Lord?' 1 And they know it thctnselves and in the n1cantin1c 
take their revenge on society by producing all kinds of 
underground n1orn1ons, shakers, tratnps . . . We arc 
surprised at the stupidity which leads people to bccon1e 
shakers and tratnps, and fail to understand that what we 
have here is a repudiation of our social fonnula, an 
obstinate and unconscious repudiation; an instinctive 
repudiation at any cost, in order to achieve salvation, a 
horrified and disgusted repudiation of the rest of us. Those 
n1illions of people, abandoned and driven away from the 
feast of htܽn1aܾ1ity, push and crush each other in the 
1 Revelation vi, I o, I I .  
47 

undergro.ur1d darkness into which they have been cast by 
their elder brethren, they grope around seeking a door at 
which to knock and_ look for an exit lest they be sn1othered 
to death in that d'ark cellar. This is the last desperate 
atten1pt to huddle together and forn1 one's own heap, 
one's own mass and to repudiate everything, the very 
in1age of rnan if need be, only to be oneself, only not to be 
with us . . .  
I saw in London another and sin1ilar ' rnass', such as you 
would never see on a like scale anywhere else. An unusual 
spectacle it certainly \Vas. Anyone who has ever visited 
London n1ust have been at least once in the Hayrnarket at 
night. It is a district in certain streets of which prostitutes 
swann by night in their thousands. Streets are lit by jets of 
gas -
son1ething corn pletcl y unknown in our own 
country. At every step you con1e across rnagnificent 
public houses, all n1irrors and gilt. They serve as rneeting 
places as well as shelters. It is a terrifying experience to 
find oneself in that crowd. And, what an odd an1algan1 it 
is. You will find old \von1en there and beautiful women at 
the sight of \Vhon1 you stop in an1azernent. There are no 
won1en in the world as beautiful as the English. 
The streets can hardly accornrnodate the dense, seething 
crowd. The rnob has not enough roon1 on the pavements 
and swa rnps the whole street. All this rnass of humanity 
craves for booty and hurls itself at the first comer with 
sharneless cynicisn1. Glistening, expensive clothes and 
serni-rags and sharp differences in age - they are all there. 
A drunken trarnp shuffling along in this terrible crowd is 
jostled by the rich and titled. You hear curses, quarrels, 
solicitations and the quiet, whispered invitation of some 
still bashful beauty. And how beautiful they sometimes are 
with their keepsake faces! I remernber once I went into a 
'casino'. The n1usic was blaring, people were dancing, a 
huge crowd was milling round. The place was _'magni­
ficently decorated. But gloorn never forsakes the English 
48 

even in the n1idst of gaiety; even when they dance they 
look serious, not to say sullen, tnaking hardly any steps 
and then only as if in execution of son1e duty. Upstairs, in 
the gallery I saw a girl and stopped in an1azetnent. She was 
sitting at a little table together with an apparently rich and 
respectable young n1an who, by all the signs, was an 
unaccustotned visitor to the casino. Perhaps he had been 
looking for her and they had at last found each other and 
arranged to meet there. He spoke to her little and only in 
short, jerky phrases as if he \vas not talking about what 
really interested hin1 .  Their conversation was punctuated 
by long and frequent silences. She, too, looked sad. Her 
face was delicate and fine, and there was son1ething 
deep-hidden and sad, sotnething thoughtful and tnelan­
choly in the proud expression of her eyes. I should say she 
had consun1ption. Mentally and tnorally she was, she 
could not fail to be, above the whole crowd of those 
wretched won1en; otherwise, what tneaning would there 
be in a hun1an face? All the san1e, however, she was then 
and there drinking gin, paid for by the young tnan. At last 
he got up, shook hands with her and went away. He left 
the casino, while she, her pale cheeks now flushed deep 
with drink, w·as soon lost in the crowd of wotnen trading 
in their bodies. 
In the Haytnarket I noticed n1others who brought their 
little daughters to tnake thetn ply that san1e trade. Little 
girls, aged about twelve, seize you by the arn1 and beg you 
to come with them. I ren1etnber once atnidst the crowd of 
people in the street I saw a little girl, not older than six, all 
in rags, dirty, bare-foot and hollow-cheeked; she had been 
severely beaten, and her body, which showed through the 
rags, was covered with bruises. She was walking along, as 
if oblivious of everybody and everything, in no hurry to 
get anywhere, and Heaven knows why loafing about in 
that crowd; perhaps she was hungry. Nobody was paying 
any attention to her. But what struck n1e n1ost was the 
49 

look of such distress, such hopeless despair on her face that 
to see that tiny bit of hun1anity already bearing the imprint 
of all that evil and 9espair was son1ehow unnatural and 
terribly painful. She kept on shaking her tousled head as if 
arguing about son1ething, gesticulated and spread her little 
hands and then suddenly clasped then1 together and 
pressed then1 to her little bare breast. I went back and gave 
her sixpence. She took the sn1all silver ·coin, gave me a 
wild look full of frightened surprise, and suddenly ran 
off as fast as her legs could carry her, as if afraid that I 
should take the money away frotn her. Jolly scenes, 
altogether. . . .  
And then one night in the n1idst of a crowd of loose 
women and debauchees I was stopped by a won1an 
n1aking her way hurriedly through it. She was dressed all 
in black and her hat aln1ost concealed her face; in fact I had 
hardly tin1e to tnake it out, I only ren1e1nber the steady 
gaze of her eyes. She said son1ething in broken French 
which I failed to understand, thrust a piece of paper into 
n1y hand and hurried on . I exatnined the paper at the light 
of a cafe window: it was a stnall square slip. One side bore 
the words 'Crois-tu cela?' printed on it. The other, also in 
French : 'I an1 the Resurrection and the Life' . . .  , etc. - the 
well-known text. This too, you n1ust adtnit, is rather 
bizarre. It was explained to n1e afterwards that that was 
Catholic propaganda ferreting round everywhere, persist­
ent and tireless. So1netin1cs they distribute these bits of 
paper in the streets, son1etin1es booklets containing 
extracts frotn the New Testatnent and the Bible. They 
distribute thetn free, thrust then1 into people's hands, press 
then1 on people. It is ingenious and cunning propaganda. 
A Catholic priest would search out and insinuate hin1self 
into a poor worktnan's fan1ily. He would find, for 
exan1pJe, a sick n1an lying in his rags on a dan1p floor, 
surrounded by children crazy fron1 cold and hunger, with 
a wife fatnished and often drunk. He would feed then1 all, 
50 

provide clothes and warmth for them, give treatment to 
the sick man, buy medicine for him, become the friend of 
the family and finally convert them all to the Catholic 
faith. Sometimes, however, after the sick man has been 
restored to health, the priest is driven out with curses and 
kicks. He does not despair and goes off to someone else. 
He is chucked out again, but puts up with everything and 
catches someone in the end. 
But an Anglican minister would never visit a poor n1an. 
The poor are not even allowed inside a church because 
they have not the money to pay for a scat. More often than 
not working-class men and won1en and the poor generally 
live together in illegitimate union, as tnarriages are 
expensive. Many husbands, by the way, beat their wives 
horribly and disfigure thcn1 to the point of death - n1ostly 
with the aid of pokers used to break up coal in open grates. 
They seem to regard thcn1 specifically as instnuncnts for 
beating purposes. At least, in describing fan1ily quarrels, 
injuries and n1urders, newspapers always n1cntion pokers. 
The children of the poor, while still very young, often go 
out into the streets, 1nerge with the crowd and in the end 
fail to return to their parents. 
Anglican ministers and bishops arc proud and rich, live 
in wealthy parishes and dioceses and wax fat with an 
entirely untroubled conscience. They arc great pedants, 
are highly educated and pon1pously and seriously believe 
in their own solidly n1oral virtues and in their right to 
preach a staid and con1placent n1orality. to grow fat and to 
live here for the sake of the rich. It is a religion of the rich, 
and undisguised at that. At least, this is rational and no one 
Is being deceived. These professors of religion, who carry 
their convictions to the point of obtuseness, have one 
amusetncnt, if such it can be called: it is tnissionary work. 
They travel all over the earth, penetrate into darkest Africa 
to convert one savage, and forget the n1illion savages in 
London because these have nothing to pay then1 with . But 
5 1  

wealthy Englishmen and in fact all the Golden Calves in 
that country are extremely religious, gloomily, sullenly 
and peculiarly so . .-English poets have, from tin1e im­
menlorial, been fond of celebrating the beauty of provin­
cial vicarages, standing in the shade of ancient oaks and 
elms, their virtuous wives and ideally-beautiful, blond and 
blue-eyed daughters. 
But when night is over and day begins, the same proud 
and gloon1y spirit once again spreads its lordly wings over 
the gigantic city. It is not worried by what happened 
during the night, neither is it worried by what it sees all 
around itself by day. Baal reigns and does not even 
den1and obedience, because he is certain of it. He has 
boundless faith in hin1self; conten1ptuously and calmly and 
only so as to be left alone, he organizes almsgiving and his 
self-confidence is not to be shaken. Baal does not close his 
eyes, as they do in Paris for instance, to certain savage 
suspicions and alanning facts of life. The poverty, 
suffering, con1plaints and torpor of the n1asses do not 
worry hin1 in the slightest. Contcn1ptuously, he allows 
these suspicions and otninous facts to jostle his own life, to 
sit on his O\Vn doorstep for everyone to see. Unlike a 
Parisian, he does not n1ake strenuous, if cowardly, 
attetnpts to convince hin1self of the falsity of facts, boost 
his own In orale and report to hin1sclf that all is quiet and 
fine. He docs not hide his poor, as is done in Paris, lest 
they disturb and needlessly trouble his sleep. The Parisian 
likes sticking his head in the sand like an ostrich 
so as not to see his pursuers catching up with him. In 
Paris . . .  But what an1 I talking about? I an1 not in Paris 
yet! . . .  Oh when, n1y God, will I learn to be orderly? . . .  
52 

CHAPTER VI 
A N  ES SAY ON THE BO URGEOIS 
WHY DOES EVERYONE here want to shrink back and shrivel 
and make out he is only stnall fry and remain as 
inconspicuous as is possible: 'I don't exist, I don't exist at 
all; I am hiding, walk past, please, don't take any notice of 
n1e, pretend you don't see n1c: pass along, pass along!' 
'But whom arc you talking about? Who shrinks back?' 
The bourgeois, of course. 
'Come now, he is King, he is everything, lc tiers Ctat c'cst 
tout, and you say he shrinks back!' 
Oh yes, he does; why otherwise, should he have hidden 
hin1self behind the En1peror Napolcon? 1 Why has he 
forgotten the lofty language he used to love so n1uch in the 
Chan1bcr of Deputies? Why docs he not want to rcn1cn1-
bcr anything and runs away frotn any retnindcrs of the 
past? Why do his thoughts, his eyes, his speech betray so 
much worry whenever others dare express a wish for 
son1ething in his presence? Why, whenever he foolishly 
forgets hin1self and expresses a wish for sotncthing, does 
he suddenly give a start and begin to deny his own words: 
'Good Heavens, what's the tnatter with n1e, really!' and 
for a long tin1c after that he tries scrupulously to n1ake 
an1ends for his behaviour by conscientiousness and obedi­
ence? Why does he look and altnost say: 'Well, now, I'll do 
a bit of trade in my shop to-day, and, God willing, I'll do a 
1 Napoleon III. Tr. uote. 
53 

bit of trade ton1orrow too, and perhaps even the day after 
if the Lord lets n1e, in His great n1ercy . . .  and then, then 
- oh, if only I could save just a teeny bit and .
.
.
 apres moi 
le deluJ:e. ' Why does he stick his poor out of the way 
son1ewhere and assure people that there aren't any? Why 
does he n1ake do with official literature? Why does he so 
n1uch want to convince hin1self that his newspapers are 
not open to bribery? Why does he agree to give so n1uch 
n1oney for the maintenance of police spies? Why does he 
not dare breathe a word about the Mexican expedition? 
Why on the stage are husbands n1ade out to be so very 
noble-n1inded and rich, while lovers are all so tattered, 
jobless and friendless, clerks or artists, so n1uch trash? 
Why does he in1agine that all wives without exception are 
faithful to the last extren1e, that the hon1e prospers, that 
the pot-aujeu is cooking on the n1ost virtuous of hearths 
and that no horns disfigure his forehead? About the horns 
- this has been decided once and for all, agreed without 
further ado and taken for granted, and though cabs with 
drawn blinds constantly ply up and down the boulevards, 
though tin1e and place can always be found for require­
nlents of an interesting nature, and though wives very 
often dress n1ore expensively than could be warranted by 
the husband's pocket, this has been agreed and ratified, 
and what n1ore do you want? And why has it been agreed 
and ratified? The answer is quite obvious: otherwise 
people n1ight perhaps think that an ideal state of things has 
not been reached yet, that Paris is not yet Heaven on 
Earth, that son1ething could perhaps still be wished for, 
that, therefore, the bourgeois hin1self is not quite satisfied 
with the state of things which he supports and which he 
tries to force on everyone, that the cloth of society has 
rents which n1ust be n1ended. This is precisely why the 
bourgeois sn1ears holes in his shoes with ink lest, God 
forbid, people should notice anything! The wives, in the 
meantin1e, suck sweets, wear gloves of a kind to send 
54 

Russian ladies in far-off St Petersburg into envious 
hysterics, show their little feet and lift their skirts on 
boulevards with all the grace in the world. What n1ore is 
needed for perfect bliss? It follows that, circun1stances 
being what they are, novels can no longer bear titles such 
as, for exan1 pie, W!fe, Husba11d m1d Lover, because there 
are no, and cannot be any, lovers. And even if in Paris they 
were as nun1erous as the sands of the sea (and n1aybe they 
are even n1ore nun1erous there), there are none there all the 
san1e, and there cannot be any because it is thus agreed and 
ratified and because virtue shines everywhere. That is the 
way it should be: virtue n1ust shine everywhere. The sight 
of the great courtyard of the Palais Royal in the evening 
and up to eleven o'clock at night is surely enough to n1ake 
anyone shed a sentin1ental tear. Innurnerable husbands 
stroll about arn1-in-arn1 with their innun1erable spouses, 
their sweet and well-behaved children garnbol round 
then1, a little fountain tinkles and its n1onotonous splash 
reminds you of son1ething still and quiet, everlasting, 
permanent, Heidelbergian. And it isn't as if there was only 
one little fountain in Paris tinkling in this way; there are 
n1any little fountains, and everywhere it is the san1e and 
one's heart rejoices at the sight of it all. 
Paris has an unquenchable thirst for virtue. Nowadays 
your Frenchman is a serious and reliable n1an, often 
tender-hearted, so that I cannot understand why he is so 
afraid of something even now, and is afraid of it in spite of 
all the gloire militaire which flourishes in France and \vhich 
Jacques Bonhon1me pays so n1uch for. The Parisian dearly 
loves to trade, but even as he trades and fleeces you in his 
shop, he fleeces you not for the sake of profit, as in the old 
days but in the nan1e of virtue, out of son1e sacred 
necessity. To an1ass a fortune and possess as n1any things 
as possible - this has becon1e the Parisian's main moral 
code, to be equated with religious observance. The same 
thing happened in the old days too, but now - now it has 
55 

assun1ed, so to speak, a sort of sacran1ental aspect. In the 
old days son1e value was attached to other things besides 
money, so that a n1an with no n1oney but possessing other 
qualities could expect son1e kind of esteen1; but now -
nothing doing. Now you n1ust n1ake money and acquire 
as n1any things as possible and you will then be able to 
expect at least some sort of esteem, otherwise you cannot 
expect to have any selj-esteen1, let alorie the esteem of 
other people. The Parisian has a very low opinion of 
hinlself if he feels his pockets are enl pty - and he holds this 
opinion consciously, and with great conviction. 
You are allowed to do an1azing things if only you have 
n1oney. Poor Socrates is nothing but a stupid and 
obnoxious phrase-n1onger, and is esteemed, if anywhere, 
only in the theatre because the bourgeois still likes to show 
esteen1 for virtue in the theatre. A strange n1an, this 
bourgeois: proclain1s openly that the acquisition of n1oney 
is the supren1e virtue and hun1an duty and yet dearly loves 
to play at supretnely noble sentin1ents. All Frenchmen 
have an extraordinarily noble appearance. The meanest 
little Frcnchtnan who would sell you his own father for 
sixpence and add son1ething into the bargain without so 
tnuch as being asked for it, has at the same time, indeed at 
the very n1on1ent of selling you his own father, such an 
itnpressive bearing that you feel perplexed. Go into a shop 
to buy son1ething and its least in1portant salesman will 
crush you, sin1ply crush you, with his astounding nobil­
ity. These are the very salesn1en who serve as n1odels of 
the n1ost exquisite refinen1ent for our Mikhailovsky 
Theatre. 1 You are overwhchned, you feel you have 
offended the salesn1an in son1e way. You have come, let us 
say, with the intention of spending ten francs, and yet you 
1 Mikhailovsky Theatre - the reference is to the annual season of French 
plays given by visiting French actors in the Mikhailovsky Theatre in St 
Petersburg (now the Maly [i. e. small ] Theatre of Opera and Ballet in 
Leningrad). Tr. note. 
56 

are received as if you were the Duke of J)evonshire. For 
son1e reason you at once feel terribly ashamed, and you 
want to assure people quickly that you are not at all the 
Duke of Devonshire, but son1ebody quite ordinary, just a 
simple traveller, and have come in to n1ake a n1ere ten 
francs' worth of purchase. But the young n1an, who has a 
most fortunate appearance and an ineffably noble express­
ion and at the sight of whon1 you are ready to acknow­
ledge yourself a rascal (because he has such a noble 
expression), begins to spread in front of you goods worth 
tens of thousands of francs. In a n1inutc he has strewn the 
whole counter with his wares and when you realize how 
much the poor man will have to fold and wrap up again 
after you are gone and that he - this Grandison, this 
Alcibiades, this Montn1orency - will have to do it - after 
whom? After you who, with your unenviable appearance, 
your vices and defects, your abon1inablc ten francs have 
dared come and worry so lordly a creature - when you 
realize all this, you in1n1ediately, on the spot and before 
you have time to leave the counter, begin willy-nilly to 
despise yourself to the highest possible degree. You repent 
and curse your fate for having only a hundred francs in 
your pocket; you throw then1 down on the counter with 
an imploring look asking forgiveness. But the article you 
have bought for your n1iserable hundred francs is 
magnanimously wrapped up for you, you are forgiven all 
the worry and all the trouble which you have caused in the 
shop and you hasten to con1e out and vanish. When you 
get home you are terribly surprised that you wanted to 
spend only ten francs and have spent one hundred. 
How often, when walking down the boulevards or the 
Rue Vivienne where so n1any huge haberdashery stores are 
situated, I used to say to n1yself: if only Russian ladies 
were let loose here and . . . but what follows is best 
known to the factors and bailiffs of estates in Orlov, 
Tambov and other provinces. In general, Russians in 
57 

shops long to show that they have a boundless amount of 
money. On the other hand, what is one to think of such 
shameless conduct as that of English women, for example, 
who not only are left completely unperturbed by the fact 
that some Adonis or William Tell has piled up goods on 
his counter and turned the whole shop upside down, but 
even - oh, horrors! - begin to argue for the sake of some 
ten francs? But Willian1 Tell is ܺ1o simpleton, either. He 
will take his revenge all right, and for a scarf worth fifteen 
hundred francs will rook milady twelve thousand, and do 
it in a way which will leave her completely satisfied. 
But in spite of this, the bourgeois is passionately fond of 
unutterable high-mindedness. On the stage he n1ust have 
nothing but people con1 pletel y disinterested in n1oney. 
Gustave n1ust shine by the light of high-n1indedness alone 
and the bourgeois sheds tears of tender en1otion . Without 
unutterable highn1indedness he will not even sleep quietly. 
And as to taking twelve thousand francs instead of fifteen 
hundred, this was his duty: he took it because he was 
virtuous. To steal is wicked and n1ean - that's what the 
galleys are for; the bourgeois is ready to forgive a great 
deal, but he will not forgive stealing even if you and your 
children should be dying of starvation. But should you 
steal for virtue's sake, then , oh then, everything is 
forgiven unto you. It n1eans you want to fa ire jortu11c and 
an1ass n1any possessions, i. e. perforn1 a natural and hun1an 
duty. In other words the legal code very clearly defines 
stealing for low n1otives, i.e. for the sake of a piece of 
bread, and stealing in the nan1e of highest virtue. The 
latter is cornpletely assured, encouraged and is organized 
on an extraordinarily sound footing. 
Why then - I an1 back at n1y old then1e again - why then 
does the bourgeois look nervous and ill at ease? What 
causes hin1 all this worry? The speechifiers? The . phrase­
n1ongers? But he can send then1 all to hell with one kick of 
his foot. Argun1ents of pure reason ? But reason has proved 
58 

bankrupt in face of reality, and besides, the rational people 
themselves, the philosophers and metaphysicians, are now 
beginning to teach that there arc no arguments of pure 
reason, that pure reason docs not even exist in this world, 
that abstract logic is not applicable to humanity, that there 
is such a thing as John's, Peter's or Gustave's reason, but 
there has never been any pure reason, that it is a baseless 
fiction of the eighteenth century. 
Whom should he fear then? Workers? But workers are 
all of them capitalists too, in their heart of hearts: their one 
ideal is to become capitalists and an1ass as n1any things as 
possible; such is their nature. People don't get their nature 
for nothing. All this requires centuries of growth and 
upbringing. National characteristics cannot easily be 
altered: it is not easy to get a way fron1 centuries-old habits 
which have become part of our flesh and blood. 
Peasants? But French peasants arc capitalists par excell­
ence, the obtuse kind of capitalists, · i.e. the very best and 
the n1ost ideally perfect type of capitalist that can possibly 
be imagined. Con1n1unists? or perhaps Socialists? But 
these fellows have considerably cotnprotnised thcn1sclvcs 
in their day, and in his heart of hearts the bourgeois has a 
profound contctnpt for thetn; and yet, for all his con­
tenlpt, he is afraid of thcn1. In f.1ct, these are the people he 
fears. But why should he fear then1, really? For did not the 
Abbe Sieyes in his fan1ous pan1phlct predict that the 
bourgeois would be everything? 'What is the tiers Ctat? 
Nothing. What n1ust it be? Everything. '  Well, now, 
things have turned out as he foretold then1. Of all the 
words spoken at the tin1c they were the only ones to have 
con1e true; the only ones to have ren1aincd. But the 
bourgeois still refuses to believe, son1ehow, despite the 
fact that all that has been said since Sieyes' words has 
collapsed and burst like a soap bubble. 
Indeed, soon after hin1 was proclaitncd the principle of 
liberte, ec.t.?alite, fratenzite. Excellent. What is liberte? Free-
59 

dom. What freedom? Equal freedon1 for all to do anything 
one wants within the limits of the law. When can a man do 
anything he wants? WJ)en he has a million. Does freedom 
give everyone a million? No. What is a man without a 
million? A man without a million is not a n1an who does 
anything he wants, but a man with whom anything is 
done that anyone wants. And what follows? What follows 
is that besides freedon1 there is also equality, in fact 
equality before the law. There is only one thing to be said 
about this equality before the law - that the way in which 
it is now applied enables, indeed forces, every Frenchman 
to consider it as a personal insult. 
What then ren1ains of the forn1ula? Fraternity, brother­
hood. Now this is a n1ost curious concept and, it must be 
admitted, constitutes the principal stumbling block in the 
West. The Western man speaks of brotherhood as of the 
great n1oving force of hutnanity, and does not realize that 
brotherhood cannot con1e about if it does not exist in fact. 
What is to be done? Brotherhood must be created at all 
costs. But it turns out that brotherhood cannot be created, 
because it creates itself, is given, exists in nature. It was, 
however, found to be absent in French and in Western 
nature generally; what was found to exist instead was the 
principle of individuality, the principle of isolation, of 
intensified self-preservation, of self-seeking, of self­
detennination within one's own personality or self, of 
contrast between this self, the whole of nature and the rest 
of lnllnanity; and this contrast was considered as an 
independent and separate principle cotnpletcly equal and 
equivalent in value to all that existed apart from itself. 
Now such a contrast could not produce brotherhood. 
Why? Because within brotherhood, true brotherhood, it is 
uot the individual personality, not the self, that should lay 
clain1 to its right of equality in value and in1portance with 
all the rest, but all this rest should itself approacܻ the 
individual, the separate self laying this clain1, and should 
60 

itself without being asked, recognize the individual as its 
equal in value and rights, i.e. the equal of all else that exists 
in the world. Nay n1ore, the individual who rebels and 
n1akes clain1s should n1uch rather sacrifice both his 
personality and the whole of hin1self to society and not 
only not clain1 his rights, but on the contrary, hand then1 
over unconditionally to society. But the Western indi­
vidual is not used to this kind of procedure: he den1ands by 
force, he den1ands rights, he wants to go shares. And, 
naturally, no brotherhood results. There is, of course, the 
possibility of regeneration. But such a regeneration takes 
thousands of years, for ideas of this kind n1ust, first of all, 
becon1e con1pletely ingrained and assin1ilated in order to 
becon1e reality. Well then, you will reply, nn1st one loose 
one's individuality in order to be happy? Is salvation to be 
found in the absence of individuaiity? My reply is no, on 
the contrary, not only should one not loose one's 
individuality, but one should, in fact, beco1ne an indi­
vidual to a degree far higher than has occurred in the West. 
You n}ust understand 1ne: a voluntary, absolutely con­
scious and con1pletely unforced sacrifice of oneself for the 
sake of all is, I consider, a sign of the highest developn1ent 
of individual personality, its highest power, highest 
self-possession and highest freedon1 of th-e individual will. 
Voluntarily to lay down one's life for all, be crucified or 
burned at the stake for the sake of all is possible only at the 
point of the highest developn1ent of individual personal­
Ity. 
A strongly developed individual personality, conlplete­
ly sure of its right to be a personality and deprived of all 
fear for itself can, in fact, do nothing else out of its 
personality, can put it, that is, to no other use than to give 
away the whole of it to all, in order that others, too, n1ay 
becon1e personalities just as independent and happy. This 
is a law of nature; n1an, nonnally, tends towards it. Here, 
however, there is a hair, one very, very thin hair but: if it 
61 

gets into the machine, all will in1n1ediately crack and 
collapse. It is the following: there n1ust not be in this case 
the slightest motive of personal gain. For cxan1ple: I offer 
myself as a total sacrifice for all; and this is as it should be ­
I should sacrifice myself wholly and irrevocably, without 
consideration of gain, not thinking in the least that here I 
am, sacrificing my entire self to society and in exchange 
society will offer the whole of itself to n1e. One must, in 
fact, make one's sacrifice with the intention of giving away 
everything, and even wish that nothing be given to you in 
exchange and that no one should spend anything on you. 
Now, how is this to be done? Surely, this is rather like 
trying not to think of a polar bear. Try and set yourself the 
problen1 of not thinking about a polar bear and you will 
see that the datnned anitnal will be constantly in your 
thoughts. What can we do then? We can do nothing; it 
must he do11e of itself, the solution n1ust exist i11 11ature; tnust 
fonn an unconscious part of the nature of the whole race, 
what is needed, in short, is the principle of brotherhood 
and love - we n1ust love. Man tnust instinctively and of his 
own accord be drawn towards brotherhood, fellowship 
and concord and he nn1st be drawn towards them despite 
itnn1en1orial sufferings of his nation, despite the barbarous 
brutality and ignorance which have become rooted in the 
nation, despite age-old slavery and foreign invasions. The 
need for brotherly fellowship n1ust, in fact, have its being 
in the nature of n1an, he hn1st be born with it or else have 
acquired the habit of it fron1 tin1e in1n1emorial. 
What would this brotherhood consist in if expressed in 
rational and conscious language? In each particular indi­
vidual, without constraint or gain to himself, saying to 
society: 'We are strong only when we are all together, 
therefore take the whole of me if you need n1e, do not 
think of n1e when you pass your laws, do not worry.in the 
slightest, I atn handing all tny rights over to you, and 
please dispose of me as you wish. It is the height of 
62 

happiness for me to sacrifice everything to you and in such 
a way that you do not suffer any loss in consequence. I 
shall fade away and n1erge with the con1pletely uniforn1 
n1ass, only let your brotherhood retnain and flourish . . . .  ' 
And the brotherhood, on the other hand, n1ust say: 'You 
are giving us too n1uch. We have no right to refuse what 
you have to give, since you yourself say that therein 
consists the whole of your hJppiness; but what can we do, 
since we, too, care unceasing} y for your happiness? You 
too, then, must take everything frotn us . We shall always 
do all we can that you n1ight have as n1uch personal 
freedom and as n1uch independence as possible. You need 
no longer fear any enen1ies, either n1en or nature. You 
have the support of all of us, we all guarantee your safety 
and have your interests at heart night and day because we 
are brothers, we are all brothers of yours and there are 
tnany of us and we arc strong. Therefore, do not worry, 
be of good cheer, fear nothing and put your trust in us. ' 
After this, there will be no necessity for sharing things 
out, they will all share then1selves out auton1atically. Love 
one another and all these things will be added unto you. 
What a Utopiܼ this is, really! It is all based on sentitnent 
and on nature, and not on reason. Surely this is hun1iliat­
ing for reason. What do you think? Is this Utopia or not? 
But then what can a socialist do if the principle of 
brotherhood is absent in Western tnan, who recognizes, 
on the contrary, the individual and personal principle 
which always insists on isolation and on demanding 
rights, sword in hand? Because there is no brotherhood he 
wants to create it, to build it up. To n1ake jugged hare you 
must begin by having a hare. But there is no hare, there is, 
in other words, no nature capable of brotherhood, no 
nature with a belief in brotherhood or drawn towards 
brotherhood! In desperation, the socialist begins to n1ake 
and define the future brotherhood, weighs and n1easures 
it, throws out the bait of personal advantage, explains, 
63 

teaches and tells people how tnuch advantage each person 
will obtain out of this brotherhood, how n1uch each will 
gain; he detern1ines .the utility and cost of each individual, 
and works out in advance the balance of this \vorld's 
blessings: how much each individual deserves then1 and 
ho\v n1uch each individual n1ust voluntarily contribute to 
the con1n1unity in exchange for then1 at the cost ofhis own 
personality. But how can there possibly be any brother­
hood if it is preceded by a distribution of shares and by 
detern1ining how tnuch each person has earned and what 
each n1ust do? 
Ho\vever, a fonnula was proclaitned which said: ' Each 
for all and all for each'. Nothing better than this could, 
naturally, be thought up, particularly as the whole formula 
was lifted in its entirety frotn a well-known book. But 
then the brethren began to apply this fonnula in practice 
and about six tnonths later brought an action against the 
founder of the brotherhood, Cabet. The Fourierists have, 
it is said, spent the last 900,000 francs of their capital, but 
arc still trying to organize a brotherhood. The results are 
nil. Of course it is very tetnpting to live according to 
purely rational, if not brotherly, principles, that is, to live 
\Veil, when you arc guaranteed by everyone and nothing is 
detnandcd of you except your consent and your work. But 
here again there is a curious paradox. A tnan is offered full 
security, protniscd food and drink, and found work, and 
as against this he is tnercly required to give up a tiny grain 
of his personal freedon1 for the sake of the con1n1on good ­
just a tiny, tiny grain. But n1an does not want to live on 
these conditions, he finds even the tiny grain too irksome. 
He thinks that he is being put in gaol, poor fool, and that 
he would be better off by himself, because then he would 
have full freedon1. And when he is free he is knocked 
about and refused work, he starves to death and has. no real 
freedon1 . But all the same, the strange fellow still· prefers 
his own freedom. Naturally enough, the socialist is simply 
64 

forced to give him up and tell hin1 that he is a fool, that he 
is not ready yet, not ripe enough to understand what is 
good for him; that a dun1b little ant, a miserable ant is 
n1ore intelligent than he is because everything is so lovely 
in an ant-hill, so well-ordered , no one goes hungry and all 
are happy, everyone knows what he has to do; in fact man 
has a long way to go before he can hope to reach the 
standards of an ant-hill. 
In other words, though socialisn1 is possible it is 
possible anywhere but in France. 
And so, in final despair, the socialist proclaims at last: 
liberte, egalite, fraternite ou Ia mort. I Then there is no tnore 
to be said, and the bourgeois is con1plctcly triutnphant. 
And if the bourgeois is triutnphant it tneans that Sieyes' 
formula has come true literally and to the last detail. And 
so the bourgeois is everything. Why then is he shy and 
retiring, what does he fear? Everyone has collapsed, none 
has proved capable of standing up to hin1. In the old days, 
at the time of Louis-Philippe for exatnple, the bourgeois 
was not as shy and tin1id, and yet he reigned then too. 
Indeed, he still fought then, sensed that he had an cnen1y 
and finally defeated hin1 on the June barricades with the aid 
of rifle and bayonet. But when the battle was over the 
bourgeois suddenly realized that he was alone in the 
world, that there was nothing better than hin1self, that he 
was the ideal and that instead of trying as hitherto to 
convince the whole of hun1anity that he was the ideal, all 
that was left for him to do was sitnply to pose with quiet 
dignity in the eyes of hun1anity as the last word in human 
beauty and perfection. A ticklish situation, say what you 
will. Salvation came frotn Napoleon III. For the bourgeois 
he was the gift of the gods, the only way out of the 
1 Based on the slogan proclaimed by Gracchus Babcuf ( 1 76o-97). Some 
of the 'decrees' he published for the benefit of his fut ure communist 
republic bore the words: 'Egalitc, Libcrtc, Bonheur Commun ou la 
mort'. Tr. note. 
65 

difficulty, the only possibility available at the time. From 
that moment on the bourgeois begins to prosper, pays a 
frightful lot for his.- prosperity and fears everything just 
because he has attained everything. When one attains 
everything it is hard to loose everything. Whence follows, 
my friends, that he who fears most prospers most. Don't 
laugh please. For what is a bourgeois these days? 
66 

CHAPTER VI I 
CONTINUATION OF THE PRECEDING 
AND 
\V HY 
ARE there so tnan y flunkeys atnong the 
bourgeois, and of such noble appearance at that? Please 
don't blan1e n1e and don't exclain1 that I an1 exaggerating 
or being libellous or spiteful. What or whon1 is 111 y spite 
directed against? Why should I be spiteful? The fact is 
sin1ply that there are n1any flunkeys. Servility seeps 
increasingly into the very nature of the bourgeois and is 
increasingly taken for virtue. And that's how it should be 
in present circun1stances. It is their natural consequence. 
But the tnain thing, ah, the rnain thing is that nature itself 
lends a hand. It isn't only that the bourgeois has a strong, 
innate propensity for spying, for instance. I an1, in fact, 
convinced that the extraordinary devcloptnent of police 
spying in France - and not just ordinary spying, but 
spying which is both a skill and a vocation, an art in itself­
is due to their innate servility in that country. What 
ideally-noble Gustave, provided only he has not yet 
accun1ulated any possessions, will not itntnediately hand 
over his lady-love's letters in exchange for ten thousand 
francs and will not betray his tnistress to her husband? 
Maybe I an1 exaggerating, but perhaps n1y words have a 
certain basis in fact. The Frenchtnan loves attracting the 
attention of authority in order to suck up to it, and he docs 
it in a con1pletely disinterested sort of way, with no 
thought of an in1n1ediate reward; he docs it on credit, on 
account. Think, for exatnplc of all those job-seekers every 
67 

tin1e there was a change of regin1e, forn1erly so frequent in 
France. Think of all the tricks they were up to and to 
which they then1sdves adn1itted. Think of one of Bar­
bier's ian1bics on that score. I ren1en1ber in a cafe once, 
looking at a newspaper dated 3 July. It had, I noticed, an 
article by a correspondent in Vichy. The En1peror was 
then staying in Vichy; and so was the Court, of course; 
there were riding parties, pleasure trips. The correspon­
dent was describing all this. He begins thus: 'We have 
n1any excellent horsetnen. You have, naturally, guessed 
who is the n1ost brilliant of then1 all. His·.Majesty rides out 
every day attended by his retinue, etc. ' 
It's understandable, let then1 adtnire their Emperor's 
brilliant qualities. It is possible to have the greatest respect 
for his intelligence, his circun1spection, his high qualities 
and so forth. You cannot tell such an enthusiastic 
gentletnan to his face that he is a dissen1bler. 
His reply to you would be: 'Such is n1 y conviction - and 
that's that' - precisely the reply you would get fron1 son1e 
of our own journalists . You see, he is quite safe: he has an 
answer with which to shut your n1outh . The freedon1 of 
conscience and of conviction is the lirst and principal 
frecdon1. But in this case \Vhat reply can he give you? In 
this case he no longer pays any regard to the laws of 
reality, he defies probability and docs so intentionally. 
And why, after all, should he do so intentionally? Surely 
no one will believe hin1? The horscn1an hitnself is not 
likely to read it, and even if he docs, are the little 
French tnan who wrote the corrcspondcllcc, the newspaper 
which published it and the newspaper's editorial board 
really all too stupid to grasp that their lord and n1astcr has 
not the slightest usc for the reputation of being the first 
horsetnan of France, that he does not even expect this 
reputation in his old age and will naturally refuse to believe 
it if people try to convince hin1 that he is the tnosf expert 
rider in all France: they say he is an exceptionally 
6H 

intelligent man. Oh no, there is son1ething else in vie\v 
here: it may be improbable and ridiculous, the sovereign 
himself may regard it \Vith disgust and may laugh it to 
scorn; maybe, maybe, but then he \vill also see the blind 
obedience, he will see the infinite obsequiousness, servile, 
stupid and unreal, but obsequiousness all the san1e, and 
that is the main thing. Think it out for yourselves no\v: if 
this were not in the spirit of the nation, if such vulgar 
flattery were not considered entirely possible and ordin­
ary, entirely natural and decent even, could such an article 
be published in a Paris ne\vspaper? Where in print \vill you 
find such flattery except in France? The reason \vhy I speak 
of the spirit of the nation is precisely because it is not one 
paper only that writes in this \vay, but ahnost all of them, 
they are all exactly the san1e, except t\vo or three \Vhich are 
quite independent. 
I remember once sitting in a hotel dining roo1n - not in 
France that time, in Italy, but there \Vas a nu1nber of 
Frenchmen at n1y table. At that tin1e everyone \Vas ahvays 
talking of Garibaldi. This \Vas a bout a fortnight before 
Aspromonte. Naturally people spoke sonle\vhat enignlati­
cally: son1e k,ept silent not wishing to n1ake their n1eaning 
absolutely clear, others shook their heads. The general 
sense of the conversation \Vas that Garibaldi had started a 
risky, indeed a rash, venture; but this opinion \Vas never 
stated quite explicitly, because Garibaldi is a n1an of such 
different stature to other people that \vhat could in the 
ordinary \Vay be considered rash n1ight \veil in his case 
prove to be reasonable. Gradually the discussion turned to 
the actual personality of Garibaldi. His qualities \Vere 
enumerated and the final judgn1ent was rather favourable 
for the Italian hero. 
' Now, there is just one quality in hin1 that an1azes n1e, ' 
exclai1ned a Frenchn1an loudly. He \Vas a pleasant, 
impressive-looking n1an, aged about thirty and with that 
extraordinary nobility of expression in his face \vhich 

verges on the impudent and which strikes you in all 
Frenchmen. 'There is just one fact about him which 
an1azes me most of all. '  
Everyone, of course, turned to the speaker, their 
curiosity aroused by his statement. 
The quality discovered in Garibaldi was intended to 
Interest everyone. 
'For a short time in 1 86o he enjoyed unlin1ited and 
completely uncontrolled power in Naples. In his hands he 
held the sun1 of twenty n1illion francs of public n1oney. He 
was accountable to no one for that sun1 .  He could have 
appropriated for hin1self any an1ount of it and no one 
would have held hin1 responsible. He appropriated no­
thing and handed it all back to the government to the last 
sou. This is aln1ost incredible! !' 
Even his eyes sparkled when he spoke of the twenty 
tnillion francs. 
You can, of course, say what you will about Garibaldi; 
but to put Garibaldi's nan1e side by side with con1n1on 
etnbezzlers of public funds - that, obviously, only a 
Frenchtnan can do. 
And ho\v naively, how sincerely he said it! Everything, 
of course, n1ay be forgiven for the sake of sincerity, even 
the loss of the capacity to understand and of the feeling for 
genuinely honourable behaviour; but as I glanced at the 
f:1ce which lit up at the n1ention of the twenty million 
francs, the thought quite involuntarily can1e into my head: 
' And what if you, tny dear fellow, had held son1e public 
office at the titne, in place of Garibaldi?' 
You will tell n1e that this, again, is untrue, that all these 
are individual cases, that precisely the same sort of thing 
happens in our own country and that I cannot really speak 
of all Frenchmen. Quite, but I an1 not, in fact, speaking of 
all of then1. Unutterable nobility of character exists 
everywhere, while n1aybe much worse things have occurred 
in our country . But why, why should this sort of thing be 
70 

raised up into a virtue? You know what? One can even be 
despicable in one's n1oral standards, but not loose one's 
sense of honour; and in France honest people are very 
nun1erous, but they have con1pletely lost their sense of 
honour, and therefore behave despicably and know not 
what they do to virtue. The forn1er is, of course, n1ore 
vicious, but the latter, say what you will, is n1ore 
conten1ptible. Such an attitude to virtue bodes no good for 
the life of a nation. And as to individual cases, I don't want 
to argue with you. Even a whole nation consists of 
nothing but individual cases, does it not? 
I even thought as follows: perhaps I was tnistaken in 
saying that the bourgeois tries to shrink back and is still 
constantly afraid of son1cthing. He docs shrink back, that 
is true enough, and he is nervous, but taking it all in all, 
the bourgeois thrives and prospers. Though he tries to 
deceive hin1self and though he constantly tells hin1sclf that 
everything is all right, this docs not interfere with his 
outward self-confidence. Not only that, but even inwardly 
he is self-confident when he gets going. How all this can 
exist together within hin1 is indeed a problcn1, but in fact it 
does. In general, the bourgeois is very far fro111 being 
stupid, but his intelligence is a short-tenn one son1ehow, 
and works by snatches. He has a great n1any rcady-n1ade 
concepts stored up, like fuel for the winter, and he 
seriously intends to live with then1 for a thousand years, if 
necessary. However, why n1ention a thousand years? The 
bourgeois rarely talks in tenns of a thousand years, except, 
perhaps, when he waxes eloquent. 'Apres moi le deluge' is 
far n1ore often used and n1ore frequently applied in 
practice. 
And what indifference to everything, what short-lived, 
en1pty interests! I had occasion in Paris to visit son1e 
people whose house had in n1y day a constant strcan1 of 
visitors. They seetned to be afraid of beginning a 
conversation about anything unusual, anything which was 
71 

not petty, any subjects of general interest, you know -
social and political problerns or sotnething. It could not, in 
this case, it seen1s to I)1e, be fear of spies, it was sin1ply that 
people no longer knew how to think or how to speak 
about n1ore serious subjects. 
There were people an1ong then1, however, who were 
terribly interested to know what itnpression Paris had 
tnade on rne, how awe-struck I had been, how an1azed, 
crushed, annihilated. The Frenchn1an still thinks hin1self 
capable of n1orally crushing and annihilating. This, too, is 
rather an ann1sing syrnptorn. I ren1en1ber particularly one 
very charn1ing, very polite, very kind old n1an to whon1 I 
took a sincere liking. He kept his eyes glued on n1y face as 
he questioned rne on rny opinion of Paris, and was terribly 
hurt whenever I failed to express any particular enthusi­
asn1. His kind face even reflected suffering - literally 
suffering, I an1 not exaggerating. Oh, dear Monsieur Le 
M-re! One can never convince a Frenchn1an, i.e. a 
Parisian (because at botton1 all Frenchn1en are Parisians) 
that he is not the greatest rnan in the whole wide world. As 
a tnattcr of fact, he knows very little about the wide 
world, apart frorn Paris, and does not want to know, 
either. That's his national trait and a very characteristic one 
at that. 
But the Frenchtnan 's n1ost characteristic trait is eloqu­
ence. Nothing can extinguish his love of eloquence which 
increases n1orc and n1ore as the years go by. I should 
terribly tnuch like to know when precisely this love of 
eloquence began in France. Naturally, it started n1ainly at 
the titne of Louis XIV . It is a ren1arkable fact - it is indeed 
- that everything in France started at the tin1e of Louis 
XIV. But the n1ost retnarkable thing is that in the whole of 
Europe, too, everything started at the tin1e of Louis XIV. 
And what is it he had, that king - I cannot understand! For 
he was not really particularly superior to any of the other, 
previous, kings. Except, perhaps, that he was the first to 
72 

say - l'Ctat c'est nwi. This had a great success and resounded 
all over Europe at the tin1c. I irnaginc it was just that quip 
that n1ade hin1 fan1ous. It bccan1e known surprisingly 
quickly even in Russia. 
A very nationally n1indcd sovereign was this Louis 
XIV, entirely in the French tradition, and I therefore fail to 
understand why the French got so out of hand . . .  at the 
end of the last century, I n1ean. They had their fun and 
garnes and went back to the old tradition; that is the way 
things are shaping; but eloquence, eloquence, oh - it is a 
stun1b!ing block for a Parisian. He is ready to forget the 
past entirely, the whole of it, ready to engage in the n1ost 
sensible conversations and be a n1ost obedient and diligent 
little boy, but eloquence, eloquence alone he cannot forget 
even yet. He pines and sighs after eloquence; recalls 
Thiers, Guizot, Odilon Barrot. 'Ah, ' he n1unnurs to 
himself son1etin1es, 'what eloquence there was then! '  and 
begins to think. Napoleon III realized .this, can1c at once to 
the conclusion that Jacques Bonhon1n1e n1ust not think 
and little by little brought back eloquence. Six Liberal 
deputies are kept for this purpose in the Legislative 
Assembly, six pern1ancnt, in1n1utablc, real Liberal de­
puties of the · kind, I n1ean, that probably could not be 
bribed if one tried. But all the san1c there arc only six of 
them - there were six, there arc six, and six there always 
will be. You needn't worry, there will never be rnore, but 
there will never be any less, either. It looks very cunning at 
first sight. In practice, however, it is quite sitnplc and is 
done by n1eans of the suffrage rmivcrscl. Naturally, all 
appropriate n1casures arc taken to prevent thcn1 talking 
too much. but they arc allowed to chatter. 
Every year at the requisite titne the n1ost itnportant state 
problen1s are discussed and the Parisian is blissfully 
thrilled. He knows there will be eloquence and is pleased. 
Naturally he knows very well that there will be nothing 
but eloquence, that there will be words, words, words and 
73 

that these words will lead to absolutely nothing. But this, 
too, pleases him very, very much indeed. And he is the 
first to find it all extremely sensible. The speeches of some 
of these six deputies are particularly popular. And a deputy 
is always ready to make speeches for the sake of public 
entertainment. Oddly enough he is quite sure himself that 
his speeches will lead to nothing, and that the whole thing 
is but a joke, an innocent game, a masquerade and nothing 
else, and yet he speaks, speaks for years on end, speaks 
excellently, and even takes great pleasure in it. And all the 
other members who listen to hin1 swoon away with 
delight. 'Wonderful speaker, that man!' - and the Presi­
dent and the whole of France swoon away with delight. 
The deputy cotnes to the end of his speech and the tutor of 
these nice and well-behaved child ren gets up in his turn. 
He soletnnly declares that the essay on the set subject: 'The 
Sunrise', has been excellently prepared and developed by 
the honourable 1nen1ber. 'We have, ' he says, 'admired the 
honourable speaker's talent, his ideas and the adtnirable 
conduct these ideas reveal, he has given us all, all, a great 
deal of pleasure . . .  However, although the honourable 
Inetnber has fully deserved his prize - a book bearing the 
inscription 'For Good Conduct and Progress in Study' - in 
spite of this, I say, for reasons of a higher order, the 
honourable n1ernber's speech will not do at all. I hope the 
right honourable n1en1bers will agree with rne. ' At this 
point he turns to all the deputies and gives then1 a stern 
glance. The deputies, still swooning with delight, im­
Inediatcly break into frantic applause at the tutor's words, 
yet at the san1e tin1e with touching enthusiasn1, they grasp 
the Liberal deputy's hands and thank hin1 then and there 
for the pleasure he has given then1 and beg hin1 to give 
thern this Liberal pleasure again next time, with the tutor's 
pennission. The tutor graciously pennits; the author of 
'The Sunrise' departs, proud of his success; the deputies go 
back, srnacking their lips, to the boson1 of theiܯ fan11lies, 
74 

and in the evening, give vent to their delight by walking 
about in the Palais-Royal arm-in-arm with their spouses 
and listening to the splash of little fountains, while the 
tutor, after submitting a full report to the Authority 
concerned, declares to the whole of France that everything 
is all right. 
Sometimes, however, when son1e n1ore in1portant 
business is in hand the stakes for which the game is played 
are higher, more important too. Prince Napoleon hin1self 
is brought to one of the Assen1bly's sittings. Prince 
Napoleon suddenly begins to act the part of the Opposi­
tion and quite frightens all these young pupils . A solemn 
hush descends upon the classroon1. Prince Napoleon plays 
the Liberal, the Prince docs not agree with the Govern­
ment, he considers that such and such n1easures should be 
adopted. The Prince censures the Governn1cnt, in other 
words things are being said which (it is assun1ed) these 
very san1e nice children could say if only their tutor \Vere 
to leave the classroon1 for one tninute. Within reason, of 
course, even so; besides, the assun1ption is absurd because 
all these nice children are so nicely brought up that they 
would not so Inuch as budge even if the tutor left thcn1 for 
a whole week. And so when Prince Napoleon's speech is 
over, the tutor gets up and soletnnly declares that the essay 
on the set subject: 'The Sunrise', has been excellently 
prepared and developed by the honourable speaker. 'We 
have adn1ired the talent, the eloquently expressed ideas 
and the virtue of the gracious Prince . . . We are quite 
prepared to let hin1 have a prize for diligence and progress 
in his studies, but . . .  ' and so forth, in other \vords all the 
things that have been said before. Naturally, the entire 
forn1 is delighted and breaks into frantic applause, the 
Prince is taken back hon1e, the virtuous pupils disperse and 
leave the classroon1 like the virtuous little goody-goodies 
they are, and in the evening go out for a \valk in the 
Palais-Royal together with their spouses and listen to the 
75 

pleasant splash of little fountains, etc. , etc. , etc. In short, 
order reigns supreme. 
We lost our way: once in the salle des pas perdus and 
instead of a criminal court we stumbled into a court 
dealing with civil cases. 
A curly-haired lawyer in cap and gown was making a 
speech, scattering pearls of eloquence. The presiding 
judge, the other judges, the lawyers and the public 
wallowed in all this with obvious delight. The hush was 
awe-inspiring; we tip-toed in. The case dealt with a legacy; 
some n1onks were n1ixed up in the case. Monks are now 
constantly mixed up in legal proceediܰgs, n1ainly dealing 
with legacies. The n1ost disgraceful, the 111ost scandalous 
occurrences are now being brought out into the light of 
day; but the public keeps silent and is very little scandal­
ized, because n1onks wield considerable power now, and 
the bourgeois is very docile. The holy fathers are 
becon1ing increasingly convinced of the superiority of a bit 
of capital over all else, over drean1s and sin1ilar things, 
increasingly convinced, in fact, that a little n1oney on the 
side brings power with it. For what's in n1cre eloquence? 
Eloquence by itself docs not suffice nowadays. But there, I 
personally think, they arc slightly tnistaken. Of course, a 
bit of capital is a twice-blessed thing, but eloquence, too, 
will get you a long way with a Frenchtnan. The wives 
generally fall under the spell of the monks - and n1uch 
tnore so no\v than at any other tin1c in the past. There is 
every hope too, that the bourgeois will follow suit. 
The case revealed how for years on end the holy fathers 
had worked cunningly and scientifically (they have 
evolved a science for this sort of thing), bringing tnoral 
pressure to bear on a lovely and very wealthy lady, how 
they had induced her to live in a convent, and how they 
had terrorized her there till she becan1e ill and hysterical, 
and how they had done it all in a calculated and 
scientifically graduated way. Finally, having tnadܱ a sick 
76 

woman of her and reduced her to imbecility, they 
persuaded her that to see relatives was a great sin in the 
sight of the Lord, and little by little they succeeded in 
keeping away all her reiations. 'Even her fifteen-year-old 
niece with a soul as virgin-pure as a new-born babe's, an 
angel of purity and innocence, even she dared not enter the 
cell of her adored aunt, who loved her beyond all else and 
who, as a result of crafty machinations, could no longer 
take her in her arms and give her a kiss on her front virginal, 
where the white angel of innocence had his seat' . . .  And 
so on in the same strain; it was wonderful. The lawyer 
n1aking the speech was obviously n1elting with joy at the 
thought of being able to speak so well, the President of the 
court was melting too, and so was the public. The holy 
fathers lost their battle solely on account of this eloquence. 
But this does not dishearten then1, of course; for each 
battle lost they win fifteen . 
'Who is the lawyer?' I asked a young student, \vho was 
one of the n1ost fervent listeners. There were n1any 
students there and all of then1 so quiet and well-n1annered. 
He looked at n1e with surprise. 
'Jules Favre, ' he replied at last, with such contetnptuous 
pity that I nattually felt abashed. Thus I had the chance to 
get to know the very flower of French eloquence at its 
n1ain source, as you tnight say. 
But there is a vast nun1ber of these sources. The 
bourgeois is riddled with eloquence. We went once to the 
Pantheon to have to look at the great n1en. It was the 
wrong titne to con1e at and we had to pay two francs. 
Thereupon a venerable, if decrepit, disabled soldier took 
the keys and led us to the church crypt. On the way there 
he still spoke like a tnan, even though the absence of teeth 
n1ade hin1 1nun1ble a little. But as soon as we were down 
in the crypt and he had brought us to the first totnb, he 
broke into sing-song. 
'Ci-gft Voltaire, Voltaire this great genius of lovely 
77 

France. He abolished prejudice, overcame ignorance, 
wrestled with the angel of darkness and held high the torch 
of enlightenment. He reached greatness in his tragedies, 
though France already had Corneille. ' 
He was clearly repeating a lesson he had learnt and 
committed to memory. Someone had once written out the 
whole sermon for him on a piece of paper and he got it off 
by heart for the rest of his life: pleasure shone on his kind 
old face as he began perorating in high-falutin' style for 
our benefit. 
'Ci-<jit Jean-Jacques Rousseau, ' he continued at the next 
ton1b. 'Jean-Jacques, l'lzomme de Ia nature et de Ia verite!' 
Suddenly I wanted to laugh. A high-falutin' style can 
n1ake anything appear ridiculous. Besides, it was obvious 
that even as he spoke of nature and verite the poor old man 
had no idea what he was talking about. 
'How odd!' I said to hirn. 'Of these two great n1en one 
spent his life calling the other a liar and a wretch, and the 
other sin1ply called the first a fool . And here they have 
con1e together, ahnost next to each other. ' 
'Monsieur, n1onsieur! ' began the disabled soldier. He 
wanted to reply son1ething but didn't and quickly took us 
to another torn b. 
'Ci-git Lannes, Marshal Lannes' - he went off into his 
sing-song again - 'one of the greatest heroes France, so 
rich in heroes , has ever had. He was not only a great 
n1arshal and the n1ost skilful leader of troops apart from 
the great En1peror, but he enjoyed an even greater 
happiness. He was the friend . . .  ' 
'Of course, ' I said, eager to shorten the speech, 'he was 
the friend of Napoleon. '  
'Monsieur, ' interrupted the disabled soldier, 'let n1e 
speak. '  He sounded somewhat hurt. 
'Go on then, I am listening. '  
. 
'But he enjoyed an even greater happiness. He was the 
friend of the great En1peror. Not one of all his other 
78 

111arshals had had the happiness of becoining the great 
In an's friend. Marshal Lannes alone proved worthy of that 
great honour. As he lay dying for his country on the field 
of battle . . .  ' 
'Well, yes, he had both his legs torn off by a cannon 
ball. '  
'Monsieur, n1onsieur, ' exclaiined the soldier altnost in 
tears, 'do let n1e speak n1ysclf. You know it all perhaps 
. . .  But let Ine tell it too. ' 
The strange fellow was terribly keen to tell the story 
hiinsclf, even though we knew it all before. 
'As he lay dying for his country, ' he began once n1orc, 
'on the field of battle, the Etnperor, struck to the heart and 
n1ourning his great loss . . .  ' 
'Caine to say farewell to hin1,' said I, unable to restrain 
n1yself froin interrupting hin1 again. But I iininediatcly 
felt I should not ha vc done it and \Vas ovcrcon1e by 
ren1orse. 
'Monsieur, Inonsieur, ' said the old Inan dolefully and 
reproachfully looking at 111e straight in the eye and shaking 
his grey head. 'Monsieur, I know, I an1 sure you know all 
this better thܲn I do, pcrha ps. But you h;-. ve yourself taken 
me on to show you: let n1e spe;-.k then. There's not n1uch 
left now . . .  Then the Ein per or, struck to the heart and 
Inourning (alas, in vain!) the great loss \vhich he, the anny 
and the whole of France had sustained, approached the 
deathbed and by his last f:1rc\vcll soothed the cruel 
sufferings of the great captain \vho died aln1ost in his 
presence - C'est fini, Inonsieur, ' he added, casting a 
reproachful glance at Inc; and continued on his \vay. 
'And here is another toinb; and those over there . . .  
quelques senateurs, '  he added \Vith co n1plete indifference 
and gave a casual nod in the direction of several other 
to1nbs nearby. He had exhausted the whole of his 
eloquence on Voltaire, Jean-Jacques and Marshal Lannes. 
ܳhis was a direct exainple, coining fron1 the people so 
79 

to speak, of the love of eloquence. Is it possible that all the 
speeches held in the National Assembly, the Convention, 
and the Clubs in which the nation had almost directly 
participated and in ܴhich it had been re-educated, is it 
possible, I repeat, that they have left only one trace: the 
love of eloquence for the sake of eloquence? 
80 

CHAPTER VIII 
BRIBRI AND MA BICHE 
AND WHAT ABOUT spouses? Spouses thrive and flourish. 
By the way, why you n1ay ask, do I write 'spouses' instead 
of wives? Lofty style, n1y dear sirs, that's why. The 
bourgeois, whenever he has recourse to lofty style, ahvays 
says 'mon epouse'. And though other classes sin1ply say 
ma femme - n1y wife - like everywhere else, it is better to 
follow the national spirit of the n1ajority and usc the lofty 
style of speech. It's n1ore characteristic. Besides, there are 
other nan1es as well. When the bourgeois is in a 
sentimental n1ood or wants to be unfaithful to his \vife he 
always calls her ma biclze 
- n1y doe. And conversely a 
loving wife in an access of dainty skittishness calls her 
darling bourgeois bribri, to the great delight of the 
bourgeois. 
Bribri and Ma Biche ahvays thrive but no\v n1ore than 
ever. It is, of course, understood (tacitly, aln1ost) that Ma 
Biche and Bribri must in our troubled tin1cs, serve as 
n1odels of society's virtue, hannony and blissful state, and 
as a reproach to the odious nonsense of absurd con1n1unist 
tramps; but apart fron1 that, Bribri becotnes1 maritally 
speaking, increasingly an1enable every year. He under­
stands that his Biche cannot be kept back, whatever is 
done or said, that a Parisiennc is tnade to have a lover, and 
that a husband cannot avoid a couple of horns. He will 
naturally keep n1un1 \vhile his savings are still n1eagre and 
his possessions few. Ho\vever, as soon as he has both, 
81 

Bribri becomܵs more exacting in every way, because he 
then acquires a great respect for himself. He begins to 
consider Gustave in a different light too, particularly if the 
latter is no more thaܶ a ragamuffin and has but few 
possessions. 
In general, a Parisian who has a little tnoney and wants 
to get married chooses a wife who also has a little money. 
Not only that, but they go through each other's accounts 
first, and if they discover that francs and possessions are 
equal on either side, they unite. This happens everywhere 
else too; but here the law of the equality of pockets has 
developed into a peculiar custom. For instance, if a girl has 
so much as a penny more than a would-be suitor she will 
never be allowed to marry hin1 and a better Bribri is then 
looked for. Besides, love-matches are becoming in­
creasingly in1possiblc and arc regarded as ahnost indecent. 
The reasonable custon1 which invariably den1ands the 
equality of pockets and the tnarriage of fortunes is very 
rarely broken -
n1ore rarely, I should think, than 
anywhere else. The bourgeois has organized his wife's 
n1oney excellently well to his own advantage. That is 
precisely why he is often ready to close his eyes to his 
Biche's escapades and not to notice a nutnber of annoying 
things, for otherwise, in case of disagreen1ent between 
thetn, the question of the dowry can raise its ugly head. 
Besides, should his Biche ever take to following fashion 
beyond her tneans, Bribri would take note but voice no 
objection; his wife tnight ask less for her dresses. Ma Biche 
is then nntch easier to deal with. Anyway, as n1arriages are 
for the n1ost part tnarriages of fortunes and very little 
attention is paid to n1utual affection, Bribri hin1self is not 
averse to letting his glances stray away fron1 his own 
Biche. Thus, it is best not to interfere with each other. In 
this way n1orc harn1ony reigns in the hon1e, and the 
beloved nan1es - Bribri and Ma Biche - arc ever rflore 
frequently murn1ured by the loving couples. 
82 

As a matter of fact, to be quite frank, Bribri has even 
here succeeded in securing his own position. The police 
officer is always at his disposal. Such is the law of which he 
is himself the author. If the worst comes to the worst and 
he finds the pair of lovers en Jla,grant delit, he can even kill 
them, without having to answer for his actions. Ma Biche 
knows this and approves it. 
A long period of protection and guardianship has 
reduced Ma Biche to such a state of n1ind that she neither 
con1plains nor dreams, as in certain other barbarous and 
ridiculous countries, of, for instance, receiving a universi­
ty education, joining clubs and becon1ing a Metnber of 
Parlian1ent. She prefers to lead her present ethereal and, so 
to speak, canary-like existence. She is decked out in fine 
clothes and gloves and taken for drives, she dances, she 
sucks sweets, superficially she is received like a queen and 
superficially, n1en are at her feet. This forn1 of relationship 
has been worked out with a surprisingly high degree of 
success and dccorun1. In short, the rules of chivalry are 
observed, and what n1orc can she want? She will not be 
deprived of Gustave. Neither docs she want her life to 
have a virtuous and noble purpose, etc. She is really quite 
as n1uch of a capitalist and quite as niggardly as her 
husband. When the canary years arc over, \vhen, that is, 
Ma Biche can no longer dupe herself about being a canary, 
when the possibility of a new Gustave becotnes an 
absolute absurdity to even the n1ost fervent and self­
satisfied itnagination, she suddenly undergoes a rapid and 
unpleasant transfonnation. Gone are daintiness, finery, 
skittishness. For the n1ost part she becotnes a bad­
tenlpered housewife and a church n1ouse, who helps her 
husband to hoard his pennies. A sort of cynicis1n suddenly 
takes hold of her; lassitude, spite, coarse instincts, point­
less life, cynical talk - all suddenly tnake their appearance. 
Son1e even becon1e slatternly. Of course, this is not always 
the case, there are other tnore cheering phenon1cna too; 
83 

sin1ilar social relationships can also be observed elsewhere 
- of course - but . . .  in France all this is n1ore natural, 
more genuine, n1ore spontaneous, fuller, it is all rnore 
national. Here is the source and en1bryo of that bourgeois 
form of society which now reigns throughout the world, 
in general imitation of the great nation. 
Certainly Ma Biche is queen - superficially. It is difficult 
to imagine the exquisite politeness with which she is 
surrounded, the importunate attention which is paid to her 
everywhere in society as well as in the streets. The 
refinen1ent of it is atnazing, but it is sotnetimes so 
mawkish that for any honest soul it would be unbearable. 
The obvious shan1 of it would cut hin1 to the quick. But 
Ma Biche is herself a great rogue and . . .  that is all she 
wants . . .  she will always get her way and will always 
prefer devious tneans to the honest and straightforward: 
the results, she thinks, are tnore certain and she gets n1ore 
fun. And for Ma Biche intrigue and fun is everything; it's 
the whole point. But then, look at the way she is dressed, 
at the way she walks along the streets. Ma Biche is 
sitnpering, affected, unnatural through and through, but 
this is precisely what captivates people, especially those 
who are blase or partly depraved and who have lost all 
taste for fresh and natural beauty. Ma Biche has a very 
under-developed personality; she has a bird's brain and 
heart, but on the other hand she is dainty, she has the 
secret of innutnerable little tricks and shifts which subju­
gate you and tnake you follow her as a piquant novelty. 
But in fact she is rarely beautiful. There is son1ething evil 
in her face, even. But it does not n1atter, the face is n1obile 
and cheerful and possesses to the highest degree the secret 
of counterfeiting feeling and nature. Maybe what you like 
about her is not that she achieves the natural by n1eans of 
the counterfeit, but you arc fascinated by the actual process 
of achievetnent by counterfeit, the art of it fascinates y·ou. 
The Parisian for the n1ost part does not care whether it is 
84 

true love or a good counterfeit. He perhaps even prefers 
the counterfeit. A kind of Eastern view of won1cn is 
gaining currency in Paris. The can1elia is n1orc and n1ore in 
fashion. 'Take the money and dupe n1c as well as you can ­
give n1c a counterfeit in1itation of love, in other words': 
that's what is required of a can1elia. V cry little n1orc is 
required of a wife, at least that is all that's asked of her, and 
there is, therefore, tacit indulgence for Gustave. Besides, 
the bourgeois knows that in her old age his Biche will 
enter fully into his interests and show a great deal of zeal in 
helping hin1 to amass his fortune. She helps hin1 a lot even 
in her youth. She son1etin1es carries on the whole trade, 
lures in the custon1ers and is, in fact, his right hand, his 
chief clerk. And in the circun1stanccs, he naturally forgives 
her her Gustave. 
In the streets won1an enjoys inviolability. No one will 
offend her and she is always given the right of way. 
Whereas in Russia any won1an who is not quite old cannot 
n1ake a step in the streets without son1conc - son1e soldier 
or debauchee - peering under her hat and trying to effect 
an introduction. 
However, in spite of the possibility of Gustave, the 
ordinary, ritual forn1 of relationship between Bribri and 
his Bichc is quite charn1ing and frequently na·ivc. In 
general aln1ost all foreigners arc incon1parably n1ore na1ve 
than the Russians. This struck n1e in1n1cdiately. It is 
difficult to explain this precisely - it is a thing that nn1st be 
noted for oneself. Le russe est sceptiquc ct moqllcllr, say the 
French about us, and this is, in fact, so. We are greater 
cynics and appreciate our national patrin1ony less, do not 
like it even, anyway have not the highest respect for it and 
do not understand it; we n1eddlc in European affairs and 
take the whole of hun1anity as our field without ourselves 
belonging to any nation, and, therefore, naturally adopt a 
n1uch cooler attitude to everything, rather as if we were 
perforn1ing a duty - and we arc certainly n1orc detached. 
85 

But I am digressing. Bribri is son1etin1es very nai've. 
When walking round the little fountains, for instance, he 
will start explaining to his Biche the reason for the 
fountain's upward jet; he explains to her the laws of 
nature, parades to her face his national pride in the beauty 
of the Bois de Boulogne, flood-lighting, the play of the 
grandes eaux in Versailles, the triumphs of the En1peror 
Napoleon and the gloire militaire; he takes delight in her 
curiosity and pleasure and is hin1self very pleased. 
The n1ost rascally Biche is also fairly tender to her 
spouse, and her tenderness is real and not counterfeit, in 
spite of the husband's horns. I do not pretend,-of course, 
to be able to take roofs off houses, like Le Sage's Devil. I 
am only telling of things that have struck n1e, things I have 
observed. Ma Biche might say to you: 'Mon mari n'a pas 
encore vu Ia mer, ' and her voice betrays a sincere and nai've 
sympathy for hin1. It n1eans that her husband has not yet 
been to Brest or Boulogne or son1ewhere to have a look at 
the sea. 
You n1ust know that the bourgeois has certain very 
nai've and very serious needs, which have aln1ost becon1e a 
general bourgeois habit. For example, apart from the need 
to make tnoney and the need for eloquence, the bourgeois 
has two other needs, two n1ost legitin1ate needs, hallowed 
by general custom and to which he adopts· an extremely 
serious, well-nigh pathetic attitude. 
The first is to see the- sea 
- voir Ia mer. The Parisian 
sometimes lives and works in Paris all his life and does not 
see the sea. Why should he? All unbeknown to himself he 
has a strong, a passionate desire for it, puts off the journey 
fron1 year to year because he is usually retained by 
business, grieves, and his wife sincerely shares his grief. 
There is, in general, a great deal of sentimentality in all 
this, and I have great respect for it. At last he succeeds in 
finding time and n1oney' gets ready and goes off 'to see the 
sea' for a few days. On his return, he tells his impressions 
86 

in rapturous and florid style to his wife, his relations and 
his friends, and all his life he treasures with delight the 
n1en1ory of having seen the sea. 
The bourgeois's other legititnate and equally strong 
need is to se rouler dans l'herbe. The fact is that as soon as a 
Parisian leaves town, he loves, and even considers it his 
duty, to lie on the grass for a bit; he does it with dignity 
and the feeling that he thereby con1munes avec la nature, 
and is particularly delighted if sotneone watches him at it. 
In general, the Parisian out of town considers it his 
in1n1ediate duty to become at once skittish, breezy and 
even dashing, in fact to appear natural and near la nature. 
L'homme de la nature et de la verite! Could it have been 
Jean-Jacques who first instilled in the bourgeois this 
intense respect for la nature? As a n1atter of fact, the 
Parisian allows hin1self to have these two needs - voir la 
mer and se rouler dans l 'herbe - for the n1ost part only after 
he has acquired a certain an1ount of wealth, in short only 
after he has gained respect for hin1self, is proud of hitnself 
and regards himself as a hun1an being. Se roulcr dans l'herbe 
can be ten, twenty times sweeter when it takes place on 
one's own land, bought for n1oney earned by one's own 
toil. Generally speaking, on retiren1cnt the bourgeois likes 
to buy a piece of land son1ewherc, acquire a house, a 
garden, his own fence, his own hens, his own cow. It 
matters not if it is all on a n1icroscopic scale - the 
bourgeois is childish I y, touching I y delighted: 'mon arbre, 
mon mur,' he constantly repeats to hin1self and to all his 
guests and never thereafter ceases fron1 repeating it to 
himself throughout his life. That is when it becon1es 
sweeter than ever to se rouler da11s l 'herbe. To perforn1 this 
duty, he will always have a lawn in front of his house. 
Someone once told me of a bourgeois who could not get 
grass to grow on the spot intended for the lawn. He tried 
to grow it, watered it, put down turf brought fron1 
elsewhere - but the soil was sandy and he had no success, 
87 

nothing took. It was just his luck to have that type of soil 
in front of his house. Then, it seen1s, he bought himself 
artificial lawn grass; went to Paris specially for it, brought 
back a round piece of turf, about two yards in diameter, 
and used to spread it out every afternoon in order to satisfy 
his legitin1ate need of lying on the grass even at the cost of 
self-deception. At the first flush of delight at the acquisi­
tion of property a bourgeois is probably qtiite capable of 
doing this, so that there is nothing inherently in1probable 
about it. 
But let n1e say a couple of \vords about Gustave. 
Gustave is, of course, sirnilar to the bourgeois, i.e. he is a 
clerk, a tradesn1an, a civil servant, lzomme de lettres, officer. 
Gustave is the san1e Bribri only not n1arried. But that does 
not n1atter, what rnatters is what Gustave now pretends to 
be, what he rnasquerades as, his present appearance and 
disguise. The ideal Gustave changes with the tin1es and is 
always represented in the theatre in the aspect in which he 
is fan1iliar to society. The bourgeois is particularly fond of 
the variety theatre, but he is even fonder of n1elodrama. 
The htunble, the gay variety theatre is the only form of art 
which it is ahnost irnpossible to transplant to another soil; 
it can live only in the place of its birth, which is Paris. The 
bourgeois is fascinated by it, but it does not fully satisfy 
hin1. He cannot help considering it a n1ere trifle. He wants 
the sublirne, he wants the utterly high-minded, he wants 
sentirnent; and rnelodrarna contains all this. The Parisian 
cannot live without n1elodrarna. Melodrama will not die 
so long as the bourgeois lives. 
It is interesting to note that variety theatre, too, is now 
gradually changing. It is still gay and screamingly funny as 
it has always been, but nowadays a new element is 
creeping in - that of n1oral preaching. The bourgeois loves 
lecturing both himself and his Biche, and considers iܷ his 
essential, indeed his sacred, duty to do so at every turn. 
Besides, the bourgeois now rules autocratically; he is a 
88 

force; and the little scribblers who write variety and 
melodrama are always flunkeys and always flatter force. 
That is why the bourgeois now always triun1phs even 
when held up to ridicule, and in the end he is always told 
that everything is all right. Presun1ably, this information 
completely reassures the bourgeois. Every faint-hearted 
person who is not certain of success in whatever he 
undertakes, feels an acute need for self-delusion, self­
encouragement and self-comfort. He even begins to 
believe in happy auguries. This is precisely what happens 
here. But melodran1a presents lofty characters and lofty 
n1odels; it has no humour - instead, you have a deeply 
moving triumph of all Bribri loves and adn1ires so n1uch. 
What he likes most is public peace and the right to save 
money in order to have an assured hon1e. That is the spirit 
in which melodran1as are now written. And that is the 
spirit in which Gustave is now presented. Gustave is 
always the true measure of what at any n1on1ent the 
bourgeois considers to be the ideal of unutterable high­
mindedness. 
Formerly, a long tin1e ago, Gustave was supposed to be 
a kind of poet, artist, unrecognized and downtrodden 
genius suffering persecution and injustice. He put up a 
praiseworthy struggle and the whole thing always ended 
with the Vicomtesse, who was secretly in love with hin1, 
and whom he treated with contetnptuous indifference, 
uniting him with her ward Cecile, who never had a penny 
before, but who was suddenly discovered to have an 
immense amount of n1oney . As a rule, Gustave revolted 
against this and spurned the n1oney. But then his work 
was crowned with success at an exhibition. Three funny 
English lords imn1ediately burst into his flat and offered 
him a hundred thousand francs each for his next picture. 
Gustave laughed at then1 conten1ptuously and declared in 
bitter despair that all men were rascals, unworthy of his 
brush, and that he would not offer up art, sacred art, to the 
89 

profanation of pygn1ies who had not noticed till then how 
great he was. But the Viscountess would burst in and 
declare that Cecile was dying of love for hin1 and that 
therefore he should paint pictures. At that point it would 
dawn on Gustave that the Viscountess, his former enen1y, 
as a result of whose n1achinations not a single one of his 
works had ever been accepted for exhibition, is secretly in 
love with him; and he realizes that she used to try to get 
her own back on hin1 n1erely out of jealousy. Naturally, 
Gustave in1n1ediately takes the n1oney fron1 the three 
lords, after giving then1 a piece of his n1ind once again, 
thus affording then1 great pleasure, runs off to Cecile, 
agrees to take her n1illion and forgives the Viscountess 
who departs to her country house; he duly n1arries, and 
settles down to children, a flannel vest, a bonnet de cot on and 
evening strolls with his Biche round the lovely little 
fountains, whose quiet splash ren1inds hin1, of course, of 
the pennanence, stability and sereneness of his earthly 
happiness. 
Son1eti1nes it happens that Gustave is not a clerk, but 
son1e oppressed and downtrodden orphan who in his heart 
of hearts nurtures unutterably noble sentin1ents. Suddenly 
it is discovered that he is by no n1eans an orphan but the 
legitin1ate son of Rothschild. He gets n1illions. But 
proudly and contetnptuously Gustave spurns these n1il­
lions. Why? Because eloquence detnands it. At this point 
in bursts Madan1e Beaupre, who is in love with hin1, but 
n1arried to a banker who is his en1ployer. She declares that 
Cecile is about to die of love for hin1 and that he n1ust go 
and save her. Gustave guesses that Madan1e Beaupre is in 
love with hin1, swipes the n1illions and after swearing at 
everyone in n1ost foul language because hutnanity has not 
the likes of hin1 for unutterable high-n1indedness, he goes 
to Cecile and is united with her. The banker's wife departs 
for her country house, Beaupre is triun1phant because his 
wife, after having hesitated on the brink of perdition, 
90 

remains pure and undefiled, and Gustave settles down to 
having children and strolls out in the evening round the 
lovely little fountains whose splash reminds him etc. , etc. 
Nowadays unutterable high-mindedness is more often 
than not represented by an army officer or a sapper or 
something, mostly in army uniform and inevitably with 
the ribbon of the Legion of Honour 'bought at the price of 
his blood'. This ribbon, by the way, is horrible. The 
bearer of it becomes so conceited that one can hardly n1eet 
him, or sit in the same carriage, or next to him in the 
theatre, or meet him in a restaurant. He aln1ost spits at 
you, swaggers about shamelessly in front of you, he 
swaggers so much he snorts and chokes so that you end up 
by feeling sick, you have a bilious attack and are obliged to 
send for a doctor. But the French love it. 
It is a remarkable fact, too, that on the stage very special 
attention is now paid to Monsieur Beaupre as well - far 
more, at least, than fonnerly. Beau pre has, of course, 
made a lot of n1oney and acquired very n1an y things. He is 
simple and straightforward and n1ade a little ridiculous by 
his bourgeois habits and the fact ofbeing a husband; but he 
is kind, honest, n1agnanin1ous and unutterably high­
minded in 'the act in which he n1ust suffer frotn the 
suspicion that his Biche is unfaithful to hin1. But in spite of 
everything he n1agnani1nously decides to forgive her. She 
turns out, of course, to be as pure as a dove: it was all a 
joke on her part, and though she had been carried away by 
Gustave, Bribri with his crushing 1nagnanin1ity is dearer 
to her than anyone else. Cecile, naturally, is as penniless as 
ever, but only in the first act; later on it turns out she has a 
n1illion. Gustave is as proud and contetnptuously high­
nlinded as ever, only he swaggers n1ore because he is an 
officer. The things that arc dearest to hin1 in the world arc 
his cross, bought at the price of blood, and (/'epee de 111 011 
pere·'. Of his father's sword he talks everywhere, constant­
ly and irrelevantly; you do not even understand what it is 
91 

all about; he swears and spits, but everyone treats him 
with respect, while the audience weeps and claps (literally 
weeps) . He is, of course, penniless - this is a sine qua non: 
Madame Beaupre is in love with him, of course; so is 
Cecile, but he has no inkling of that. Her love n1akes 
Cecile grunt and groan throughout the five acts. 
At last it begins to snow, or sotnething lܸke that. Cecile 
wants to throw herself out of the window. But two shots 
are heard under the window and everyone flocks in; enter 
slowly Gustave pale and with his hand bandaged. The 
ribbon bought at the price of blood sparklܹs on his coat. 
Cecile's slanderer and seducer has been punished. Gustave 
at last forgets that Cecile loves hin1 and that it is all 
Madan1e Beaupre's tricks. But Madan1e Beaupre is pale 
and frightened, and Gustave guesses her love for him. 
However, another shot is heard. This is Beaupre conlnlit­
ting suicide out of despair. Madatne Beaupre gives a 
screan1 and rushes to the door, but in con1es Beaupre 
hin1sclf carrying a fox or son1cthing he had just killed. Ma 
Biche has had her lesson and will never forget it. She clings 
to Bribri who forgives everything. 
But then suddenly Cecile gets a tnillion and Gustave is 
again in revolt. He docs not want to tnarry. Gustave 
n1akes a fuss, Gustave uses bad language. It is quite 
essential th:lt Gustave should usc bad language and spurn a 
tnillion , otherwise the bourgeois will never forgive hin1; 
there would not be enough unutterable high-tnindcdness. 
Please do not think that the bourgeois is inconsistent with 
hitnsclf. Don't you worry: the n1illion will not avoid the 
happy couple, it is inevitable and in the end always appears 
as a reward of virtue. The bourgeois will never be untrue 
to hirnsclf. In the end Gustave takes the n1illion and Cecile, 
and then begin the inevitable little fountains, cotton 
nightcaps, the splash of water, etc. , etc. In this way there is 
a lot of sentitnent and unutterable high-tnindedness by the 
sackful, and the triutnphant Beaupre, crushing everyone 
92 

with his family virtues, and, above all, the million which 
appears like Nemesis, like a law of nature, to which all 
honour, glory and worship, etc. , etc. 
Bribri and his Biche leave the theatre completely 
satisfied, reassured and comforted. Gustave accompanies 
them and furtively kisses the hand of another man's Biche 
as he helps her into the cab. All is as it should be. 
93 


