

FROM THE PAGES OF 
THE HOUSE OF THE DEAD AND 
POOR FOLK 
In the remote parts of Siberia in the midst of steppes, mountains, or 
impassable forests, there are scattered here and there wretched little 
wooden towns of one, or at the most two, thousand inhabitants, with 
two churches, one in the town and one in the cemetery-more like 
fair-sized villages in the neighbourhood of Moscow than towns. 
(from The House of the Dead, page 7) 
Our prison stood at the edge of the fortress grounds, close to the 
fortress wall. One would sometimes, through a chink in the fence, 
take a peep into God's world to try and see something; but one could 
see only a strip of the sky and the high earthen wall overgrown with 
coarse weeds, and on the wall sentries pacing up and down day and 
night. 
(from The HOllse of the Dead, page 12) 
I realized that besides the loss of freedom, besides the forced labour, 
there is another torture in prison life, almost more terrible than any 
other-that is, compulsory life in common. Life in common is to be found 
of course in other places, but there are men in prison whom not 
everyone would care to associate with and I am certain that every con­
vict felt this torture, though of course in most cases unconsciously. 
(from The House of the Dead, pages 26-27) 
Life in prison was so dreary, a convict is a creature by nature so eager 
for freedom, and from his social position so careless and reckless, 
that to "have his fling for all he is worth," to spend all his fortune 
carousing with noise and music and so to forget his depression, if 
only for the moment, naturally attracts him. 
(from The House of the Dead, page 43) 
The prison authorities are sometimes surprised that after leading a 
quiet, exemplary life for some years, and even being made a foreman 
for his model behaviour, a convict with no apparent reason suddenly 

breaks out, as though he were possessed by a devil. plays pranks, 
drinks, makes an uproar and sometimes positively ventures on serious 
crimes-such as open disrespect to a superior officer, or even com­
mits murder or rape. They look at him and marvel. And all the while 
possibly the cause of this sudden outbreak, in the man from whom 
one would least have expected it, is simply the poignant hysterical 
craving for self-expression, the unconscious yearning for himself, 
. the desire to assert himself, to assert his crushed personality, a desire 
which suddenly takes possession of him and reaches the pitch of fury, 
of spite, of mental aberration, of fits and nervous convulsions. 
(from The House of the Dead, pages 83-84) 
The other day the editor of the notes from "The House of the Dead" 
received information from Siberia that the criminal really was inno­
cent and had suffered ten years in penal servitude for nothing. 
(from The House of the Dead, page 255) 
His name is Gorshkov-such a grey little man; he goes about in such 
greasy, such threadbare clothes that it is sad to see him; ever so much 
worse than mine. He is a pitiful, decrepit figure (we sometimes meet 
in the passage) ; his knees shake, his hands shake, his head shakes, 
from some illness I suppose, poor fellow. 
(from Poor Folk, page 318) 
The whole family lives in one room, only divided by a screen for de­
cency. There was a little coffin standing in the room already-a sim­
ple little coffin, but rather pretty; they bought it ready-made; the boy 
was nine years old, he was a promising boy, they say. 
(from Poor Folk, page 352) 
Why does it happen that a good man is left forlorn and forsaken, 
while happiness seems thrust upon another? 
(from Poor Folk, page 396) 
What good are frills and flounces? Why, it is nonsense, Varinka! Here 
it is a question of a man's life: and you know a frill's a rag; it's a rag, 
Varinka, a frill is; why, I shall buy you frills myself, that's all the re­
ward I get; I shall buy them for you, my darling, I know a shop, that's 
all the reward you let me hope for, my cherub, Varinka. 
(from Poor Folk, page 423) 

THE HOUSE OF 
THE DEAD 
AND 
POOR FOLK 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
Translated by Constance Garnett 
With an Introduction by Joseph Frank 
Notes by Elena Yuffa 
George Stade 
Consulting Editorial Director 
Jlr 
BARNES & NOBLE CLASSICS 
NE'" YORK 

Jlr 
BARNES & NOBLE CLASSICS 
NEW¥ORK 
Poor Folk was first published in 1846 as Bednyye Iyudi. 
The House of the Dead was first published in 1861 as Zapiski iz myortvogo doma. 
Constance Garnett's translation of The House of the Dead first appeared in 1915; 
her translation of Poor Folk appeared in tl1e collection The Gambler and Other Stories in 1917. 
Introduction 
Copyright © 2004 by Joseph Frank. 
Note on Fyodor Dostoevsky; The World of Fyodor Dostoevsky, The House of the Dead 
and Poor Folk; Notes; Inspired by The House of the Dead; Comments & Questions; 
and For Further Reading Copyright © 2004 by Fine Creative Media, Inc. 
"The Peasant Marey" from Fyodor Dostoevsky, AWriter's Diary, Vol. I, 1873-1876, 
translated by Kenneth Lantz (Northwestern University Press: Evanston, IL). 
Copyright © 1994 by Northwestern University Press. Reprinted by permission 
of the publisher. 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or 
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, 
including photocopy, recording, or any information storage and 
retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the publisher. 
Barnes & Noble Classics and the Barnes & Noble Classics colophon are 
trademarks of Barnes & Noble, Inc. 
The House of the Dead and Poor Folk 
ISBN 1-59308-194-4 
LC Control Number 2003116509 
Produced and published in conjunction with: 
Fine Creative Media , Inc. 
322 Eighth Avenue 
New York, NY 1000 I 
Michael]. Fine, President & Publisher 
Printed in the United States of America 
QM 
1 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 2 
FIRST PRtNTtNG 

FYODOR DOSTOEVSKY 
Fyodor Mikhailovich Dostoevsky was born in Moscow on October 
30, 1821. His mother died when he was fifteen, and his father, a 
strict but conscientious former army surgeon, sent him and his older 
brother, Mikhail, to preparatory school in St. Petersburg. Fyodor con­
tinued his education at the St. Petersburg Academy of Military Engi­
neers and graduated as a lieutenant in 1843. After serving as a military 
engineer for two years, and inheriting some money from his father's 
estate, he retired from the army and decided instead to devote him­
self to writing. 
Dostoevsky won immediate recognition with the 1846 publica­
tion of his first work of fiction, a short novel titled Poor Folk. The im­
portant Russian critic Vissarion Grigorievich Belinsky praised his 
work and introduced him into the literary circles of St. Petersburg. 
Over the next few years Dostoevsky published several stories, includ­
ing "The Double" and "White Nights." He also became involved with 
a progressive group known as the Petrashevsky Circle, headed by the 
charismatic utopian socialist Mikhail Petrashevsky. In 1849 Czar 
Nicholas I ordered the arrest of all the members of the group, includ­
ing Dostoevsky. He was kept in solitary confinement for eight months 
while the charges against him were investigated and then, along with 
other members of Petrashevsky's group, was sentenced to death by 
firing squad. Nicholas commuted the sentence to penal servitude in 
Siberia for four years, and then service in the Russian Army-but only 
at the last minute. This near-execution haunts much of Dostoevsky's 
subsequent writing. 
The ten years Dostoevsky spent in prison and then in exile in 
Siberia had a profound effect on him. By the time he returned to 
St. Petersburg in 1859, he had rejected his radical ideas and acqUired 
a new respect for the religiOUS ideas and ideals of the Russian people. 
He had never been an atheist, but his Christianity was now closer to 
the Orthodox faith. While in exile he had also married. 
Dostoevsky quickly resumed his literary career in St. Petersburg. He 

and his brother Mikhail founded two journals, Vremya (1861-1863) 
and Epokha (1864-1865). Dostoevsky published many of his well­
known post-Siberian works in these journals, including The House of the 
Dead, an account of his prison experiences, and the dark, complex 
novella "Notes from Underground." 
The next several years of Dostoevsky's life were marked by the 
deaths of his wife, Maria, and his brother Mikhail. He began to gamble 
compulsively on his trips abroad, and he suffered from bouts of 
epilepsy. In 1866, while dictating his novel The Gambler to meet a dead­
line, he met a young stenographer, Anna Snitkina, and the two married 
a year later. Over the next fifteen years Dostoevsky produced his finest 
works, including the novels Crime and Punishment (1866) , The Idiot ( 1868), 
The Possessed (J 871-1 872), and The Brothers Karamazov (1879-1880) . His 
novels are complex psychological studies that examine man's struggle 
with such elemental issues as good and evil, life and death, belief and 
reason. Fyodor Mikailovich Dostoevsky died from a lung hemorrhage 
on January 28, 1881, in St. Petersburg at the age of fifty-nine. 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
The World of Fyodor Dostoevsky, 
The House of the Dead and Poor Folk 
ix 
Introduction by Joseph Frank 
xiii 
T HE H OUSE O F  T HE DEAD 
1 
P O O R  F O L K  
305 
Appendix: "The Peasant Marey" 
425 
Endnotes 
431 
Inspired by The House of the Dead 
435 
Comments & Questions 
439 
For Further Reading 
445 


THE WORLD OF FYODOR 
DOSTOEVSKY, THE HOUSE OF 
THE DEAD AND POOR FOLK 
182 1  Fyodor Mikhailovich Dostoevsky is born on October 30 in 
Moscow. The second of seven children, he grows up in a 
middle-class household run by his father, a former army sur­
geon and strict family man. 
1833 Aleksandr Pushkin's novel in verse Eugene Onegin is published. 
183 7  Fyodor's mother dies. He and his older brother Mikhail are 
sent to a preparatory school in St. Petersburg. 
1838 Dostoevsky begins his tenure at the St. Petersburg Academy 
of Military Engineers, where he studies until 1843. He be­
comes acquainted with the works of such writers as Byron, 
Corneille, Dickens, Goethe, Gogol, Homer, Hugo, Pushkin, 
Racine, Rousseau, Shakespeare, and Schiller. 
1839 Dostoevsky's father is, according to rumor, murdered on his 
country estate, presumably by his own serfs. 
1842 Part 1 of Nikolay Gogol's novel Dead Souls is published. 
1843 Dostoevsky graduates from the Academy as a lieutenant, but 
instead of pursuing a career in the army, resolves to dedicate 
his life to writing. His first published work appears, a Russian 
translation of Honore de Balzac's 1833 novel Eugenie Grander. 
1844 Dostoevsky begins work on his first novel, Poor Folk. 
1845 On the basis of Poor Folk, Dostoevsky wins the friendship and 
acclaim of Russia's premier literary critic, Vissarion Grig­
orievich Belinsky, later author of the scathingly critical "Letter 
to Gogol" ( 1 847). 
1846 Poor Folk and "The Double" are published. "The Double" is 
the first work in which Dostoevsky writes about the psychol­
ogy of the split self Dostoevsky meets the utopian socialist 
M. V Butashevich-Petrashevsky. 
1847 Dostoevsky publishes numerous short stories, including 
"A Weak Heart," "Polzunkov," and "The Landlady." 
ix 

x 
The World of Fyodor Dostoevsky 
1848 He publishes the short story "White Nights." The Communist 
Manifesto, by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, is published. 
Revolutions break out in France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, and 
Poland. 
1849 Dostoevsky is arrested for his participation in the socialist Pe­
trashevsky Circle, only a discussion group but, in the revolu­
tionary climate of the time, considered subversive. He first 
spends eight months in solitary confinement and is then con­
demned to death by firing-squad. Czar Nicholas I commutes 
his sentence to penal servitude in Siberia, but orders this to be 
announced only at the last minute. 
1850 Dostoevsky begins his four-year internment at Omsk prison 
in western Siberia. His experiences there will influence many 
of his later works. While imprisoned he abandons the radical 
ideas of his youth and becomes more deeply religiOUS; his 
only book in prison is a copy of the Bible. 
1852 Part 2 of Gogol's Dead Souls is published. 
1853 The Crimean War breaks out, the cause being a dispute be­
tween Russia and France over the Palestinian holy places. 
1854 Still exiled in Siberia, Dostoevsky begins four years of com-
pulsory military service. 
1857 He marries the widow Maria Dmitrievna Isaeva. 
1859 Dostoevsky and Maria are allowed to return to St. Petersburg. 
1861 He and his brother Mikhail establish Vremya (Time); the jour-
nal publishes Dostoevsky's The House of the Dead, a work based on 
his experiences in Siberia. 
1862 Dostoevsky travels to England, France, Germany, Italy, and 
Switzerland, a trip that engenders in him an anti-European 
outlook. He gambles heavily at resorts abroad, losing money. 
1863 Dostoevsky makes a second trip to Europe and arranges to meet 
Apollinaria Suslova in Paris; he had published a story by her in 
Vremya the previous year, and the two have an affair. The pro­
gressive Nikolay Chernyshevsky publishes the utopian novel 
What Is to Be Done?, which Dostoevsky will react against a year 
later in "Notes from Underground." Vremya is banned for 
printing an article mistakenly thought to support the Polish 
rebellion. The serialization of War and Peace begins; it will last 
through 1869. 

The World of Fyodor Dostoevsky 
xi 
1864 Dostoevsky and his brother Mikhail establish Epokha (Epoch), 
the short-lived successor to Vremya; the journal publishes 
"Notes from Underground," the first of Dostoevsky's master­
works. Dostoevsky's wife, Maria, dies from tuberculosis. His 
brother Mikhail dies three months later. 
1865 Burdened with debt, Dostoevsky embarks on another failed 
gambling spree in Europe. He proposes to Apollinaria Suslova 
without success. 
1866 Crime and Punishment starts serial publication at the beginning of 
the year. Dostoevsky interrupts the writing in October in or­
der to work on The Gambler, forced to meet the contract dead­
line for that book in order to retain the rights to his published 
works, including Crime and Punishment. He dictates The Gambler to 
a stenographer, Anna Grigorievna Snitkina, over the course 
of a month. He and Anna, who is twenty-five years his junior, 
become romantically involved. 
1867 Dostoevsky marries Anna Snitkina, one of the most fortunate 
events of his life. To escape debtor's prison, the two live abroad 
for the next four years, in Geneva, Florence, Vienna, Prague, and 
finally Dresden. Dostoevsky's epilepsy worsens. He begins work 
on his novel The Idiot, in which the protagonist is an epileptic. 
1868 The Idiot is published in installments. 
1869 Tolstoy's War and Peace is published for the first time in volume 
form. 
1871 The Dostoevskys return to St. Petersburg. Serialization of his 
novel The Possessed begins. 
1873 Dostoevsky becomes editor of the conservative weekly Grazh­
danin (The Citizen) ; "A Writer's Diary" becomes a regular and 
popular feature of the weekly. 
1875 Tolstoy begins publishing Anna Karenina. 
1876 A Writer's Diary is published as a monojournal-that is, written 
and edited entirely by Dostoevsky; in i.t he publishes "The 
Meek One." 
187 7  "The Dream of a Ridiculous Man" is published in A Writer's 
Diary. 
1879 AWriter's Diary ceases, and serialization begins in another j"our­
nal of The Brothers Karamazov, Widely considered Dostoevsky's 
greatest novel. 

xii 
The World of Fyodor Dostoevsky 
1880 Six months before his death, Dostoevsky delivers his famous 
speech on Pushkin at the dedication of the Pushkin memorial 
in Moscow. 
1881 Dostoevsky dies from a lung hemorrhage on January 28 in 
St. Petersburg. His epitaph, also the epigraph to The Brothers 
Karamazov, is from the Bible (John 12: 24); it reads, "Verily, verily, 
I say unto you, Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and 
die, it abideth alone: but if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit" 
(King James Version). 
1886 The German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche publishes Beyond 
Good and Evil, which was greatly influenced by The Possessed. 
1912 Constance Garnett begins her translations of the works of 
Dostoevsky, introducing his writings to the English-reading 
world. 

INTRODUCTION 
If one were asked to select two books of Dostoevsky that represent the 
variety and range of his literary talent, no better choice could be 
made than the ones published in this volume. Dostoevsky is best 
known for his larger and later novels, such as Crime and Punishment and 
The Devils (also translated as The Possessed), and an influential critical 
tradition views him primarily as the unsurpassed chronicler of the 
moral-psychological dilemmas of the alienated, refractory urban in­
telligentsia. This aspect of his work has had the greatest influence on 
later writers, particularly as he became more Widely read outside of 
Russia; but it represents much too limited a perspective on the full 
scope of his creations. 
To be sure, there are elements of the later Dostoevsky in Poor Folk, 
with its vivid depiction of the St. Petersburg background and its first 
embryoniC sketch of educated types; but its main character is not a 
member of the intelligentsia at all and anything but rebellious. He is a 
humble, SOCially and emotionally downtrodden clerk in the vast Rus­
sian bureaucracy ofSt. Petersburg, frightened to death at his temerity in 
questioning, even in thought, the supreme virtues of the God-ordained 
order in which he lives. 
The House of the Dead, on the other hand, stands alone in the Dosto­
evsky corpus as an unprecedented depiction, the first in Russian liter­
ature, of the prison gulags of the vast czarist empire. Dostoevsky's 
initial readers were shocked by the conditions of life he described, 
but we have since learned from Solzhenitsyn that these gulags were 
relatively humane compared to their successors under the Bolsheviks. 
The book also contains a gallery of Russian peasant types and sketches 
of Russian peasant life that equal those ofTurgenev and Tolstoy, both 
of whom admired the book (Tolstoy thought it the best work Dosto­
evsky had ever written) . Such peasant types are depicted only fleet­
ingly in the major novels; but they were by no means, as we see here, 
outside Dostoevsky's creative purview. 
xiii 

xiv 
Introduction 
These two books are thus miles apart in theme and artistic treat­
ment. The first initiates Dostoevsky's exploration of guilt-ridden char­
acters; the second demonstrates his ability as an objective reporter 
and observer of a new social milieu. But there is one thing they have 
in common: Both opened the path to fame (if not to fortune) for 
their author. Poor Folk brought him to the forefront of the Russian lit­
erary scene at the age of twenty-four, and for a brief period he was, 
quite literally, the talk of the town. 
Dostoevsky began The House of the Dead when he was thirty-nine, 
haVing returned to Russia after serving a prison sentence in Siberia 
and being absent from the literary scene for ten years. His first cre­
ations at this time, the novellas Uncle's Dream and The Friend of the Family, 
were received quite tepidly, and it was generally felt that his talent 
had not survived his exile. His prison memoirs, however, convinced 
even his detractors that they had been mistaken. These memoirs cre­
ated a sensation by opening up a hitherto concealed world for the 
Russian reader; and the outcast criminal inhabitants of this hidden 
universe, generally looked down upon as little better than subhuman, 
were treated by Dostoevsky with respect and even occasionally with 
sympathy. He made no effort to conceal their sometimes horrendous 
crimes; but he saw them as sentient human beings whose behavior 
deserved to be understood if not pardoned. 
2 
Poor Folk is Dostoevsky's first novel, and the story of its creation, as well 
as its reception, has become famous in the annals of Russian litera­
ture. Both Dostoevsky and his older brother, Mikhail, had made up 
their minds as adolescents to follow a literary career. Both, however, 
obeyed the wishes of their father to study to become military engi­
neers, and Dostoevsky was still taking advanced courses, though liv­
ing independently, in the years just preceding his literary debut. Even 
before leaving home for their studies, he and Mikhail had steeped 
themselves in the literature of their time. Indeed, the admiration of 
the youthful Fyodor for Pushkin was so great that, on hearing of the 
poet's death in a duel (in 183 7 ) ,  he told his family that if he had not 
already been wearing mourning for his mother, he would have done 
so in memory of Pushkin. One of the very last speeches he made in 

Introduction 
xv 
his life was a panegyric of Pushkin as equal, if not superior, to the 
greatest writers of European literature. 
Dostoevsky came to maturity during a transition period in Russian 
culture, a moment when it was evolving from the metaphysical­
spiritual influence of German Romanticism toward the more down­
to-earth social thematics of the French. His letters to Mikhail are thus 
filled with references to writers of both types. E. T. A. Hoffmann en­
joyed a tremendous vogue at this time in Russia, and in 1838 Fyodor 
writes that he had read " all of Hoffmann in Russian and German." He 
continued to admire this Romantic fabulist; in 1861 he wrote an article 
declaring him superior to Edgar Allan Poe. But he was enthusiastically 
proclaiming Simultaneously that "Balzac is great. His characters are the 
creations of universal mindl" (letter of August 9, 1838) . Dostoevsky's 
first publication, as a matter of fact, was a translation of Balzac's Eugenie 
Grandet, undertaken at the end of 1843 to supplement his income. 
No French writer was more important for Dostoevsky than Victor 
Hugo, who, as the poet wrote of himself, "pleaded for those who are 
the lowest and the most miserable." In a letter of 1840 Dostoevsky 
declared Hugo's Christian social Romanticism to be as momentous 
for the modern world as Homer had been for the ancient; and Hugo's 
social-Christian radicalism left a permanent imprint on his own ideo­
logical views. One of Hugo's works, Le dernier jour d'un condamne (The Last 
Day of a Condemned Man) , is the diary of someone awaiting execution for 
an unspecified crime-an intensely moving, and still very relevant, 
anguished outcry against capital punishment. Dostoevsky knew it by 
heart; and when he believed he was going to be executed himself, 
phrases from it came to his mind. Traces of its effect can also be found 
throughout his novels. 
In the early 1 840s, the most prestigious literary genre was still that 
of Romantic tragedy, with Russians like Pushkin (Boris Godunov) follow­
ing in the footsteps of Shakespeare, Schiller, and Hugo. It is thus no 
surprise to learn that Dostoevsky's first try at literary composition 
should have been in this genre. In 1841 he read to friends parts of two 
dramas, Mary Stuart and Boris Godunov, which, alas, have not survived. But 
the titles are enough to show the range of his literary ambition, which 
did not hesitate to measure itself against the greatest. Romantic drama, 
however, was already losing its appeal for the younger generation, and 
Dostoevsky's own evolution followed the literary trend. 

xvi 
Introduction 
The new vogue turned to the social thematics of French Romanti­
cism' as well as to the prose forms that were being developed, such as 
the so-called "physiological sketch," to portray the feel and texture 
of ordinary life. One of the dominating figures of Russian literature, 
the impassioned and fiery critic Vissarion Belinsky, had become con­
verted to French Utopian Socialism in 1841, and immediately began 
to urge Russian writers to follow the French example. Gogol's Dead 
Souls had been published in 1842, and his Petersburg Tales, including 
"The Overcoat," in 1843. Belinsky interpreted Gogol very freely as 
having pioneered the down-to-earth and SOCially conscious depiC­
tion of Russian life that he wished to encourage; and in 1843-as 
Dr. Riesenkampf, with whom Dostoevsky shared a flat, tells us in his 
memoirs-Dostoevsky "was particularly fond of reading Gogol and 
loved to declaim pages of Dead Souls by heart." 
Dostoevsky did not immediately surrender the idea of writing for 
the stage, but his references at this time to a work called The ]ewYankel 
(from a character in Gogol's novel Taras Bulba) indicate a shift to a less 
elevated subject. Whether such a work was ever written remains in 
doubt; but in the early fall of 1844 he tells Mikhail he is working on 
"a rather original novel" which he hopes will bring in 400 rubles. 
This is the first reference to Poor Folk; Dostoevsky planned to send the 
manuscript to Belinsky's journal Notes of the Fatherland, but it reached its 
destination by a much more original route. 
3 
Dostoevsky was then sharing a flat with D. V Grigorovich, himself a 
burgeoning writer, and read him the completed work. Grigorovich was 
so impressed that he took the manuscript to N. A. Nekrasov, destined to 
become a famous poet and already an active literary editor. Both were 
so overcome that they rushed to Dostoevsky's apartment at four in the 
morning-it was a Petersburg "white night"-to congratulate him on 
his accomplishment. Both were among a group of young writers who, 
clustered around Belinsky, were known as his pleiade; and Nekrasov took 
the manuscript to Belinsky the next day. Belinsky's reaction is best de­
scribed in the words of P V Annenkov, an important critic and cultural 
commentator, who visited him two days later. "You see this manu­
script7" he said. "I haven't been able to tear myself away from it for 

Introduction 
xvii 
almost two days now. It's a novel by a beginner, a new talent . . .  but his 
novel reveals such secrets of life and character in Russia as no one 
before even dreamed of . . .  -it's the first attempt at a social novel 
we've had" (PV Annenkov, The Extraordinary Decade, translated by Irwin R. 
Titunik, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1968, p. 150). 
Belinsky's enthusiasm is quite understandable because, as Dosto­
evsky wrote to Mikhail shortly after joining the pleiade himself, he "seri­
ously sees in me a public proof and justification of his opinions" (letter of 
October 8, 1845). The critic had called for the Russians to follow the 
French lead, and lower-class Russian life had now begun to be depicted 
in all its varieties (a famous sketch of Grigorovich, used by Dostoevsky 
in Poor Folk, was devoted to organ-grinders). But emphaSiS was placed 
on the description of externals, on photographic accuracy (the sketches 
were also called "daguerreotypes," and were accompanied by illustra­
tions), rather than on imaginative penetration and inner identification 
with the people involved. Also, even when an author collected his 
sketches in a volume, they were not united by any sort of narrative con­
tinuity. Dostoevsky created the first Russian social novel by fUSing such 
phYSiological sketches into a story about two lonely souls struggling to 
keep afloat in the sea of St. Petersburg life. 
Dostoevsky is once supposed to have said (though the source has 
never been located) that all of Russian literature emerged from Gogol's 
"The Overcoat." Whether or not he ever uttered such a thought, there 
is no doubt that the dictum applies to Poor Folle Indeed, the reference to 
Gogol illustrates a more important general point. There has been a 
strong tendency, espeCially in Western criticism, to focus on Dosto­
evsky's quite sensational biography in seeking to explore the sources of 
his work. But such sources are as much literary and social-cultural as 
purely personal, and whatever happened in his life was invariably as­
similated and interpreted in terms of such a larger context. To under­
stand his work, it is thus necessary to keep this larger ideological 
context constantly in mind. 
In Poor Folk, we find the influences not only of Gogol but also of 
Nikolay Karamzin, the title of whose story "Poor Liza" is immediately 
evoked. Both works depict the sad fate of the lower classes (in "Poor 
Liza" a peasant flower-girl is seduced and abandoned by a noble lover), 
but Dostoevsky's tone is far grittier than Karamzin's idyllic-sentimental 
treatment. Parodies are also included in Poor Folk of Romantic historical 

xviii 
Inuoduction 
novels, and reference is made to the latest vogue for "physiological 
sketches." of most importance is the relation of Poor Folk to two stories, 
Pushkin's "The Stationmaster" and Gogol's "The Overcoat," both of 
which are read by Dostoevsky's main character, Makar Dyevushkin. The 
first, like "Poor Liza," again dwells on the misfortunes of the humble 
and the defenseless when confronted with their betters, and Makar sees 
his own sad fate prefigured in that of the hapless stationmaster. Gogol's 
story, however, drives him into a rage; and a good way to approach Poor 
Folk is to examine the reason for his indignation. 
"The Overcoat" is very far from embodying the plea for social jus­
tice that Belinsky was now advocating, though it does contain one 
passage in which such an appeal is made. But the story is as much a car­
icature of the main figure, who bears the impliCitly scatological name 
of Akaky Akakievich, as it is a call for a more benevolent attitude toward 
those of his inferior status. Gogol's story takes its place in a long line of 
stories in which such characters, lower-level copyists and clerks in the 
St. Petersburg bureaucracy, were the butt of comic anecdotes; and his 
own treatment is no different. Akaky is a human Cipher, perfectly happy 
to grind away at his routine task and incapable of assuming any other; 
the narrator views him with the same relentless mockery that Akaky 
experiences at the hands of his office-mates. But at one point a younger 
clerk rebukes the others for mercilessly tormenting their helpless 
victim, and reminds them that he is, after ali, "their brother." Akaky's 
life is temporarily enriched when he acquires a new overcoat (hence 
the title), which becomes for him the eqUivalent of a loved object. A 
few days later it is stolen as he is walking home during the night. Un­
ceremoniously evicted when he shows up at the home of an official of 
his district to appeal for aid, he dies shortly afterward. 
Dostoevsky's Poor Folk turns this story inside out, as it were, by adopting 
the form of the sentimental epistolary novel. His two main characters 
write letters to each other, and we thus become aware of everything 
through their reactions and responses rather than through the supercil­
ious remarks of a narrator. Makar Dyevushkin is a middle-aged copying 
clerk like Akaky, and his correspondent is Varvara Dobroselov, a young 
girl barely out of her teens. The two are related in some distant fashion, 

Introduction 
xix 
and Makar is trying to protect her from the wiles of a procuress who, 
in the guise of a friend of the family, has already succeeded in selling 
her once to a wealthy libertine. Dyevushkin is timidly in love with 
Varvara himself, but the difference in their ages, if nothing else, 
makes any such relation impossible; what she feels for him is friendly 
affection and gratitude, nothing more. 
Both are tender, lonely, fragile souls, whose solicitude for each 
other brings a ray of warmth into their otherwise bleak lives; but 
their innocent little idyll is soon ended by the pressure of the sordid 
forces against which they struggle. Dyevushkin reduces himself to ab­
ject poverty for the sake ofVarvara, and he suffers agonies of humili­
ation, which he tries to conceal, as he sinks lower and lower in the 
social scale. Finally, Varvara's violator shows up again and churlishly 
offers her marriage-not out of remorse or even desire but because 
he wishes to engender an heir to disinherit a nephew. The hopeless­
ness of her position, and the chance to reestablish her social situa­
tion, compel Varvara to accept a loveless union with a callous mate 
and a harsh life in the Russian provinces. 
This simple story line is surrounded with a number of accessories 
that enlarge it into a true social novel. Inserted among the earlier 
letters is Varvara's diary, which introduces the classic contrast between 
the happiness and innocence of rustic childhood and the dangers and 
corruptions of the city. In these pages we catch a glimpse of a succes­
sion of penniless girls who have suffered the same fate as Varvara, or 
who, under the guise of beneficence, are being prepared for it by the 
sinister procuress Anna Fyodorovna. The same insert-diary also con­
tains a portrait of the gravely ill tubercular young student Pokrovsky, 
a devotee of Pushkin, who is Dostoevsky's first delineation of the new 
young intellectual, a ramochinets (meaning he has no official rank or 
status), eventually to evolve into Raskolnikov in Crime and Punishment. As 
Varvara's informal tutor and intellectual mentor, Pokrovsky stirs her 
first romantic feelings. He is the illegitimate son of Bykov, the same 
landowner who raped Varvara, by another of Anna Fyodorovna's "pro­
tegees"; the latter was then married off to a drunken ex-clerk who 
gave the young man his name. 
The relation of the pseudo-father, old Pokrovsky, to his educated 
son, whose cultural attainments he admires to the point of idolatry, 
symbolizes as well the aspirations of Makar Dyevushkin himself to 

xx 
Introduction 
rise to a higher social-cultural status than the one in which he is 
placed. The funeral of young Pokrovsky, with the older one running 
after the carriage in a pouring rain as books fall out of his pockets, ri­
vals Dickens in its tragicomic pathos. Belinsky remarked that it was 
impossible not to laugh at old Pokrovsky; "but if he does not touch 
you deeply at the same time you are laughing . . .  do not speak of this 
to anyone, so that some Pokrovsky, a buffoon and a drunkard, will not 
have to blush for you as a human being." Another narrative line in­
volves the Gorshkov family, who have come from the provinces so that 
the father, an ex-clerk, may clear himself of a charge; they live in such 
heartrending poverty that even the impoverished Dyevushkin cannot 
resist giving them twenty kopecks to buy some food. 
These narrative strands interweave to build up an image of the un­
availing struggle to keep afloat humanly in the face of crushing circum­
stances. Everywhere is poverty and humiliation, the exploitation of the 
weak and the helpless by the rich, powerful, and unscrupulous-all 
this in the midst of crowded St. Petersburg slum life, with its nauseat­
ing odors and debris-littered dwellings. Describing his own quarters, 
Dyevushkin writes: "On every landing there are boxes, broken chairs 
and cupboards, rags hung out, windows broken, tubs stand about 
full of all sorts of dirt and litter, eggshells and the refuse of fish; there 
is a horrid smell . . .  in fact it is not nice" (p. 317). Dostoevsky's use 
of anticlimax here conveys the slightly risible (but nonetheless 
touching and mOVing) quality of Dyevushkin as a person. Yet amidst 
all this squalor, there are treasures of emotive responsiveness and 
moral sensitivity that appear in the most unlikely figures-unlikely, at 
least, from the point of view of previous Russian literature. 
Poor Folk combines these local-color aspects of the physiological 
sketches with a new and unerring inSight into the tortures of the hu­
miliated sensibility. "Poor people are touchy-that's in the nature of 
things," Dyevushkin explains to Varvara. "I felt that even in the past. 
The poor man is exacting; he takes a different view of God's world, 
and looks askance at every passer-by and turns a troubled gaze about 
him and looks to every word, wondering whether people are not 
talking about him, whether they are saying that he is so ugly, specu­
lating about what he would feel exactly," and so on. (p. 3 74) . This 
"different view of God's world," the world as seen from below rather 
than above, constitutes the major innovation of Dostoevsky vis-a.-vis 

Introduction 
xxi 
Gogol. The situations and the psychology of Poor Folk thus speak for 
themselves against class pride and class prejudice; but the book also 
contains a much more outspoken protest, even though cast in terms 
of an easily comprehended "allegory." 
5 
Makar Dyevushkin is by no means an uncomplicated character, and 
he undergoes a distinct evolution. In his early letters, he accepts his 
lowly place in life without a murmur of protest, even taking pride in 
performing his unassuming task as conscientiously as he can. He is 
perfectly content to live in the world as he finds it, although he re­
fuses to accept the lowly image of himself that he knows exists in the 
eyes of his social superiors. But this unquestioned acceptance of the 
rightness and justness of the social order as it exists is severely shaken 
by his inability to protect and proVide for Varvara. 
At the very lowest point of Dyevushkin's misery-when he is being 
hounded by his landlady, insulted by the boardinghouse slaveys, and 
tormented by his ragged appearance-he loses heart entirely and takes 
to drink. But this is also the moment when a faint spark of rebellion 
flares even in his docile breast. Walking along one of the fashionable 
St. Petersburg streets just after leaving the dreary slums in which he 
lives, he suddenly begins to wonder why he and Varvara should be con­
demned to poverty and misery. And he gUiltily finds himself protesting 
("I know . . .  that it's wrong to think that, that it is free-thinking") 
against a world in which some people are just born to wealth, "while 
another begins life in the orphan asylum . . . .  And you know it often 
happens that Ivan the fool is favoured by fortune" (p. 396). Such no­
tions are an attack on the entire structure of his own hierarchical soci­
ety; and he goes even further by proclaiming the distinctly Utopian 
Socialist idea that the humblest worker is more worthy of respect, be­
cause he is more useful, than any wealthy, idle social parasite. 
Dyevushkin's timid revolt against social injustice is embodied in 
his vision of an apartment house, on whose ground floor lives a 
poor shoemaker, whose only concern is the "boots" that he makes to 
feed his family. "His children are crying and his wife is hungry"; 
why should he not think only of "boots?" But elsewhere in the same 
building there is "a wealthy man in his gilded apartments," and he 

xxii 
Introduction 
also thinks of "boots, that is, boots in a different manner, in a dif­
ferent sense, but still boots." Why is there not someone to tell him 
to stop "thinking of nothing but yourself, living for nothing but 
yourself. . . .  Look about you, can't you see some object more noble to 
worry about than your boots?" (p. 400) . Such a plea for the wealthy to 
concern themselves with the plight of the less fortunate, as Dostoevsky 
formulates it, obviously has Christian overtones; and if we are to de­
fine Dostoevsky's political beliefs at all in this period, it would be as a 
Christian Socialist. 
The same motif is dramatized in another scene, but given more 
than a material significance, when Dyevushkin is summoned to ap­
pear before his civil service superior because of some minor error. 
His terror and tatterdemalion garments so move the kindhearted 
General that he gives Dyevushkin a hundred rubles. Refusing to allow 
the grateful clerk to kiss his hand, he gives him an egalitarian hand­
shake instead; and this respect for his human dignity takes on more 
importance for Dyevushkin than the money. "I swear that however 
cast down I was and afflicted in the bitterest days of our misfor­
tunes, . . .  I swear that the hundred roubles is not as much to me as 
that his Excellency deigned to shake hands with me, a straw, a worth­
less drunkard I " (pp. 405-406) .  This tension between the psycholog­
ical and spiritual on the one hand, and the economic and material on 
the other, will run through all of Dostoevsky's later work and eventu­
ally receive its unsurpassed expression in "The Legend of the Grand 
Inquisitor" (in The Brothers Karamazov) . 
Another motif timidly broached in Poor Folk, and which also antici­
pates the later Dostoevsky, occurs as Varvara is preparing to leave after 
her marriage. She has placed her fate, she says, in God's "holy, in­
scrutable power," and Dyevushkin can only agree. "of course, every­
thing is according to God's will; that is so, that certainly must be 
so-that is, it certainly must be God's will in this; and the providence of 
the Heavenly Creator is blessed, of course, and inscrutable . . . .  only 
Varinka, how can it be so soon? . . .  I shall be left alone" (pp. 415-416). 
Dyevushkin's despairingly stumbling efforts to reconcile a belief in 
God's wisdom and goodness with the tragedy of his own life, and im­
pliCitly of human life in general, clearly foreshadow the angUished re­
flections of many other Dostoevsky characters assailed by the same 
conundrum. 

Introduction 
xxiii 
6 
The French Utopian Socialists who influenced Dostoevsky, and par­
ticularly those of the Christian variety, were not advocates of violence 
or revolution; they believed it possible to change the world by 
demonstrating the benefits of their precepts. One may well wonder, 
therefore, why Dostoevsky and all the other members of the discussion 
group to which he belonged (the Petrashevsky Circle) were arrested 
in the spring of 1 849. One reason is that the wave of revolution that 
swept through Europe in 1 848 had frightened Czar Nicholas 1. Al­
though the Petrashevtsi as a whole were guilty of nothing more than 
talk that might be considered subversive, and which they had carried 
on undisturbed for several years, this was enough now for the Czar to 
order them hauled in. It was once generally accepted in Dostoevsky 
scholarship that, like most of the others, he had been an innocent vic­
tim of a despotic tyrant; and various theories have been offered as to 
why, in later life, he seemed to have accepted his condemnation with 
relative equanimity. 
In fact, however, as we now know, he was far from being as inno­
cent as was long believed. The Petrashevsky Circle as a whole never 
made any attempt to conceal their meetings or discussions; but Dos­
toevsky belonged to a small secret group within the larger circle 
whose aim was to foment a revolution against serfdom. The seven 
members of this small group managed to conceal its existence from 
the commission of army officers appOinted to investigate the activi­
ties of the circle as a whole. But why should a Christian Socialist like 
Dostoevsky have participated in such a conspiracy? 
The answer is probably that he hated serfdom with every bone in 
his body, and his seething revulsion against it was openly expressed 
the few times that he spoke at the larger group gatherings. Also, he 
may well have believed (though this is only inferential) that his father 
had been murdered by the serfs on their country property. This may 
help to explain why he agreed to become a member of this activist 
subgroup, and even acted as a recruiting agent. A friend he visited 
recalled Dostoevsky (in a document first published in 1 92 2) sitting 
in his nightshirt "like a dying Socrates" unsuccessfully trying to per­
suade him to join. Dostoevsky thus lived all his life with the knowledge 
that he had once himself been a secret revolutionary conspirator, and 

xxiv 
Introduction 
his masterful depiction of the psychology of such characters can be 
attributed to this personal experience. 
After his arrest, he was held in solitary confinement for a year and 
a half, questioned repeatedly (his caste status as a Russian nobleman 
precluded any physical mistreatment) and finally forced to undergo 
the ordeal of a mock execution. He believed for about a half hour that 
he had been sentenced to be shot, but then learned his true sentence­
four years in a labor camp, and then service in the Russian Army: This 
mock execution was one of the most crucial experiences of his life; it 
was then, standing in the shadow of death, that the religiOUS question 
so timidly adumbrated in Poor Folk began to take on the supreme im­
portance it assumed in his later works. It also conditioned him to open 
his eyes and his sensibility to the manner in which the Christian ethos 
had penetrated--or so he came to believe-to the depths of the person­
ality even of the most ignorant and illiterate Russian peasant-convicts 
among whom he was now condemned to live. 
Dostoevsky served out his prison term, began life in relative free­
dom as a private in the Army, and then, with the help of influential 
friends in St. Petersburg, was promoted to officer-which gave him 
the privilege of resigning and resuming his literary career. He pro­
duced two novellas, as already mentioned, while still in Siberia, but 
his major work of this time, The House of the Dead, was written after his 
return. Dostoevsky had thought of such a work earlier, and mentions 
it in a letter in 1859 to his brother Mikhail while still on the way 
back to the capital. "These Notes from the House of the Dead ," he tells him, 
"have now taken shape in my mind . . . .  My figure will disappear. 
These are the notes of an unknown; but I guarantee their interest. There 
will be the serious and the gloomy and the humorous and peasant 
conversation with a particular convict coloring . . .  recorded by me on 
the spot [Dostoevsky had kept a notebook in the camp] and the depiC­
tion of characters unheard of preViously in literature . . .  and finally, the 
most important, my name." So that while Dostoevsky himself will 
presumably disappear (he becomes only the editor of a manuscript 
left by a minor official who murdered his Wife) , in fact everyone will 
be aware that the editor is talking about himself. Indeed, there are 
several indications in the text that, unlike the peasant-convicts ac­
cused of common-law offenses, the author has been sent to Siberia 
for a political crime and not for murder. 

Introduction 
xxv 
Dostoevsky and Mikhail were planning to bring out a new journal 
Vremya (Time) in 1860, a period of relative liberalization of the press. 
Most of the book was published there in monthly installments, and it 
contributed greatly to the success of the magazine. The first several 
chapters, however, were published in another, rather obscure period­
ical. Dostoevsky was worried that his aim of opening the gates of the 
prison-camp world to public inspection would never pass the censor­
ship; and he decided to allow another editor to explore the lay of the 
land. 
His first installment was published without a hitch, but the second 
ran into trouble-of a kind that often turns the history of czarist cen­
sorship into a black comedy. Far from objecting, as might have been 
expected, that the portrayal of prison conditions was too harsh to be 
permitted, the censors feared that peasants might be tempted to com­
mit crimes just to enjoy the amenities of prison life that Dostoevsky 
portrayed. This objection was overcome by the consideration that the 
largely illiterate peasants were hardly likely to read the book; and 
Dostoevsky also wrote a supplement, not included in the final text, 
explaining that, even if one lived in paradise, "the moral torture" of 
loss of freedom would make camp life ultimately unbearable. 
7 
The House of the Dead appears, on the surface, to be an extremely simple 
book. It contains the memoirs of Dostoevsky's years in the prison 
camp, and for the readers of his time it brought to public scrutiny a 
whole world hitherto concealed from their gaze. Here was a gallery 
of peasant-criminals, most of whom had committed at least one 
murder, and about whom nobody else had ever written with such in­
timate knowledge. The aim of the work was to reveal their lives and 
their psychology, depicted, so far as possible, from their own point of 
view. Dostoevsky was in a unique position to accomplish this task be­
cause his sentence had placed him, unlike other members of his class, 
on the same social level as the peasant-convicts (actually on an infe­
rior level, since they were better able to perform the physical tasks as­
signed). They thus behaved with him unrestrainedly, as would not 
have been possible in nonprison conditions, where the class distinc­
tion would have governed their conduct and their words. 

xxvi 
Introduction 
For the first time the Russian reader was presented with a peasant 
world possessing its own norms and values, which Dostoevsky de­
picts primarily through sketches of the utterances, actions, and be­
havior of its inhabitants. The book unleashed a huge debate in the 
Russian press about the conditions it described, and some of the 
senselessly cruel regulations it brought to light were angrily chal­
lenged. Dostoevsky also stressed that there were different motivations. 
for a crime such as murder (sometimes it was sordid, sometimes self­
defense) , even though all murders were inexplicably punished with 
the same sentence; and such considerations led to widespread discus­
sion of Russian legal anomalies. What predominated in the reaction 
to the book was a recognition of the author's "humanism." Dosto­
evsky, it was felt, had succeeded in "redeeming" a whole class of 
criminals and outcasts (not all, to be sure, but the vast majority) and, 
as it were, returning them to the human fold. No attempt was made 
to lessen their misdeeds, or to sentimentalize over their fate. But in­
stead of being seen as aberrant monsters, they were shown rather as 
human beings whose often desperate crimes could be understood as 
responses to difficult and tormenting situations. 
For present-day readers, the impact of Dostoevsky's book in its 
own time is ofless interest than what it reveals about the author him­
self. As we have said, he made superfiCial efforts to conceal his own 
presence by inventing a fictitious narrator, and his focus is on the 
world he is portraying rather than directly on himself. But in A Writer's 
Diary (Vol. 1, 1873-1876; see "For Further Reading"), Dostoevsky 
spoke of these years as haVing brought about "the regeneration of my 
convictions"-that is, the convictions he had held before his arrest 
and imprisonment. These were now abandoned-though the process 
was by no means instantaneous-and replaced by those to which he 
remained faithful for the remainder of his life. Without approaching 
this change of heart and mind directly, The House of the Dead can 
nonetheless, if read with sufficient care, help us to understand the 
transformation brought about by his prison years in Dostoevsky's 
ideas and values. 
One such transformation involved the relation between the upper, 
educated class and the people. We now know he had believed in the 
possibility of fomenting a revolution among the peasantry-a revo­
lution led and guided by upper-class superiors like himself. No such 

Introduction 
xxvii 
hope could continue to exist, however, after the events portrayed in 
part II, chapter VII , "The Complaint." Here Dostoevsky describes how 
he attempted to join a protest organized by the peasant-convicts 
against the miserable rations they were being fed; but they forcibly 
led him away to the kitchen where the non peasant convicts, and oth­
ers who had refused to join the strike, were gathered. "I had never 
before been so insulted in the prison," he writes, even though he de­
picts his daily humiliation on other grounds, "and this time I felt it 
very bitterly" (p. 265). The quotidian offenses to his dignity were 
only incidental and personal; but here his rejection cut to the core of 
what had been a deeply held conviction. 
When he questioned a friendly prisoner about this incident, asking 
why he and other "noblemen" had not been able to join in with them 
"as comrades," the peasant-convict replied in perplexity: "But . . .  but 
how can you be our comrades?" (p. 2 70). The gap between the peas­
ants and the noblemen was so great, not only in status but in men­
tality, that "in spite of the fact that [the ex-nobles] are deprived of 
all the rights of their rank . . .  [the others] never consider them 
their comrades. This is not the result of conscious prejudice but 
comes about of itself, quite Sincerely and unconSCiously" (p. 3 2 ) .  
The very notion o f  them actmg together thus proved to be com­
pletely delusory; and never afterward would Dostoevsky believe 
that the Russian peasantry would respond to any call of revolution 
issuing from the intelligentsia. Indeed, such calls were often uttered 
in a vocabulary whose terms the peasants could not even under­
stand; and he would continue to maintain that the greatest social 
problem of Russia, whatever the economic or political situation, 
was to bridge the yawning gap of incomprehension between the 
peasantry and the educated class. 
Also, Dostoevsky's view of the peasantry itself underwent an ex­
tremely Significant evolution. A work like Poor Folk, with its sympathy 
and pity for the lower classes (even if nor the peasantry) would indicate 
that Dostoevsky shared the Christian Socialist view of their moral supe­
riority to their betters. In a letter to his brother Mikhail, written j ust be­
fore departing for exile, he remarked that he was not being sent to a 
jWlgle but would be with other beings like himself, perhaps even bet­
ter than himself Nothing was more shocking and upsetting for him 
than to find, in the prison camp. a world that could only be labeled as 

xxviii 
Introduction 
one of moral horror. The peasant-convicts stole from each other inces­
santly, and Dostoevsky was not spared; every form of vice was available, 
including female and male prostitution; drunken quarrels were a daily 
occurrence, and cruel beatings among the convicts themselves were 
frequent. Dostoevsky's image of this world is painted in appalling col­
ors. "Noise, uproar, laughter, swearing, the clank of chains, smoke and 
grime, shaven heads, branded faces, ragged clothes, everything defiled 
and degraded" (p. 14). Dostoevsky sometimes fled to the hospital, even 
though not ill and despite the risk of infection, where friendly doctors 
allowed him to stay. "I was constantly going to the hospital . . .  to get 
away from the prison. It was unbearable there, more unbearable than 
[the hospital], morally more unbearable" (p. 214). 
Nonetheless, after a certain amount of time, Dostoevsky's revulsion 
against the prisoners and their world began to be altered by other im­
pressions. For one thing, the more he learned about the circumstances 
in which many of their crimes had been committed, the more he 
could see that they were often a response to unbearable oppression or 
mistreatment. Moreover, what impressed him very deeply was that, 
whatever their crimes, the peasants unconditionally accepted the tra­
ditional Christian morality that condemned their behavior. Indeed, it 
was only because this morality exercised its effect that the pandemo­
nium of the ordinary prison environment was occaSionally replaced, 
even if only momentarily, by a less revolting atmosphere. 
At Christmas, for example, gifts for the prisoners were sent by the 
lower classes of the town, and these were divided evenly by the con­
victs themselves with no quarreling at all. The effect of the holy day 
was enough to stem the incessant thievery and brutal brawling. At 
Easter the convicts were relieved of work and went to church two or 
three times a day. They "prayed very earnestly and every one of them 
brought his poor farthing to the church every time to buy a candle, 
or to put it in the collection . . . .  When with the chalice in his hands 
the priest read the words, ' . . .  accept me, 0 Lord, even as the thief,' 
almost all of them bowed down to the ground with a clanking of 
chains. apparently applying tlle words literally to themselves" (p. 230). 
However much they may have violated Christ's commandments, their 
reverence for them did not diminish. and these continued to remain 
the standard by which they judged their own behavior. One of Dos­
toevsky's most fervent convictions was that-unlike, as he believed. 

Introduction 
xxix 
the European proletariat-the Russian people would never attempt to 
justify, or refuse to acknowledge, their violations of the moral law. 
What occurred to Dostoevsky at this time is best depicted in a 
sketch, "The Peasant Marey" (see page 425) , that curiously enough 
he wrote several years later (see A Writer's Diary, Vol. 1, 1 873-1876) . 
Here he returns to reminisce about his prison years, and though the 
sketch is not included in his memoirs it symbolically condenses the 
lengthier internal development that occurred during this time. It is 
placed in Easter week, when the convicts, after their brief moment of 
piety, had returned to their usual rowdiness and unruliness. "Dis­
graceful, hideous songs; card games in little nooks under the bunks; 
a few convicts, already beaten half to death; . . .  knives had already 
been drawn a few times" (p. 425) . To escape this repulsive spectacle, 
Dostoevsky walks outside and meets an educated Polish convict, also 
a political prisoner, who says to him in French: "I hate these bandits." 
The Pole obviously intuited that Dostoevsky was harboring much the 
same revulsion against his barbarous fellow-countrymen. 
Dostoevsky then returns to his bunk bed and recalls an episode 
from his childhood. Walking alone in a forest, where his mother had 
warned him that wolves might be wandering, he thought he heard a 
cry that a wolf was roaming in the vicinity. Frightened, he ran to one 
of his father's serf-peasants named Marey, plOWing in a field. The 
gray-haired Marey assured the terrified child that no cry had been ut­
tered and, calming him with the tenderness of "a mother," blessed 
him with the sign of the Cross and sent him home. This spontaneous 
kindness on the part of an enserfed peasant with every reason to ab­
hor his master and his master's family suddenly resurfaces in Dosto­
evsky's memory, transforming his entire attitude to the peasant-world 
around him as he ponders its meaning. "I suddenly felt I could regard 
these unfortunates in an entirely different way and that suddenly, 
through some sort of miracle, the former hatred and anger in my 
heart had vanished . . . .  This disgraced peasant, with shaven head and 
brands on his cheek, drunk and roaring out his hoarse, drunken 
song-why he might also be that very same Marey; I cannot peer into 
his heart, after all" (p. 430). Dostoevsky was thus capable of ac­
knowledging the abhorrent aspects of peasant behavior, but also of 
seeking for-and finding, as he persuaded himself-the redeeming 
Christian features lying concealed beneath the repellent surface. 

xxx 
Introduction 
At the very same time that the peasant-convicts were thus meta­
morphosing into "Marey," Dostoevsky could not find a single re­
deeming feature in an upper-class convict named Aristov, referred to 
in this translation as "A." He had been sent to prison for having 
falsely denounced others to the authorities as political subversives in 
exchange for payment to finance a life of debauchery. In prison, he 
served as a spy on his fellow inmates for the sadistic major in charge 
of the camp. He was clever, good-looking, well educated, and for 
Dostoevsky "the most revolting example of the depths to which a 
man can sink and degenerate, and the extent to which he can destroy 
all moral feeling in himself without difficulty or repentance" (p. 78). 
Far better the instinctive Christianity of the peasants, whatever their 
crimes, than Aristov's self-satisfied and gloating pleasure in his own 
ignominy' In Crime and Punishment, the name of Aristov is first given to 
the character who became Svidrigailov; and Dostoevsky's later decla­
ration that, morally speaking, the people had nothing to learn from 
the educated class, may well be traced to such a recollection. 
8 
There can be no doubt that one aspect of Dostoevsky's "regeneration 
of his convictions" referred to this change in his former condescend­
ingly upper-class attitude toward the peasantry. But there is another, 
much deeper feature of this "regeneration" that can be detected in 
The House of the Dead, and which involves his own most fundamental re­
ligious idea-feelings. It was long thought that Dostoevsky became 
converted to atheism in the 1 840s and, under the stress of his mock 
execution and the ordeal of the prison camp, returned to a belief in 
God and to fidelity to God's anointed, the Czar. Matters are not so 
simple, however, and there is no evidence that he ever lost his faith in 
the existence of God and the divinity of Christ, though he was thor­
oughly familiar with all the arguments being made against them by 
such thinkers as Ludwig Feuerbach and D. F. Strauss. But he remained 
a Christian Socialist, whose ideal was to embody the law of love 
preached by a divine Christ into the daily life of his own society. 
However, the ordeal of the mock execution had brought him face 
to face with eternity, and observations in the prison camp had also 
revealed to him the power of the irrational in the human psyche. The 

Introduction 
xxxi 
convicts sometimes acted in the most irrational and even self­
destructive ways simply to give themselves a sense of freedom; and 
they were often sustained by the most delusory hopes about the bet­
terment of their conditions. Without such hope, indeed, Dostoevsky 
concluded that they would have gone berserk (some of them did). 
Such observations are not specifically applied to religion, but there 
is one striking passage in the book which, if extended a bit, gives 
us a revelatory glimpse into the transformation of Dostoevsky's own 
faith as a result of his prison years. Noting that the prisoners resented 
the forced labor they were required to perform, he yet remarks that it 
was not intolerable because it made sense and could be seen to serve 
a useful purpose. But what if they were reqUired to perform perfectly 
useless tasks? What if they "had to pour water from one vessel into 
another and back, over and over again, to pound sand, to move a 
heap of earth from one place to another and back again-I believe 
the convict would hang himself in a few days or would commit 
a thousand crimes, preferring rather to die than endure such humili­
ation, shame and torture" (p. 26). (Nothing of this sort, to be sure, 
happened in Dostoevsky's camp; but his conclusion can be supported 
by evidence gathered from Nazi work camps during World War II.) 
What does this have to do, it may be asked, with the question of 
religiOUS faith? The answer is that, if we transpose the terms of this 
passage slightly, its religious-metaphysical implications become self­
evident. Not to believe in God and immortality, for the Dostoevsky 
who emerged from the prison camp, is to be condemned to live in an 
ultimately senseless universe-analogous to that of the prisoners per­
forming a useless task. The result, as he said himself, was that either a 
thousand crimes would be committed to escape such humiliating 
degradation, or those condemned to such a fate would destroy them­
selves. 
The characters in his great novels (all written after The House of the 
Dead) , who have lost or renounced their faith, consequently behave in 
this fashion-they commit crimes or take their own lives. And while 
their motives are more complicated than in Dostoevsky's thought­
experiment, the psychological root of their behavior is much the 
same-the Christian moral laws of their universe have become sense­
less for them, and they have become monsters in their misery. The 
world of the post-Siberian Dostoevsky is thus no longer limited to 

xxxii 
Introduction 
applying the Christian law of love to earthly life, or rather, this prob­
lem is now broadened and enriched by an excruciatingly heightened 
awareness of the importance of its linkage with the ultimate religious 
and supernatural sources of the Christian faith. 
9 
The House of the Dead is thus a superb job of reportage, opening up a 
whole new world for the Russian reader, as well as providing a pene­
trating glimpse into Dostoevsky's inner development. As a work, 
however, it seems at first Sight to be more or less a collection of 
scenes and sketches, fascinating in their own right but given unity 
only by a common location. In fact, though, the book is very care­
fully constructed to correspond indirectly, by the manner in which its 
material is organized and arranged, with the inner process of Dosto­
evsky's encounter with, and assimilation of, this strange new world. 
In part I, the first six chapters depict his disorienting perceptions 
and the initial shock of contact ("First Impressions"), which then 
move on to the depiction of individual characters (Petrov, Isay 
Fomitch, and Baklushin) .  In part II the chapters are held together ex­
ternally ("The Hospital") or by loose general groupings ("Prison An­
imals" and "Comrades"). The narrator, whose surprised and startled 
reactions were quite prominent earlier, fades into the background as 
he merges into the everyday life of the community. 
Dostoevsky's handling of time is particularly subtle, and it antici­
pates the experiments of our own day in correlating the shape of the 
narrative to accord with subjective experience. Time literally comes 
to a stop in the early chapters as the narrator concentrates on the nov­
elty of the unfamiliar environment into which he has been thrown. 
More than a hundred pages are devoted to his first month; but the 
years then pass by unobtrusively as he becomes accustomed to camp 
routine, though time comes into prominence thematically as the end 
of his sentence nears. (The narrator received a ten-year sentence, but 
Dostoevsky had only been given four.) 
The House of the Dead is nominally a memoir, but it can be better de­
scribed as a semi-fictional autobiography. As such it takes its place with 
two other works written about the same time, Turgenev's Notes of a Hunter 
( 1 8 5 2) and Tolstoy's Sevastopol Sketches ( 1 8 5 5- 1 8 5 6) .  Dostoevsky could 

Introduction 
xxxiii 
well have been inspired by their example in the sketch-form that he 
created for the account of his prison-camp years. All three works in fact 
share the same overriding theme-the encounter of a member of the 
upper, educated class with the Russian people-and each author treats 
it in his own distinctive way. 
Turgenev stresses the spiritual beauty and richness of Russian peas­
ant life, the poetry of its customs and superstitions, and by so doing 
makes the serf status of the peasants and the casual cruelty of their 
treatment all the more unforgivable. Tolstoy discovers the Russian peas­
antry amidst the beSieged bastions of Sevastopol, and is astonished by 
the calm tranquillity of their unassuming heroism-so different from 
the vanity occupying the consciousness of their upper-class officers, 
dreaming of decorations and promotions. Only Dostoevsky, however, 
depicts the Russian people in revolt against their enslaved condition, 
implacably hating the nobles who have oppressed them and ready to 
use their knives and axes to strike back when mistreatment becomes 
unendurable. 
At the very end of the book, just before his own fetters were 
struck off and he was once again a free man, Dostoevsky sets down 
a statement about the convicts that has led to some misunder­
standing. "After all," he wrote, "one must tell the whole truth; these 
men were exceptional men. Perhaps they were the most gifted, the 
strongest of our people. But their mighty energies were vainly 
wasted, wasted abnormally, unjustly, hopelessly." Dostoevsky here is 
obViously protesting against serfdom and the whole complex of 
Russian social customs that treated the peasant as an inferior 
species; those who refused to accept such injustice and revolted 
against it could well be seen as the "strongest" of the people, whose 
"mighty energies" had been perverted. 
However, among the notes left by Nietzsche and later published in 
The Will to Power, the philosopher wondered whether one of his sub­
conscious (unwillkiirlich) aims was not "to return a good conscience to 
an evil human being . . .  and the evil human being precisely insofar 
as he is the strongest human being. Here one should bring in the 
judgment of Dostoevsky about the criminals in the prison camp" 
(book 2, note 233). For Nietzsche, presumably, Dostoevsky's peasant­
convicts were "evil human beings," whose "strength" derived from 
haVing overcome the inhibitions of customary moral constraints. 

xxxiv 
Inttoduction 
Nothing, however, could have been farther from Dostoevsky's own 
point of view. Indeed, perhaps the most important conviction he had 
acquired as a result of his prison camp ordeal was that, even in their 
worst excesses, the Russian people had never abandoned the moral 
law proclaimed by Christ. 
Joseph Frank is Professor Emeritus of Comparative Literature at 
Princeton University and Professor Emeritus of Comparative Litera­
ture and Slavic Languages and Literature at Stanford University. He is 
the author of a five-volume study of Dostoevsky's life and work. The 
first four volumes received the National Book Critics Circle Award 
for Biography, two Christian Gauss Awards, two James Russell Lowell 
Awards of the Modern Language Association, a Los Angeles Times Book 
Prize, and other honors. Frank is also the author of Through the Russian 
Prism: Essays on Literature and Culture, The Widening Gyre, and The Idea of Spatial 
Form. 

THE H O U S E  O F  T H E  DEAD 


CONTENTS 
PART I 
INTRODUCTION 
-
7 
I. THE HOUSE OF THE DEAD 
1 2 
II. FIRST IMPRESSIONS ( 1 )  -
2 5  
III. FIRST IMPRESSIONS (2) -
4 1  
IV FIRST IMPRESSIONS (3) -
5 5  
V THE FIRST MONTH ( 1 )  
7 1 
VI. THE FIRST MONTH (2) 
85 
VII. NEW ACQUAINTANCES. PETROV 
-
9 8  
VIII. DETERMINED CHARACTERS. LUTCHKA 
1 1 0 
IX. ISAY FOMITCH-THE BATH-HoUSE-BAKLUSHIN'S STORY 
1 1 7 
X. CHRISTMAS 
-
1 3 3  
XI. THE THEATRICALS 
1 49 
I. THE HOSPITAL ( 1 )  -
II. THE HOSPITAL (2) 
-
III. THE HOSPITAL (3) 
-
IV AKULKA'S HUSBAND 
V SUMMER TIME 
VI. PRISON ANIMALS 
VII. THE COMPLAINT 
VIII. COMRADES 
-
IX. AN ESCAPE 
-
X. How I LEFT PRISON 
PART II 
3 
1 7 1  
1 8 5 
1 99 
2 1 6  
2 2 6  
243 
2 5 5  
2 7 2  
2 8 6  
3 0 0  


PART I 


INTRODUCTION 
I N  THE REMOTE PARTS of Siberia in the midst of steppes, mountains, or 
impassable forests, there are scattered here and there wretched little 
wooden towns of one, or at the most two, thousand inhabitants, with 
two churches, one in the town and one in the cemetery-more like 
fair-sized villages in the neighbourhood of Moscow than towns. They 
are usually well provided with police officers, superintendents and 
minor officials of all sorts. A post in Siberia is usually a snug berth in 
spite of the cold. The inhabitants are simple folk and not of liberal 
views; everything goes on according to the old-fashioned, solid, time­
honoured traditions. The officials, who may fairly be said to be the 
aristocracy of Siberia, are either born and bred in Siberia, or men 
who have come from Russia, usually from Petersburg or Moscow, at­
tracted by the extra pay, the double travelling expenses and alluring 
hopes for the future. Those of them who are clever at solving the 
problem of existence almost always remain in Siberia, and eagerly 
take root there. Later on they bring forth sweet and abundant fruit. 
But others of more levity and no capacity for solving the problems 
of existence soon weary of Siberia, and wonder regretfully why they 
came. They wait with impatience for the end of their three years' 
term of office, and instantly, on the expiration of it, petition to be 
transferred and return home abusing Siberia and sneering at it. They 
are wrong: not only from the official standpoint but from many oth­
ers, one may find a blissful existence in Siberia. The climate is excel­
lent; there are many extremely wealthy and hospitable merchants; 
many exceedingly well-to-do natives. Young ladies bloom like roses, 
and are moral to the last extreme. The wild game-birds fly about the 
streets and pOSitively thrust themselves upon the sportsman. The 
amount of champagne consumed is supernatural. The caviare is mar­
vellous. In some parts the crops often yield fifteenfold. In fact it is a 
blessed land. One need only know how to reap the benefits of it. In 
Siberia people do know. 
In one of these lively, self-satisfied little towns with most charming 
7 

8 
The House of the Dead 
inhabitants, the memory of whom is imprinted for ever on my heart, 
I met Alexandr Petrovitch Goryanchikov, a man who had been a gentle­
man and landowner born in Russia, had afterwards become a convict 
in the second division for the murder of his wife, and on the expiration 
of his ten years' sentence was spending the rest of his life humbly and 
qUietly as a settler in the town. Although he was offiCially described as 
an inhabitant of a neighbouring village, he did actually live in the town 
as he was able to earn some sort of a living there by giving lessons to 
children. In Siberian towns one often meets teachers who have been 
convicts; they are not looked down upon. They are principally em­
ployed in teaching French, of which in the remote parts of Siberia the 
inhabitants could have no notion but for them, though the language is 
so indispensable for success in life. The first time I met Alexandr Petro­
vitch was in the house of Ivan Ivanitch Gvozdikov, an old-fashioned 
and hospitable official who had gained honours in the service and had 
five very promising daughters of various ages. Alexandr Petrovitch gave 
them lessons four times a week for thirty kopecks a lesson. His appear­
ance interested me. He was an exceedingly pale, thin man, small and 
frail-looking, who could hardly be called old-about five-and-thirty. 
He was always very neatly dressed in European style. If one talked 
to him he looked at one very fixedly and intently, listened with strict 
courtesy to every word one uttered, as though reflecting upon it, as 
though one had asked him a riddle or were trying to worm out a secret, 
and in the end answered clearly and briefly, but so weighing every 
word that it made one feel ill at ease, and one was relieved at last when 
the conversation dropped. I questioned Ivan Ivanitch about him at the 
time and learnt that Goryanchikov was a man of irreproachably moral 
life, and that otherwise Ivan Ivanitch would not have engaged him for 
his daughters; but that he was dreadfully unsociable and avoided every­
one, that he was extremely learned, read a great deal but spoke very lit­
tle, and in fact it was rather difficult to talk to him; that some people 
declared that he was positively mad, though they considered that this 
was not a failing of much importance; that many of the most respected 
persons in the town were ready to be kind to Alexandr Petrovitch in all 
sorts of ways; that he might be of use, indeed, writing petitions and so 
forth. It was supposed that he must have decent relations in Russia, 
pOSSibly people of good position, but it was known that from the time 
of his conviction he had resolutely cut off all communication with 

Introduction 
9 
them-in fact he was his own enemy Moreover, everyone in the town 
knew his story, knew that he had killed his wife in the first year of his 
marriage, had killed her from jealousy, and had surrendered himself to 
justice (which had done much to mitigate his sentence). Such crimes 
are always looked upon as misfortunes, and pitied accordingly. But in 
spite of all this the queer fellow persisted in holding himself aloof from 
everyone, and only came among people to give his lessons. 
I paid no particular attention to him at first but, I can't tell why, he 
gradually began to interest me. There was something enigmatic about 
him. It was utterly impossible to talk freely with him. He always an­
swered my questions, of course, and with an air, indeed, of consider­
ing it a sacred obligation to do so; but after his answers I somehow 
felt it awkward to ask him anything more; and there was a look 
of suffering and exhaustion on his face afterwards. I remember one 
fine summer evening, as I was walking home with him from Ivan 
Ivanitch's, it occurred to me suddenly to invite him in for a minute to 
smoke a cigarette. I can't describe the look of horror that came into 
his face; he was utterly disconcerted, began muttering incoherent 
words, and, suddenly looking angrily at me, rushed away in the 
opposite direction. I was positively astounded. From that time he 
looked at me with a sort of alarm whenever we met. But I did not 
give in: something attracted me to him, and a month later for no par­
ticular reason I went to Goryanchikov's myself No doubt I acted stu­
pidly and tactlessly He lodged in the very outskirts of the town in the 
house of an old woman of the working class, who had a daughter 
in consumption, and this daughter had an illegitimate child, a pretty, 
merry little girl of ten. Alexandr Petrovitch was sitting beside this 
child teaching her to read at the moment when I went in. Seeing me, 
he was as confused as though he had been caught in a crime. He was 
utterly disconcerted, jumped up from his chair and gazed open-eyed 
at me. At last we sat down; he watched every look in my face intently, 
as though he suspected in each one of them some peculiar mysteri­
ous Significance. I guessed that he was suspicious to the point of in­
sanity He looked at me with hatred, almost as though asking me: 
how soon are you going? I began talking about our town and the 
news of the day; it appeared that he did not know the most ordinary 
news of the town known to everyone, and what is more, did not care 
to. Then I began talking of the country and its needs; he heard me in 

10 
The House of the Dead 
silence and looked me in the face so strangely that at last I felt 
ashamed of what I was saying. I almost succeeded in tempting him, 
however, with new books and reviews; they had just come by post, 
they were in my hands and I offered to lend them, uncut. He glanced 
eagerly at them but at once changed his mind and declined my offer, 
alleging that he had no time for reading. At last I took leave of him, 
and as I went out I felt as though an insufferable weight were taken 
off my heart. I felt ashamed, and it seemed horribly stupid to pester 
a man who made it his great aim to shrink as far as possible out of 
Sight of everyone. But the thing was done. I remember that I noticed 
scarcely a Single book in his room, and so it was not true that he read 
a great deal as people said. Yet passing by his windows once or twice, 
very late at night, I noticed a light in them. What was he dOing, sit­
ting up till daybreak? Could he have been writing? And if so, what? 
Owing to circumstances I left the town for three months. Return­
ing home in the winter, I learnt that Alexandr Petrovitch had died in 
the autumn, in solitude, without even sending for the doctor. He was 
already almost forgotten in the town. His lodgings were empty. I im­
mediately made the acquaintance of his landlady, intending to find 
out from her what had occupied her lodger, and whether he had 
written anything. For twenty kopecks she brought me quite a hamper 
of manuscript left by her late lodger. The old woman confessed that 
she had already torn up two exercise books. She was a grim and taci­
turn old woman from whom it was difficult to extract anything 
much. She could tell me nothing very new of her lodger. According 
to her, he scarcely ever did anything, and for months together did not 
open a book or take up a pen; but he would walk up and down the 
room all night, brooding, and would sometimes talk to himself; that 
he was very fond of her little grandchild, Katya, and was very kind to 
her, especially since he had heard that her name was Katya, and that 
on St. Katherine's day he always had a requiem service sung for some­
one. He could not endure visitors; he never went out except to give 
his lessons; he looked askance even at an old woman like her when 
she went in once a week to tidy up his room a bit, and scarcely ever 
said a word to her all those three years. I asked Katya whether she re­
membered her teacher. She looked at me without speaking, turned to 
the wall and began to cry. So this man was able to make someone, at 
least, love him. 

Introduction 
1 1  
I carried off his papers and spent a whole day looking through 
them. Three-fourths of these papers were trifling, insignificant scraps, 
or exercises written by his pupils. But among them was one rather 
thick volume of finely written manuscript, unfinished, perhaps thrown 
aside and forgotten by the writer. It was a disconnected description of 
the ten years spent by Alexandr Petrovitch in penal servitude. In parts 
this account broke off and was interspersed by passages from another 
story, some strange and terrible reminiscences, jotted down irregularly, 
spasmodically, as though by some overpowering impulse. I read these 
fragments over several times, and was almost convinced that they were 
written in a state of insanity. But his reminiscences of penal servitude­
"Scenes from the House of the Dead" as he calls them himself some­
where in his manuscript-seemed to me not devoid of interest. I 
was carried away by this absolutely new, till then unknown, world, 
by the strangeness of some facts, and by some special observations 
on these lost creatures, and I read some of it with curiosity. I may, of 
course, be mistaken. To begin with I am picking out two or three 
chapters as an experiment-the public may judge of them. 

CHAPTER I 
T H E  H O U S E  O F  T H E  DEAD 
OUR PRISON STOOD AT the edge of the fortress grounds, close to the 
fortress wall. One would sometimes, through a chink in the fence, 
take a peep into God's world to try and see something; but one could 
see only a strip of the sky and the high earthen wall overgrown with 
coarse weeds, and on the wall sentries pacing up and down day and 
night. And then one would think that there are long years before one, 
and that one will go on coming to peep through the chink in the 
same way, and will see the same wall, the same sentries and the same 
little strip of sky, not the sky that stood over the prison, but a free, far­
away sky. Imagine a large courtyard, two hundred paces long and a 
hundred and fifty wide, in the form of an irregular hexagon, all shut 
in by a paling, that is, a fence of high posts stuck deeply into the 
earth, touching one another, strengthened by crossway planks and 
pOinted at the top; this was the outer fence of the prison. On one side 
of the fence there is a strong gate, always closed, always, day and 
night, guarded by sentries; it is opened on occasion to let us out to 
work. Outside that gate is the world of light and freedom, where men 
live like the rest of mankind. But those living on this side of the fence 
picture that world as some unattainable fairyland. Here there is a 
world apart, unlike everything else, with laws of its own, its own 
dress, its own manners and customs, and here is the house of the liv­
ing dead-life as nowhere else and a people apart. It is this corner 
apart that I am going to describe. 
When you come into the enclosure you see several buildings within 
it. On both sides of the large inner court run two long log-houses of 
one storey. These are the prison barracks. Here the convicts live, distrib­
uted in divisions. Then at the further end of the enclosure another 
similar log-house: this is the kitchen, divided in two for the use of two 
messes. Beyond it another building, where are the cellars, the store­
houses and stables, all under one roof The middle of the courtyard is 
1 2  

The House of the Dead 
1 3  
empty and forms a fairly large level square. Here the convicts fall in, 
here they are mustered, and their names are called over in the morn­
ing, at midday, and in the evening, and on occasion several times a day 
as well-if the sentries are suspicious and not very clever at counting. A 
fairly wide space is left all round between the buildings and the fence. 
Here behind the bUildings prisoners of an unsociable and gloomy dis­
position like to walk in their spare time, to think their own thoughts, 
hidden from all eyes. Meeting them as they walked there, I used to like 
looking into their grim, branded faces, and guessing what they were 
thinking about. There was a prisoner whose favourite occupation in his 
spare time was counting the posts in the fence. There were fifteen hun­
dred of them, and he had counted and noted them all. Every post stood 
for a day with him: he marked off one post every day, and in that 
way could see at a glance from the number of posts uncounted how 
many days he had left in prison before his term was out. He was gen­
uinely glad every time one side of the hexagon was finished. He had 
many years yet to wait, but one had time in prison to learn patience. 
I once saw a convict who had been twenty years in prison and was 
being released take leave of his fellow prisoners. There were men who 
remembered his first coming into the prison, when he was young, 
careless, heedless of his crime and his punishment. He went out a grey­
headed, elderly man, with a sad sullen face. He walked in silence 
through our six barrack-rooms. As he entered each room he prayed to 
the ikons, and then bowing low to his fellow prisoners he asked them 
not to remember evil against him. I remember too how a prisoner who 
had been a well-to-do peasant in Siberia was one evening summoned 
to the gate. Six months, before, he had heard that his former wife had 
married again, and he was terribly downcast about it. Now she herself 
had come to the prison, asked for him, and given him alms. They talked 
for a couple of minutes, both shed tears and parted for ever. I saw his 
face when he returned to the barracks . . . .  Yes, in that place one might 
learn to be patient. 
When it got dark we used all to be taken to the barracks, and to be 
locked up for the night. I always felt depressed at coming into our 
barrack-room from outside. It was a long, low-pitched, stuffy room, 
dimly lighted by tallow candles, full of a heavy stifling smell. I don't 
understand now how I lived through ten years in it. I had three 
planks on the wooden platform; that was all I had to myself. On this 

1 4  
The House of the Dead 
wooden platform thirty men slept side by side in our room alone. In 
the winter we were locked up early; it was fully four hours before 
everyone was asleep. And before that-noise, uproar, laughter, swear­
ing, the clank of chains, smoke and grime, shaven heads, branded 
faces, ragged clothes, everything defiled and degraded. What cannot 
man live through I Man is a creature that can get accustomed to any­
thing, and I think that is the best definition of him. 
There were two hundred and fifty of us in the prison, and the 
number scarcely varied. Some came, others completed their sentence 
and went away, others died. And there were some of all sorts. I imag­
ine every province, every region of Russia had some representative 
there. There were some aliens, and there were some prisoners even 
from the mountains of Caucasus. They were all divided according to 
the degree of their criminality, and consequently according to the 
number of years they had to serve. I believe there was no sort of 
crime that had not sent some prisoner there. The bulk of the prison 
population were exiled convicts or sylno-katorzhny of the civilian divi­
sion (the silno-katorzhny, or heavily punished convicts, as the prisoners 
naively mispronounced it) . 
These were criminals entirely deprived of all rights of property, 
fragments cut off from society, with branded faces to bear witness for 
ever that they were outcasts. They were sentenced to hard labour for 
terms varying from eight to twelve years, and afterwards they were 
sent to live as settlers in some Siberian village. There were prisoners of 
the military division, too, who were not deprived of rights, as is usual 
in Russian diSciplinary battalions. They were sentenced for brief terms; 
at the expiration of their sentence they were sent back whence they 
had come, to serve in the Siberian line regiments. Many of them re­
turned almost at once to the prison for some second serious offence, 
this time not for a short term, but for twenty years: this division was 
called the "lifers." But even these "lifers" were not deprived of all 
rights. Finally there was one more, fairly numerous, special division of 
the most terrible criminals, principally soldiers. It was called "the spe­
cial section." Criminals were sent to it from all parts of Russia. They 
considered themselves in for life, and did not know the length of their 
sentence. According to law they had to perform double or treble tasks. 
They were kept in the prison until some works involving very severe 
hard labour were opened in Siberia. "You are in for a term, but we go 

The House of the Dead 
1 5  
onwards into servitude," they used to say to other prisoners. I have 
heard that this class has since been abolished. The civilian division, too, 
has been removed from our prison also, and a Single disciplinary bat­
talion of convicts has been formed. Of course, the officials in control of 
the prison were all changed at the same time. So I am describing the 
past, things long bygone. 
It was long ago; it all seems like a dream to me now. I remember 
how I entered the prison. It was in the evening, in January. It was al­
ready dark, the men were returning from their work, and they were 
gening ready for the roll-call. A non-commissioned officer with mous­
taches at last opened for me the door of this strange house in which I 
was to spend so many years, and to endure sensations of which I could 
never have formed the faintest idea if I had not experienced them. I 
could never have imagined, for instance, how terrible and agonizing it 
would be never once for a Single minute to be alone for the ten years of 
my imprisonment. At work to be always with a guard, at home with 
two hundred fellow prisoners; not once, not once alone' Yet this was 
not the worst I had to get used to' 
There were here men who were murderers by mischance and men 
who were murderers by trade, brigands and brigand chiefs. There 
were simple thieves, and tramps who were pickpockets or burglars. 
There were people about whom it was difficult to guess why they 
had come. Yet each had his own story, confused and oppressive as the 
heaviness that follows a day's drinking. As a rule they spoke linle of 
their past, they did not like talking about it and eVidently tried not to 
think of bygone days. I knew some among tl1em, even murderers, so 
gay, so heedless of everything that one might bet with certainty that 
their consciences never reproached them. But there were gloomy faces, 
too, men who were almost always silent. As a rule it was rare for any­
one to talk of his life. and curiosity was not the fashion; it was some­
how not the custom and not correct. Only on rare occasions, from 
want of something better to do, some prisoner would grow talkative, 
and another would listen coldly and gloomily. No one could astonish 
anyone here. "We are men who can read," they would often say with 
strange satisfaction. I remember how a robber began once when he 
was drunk (it was sometimes possible to get drunk in prison) telling 
how he had murdered a boy of five, how he had enticed him at first 
with a toy, led him away to an empty shed, and there had murdered 

1 6  
The House of the Dead 
him. The whole roomful of men, who had till then been laughing at 
his jokes, cried out like one man, and the brigand was forced to be 
silent; it was not from indignation they cried out, but simply because 
there is no need to talk about that, because talking about that is not the cor­
rect thing. I may mention in parenthesis that they were "men who 
could read," and not in the slang, but in the literal sense. Probably more 
than half of them actually could read and write. In what other place in 
which Russian peasants are gathered together in numbers can you find 
two hundred and fifty men, half of whom can read and write? I have 
heard since that someone deduces from such facts that education is 
detrimental to the people. That is a mistake; there are quite other causes 
at work here, though it must be admitted that education develops self­
reliance in the people. But this is far from being a defect. 
The divisions were distinguished from one another by their dress: 
some had half their jackets brown and half grey, and the same with their 
trousers--one leg dark brown and one grey One day when we were at 
work a girl who was selling rolls looked at me intently for some time 
and then suddenly burst out laughing. "Ugh, how horrid," she cried, 
"they had not enough grey cloth and they had not enough black!" 
There were others whose jackets were all grey, and only the sleeves were 
blackish-brown. Our heads were shaved in different ways too: some 
had half the head shaved lengthways and others transversely 
At the first glance one could discover one conspicuous trait, com­
mon to all this strange family; even the most prominent and original 
personalities, who unconsciously dominated the others, tried to adopt 
the common tone of the prison. Speaking generally, I may say that, 
with the exception of a few indefatigably cheerful fellows who were 
consequently regarded with contempt by everyone, they were all 
sullen, envious, dreadfully vain, boastful people, prone to take of­
fence and great sticklers for good form. Not to be surprised at anything 
was regarded as the greatest merit. They were all mad on keeping up 
to their standard of good form. But often the most aggressive conceit 
was followed in a flash by the most cringing feebleness. There were 
some genUinely strong characters; they were simple and unaffected. 
But strange to say, among these really strong people there were some 
who were vain to the most exaggerated degree, to a morbid point. 
As a rule vanity and regard for appearances were most conspicuous. 
The majority of them were corrupt and horribly depraved. Slander 

The House of the Dead 
1 7  
and backbiting went on incessantly; it was hell, outer darkness. But 
no one dared to rebel against the self-imposed rules and the accepted 
customs of the prison; all submitted to them. There were exceptional 
characters who found it hard and difficult to submit, but still they did 
submit. Some who came to the prison were men who had lost their 
heads, had become too reckless when at liberty, so that at last they 
committed their crimes as it were irresponsibly, as it were without an 
object, as it were in delirium, in intoxication, often from vanity ex­
cited to the highest pitch. But they were qUickly suppressed, though 
some had been the terror of whole villages and towns before they 
came to prison. Looking about him, the new-comer soon realized 
that he had come to the wrong place, that there was no one he could 
impress here, and he gradually submitted and fell in with the general 
tone. This general tone was apparent externally in a certain peculiar 
personal dignity of which almost every inmate of the prison was 
acutely conscious. It was as though the status of a convict, of a con­
demned prisoner, was a sort of rank, and an honourable one too. 
There was no sign of shame or repentance! Yet there was an external, 
as it were official, resignation, a sort of philosophic calm. "We are a lost 
lot," they used to say; "since we didn't know how to get on in free­
dom now we must walk the Green Street, and count the ranks." "Since 
we disobeyed our fathers and mothers, now we must obey the drum 
tap." "We wouldn't embroider with gold, so now we break stones on 
the road." Such things were often said by way of moral reflections 
and proverbial sayings, but never seriously. They were al words. I doubt 
whether one of the convicts ever inwardly admitted his lawlessness. If 
anyone, not a prisoner, were to try reproaching the criminal for his 
crime, upbraiding him (though it is not the Russian way to reproach 
a criminal) , an endless stream of oaths would follow. And what mas­
ters of abuse they were! They swore elaborately, artistically. Abuse was 
carried to a science with them; they tried to score not so much by in­
sulting words as by insulting meaning, spirit, ideas-and that is sub­
tler and more malignant. This science was developed to a higher point 
by their incessant quarrels. All these people were kept at work by 
force, consequently they were idle, consequently they were demoral­
ized; if they had not been depraved beforehand, they became so in 
prison. They had all been brought together here apart from their own 
will; they were all strangers to one another. 

1 8  
The House of the Dead 
"The devil must have worn out three pairs of shoes before he 
brought us all here," they used to say of themselves, and so backbiting, 
intrigues, womanish slander, envy, quarrelling, hatred were always 
conspiCUOUS in this hellish life. No old women could be such old 
women as some of these cut-throats. I repeat, there were strong charac­
ters even among them, men who had been accustomed all their lives to 
go ahead and to dominate, hardy and fearless. These men were instinc­
tively respected; yet though they for their part were often very jealous 
over their prestige, as a rule they tried not to oppress the others, did not 
pick quarrels over trifles, behaved with exceptional dignity, were rea­
sonable and almost always obeyed the authorities-not from any prin­
Ciple of obedience, nor from a sense of duty, but as though it were a 
sort of contract with the authorities for the mutual advantage of both. 
On the other hand they were treated with consideration. 
I remember how one of these convicts, a fearless and determined 
man, well known to the authorities for his brutal propensities, was 
once summoned to be punished for some offence. It was a summer 
day and not in working hours. The officer who was immediately re­
sponsible for the management of the prison came himself to the 
guard-house, which was close to our gate, to be present at the punish­
ment. This major was, so to speak, a fateful being for the prisoners; he 
had reduced them to trembling before him. He was insanely severe, 
"flew at people," as the convicts said. What they feared most in him 
was his penetrating lynx-like eyes, from which nothing could be con­
cealed. He seemed to see without looking. As soon as he came into the 
prison he knew what was being done at the furthest end of it. The 
prisoners used to call him "eight eyes." His system was a mistaken 
one. By his ferocious, spiteful actions he only exasperated people who 
were already exasperated, and if he had not been under the governor 
of the prison, a generous and sensible man who sometimes moder­
ated his savage outbursts, his rule might have led to great trouble. I 
can't understand how it was he did not come to a bad end; he retired 
and is alive and well, though he was brought to trial for his misdeeds. 
The convict turned pale when his name was called. As a rule he lay 
down to be flogged resolutely and without a word, endured his pun­
ishment in silence and got up again quite lively, looking calmly and 
philosophically at the mishap that had befallen him. He was always, 
however, handled with caution. But this time he thought himself for 

The House of the Dead 
1 9  
some reason in the right. He turned pale and managed. unseen by the 
guard. to slip into his sleeve a sharp English knife. Knives and all sharp 
instruments were sternly forbidden in prison. Searches were made 
frequently and unexpectedly. and they were no joking matter for the 
penalties were severe; but as it is difficult to find what a thief particu­
larly means to lude. and as knives and instruments were always indis­
pensable in the prison. in spite of searches they were always there. And 
if they were taken away. new ones were immediately obtained. All the 
convicts rushed to the fence and looked through the crevices with 
beating hearts. They all knew that this time Petrov did not mean to lie 
down to be flogged. and that it would be the end of the major. But at 
the critical moment our major got into his droshki and drove away. 
leaving the execution of the punishment to another officer. "God him­
self delivered him'" the convicts said afterwards. As for Petrov. he bore 
his punishment quite calmly. His wrath passed off with the departure 
of the major. The convict is obedient and submissive up to a certain 
pOint; but there is a limit which must not be overstepped. By the way. 
nothing can be more curious than these strange outbreaks of impa­
tience and revolt. Often a man is patient for several years. is reSigned. 
endures most cruel punishment. and suddenly breaks out over some 
little thing. some trifle. a mere nothing. From a certain point of view 
he might be called mad. and people do call him so in fact. 
I have said already that in the course of several years I never saw 
one sign of repentance among these people. not a trace of despon­
dent brooding over their crime. and that the majority of them in­
wardly considered themselves absolutely in the right. This is a fact. 
No doubt vanity. bad example. brag. false shame are responSible for a 
great deal of this. On the other side. who can say that he has sounded 
the depths of these lost hearts. and has read what is hidden from 
all the world in them? Yet surely it would have been possible during 
all those years to have noticed. to have detected something. to have 
caught some glimpse which would have borne witness to some inner 
angUish and suffering in those hearts. But it was not there. it certainly 
was not there. No. it seems crime cannot be interpreted from precon­
ceived conventional points of view. and the philosophy of it is a little 
more difficult than is supposed. Of course. prisons and penal servi­
tude do not reform the criminal; they only punish him and protect so­
ciety from further attacks on its security. In the criminal. prison and 

20 
The House of the Dead 
the severest hard labour only develop hatred, lust for forbidden pleas­
ures, and a fearful levity. But I am firmly convinced that the belauded 
system of solitary confinement attains only false, deceptive, external 
results. It drains the man's vital sap, enervates his soul, cows and en­
feebles it, and then holds up the morally withered mummy, half imbe­
cile, as a model of penitence and reformation. of course, the criminal 
who revolts against society hates it, and almost always considers him­
self in the right and society in the wrong. Moreover, he has already en­
dured punishment at its hands, and for that reason almost considers 
himself purged and quits with society. There are points of view, in fact, 
from which one is almost brought to justify the criminal. But in spite 
of all possible points of view everyone will admit that there are crimes 
which always and everywhere from the beginning of the world, under 
all legal systems, have unhesitatingly been considered crimes, and will 
be considered so as long as man remains human. Only in prison have 
I heard stories of the most terrible, the most unnatural actions, of the 
most monstrous murders told with the most spontaneous, childishly 
merry laughter. 
I am particularly unable to forget one parricide. He was of the up­
per class and in the service, and had been something like a prodigal 
son. He was thoroughly dissipated in his behaviour, and made debts 
everywhere. His father, an old man of sixty, tried to influence and re­
strain him; but the father had a house, a small estate, and, it was sus­
pected, money, and the son killed the father through greed for his 
inheritance. The crime was only discovered a month later. The mur­
derer himself gave information to the police that his father had disap­
peared, he knew not where. He spent all that month in the most 
profligate way. At last in his absence the police found the body. There 
was running right across the yard a ditch covered with planks for 
carrying off refuse water. The body was lying in this ditch. It was 
dressed and tidy, the grey head which had been cut off had been put 
on the body, and under the head the murderer laid a pillow. He did 
not confess, was deprived of his rank and rights, and sent to penal 
servitude for twenty years. All the time I spent with him, he was in the 
liveliest, merriest spirits. He was an unaccountable, feather-brained 
fellow, irresponsible in the highest degree, though by no means stu­
pid. I never noticed any special cruelty in him. The convicts despised 
him-not on account of his crime, which was never mentioned, but 

The House of the Dead 
2 1  
for his foolishness, for his not knowing how to behave. In conversa­
tion he sometimes referred to his father. Once talking to me about the 
healthy constitution hereditary in their family, he added: "My parent, for 
instance, never complained of any illness right up to the end." Such 
savage insenSibility seems impOSSible. It is phenomenal; it is not a case 
of simple crime, but of some constitutional defect, some mental and 
bodily monstrosity not yet understood by science. Of course I did not 
believe this criminal's story. But people who came from the same 
town and must have known every detail of his history told me about 
the whole case. The facts were so clear that it was impossible not to be­
lieve in them. 
The convicts heard him cry out one night in his sleep, "Hold him, 
hold himl Chop off his head, his head, his headl" 
Almost all the convicts raved and talked in their sleep. Oaths, 
thieves' slang, knives, axes were what came most frequently to their 
tongues in their sleep. "We are a beaten lot," they used to say; "our 
guts have been knocked out, that's why we shout at night." 
Forced and penal labour was not an occupation, but a compulsory 
task: the convict completed his task or worked the allotted hours and 
returned to the prison. The work was looked upon with hatred. If it 
were not for his own private work to which he was devoted with his 
whole mind, his whole interest, a man could not live in prison. And, 
indeed, how else could all that mass of men, who had had experi­
ences, lived keenly and desired to live, who had been forCibly brought 
together here, forCibly torn away from society and normal existence, 
be expected to live a normal and regular life here of their own free 
wilP Idleness alone would have developed in the convict here crimi­
nal propensities of which he had no idea before. Without labour, 
without lawful normal property man cannot live; he becomes de­
praved, and is transformed into a beast. And so, in obedience to a 
natural craving and a sort of sense of self-preservation, everyone in 
the prison had his speCial craft and pursuit. The long summer day was 
almost filled up with the compulsory work; there was hardly time in 
the brief night for sleep. But in the winter the convict had by regula­
tion to be locked up in prison as soon as it got dark. What could he 
do in the long dull hours of the winter evenings 7 And so in spite of 
prohibition almost every prison ward was transformed into a huge 
workshop. Work, occupation, were not formally forbidden; but it was 

2 2  
The House of the Dead 
strictly forbidden to have in one's possession in prison any tools, and 
without these work was impossible. But they worked by stealth, and I 
fancy that in some cases the authorities shut their eyes to it. Many 
convicts came to the prison knowing nothing, but they learnt from 
others, and afterwards went back into the world skilled workmen. 
There were cobblers there, shoemakers, tailors, cabinet-makers, lock­
smiths, woodcarvers and gilders. There was one Jew, Isay Bumshtein, 
a jeweller and pawnbroker. They all worked and earned something. 
They got orders for work from the town. Money is coined liberty, and 
so it is ten times dearer to the man who is deprived of freedom. If 
money is mingling in his pocket, he is half consoled, even though he 
cannot spend it. But money can always and everywhere be spent, and, 
moreover, forbidden fruit is sweetest of all. Even vodka could be got 
in prison. Pipes were strictly forbidden, but everyone smoked them. 
Money and tobacco saved them from scurvy and other diseases. Work 
saved them from crime; without work the convicts would have de­
voured one another like spiders in a glass jar. In spite of tllis, both work 
and money were forbidden. From time to time a sudden search was 
made at night and all forbidden articles were carried off, and however 
carefully money was hidden, it was sometimes found by the searchers. 
This was partly why it was not saved but was qUickly spent on drink; 
that was how vodka came to be brought into prison. After every 
search the guilty, in addition to lOSing their property, were severely 
punished. But after every search all they had lost was immediately re­
placed, new articles were promptly procured, and everything went on 
as before. The authorities knew this and the convicts did not grumble 
at the punishments, though such a life was like living on Vesuvius. 
Those who did not know a craft carried on some other sort of 
trade. Some ways of doing so were rather original. Some, for instance, 
were only occupied in buying and retailing, and they sometimes sold 
things which it would never occur to anyone outside the walls of the 
prison to buy or sell, or, indeed, to consider as things at all. But the 
prisoners were very poor and had great commercial ability. The poor­
est rag had its price and was turned to account. They were so poor that 
money had quite a different value in prison. A great and complicated 
piece of work was paid for in farthings. Some practised moneylending 
with success. Convicts who had been extravagant or unlucky carried 
their last possessions to the moneylender and got from him a few 

The House of the Dead 
2 3  
copper coins at a fearful rate of interest. If the articles were not 
redeemed at the time fixed, they were sold without delay or remorse; 
the moneylending flourished to such an extent that even prison prop­
erty liable to inspection was accepted as a pledge; for instance, the 
prison clothes, boots, and so on-things which were essential for 
every convict at every moment. But such transactions sometimes took 
a different though not altogether unexpected turn: the pawner after 
receiving the money would sometimes, without further talk, go 
straight to the senior sergeam in command, and inform him of the 
pawning of prison property, and it would be immediately taken back 
from the pawnbroker without even a report on the subject to the 
higher authorities. It is a curious fact that sometimes this was not fol­
lowed by a quarrel: the moneylender returned what was reqUired in 
sullen silence, and seemed even to expect what had happened. Perhaps 
he could not help admitting that in the pawner's place he would have 
done the same. And so even if he sometimes swore afterwards, it 
would be without malice, simply to appease his conscience. 
Generally speaking, they stole from one another dreadfully. Almost 
everyone had a box of his own, with a lock on it to keep his prison 
belongings in. This was allowed; but boxes were no security. One may 
imagine that there were skilful thieves among them. A convict who 
was Sincerely attached to me (thiS is no exaggeration) stole from me 
a Bible, the only book which one was allowed to have in the prison; 
he confessed it to me himself the same day, not from repentance, but 
feeling sorry for me because I spent such a long time looking for it. 
There were convicts who traded in vodka and soon grew rich. Of 
this trade I will speak more in detail later: it was rather remarkable. 
There were many convicts who were in prison for smuggling, and so 
it was scarcely to be wondered at that vodka was brought into the 
prison in spite of guards and supervision. Smuggling, by the way, is a 
crime of a peculiar character. Would it be believed, for instance, that 
gain is only a secondary consideration with some smugglers, and is 
never in the foreground of their minds ?Yet "there are cases of this kind. 
A smuggler works from inclination, from passion. He is on one side 
an artist. He risks everything, runs terrible dangers; he is cunning, in­
vents dodges, and gets out of scrapes, and sometimes acts with a sort 
of inspiration. It is a passion as strong as gambling. I knew a convict in 
the prison, of colossal proportions phYSically, but so quiet, gentle and 

24 
The House of the Dead 
meek that it was impossible to imagine how he had got into prison. 
He was so mild and easy to get on with that all the while he was in 
prison he never quarrelled with anyone. But he was a smuggler who 
came from the western frontier, and, of course, he could not resist 
smuggling vodka into the prison. How often he was punished for do­
ing this, and how he dreaded the lash! And for bringing in the vodka 
he was paid the merest trifle. No one made money out of it but the 
dealer. The queer fellow loved art for art's sake. He was as lachrymose 
as a woman, and how often after being punished he swore and vowed 
not to smuggle. He manfully controlled himself sometimes for a 
whole month, but yet in the end he broke down . . . .  Thanks to men 
like him, there was no stint of vodka in the prison. 
Finally there was another source of income for the convicts, which, 
though it did not enrich them, was constant and very welcome. This 
was charity. The higher classes in Russia have no idea how deeply our 
merchants, tradespeople and peasants concern themselves about "the 
unfortunates." Almsgiving is almost continual, usually in the form of 
bread, fancy loaves and rolls, far more rarely in money. But for these 
gifts, in many places prisoners, espeCially those who are awaiting trial 
and are much worse treated than convicts, would fare badly. The alms 
are divided with religiOUS exactitude among the convicts. If there is 
not enough for all, the loaves are cut up equally, sometimes even into 
six portions, and every prisoner invariably receives his piece. 
I remember the first time I received money alms. It was soon after 
my arrival in the prison. I was returning from my morning work 
alone with the guard. There came to meet me a mother and her child, 
a little girl of ten, pretty as an angel. I had seen them once already, the 
mother was the widow of a soldier. Her husband, a young soldier, 
had died in hospital in the convict ward while awaiting his trial, at 
the time when I, too, was lying ill there. The mother and daughter 
came to say good-bye to him; both cried terribly. Seeing me the little 
girl flushed and whispered something to her mother. The latter at 
once stopped short, found a farthing in her bag and gave it to the 
child. The latter flew running after me. "There, poor man, take a far­
thing, for Christ's sake!" I she cried, overtaking me and thrusting the 
coin into my hand. I took her farthing, and the girl returned to her 
mother quite satisfied. I treasured that farthing for a long time. 

C H A P T E R  I I  
F I R S T  I M P R E S S I O N S  ( 1 )  
THE FIRST MOl'\TH AND all the early days of my prison life rise vividly be­
fore my imagination novl/. My other prison years flit far more dimly 
through my memory. Some seem to have sunk completely into the 
background, to have melted together, leaving only one collective 
impression-oppressive, monotonous , suffocating. 
But all 1 went through during my first days in Siberia is as vivid 
to me now as though it had happened yesterday. And this is bound to 
be so. 
I remember clearly that from the first step what struck me most in 
this life was that I found in it nothing striking, nothing exceptional or, 
rather, nothing unexpected. It seemed as though I had had glimpses of 
it in my imagination when, on my way to Siberia, I tried to conj ecture 
what lay in store for me. But soon I began to find a mass of the 
strangest surprises, the most monstrous facts awaiting me at every 
step. And it was only later, after I had been some time in the prison, 
that 1 realized fully the exceptional, the surprising nature of such an 
existence, and I marvelled at it more and more. I must confess that this 
wonder did not l eave me throughout the long years of my lmprison­
ment; I never could get used to it. 
My first impression on entering the prison was most revolting, 
and yet strange to say it seemed to me that life in prison was much 
easier than on the j ourney I had fancied it would be. Though the pris­
oners wore fetters, they walked freely about the prison, swore, sang 
songs, did work on their own account, smoked, even drank vodka 
(though very few of them) and at night some of them played cards. 
The labour, f(x instance, seemed to me by no means so hard, so penal, 
and only long afterwards I realized that the hardness , the penal char·· 
acter of the work Jay not so much in its being difficult and uninter­
rupted as in its being cornpulsor}U obligatory, enforced. The peasant in 
freedom works, I dare say, incomparably harder, sometimes even all 
2 .5  

26 
The House of the Dead 
night, especially in the summer; but he is working for himself, he is 
working with a rational obj ect, and it makes it much easier for him 
than for the convict working at forced labour which is completely 
useless to himself The idea has occurred to me that if one wanted to 
crush, to annihilate a man utterly, to inflict on him the most terrible 
of punishments so that the most ferocious murderer would shudder 
at it and dread it beforehand, one need only give him work of an ab­
solutely, completely useless and irrational character. Though the hard 
labour now enforced is uninteresting and wearisome for the pris­
oner, yet in itself as work it is rational; the convict makes bricks , digs, 
does plastering, building ; there is sense and meaning in such work. 
The convict worker sometimes even grows keen over it, tries to work 
more skilfully, faster, better. But if he had to pour water from one ves­
sel into another and back, over and over again, to pound sand, to 
move a heap of earth from one place to another and back again-I 
believe the convict would hang himself in a few days or would com­
mit a thousand crimes, preferring rather to die than endure such hu­
miliation, shame and torture. Of course such a punishment would 
become a torture, a form of vengeance, and would be senseless, as it 
would achieve no rational obj ect. But as something of such torture, 
senselessness, humiliation and shame is an inevitable element in all 
forced labour, penal labour is incomparably more painful than any 
free labour-just because it is forced. 
I entered the prison in winter, however, in December, and had as 
yet no conception of the summer work, which was five times as hard. 
In winter compulsory work was generally scarce in our prison. The 
convicts used to go to the River Irtish to break up old government 
barges, to work in the workshops , to shovel away snow-drifts from 
government buildings, to bake and pound alabaster and so on. The 
winter day was short, the work was soon over and all of us returned 
early to the prison, where there was scarcely anything for us to do, if 
one did not happen to have work of one's own. But only a third of the 
prisoners, perhaps, were occupied in work of their own. The others 
were simply idle, wandered aimlessly all over the prison, swore at one 
another, got up intrigues and rows, got drunk if they could scrape up 
a little money, at night staked their last shirt at cards, and all this from 
boredom, from idleness , from haVing nothing to do. Later on I real­
ized that besides the loss of freedom, besides the forced labour, there 

First Impressions (1) 
27 
is another torture in prison life, almost more terrible than any other­
that is, compulsory life in common. Life in common is to be found of course 
in other places, but there are men in prison whom not everyone 
would care to associate with and I am certain that every convict felt 
this torture, though of course in most cases unconsciously. 
The food too seemed to me fairly sufficient. The convicts used to 
declare that it was not so good in diSCiplinary battalions in European 
Russia. That I cannot undertake to pronounce upon: I have not been in 
them. Moreover, many of the convicts were able to have food of their 
own. Beef cost a halfpenny a pound, in summer three farthings. But 
only those who always had money used to buy food for themselves; 
the majority of the convicts ate only what was provided. But when the 
convicts praised the prison fare they referred only to the bread and 
they blessed the fact that it was given us all together and was not 
served out in rations. The latter system horrified them; had the bread 
been served out by weight, a third of the people would have been 
hungry; but served in common there was plenty for everyone. Our 
bread was particularly nice and was celebrated throughout the town. It 
was ascribed to the successful construction of the prison oven. But the 
cabbage soup was very unattractive. It was cooked in a common caul­
dron, was slightly thickened with grain and, particularly on working 
days, was thin and watery I was horrified at the immense number of 
cockroaches in it. The convicts took absolutely no notice of them. 
The first three days I did not go to work; it was the custom with 
every prisoner on arrival to give him a rest after the j ourney. But I had 
to go out next day to have my fetters changed. My fetters were not 
the right pattern, they were made of rings, " tinklers ," as the convicts 
called them. They were worn outside the clothes. The regulation 
prison fetters that did not prevent the prisoner from working were 
not made of rings, but of four iron rods almost as thick as a finger, 
joined together by three rings. They had to be put on under the 
trousers. A strap was fastened to the middle ring and this strap was 
fastened to the prisoner's belt which he wore next to his shirt. 
I remember my first morning in the prison. In the guardhouse at 
the prison gates the drum beat for daybreak and ten minutes later the 
sergeant on duty began unlocking the prison wards. We began to 
wake up. By the dim light of a tallow candle the prisoners got up 
from their sleeping platform, shivering with cold. Most of them were 

28 
The House of the Dead 
silent and sleepily sullen. They yawned, stretched and wrinkled up 
their branded foreheads. Some were crossing themselves, others had 
already begun to quarrel. The stuffiness was awful. The fresh winter 
air rushed in at the door as soon as it was opened and floated in 
clouds of steam through the barracks. The prisoners crowded round 
the buckets of water; in turns they took the dipper, filled their mouths 
with water and washed their hands and faces from their mouths. Water 
was brought in overnight by the parashnik or slop-pail man. In every 
room there was by regulation a prisoner elected by the others to do 
the work of the room. He was called the parashnik and did not go out 
to work. His duty was to keep the room clean, to wash and scrub the 
platform beds and the floor, to bring in and remove the night pail 
and to bring in two buckets of fresh water-in the morning for 
washing and in the daytime for drinking. They began quarrelling at 
once over the dipper; there was only one for all of us. 
"Where are you shoving, you roach-head! "  grumbled a tall surly 
convict, lean and swarthy with strange protuberances on his shaven 
head, as he pushed another, a stout, squat fellow with a merry, ruddy 
face. "Stay there ! "  
"What are you shouting for? Folks pay for their stay, you know! 
You get along yourself! There he stands like a monument. There isn't 
any fortikultiapnost about him, brothers ! "  
This invented word produced a certain sensation. Many of them 
laughed. That was all the cheery fat man wanted. He eVidently played 
the part of a gratuitous j ester in the room. The tall convict looked at 
him with the deepest contempt. 
" You great sow ! "  he said as though to himself. "He's grown fat on 
the prison bread. Glad he'll give us a litter of twelve sucking pigs by 
Christmas." 
The fat man got angry at last. 
"But what sort of queer bird are you ? "  he cried, suddenly turning 
crimson. 
"Just so, a bird." 
"What sort? "  
"That sort." 
"What sort's that sort? "  
"Why, that sort, that's all." 
"But what sort? "  

First Impressions (1) 
29 
They fixed their eyes on each other. The fat man waited for an an­
swer and clenched his fists as though he meant to fall to fighting at 
once. I really thought there would be a fight. All this was new to me 
and I looked on with curiosity. But afterwards I found out that such 
scenes were extremely harmless; that they were played by way of a 
farce for the general entertainment and hardly ever ended in fights. It 
was all a fairly typical specimen of prison manners. 
The tall convict stood calm and majestic. He felt that they were 
looking at him and waiting to see whether he would discredit him­
self by his answer or not; that he must keep up his reputation and 
show that he really was a bird and what sort of bird he was. He 
looked with inexpressible contempt at his opponent, trying to insult 
him to the utmost by looking down upon him as it were over his 
shoulder, as though he were examining him like an insect, and slowly 
and distinctly he brought out: 
"Cocky-locky! " 
Meaning that that was the bird he was. A loud roar of laughter 
greeted the convict's readiness. 
"You are a rascal not a cocky-locky! "  roared the fat man, feeling he 
had been done at every point and flying into a violent rage. 
But as soon as the quarrel became serious the combatants were at 
once pulled up. 
"What are you shouting about! " the whole room roared at them. 
"You'd better fight than split your throats! "  someone called from a 
corner. 
"Likely they'd fight!" sounded in reply. "We are a bold, saucy lot; 
when we are seven against one we are not frightened." 
"They are both fine fellows! One was sent here for a pound of 
bread, and the other is a plate-licking jade; he guzzled a country 
woman's junket, that's what he got the knout for! "  
"Come, come, come, shut up! "  cried the veteran soldier who had 
to be in the room to keep order and so slept on a speCial bedstead in 
the corner. 
"Water, lads! Old Petrovitch has waked up. Good morning, old 
veteran Petrovitch, dear brother! "  
"Brother . . .  brother indeed! I never drank a rouble with you and 
I am brother, am I!" grumbled the old soldier putting his arms into 
the sleeves of his overcoat. 

3 0  
The House of the Dead 
They were making ready for inspection; it began to get light; a 
dense, closely packed crowd had gathered in the kitchen. The convicts 
in their sheepskins and particoloured caps were crowding round the 
bread which one of the cooks was cutting up for them. The cooks 
were chosen by the prisoners , two for each kitchen. They kept the 
knife, one only for each kitchen, to cut up the bread and meat . 
In every corner and all about the tables there were convicts with 
their caps and sheepskins on, their belts fastened, ready to go out to 
work at once. Before some of them stood wooden cups of kvas. They 
crumbled the bread into the kvas and sipped that. The noise and up­
roar were insufferable ; but some were talking qUietly and senSibly in 
the corners. 
" A  good breakfast to old man Antonitch, good morning ! "  said a 
young convict sitting down by a frowning and toothless prisoner. 
"Well , good morning, if you mean it," said the other, not raising 
his eyes and trying to munch the bread with his toothless gums. 
"I thought you were dead, Antonitch, I really did." 
" No, you may die first, I'll come later." 
I sat down beside them. Two steady-looking convicts were talking 
on my right, evidently trying to keep up their dignity with one 
another. 
"They won't steal from me, no fear," said one. "There's more chance 
of my stealing something from them." 
"I am a prickly customer too." 
"Are you though? You are a jail-bird like everyone else; there 's no 
other name for us . . . .  She 'll strip you and not say thank you. That's 
where my money went, brother. She came herself the other day. Where 
could I go with her? I began asking to go to Fedka-Hangman's , he's 
got a house at the end of the town , he bought it from the Jew, Scabby­
Solomon, the fellow who hanged himself afterwards." 
"I know. He used to sell vodka here three years ago and was nick­
named Grishka Black Pot-house. I know." 
" No, you don't know. That was another fellow, Black Pot-house." 
" Another! You know a fat lot. I'll bring you ever so many wit­
nesses." 
"You'll bring witnesses ! Where do you come from and who am I ? "  
"Who are you ? Why, I used t o  beat you and I don't boast o f  it and 
you ask who are you ! " 

First Impressions (1) 
3 1  
"You used to beat me! Why, the man's not born who'll beat me, 
and the man who did is underground." 
"You Bender pest! " 
"Siberian plague take you!" 
"And I hope a Turkish sabre will have something to say to you!" 
A storm of abuse followed. 
"Come, come! They are at it again! "  people shouted round them. 
"They couldn't live in freedom; they may be glad they've bread to eat 
here . . . .  
" 
They qUieted them down at once. Swearing, "wagging your 
tongue" is allowed. It is to some extent an entertainment for all. 
But they don't always let it come to a fight, and it is only rarely, in ex­
ceptional cases, that enemies fight. Fights are reported to the major; 
investigations follow, the major himself comes-in short, everyone 
has to suffer for it, and so fights are not allowed. And indeed the com­
batants swear at one another rather for entertainment, for the exercise 
of their linguistic powers. Often they deceive themselves, they begin 
very hot and exasperated. One fancies they will fall on one another in 
a minute; not a bit of it: they go on to a certain point and then sepa­
rate at once. All this surprised me immensely at first. I have intention­
ally quoted here a typical specimen of convict conversation. I could 
not imagine at first how they could abuse one another for pleasure, 
find in it amusement, pleasant exercise, enjoyment. But one must not 
forget their vanity. A connoisseur in abuse was respected. He was al­
most applauded like an actor. 
The evening before, I had noticed that they looked askance at me. 
I had caught several dark looks already. On the other hand some of 
the convicts hung about me suspecting I had brought money with 
me. They began making up to me at once, began showing me how 
to wear my new fetters, got me-for money of course-a box with a 
lock on it, for me to put away the prison belongings already served 
out to me, as well as some underclothes I brought with me into the 
prison. Next day they stole it from me and sold it for drink. One of 
them became most devoted to me later on, though he never gave up 
robbing me at every convenient opportunity. He did this without the 
slightest embarrassment, almost unconsciously, as though fulfilling a 
duty, and it was impossible to be angry with him. 
Among other things, they told me that I ought to have tea of my 

32 
The House of the Dead 
own, that it would be a good thing for me to have a teapot too, and 
meanwhile they got me one on hire, and recommended a cook, say­
ing that for thirty kopecks a month he would cook me anything I 
liked if I cared to eat apart and buy my own provisions . . . .  They bor­
rowed money from me of course, and every one of them came to 
borrow from me three times the first day. 
As a rule, convicts who have been gentlemen are looked at with 
hostility and dislike. 
In spite of the fact that they are deprived of all the rights of their 
rank and are put on exactly the same level as the other prisoners, the 
convicts never consider them their comrades. This is not the result of 
conscious prejudice but comes about of itself, quite sincerely and 
unconsciously. They genuinely looked upon us as gentlemen, though 
they liked to taunt us with our downfall. 
"No, now it's time to pull up! In Moscow, Pyotr drove like a lord, 
but now Pyotr sits and twists a cord," and similar pleasantries were 
frequent. 
They looked with enjoyment at our sufferings, which we tried to 
conceal from them. We used to have a particularly bad time at work 
because we had not as much strength as they had and could not do 
our full share in helping them. Nothing is harder than to win peo­
ple's confidence (especially such people's) and to gain their love. 
There were several men belonging to the upper classes in the 
prison. To begin with there were five or six Poles. I will speak of them 
separately later on. The convicts particularly disliked the Poles, even 
more than those who had been Russian gentlemen. The Poles (I am 
speaking only of the political prisoners) were elaborately, offensively 
polite and exceedingly uncommunicative with them. They never could 
conceal from the convicts their aversion for them, and the latter saw it 
very clearly and paid the Poles back in the same coin. 
I spent nearly two years in the prison before I could succeed in 
gaining the goodwill of some of the convicts. But in the end most of 
them grew fond of me and recognized me as a "good" man. 
There were four other Russians of the upper class besides me. One 
was a mean abject little creature, terribly depraved, a spy and informer 
by vocation. I had heard about him before I came to the prison, and 
broke off all relations with him after the first few days. Another was 
the parricide of whom I have spoken already. The third was Akim 

First Impressions (1) 
3 3  
Akimitch; I have rarely met such a queer fellow as this Akim Akim­
itch. I have still a vivid recollection of him. He was tall, lean, dull­
witted, awfully illiterate, very prosy and as precise as a German. The 
convicts used to laugh at him, but some of them were positively 
afraid to have anything to do with him, owing to his fault-finding, 
his exactingness and his readiness to take offence. He got on to famil­
iar terms with them from the first, he quarrelled and even fought with 
them. He was phenomenally honest. If he noticed any injustice he al­
ways interfered, though it might have nothing to do with him. He was 
naive in the extreme; when he quarrelled with the convicts he some­
times reproached them with being thieves and seriously exhorted 
them not to steal. He had been a lieutenant in the Caucasus. We were 
friendly from the first day, and he immediately told me about his 
case. He began as a cadet in an infantry regiment in the Caucasus, 
plodded on steadily for a long time, was promoted to be an officer at 
last, and was sent as senior in command to a fortress. One of the al­
lied chieftains burnt his fortress and made a night assault upon it. 
This was unsuccessful. Akim Akimitch was wily and gave no sign of 
knowing who had done it. The attack was attributed to the hostile 
tribes, and a month later Akim Akimitch invited the chieftain to visit 
him in a friendly way. The latter came, suspecting nothing. Akim Akim­
itch drew up his company, proved the chieftain's guilt and upbraided 
him before them all, pointing out to him that it was shameful to burn 
fortresses. He discoursed to him in great detail on the way allied chiefs 
should behave in the future, and, in conclusion, shot him and at once 
sent in a full report of the proceedings to the authorities. For all this he 
was court-martialled and condemned to death, but the sentence was 
commuted and he was sent to Siberia to penal servitude in the second 
divi.sion for twelve years. He fully recognized that he had acted irreg­
ularly. He told me he knew it even before he shot the chieftain, he 
knew that an ally ought to be legally tried; but, although he knew this, 
he seemed unable to see his guilt in its true light. 
"Why, upon my word! Hadn't he burnt my fortress? Was I to say 
thank you to him for it?" he said to me in reply to my objections. 
But, although the convicts laughed at Aki.m Akimitch's foolishness, 
they respected him for his preciseness and practical ability. 
There was no handicraft which Akim Akimitch did not understand. 
He was a cabinet-maker, a cobbler, a shoemaker, a painter, a gi.lder, 

3 4  
The House of the Dead 
a locksmith, and he had learnt all this in the prison. He was self-taught 
in everything; he would take one look at a thing and do it. He used to 
make all sorts oflittle boxes, baskets, lanterns, children's toys, and sold 
them in the town. In that way he made a little money and he immedi­
ately spent it on extra underclothes, on a softer pillow or a folding 
mattress. He was in the same room as I was, and was very helpful to 
me during my first days in prison. 
When they went out from prison to work the convicts used to be 
drawn up in two rows before the guard-house; in front of them and 
behind them the soldiers were drawn up, with loaded muskets. An 
officer of the Engineers, the foreman and several engineers of the 
lower rank, who used to superintend our work, came out. The fore­
man grouped the convicts and sent them to work in parties where 
they were needed. 
I went with the others to the engineers' workshop. It was a low­
pitched stone building standing in a large courtyard which was 
heaped up with all sorts of materials; there was a smithy, a lock­
smith's shop, a carpenter's, a painter's and so on. Akim Akimitch used 
to come here and work at painting; he boiled the oil, mixed the 
colours and stained tables and other furniture to look like walnut. 
While I was waiting for my fetters to be changed, I was talking to 
Akim Akimitch about my first impressions in prison. 
"Yes, they are not fond of gentlemen," he observed, "especially po­
liticals; they are ready to devour them; no wonder. To begin with, you 
are a different sort of people, unlike them; besides, they've all been 
serfs or soldiers. Judge for yourself whether they would be likely to be 
fond of you. It's a hard life here, I can tell you. And in the Russian dis­
ciplinary battalions it's worse still. Some of these fellows come from 
them and they are never tired of praising our prison, they say it's like 
coming from hell to paradise. It's not the work that's the trouble. There 
in the first division they say the authorities are not all military, anyhow 
they behave very differently from here. There they say the convicts can 
have little homes of their own. I haven't been there, but that's what 
they say. They don't have their heads shaved, they don't wear a uni­
form, though it's a good thing they do wear a uniform and have their 
heads shaved here; it's more orderly, anyway. and it's pleasanter to the 
eye. Only they don't like it. And look what a mixed rabble they are! 
One will be a Kantonist,2 another will be a Circassian, a third an Old 

First Impressions (1) 
3 5  
Believer, a fourth will be an orthodox peasant who has left a wife and 
dear little children behind in Russia, the fifth will be a Jew, the sixth a 
gipsy, and the seventh God knows who; and they've all got to live to­
gether, they've all got to get on together somehow, eat out of the same 
bowl, sleep on the same bed. And no sort of freedom. If you want an 
extra crust you must eat it on the sly; every farthing you've to hide in 
your boots, and nothing before you but prison and more prison . . . .  
You can't help all sorts of nonsense coming into your head." 
But I knew that already. I particularly wanted to question him about 
our major. Akim Akimitch made no secret of things and I remember 
my impression was not altogether agreeable. 
But I had to live for two years under his rule. All that Akim Akimitch 
told me about him turned out to be perfectly true, with the only dif­
ference that the impression made by the reality is always stronger than 
that made by description. The man was terrible, just because being 
such a man he had almost unlimited power over two hundred souls. In 
himself he was simply a spiteful and ill-regulated man, nothing more; 
he looked on the convicts as his natural enemies and that was his first 
and great mistake. He really had some ability, but everything, even what 
was good in him, came out in a distorted form. Unrestrained and ill­
tempered, he would sometimes burst into the prison even at night, and 
if he noticed that a convict was sleeping on his left side or on his back 
he would have him punished next day: "You've to sleep on your right 
side, as I've ordered you." In the prison he was hated and feared like the 
plague. His face was purplish crimson and ferocious. Everyone knew 
that he was completely in the hands of his orderly, Fedka. What he 
loved most in the world was his poodle, Trezorka, and he almost went 
mad with grief when Trezorka fell ill. They say he sobbed over him as 
though it had been his own son; he drove away one veterinary surgeon 
and, after his usual fashion, almost beat him. Hearing from Fedka that 
one of the convicts in the prison was a self-taught "vet" who was very 
successful in curing animals, he called him in at once. 
"Help me! I'll load you with gold, cure Trezorka! "  he shouted to 
the convict. 
The man was a Siberian peasant, crafty, clever, really a very skilful 
vet, though a peasant in every sense of the word. 
"I looked at Trezorka," he told the convicts afterwards, long after 
his visit to the major, however, when the whole story was forgotten. 

3 6  
The House of the Dead 
"I looked-the dog was lying on a white cushion on the sofa and I 
saw it was inflammation, that it ought to be bled and the dog would 
get well, yes indeed! And I thinks to myself-what if I don't cure it, 
what if it dies? 'No, your honour,' said I, 'you called me in too late; if 
it had been yesterday or the day before, I could have cured the dog, 
but now I can't.' " 
So Trezorka died. 
I was told in detail of an attempt to kill the major. There was a con­
vict in the prison who had been there several years and was distin­
guished for his mild behaviour. It was observed, too, that he hardly 
ever spoke to anyone. He was looked upon as a bit queer in the reli­
gious way. He could read and write and during the last year he was 
continually reading the Bible, he read it day and night. When every­
one was asleep he would get up at midnight, light a church wax can­
dle, climb on to the stove, open the book and read till morning. One 
day he went up and told the sergeant that he would not go to work. It 
was reported to the major; he flew into a rage, and rushed into the 
prison at once himself The convict threw himself upon him with 
a brick he had got ready beforehand, but mi.ssed his aim. He was 
seized, tried and punished. It all happened very quickly. Three days 
later he died in the hospital. As he lay dying he said that he meant no 
harm to anyone, but was only seeking suffering. He did not, however, 
belong to any dissenting sect. In the prison he was remembered with 
respect. 
At last my fetters were changed. Meanwhile several girls selling 
rolls had come into the workshop. Some of them were quite little 
girls. They used to come with the rolls till they were grown up; their 
mothers baked them and they brought them for sale. When they were 
grown up they still came, but not to sell bread; this was almost always 
the case. There were some who were not little girls. The rolls cost a 
halfpenny and almost all the convicts bought them. 
I noticed one of the convicts, a grey-headed but ruddy cabinet­
maker, smiling and flirting with the baker girls. Just before they came 
in he had tied a red handkerchief round his neck. A fat peasant 
woman whose face was covered with pock-marks put her tray on his 
bench. Conversation began between them. 
"Why didn't you turn up yesterday?" said the convict with a self­
satisfied smile. 

First Impressions (I) 
3 7  
"Upon my word I did, but not a sign to be seen of you," answered 
the lively woman. 
"I was wanted, or you may be sure I'd have been there . . .  The day 
before yesterday all your lot came to see me." 
"Who did?" 
"Maryashka came, Havroshka came, Tchekunda came, Twopenny­
halfpenny came." 
"What does it mean?" I asked Akim Akimitch. "Is it possible?" 
"It does happen," he answered, dropping his eyes discreetly, for he 
was an extremely chaste man. 
It certainly did happen, but very rarely, and in spite of immense dif­
ficulties. On the whole, men were much more keen on drinking, for 
instance, than on that sort of thing, in spite of its being naturally diffi­
cult for them to live in the way they were forced to do. Women were 
difficult to get hold of. The time and place had to be found, arrange­
ments had to be made, meetings had to be fixed, seclusion had to 
be sought, which was particularly difficult, the guards had to be won 
over, which was still more difficult, and altogether a sum of money­
immense, relatively speaking-had to be spent. Yet I happened some­
times, later on, to be a witness of amatory scenes. I remember one 
day in the summer we were three of us in a shed on the bank of the 
Irtish, heating some sort of kiln; the guards were good-natured fel­
lows. At last two "frillies," as the convicts called them, made their ap­
pearance. 
"Well, where have you been so long? I bet you've been at the Zvy­
erkovs," was how they were greeted by the convict whom they had 
come to see and who had been expecting them a long time. 
"I've been so long? Why, I haven't been there longer than a magpie 
on a pole," the girl answered gaily. 
She was the dirtiest girl imaginable. She was the one called 
Tchekunda. With her came Twopenny-halfpenny. The latter was be­
yond all description. 
"I've not seen you for a long time, either," the gallant went on, ad­
dressing Twopenny-halfpenny; "how is it you seem to be thinner?" 
"Maybe. I used to be ever so fat, but now one would think I'd 
swallowed a needle." 
"Always being with the soldiers, eh?" 
"No, that's a lie that spiteful tongues have told you; though what 

3 8  
The House of the Dead 
of it? Though I'm thin as any rake, the soldier-lads I'll ne' er forsake! "  
"You chuck them and love us; we've got cash . . . .  " 
To complete the picture, imagine this gallant with a shaven head, 
in parti-coloured clothes, guarded and in fetters. 
I took leave of Akim Akimitch, and hearing that I might go back to 
the prison, I went back escorted by a guard. The convicts were already 
coming home. The men on piece-work are the first to return. The 
only way of making a convict work hard is to put him on piece-work. 
Sometimes huge tasks are set them, but they always do the work 
twice as qUickly as when they are working by the day. When he fin­
ishes his task the convict goes home without hindrance and no one 
prevents his doing so. 
They don't dine all together, but as they come in, just as it hap­
pens; indeed, there would not have been room for them all at once in 
the kitchen. I tried the soup, but not being used to it I could not eat 
it, and I made myself some tea. We sat down at the end of the table. 
With me was a comrade of the same social class as myself. 
Convicts kept going and coming. There was plenty of room how­
ever; they were not yet all in. A group of five men sat down together 
at the big table. The cook poured them out two bowls of soup and put 
on the table a whole dish of fried fish. They were keeping some sort 
of fete and eating their own food. They cast unfriendly glances in our 
direction. One of the Poles came in and sat down beside us. 
"I've not been at home, but I know all the news," a tall convict 
shouted aloud as he walked into the kitchen and looked round at 
everyone present. 
He was a thin, muscular man of fifty. There was something sly, and 
at the same time merry, about his face. What was particularly striking 
about him was his thick, protruding lower lip; it gave a peculiarly 
comic look to his face. 
"Well, have you had a good night? Why don't you say good morn­
ing? Hullo, my Kursk friends! "  he added, sitting down beside the 
group who were eating their own food. "A good appetite to you! 
Give a welcome to a friend." 
"We are not Kursk men, brother." 
"Tambov, then?" 
"But we are not from Tambov either. You'll get nothing from us, 
brother. You go and ask a rich peasant." 

First Impressions (1) 
3 9  
"I've colliwobbles and rumble-tumbles in my belly to-day. And 
where is he living, your rich peasant?" 
"Why, Gazin yonder is a rich peasant, you go to him." 
"Gazin's having a spree to-day, lads, he is drinking; he is drinking 
all his money." 
"He's worth a good twenty roubles," observed another. "It's a 
good business, lads, selling vodka." 
"Well, won't you welcome a friend? I must have a sup of regula­
tion fare, then." 
"You go and ask for some tea. The gentlemen there have got some." 
"Gentlemen? There are no gentlemen here. They are the same as 
we are now," a convict sitting in the corner brought out gloomily. He 
had not said a word till then. 
"I should like some tea, but I am ashamed to ask; we have our 
pride! "  observed the convict with the protruding lip, looking good­
naturedly at us. 
''I'll give you some, if you like," I said, inviting the convict to have 
tea; "would you like some?" 
"Like it? To be sure I'd like it." 
He came up to the table. 
"At home he ate broth out of a shoe, but here he's learnt to like tea; 
and wants to drink it like the gentry," the gloomy convict pronounced. 
"Why, does no one drink tea here?" I asked him. But he did not 
deign to answer me. 
"Here they are bringing rolls. Mayn't we have a roll, too?" 
Rolls were brought in. A young convict brought in a whole bundle 
and was selling them in the prison. The baker girl used to give him 
one roll out of every ten he sold; he was reckoning on that tenth roll. 
"Rolls, rolls! "  he cried, entering the kitchen. "Moscow rolls, all 
hot! I'd eat them myself, but I haven't the money. Come, lads, the last 
roll is left; surely someone, for his mother's sake?" 
This appeal to filial affection amused everyone and several rolls 
were bought. 
"I say, lads," he announced, "Gazin will get into trouble, the way 
he's carrying on! Upon my word, he has pitched on a time to drink! 
Ten to one, Eight-Eyes will be round." 
"They'll hide him. Why, is he very drunk?" 
"Rather! He is wild, he is pestering everyone." 

40 
The House of the Dead 
"Oh, it will end in a fight, then . . . .  " 
"Of whom are they talking?" I asked the Pole, who had sat down 
beside me. 
"It's Gazin, a convict. He does a trade in vodka here. When he's saved 
up money enough, he spends it in drink. He is spiteful and cruel; when 
he is sober he is quiet, though; when he is drunk it all comes out; he 
flies at people with a knife. Then they have to restrain him." 
"How do they restrain him?" 
"A dozen convicts fall upon him and begin beating him horribly 
until he loses consciousness, they beat him till he is half dead. Then 
they lay him on the bed and cover him with a sheepskin." 
"But they may kill him! " 
"Anyone else would have been killed by now, but not he. He is aw­
fully strong, stronger than anyone in the prison and of the healthiest 
constitution. Next day he is perfectly well." 
"Tell me, please," I went on questioning the Pole; "here they are 
eating their own food while I drink my tea. And yet they look as 
though they were envious of the tea. What does it mean?" 
"It's not because of the tea," answered the Pole. "They are ill­
disposed to you because you are a gentleman and not like them. 
Many of them would like to pick a quarrel with you. They would 
dearly like to insult you, to humiliate you. You will meet with a lot of 
unpleasantness here. We have an awfully hard time. It's harder for us 
than for any of them. One needs to be philosophical to get used to it. 
You will meet unpleasantness and abuse again and again for haVing 
your own food and tea, though very many of them here frequently 
have their own food, and some have tea every day. They may, but you 
mustn't." 
He got up and went away from the table; a few minutes later his 
words came true. 

C H A P T E R  I I I  
F I R S T I M P R E S S I O N S  (2 ) 
M--Y (THE POLE WHO had been talking to me) had scarcely gone 
out when Gazin rolled into the kitchen, hopelessly drunk. 
This convict, drunk in broad daylight, on a working day when all 
were bound to be out at work, under the rule of a stern officer who 
might come into the prison at any moment, under the control of the 
sergeant who never left the prison, with guards and sentries about­
in short, in the midst of severity and discipline-threw into confu­
sion all the ideas I had begun to form of prison life. And it was a long 
time before I could explain to myself all the facts which were so puz­
zling to me during my early days in prison. 
I have mentioned already that the convicts always had private work 
of their own and that such work was a natural craving in prison life; 
that, apart from this craving, the prisoner is passionately fond of 
money, and prizes it above everything, almost as much as freedom, 
and that he is comforted if he has it jingling in his pocket. On the 
other hand, he becomes dejected, sad, uneasy and out of spirits when 
he has none, and then he is ready to steal or do anything to get it. But, 
though money was so precious in prison, it never stayed long with 
the lucky man who had it. To begin with, it was difficult to keep it 
from being stolen or taken away. If the major discovered it in the 
course of a sudden search, he promptly confiscated it. Possibly he 
spent it on improving the prison fare; anyway, it was taken to him. But 
much more frequently it was stolen; there was no one who could be 
relied upon. Later on, we discovered a way of keeping money quite se­
curely: it was put into the keeping of an Old Believer who came to us 
from the Starodubovsky settlements. 
He was a little grey-headed man of sixty. He made a vivid impres­
sion on me from the first minute. He was so unlike the other convicts, 
there was something so calm and gentle in his expression that I re­
member I looked with a peculiar pleasure at his serene, candid eyes, 
4 1  

42 
The House of the Dead 
which were surrounded with tiny wrinkles like rays. I often talked to 
him and I have rarely met a more kindly, warm-hearted creature in my 
life. He had been sent there for a very serious offence. Among the Star­
odubovsky Old Believers, some converts to the Orthodox Church were 
made. The government gave them great encouragement and began to 
make great efforts for the conversion of the others. The old man re­
solved with other fanatics to stand up for the faith, as he expressed it. 
An orthodox church was being built and they burnt it down. As one of 
the instigators, the old man was sent to penal servitude. He had been 
a well-to-do tradesman and left a wife and children behind him, but 
he went with a brave heart into exile, for in his blindness he consid­
ered it "martyrdom for the faith." After spending some time with him, 
one could not help asking oneself how this meek old man, as gentle as 
a child, could have been a rebel. Several times I talked to him of "the 
faith" ;  he would never yield an inch in his convictions, but there was 
no trace of anger or of hatred in his replies. And yet he had destroyed 
a church and did not deny doing it. It seemed that from his convic­
tions he must have considered his action and his suffering for it a 
glorious achievement. But, however closely I watched him and stud­
ied him, I never detected the faintest sign of pride or vanity in him. 
There were other Old Believers in the prison, mostly Siberians. They 
were very well-educated people, shrewd peasants, great students of 
the Bible who quibbled over every letter, and great dialecticians in 
their own way; they were a crafty, conceited, aggressive and extremely 
intolerant set. The old man was absolutely different. Though perhaps 
better read than they, he avoided argument. He was of a very commu­
nicative disposition. He was merry, often laughing, not with the coarse 
cynical laugh of the other convicts, but with a gentle candid laugh, in 
which there was a great deal of childlike simplicity that seemed pecu­
liarly in keeping with his grey hair. I may be mistaken, but I fancy that 
one can know a man from his laugh, and if you like a man's laugh be­
fore you know anything of him, you may confidently say that he is a 
good man. Though the old man had gained the respect of all through­
out the prison, he was not in the least conceited about it. The con­
victs used to call him grandfather, and they never insulted him. I 
could partly imagine the sort of influence he must have had on his 
fellow believers. But in spite of the unmistakable courage with which 
he endured his punishment, there was also a deep inconsolable 

First Impressions (2) 
43 
melancholy in his heart, which he tried to conceal from all. I lived in 
the same room with him. One night I woke up at three o'clock and 
heard the sound of quiet, restrained weeping. The old man was sit­
ting on the stove (the same stove on which the Bible reader who 
threw the brick at the major used to pray at night) . He was saying 
his prayers over his manuscript book. He was weeping and I could 
hear him saying from time to time, "Lord, do not forsake me! Lord, 
give me strength! My little ones, my darling little ones, I shall never 
see you again! "  I can't describe how sad it made me. 
It was to this old man that almost all the convicts began by degrees 
to give their money, for him to take care of it. Almost all the prisoners 
were thieves, but suddenly for some reason the belief gained ground 
that the old man could not steal. They knew that he hid the money 
given into his keeping in some place so secret that no one could find 
it. In the end he explained his secret to me and some of the Poles. On 
one of the posts of the fence there was a twig apparently adhering 
firmly on the trunk. But it could be taken out, and there was a deep 
hollow in the wood. Here " grandfather" used to hide the money and 
then insert the twig again so that no one could ever find anything. 
But I am wandering from my story. I was just saying why money 
never stayed long in a convict's pocket. Apart from the difficulty of 
keeping it, life in prison was so dreary, a convict is a creature by na­
ture so eager for freedom, and from his social position so careless and 
reckless, that to "have his fling for all he is worth," to spend all his 
fortune carousing with noise and music and so to forget his depres­
sion, if only for the moment, naturally attracts him. It was strange to 
see how some of them would work unceasingly, sometimes for sev­
eral months, simply to spend all their earnings in one day, leaving 
nothing, and then to drudge away for months again, till the next out­
break. Many of them were very fond of getting new clothes, which 
were never of the regulation pattern: black trousers unlike the uni­
form, tunics, coats. Cotton shirts and belts studded with metal discs 
were also in great demand. They dressed up on holidays, and then al­
ways paraded through all the prison wards to show themselves to all 
the world. Their pleasure in fine clothes was quite childish, and in 
many things the convicts were perfect children. It is true that all these 
fine things soon vanished from the owner's possession-sometimes 
they pawned or sold them for next to nothing the same evening. The 

44 
The House of the Dead 
outbreak of drinking developed gradually, however. It was put off as 
a rule till a holiday or till a nameday: on his nameday the convict set 
a candle before the ikon and said his prayers as soon as he got up; 
then he dressed in his best and ordered a dinner. He bought beef and 
fish, Siberian patties were made; he would eat like an ox, almost al­
ways alone, rarely inviting his comrades to share his meal. Then 
vodka was brought out; the hero of the day would get drunk as a lord 
and always walked all over the prison, reeling and staggering, trying 
to show to everyone that he was drunk, that he was "jolly" and so de­
serving of general respect. Everywhere among the Russian people a 
certain sympathy is felt for a drunken man; in prison he was posi­
tively treated with respect. There were certain aristocratic customs 
connected with prison revelry. The carousing convict always hired 
music. There was a little Pole in prison, a runaway soldier, a nasty lit­
. tle fellow who played the fiddle and had an instrument-his one 
possession in the world. He had no sort of trade, and his only way of 
earning money was by playing lively dances for convicts who were 
having a spree. His duty was to follow his drunken employer from 
room to room and to play the fiddle with all his might. Often his face 
betrayed boredom and dejection. But the shout of "Play on, you're 
paid to do it! " made him go on scraping away. The convict can always 
feel confident when he begins drinking that, if he gets too drunk, he 
will certainly be looked after, will be put in bed in time and hidden 
away if the authorities turn up, and all this will be quite disinterested. 
The sergeant and the veteran guards, who lived in the prison to keep 
diSCipline, could have their minds at rest too: the drunken convict 
could not create any disorder. All the prisoners in the room looked af­
ter him, and if he were noisy or unmanageable they would quickly 
restrain him and even tie him up. And so the inferior prison officials 
winked at drunkenness and were unwilling to notice it. They knew 
very well that if vodka were not allowed it would make things worse. 
But how was vodka obtained? 
It was bought in the prison itself from the so-called "publicans." 
There were several of them, and they carried on their trade successfully 
and unintermittently, though the number of those who drank and 
"made merry" was small, for merry-making costs money and the con­
victs' money is hardly earned. The "publicans'" operations were begun, 
managed and carried on in a very original way. Suppose a convict 

First Impressions (2) 
45 
knows no trade and is not willing to exert himself (there were men 
like this) , but is keen on getting money and of an impatient disposi­
tion, in a hurry to make his pile. If he has a little money to start with, 
he makes up his mind to trade in vodka: it's a bold and risky enter­
prise involving considerable danger. He may have to pay for it with a 
flogging, and lose his stock and his capital all at once. But the "publi­
can" takes the risk. He begins with a small sum, and so at first he 
smuggles the vodka into the prison himself, and, of course, disposes 
of it to great advantage. He repeats the experiment a second and a 
third time, and if he does not get caught he qUickly sells his stock and 
only then builds up a real trade on a large scale: he becomes an en­
trepreneur, a capitalist, employs agents and assistants, runs far less 
risk and makes more and more money. His subordinates risk them­
selves for him. 
There are always in the prison lots of men who have wasted all they 
have on cards or drink, wretched ragged creatures who have no trade 
but have a certain pluck and daring. The only asset such a man has left 
is his back; it may still be of some use to him and so the spendthrift 
profligate decides to turn it to profit. He goes to the "publican" and 
offers his services for smuggling vodka; a well-to-do "publican" has 
several such working for him. Somewhere outside the prison there is 
some person-a soldier, a workman, sometimes even a woman-who 
for a comparatively large commission buys vodka at a tavern with the 
"publican's" money and conceals it in some out-of-the-way place 
where the convicts go to work. Almost always the intermediary tests 
the quality of the vodka to begin with, and ruthlessly fills up the mea­
sure with water; the "publican" may take it or leave it-a convict is 
not in a position to make his own terms. He must be thankful that he 
has got the vodka, however poor the quality, and has not lost his 
money altogether. The "publican" introduces his agents to the inter­
mediary beforehand, and then they go to the latter carrying with them 
the guts of a bullock, which have been washed and then filled with 
water to keep them supple and fit to hold vodka. When he has filled 
the guts with vodka the convict winds them round himself where they 
will be least conspicuous. I need not say that this calls forth all the 
ingenuity, all the thievish cunning of the smuggler. His honour is to 
some extent involved: he has to deceive both the guards and the sen­
tries. He does deceive them: the guard, often a raw recruit, is never 

46 
The House of the Dead 
a match for a clever thief Of course the guard is the subject of special 
study beforehand; besides, the time and place where he is working is 
all carefully considered, too, by the smuggler. The convict may be 
building a stove; he climbs on to the stove; who can tell what he is do­
ing there? A guard cannot be expected to climb after him. On his way 
to the prison he takes some money in his hand, fifteen or twenty silver 
kopecks, in case of need, and waits for the corporal at the gate. The 
corporal examines every convict returning from work, and feels him 
over before opening the prison door to him. The man smuggling in 
vodka usually reckons on the corporal's scrupling to handle him too 
minutely in some parts. But sometimes the wily corporal does not 
stand on ceremony and discovers the vodka. Then there is only one 
thing left to do: the smuggler, unseen by the guard, silently slips into 
the corporal's hand the coin he has been keeping concealed in his 
own. It sometimes happens that, thanks to this manceuvre, he gets 
successfully into the prison with the vodka. But sometimes this method 
does not answer, and then he has to pay with his last asset, his back. It 
is reported to the major, the asset is flogged, and cruelly flogged, the 
vodka is confiscated and the agent takes it all on himself without giv­
ing away his employer, and, be it noted, not because he scorns to tell 
tales, but simply because it does not pay him to do so. He would be 
flogged anyway; his only consolation would be that the other man 
would be flogged too. But he will need his employer again, though in 
accordance with custom and previous agreement the smuggler gets 
nothing from his employer to compensate him for the flogging. As for 
telling tales in general, it is very common. In prison the man who 
turns traitor is not exposed to humiliation; indignation against him is 
unthinkable. He is not shunned, the others make friends with him; in 
fact, if you were to try and point out the loathsomeness of treachery, 
you would not be understood. The convict with whom I had broken 
off all relations, a mean and depraved creature who had been a gentle­
man, was friendly with the major's orderly, Fedka, and served him as a 
spy, while the latter reported all he heard about the convicts to the ma­
jor. Every one of us knew this, yet no one ever dreamed of punishing 
the scoundrel or even reproaching him for it. 
But I am wandering from my subject. It happens, of course, that 
vodka is smuggled in successfully. Then the "publican" takes the guts, 
pays for them, and begins to count the cost. It turns out when he 

First Impressions (2) 
4 7  
reckons it that the stuff has cost him a great deal, and so to increase 
his profit he dilutes the vodka once more, adding almost an equal 
bulk of water, and then he is ready for his customers. On the first hol­
iday, sometirries even on a working day, the customer turns up: this is 
a convict who has been working like an ox for some months, and has 
saved up his money in order to spend it all on drink on some day 
fixed beforehand. Long before it arrives, this day has been the object 
of the poor toiler's dreams at night and happy day-dreams over his 
work, and its fascination has kept up his spirits through the weary 
routine of prison life. At last the happy day dawns in the east; his 
money has been saved, not taken away, not stolen, and he brings it to 
the publican. To begin with, the latter gives him the vodka as pure as 
possible, that is, only twice diluted; but as the bottle gets emptier he 
invariably fills it up again with water. A cup of vodka costs five or six 
times as much as in a tavern. You can imagine how many cups of such 
vodka must be drunk, and what they will have cost before the point 
of intoxication is reached. But from having lost the habit of drinking, 
and having abstained from it so long, the convict readily gets drunk 
and he usually goes on drinking till he has spent all his money. Then 
he brings out all his new clothes; the publican is a pawnbroker as 
well. He first gets hold of the newly acquired personal possessions, 
then the old things and finally the prison clothes. When he has drunk 
up everything to the last rag, the drunken convict lies down to sleep, 
and next day, waking up with the inevitable splitting headache, he 
vainly entreats the publican to give him just a sip of vodka as a pick­
me-up. Mournfully he endures his sad plight and the same day sets to 
work again, and works again for several months unceasingly, dream­
ing of the happy day of debauch lost and gone for ever, and by de­
grees beginning to take heart again and look forward to another 
similar day, still far away, but sure to come sometime in its turn. 
As for the publican, after making a huge sum of money-some 
dozens of roubles-he gets the vodka ready for the last time, adding 
no water to it for he means it for himself-he has done enough of 
trading, it is time for him to enjoy himself too! Then begins an orgy of 
drinking, eating and music. With such means at his disposal he even 
softens the hearts of the inferior prison officials. The debauch some­
times lasts several days. All the vodka he has prepared is soon drunk, of 
course; then the prodigal resorts to the other publicans, who are on 

48 
The House of the Dead 
the look-out for him, and drinks until he has spent every farthing! 
However carefully the convicts guard their drunken fellow, he is some­
times seen by a higher official, by the major or the officer on duty. He 
is taken to the guard-house, stripped of his money if he has it on him 
and finally flogged. He shakes himself, goes back into the prison, and 
a few days later takes up his trade in vodka again. Some of the festive 
characters, the rich ones of course, have dreams of the fair sex, too; 
for a big bribe to the guard escorting them, they can sometimes be 
taken in secret to some place in town instead of to work. There in 
some out-of-the-way little house at the furthest end of the town 
there is a feast on a huge scale, and really large sums of money are 
squandered. Even a convict is not despised if he has money. A guard 
is picked out beforehand who knows his way about. Such guards are 
usually future candidates for prison themselves. But anything can be 
done for money, and such expeditions almost always remain a secret. 
I must add that they are a very rare occurrence; so much money is 
needed and devotees of the fair sex have recourse to other methods 
which are quite free from danger. 
Before I had been many days in prison my curiosity was particu­
larly aroused by a young convict, a very pretty lad. He was called 
Sirotkin. He was rather an enigmatic creature in many ways. What 
struck me first of all was his beautiful face; he was not more than 
three-and-twenty. He was in the "special division," that is, of crimi­
nals with a life sentence, which means that he was considered one of 
the worst of the military convicts. Mild and gentle, he talked little and 
rarely laughed. He had blue eyes, regular features, a clear-skinned 
delicate face and fair hair. He was such a pretty fellow that even his 
half-shaven head hardly disfigured him. He knew no sort of trade but 
he often had money, though not much at a time. One could see that he 
was lazy, and he was untidy in his dress. But occasionally someone 
would give him something nice to wear, even sometimes a red shirt, 
and Sirotkin was obviously pleased at his new clothes and walked 
about the prison to show himself He did not drink nor play cards, and 
hardly ever quarrelled with anyone. He used to walk behind the 
prison with his hands in his pockets, quiet and dreamy. What he 
could be dreaming about it was difficult to guess. If one called to him 
sometimes from curiosity. asked him some question, he answered at 
once and even respectfully, not like a convict, though always briefly 

First Impressions (2) 
49 
and uncommunicatively; and he looked at one like a child of ten 
years old. When he had any money he did not buy himself something 
necessary, did not get his coat mended, did not order new boots, but 
bought rolls or gingerbread and ate them like a child of seven. "Ah, 
you Sirotkin,"* the convicts would say to him sometimes, "you are an 
orphan all forlorn! "  Out of working hours he used to wander about 
the prison barracks; almost everyone else would be at work, only he 
had nothing to do. If anything was said to him, usually a taunt (he 
and the others in his division were often made fun of) , he would 
turn round and go off to another room without saying a word; some­
times he blushed crimson if he were much ridiculed. I often won­
dered how this peaceable, simple-hearted creature had come into 
prison. Once I was in the convicts' ward in the hospital. Sirotkin too 
was ill, and was in the bed next to mine; one evening we fell into talk. 
Somehow he got warmed up, and incidentally told me how he had 
been taken for a soldier, how his mother cried seeing him off, and 
how wretched he was as a recruit. He added that he could not endure 
the life of a recruit, because everyone there was so cross and stern, and 
the officers were almost always displeased with him. 
"How did it end?" I asked. "What brought you here? And in the 
special division too . . . .  Ah, Sirotkin, Sirotkin! "  
"Why, I was only a year in the battalion, Alexandr Petrovitch, and I 
came here because I killed my commanding officer." 
"I'd heard it, Sirotkin, but I can't believe it. How could you kill 
anyone?" 
"It happened so, Alexandr Petrovitch. I was awfully miserable." 
"But how do the other recruits manage? Of course it's hard at first, 
but they get used to it and in the end they become fine soldiers. Your 
mother must have spoiled you; she fed you on milk and goodies till 
you were eighteen." 
"My mother was very fond of me, it's true. She took to her bed 
when I went for a recruit and I've heard she never got up from it . . . .  
Life was very bitter to me at last when I was a recruit. The officer did 
not like me, he was always punishing me-and what for? I gave way to 
everyone, was punctual in everything, did not touch vodka, did not 
*In Russian Sirota (Garnett's note) . 

5 0  
The House of the Dead 
pick up any habits; it's a bad business, you know, Alexandr Petrovitch, 
when one picks up habits. Such cruel-heartedness everywhere, no 
chance to have a good cry. Sometimes you'd get behind a corner and 
cry there. Well, I was once on sentry duty. It was at night; I was put as 
sentry by the gun-rack. It was windy; it was autumn, and pitch-dark. 
And I felt so sick, so sick. I stood my gun on the ground, I twisted off 
the bayonet and put it on one side; slipped off my right boot, put the 
barrel to my breast, leant against it and with my big toe pulled the trig­
ger. It missed fire. I looked at the gun, cleaned the touch-hole, poured 
some fresh powder into it, struck the flint and put the gun to my breast 
again. And would you believe it? The powder flashed but the gun did 
not go off again. I wondered what was the meaning of it. I took my 
boot and put it on, fixed on the bayonet and walked to and fro, saying 
nothing. It was then I made up my mind to do what I did: I did not care 
where I went if I could get away from there. Half an hour later, the of­
ficer rode up; he was making the chief round of inspection. He went 
straight for me: "Is that the way to stand on sentry duty?" I took my 
gun in my hand and stuck the bayonet into him up to the hilt. I've 
come four thousand miles and I am here with a life sentence . . . .  " 
He was not lying. And for what other crime could he have been 
given a life sentence? Ordinary crimes are punished far more le­
niently. But Sirotkin was the only good-looking one of these "lifers." 
As for the others in the same case, of whom there were about fifteen 
among us, it was strange to look at them: there were only two or 
three tolerable faces among them; the others were all such hideous 
creatures, filthy-looking, with long ears. Some of them were grey­
headed men. If possible, I will describe all this group more exactly 
later on. Sirotkin was often friendly with Gazin, the convict whom I 
mentioned at the beginning of the chapter, describing how he stag­
gered into the kitchen drunk and how he upset my preconceived 
ideas of prison life. 
This Gazin was a horrible creature. He made a terrible and painful 
impression on everyone. It always seemed to me that there could not 
be a more ferocious monster than he was. I have seen at Tobolsk, 
Kamenev, a robber famous for his crimes; later on I saw Sokolov, a 
runaway soldier who was being tried for terrible murders he had 
committed. But neither of them made such a repulsive impression 
on me as Gazin. I sometimes felt as though I were looking at a huge 

First Impressions (2) 
5 1  
gigantic spider of the size of a man. He was a Tatar, terribly strong, 
stronger than anyone in the prison, of more than average height, of 
Herculean proportions, with a hideous, disproportionately huge 
head; he walked with a slouch and looked sullenly from under his 
brows. There were strange rumours about him in the prison; it was 
known that he had been a soldier, but the convicts said among them­
selves, I do not know with what truth, that he was an escaped con­
vict from Nertchinsk, that he had been sent more than once to Siberia 
and had escaped more than once, had more than once changed his 
name, and had at last been sent to our prison with a life sentence. It 
was said, too, that he had been fond of murdering small children 
simply for pleasure: he would lure the child to some convenient 
spot, begin by terrifying and tormenting it, and after enjoying to the 
full the shuddering terror of the poor little victim, he would kill it 
with a knife slowly, with deliberation and enjoyment. All this per­
haps was invented in consequence of the feeling of oppression Gazin 
aroused in everyone; but all these stories were in keeping with him, 
and harmonized with his appearance. Yet at ordinary times, when he 
was not drunk, his behaviour in prison was very orderly. He was al­
ways quiet, did not quarrel with anyone, and avoided quarrels, but, 
as it seemed, from contempt for the others, as though he considered 
himself superior to all the rest; he spoke very little, and was, as it 
were, intentionally reserved. All his movements were calm, deliber­
ate, self-confident. One could see from his eyes that he was very in­
telligent and exceedingly cunning; but there was always something 
of superciliOUS derision and cruelty in his face and smile. He traded 
in vodka, and was one of the richest vodka dealers in the prison. But 
about twice in the year he would get drunk himself, and then all the 
brutality of his nature came out. As he gradually got drunk, he began 
at first attacking people with gibes, the most spiteful, calculated, as it 
seemed, long-premeditated taunts; finally, when he was quite drunk 
he passed into a stage of blind fury, snatched up a knife and rushed 
at people. The convicts knowing his terrible strength ran and hid 
themselves: he fell upon anyone he met. But they soon found 
means to get control of him. A dozen men, inmates of the same 
prison ward as Gazin, would suddenly rush at him all at once and 
begin beating him. Nothing crueller could be imagined: they beat 
him on the chest, on the heart, on the pit of the stomach, on the 

5 2  
The House of the Dead 
belly; they beat him hard and beat him a long time; they only de­
sisted when he lost consciousness and lay like a corpse. They could 
not have brought themselves to beat any other convict like that: to 
beat like that meant killing any other man, but not Gazin. Then 
they wrapped his unconscious body in a sheepskin and carried it to 
the bed. "He'll sleep it off." And he did in fact get up next morning 
almost uninjured and went to work, silent and sullen. Every time 
Gazin got drunk everyone in the prison knew that the day would 
certainly end in a beating for him. And he knew this himself and 
yet he got drunk. So it went on for several years; at last it was no­
ticed that Gazin was beginning to break up. He began to complain 
of pains of all sorts, grew noticeably weaker and was more and 
more often in the hospital. "He is breaking up I "  the convicts said 
among themselves. 
He came into the kitchen, followed by the nasty little Pole with the 
fiddle, who was generally hired by the "festive convicts" to enhance 
their jollity, and he stood still in the middle of the room, silently and 
attentively scanning all present. All were silent. At last seeing me and 
my companion, he looked at us spitefully and deriSively, smiled self­
complacently, seemed to think of something, and staggering heavily 
came towards our table. 
"Where did you get the money for this little treat may I inqUire?" 
he began (he spoke Russian) . 
I exchanged silent glances with my companion, realizing that the 
best thing was to hold our tongues and not to answer him. At the first 
contradiction he would have flown into a fury. 
"So you've money, have you?" He went on questioning us. "So 
you've a lot of money, eh? Have you come to prison to drink tea? 
You've come to drink tea, have you? Speak, damn you! " 
But seeing that we had made up our minds to be silent and to take 
no notice of him, he turned crimson and shook with rage. Near him 
in the corner stood a big tray which was used for the slices of bread 
cut for the dinner or supper of the convicts. It was large enough to 
hold the bread for half the prison; at the moment it was empty. He 
picked it up with both hands and raised it above us. In another mo­
ment he would have smashed our heads. A murder, or an attempt at 
murder, threatened the whole prison with extremely unpleasant con­
sequences: it would be followed by inquiries, searches and greater 

First Impressions (2) 
S 3  
severity, and so the convicts did their utmost not to let things come to 
such an extremity. And yet in spite of that, on this occasion all kept 
quiet and waited. Not one word in our defence! Not one shout at 
Gazin, so intense was their hatred of us! They were apparently pleased 
at our dangerous position. But the incident passed off without harm: 
just as he was about to bring down the tray someone shouted from 
the passage: 
"Gazin! Vodka's stolen! "  He let the tray fall crashing on the floor 
and rushed like mad out of the kitchen. 
"Well, God saved them! " the convicts said among themselves. 
And they repeated it long after. I could not find out afterwards 
whether the news of the theft of the vodka was true or invented on 
the spur of the moment to save us. 
In the evening, after dusk, before the prison was locked up, I walked 
round the fence and an overwhelming sadness came upon me. I never 
experienced such sadness again in all my prison life. The first day of 
confinement, whether it be in prison, in the fortress, or in Siberia, is 
hard to bear . . .  But I remember what absorbed me more than any­
thing was one thought, which haunted me persistently all the time I 
was in prison, a difficulty that cannot be fully solved-I cannot solve 
it even now: the inequality of punishment for the same crime. It is 
true that crimes cannot be compared even approximately. For instance, 
two men may commit murders; all the circumstances of each case are 
weighed; and in both cases almost the same punishment is given. Yet 
look at the difference between the crimes. One may have committed a 
murder for nothing, for an onion; he murdered a peasant on the high 
road who turned out to have nothing but an onion. "See, father, you 
sent me to get booty. Here I've murdered a peasant and all I've found 
is an onion." "Fool! An onion means a farthing! A hundred murders 
and a hundred onions and you've got a rouble! "  (a prison legend) . 
Another murders a sensual tyrant in defence of the honour of his be­
trothed, his sister, or his child. Another is a fugitive, hemmed in by a 
regiment of trackers, who commits a murder in defence of his free­
dom, his life, often dying of hunger; and another murders little chil­
dren for the pleasure of killing, of feeling their warm blood on his 
hands, of enjoying their terror, and their last dove-like flutter under 
the knife. Yet all of these are sent to the same penal servitude. 
It is true that there are variations in the length of the sentence. But 

54 
The House of the Dead 
these variations are comparatively few, and the variations in the same 
sort of crime are infinitely numerous. There are as many shades of 
difference as there are characters. But let us admit that it is impossible 
to get over this inequality, that it is in its own way an insoluble prob­
lem, like squaring the circle. 
Apart from this, let us look at another inequality, at the difference 
in the effect of a punishment. One man will pine, waste away like a 
candle in prison, while another had no notion till he came to prison 
that such a jolly existence, such a pleasant club of spirited compan­
ions was to be found in the world. Yes, there are some in prison like 
that. Or take the case of an educated man with an awakened con­
science, intelligence, heart. The mere ache of his own heart will kill 
him by its torments sooner than any punishment. He condemns him­
self for his crime more unsparingly, more relentlessly than the most 
rigorous law. And beside him is another who has never once all the 
time he has been in prison thought of the murder he has committed. 
He positively considers he has done right. And there are men who 
commit crimes on purpose to be sent to penal servitude, in order to 
escape from a far more penal life of labour outside. There he lived in 
the deepest degradation, never had enough to eat and worked from 
morning to night for his exploiter; in prison the work is lighter than 
at home, there is bread in plenty and of better quality than he has 
ever seen before; and on holidays there is beef; then there are alms 
and there is a chance of earning something. And the company? It con­
sists of shrewd crafty fellows who know everything; and he looks on 
his companions with respectful astonishment; he has never seen any­
one like them before; he looks upon them as the very highest society 
in the world. Is the punishment equally felt in these two cases? But 
why trouble oneself with unanswerable questions! The drum beats, it 
is time to be back in our wards. 

C H A P T E R  I V  
F I R S T I M P R E S S I O N S  (3 ) 
THE LAST ROLL-CALL BEGAN. After this call-over the prison wards are 
locked up, each with its own lock, and the convicts remain shut up 
till daybreak. 
The roll was called by a sergeant and two soldiers. For this purpose 
the convicts were sometimes drawn up in ranks in the yard, and the 
officer on duty was present. But more frequently the ceremony was 
conducted in a more homely fashion. The roll was called indoors. This 
is how it was on that occasion. The men on duty made many mis­
takes, were wrong in their reckoning, went away and came back 
again. At last the poor fellows brought their sum out right and locked 
our prison room. In it there were as many as thirty convicts, rather 
closely packed on the bed. It was too early to go to sleep. Obviously, 
everyone needed something to do. 
The only representative of authority in the room was the veteran 
soldier whom I have mentioned already. There was also in each room a 
head convict who was appOinted by the major himself, on the grounds 
of good behaviour, of course. It often happened that these head con­
victs were involved in some serious mischief; then they were flogged, 
at once degraded and replaced by others. In our room the head convict 
was Akim Akimitch, who to my surprise not infrequently shouted at 
other convicts. They usually responded with jeers. The veteran was 
wiser, he never interfered in any way, and, if he ever did open his lips, 
it was no more than a matter of form to satisfy his conscience. He sat in 
silence on his bedstead sewing a boot. The convicts took hardly any no­
tice of him. 
On that first day of my prison life I made one observation, and 
found as time went on that it was correct. All who are not convicts, 
whoever they are, from those who have the most contact with them 
such as guards, soldiers on duty, down to all who have ever had any 
connexion with prison life, have an exaggerated idea of convicts. It is 
55 

S 6  
The House of the Dead 
as though they were every minute in uneasy expectation of the con­
victs suddenly flying at them with a knife. But what is most remark­
able, the convicts were themselves aware that they were feared, and it 
gave them a certain conceit. And yet the very best man to look after 
convicts is one who is not afraid of them. And, indeed, in spite of his 
conceit the convict likes it much better when one trusts him. One 
may even win his affection by doing so. It happened, though very 
rarely during my life in prison, that some superior officer came into 
the prison without a guard. It was worth seeing how it impressed the 
convicts, and impressed them in the most favourable way. Such a fear­
less visitor always aroused their respect, and if any harm had been 
possible, it would not have been so in his presence. The dread in­
spired by convicts is found everywhere where there are prisoners, 
and I really do not know to what exactly it is due. It has, of course, 
some foundation, even in the external appearance of the convict, who 
is, after all, an acknowledged malefactor; besides, everyone who 
comes near the prison feels that all this mass of people has been 
brought together not of their own will, and that, whatever measures 
are taken, a live man cannot be made into a corpse; he will remain 
with his feelings, his thirst for revenge and life, his passions and the 
craving to satisfy them. At the same time I am convinced that there is 
no need to fear convicts. A man does not so qUickly or so easily fly at 
another with a knife. In fact, if there may be danger, if there is some­
times trouble, the rarity of such instances shows how trifling the 
risk is. I am speaking, of course, only of convicted prisoners, many of 
whom are glad to have reached the prison at last (a new life is some­
times such a good thing! ) and are consequently disposed to live qui­
etly and peaceably. Moreover, the others will not let those who are 
really troublesome do mischief. Every convict, however bold and in­
solent he may be, is afraid of everything in prison. But a convict 
awaiting punishment is a different matter. He is certainly capable of 
falling on any outsider, apropos of nothing, simply because he will 
have to face a flogging next day, and if he does anything to bring 
about another trial his punishment will be delayed. Here there is an 
object, a motive for the attack; it is "to change his luck" at any cost 
and as qUickly as possible. I know one strange psychological instance 
of the kind. 
In the military division in our prison there was a convict who had 

First Impressions (3) 
5 7  
been a soldier, and had been sentenced for two years without depri­
vation of rights, an awful braggart and a conspicuous coward. As a 
rule boastfulness and cowardice are rarely found in a Russian soldier. 
Our soldiers always seem so busy that if they wanted to show off they 
would not have time. But if one is a braggart he is almost always an 
idler and a coward. Dutov (that was the convict's name) served out 
his sentence at last and returned to his line regiment. But as all, like 
him, sent to prison for correction are finally corrupted there, it usu­
ally happens that after they have been not more than two or three 
weeks in freedom, they are arrested again and come back to the 
prison, this time not for two or three years, but as a "lifer" for fifteen 
or twenty years; and so it happened with him. Three weeks after leav­
ing the prison, Dutov stole something, breaking a lock to do so, and 
was insolent and unruly as well. He was tried and sentenced to a se­
vere punishment. Reduced to the utmost terror by the punishment 
awaiting him, being a most pitiful coward, he fell, knife in hand, 
upon an officer who went into the convicts' room, the day before he 
would have had to "walk the Green Street." Of course, he was well 
aware that by such an act he greatly increased his sentence and his 
term of penal servitude, but all he was reckoning on was putting off 
the terrible moment of punishment for a few days, even for a few 
hours! He was such a coward that he did not even wound the officer, 
but only attacked him as a matter of form, that there might appear to 
be a new crime for which he would be tried again. 
The minute before punishment is certainly terrible for the con­
demned man, and in the course of several years it was my lot to see a 
good number of men on the eve of this fatal day. I usually came across 
these condemned prisoners in the convict ward of the hospital when 
I lay there ill, which happened pretty often. It is well known to all the 
convicts throughout Russia that the people most compassionate to 
them are doctors. They never make any distinction between convicts 
and other people, as almost all outsiders do, except, perhaps, the peas­
ants. The latter never reproach the convict with his crime, however ter­
rible it may have been, and forgive him everything on account of the 
punishment he has endured and his general misery. Significantly the 
peasants all over Russia speak of crime as a misfortune, and of crimi­
nals as the unfortunate. It is a definition of deep import, and it is the 
more significant because it is unconscious, instinctive. The doctors 

5 8  
The House of the Dead 
are truly a refuge for the convicts in many cases, especially for those 
awaiting punishment, who are kept far more severely than the ordi­
nary prisoners. The convict awaiting punishment, who has reckoned 
the probable date of the awful ordeal, often gets into hospital, trying 
to ward off the terrible moment, even by a little. When he is taking 
his discharge from the hospital. knowing almost for certain that the 
fatal hour will be next day, he is nearly always in a state of violent ag­
itation. Some try from vanity to conceal their feelings, but their awk­
ward show of swagger does not deceive their companions. Everyone 
understands how it is, but is silent from humane feeling. 
I knew a convict, a young man who had been a soldier, condemned 
for murder to the maximum number of strokes. He was so panic­
stricken that on the eve of the punishment he drank off a jug of vodka, 
in which he had previously soaked snuff. Vodka, by the way, is always 
taken just before the flogging. It is smuggled in long before the day, 
and a high price is paid for it. The convict would rather go without 
every necessity for six months than fail to have the money for a bottle 
of vodka to be drunk a quarter of an hour before the flogging. There is 
a general belief among the convicts that a drunken man feels the lash 
or the sticks less acutely. But I am wandering from my story. The poor 
fellow after drinking his jug of vodka was at once taken ill in earnest; 
he began vomiting blood and he was carried to the hospital almost 
unconscious. The vomiting so affected his chest that in a few days he 
showed unmistakable signs of consumption, of which he died six 
months later. The doctors who treated him for tuberculosis did not 
know how it had been caused. 
But, speaking of the cowardice so often found in the convict be­
fore punishment, I ought to add that some, on the contrary, astonish 
the observer by their extraordinary fearlessness. I remember some 
examples of courage which approached insensibility, and such exam­
ples were not so very rare. I particularly remember my meeting with 
a terrible criminal. One summer day a rumour spread in the hospital 
wards that a famous robber, a runaway soldier called Orlov, would be 
punished that evening, and would be afterwards brought to the ward. 
While the convict patients were expecting Orlov to be brought in, 
they asserted that he would be punished cruelly. They were all in 
some excitement, and I must confess that I, too, awaited the famous 
robber's arrival with extreme curiosity. I had heard marvellous stories 

First Impressions (3) 
59 
about him long before. He was a criminal such as there are few, who 
had murdered old people and children in cold blood-a man of a 
terrible strength of will and proud consciousness of his strength. He 
had confessed to many murders, and was sentenced to be beaten with 
sticks. 
It was evening before he was brought. It was dark and the candles 
had been lighted in the ward. Orlov was almost unconscious, horri­
bly pale, with thick, dishevelled pitch-black hair. His back was 
swollen and red and blue. The convicts were waiting on him all night, 
constantly bringing him water, turning him over, giving him medi­
cines, as though they were looking after a brother or a benefactor. 
Next day he regained consciousness completely, and walked twice up 
and down the ward! It amazed me: he had come into the hospital so 
very weak and exhausted. He had received at one time half of the 
whole number of blows to which he was sentenced. The doctor 
had only stopped the punishment when he saw that its continuance 
would inevitably cause his death. Moreover, Orlov was small and 
weakly built and exhausted by long imprisonment before his trial. 
Anyone who has met prisoners awaiting their trial probably remem­
bers long after their thin, pale, worn-out faces, their feverish looks. 
But, in spite of that, Orlov was recovering quickly. Evidently the en­
ergy of his spirit assisted nature. He was certainly not an ordinary 
man. I was moved by curiosity to make a closer acquaintance with 
him, and for a week I studied him. I can confidently say that I have 
never in my life met a man of such strength, of so iron a will as he. I 
had already seen at Tobolsk a celebrity of the same kind, formerly a 
brigand chief. He was a wild beast in the fullest sense of the word, 
and when you stood near him you felt instinctively that there was a 
terrible creature beside you, even before you knew his name. But in 
that case what horrified me was the spiritual deadness of the man. 
The flesh had so completely got the upper hand of all spiritual char­
acteristics that at the first glance you could see from his face that 
nothing was left but a fierce lust of physical gratification-sensuality, 
gluttony. I am convinced that Korenev-that was the brigand's 
name-would have been in a panic and trembling with fear before a 
flogging, although he could cut a man's throat without turning a hair. 
Orlov was a complete contrast to him. His was unmistakably the 
case of a complete triumph over the flesh. It was evident that the 

6 0  
The House of the Dead 
man's power of control was unlimited, that he despised every sort of 
punishment and torture, and was afraid of nothing in the world. We 
saw in him nothing but unbounded energy, a thirst for action, a thirst 
for vengeance, an eagerness to attain the object he had set before him. 
Among other things I was struck by his strange haughtiness. He 
looked down on everything with incredible disdain, though he made 
no sort of effort to maintain this lofty attitude-it was somehow nat­
ural. I imagine there was no creature in the world who could have 
worked upon him simply by authority. He looked upon everything 
with surprising calmness, as though there were nothing in the uni­
verse that could astonish him, and though he quite saw that the other 
convicts looked on him with respect, he did not pose to them in the 
least. Yet vanity and self-assertion are characteristic of almost all con­
victs without exception. He was very intelligent and somehow 
strangely open, though by no means talkative. To my questions he 
answered frankly that he was only waiting to recover in order to get 
through the remainder of his punishment as quickly as possible, 
that he had been afraid beforehand that he would not survive it; 
"but now," he added, winking at me, "it's as good as over. I shall walk 
through the remainder of the blows and set off at once with the party 
to Nerchinsk, and on the way I'll escape. I shall certainly escape! If 
only my back would make haste and heal!" And all those five days he 
was eagerly awaiting the moment when he could be discharged, and 
in the meantime was often laughing and merry. I tried to talk to him 
of his adventures. He frowned a little at such questions, but always an­
swered openly. When he realized that I was trying to get at his con­
science and to discover some sign of penitence in him, he glanced at 
me with great contempt and haughtiness, as though I had suddenly in 
his eyes become a foolish little boy, with whom it was impossible to 
discuss things as you would with a grown-up person. There was even 
a sort of pity for me to be seen in his face. A minute later he burst out 
laughing at me, a perfectly open-hearted laugh free from any hint of 
irony, and I am sure that, recalling my words when he was alone, he 
laughed again to himself, many times over perhaps. At last he got his 
discharge from hospital with his back hardly healed. I was discharged 
at the same time, and it happened that we came out of the hospital to­
gether, I going to the prison and he to the guard-house near the 
prison where he had been detained before. As he said good-bye, he 

First Impressions (3) 
6 1  
shook hands with me, and that was a sign of great confidence on his 
part. I believe he did it because he was much pleased with himself, 
and glad that the moment had come. He could not really help despis­
ing me, and must have looked upon me as a weak, pitiful, submissive 
creature, inferior to him in every respect. Next day he was led out for 
the second half of his punishment. 
When our prison room was shut it suddenly assumed a special 
aspect-the aspect of a real dwelling-place, of a home. It was only 
now that I could see the prisoners, my comrades, quite at home. In the 
daytime the sergeants, the guards and officials in general could make 
their appearance at any moment in the prison, and so all the inmates 
behaved somewhat differently, as though they were not quite at ease, 
as though they were continually expecting something with some anx­
iety. But as soon as the room was shut up they all qUietly settled down 
in their places, and almost every one of them took up some handi­
craft. The room was suddenly lighted up. Every one had his candle and 
his candlestick, generally made of wood. One worked at a boot, an­
other sewed some garment. The foul atmosphere of the room grew 
worse from hour to hour. A group of festive souls squatted on their 
heels round a rug in a corner to a game of cards. In almost every 
prison room there was a convict who kept a threadbare rug a yard 
wide, a candle and an incredibly dirty, greasy pack of cards, and all this 
together was called the maidan. The owner of these articles let them to 
the players for fifteen kopecks a night; that was his trade. The players 
usually played "Three Leaves," "Hillock," and such games. They always 
played for money. Each player heaped a pile of copper coins before 
him-all he had in his pocket-and only got up when he had lost 
every farthing or stripped his companions. The game went on till late 
in the night, sometimes lasting till daybreak, till the moment when 
the door was opened. In our room, as in all the other rooms of the 
prison, there were always a certain number of destitute convicts, who 
had lost all their money at cards or on vodka or who were simply beg­
gars by nature. I say "by nature" and I lay special stress on this expres­
sion. Indeed, everywhere in Russia, in all surroundings and under all 
conditions, there always are and will be certain strange individuals, 
humble and not infrequently by no means lazy, whose destiny is to be 
destitute for ever. They are always without family ties and always 
slovenly, they always look cowed and depressed about something, and 

62 
The House of the Dead 
are always at the beck and call of someone, usually a dissipatey fellow, 
or one who has suddenly grown rich and risen. And position ofre­
spect or anything calling for initiative is a burden and affliction to 
them. It seems as though they had been born on the understanding 
that they should begin nothing of themselves and only wait on oth­
ers, that they should do not what they like, should dance while others 
pipe; their vocation is only to carry out the will of others. And what is 
more, no circumstance, no change of luck can enrich them. They are 
always beggars. I have noticed that such individuals are to be found 
not only among the peasants, but in every class of society, in every 
party, in every association, and on the staff of every magazine. It is the 
same in every room, in every prison, and, as soon as a game of cards is 
got up, such a beggar always turns up to wait on the party. And, in­
deed, no card party can get on without an attendant. He was usually 
hired by all the players in common for five kopecks the night, and his 
chief duty was to stand all night on guard. As a rule he used to freeze 
six or seven hours together in the passage in the dark, in thirty degrees 
of frost, listening to every knock, every clang, every step in the yard. 
But sometimes the major or the officers on duty visited the prison 
rather late at night, came in quietly and discovered the men at play and 
at work, and the extra candles, which could indeed be seen from the 
yard. Anyway, when the key was grating in the lock of the door that 
led from the passage to the yard, it was too late to hide what they were 
doing, put out the lights and go to bed. But as the attendant on duty 
caught it severely from the card players afterwards, cases of such ne­
glect were extremely rare. Five kopecks, of course, is a ridiculously 
small sum, even for prison, but I was always struck in prison by the 
harshness and mercilessness of employers, in this and also in other 
cases. "You've had your money, sO do your work! "  was an argument 
that would bear no objection. For the trifle he had paid the employer 
would take all he could take-take, if he could, more than was his 
due, and he considered that he was conferring a favour on the other 
into the bargain. The convict who is drunk and making merry, flinging 
his money right and left, always beats down his attendant, and I have 
noticed it not only in one prison, not only in one group of players. 
I have mentioned already that almost all in the room had settled 
down to some sort of work: except the card players there were not 
more than five people quite idle; they immediately went to bed. My 

First Impressions (3) 
63 
place on the bed was next to the door. On the other side of the bed, 
his head nearly touching mine, lay Akim Akimitch. Till ten or eleven 
he worked, making some sort of coloured Chinese lantern, which had 
been ordered in the town for a fairly good price. He made lanterns in 
a masterly way, and worked methodically, without stopping; when he 
had finished his work he put it away tidily, spread out his little mat­
tress, said his prayers, and conscientiously went to bed. Conscien­
tiousness and orderliness he carried apparently to the point of trivial 
pedantry; eVidently he must have considered himself an exceedingly 
clever person, as is usually the case with limited and dull-witted peo­
ple. I did not like him from the first day, though I remember I thought 
a great deal about him that first day, and what surprised me most was 
that such a man should have got into prison instead of making his way 
in the world. Later on, I shall have to speak more than once of Akim 
Akimitch. 
But I will briefly describe all the inmates of our room. I had many 
years to spend in it, and these were all my future comrades and asso­
ciates. It may well be understood that I looked at them with eager cu­
riosity. Next to me on the left were a group of mountaineers from the 
Caucasus, who had been sent here to various term of imprisonment, 
chiefly for robbery. There were two Lezghis, one Tchetchenian and 
three Daghestan Tatars. The Tchetchenian was a gloomy and morose 
person; he hardly spoke to anyone, and was always looking about 
him from under his brows with hatred and a venomous, malignantly 
sneering smile. One of the Lezghis was an old man with a long, thin, 
hooked nose, a regular brigand in appearance. But the second, Nurra, 
made upon me from the first day a most charming and delightful im­
pression. He was a man still young, of medium height, of Herculean 
build, with the face of a Finnish woman, quite flaxen hair, light blue 
eyes, and a snub nose. He had bandy legs from having spent all his 
previous life on horseback. His whole body was covered with scars, 
bayonet and bullet wounds. In the Caucasus he had belonged to an al­
lied tribe, but was always riding over on the sly to the hostile moun­
taineers, and making raids with them on the Russians. Everyone in 
prison liked him. He was always good-humoured and cordial to 
everyone, he worked without grumbling and was calm and serene, 
though he often looked with anger at the filth and loathsomeness of 
prison life, and was furiously indignant at all the thieving, cheating, 

64 
The House of the Dead 
and drunkenness, in fact, at everything that was dishonest; but he 
never picked a quarrel, he merely turned away with indignation. He 
had never during his prison life stolen anything himself, or been 
guilty of any bad action. He was exceedingly devout, he religiously re­
peated his prayers; during the fasts before the Mohammedan holy days 
he fasted fanatically, and spent whole nights over his prayers. Everyone 
liked him and believed in his honesty. "Nurra's a lion," the convicts 
used to say, and the name "lion" had stuck to him. He was firmly per­
suaded that on the expiration of his sentence he would be sent home 
to the Caucasus, and only lived on the hope of it. I believe he would 
have died had he been deprived of it. I got a vivid impression of him 
on my first day in prison. It was impossible to overlook his good sym­
pathetic face among the surly, ill-humoured and sneering faces of the 
other convicts. Within my first half-hour in the prison he slapped me 
on the shoulder as he passed by me, and laughed good-naturedly in 
my face. I could not make out at first what this meant. He spoke Rus­
sian very badly. Soon afterwards, he came up to me again, and smiling 
gave me another friendly pat on the shoulder. He did it again and 
again, and so it went on for three days. It meant, as I guessed and 
found out later, that he was sorry for me, that he felt how hard it was 
for me to get used to prison, that he wanted to show his goodwill to 
me, to cheer me up and assure me of his protection. Kind, simple­
hearted Nurra! 
The Daghestan Tatars were three in number and they were all broth­
ers. Two of them were middle-aged men, but the third, Aley, was not 
more than two-and-twenty and looked even younger. His place on the 
bed was next to me. His handsome, open, intelligent, and at the same 
time good-naturedly simple face won my heart from the first minute. I 
was so thankful that fate had sent me him as a neighbour rather than 
any other. His whole soul was apparent in his handsome, one might 
even say beautiful, face. His smile was so confiding, so childishly trust­
ful, his big black eyes were so soft, so caressing, that I always found a 
particular pleasure in looking at him, even a consolation in my misery 
and depression. I am not exaggerating. When he was in his native 
place one of his elder brothers-he had five of them, two of the oth­
ers had been sent to some sort of penal factory-ordered him to take 
his sabre, to get on his horse and to go with them on some sort of ex­
pedition. The respect due to an elder brother is so great among the 

First Impressions (3) 
6S 
mountaineers that the boy did not dare ask, did not even dream of 
asking, where they were going, and the others did not think it neces­
sary to inform him. They were going out on a pillaging expedition, to 
waylay and rob a rich Armenian merchant on the road. And so indeed 
they did: they killed the escort, murdered the Armenian and carried 
off his goods. But the affair was discovered; all the six were caught, 
tried, convicted, punished, and sent to penal servitude in Siberia. The 
only mercy shown by the court to Aley was that he received a shorter 
sentence: he had been sent to Siberia for four years. His brothers were 
very fond of him, and their affection was more like a father's than a 
brother's. He was their comfort in exile, and sullen and gloomy as they 
usually were, they always smiled when they looked at him, and when 
they spoke to him (though they spoke to him very little, as though 
they still thought of him as a boy with whom it was useless to talk of 
serious things) their surly faces relaxed, and I guessed that they spoke 
to him of something humorous, almost childish; at least they always 
looked at one another and smiled good-humouredly after listening to 
his answer. He hardly dared to address them, so deep was his respect 
for them. It was hard to imagine how this boy was able during his 
prison life to preserve such a gentle heart, to develop such strict hon­
esty, such warm feelings and charming manners, and to escape grow­
ing coarse and depraved. But his was a strong and steadfast nature in 
spite of all its apparent softness. As time went on I got to know him 
well. He was pure as a chaste girl, and any ugly, cynical, dirty, unjust or 
violent action in the prison brought a glow of indignation into his 
beautiful eyes, making them still more beautiful. But he avoided all 
strife and wrangling, though he was not one of those men who allow 
themselves to be insulted with impunity and knew how to stand up 
for himself. But he never had quarrels with anyone, everyone liked 
him and was friendly to him. At first he was simply courteous to me. 
By degrees I began talking to him; in a few months he had learned to 
speak Russian very well, which his brothers never succeeded in doing 
all the time they were in Siberia. He seemed to me a boy of marked in­
telligence and peculiar modesty and delicacy, who had in fact reflected 
a good deal. I may as well say at once that I consider Aley far from be­
ing an ordinary person, and I look back upon my meeting with him as 
one of the happiest meetings in my life. There are natures so innately 
good, so richly endowed by God, that the very idea of their ever 

66 
The House of the Dead 
deteriorating seems impossible. One is always at ease about them. I am 
at ease about Aley to this day. Where is he now? 
One night, when I had been some time in prison, I was lying on 
the bed musing; Aley, always occupied and industrious, happened to 
be doing nothing at the moment, though it was early to go to bed. 
But it was their Mussulman holiday, and they were not working. He 
was lying down with his hands clasped behind his head, pondering 
on something, too. All at once he asked me: 
"Are you very sad just now?" I looked at him with curiosity and it 
seemed strange to me to hear this rapid direct question from Aley, al­
ways so delicate, so considerate, so full of the wisdom of the heart. 
But looking more intently I saw in his face such sadness, such distress 
at some memory, that I felt at once that his own heart was heavy at 
that moment and I told him so. He Sighed and smiled mournfully. I 
loved his smile, which was always warm and tender. Besides, when 
he smiled he showed two rows of pearly teeth which the greatest 
beauty in the world might have envied. 
"Ah, Aley, no doubt you are thinking how they are keeping this 
holiday at home in Daghestan? It must be nice there." 
"Yes," he answered enthusiastically, and his eyes shone. "But how 
do you know I am thinking about it?" 
"How can I help knowing! It's better there than here, isn't it?" 
"Oh, why do you say that! . . .  " 
"What flowers there must be there now, what a paradise! "  
"O-oh, better not talk of it." 
He was deeply stirred. 
"Listen, Aley, had you a sister?" 
"Yes, but why?" 
"She must be a beauty if she is like you." 
"Like me! She is such a beauty, there is no one in Daghestan hand­
somer. Ah, she is a beauty, my sister! You've never seen anyone like 
her. My mother was beautiful too." 
"Was your mother fond of you?" 
"Ah! What are you saying! She must have died of grieving over me 
by now. I was her favourite son. She loved me more than my sister, 
more than anyone . . . .  She came to me in my dreams last night and 
cried over me." 
He sank into silence and said nothing more that evening. But from 

First Impressions (3) 
6 7  
that time forward he sought every opportunity to talk to me, though 
the respect which he for some reason felt for me always prevented 
him from speaking first. But he was greatly delighted whenever I ad­
dressed him. I questioned him about the Caucasus, about his former 
life. His brothers did not hinder his talking to me, in fact they seemed 
to like it. Seeing that I was getting fonder and fonder of Aley, they, 
too, became much more cordial to me. 
Aley helped me at work, did his utmost to be of service to me in 
the prison, and I could see that he was delighted when he could do 
anything to please me or make my life easier, and in his efforts to 
please me there was not a trace of anything cringing or self-seeking, 
nothing but a warm, friendly feeling for me which he no longer con­
cealed. He had, moreover, a good deal of mechanical ability: he learnt 
to make underclothes fairly well, and to make boots and later on, 
as far as he could, to do carpentering. His brothers praised him and 
were proud of him. 
"Listen, Aley," I said to him one day, "why don't you learn to read 
and write Russian? It would be a great advantage to you in Siberia 
later on, you know." 
"I should like to very much. But of whom can I learn?" 
"Lots of men here can read and write! But if you like, I'll teach 
you." 
"Oh, please do! "  And he positively sat up on the bed and clasped 
his hands, looking at me imploringly. 
We set to work the next evening. I had the Russian translation of 
the New Testament, a book not prohibited in prison. With this book 
alone and no alphabet, Aley learnt in a few weeks to read excellently. 
In three months he had completely mastered the language of the 
book. He learnt eagerly, with enthusiasm. 
One day we read together the whole of the Sermon on the Mount. 
I noticed that he seemed to read parts of it aloud with special feeling. 
I asked him if he liked what he had read. 
He glanced at me qUickly and the colour came into his face. 
"Oh, yes," he answered. "Yes. Jesus is a holy prophet. Jesus speaks 
God's words. How good it is! "  
"What do you like best of all?" 
"Where He says 'forgive, love, don't hurt others, love even your 
enemies.' Ah, how well He speaks! "  

68 
The House of the Dead 
He turned to his brothers who were listening to our conversation, 
and began warmly saying something to them. They talked earnestly 
for a long time together, and nodded their heads approvingly. Then 
with a dignified and gracious, that is, a typically Mussulman, smile 
(which I love so much, and love especially for its dignity) they 
turned to me and repeated that Jesus was a prophet of God, and that 
He worked great marvels; that He had made a bird out of clay, had 
breathed on it and it had flown away . . .  and that that was written in 
their books. They were convinced that in saying this they were giving 
me great pleasure by praising Jesus, and Aley was perfectly happy that 
his brothers had deigned and desired to give me this pleasure. 
The writing lessons, too, were very successful. Aley procured pa­
per (he would not let me buy it with my money) , pens and ink, and 
in about two months he had learnt to write an excellent hand. This 
actually impressed his brothers. Their pride and satisfaction knew no 
bounds. They did not know how to show their gratitude to me. If 
they happened to be working near me, they were continually helping 
me, and looked on it as a happiness to be able to. I need hardly say the 
same of Aley. He loved me perhaps as much as he loved his brothers. 
I shall never forget how he left the prison. He drew me away behind 
the prison, flung himself on my neck and cried. He had never before 
kissed me or shed tears. "You've done so much for me, so much for 
me," he said, "that my father and my mother could not have done 
more: you have made a man of me. God will repay you and I shall 
never forget you . . . .  " 
Where is he now, my good, dear, dear Aley? 
Besides the Circassians there was a group of Poles in our room, 
and they made a family apart, and had hardly anything to do with the 
other convicts. I have mentioned already that their exclusiveness and 
their hatred of the Russian prisoners made them hated by everyone. 
There were six of them; they were men broken and made morbid 
by suffering. Some of them were educated men; I will speak of them 
more fully afterwards. During my later years in prison I used some­
times to get books from them. The first book I read made a great, 
strange and peculiar impression upon me. I will speak of these im­
pressions more particularly later; they were most interesting to me, 
and I am sure that to many people they would be utterly unintelligi­
ble. Some things one cannot judge without experience. One thing 

First Impressions (3) 
6 9  
I can say, that moral privation is harder to bear than any physical ago­
nies. When a peasant goes to prison he finds there the company of his 
equals, perhaps even of his superiors. He has lost a great deal, of 
course-home, family, everything, but his environment is the same. 
The educated man condemned to the same punishment often loses 
infinitely more. He must overcome all his cravings, all his habits, live 
under conditions that are insufficient for him; must learn to breathe a 
different air . . . .  He is a fish out of water . . . .  And often a punish­
ment supposed to be equal in law is ten times as cruel for him. This is 
the truth, even if we consider only the material habits which have to 
be sacrificed. 
But the Poles formed a group apart. There were six of them and 
they kept together. The only other person they liked in our room was 
a Jew, and him they liked perhaps simply because he amused them. 
He was liked indeed by the other convicts too, though every one 
without exception laughed at him. He was the only Jew among us, 
and I can't think of him even now without laughing. Every time I 
looked at him I could not help recalling Gogol's JewYankel in "Taras 
Bulba,"3 who when he undressed at night and prepared to get into the 
cupboard where he slept with his wife, looked exactly like a chicken. 
Isay Fomitch, our Jew, was the very image of a plucked chicken. He 
was a man about fifty, short and weakly built, cunning and at the same 
time decidedly stupid. He was impudent and conceited, and at the 
same time awfully cowardly. He was covered all over with wrinkles, 
and on his forehead and each cheek bore the marks of having been 
branded on the scaffold. I could never understand how he had sur­
vived sixty lashes. He had been sent here charged with murder. He 
had hidden away a receipt which his friends had procured from a 
doctor immediately after his punishment. It was the receipt for an 
ointment supposed to remove all traces of branding in a fortnight. He 
dare not make use of this ointment in the prison, and was awaiting 
the end of his twelve years' term of imprisonment, after which he 
fully intended to take advantage of the receipt when he could live as 
a settler. "Else I shall never be able to get married," he said to me 
once, "and I certainly want to be married." We were great friends; 
he was always in excellent spirits; he had not a bad time in prison. He 
was a jeweller by trade, always had more than enough work from the 
town, in which there was no jeweller, and so escaped hard labour. Of 

7 0  
The House of the Dead 
course he was a pawnbroker at the same time, and supplied the 
whole prison with money at a percentage and on security. He had 
come to the prison before me, and one of the Poles gave me a minute 
description of his arrival. It is a most amusing story which I will tell 
later on; I shall speak of Isay Fomitch more than once again. 
Among the other prisoners in our room were four Old Believers, el­
derly men and great Bible readers, one of whom was the old fellow 
from the Starodubovsky settlement. Then there were two or three Little 
Russians, gloomy fellows; a young convict of three-and-twenty with 
a lean little face and a sharp little nose, who had already committed 
eight murders; a group of false coiners one of whom kept all the room 
amused; and finally several gloomy and sullen individuals, shaven and 
hideous, taciturn and envious, who looked with hatred about them and 
meant to look like that, to scowl, to be silent and full of hatred for long 
years to come, the whole term of their imprisonment. Of all this I had 
only a glimpse on that first desolate evening of my new life, a glimpse 
in the midst of smoke and filth, of oaths and indescribable obscenity, of 
foul air, of clanking fetters, of curses and shameless laughter. I lay down 
on the bare boards of the bed, and putting my clothes under my head 
(I had not a pillow yet) , covered myself with my sheepskin; but for 
a long while I could not get to sleep, though I was utterly worn out and 
shattered by all the monstrous, unexpected impressions of that first 
day. But my new life was only just beginning. There was much awaiting 
me in the future of which I had never dreamed, of which I had no 
foreboding. 

C H A P T E R V 
T H E  F I R S T  M O N T H  ( 1 )  
THREE DAYS AFTER MY arrival in prison I was ordered to go out to work. 
That first day of work is very distinct in my memory, though nothing 
very unusual happened to me in the course of it, except in so far as 
my position was in itself unusual. But it was still one of my first im­
pressions, and I still looked eagerly at everything. I had spent those 
three days in the greatest depression. "This is the end of my wander­
ings: I am in prison!" I was continually repeating to myself "This is 
to be my haven for many long years, my niche which I enter with 
such a mistrustful, such a painful sensation . . . .  And who knows? 
Maybe when I come to leave it many years hence I may regret it! "  I 
added, not without an element of that malignant pleasure which at 
times is almost a craving to tear open one's wound on purpose, as 
though one desired to revel in one's pain, as though the conscious­
ness of one's misery was an actual enjoyment. The idea of ever regret­
ting this hole struck me with horror: I felt even then how monstrously 
a man may get used to things. But that was all in the future, and 
meantime everything about me was hostile and-terrible, for though 
not everything was really so, it seemed so to me. The savage curiosity 
with which my new comrades, the convicts, stared at me, the extra 
surliness of their behaviour towards the new member of their com­
munity, who had been a "gentleman." A surliness which sometimes 
reached the point of active hatred-all this so tortured me that I 
was eager to begin work, so as to find out and test all my sufferings 
as soon as possible, to begin living like all the rest, so as to get into 
the same rut with all the others without delay. Of course there was 
a great deal I did not notice then; I had no suspicion of things that 
were going on in front of me. I did not divine the presence of con­
solation in the midst of all that was hostile. Yet the few kind and 
friendly faces I had come across in the course of those three days 
helped to give me courage. 
7 1  

72 
The House of the Dead 
The kindest and friendliest of all was Akim Akimitch. And among 
the faces of other convicts that were sullen and full of hatred, I could 
not help noticing some kind and good-natured ones. "There are bad 
people everywhere, and good ones among the bad," I hastened to 
console myself by reflecting: "and who knows? These people are per­
haps by no means so much worse than the remainder who have remained 
outside the prison." Even as I thought this, I shook my head at the 
idea, and yet, my God, if I had only known at the time how true that 
thought was! 
Here, for instance, was a man whom I only came to understand 
fully in the course of many many years, and yet he was with me and 
continually near me almost all the time I was in prison. This was the 
convict Sushilov. As soon as I begin to speak of prisoners being no 
worse than other men, I involuntarily recall him. He used to wait on 
me. I had another attendant too. From the very beginning Akim 
Akimitch recommended me one of the convicts called Osip, telling 
me that for thirty kopecks a month he would cook my food for me 
every day, if I so disliked the prison fare, and had the money to get 
food for myself. Osip was one of the four cooks elected by the con­
victs for our two kitchens. They were, however, quite free to accept or 
refuse the appointment and could throw it up at any moment. The 
cooks did not go out to work, and their duties were confined to bak­
ing bread and preparing soup. They were not called "povars" (i.e. 
male cooks) but "stryapki" (i.e. female cooks) , not as a sign of con­
tempt for them-for sensible, and as far as might be, honest convicts 
were chosen for the kitchen-but just as an amiable pleasantry which 
our cooks did not resent in the slightest. Osip was, as a rule, elected, 
and for several years in succession he was almost always cook, and 
only threw up the job occasionally for a time, when he was overcome 
with violent melancholy and a craving for smuggling in vodka. He 
was a man of rare honesty and gentleness, though he was in prison 
for smuggling. He was the tall, sturdy smuggler I have mentioned al­
ready. He was afraid of everything, especially of a flogging, was friendly 
to everyone, very meek and mild. He never quarrelled, yet he had 
such a passion for smuggling that he could not resist bringing in 
vodka in spite of his cowardice. Like the other cooks he carried on a 
trade in vodka, though, of course, not on the same scale as Gazin, for 
instance, because he had not the courage to risk much. I always got 

The First Month (1) 
73 
on capitally with OSip. As for providing one's food, the cost was tri­
fling. I am not far wrong if I say that I hardly spent more than a rou­
ble a month on my board, always excluding bread, which was part of 
the prison fare, and occasionally soup, which I took if I were very 
hungry in spite of the disgust it inspired, though that, too, passed off 
almost completely in time. Usually I bought a pound of beef a day. 
And in winter a pound cost a halfpenny. One of the old veterans, of 
whom there was one in each room to keep order, used to go to the 
market to buy beef These veterans voluntarily undertook to go to mar­
ket every day to buy things for the prisoners and charged the merest 
trifle, next to nothing, for doing so. They did this for the sake of their 
own peace and comfort, for they could hardly have existed in the 
prison if they had refused. In this way they brought in tobacco, tea in 
bricks, beef, fancy bread and so on, everything in fact but vodka. They 
were not asked to bring in vodka, though they were sometimes re­
galed with it. 
For years together Osip roasted me a piece of beef, always the 
same cut. But how it was roasted is another question, and indeed is 
not what mattered. It is a remarkable fact that for several years I 
hardly exchanged two words with Osip. Several times I tried to talk to 
him, but he was incapable of keeping up a conversation; he would 
smile or answer "yes" or "no," and that was all. It was strange to see 
this Hercules who was like a child of seven. 
Another convict who helped me was Sushilov. I did not ask for his 
services nor seek them. He found me out and placed himself at my dis­
posal of his own accord; I don't remember when or how it happened. 
He did my washing. There was a large hole for emptying the water at 
the back of the prison, made on purpose. The washing troughs stood 
above this hole and the convicts' clothes were washed there. Sushilov 
invented a thousand different little duties to please me: he got my tea 
ready, ran all sorts of errands, took my jacket to be mended, greased my 
boots four times a month; all this he did eagerly. fussily, as though no 
one knew what duties he was overwhelmed with; in fact he completely 
threw in his lot with mine, and took all my business on himself He 
would never say, for instance, "You have so many shirts, your jacket is 
torn," and so on, but always "We have so many shirts now, our jacket is 
torn." He watched me to forestall every want, and seemed to make 
it the chief object of his life. He had no trade, and I think he earned 

74 
The House of the Dead 
nothing except from me. I paid him what I could, that is in halfpence, 
and he was always meekly satisfied. He could not help serving some­
one, and pitched upon me, I fancy, as being more considerate than oth­
ers and more honest in paying. He was one of those men who could 
never grow rich and get on, and who undertook to act as sentry for 
card players, standing all night in the freezing cold passage, listening to 
every sound in the yard, on the alert for the major. They charged five 
farthings for spending almost the whole night in this way, while if they 
blundered they lost everything and had to pay for it with a beating. I 
have mentioned them already. It is the leading characteristic of such 
men to efface their personality always, everywhere, and before almost 
everyone, and to play not even a secondary, but a tertiary part in every­
thing done in common. All this is innate in them. 
Sushilov was a very pitiful fellow, utterly spiritless and humbled, 
hopelessly down-trodden, though no one used to ill-treat him, but 
he was down-trodden by nature. I always for some reason felt sorry 
for him. I could not look at him without feeling so, but why I was 
sorry for him I could not have said myself I could not talk to him ei­
ther; he, too, was no good at conversation, and it was eVidently a 
great labour to him. He only recovered his spirits when I ended the 
conversation by giving him something to do, asking him to go some­
where or to run some errand. I was convinced at last that I was be­
stowing a pleasure upon him by doing so. He was neither tall nor 
short, neither good-looking nor ugly, neither stupid nor clever, some­
what pockmarked and rather light-haired. One could never say any­
thing quite definite about him. Only one other point: he belonged, I 
believe, as far as I could guess, to the same section as Sirotkin and be­
longed to it simply through his submissiveness and spiritlessness. The 
convicts sometimes jeered at him, chiefly because he had exchanged on 
the way to Siberia, and had exchanged for the sake of a red shirt and 
a rouble. It was because of the smallness of the price for which he 
had sold himself that the convicts jeered at him. To exchange meant 
to change names, and consequently sentences, with someone else. 
Strange as it seems, this was actually done, and in my day the practice 
flourished among convicts on the road to Siberia, was consecrated by 
tradition and defined by certain formalities. At first I could not be­
lieve it, but I was convinced at last by seeing it with my own eyes. 
This is how it is done. A party of convicts is being taken to Siberia. 

The First Month (1) 
7 5  
There are some of all sorts, going to penal servitude, to penal factories, 
or to a settlement; they travel together. Somewhere on the road, in the 
province of Perm for instance, some convict wants to exchange with 
another. Some Mihailov, for instance, a convict sentenced for murder or 
some other serious crime, feels the prospect of many years' penal servi­
tude unattractive. Let us suppose he is a crafty fellow who has knocked 
about and knows what he is dOing. So he tries to find someone of the 
same party who is rather simple, rather down-trodden and submissive, 
and whose sentence is comparatively light, exile to a settlement or to a 
few years in a penal factory, or even to penal servitude, but for a short 
period. At last he finds a Sushilov. Sushilov is a serf who is simply being 
sent out to a settlement. He has marched fifteen hundred miles without 
a farthing in his pocket-for Sushilov, of course, never could have a 
farthing--exhausted, weary, tasting nothing but the prison food, with­
out even a chance morsel of anything good, wearing the prison clothes, 
and waiting upon everyone for a pitiful copper. Mihailov accosts 
Sushilov, gets to know him, even makes friends with him, and at last at 
some etape* gives him vodka. Finally he suggests to him, would not he 
like to exchange? He says his name is Mihailov, and tells him this and 
that, says he is going to prison, that is, not to prison but to a "special 
division."Though it is prison it is "special," therefore rather better. Lots 
of people, even in the government in Petersburg for instance, never 
heard of the "special division" all the time it existed. It was a special, 
peculiar little class in one of the remote parts of Siberia, and there were 
so few in it, in my time not more than seventy, that it was not easy to 
get to hear of it. I met people afterwards who had served in Siberia and 
knew it well, who yet heard for the first time of the "special division" 
from me. In the Legal Code there are six lines about it: "There shall be 
instituted in such and such a prison a special division for the worst 
criminals until the opening of works involVing harder labour in 
Siberia." Even the convicts of this division did not know whether it was 
a permanent or a temporary institution. No time limit was mentioned, 
all that was said was "until the opening of works involving harder 
labour," so it was meant for convicts who were in for life. 
It is no wonder that Sushilov and the rest of his party knew nothing 
*Stage; point in time (French) . 

7 6  
The House of the Dead 
about it, even including Mihailov, who could only form an idea of the 
"special division" from the gravity of his crime, for which he had al­
ready received three or four thousand blows. He might well conclude 
they were not sending him to anything very nice. Sushilov was on his 
way to a settlement; could anything be better? "Wouldn't you like to 
exchange?" Sushilov, a simple-hearted soul, a little tipsy and over­
whelmed with gratitude to Mihailov for being kind to him, does not 
venture to refuse. Besides, he has heard already from the others that ex­
changes are possible, that other people have exchanged, so that there 
is nothing exceptional or unheard of about it. They come to an agree­
ment. The shameless Mihailov, taking advantage of Sushilov's extraor­
dinary simplicity, buys his name for a red shirt and a silver rouble, 
which he gives him on the spot before witnesses. Next day Sushilov is 
no longer drunk; but he is given drink again; besides, it is a mean 
thing to go back on a bargain; the rouble he has taken has gone on 
drink, and the red shirt quickly follows it. If he won't keep his bar­
gain he must give back the money. And where is Sushilov to get a 
whole silver rouble? And if he does not repay it the gang will make 
him; that's a point they are strict about. Besides, if he has made a 
promise he must keep it-the gang will insist on that too; or else 
they will devour him. They will beat him, perhaps, or simply kill him; 
in any case, they will threaten to. 
Indeed, if the gang were once to be indulgent in such a matter, the 
practice of changing names would be at an end. If it were possible to 
go back on a promise and break a bargain after taking money, who 
would ever keep it afterwards? This, in fact, is a question that concerns 
the gang, concerns all, and therefore the gang is very stern about it. At 
last Sushilov sees that there is no begging off it and makes up his mind 
to agree without protest. It is announced to the whole gang; and other 
people are bribed with drink and money, if necessary. It is just the 
same to them, of course, whether Mihailov or Sushilov goes to the dev­
il, but vodka has been drunk, they have been treated, so they hold their 
tongues. At the next etope the roll is called; when Mihailov's name is 
called, Sushilov answers "here," when Sushilov's is called, Mihailov 
shouts "here" and they go on their way. Nothing more is said about it. 
At Tobolsk the convicts are sorted: Mihailov is sent to a settlement and 
Sushilov is conducted with extra guards to the "special division." 
Protest later is impossible; and after all, how could he prove it? How 

The First Month (1) 
7 7  
many years would an inquiry into such a case take? Might he not 
come in for something else? Where are his witnesses? If he had them 
they would deny it. So the upshot of it is that for a red shirt and a rou­
ble Sushilov is sent to the "special division." 
The convicts laughed at Sushilov not because he had exchanged 
(though they feel contempt for all who exchange a lighter sentence 
for a heavier one, as they do for all fools who have been duped) but 
because he had done it for a red shirt and a rouble-too trivial a 
price. Convicts usually receive large sums, relatively speaking, for ex­
changing. They sometimes charge dozens of roubles. But Sushilov was 
so submissive, such a nonentity, so paltry in the eyes of all that he was 
not even worth laughing at. 
I got on very well with Sushilov for several years. By degrees he 
became extremely devoted to me. I could not help noticing it, so that 
I became quite attached to him too. But one day he did not do some­
thing I had asked him, though I had just given him some money 
and-I can never forgive myself for it-I had the cruelty to say to 
him, "Well, Sushilov, you take the money but you don't do your 
work." He said nothing, ran to do the job, but became suddenly de­
pressed. Two days passed. I thought to myself, "Surely it can't be on 
account of what I said?" I knew that one of the convicts called Anton 
Vassilyev was worrying him very persistently about a trifling debt. 
"Probably he has no money and is afraid to ask me! "  On the third day 
I said to him: "Sushilov, I think you wanted to ask me for the money 
to pay Anton Vassilyev? Take it." I was sitting on the bed at the time; 
Sushilov was standing before me. He seemed greatly impressed at my 
offering him the money, at my thinking of his difficult position of my 
own accord, especially as he had, in his own opinion, been paid too 
much by me of late, so that he had not dared to hope I would give 
him more. He looked at the money, then at me, suddenly turned away 
and went out. All this surprised me very much. I followed him and 
found him behind the prison. He was standing facing the fence with 
his head bent down and his elbow leaning on the fence. 
"Sushilov, what is it?" I asked him. He did not look at me, and I 
noticed to my great amazement that he was on the point of tears. 
"Alexandr Petrovitch, you think . . .  " he began in a breaking voice, 
trying to look away, "that I . . .  do for you . . .  for money . . .  but I . . .  
e-ech! "  

7 8  
The House of the Dead 
Then he turned to the fence again, even striking his forehead against 
it-and broke into sobs' It was the first time I had seen a man crying in 
prison. With great effort I comforted him, and though after that he began 
to serve me and look after me more zealously than ever-if possible-­
yet from certain hardly perceptible signs I perceived that his heart could 
never forgive me that reproach; and yet other people laughed at him, 
nagged at him on every occasion, and sometimes abused him violently­
and he was on amiable and even friendly terms with them, and never 
took offence. Yes, indeed, it is very hard to understand a man, even after 
long years! 
That is why I could not see the prisoners at first as they really 
were, and as they seemed to me later. That is why I said that, though I 
looked at everything with eager and concentrated attention, I could 
not discern a great deal that was just before my eyes. It was natural 
that I was struck at first by the most remarkable and prominent facts, 
but even these I probably saw incorrectly, and all that was left by them 
was an oppressive, hopelessly melancholy sensation, which was 
greatly confirmed by my meeting with A., a convict who had reached 
the prison not long before me, and who made a particularly painful 
impression upon me during the first days I was in prison. I knew, 
however, before I reached the prison, that I should meet A. there. He 
poisoned that first terrible time for me and increased my mental suf­
ferings. I cannot avoid speaking about him. 
He was the most revolting example of the depths to which a man 
can sink and degenerate, and the extent to which he can destroy all 
moral feeling in himself without difficulty or repentance. A. was that 
young man of good family of whom I have mentioned already that 
he reported to the major everything that took place in the prison, and 
was friendly with his orderly Fedka. Here is a brief account of his 
story After quarrelling with his Moscow relations, who were horri­
fied by his vicious conduct, he arrived in Petersburg without finish­
ing his studies, and to get money he gave information to the police in 
a very base way, that is, sold the lives of a dozen men for the imme­
diate gratification of his insatiable lust for the coarsest and most 
depraved pleasures. Lured by the temptations of Petersburg and its 
taverns, he became so addicted to his vices that, though he was by no 
means a fool, he ventured on a mad and senseless enterprise: he was 
soon detected. In his information to the police he had implicated 

The First Month (1) 
79 
innocent people, and deceived others, and it was for this he was sent 
for ten years to Siberia to our prison. He was still quite young, life 
was only beginning for him. One would have thought such a terrible 
change in his fate must have made a great impression on his nature, 
would have called forth all his powers of resistance, and have caused 
a complete transformation in him. But he accepted his new life with­
out the slightest perturbation, without the slightest aversion, indeed; 
he was not morally revolted by it, nor frightened by anything except 
the necessity of working, and the loss of the taverns and other attrac­
tions of Petersburg. It actually seemed to him that his position as a 
convict set him free to commit even more scoundrelly and revolting 
actions. "If one is a convict, one may as well be one; if one is a con­
vict, one may do nasty things and it's no shame to." That was literally 
his opinion. I think of this disgusting creature as a phenomenon. I 
spent several years among murderers, profligates and thorough­
going scoundrels, but I can positively say that I never in my life met 
such an utter moral downfall, such complete depravity and such in­
solent baseness as in A. There was amongst us a parricide, of good 
family; I have mentioned him already, but I became convinced from 
many traits and incidents that even he was incomparably nobler and 
more humane than A. All the while I was in prison A. seemed to me a 
lump of flesh with teeth and a stomach and an insatiable thirst for the 
most sensual and brutish pleasures. And to satisfy the most trifling 
and capricious of his desires he was capable of the most cold-blooded 
murder, in fact of anything, if only the crime could be concealed. I 
am not exaggerating; I got to know A. well. He was an example of 
what a man can come to when the physical side is unrestrained by 
any inner standard, any principle. And how revolting it was to me to 
look on his everlasting mocking smile! He was a monster; a moral 
Quasimodo.4 Add to that, that he was cunning and clever, good­
looking, even rather well-educated and had abilities. Yes, such a man 
is a worse plague in society than fire, flood and famine! I have said al­
ready that there was such general depravity in prison that spying and 
treachery flourished, and the convicts were not angry at it. On the 
contrary they were all very friendly with A., and behaved far more 
amiably to him than to us. The favour in which he stood with our 
drunken major gave him importance and weight among them. Mean­
while he made the major believe that he could paint portraits (he had 

80 
The House of the Dead 
made the convicts believe that he had been a lieutenant in the Guards) 
and the major insisted on A.'s being sent to work in his house, to 
paint the major's portrait, of course. Here he made friends with the 
major's orderly, Fedka, who had an extraordinary influence over his 
master, and consequently over everything and everybody in the 
prison. A. played the spy amongst us to meet the major's require­
ments, and when the latter hit A. in the face in his fits of drunkenness 
he used to abuse him as being a spy and a traitor. It happened some­
times, pretty often in fact, that the major would sit down and com­
mand A. to go on with his portrait immediately after beating him. 
Our major seemed really to believe that A. was a remarkable artist, al­
most on a level with Briillov,s of whom even he had heard. At the 
same time he felt himself quite entitled to slap him in the face, feel­
ing probably that, though he was a great artist, he was now a convict, 
and had he been ten times Briillov the major was still his superior, 
and therefore could do what he liked with him. Among other things 
he made A. take off his boots for him and empty his slops, and yet for 
a long time he could not get over the idea that A. was a great artist. 
The portrait lingered on endlessly, almost for a year. At last the major 
realized that he was being duped, and becoming convinced that the 
portrait never would be finished, but on the contrary became less and 
less like him every day, he flew into a rage, gave the artist a thrashing 
and sent him to hard labour in the prison as a punishment. A. evi­
dently regretted this, and felt bitterly the loss of his idle days, his tit­
bits from the major's table, the company of his friend Fedka and all 
the enjoyments that Fedka and he contrived for themselves in the ma­
jor's kitchen. At any rate after getting rid of A. , the major gave up per­
secuting M. , a convict whom A. was always slandering to the major. 
At the time of A.'s arrival M. was the only "political" in the prison. 
He was very miserable, had nothing in common with the other con­
victs, looked upon them with horror and loathing, failed to observe 
what might have reconciled him to them, and did not get on with 
them. They repaid him with the same hatred. The position of people 
like M. in prison is awful as a rule. M. knew nothing of the crime that 
had brought A. to prison. On the contrary, seeing the sort of man he 
had to do with, A. at once assured him that he was being punished' 
for the very opposite of treachery, almost the same thing in fact as the 
charge for which M. was suffering. The latter was greatly delighted at 

The First Month (1) 
8 1  
having a comrade, a friend. He waited upon him, comforted him in 
the first days of prison, imagining that he must be in great distress, 
gave him his last penny, fed him, and shared the most necessary 
things with him. But A. conceived a hatred for him at once, just be­
cause he was a fine man, just because he looked with horror on any­
thing mean, because he was utterly unlike himself; and all that M. 
told A. about the major and the prison A. hastened at the first opportu­
nity to report to the major. The major took an intense dislike to M. in 
consequence and persecuted him. Had it not been for the governor of 
the prison, it would have ended in a tragedy. A. was not in the least 
disconcerted when M. found out later on how base he had been; on 
the contrary he liked meeting him and looked at him ironically. It ev­
idently gave him gratification. M. himself pointed this out to me sev­
eral times. This abject creature afterwards ran away from the prison, 
with another convict and a guard, but that escape I will describe later. 
At first he made up to me, thinking I had heard nothing of his story. 
I repeat, he poisoned my first days in prison and made them even 
more miserable. I was terrified at the awful baseness and degradation 
into which I had been cast and in the midst of which I found myself 
I imagined that everything here was as base and as degraded. But 
I was mistaken, I judged of all by A. 
I spent those three days wandering miserably about the prison and 
lying on the bed. I gave the stuff that was served out to me to a trust­
worthy convict recommended to me by Akim Akimitch, and asked 
him to make it into shirts, for payment, of course (a few halfpence 
a shirt) . I proVided myself at Akim Akimitch's urgent advice with a 
folding mattress made of felt encased in linen, but as thin as a pan­
cake, and also got a pillow stuffed with wool, terribly hard till one 
was used to it. Akim Akimitch was quite in a bustle arranging all 
these things for me, and helped to get them himself With his own 
hands he made me a quilt out of rags of old cloth cut out of discarded 
jackets and trousers which I bought from other convicts. The prison 
clothes become the property of the prisoner when they are worn out; 
they are at once sold on the spot in the prison, and however ancient 
a garment might be, there was always a hope of getting something 
for it. I was much surprised at first by all this. It was practically my 
first contact with men of the peasant class. I had suddenly become a 
man of the same humble class, a convict like the rest. Their habits, 

8 2  
The House of the Dead 
ideas, opinions, customs became, as it were, also mine, externally, 
legally anyway, though I did not share them really. I was surprised 
and confused, as though I had heard nothing of all this and had not 
suspected its existence. Yet I had heard of it and knew of it. But the re­
ality makes quite a different impression from what one hears and 
knows. I could, for instance, never have suspected that such things, 
such old rags could be looked upon as objects of value. Yet it was of 
these rags I made myself a quilt! It was hard to imagine such cloth as 
was served out for the convict's clothing. It looked like thick cloth 
such as is used in the army, but after very little wearing it became like 
a sieve and tore shockingly. Cloth garments were, however, only ex­
pected to last a year. Yet it was hard to make them do service for so long. 
The convict has to work, to carry heavy weights; his clothes quickly 
wear out and go into holes. The sheepskin coats are supposed to last 
three years, and they were used for that time as coats by day and both 
underblanket and covering at night. But a sheepskin coat is strong, 
though it was not unusual to see a convict at the end of the third year 
in a sheepskin patched with plain hempen cloth. Yet even very shabby 
ones were sold for as much as forty kopecks at the end of the three 
years. Some in better preservation even fetched as much as sixty or 
seventy, and that was a large sum in prison. 
Money, as I have mentioned already, was of vast and overwhelming 
importance in prison. One may say for a positive fact that the suffer­
ings of a convict who had money, however little, were not a tenth of 
what were endured by one who had none, though the latter, too, had 
everything provided by government, and so, as the prison authorities 
argue, could have no need of money. I repeat again, if the prisoners 
had been deprived of all possibility of having money of their own, 
they would either have gone out of their minds, or have died off like 
flies (in spite of being provided with everything) , or would have re­
sorted to incredible violence-some from misery, others in order 
to be put to death and end it all as soon as possible, or anyway "to 
change their luck" (the technical expression) . If after earning his 
money with cruel effort, or making use of extraordinary cunning, of­
ten in conjunction with theft and cheating, the convict wastes what 
he has earned so carelessly, with such childish senselessness, it does 
not prove that he does not appreciate it, though it might seem so at 
the first glance. The convict is morbidly, insanely greedy of money, 

The First Month (1) 
83 
and if he throws it away like so much rubbish, he throws it away on 
what he considers of even more value. What is more precious than 
money for the convict? Freedom or some sort of dream of freedom. 
The prisoner is a great dreamer. I shall have something to say of this 
later, but, while we are on the subject, would it be believed that I have 
known convicts sentenced for twenty years who, speaking to me, have 
quite calmly used such phrases as "you wait a bit; when, please God, 
my term is up, then I'll . . .  " The word convict means nothing else 
but a man with no will of his own, and in spending money he is 
showing a will of his own. In spite of brands, fetters and the hateful 
prison fence which shuts him off from God's world and cages him in 
like a wild beast, he is able to obtain vodka, an article prohibited un­
der terrible penalties, to get at women, even sometimes (though not 
always) to bribe the veterans and even the sergeants, who will wink 
at his breaches of law and discipline. He can play the swaggering 
bully over them into the bargain, and the convict is awfully fond of 
bullying, that is, pretending to his companions and even persuading 
himself, if only for a time, that he has infinitely more power and free­
dom than is supposed. He can in fact carouse and make an uproar, 
crush and insult others and prove to them that he can do all this, that 
it is all in his own hands, that is, he can persuade himself of what is 
utterly out of the question for the poor fellow. That, by the way, is 
perhaps why one detects in all convicts, even when sober, a propen­
sity to swagger, to boastfulness, to a comic and very naIve though 
fantastic glorification of their personality. Moreover all this disorder­
liness has its special risk, so it all has a semblance of life, and at least a 
far-off semblance of freedom. And what will one not give for free­
dom? What millionaire would not give all his millions for one breath 
of air if his neck were in the noose? 
The prison authorities are sometimes surprised that after leading a 
quiet, exemplary life for some years, and even being made a foreman 
for his model behaviour, a convict with no apparent reason suddenly 
breaks out, as though he were possessed by a devil, plays pranks, 
drinks, makes an uproar and sometimes positively ventures on serious 
crimes-such as open disrespect to a superior officer, or even com­
mits murder or rape. They look at him and marvel. And all the while 
possibly the cause of this sudden outbreak, in the man from whom one 
would least have expected it, is simply the poignant hysterical craving 

84 
The House of the Dead 
for self-expression, the unconscious yearning for himself, the desire to 
assert himself, to assert his crushed personality, a desire which sud­
denly takes possession of him and reaches the pitch of fury, of spite, 
of mental aberration, of fits and nervous convulsions. So perhaps a 
man buried alive and awakening in his coffin might beat upon its lid 
and struggle to fling it off, though of course reason might convince 
him that all his efforts would be useless; but the trouble is that it is 
not a question of reason, it is a question of nerves. We must take into 
consideration also that almost every expression of personality on the 
part of a convict is looked upon as a crime, and so it makes no differ­
ence whether it is a small offence or a great one. If he is to drink he 
may as well do it thoroughly, if he is to venture on anything he may 
as well venture on everything, even on a murder. And the only effort 
is to begin: as he goes on, the man gets intoxicated and there is no 
holding him back. And so it would be better in every way not to drive 
him to that point. It would make things easier for everyone. 
Yes; but how is it to be done? 

C H A P T E R  V I  
T H E  F I R S T  M O N T H  ( 2 )  
I HAD A LITTLE money when I entered the prison; I carried only very lit­
tle on me for fear it should be taken away, but as a last resource I had 
several roubles hidden in the binding of a New Testament, a book 
which one is allowed to have in prison. This book, together with the 
money hidden in the binding, was given me in Tobolsk by men who 
were exiles too, who could reckon their years of banishment by de­
cades, and had long been accustomed to look at every "unfortunate" 
as a brother. There are in Siberia, and practically always have been, 
some people who seem to make it the object of their lives to look af­
ter the "unfortunate," to show pure and disinterested sympathy and 
compassion for them, as though they were their own children. I must 
briefly mention here one encounter I had. 
In the town where our prison was there lived a lady, a widow called 
Nastasya Ivanoyna. Of course none of us could make her acquaintance 
while we were in prison. She seemed to devote her life to the relief of 
convicts, but was especially active in helping us. Whether it was that she 
had had some similar trouble in her family, or that someone particularly 
near and dear to her had suffered for a similar* offence, anyway she 
seemed to consider it a particular happiness to do all that she could for 
us. She could not do much, of course; she was poor. But we in prison 
felt that out there, beyond the prison walls, we had a devoted friend. She 
often sent us news, of which we were in great need. When I left prison 
and was on my way to another town, I went to see her and made her 
acquaintance. She lived on the outskirts of the town in the house of a 
near relation. She was neither old nor young, neither good-looking nor 
plain; it was impossible to tell even whether she were intelligent or 
educated. All that one could see in her was an infinite kindliness, an 
irresistible desire to please one, to comfort one, to do something nice 
*That is, political (Garnett's note) . 
85 

86 
The House of the Dead 
for one. All that could be read in her kind gentle eyes. Together with a 
comrade who had been in prison with me I spent almost a whole eve­
ning in her company. She was eager to anticipate our wishes, laughed 
when we laughed, was in haste to agree with anything we said and was 
all anxiety to regale us with all she had to offer. Tea was served with 
savouries and sweetmeats, and it seemed that if she had had thousands 
she would have been delighted, simply because she could do more for 
us and for our comrades in prison. When we said goodbye she brought 
out a cigarette-case as a keepsake for each of us. She had made these 
cigarette-cases of cardboard for us (and how they were put together!) 
and had covered them with coloured paper such as is used for covering 
arithmetic books for children in schools (and possibly some such 
school book had been sacrificed for the covering) . Both the cigarette­
cases were adorned with an edging of gilt paper, which she had bought, 
perhaps, expressly for them. "I see you smoke cigarettes, so perhaps it 
may be of use to you," she said, as it were apologizing timidly for her 
present . . . .  Some people maintain (I have heard it and read it) that the 
purest love for one's neighbour is at the same time the greatest egoism.6 
What egoism there could be in this case, I can't understand. 
Though I had not much money when I came into prison, I could not 
be seriously vexed with those of the convicts who, in my very first hours 
in prison, after deceiving me once, came a second, a third, and even a 
fifth time to borrow from me. But I will candidly confess one thing: it 
did annoy me that all these people with their naive cunning must, as I 
thought, be laughing at me and thinking of me as a Simpleton and a fool 
just because I gave them money the fifth time of asking. They must have 
thought that I was taken in by their wiles and cunning, while, if I had 
refused them and driven them away, I am convinced they would have 
respected me a great deal more. But annoying as it was, I could not re­
fuse. I was annoyed because I was seriously and anxiously considering 
during those first days what sort of position I could make for myself in 
the prison, or rather on what sort of footing I ought to be with them. I 
felt and thoroughly realized that the surroundings were completely new 
to me, that I was quite in the dark and could not go on living so for sev­
eral years. I had to prepare myself I made up my mind, of course, that 
above all I must act straightforwardly, in accordance with my inner feel­
ings and conscience. But I knew, too, that that was a mere aphorism, and 
that the most unexpected difficulties lay before me in practice. 

The First Month (2) 
8 7  
And so, in spite of all the petty details of settling into the prison 
which I have mentioned already, and into which I was led chiefly by 
Akim Akimitch, and, although they served as some distraction, I was 
more and more tormented by a terrible devouring melancholy. HA 
dead house," I thought to myself sometimes, standing on the steps of 
the prison at twilight and looking at the convicts who had come back 
from work, and were idly loafing about the prison yard and moving 
from the prison to the kitchen and back again. I looked intently at them 
and tried to conjecture from their faces and movements what sort of 
men they were, and what were their characters. They sauntered about 
before me with scowling brows or overjubilant faces (these two ex­
tremes are most frequently met with, and are almost typical of prison 
life) , swearing or simply talking together, or walking alone with quiet 
even steps, seemingly lost in thought, some with a weary, apathetic air, 
others (even here!) with a look of conceited superiority, with caps on 
one side, their coats flung over their shoulders, with a sly insolent stare 
and an impudent jeer. "This is my sphere, my world, now," I thought, 
"with which I must live now whether I will or not." I tried to find out 
about them by questioning Akim Akimitch, with whom I liked to have 
tea, so as not to be alone. By the way, tea was almost all I could take at 
first. Tea Akim Akimitch did not decline, and used himself to prepare 
our absurd, home-made little tin samovar, which was lent me by M. 
Akim Akimitch usually drank one glass (he had glasses, too) , drank it 
silently and sedately, returning it to me, thanked me and at once began 
working at my quilt. But what I wanted to find out he could not tell 
me. He could not in fact understand why I was interested in the char­
acters of the convicts surrounding us, and listened to me with a sort of 
sly smile which I very well remember. Yes, evidently I must find out by 
experience and not ask questions, I thought. 
On the fourth day, early in the morning, all the convicts were drawn 
up in two rows at the prison gates before the guard-house, just as they 
had been that time when I was being refettered. Soldiers with loaded 
rifles and fixed bayonets stood opposite them, in front and behind. A 
soldier has the right to fire at a convict if the latter attempts to escape; 
at the same time he would have to answer for firing except in extreme 
necessity; the same rule applies in case of open mutiny among the con­
victs. But who would dream of attempting to escape openly? An officer 
of engineers, a foreman and also the non-commissioned officers and 

88 
The House of the Dead 
soldiers who superintend the works were present. The roll was called; 
those of the convicts who worked in the tailoring room set off first of 
all; the engineering officers had nothing to do with them; they worked 
only for the prison and made all the prison clothes. Then the contin­
gent for the workshops started, followed by those who did unskilled 
work, of whom there were about twenty. I set off with them. 
On the frozen river behind the fortress were two government barges 
which were of no more use and had to be pulled to pieces, so that the 
timber might not be wasted, though I fancy all the old material was 
worth very little, practically nothing. Firewood was sold for next to 
nothing in the town, and there were forests all round. They put us on 
this job chiefly to keep us occupied, and the convicts themselves quite 
understood that. They always worked listlessly and apathetically at such 
tasks, and it was quite different when the work was valuable in itself 
and worth dOing, especially when they could succeed in getting a fixed 
task. Then they seemed, as it were, inspirited, and although they got no 
advantage from it, I have seen them exert themselves to the utmost to 
finish the work as quickly and as well as possible; their vanity indeed 
was somehow involved in it. But with work such as we had that day, 
done more as a matter of form than because it was needed, it was dif­
ficult to obtain a fixed task and we had to work till the drum sounded 
the recall home at eleven 0' clock in the morning. 
The day was warm and misty; the snow was almost thawing. All our 
group set off to the river-bank beyond the fortress with a faint jingling 
of chains, which gave a thin, sharp metallic clank at every step, though 
they were hidden under our clothes. Two or three men went into the 
house where the tools were kept to get the implements we needed. I 
walked with the rest and felt a little more cheerful: I was in haste to 
see and find out what sort of work it was. What was this hard labour? 
And how should I work for the first time in my life? 
I remember it all to the smallest detail. On the road we met a 
workman of some sort with a beard; he stopped and put his hand in 
his pocket. A convict immediately came forward out of our group, 
took off his cap, took the alms-five kopecks-and quickly rejOined 
the others. The workman crossed himself and went on his way. The 
five kopecks were spent that morning on rolls, which were divided 
equally among the party. 
Some of our gang were, as usual, sullen and taciturn, others 

The First Month (2) 
89 
indifferent and listless, others chattered idly together. One was for 
some reason extraordinarily pleased and happy, he sang and almost 
danced on the way, jingling his fetters at every caper. It was the same 
short, thick-set convict who on my first morning in prison had 
quarrelled with another while they were washing because the latter 
had foolishly ventured to declare that he was a "cocky-locky." This 
merry fellow was called Skuratov. At last he began singing a jaunty 
song of which I remember the refrain: 
I was away when they married me 
I was away at the mill. 
All that was lacking was a balalaika. 
His extraordinary cheerfulness, of course, at once aroused indig­
nation in some of our party; it was almost taken as an insult. 
"He is setting up a howl!" a convict said reproachfully, though it 
was no concern of his. 
"The wolf has only one note and that you've cribbed, you Tula 
fellow! "  observed another of the gloomy ones, with a Little Russian 
accent. 
"I may be a Tula man," Skuratov retorted promptly, "but you choke 
yourselves with dumplings in Poltava." 
"Lie away! What do you eat? Used to ladle out cabbage soup with 
a shoe." 
"And now it might be the devil feeding us with cannon balls," 
added a third. 
"I know I am a pampered fellow, mates," Skuratov answered with 
a faint sigh, as though regretting he had been pampered and address­
ing himself to all in general and to no one in particular, "from my 
earliest childhood bred up--(that is, brought up, he intentionally 
distorted his words)-on prunes and fancy bread; my brothers have a 
shop of their own in Moscow to this day, they sell fiddlesticks in No 
Man's street, very rich shopkeepers they are." 
"And did you keep shop too?" 
"I, too, carried on in various qualities. It was then, mates, I got my 
first two hundred . . .  
" 
"You don't mean roubles?" broke in one inquisitive listener, posi­
tively starting at the mention of so much money. 

90 
The House of the Dead 
"No, my dear soul, not roubles-sticks. Luka, hey, Luka! "  
"To some I am Luka but to you I am Luka Kuzmitch," a thin little 
sharp-nosed convict answered reluctantly. 
"Well, Luka Kuzmitch then, hang you, so be it." 
"To some people I am Luka Kuzmitch, but you should call me 
uncle." 
"Well, hang you then, uncle, you are not worth talking to! But 
there was a good thing I wanted to say. That's how it happened, 
mates, I did not make much in Moscow; they gave me fifteen lashes 
as a parting present and sent me packing. So then I . . .  " 
"But why were you sent packing?" inquired one who had been 
carefully following the speaker. 
"Why, it's against the rules to go into quarantine and to drink tin­
tacks and to play the jingle-jangle. So I hadn't time to get rich in 
Moscow, mates, not worth talking about. And I did so, so, so want to 
get rich. I'd a yearning I cannot describe." 
Many of his listeners laughed. Skuratov was evidently one of those 
volunteer entertainers, or rather buffoons, who seemed to make it 
their duty to amuse their gloomy companions, and who got nothing 
but abuse for their trouble. He belonged to a peculiar and noteworthy 
type, of which I may have more to say hereafter. 
"Why, you might be hunted like sable now," observed Luka 
Kuzmitch."your clothes alone would be worth a hundred roubles." 
Skuratov had on the most ancient threadbare sheepskin, on which 
patches were conspicuous everywhere. He looked it up and down at­
tentively, though unconcernedly. 
"It's my head that's priceless, mates, my brain," he answered. 
"When I said good-bye to Moscow it was my one comfort that I took 
my head with me. Farewell, Moscow, thanks for your bastings, thanks 
for your warmings, you gave me some fine dressings! And my sheep­
skin is not worth looking at, my good soul. . . .  " 
"I suppose your head is, then?" 
"Even his head is not his own but a charity gift," Luka put in 
again. "It was given him at Tyumen for Christ's sake, as he marched 
by with a gang." 
"I say, Skuratov, had you any trade?" 
"Trade, indeed! he used to lead puppydogs about and steal their 
tit-bits, that was all his trade," observed one of the gloomy convicts. 

The First Month (2) 
9 1  
"I really did try my hand at cobbling boots," answered Skuratov, 
not observing this biting criticism. "I only cobbled one pair." 
"Well, were they bought?" 
"Yes, a fellow did turn up; I suppose he had not feared God or 
honoured his father and mother, and so the Lord punished him and 
he bought them." 
All Skuratov's audience went off into peals of laughter. 
"And I did once work here," Skuratov went on with extreme non­
chalance. "I put new uppers on to Lieutenant Pomortzev's boots." 
"Well, was he satisfied?" 
"No, mates, he wasn't. He gave me oaths enough to last me a life­
time, and a dig in the back with his knee too. He was in an awful tak­
ing. Ah, my life has deceived me, the jade's deceived me! "  
And not many minutes later 
Akulina's husband came . . .  
he unexpectedly carolled again, and began pattering a dance step 
with his feet. 
"Ech, the graceless fellow," the Little Russian who was walking be­
side me observed with a side glance of spiteful contempt at Skuratov. 
"A useless fellow," observed another in a serious and final tone. 
I could not understand why they were angry with Skuratov, and 
why, indeed, all the merry ones seemed to be held in some contempt, 
as I had noticed already during those first days. I put down the anger 
of the Little Russian and of the others to personal causes. But it was 
not a case of personal dislike; they were angry at the absence of reserve 
in Skuratov, at the lack of the stern assumption of personal dignity 
about which all the prisoners were pedantically particular; in fact, at 
his being a "useless fellow", to use their own expression. Yet they were 
not angry with all the merry ones, and did not treat all as they did 
Skuratov and those like him. It depended on what people would put 
up with: a good-natured and unpretentious man was at once exposed 
to insult. I was struck by this fact indeed. But there were some among 
the cheerful spirits who knew how to take their own part and liked 
doing so, and they exacted respect. In this very group there was one of 
these prickly characters; he was a tall good-looking fellow with a large 
wart on his cheek and a very comic expression, though his face was 

92 
The House of the Dead 
rather handsome and intelligent. He was in reality a light-hearted and 
very charming fellow, though I only found out that side of him later 
on. They used to call him "the pioneer" because at one time he had 
served in the Pioneers; now he was in the "special division." I shall 
have a great deal to say of him later. 
Not all of the "serious-minded," however, were so outspoken as 
the indignant Little Russian. There were some men in the prison who 
aimed at superiority, at knowing all sorts of things, at showing re­
sourcefulness, character and intelligence. Many of these really were 
men of intelligence and character, and did actually attain what they 
aimed at, that is, a leading position and a considerable moral influ­
ence over their companions. These clever fellows were often at dag­
gers drawn with one another, and every one of them had many 
enemies. They looked down upon other convicts with dignity and 
condescension, they picked no unnecessary quarrels, were in favour 
with the authorities, and took the lead at work. Not one of them would 
have found fault with anyone for a song, for instance; they would not 
have stooped to such trifles. These men were very polite to me all the 
time I was in prison, but they were not very talkative, also apparently 
from a sense of dignity. I shall have to speak more in detail of them 
also. 
We reached the river-bank. The old barge which we had to break 
up was frozen into the ice below us. On the further side of the river 
the steppes stretched blue into the distance; it was a gloomy and 
desert view. I expected that everyone would rush at the work, but 
they had no idea of doing so. Some sat down on the logs that lay 
about on the bank; almost all of them brought out of their boots bags 
of local tobacco which was sold at three farthings a pound in the 
market, and short willow pipes of home manufacture. They lighted 
their pipes; the soldiers formed a cordon round us and proceeded to 
guard us with a bored expression. 
"Whose notion was it to break up this barge?" one observed as it 
were to himself, not addreSSing anyone. "Are they in want of chips?" 
"He wasn't afraid of our anger, whoever it was," observed another. 
"Where are those peasants trudging to?" the first asked after a 
pause, not noticing of course the answer to his first question, and 
pointing to a group of peasants who were making their way in Indian 
file over untrodden snow in the distance. Everyone turned lazily in 

The First Month (2) 
9 3  
that direction and to while away the time began mocking at them. 
One of the peasants, the last of the file, walked very absurdly, stretch­
ing out his arms and swinging his head on one side with a long peas­
ant's cap on it. His whole figure stood out clearly and distinctly against 
the white snow. 
"Look how brother Peter has rigged himself out! " observed one, 
mimicking the peasant accent. 
It is remarkable that the convicts rather looked down on peasants, 
though half of them were of the peasant class. 
"The last one, mates, walks as though he was sowing radishes." 
"He is a slow-witted fellow, he has a lot of money," observed 
a third. 
They all laughed, but lazily too, as it were reluctantly. Meantime 
a baker woman had come, a brisk lively woman. 
They bought rolls of her for the five kopecks that had been given 
us and divided them in equal shares on the spot. 
The young man who sold rolls in prison took two dozen and be­
gan a lively altercation, trying to get her to give him three rolls in­
stead of the usual two as his commission. But the baker woman 
would not consent. 
"Well, and won't you give me something else?" 
"What else?" 
"What the mice don't eat." 
"A plague take you," shrieked the woman and laughed. 
At last the sergeant who superintended the work came up with a 
stick in his hand. 
"Hey, there, what are you sitting there for? Get to work! " 
"Set us a task, Ivan Matveitch," said one of the "leaders" slowly 
getting up from his place. 
"Why didn't you ask for it at the start? Break up the barge, that's 
your task." 
At last they got up desultorily and slouched to the river. Some of 
them immediately took up the part of foreman, in words, anyway. It 
appeared that the barge was not to be broken up anyhow, but the tim­
ber was to be kept as whole as possible, espeCially the crossway 
beams which were fixed to the bottom of the barge by wooden bolts 
along their whole length. 
"We ought first of all to get out this beam. Set to this, lads," 

94 
The House of the Dead 
observed one of the convicts who had not spoken before, a quiet and 
unassuming fellow, not one of the leading or ruling spirits; and 
stooping down he got hold of a thick beam, waiting for the others to 
help him. But nobody did help him. 
"Get it up, no fear! You won't get it up and if your grandfather the 
bear came along, he wouldn't," muttered someone between his teeth. 
"Well then, brothers, how are we to begin? I don't know . . .  " said 
the puzzled man who had put himself forward, letting go the beam 
and getting on to his feet again. 
"Work your hardest you'll never be done . . .  why put yourself 
forward?" 
"He could not feed three hens without making a mistake, and now 
he is to be first . . .  The fidget! " 
"I didn't mean anything, mates . . .  " the disconcerted youth tried 
to explain. 
"Do you want me to keep covers over you all? Or to keep you in 
pickle through the winter?" shouted the sergeant again, looking in 
perplexity at the crowd of twenty convicts who stood not knowing 
how to set to work. "Begin! Make haste! "  
"You can't do things quicker than you can, Ivan Matveitch." 
"Why, but you are doing nothing! Hey, Savelyev! ,  Talky Petrovitch 
ought to be your name! I ask you, why are you standing there, rolling 
your eyes? Set to work." 
"But what can I do alone?" 
"Set us a task, Ivan Matveitch." 
"You've been told you won't have a task. Break up the barge and 
go home. Get to work! " 
They did set to work at last, but listlessly, unwillingly, incompetently 
It was quite provoking to see a sturdy crowd of stalwart workmen who 
seemed utterly at a loss how to set to work. As soon as they began to 
take out the first and smallest beam, it appeared that it was breaking, 
"breaking of itself," as was reported to the overseer by way of apology; 
so it seemed they could not begin that way but must try somehow else. 
There followed a lengthy discussion among the convicts what other 
way to try, what was to be done? By degrees it came, of course, to abuse 
and threatened to go further . . . .  The sergeant shouted again and 
waved his stick, but the beam broke again. It appeared finally that axes 
were not enough, and other tools were needed. Two fellows were 

The First Month (2) 
9 5  
dispatched with a convoy to the fortress to fetch them, and meantime 
the others very serenely sat down on the barge, pulled out their pipes 
and began smoking again. 
The sergeant gave it up as a bad job at last. 
"Well, you'll never make work look silly! Ach, what a set, what a 
set! " he muttered angrily, and with a wave of his hand he set off for 
the fortress, swinging his stick. 
An hour later the foreman came. After listening calmly to the con­
victs he announced that the task he set them was to get out four 
more beams without breaking them, and in addition he marked out 
a considerable portion of the barge to be taken to pieces, telling 
them that when it was done they could go home. The task was a 
large one, but, heavens! how they set to! There was no trace of lazi­
ness, no trace of incompetence. The axes rang; they began unscrew­
ing the wooden bolts. Others thrust thick posts underneath and, 
pressing on them with twenty hands, levered up the beams, which 
to my astonishment came up now whole and uninjured. The work 
went like wild fire. Everyone seemed wonderfully intelligent all of a 
sudden. There was not a word wasted, not an oath was heard, every­
one seemed to know what to say, what to do, where to stand, what 
advice to give. Just half an hour before the drum beat, the last of the 
task was finished, and the convicts went home tired but quite con­
tented, though they had only saved half an hour of their working 
day. But as far as I was concerned I noticed one thing; wherever I 
turned to help them during the work, everywhere I was superfluous, 
everywhere I was in the way, everywhere I was pushed aside almost 
with abuse. 
The lowest ragamuffin, himself a wretched workman, who did not 
dare to raise his voice among the other convicts who were sharper 
and cleverer than he, thought himself entitled to shout at me on the 
pretext that I hindered him if I stood beside him. At last one of the 
smarter ones said to me plainly and coarsely: 
"Where are you shOVing? Get away! Why do you poke yourself 
where you are not wanted?" 
"Your game's up! "  another chimed in at once. 
"You'd better take a jug and go round asking for halfpence to 
build a fine house and waste upon snuff, but there's nothing for you 
to do here." 

96 
The House of the Dead 
I had to stand apart, and to stand apart when all are working makes 
one feel ashamed. But when it happened that I did walk away and 
stood at the end of the barge they shouted at once: 
"Pine workmen they've given us; what can one get done with 
them? You can get nothing done." 
All this, of course, was done on purpose, for it amused everyone. 
They must have a gibe at one who has been a "fine gentleman," and, 
of course, they were glad to have the chance. 
It may well be understood now why, as I have said already, my 
first question on entering the prison was how I should behave, what 
attitude I should take up before these people. I had a foreboding that 
I should often come into collision with them like this. But in spite of 
all difficulties I made up my mind not to change my plan of action 
which I had partly thought out during those days; I knew it was 
right. I had made up my mind to behave as simply and indepen­
dently as possible, not to make any special effort to get on intimate 
terms with them, but not to repel them if they desired to be friendly 
themselves; not to be afraid of their menaces and their hatred, and as 
far as possible to affect not to notice, not to approach them on cer­
tain points and not to encourage some of their habits and customs­
not to seek in fact to be regarded quite as a comrade by them. I 
guessed at the first glance that they would be the first to despise me 
if I did. According to their ideas, however (I learned this for certain 
later on) , I ought even to keep up and respect my class superiority 
before them, that is, to study my comfort, to give myself airs, to 
scorn them, to turn up my nose at everything; to play the fine gen­
tleman in fact. That was what they understood by being a gentleman. 
They would, of course, have abused me for doing so, but yet they 
would privately have respected me for it. To play such a part was not 
in my line; I was never a gentleman according to their notions; but, 
on the other hand, I vowed to make no concession derogatory to my 
education and my way of thinking. If I had begun to try and win 
their goodwill by making up to them, agreeing with them, being fa­
miliar with them and had gone in for their various "qualities," they 
would have at once supposed that I did it out of fear and cowardice 
and would have treated me with contempt. A. was not a fair example: 
he used to visit the major and they were afraid of him themselves. 
On the other side, I did not want to shut myself off from them by 

The First Month (2) 
9 7  
cold and unapproachable politeness, as the Poles did. I saw clearly 
that they despised me now for wanting to work with them, without 
seeking my own ease or giving myself airs of superiority over them. 
And although I felt sure that they would have to change their opin­
ion of me later, yet the thought that they had, as it were, the right to 
despise me, because they imagined I was trying to make up to them 
at work-this thought was very bitter to me. 
When I returned to the prison in the evening after the day's work, 
worn out and exhausted, I was again overcome by terrible misery. 
"How many thousands of such days lie before me," I thought, "all the 
same, all exactly alike! "  As it grew dusk I sauntered up and down be­
hind the prison by the fence, silent and alone, and suddenly I saw our 
Sharik running towards me. Sharik was the dog that belonged to our 
prison, just as there are dogs belonging to companies, batteries and 
squadrons. He had lived from time immemorial in the prison, he be­
longed to no one in particular, conSidering everyone his master, and 
he lived on scraps from the kitchen. He was a rather large mongrel, 
black with white spots, not very old, with intelligent eyes and a 
bushy tail. No one ever stroked him, no one took any notice of him. 
From the first day I stroked him and fed him with bread out of my 
hands. While I stroked him, he stood qUietly, looking affectionately 
at me and gently wagging his tail as a sign of pleasure. Now after 
not seeing me for so long-me, the only person who had for years 
thought of caressing him-he ran about looking for me amongst all 
of them, and finding me behind the prison, ran tO,meet me, whining 
with delight. I don't know what came over me but I fell to kissing 
him, I put my arms round his head; he put his forepaws on my shoul­
ders and began licking my face. "So this is the friend fate has sent me," 
I thought, and every time I came back from work during that first 
hard and gloomy period, first of all, before I went anywhere else, I 
hurried behind the prison with Sharik leaping before me and whining 
with joy, held his head in my arms and kissed him again and again, 
and a sweet and at the same time poignantly bitter feeling wrung my 
heart. And I remember it was positively pleasant to me to think, as 
though priding myself on my suffering, that there was only one crea­
ture in the world who loved me, who was devoted to me, who was 
my friend, my one friend-my faithful dog Sharik. 

C H A P T E R V I I  
N E W  A C Q UA I N TA N C E S .  P E T RO V  
BUT TIME PASSED AND little by little I got used to it. Every day I was less 
and less bewildered by the daily events of my new life. My eyes grew, 
as it were, accustomed to incidents, surroundings, men. To be recon­
ciled to this life was impossible, but it was high time to accept it as an 
accomplished fact. Any perplexities that still remained in my mind I 
concealed within myself as completely as possible. I no longer wan­
dered about the prison like one distraught, and no longer showed my 
misery. The savagely inquisitive eyes of the convicts were not so often 
fixed on me, they did not watch me with such an assumption of inso­
lence. They had grown used to me too, apparently, and I was very glad 
of it. I walked about prison as though I were at home, knew my place 
on the common bed and seemed to have grown used to things which 
I should have thought I could never in my life have grown used to. 
Regularly once a week I went to have half my head shaved. Every 
Saturday in our free time we were called out in turn from the prison 
to the guard-house (if we did not go we had to get shaved on our 
own account) and there the barbers of the battalion rubbed our 
heads with cold lather and mercilessly scraped them with blunt ra­
zors; it makes me shiver even now when I recall that torture. But the 
remedy was soon found: Akim Akimitch pointed out to me a convict 
in the military division who for a kopeck would shave with his own 
razor anyone who liked. That was his trade. Many of the convicts went 
to him to escape the prison barbers, though they were by no means 
a sensitive lot. Our convict barber was called the major, why I don't 
know, and in what way he suggested the major I can't say. As I write I 
recall this major, a tall, lean, taciturn fellow, rather stupid, always ab­
sorbed in his occupation, never without a strop on which he was day 
and night sharpening his incredibly worn out razor. He was appar­
ently concentrated on this pursuit, which he evidently looked upon 
as his vocation in life. He was really extremely happy when the razor 
9 8  

New Acquaintances. Petrov 
9 9  
was in good condition and someone came to be shaved; his lather 
was warm, his hand was light, the shaving was like velvet. He evi­
dently enjoyed his art and was proud of it, and he carelessly took the 
kopeck he had earned as though he did the work for art's sake and 
not for profit. 
A. caught it on one occasion from our major when, telling him 
tales about the prisoners, he incautiously spoke of our barber as the 
major. The real major flew into a rage and was extremely offended. 
"Do you know, you rascal, what is meant by a major?" he shouted, 
foaming at the mouth, and falling upon A. in his usual fashion. "Do 
you understand what is meant by a major? And here you dare to call 
a scoundrelly convict major before me, in my presence! "  No one but 
A. could have got on with such a man. 
From the very first day of my life in prison, I began to dream of 
freedom. To calculate in a thousand different ways when my days in 
prison would be over became my favourite occupation. It was always 
in my mind, and I am sure that it is the same with everyone who is 
deprived of freedom for a fixed period. I don't know whether the 
other convicts thought and calculated as I did, but the amazing au­
dacity of their hopes impressed me from the beginning. The hopes of 
a prisoner deprived of freedom are utterly different from those of a 
man living a natural life. A free man hopes, of course (for a change of 
luck, for instance, or the success of an undertaking), but he lives, he 
acts, he is caught up in the world of life. It is very different with the 
prisoner. There is life for him too, granted-prison life-but what­
ever the convict may be and whatever may be the term of his 
sentence, he is instinctively unable to accept his lot as something pos­
itive, final, as part of real life. Every convict feels that he is, so to 
speak, not at home, but on a visit. He looks at twenty years as though 
they were two, and is fully convinced that when he leaves prison at 
fifty-five he will be as full of life and energy as he is now at thirty­
five. "I've still life before me," he thinks and resolutely drives away all 
doubts and other vexatious ideas. Even those in the "special division" 
who had been sentenced for life sometimes reckoned on orders 
suddenly coming from Petersburg: "to send them to the mines at 
Nerchinsk and to limit their sentence." Then it would be all right: to 
begin with, it is almost six months' journey to Nerchinsk, and how 
much pleasanter the journey would be than being in prison! And 

1 00 
The House of the Dead 
afterwards the term in Nerchinsk would be over and then . . . .  And 
sometimes even grey-headed men reckoned like this. 
At Tobolsk I have seen convicts chained to the wall. The man is 
kept on a chain seven feet long; he has a bedstead by him. He is 
chained like this for some exceptionally terrible crime committed in 
Siberia. They are kept like that for five years, for ten years. They are 
generally brigands. I only saw one among them who looked as if he 
had belonged to the upper classes; he had been in the government 
service somewhere. He spoke submissively with a lisp; his smile was 
mawkishly sweet. He showed us his chain, showed how he could 
most comfortably lie on the bed. He must have been a choice speci­
men! As a rule they all behave quietly and seem contented, yet every 
one of them is intensely anxious for the end of his sentence. Why, one 
wonders? I will tell you why: he will get out of the stifling dank 
room with its low vaulted roof of brick, and will walk in the prison 
yard . . .  and that is all. He will never be allowed out of the prison. He 
knows those who have been in chains are always kept in prison and 
fettered to the day of their death. He knows that and yet he is desper­
ately eager for the end of his time on the chain. But for that longing 
how could he remain five or six years on the chain without dying or 
going out of his mind? Some of them would not endure it at all. 
I felt that work might be the saving of me, might strengthen my 
physical frame and my health. Continual mental anxiety, nervous irri­
tation, the foul air of the prison might well be my destruction. Being 
constantly in the open air, working every day till I was tired, learning 
to carry heavy weights-at any rate I shall save myself, I thought, I 
shall make myself strong, I shall leave the prison healthy, vigorous, 
hearty and not old. I was not mistaken: the work and exercise were 
very good for me. I looked with horror at one of my companions, a 
man of my own class: he was wasting like a candle in prison. He en­
tered it at the same time as I did, young, handsome and vigorous, and 
he left it half-shattered, grey-headed, gasping for breath and unable 
to walk. No, I thought, looking at him; I want to live and will live. But 
at first I got into hot water among the convicts for my fondness for 
work, and for a long time they assailed me with gibes and contempt. 
But I took no notice of anyone and set off cheerfully, for instance, to 
the baking and pounding of alabaster-one of the first things I learnt 
to do. That was easy work. 

New Acquaintances. Petrov 
1 0 1  
The officials who supervised our work were ready, as far as possi­
ble, to be lenient in allotting work to prisoners belonging to the up­
per classes, which was by no means an undue indulgence but simple 
justice. It would be strange to expect from a man of half the strength 
and no experience of manual labour the same amount of work as the 
ordinary workman had by regulation to get through. But this "indul­
gence" was not always shown, and it was as it were surreptitious; a 
strict watch was kept from outside to check it. Very often we had to 
go to heavy work, and then, of course, it was twice as hard for the 
upper-class convicts as for the rest. 
Three or four men were usually sent to the alabaster, old or weak 
by preference, and we, of course, came under that heading; but be­
sides these a real workman who understood the work was always told 
off for the job. The same workman went regularly for some years to 
this task, a dark, lean, oldish man called Almazov, grim, unsociable 
and peevish. He had a profound contempt for us. But he was so taci­
turn that he was even lazy about grumbling at us. 
The shed in which the alabaster was baked and pounded stood 
also on the steep, desolate river-bank. In winter, espeCially in dull 
weather, it was dreary to look over the river and at the far-away bank 
the other side. There was something poignant and heart-rending in 
this wild desolate landscape. But it was almost more painful when the 
sun shone brightly on the immense white expanse of snow. One 
longed to fly away into that expanse which stretched from the other 
side of the river, an untrodden plain for twelve hundred miles to 
the south. Almazov usually set to work in grim silence; we were 
ashamed, as it were, that we could not be any real help to him, and he 
managed alone and asked no help from us, on purpose, it seemed, to 
make us conscious of our short -comings and remorseful for our use­
lessness. And yet all he had to do was to heat the oven for baking in it 
the alabaster, which we used to fetch for him. Next day, when the al­
abaster was thoroughly baked, the task of unloading it from the oven 
began. Each of us took a heavy mallet, filled himself a speCial box of 
alabaster and set to work to pound it. This was delightful work. The 
brittle alabaster was quickly transformed to white shining powder, it 
crumbled so well and so easily. We swung our heavy mallets and 
made such a din that we enjoyed it ourselves. We were tired at the end 
and at the same time we felt better; our cheeks were flushed, our 

1 02 
The House of the Dead 
blood circulated more quickly. At this point even Almazov began to 
look at us with indulgence, as people look at small children; he 
smoked his pipe condescendingly, though he could not help grum­
bling when he had to speak. But he was like that with everyone, 
though I believe he was a good-natured man at bottom. 
Another task to which I was sent was to turn the lathe in the work­
shop. It was a big heavy wheel. It needed a good deal of effort to 
move it, especially when the turner (one of the regimental work­
men) was shaping some piece of furniture for the use of an official, 
such as a banister or a big table leg for which a big log was required. 
In such cases it was beyond one man's strength to turn the wheel and 
generally two of us were sent-myself and another "gentleman" 
whom I will call B. For several years whenever anything had to be 
turned this task fell to our share. B. was a frail, weakly young fellow 
who suffered with his lungs. He had entered the prison a year before 
my arrival together with two others, his comrades-one an old man 
who spent all his time, day and night, saying his prayers (for which 
he was greatly respected by the convicts) and died before I left 
prison, and the other quite a young lad, fresh, rosy, strong and full of 
spirit, who had carried B. for more than five hundred miles on the 
journey when the latter was too exhausted to walk. The affection be­
tween them was worth seeing. B. was a man of very good education, 
generous feelings and a lofty character which had been embittered 
and made irritable by illness. We used to manage the wheel together 
and the work interested us both. It was first-rate exercise for me. 
I was particularly fond, too, of shovelling away the snow. This had 
to be done as a rule after snowstorms, which were pretty frequent in 
winter. After a snowstorm lasting twenty-four hours, some houses 
would be snowed up to the middle of the windows and others would 
be almost buried. Then as soon as the storm was over and the sun 
came out, we were driven out in big gangs, sometimes the whole lot 
of us, to shovel away the snowdrifts from the government buildings. 
Everyone was given a spade, a task was set for all together, and some­
times such a task that it was a wonder they could get through it, and 
all set to work with a will. The soft new snow, a little frozen at the top, 
was easily lifted in huge spadefulls and was scattered about, turning to 
fine glistening powder in the air. The spade cut readily into the white 
mass sparkling in the sunshine. The convicts were almost always 

New Acquaintances. Petrov 
1 03 
merry over this job. The fresh winter air and the exercise warmed 
them up. Everyone grew more cheerful; there were sounds of laugh­
ter, shouts, jests. They began snowballing each other, not without 
protest, of course, from the serious ones, who were indignant at the 
laughter and merriment; and the general excitement usually ended in 
swearing. 
Little by little, I began to enlarge my circle of acquaintance. Though, 
indeed, I did not think of making acquaintances myself; I was still 
restless, gloomy and mistrustful. My acquaintanceships arose of them­
selves. One of the first to visit me was a convict called Petrov. I say visit 
me and I lay special emphasis on the word; Petrov was in the "special 
division," and lived in the part of the prison furthest from me. There 
could apparently be no connection between us, and we certainly had 
and could have nothing in common. And yet in those early days 
Petrov seemed to feel it his duty to come to our room to see me al­
most every day, or to stop me when I was walking in our leisure hour 
behind the prison as much out of sight as I could. At first I disliked 
this. But he somehow succeeded in making his visits a positive diver­
sion to me, though he was by no means a particularly sociable or 
talkative man. He was a short, strongly built man, agile and restless, 
pale with high cheek-bones and fearless eyes, with a rather pleasant 
face, fine white close-set teeth, and an everlasting plug of tobacco be­
tween them and his lower lip. This habit of holding tobacco in the 
mouth was common among the convicts. He seemed younger than 
his age. He was forty and looked no more than thirty. He always 
talked to me without a trace of constraint, and treated me exactly as 
his equal, that is, behaved with perfect good-breeding and delicacy. If 
he noticed, for instance, that I was anxious to be alone, he would 
leave me in two or three minutes after a few words of conversation, 
and he always thanked me for attending to him, a courtesy which he 
never showed, of course, to anyone else in prison. It is curious that 
such relations continued between us for several years and never be­
came more intimate, though he really was attached to me. I cannot to 
this day make up my mind what he wanted of me, why he came to 
me every day. Though he did happen to steal from me later on, he 
stole, as it were, by accident; he scarcely ever asked me for money, so he 
did not come for the sake of money or with any interested motive. 
I don't know why, but I always felt as though he were not living in 

1 04 
The House of the Dead 
prison with me, but somewhere far away in another house in the 
town, and that he only visited the prison in passing, to hear the news, 
to see me, to see how we were all getting on. He was always in a 
hurry, as though he had left someone waiting for him, or some job 
unfinished. And yet he did not seem flustered. The look in his eyes, 
too, was rather strange: intent, with a shade of boldness and mockery. 
Yet he looked, as it were, into the distance, as though beyond the 
things that met his eyes he were trying to make out something else, 
far away. This gave him an absent-minded look. I sometimes pur­
posely watched where Petrov went when he left me. Where was 
someone waiting for him? But he would hurry away from me to a 
prison ward or a kitchen, would sit down there beside some convicts, 
listen attentively to their conversation and sometimes take part in it 
himself, even speaking with heat; then he would suddenly break off 
and relapse into silence. But whether he were talking or sitting silent, 
it always appeared that he did so for a moment in passing, that he 
had something else to do and was expected elsewhere. The strangest 
thing was that he never had anything to do: he led a life of absolute 
leisure (except for the regulation work, of course) . He knew no sort 
of trade and he scarcely ever had any money. But he did not grieve 
much over the lack of it. And what did he talk to me about? His con­
versation was as strange as himself He would see, for instance, that I 
was walking alone behind the prison and would turn abruptly in my 
direction. He always walked qUickly and turned abruptly. 
He walked up, yet it seemed he must have been running. 
"Good morning." 
"Good morning." 
"I am not interrupting you?" 
"No." 
"I wanted to ask you about Napoleon. He is a relation of the one 
who was here in 1 8 1 2 , isn't he?"7 (Petrov was a kantonist and could 
read and write.) 
"Yes." 
"He is some sort of president, they say, isn't he?" 
He always asked rapid, abrupt questions, as though he were in a 
hurry to learn something. It seemed as though he were investigat­
ing some matter of great importance which would not admit of any 
delay. 

New Acquaintances. Petrov 
l O S 
I explained how he was a president and added that he might soon 
be an emperor. 
"How is that?" 
I explained that too, as far as I could. Petrov listened attentively, 
understanding perfectly and reflecting rapidly, even turning his ear 
towards me. 
"H'm . . .  I wanted to ask you, Alexandr Petrovitch: is it true, as 
they say, that there are monkeys with arms down to their heels and as 
big as a tall man?" 
"Yes, there are." 
"What are they like?" 
That, too, I explained as far as I was able. 
"And where do they live)" 
"In hot countries. There are some in the island of Sumatra." 
"That's in America, isn't it? Don't they say that the people in those 
parts walk on their heads?" 
"Not on their heads. You mean the Antipodes." 
I explained what America was like and what was meant by the An­
tipodes. He listened as attentively as though he had come simply to 
hear about the Antipodes. 
"A-ah! Last year I read about the Countess La Valliere. Arefyev got 
the book from the adjutant's. Is it true or is it just invented? It's writ­
ten by Dumas."8 
"It's invented, of course." 
"Well, good-bye. Thank you." 
And Petrov vanished, and we rarely talked except in this style. 
I began inquiring about him. M. positively warned me when he 
heard of the acquaintance. He told me that many of the convicts had 
inspired him with horror, especially at first, in his early days in 
prison; but not one of them, not even Gazin, had made such a terri­
ble impression on him as this Petrov. 
"He is the most determined, the most fearless of all the convicts," 
said M. "He is capable of anything; he would stick at nothing if the 
fancy took him. He would murder you if it happened to strike him; 
he would murder you in a minute without flinching or giving it a 
thought afterwards. I believe he is not quite in his right mind." 
This view interested me very much. But M. could give me no rea­
son for thinking so. And strange to say, I knew Petrov for several years 

1 06 
The House of the Dead 
afterwards and talked to him almost every day, he was genuinely at­
tached to me all that time (though I am absolutely unable to say why) 
and all those years he behaved well in prison and did nothing horri­
ble' yet every time I looked at him and talked to him I felt sure that M. 
was right, and that Petrov really was a most determined and fearless 
man who recognized no restraint of any sort. Why I felt this I can't 
explain either. 
I may mention, however, that this Petrov was the convict who had 
intended on being led out to be flogged to murder the major, when 
the latter was saved only "by a miracle" as the convicts said, through 
driving away just before. It had happened once, before he came to 
prison, that he had been struck by the colonel at drill. Probably he 
had been struck many times before, but this time he could not put up 
with it and he stabbed his colonel openly, in broad daylight, in the 
face of the regiment. But I don't know all the details of this story; he 
never told it me. No doubt these were only outbursts when the man's 
character showed itself fully all at once. But they were very rare in 
him. He really was sensible and even peaceable. Passions were latent 
in him, and hot, violent passions, too; but the burning embers were 
always covered with a layer of ashes and smouldered quietly. I never 
saw the faintest trace of vanity or boastfulness in him, as in others. He 
rarely quarrelled; on the other hand he was not particularly friendly 
with anyone, except perhaps with Sirotkin, and then only when the 
latter was of use to him. Once, however, I saw him seriously angry. 
Something was not given him, something which was properly his 
share. A convict in the civilian division called Vassily Antonov was 
quarrelling with him. He was a tall, powerful athlete, spiteful, quar­
relsome, malicious and very far from being a coward. They had been 
shouting at each other for a long time and I thought that the matter 
would at most end in a blow or two, for at times, though rarely, 
Petrov swore and fought like the meanest convict. But this time it was 
not so: Petrov suddenly blanched, his lips suddenly quivered and 
turned blue; he began breathing hard. He got up from his place and 
slowly, very slowly with his bare noiseless steps (in summer he was 
very fond of going barefoot) he approached Antonov. There was 
a sudden silence in the noisy shouting crowd; one could have heard 
a fly. Everyone waited to see what would happen. Antonov leapt up as 
he approached, looking aghast . . .  I could not bear the Sight of it and 

New Acquaintances. Petrov 
1 0 7 
left the room. I expected to hear the shriek of a murdered man before 
I had time to get down the steps. But this time, too, it ended in noth­
ing: before Petrov had time to reach him, Antonov hastily and in si­
lence flung him the object about which they were disputing, which 
was some old rag they used to put round their legs. Of course, two or 
three minutes later, Antonov swore at him a little to satisfy his con­
science and keep up appearances by showing that he was not quite 
cowed. But Petrov took no notice of his abuse, did not even answer it; 
it was not a question of abuse, the point had been won in his favour; 
he was very well pleased and took his rag. A quarter of an hour later, 
he was sauntering about the prison as usual with an air of complete 
unconcern, and seemed to be looking round to find people talking 
about something interesting, that he might poke his nose in and lis­
ten. Everything seemed to interest him, yet it somehow happened 
that he remained indifferent to most things and simply wandered 
aimlessly about the prison, drawn first one way and then another. 
One might have compared him with a workman, a stalwart workman 
who could send the work flying but was for a while without a job, and 
meantime sat playing with little children. I could not understand ei­
ther why he remained in prison, why he did not run away. He would 
not have hesitated to run away if he had felt any strong inclination to 
do so. Men like Petrov are only ruled by reason till they have some 
strong desire. Then there is no obstacle on earth that can hinder them. 
And I am sure he would have escaped cleverly, that he would have 
outwitted everyone, that he could have stayed for a week without 
bread, somewhere in the forest or in the reeds of the river. But he ev­
idently had not reached that point yet and did not fully desire it. I 
never noticed in him any great power of reflection or any marked 
common sense. These people are born with one fixed idea which un­
consciously moves them hither and thither; so they shift from one 
thing to another all their lives, till they find a work after their own 
hearts. Then they are ready to risk anything. I wondered sometimes 
how it was that a man who had murdered his officer for a blow could 
lie down under a flogging with such resignation. He was sometimes 
flogged when he was caught smuggling in vodka. Like all convicts 
without a trade he sometimes undertook to bring in vodka. But he 
lay down to be flogged, as it were with his own consent, that is, as 
though acknowledging that he deserved it; except for that, nothing 

1 08 
The House of the Dead 
would have induced him to lie down, he would have been killed first. 
I wondered at him, too, when he stole from me in spite of his un­
mistakable devotion. This seemed to come upon him, as it were, in 
streaks. It was he who stole my Bible when I asked him to carry 
it from one place to another. He had only a few steps to go, but he 
succeeded in finding a purchaser on the way, sold it, and spent the 
proceeds on drink. Evidently he wanted very much to drink, and any­
thing that he wanted very much he had to do. That is the sort of man 
who will murder a man for sixpence to get a bottle of vodka, though 
another time he would let a man pass with ten thousand pounds on 
him. In the evening he told me of the theft himself without the 
slightest embarrassment or regret, quite indifferently, as though it 
were a most ordinary incident. I tried to give him a good scolding; 
besides, I was sorry to lose my Bible. He listened without irritation, 
very meekly, in fact; agreed that the Bible was a very useful book, sin­
cerely regretted that I no longer possessed it, but expressed no regret 
at having stolen it; he looked at me with such complacency that I at 
once gave up scolding him. He accepted my scolding, probably re­
flecting that it was inevitable that one should be sworn at for such 
doings, and better I should relieve my feelings and console myself by 
swearing: but that it was all really nonsense, such nonsense that a se­
rious person would be ashamed to talk about it. It seemed to me that 
he looked upon me as a sort of child, almost a baby, who did not 
understand the simplest things in the world. If I began, for instance, 
on any subject not a learned or bookish one, he would answer 
me, indeed, but apparently only from politeness, confining himself 
to the briefest reply. I often wondered what the book knowledge 
about which he usually questioned me meant to him. I sometimes 
happened to look sideways at him during our conversations to see 
whether he were laughing at me. But no; usually he was listening 
seriously and even with some attention, though often so little that I 
felt annoyed. He asked exact and definite questions, but showed no 
great surprise at the information he got from me, and received it 
indeed rather absent-mindedly. I fancied, too, that he had made up 
his mind once for all, without bothering his head about it, that it 
was no use talking to me as one would to other people, that apart 
from talking of books I understood nothing and was incapable of 
understanding anything, so there was no need to worry me. 

New Acquaintances. Petrov 
1 09 
I am sure that he had a real affection for me, and that struck me 
very much. Whether he considered me undeveloped, not fully a man, 
or felt for me that special sort of compassion that every strong crea­
ture instinctively feels for someone weaker, recognizing me as such­
I don't know. And although all that did not prevent him from robbing 
me, I am sure he felt sorry for me as he did it. "Ech!" he may have 
thought as he laid hands on my property, "what a man, he can't even 
defend his own property! "  But I fancy that was what he liked me for. 
He said to me himself one day, as it were casually, that I was "a man 
with too good a heart" and "so simple, so simple, that it makes one 
feel sorry for you. Only don't take it amiss, Alexandr Petrovitch," he 
added a minute later, "I spoke without thinking, from my heart." 
It sometimes happens that such people come conspicuously to the 
front and take a prominent position at the moment of some violent 
mass movement or revolution, and in that way achieve all at once 
their full possibilities. They are not men of words and cannot be the 
instigators or the chief leaders of a movement; but they are its most 
vigorous agents and the first to act. They begin simply, with no special 
flourish, but they are the first to surmount the worst obstacles, facing 
every danger without reflection, without fear-and all rush after, 
blindly following them to the last wall, where they often lay down 
their lives. I do not believe that Petrov has come to a good end; he 
would make short work of everything all at once, and, if he has not 
perished yet, it is simply that the moment has not come. Who knows, 
though? Maybe he will live till his hair is grey and will die peaceably 
of old age, wandering aimlessly to and fro. But I believe M. was right 
when he said that Petrov was the most determined man in all the 
prison. 

C H A P T E R V I I I  
D E T E R M I N E D  C HARA C T E R S .  L U T C H KA 
IT IS DIFFICULT TO talk about "determined" characters; in prison as 
everywhere else they are few in number. A man may look terrible; if 
one considers what is said of him one keeps out of his way. An in­
stinctive feeling made me shun such people at first. Afterwards I 
changed my views in many respects, even about the most terrible 
murderers. Some who had never murdered anyone were more terri­
ble than others who had been convicted of six murders. There was an 
element of something so strange in some crimes that one could 
not form even a rudimentary conception of them. I say this because 
among the peasantry murders are sometimes committed for most as­
tounding reasons. The following type of murderer, for instance, is to 
be met with, and not uncommonly indeed. He lives qUietly and 
peaceably and puts up with a hard life. He may be a peasant, a house­
serf, a soldier or a workman. Suddenly something in him seems to 
snap; his patience gives way and he sticks a knife into his enemy and 
oppressor. Then the strangeness begins: the man gets out of all bounds 
for a time. The first man he murdered was his oppressor, his enemy; 
that is criminal but comprehensible; in that case there was a motive. 
But later on he murders not enemies but anyone he comes upon, 
murders for amusement, for an insulting word, for a look, to make a 
round number or simply "out of my way, don't cross my path, I am 
coming! "  The man is, as it were, drunk, in delirium. It is as though, 
haVing once overstepped the sacred limit, he begins to revel in the 
fact that nothing is sacred to him; as though he had an itching to defy 
all law and authority at once, and to enjoy the most unbridled and 
unbounded liberty, to enjoy the thrill of horror which he cannot help 
feeling at himself. He knows, too, that a terrible punishment is await­
ing him. All this perhaps is akin to the sensation with which a man 
gazes down from a high tower into the depths below his feet till at 
last it would be a relief to throw himself headlong-anything to put 
1 1 0 

Determined Characters. Lutchka 
I I I  
an end to it quickly. And this happens even to the most peaceable and 
till then inconspicuous people. Some of these people positively play 
a part to themselves in this delirium. The more down-trodden such 
a man has been before, the more he itches now to cut a dash, to strike 
terror into people. He enjoys their terror and likes even the repulsion 
he arouses in others. He assumes a sort of desperateness, and a desperate 
character sometimes looks forward to speedy punishment, looks for­
ward to being settled, because he finds it burdensome at last to keep up 
his assumed recklessness. It is curious that in most cases all this state 
of mind, this whole pose persists up to the moment of the scaffold, 
and then it is cut short once for all; as though its duration were pre­
scribed and defined beforehand. At the end of it, the man suddenly 
gives in, retires into the background and becomes as limp as a rag. 
He whimpers on the scaffold and begs forgiveness of the crowd. He 
comes to prison and he is such a drivelling, snivelling fellow that 
one wonders whether he can be the man who has murdered five or 
six people. 
Some, of course, are not soon subdued even in prison. They still 
preserve a certain bravado, a certain boastfulness which seems to say 
"I am not what you take me for; I am in for six souls! "  But yet he, 
too, ends by being subdued. Only at times he amuses himself by re­
calling his reckless exploits, the festive time he once had when he 
was a "desperate character," and if he can only find a Simple-hearted 
listener there is nothing he loves better than to give himself airs and 
boast with befitting dignity, describing his feats, though he is careful 
not to betray the pleasure this gives him. "See the sort of man I was," 
he seems to say. 
And with what subtlety this pose is maintained, how lazily casual 
the story sometimes is! What studied nonchalance is apparent in the 
tone, in every word! Where do such people pick it up? 
Once in those early days I spent a long evening lying idle and de­
pressed on the plank bed and listened to such a story, and in my inex­
perience took the storyteller to be a colossal, hideous criminal of an 
incredible strength of will, while I was inclined to take Petrov lightly. 
The subject of the narrative was how the speaker, Luka Kuzmitch, for 
no motive but his own amusement had laid out a major. This Luka 
Kuzmitch was the little, thin, sharp-nosed young convict in our room, 
a Little Russian by birth, whom I have mentioned already. He was really 

1 1 2 
The House of the Dead 
a Great Russian, but had been born in the south; I believe he was a 
house-serf There was really something pert and aggressive about him, 
"though the bird is small its claw is sharp." But convicts instinctively 
see through a man. They had very little respect for him, or as the con­
victs say, "little respect to him." He was fearfully vain. He was sitting 
that evening on the platform bed, sewing a shirt. Sewing undergar­
ments was his trade. Beside him was sitting a convict called Kobylin, a 
tall, stalwart lad, stupid and dull-witted but good-natured and friendly, 
who slept next to him on the bed. As they were neighbours, Lutchka 
frequently quarrelled with him and generally treated him supercil­
iously, ironically and despotically, of which Kobylin in his simplicity 
was not fully conscious. He was knitting a woollen stocking listening 
indifferently to Lutchka. The latter was telling his story rather loudly 
and distinctly. He wanted everyone to hear, though he tried to pretend 
that he was telling no one but Kobylin. 
"Well, brother, they sent me from our parts," he began, sticking in 
his needle, "to Tch-v for being a tramp." 
"When was that, long ago?" asked Kobylin. 
"It will be a year ago when the peas come in. Well, when we came 
to K. they put me in prison there for a little time. In prison with me 
there were a dozen fellows, all Little Russians, tall, healthy, and as 
strong as bulls. But they were such quiet chaps; the food was bad; the 
major did as he liked with them. I hadn't been there two days before 
I saw they were a cowardly lot. 'Why do you knuckle under to a fool 
like that?' says I. 
" 'You go and talk to him yourself! ' they said, and they fairly 
laughed at me. I didn't say anything. One of those Little Russians was 
particularly funny, lads," he added suddenly, abandoning Kobylin and 
addreSSing the company generally. "He used to tell us how he was 
tried and what he said in court, and kept crying as he told us; he had 
a wife and children left behind, he told us. And he was a big, stout, 
grey-headed old fellow. 'I says to him: nay!' he told us. And he, the dev­
irs son, kept on writing and writing. 'Well: says I to myself, 'may you 
choke. I'd be pleased to see it.' And he kept on writing and writing and 
at last he'd written something and it was my ruin! Give me some 
thread, Vassya, the damned stuff is rotten." 
"It's from the market," said Vassya, giving him some thread. 
"Ours in the tailoring shop is better. The other day we sent our 

Determined Characters. Lutchka 
1 1 3 
veteran for some and I don't know what wretched woman he buys it 
from," Lutchka went on, threading his needle by the light. 
"A crony of his no doubt." 
"No doubt." 
"Well, but what about the major?" asked Kobylin, who had been 
quite forgotten. 
This was all Lutchka wanted. But he did not go on with his story at 
once; apparently he did not deign to notice Kobylin. He calmly 
pulled out his thread, calmly and lazily drew up his legs under him 
and at last began to speak. 
"I worked up my Little Russians at last and they asked for the ma­
jor. And I borrowed a knife from my neighbour that morning; I took 
it and hid it to be ready for anything. The major flew into a rage and 
he drove up. 'Come: said I, 'don't funk it, you chaps.' But their hearts 
failed them, they were all of a tremble! The major ran in, drunk. 'Who 
is here? What's here? I am Tsar, I am God, too.' As he said that I 
stepped forward," Lutchka proceeded, "my knife in my sleeve. 
" 'No: said I, 'your honour,' and little by little I got closer. 'No, how 
can it be, your honour: said I, 'that you are our Tsar and God too?' 
" 'Ah, that's you, that's you: shouted the major. 'You mutinous 
fellow! '  
" 'No: I said, and I got closer and closer. 'No: I said, 'your honour, 
as may be well known to yourself, our God the Almighty and All Pres­
ent is the only One. And there is only one Tsar set over us by God 
himself. He, your honour, is called a monarch: says 1. 'And you: says 
I, 'your honour, are only a major, our commander by the grace of the 
Tsar and your merits: says I. 'What, what, what, what!' he fairly cack­
led; he choked and couldn't speak. He was awfully astonished. 'Why, 
this,' says I, and I just pounced on him and plunged the whole knife 
into his stomach. It did the trick. He rolled over and did not move ex­
cept for his legs kicking. I threw down the knife. 'Look, you fellows, 
pick him up now I ' says 1." 
Here I must make a digression. Unhappily such phrases as "I am 
your Tsar, I am your God, too," and many similar expressions were 
not uncommonly used in old days by many commanding officers. It 
must be admitted, however, that there are not many such officers left; 
perhaps they are extinct altogether. I may note that the officers who 
liked to use and prided themselves on using such expressions were 

1 1 4 
The House of the Dead 
mostly those who had risen from the lower ranks. Their promotion 
turns everything topsy-turvy in them, including their brains. After 
groaning under the yoke for years and passing through every subor­
dinate grade, they suddenly see themselves officers, gentlemen in 
command, and in the first intoxication of their position their inexpe­
rience leads them to an exaggerated idea of their power and impor­
tance; only in relation to their subordinates, of course. To their 
superior officers they show the same servility as ever, though it is ut­
terly unnecessary and even revolting to many people. Some of these 
servile fellows hasten with peculiar zest to declare to their superior 
officers that they come from the lower ranks, though they are offi­
cers, and that "they never forget their place." But with the common 
soldiers they are absolutely autocratic. Now, of course, there are 
scarcely any of these men left, and I doubt if anyone could be found 
to shout, "I am your Tsar, I am your God." But in spite of that, I may 
remark that nothing irritates convicts, and indeed all people of the 
poorer class, so much as such utterances on the part of their officers. 
This insolence of self-glorification, this exaggerated idea of being 
able to do anything with impunity, inspires hatred in the most sub­
missive of men and drives them out of all patience. Fortunately this 
sort of behaviour, now almost a thing of the past, was always severely 
repressed by the authorities even in old days. I know several instances 
of it. 
And, indeed, people in a humble position generally are irritated 
by any supercilious carelessness, any sign of contempt shown them. 
Some people think that if convicts are well fed and well kept and all 
the requirements of the law are satisfied, that is all that is necessary. 
This is an error, too. Everyone, whoever he may be and however 
down-trodden he may be, demands-though perhaps instinctively, 
perhaps unconsciously-respect for his dignity as a human being. 
The convict knows himself that he is a convict, an outcast, and knows 
his place before his commanding officer; but by no branding, by no 
fetters will you make him forget that he is a human being. And as he 
really is a human being he ought to be treated humanely. My God, 
yes! Humane treatment may humanize even one in whom the image 
of God has long been obscured. These "unfortunates" need even 
more humane treatment than others. It is their salvation and their joy. 
I have met some good-hearted, high-minded officers. I have seen the 

Determined Characters. Lutchka 
1 1 5 
influence they exerted on these degraded creatures. A few kind words 
from them meant almost a moral resurrection for the convicts. They 
were as pleased as children and as children began to love them. I 
must mention another strange thing: the convicts themselves do not 
like to be treated too familiarly and too softly by their officers. They 
want to respect those in authority over them, and too much softness 
makes them cease to respect them. The convicts like their command­
ing officer to have decorations, too, they like him to be presentable, 
they like him to be in favour with some higher authority, they like 
him to be strict and important and just, and they like him to keep up 
his dignity. The convicts prefer such an officer: they feel that he keeps 
up his own dignity and does not insult them, and so they feel every­
thing is right and as it should be. 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
"You must have caught it hot for that?" Kobylin observed calmly. 
"H'm! Hot, my boy, yes-it was hot certainly. Aley, pass the scis­
sors! Why is it they are not playing cards to-day, lads?" 
"They've drunk up all their money," observed Vassya. "If they 
hadn't they'd have been playing." 
"If! They'll give you a hundred roubles for an 'if ' in Moscow," ob­
served Lutchka. 
"And how much did you get altogether, Lutchka?" Kobylin began 
again. 
"They gave me a hundred and five, my dear chap. And, you know, 
they almost killed me, mates," Lutchka declared, abandoning Kobylin 
again. "They drove me out in full dress to be flogged. Till then I'd 
never tasted the lash. There were immense crowds, the whole town 
ran out: a robber was to be flogged, a murderer, to be sure. You can't 
think what fools the people are, there's no telling you. The hangman 
stripped me, made me lie down and shouted, 'Look out, I'll sting you: 
I wondered what was coming. At the first lash I wanted to shout, I 
opened my mouth but there was no shout in me. My voice failed me. 
When the second lash came, you may not believe it, I did not hear 
them count two. And when I came to I heard them call 'seventeen: Four 
times, lad, they took me off the donkey, and gave me half an hour's 
rest and poured water over me. I looked at them all with my eyes start­
ing out of my head and thought 'I shall die on the spot . . .  : " 
"And you didn't die?" Kobylin asked naIvely. 

1 1 6 
The House of the Dead 
Lutchka scanned him with a glance of immense contempt; there 
was a sound of laughter. 
"He is a regular block! "  
"He is not quite right in the top storey," observed Lutchka, as 
though regretting he had deigned to converse with such a man. 
"He is a natural," Vassya summed up conclusively. 
Though Lutchka had murdered six people no one was ever afraid 
of him in the prison, yet perhaps it was his cherished desire to be 
considered a terrible man. 

C H A P T E R I X  
I SAY F O M I T C H - T H E  BAT H - H O U S E ­
BAKL U S H I N ' S  S TO RY 
CHRISTMAS WAS APPROACHING. THE convicts looked forward to it with a 
sort of solemnity, and looking at them, I too began to expect some­
thing unusual. Four days before Christmas Day they took us to the 
bath-house. In my time, especially in the early years, the convicts 
were rarely taken to the bath-house. All were pleased and began to get 
ready. It was arranged to go after dinner, and that afternoon there was 
no work. The one who was most pleased and excited in our room 
was Isay Fomitch Bumshtein, a Jewish convict whom I have men­
tioned in the fourth chapter of my story. He liked to steam himself 
into a state of stupefaction, of unconsciousness; and whenever going 
over old memories I recall our prison baths (which deserve to be re­
membered) , the blissful countenance of that prison comrade, whom 
I shall never forget, takes a foremost place in the picture. Heavens, 
how killingly funny he was! I have already said something about his 
appearance: he was a thin, feeble, puny man of fifty, with a wrinkled 
white body like a chicken's and on his cheeks and forehead awful 
scars left from being branded. His face wore a continual expression of 
imperturbable self-complacency and even blissfulness. Apparently he 
felt no regret at being in prison. As he was a jeweller and there were 
no jewellers in the town, he worked continually at nothing but his 
own trade for the gentry and officials of the town. He received some 
payment for his work. He wanted for nothing, was even rich, but 
he saved money and used to lend it out at interest to all the convicts. 
He had a samovar of his own, a good mattress, cups, and a whole 
dining outfit. The Jews in the town did not refuse him their acquain­
tance and patronage. On Saturdays he used to go with an escort to the 
synagogue in the town (which is sanctioned by law) . He was in 
clover, in fact. At the same time he was impatiently awaiting the end 
of his twelve years' sentence "to get married." He was a most comical 
mixture of naivete, stupidity, craft, impudence, good-nature, timidity, 
1 1 7 

1 1 8 
The House of the Dead 
boastfulness and insolence. It surprised me that the convicts never 
jeered at him, though they sometimes made a joke at his expense. 
Isay Fomitch was evidently a continual source of entertainment and 
amusement to all. "He is our only one, don't hurt Isay Fomitch," was 
what they felt, and although Isay Fomitch saw his position he was ob­
viously proud of being so important and that greatly amused the con­
victs. His arrival in the prison was fearfully funny (it happened before 
my time, but I was told of it) . One day, in the leisure hour towards 
evening, a TUmour suddenly spread through the prison that a Jew had 
been brought, and was being shaved in the guard-room and that he 
would come in directly. There was not a single Jew in the prison at the 
time. The convicts waited with impatience and surrounded him at 
once when he came in at the gate. The sergeant led him to the civilian 
room and showed him his place on the common bed. Isay Fomitch 
carried in his arms a sack containing his own belongings, together 
with the regulation articles which had been given to him. He laid 
down the sack, climbed on to the bed and sat down, tucking his feet 
under him, not daring to raise his eyes. There were sounds of laugh­
ter and prison jokes alluding to his Jewish origin. Suddenly a young 
convict made his way through the crowd carrying in his hand his 
very old, dirty, tattered summer trousers, together with the regula­
tion leg-wrappers. He sat down beside Isay Fomitch and slapped him 
on the shoulder. 
"I say, my dear friend, I've been looking out for you these last six 
years. Look here, how much will you give?" 
And he spread the rags out before him. 
Isay Fomitch, who had been too timid to utter a word and so cowed 
at his first entrance that he had not dared to raise his eyes in the crowd 
of mocking, disfigured and terrible faces which hemmed him in, was 
cheered at once at the Sight of the proffered pledge, and began briskly 
turning over the rags. He even held them up to the light. Everyone 
waited to hear what he would say. 
"Well, you won't give me a silver rouble, I suppose? It's worth it, 
you know," said the would-be borrower, winking at Isay Fomitch. 
"A silver rouble, no, but seven kopecks maybe." 
And those were the first words uttered by Isay Fomitch in prison. 
Everyone roared with laughter. 
"Seven! Well, give me seven, then; it's a bit of luck for you. Mind 

Isay Fomitch-The Bath-House-Baklushin's Story 
1 1 9 
you take care of the pledge; it's as much as your life's worth if you 
lose it." 
"With three kopecks interest makes ten," the Jew went on jerkily 
in a shaking voice, putting his hand in his pocket for the money and 
looking timidly at the convicts. He was fearfully scared, and at the 
same time he wanted to do business. 
"Three kopecks a year interest, I suppose?" 
"No, not a year, a month." 
"You are a tight customer, Jew! What's your name?" 
"1say Fomitch." 
"Well, 1say Fomitch, you'll get on finely here! Good-bye." Isay 
Fomitch examined the pledge once more, folded it up carefully and 
put it in his sack in the midst of the still laughing convicts. 
Everyone really seemed to like him and no one was rude to him, 
though almost all owed him money. He was himself as free from mal­
ice as a hen, and, seeing the general goodwill with which he was re­
garded, he even swaggered a little, but with such simple-hearted 
absurdity that he was forgiven at once. Lutchka, who had known 
many Jews in his day, often teased him and not out of ill-feeling, but 
simply for diversion, just as one teases dogs, parrots, or any sort of 
trained animal. Isay Fomitch saw that clearly, was not in the least of­
fended and answered him back adroitly. 
"Hey, Jew, I'll give you a dressing! "  
"You give me one blow and I'll give you ten," Isay Fomitch would 
respond gallantly. 
"You damned scab!" 
"1 don't care if 1 am." 
"You itching Jew! " 
"I don't care if I am. I may itch, but I am rich; I've money." 
"You sold Christ." 
"I don't care if I did." 
"That's right, Isay Fomitch, bravo! Don't touch him, he's the only 
one we've got," the convicts would shout, laughing. 
"Aie, Jew, you'll get the whip, you'll be sent to Siberia." 
"Why, I am in Siberia now." 
"Well, you'll go further." 
"And is the Lord God there, too?" 
"Well, I suppose he is." 

1 20 
The House of the Dead 
"Well, I don't mind, then. If the Lord God is there and there's 
money, I shall be all right everywhere." 
"Bravo, Isay Fomitch, you are a fine chap, no mistake! "  the convicts 
shouted round him, and though Isay Fomitch saw they were laughing 
at him, he was not cast down. 
The general approval afforded him unmistakable pleasure and he 
began carolling a shrill little chant "la-la-la-la-la" all over the prison, 
an absurd and ridiculous tune without words, the only tune he 
hummed all the years he was in prison. Afterwards, when he got to 
know me better, he protested on oath to me that that was the very 
song and the very tune that the six hundred thousand Jews, big and 
little, had sung as they crossed the Red Sea, and that it is ordained for 
every Jew to sing that song at the moment of triumph and victory 
over his enemies. 
Every Friday evening convicts came to our ward from other parts of 
the prison on purpose to see Isay Fomitch celebrate his Sabbath. Isay 
Fomitch was so naively vain and boastful that this general interest gave 
him pleasure, too. With pedantic and studied gravity he covered his lit­
tle table in the corner, opened his book, lighted two candles and mut­
tering some mysterious words began putting on his vestment. It was a 
parti-coloured shawl of woollen material which he kept carefully in his 
box. He tied phylacteries on both hands and tied some sort of wooden 
ark by means of a bandage on his head, right over his forehead, so that 
it looked like a ridiculous horn sprouting out of his forehead. Then the 
prayer began. He repeated it in a chant, uttered cries, spat on the floor, 
and turned round, making wild and absurd gesticulations. All this, of 
course, was part of the ceremony and there was nothing absurd or 
strange about it, but what was absurd was that Isay Fomitch seemed 
purposely to be playing a part before us, and made a show of his ritual. 
Suddenly he would hide his head in his hands and recite with sobs. The 
sobs grew louder and in a state of exhaustion and almost howling he 
would let his head crowned with the ark drop on the book; but sud­
denly, in the middle of the most violent sobbing he would begin to 
laugh and chant in a voice broken with feeling and solemnity, and 
weak with bliss. "Isn't he going it! " the convicts commented. I once 
asked Isay Fomitch what was the meaning of the sobs and then the sud­
den solemn transition to happiness and bliss. Isay Fomitch particularly 
liked such questions from me. He at once explained to me that 

Isay Fomitch-The Batb-House-BakJusbin's Story 
1 2 1  
the weeping and sobbing were aroused at the thought of the loss of 
Jerusalem, and that the ritual prescribed sobbing as violently as possi­
ble and beating the breast at the thought. But at the moment of the 
loudest sobbing, he, Isay Fomitch, was suddenly. as it were accidentally 
(the suddenness was also prescribed by the ritual) , to remember that 
there is a prophecy of the return of the Jews to Jerusalem. Then he must 
at once burst into joy, song, and laughter, and must repeat his prayers 
in such a way that his voice itself should express as much happiness 
as possible and his face should express all the solemnity and dignity of 
which it was capable. This sudden transition and the obligation to make 
it were a source of extreme pleasure to Isay Fomitch: he saw in it a very 
subtle kiinst-stuck, and boastfully told me of this difficult rule. Once 
when the prayer was in full swing the major came into the ward ac­
companied by the officer on duty and the sentries. All the convicts 
drew themselves up by the bed; Isay Fomitch alone began shouting and 
carrying on more than ever. He knew that the prayer was not prohib­
ited, it was impossible to interrupt it, and, of course, there was no risk 
in his shouting before the major. But he particularly enjoyed making a 
display before the major and showing off before us. The major went up 
within a step of him. Isay Fomitch turned with his back to his table and 
waving his hands began chanting his solemn prophecy right in the ma­
jor's face. As it was prescribed for him to express extreme happiness and 
dignity in his face at that moment, he did so immediately. screwing up 
his eyes in a peculiar way, laughing and nodding his head at the major. 
The major was surprised but finally went off into a guffaw, called him a 
fool to his face and walked away; and Isay Fomitch vociferated louder 
than ever. An hour later, when he was having supper, I asked him, "And 
what if the major in his foolishness had flown into a rage?" 
"What major?" 
"What major! Why, didn't you see him?" 
"No," 
"Why, he stood not a yard away from you, just facing you." 
But Isay Fomitch began earnestly assuring me that he had not seen 
the major and that at the time, during the prayer, he was usually in 
such a state of ecstasy that he saw nothing and heard nothing of what 
was going on around him. 
I can see Isay Fomitch before me now as he used to wander about 
the prison on Saturdays with nothing to do, making tremendous 

1 22 
The House of the Dead 
efforts to do nothing at all, as prescribed by the law of the Sabbath. 
What incredible anecdotes he used to tell me every time he came 
back from the synagogue! What prodigious news and rumours from 
Petersburg he used to bring me, assuring me that he had got them 
from his fellow Jews, and that they had them first-hand. 
But I have said too much of Isay Fomitch. 
There were only two public baths in the town. One of these, which 
was kept by a Jew, consisted of separate bathrooms, for each of which 
a fee of fifty kopecks was charged. It was an establishment for people 
of the higher class. The other bath-house was intended for the work­
ing class; it was dilapidated, dirty and small, and it was to this house 
that we convicts were taken. It was frosty and sunny, and the convicts 
were delighted at the very fact of getting out of the fortress grounds 
and looking at the town. The jokes and laughter never flagged all the 
way. A whole platoon of soldiers with loaded rifles accompanied us, 
to the admiration of the whole town. In the bath-house we were im­
mediately divided into two relays: the second relay had to wait in the 
cold ante-room while the first were washing themselves. This divi­
sion was necessary, because the bath-house was so small. But the 
space was so limited that it was difficult to imagine how even half of 
our number could find room. Yet Petrov did not desert me; he 
skipped up of his own accord to help, and even offered to wash me. 
Another convict who offered me his services was Baklushin, a pris­
oner in the "special division" who was nicknamed "the pioneer," and 
to whom I have referred already as one of the liveliest and most 
charming of the convicts, as indeed he was. I was already slightly ac­
quainted with him. Petrov even helped me to undress, for, not being 
used to it, I was slow undressing, and it was cold in the ante-room, 
almost as cold as in the open air. 
It is, by the way, very difficult for a convict to undress till he has 
quite mastered the art. To begin with, one has to learn how to unlace 
quickly the bands under the ankle irons. These bands are made of 
leather, are eight inches in length and are put on over the undergar­
ment, just under the ring that goes round the ankle. A pair of these 
bands costs no less than sixty kopecks and yet every convict procures 
them, at his own expense, of course, for it is impossible to walk with­
out them. The ring does not fit tightly on the leg, one can put one's 
finger in between, so that the iron strikes against the flesh and rubs it, 

Isay Fomitch-The Bath-HousØBakIushin's Story 
1 23 
and without the leather a convict would rub his leg into a sore in 
a day. But to get off the bands is not difficult. It is more difficult to 
learn how to get off one's underlinen from under the fetters. It is 
quite a special art. Drawing off the undergarments from the left leg, 
for instance, one has first to pull it down between the ring and the leg, 
then freeing one's foot one has to draw the linen up again between the 
leg and the ring; then the whole of the left leg of the garment has to 
be slipped through the ring on the right ankle, and pulled back again. 
One has to go through the same business when one puts on clean 
linen. It is hard for a novice even to guess how it can be done; I was 
first taught how to do it at Tobolsk by a convict called Korenev, who 
had been the chief of a band of robbers and had been for five years 
chained to the wall. But the convicts get used to it, and go through the 
operation without the slightest difficulty. 
I gave Petrov a few kopecks to get me soap and a handful of tow; 
soap was, indeed, served out to the convicts, a piece each, the size of a 
halfpenny and as thick as the slices of cheese served at the beginning 
of supper among middle-class people. Soap was sold in the ante-room 
as well as hot spiced mead, rolls and hot water. By contract with the 
keeper of the bath-house, each convict was allowed only one bucket­
ful of hot water; everyone who wanted to wash himself cleaner could 
get for a half-penny another bucketful, which was passed from the 
ante-room into the bathroom through a little window made on pur­
pose. When he had undressed me, Petrov took me by the arm, notic­
ing that it was very difficult for me to walk in fetters. 
"You must pull them higher, on to your calves," he kept repeating, 
supporting me as though he were my nurse, .. and now be careful, 
here's a step." 
I felt a little ashamed, indeed; I wanted to assure Petrov that I could 
walk alone, but he would not have believed it. He treated me exactly 
like a child not able to manage alone, whom everyone ought to help. 
Petrov was far from being a servant, he was pre-eminently not a ser­
vant; if I had offended him, he would have known how to deal with 
me. I had not promised him payment for his services, and he did not 
ask for it himself. What induced him, then, to look after me in this 
way? 
When we opened the door into the bathroom itself, I thought we 
were entering hell. Imagine a room twelve paces long and the same 

1 24 
The House of the Dead 
in breadth, in which perhaps as many as a hundred and certainly as 
many as eighty were packed at once, for the whole party were di­
vided into only two relays, and we were close on two hundred; steam 
blinding one's eyes; filth and grime; such a crowd that there was not 
room to put one's foot down. I was frightened and tried to step back, 
but Petrov at once encouraged me. With extreme difficulty we some­
how forced our way to the benches round the wall, stepping over the 
heads of those who were sitting on the floor, asking them to duck 
to let us get by: But every place on the benches was taken. Petrov in­
formed me that one had to buy a place and at once entered into ne­
gotiations with a convict sitting near the window. For a kopeck the 
latter gave up his place, receiving the money at once from Petrov, 
who had the coin ready in his fist, having providently brought it with 
him into the bathroom. The convict I had ousted at once ducked un­
der the bench just under my place, where it was dark and filthy, and 
the dirty slime lay two inches thick. But even the space under the 
benches was all filled; there, too, the place was alive with human be­
ings. There was not a spot on the floor as big as the palm of your 
hand where there was not a convict squatting, splashing from his 
bucket. Others stood up among them and holding their buckets 
in their hands washed themselves standing; the dirty water trickled 
off them on to the shaven heads of the convicts sitting below them. 
On the top shelf and on all the steps leading up to it men were 
crouched, huddled together washing themselves. But they did not 
wash themselves much. Men of the peasant class don't wash much 
with soap and hot water; they only steam themselves terribly and then 
douche themselves with cold water-that is their whole idea of a 
bath. Fifty birches were rising and falling rhythmically on the shelves; 
they all thrashed themselves into a state of stupefaction. More steam 
was raised every moment. It was not heat; it was hell. All were shout­
ing and vociferating to the accompaniment of a hundred chains clank­
ing on the floor . . .  Some of them, wanting to pass, got entangled in 
other men's chains and caught in their owns chains the heads of 
those below them; they fell down, swore, and dragged those they 
caught after them. liquid filth ran in all directions. Everyone seemed 
in a sort of intoxicated, over-excited condition; there were shrieks 
and cries. By the window of the ante-room from which the water 
was handed out there was swearing, crowding, and a regular scuffle. 

Isay Fomitcb-The Bath-House-Baklushin's Story 
1 25 
The fresh hot water was spilt over the heads of those who were sit­
ting on the floor before it reached its destination. Now and then the 
moustached face of a soldier with a gun in his hand peeped in at the 
window or the half-open door to see whether there were anything 
wrong. The shaven heads and crimson steaming bodies of the con­
victs seemed more hideous than ever. As a rule the steaming backs of 
the convicts show distinctly the scars of the blows or lashes they have 
received in the past, so that all those backs looked now as though 
freshly wounded. The scars were horrible! A shiver ran down me at 
the sight of them. They pour more boiling water on the hot bricks 
and clouds of thick, hot steam fill the whole bath-house; they all 
laugh and shout. Through the cloud of steam one gets glimpses of 
scarred backs, shaven heads, bent arms and legs; and to complete the 
picture Isay Fomitch is shouting with laughter on the very top shelf. 
He is steaming himself into a state of unconsciousness, but no degree 
of heat seems to satisfy him; for a kopeck he has hired a man to beat 
him, but the latter is exhausted at last, flings down his birch and runs 
off to douche himself with cold water. Isay Fomitch is not discour­
aged and hires another and a third; he is resolved on such an occasion 
to disregard expense and hires even, a fifth man to wield the birch. 
"He knows how to steam himself, bravo, Isay Fomitch! "  the convicts 
shout to him from below. Isay Fomitch, for his part, feels that at the 
moment he is superior to everyone and has outdone them all; he is 
triumphant, and in a shrill crazy voice screams out his tune "la-Ia-Ia­
la-Ia," which rises above all the other voices. It occurred to me that if 
one day we should all be in hell together it would be very much like 
this place. I could not help expressing this thought to Petrov; he 
merely looked round and said nothing. 
I wanted to buy him, too, a place beside me, but he sat down at 
my feet and declared that he was very comfortable. Meantime 
Baklushin was buying us water and brought it as we wanted it. Petrov 
declared that he would wash me from head to foot, "so that you will 
be all nice and clean," and he urged me to be steamed. This I did not 
venture on. Petrov soaped me all over. "And now I'll wash your little 
feet, " he added in conclusion. I wanted to reply that I could wash 
them myself, but I did not contradict him and gave myself into his 
hands completely. There was not the faintest note of serVility about 
the expression "little feet" ; it was simply that Petrov could not call my 

1 26 
The House of the Dead 
feet simply feet, probably because other real people had feet, while 
mine were "little feet." 
After having washed me he led me back to the ante-room with the 
same ceremonies, that is , giving me the same support and warnings 
at every step, as though I were made of china. Then he helped me to 
put on my linen, and only when he had quite finished with me he 
rushed back to the bathroom to steam himself 
When we got home I offered him a glass of tea. Tea he did not re­
fuse; he emptied the glass and thanked me. I thought I would be lav­
ish and treat him to a glass of vodka. This was forthcoming in our 
ward. Petrov was extremely pleased; he drank it, cleared his throat 
and observing that I had quite revived him, hurried off to the kitchen 
as though there were something there that could not be settled with­
out him. His place was taken by another visitor, Baklushin "the pio­
neer," whom I had invited to have tea with me before we left the 
bath-house. 
I don't know a more charming character than Baklushin's. It was 
true that he would not knuckle under to anyone; indeed, he often 
quarrelled, he did not like people to meddle with his affairs-in 
short, he knew how to take his own part. But he never quarrelled for 
long, and I believe we all liked him. Wherever he went everyone met 
him with pleasure. He was known even in the town as the most 
amusing fellow in the world who was always in high spirits. He was 
a tall fellow of thirty with a good-natured and spirited countenance, 
rather good-looking, though he had a wart on his face. He could con­
tort his features in a killing way, mimicking anyone he came across, 
so that no one near him could help laughing. He, too, belonged to 
the class of comic men, but he would not be set upon by those who 
despised and detested laughter, so they never abused him for being a 
"foolish and useless" person. He was full of fire and life. He made my 
acquaintance during my first days and told me that he was a kanton­
ist and had afterwards served in the pioneers, and had even been no­
ticed and favoured by some great personages, a fact which he still 
remembered with great pride. He began at once questioning me 
about Petersburg. He even used to read. When he came to have tea 
with me he at once entertained the whole ward by describing what 
a dressing down Lieutenant S. had given the major that morning, and 
sitting down beside me, he told me with a look of pleasure, that the 

Isay Fomitch-The Bath-House-Baklushin's Story 
1 2 7 
theatricals would probably come off. They were getting up theatricals 
in the prison for Christmas. Actors had been discovered, and scenery 
was being got ready by degrees. Some people in the town had prom­
ised to lend dresses for the actors, even for the female characters; they 
positively hoped by the assistance of an orderly to obtain an officer's 
uniform with epaulettes. If only the major did not take it into his 
head to forbid it, as he did last year. But last Christmas he had been in 
a bad temper: he had lost at cards somewhere, and, besides, there had 
been mischief in the prison, so he had forbidden it out of spite; but 
now perhaps he would not want to hinder it. In short, Baklushin was 
excited. It was evident that he was one of the most active in getting 
up the performance, and I inwardly resolved on the spot that I would 
certainly be present. Baklushin's simple-hearted delight that every­
thing was going well with the theatricals pleased me. Little by little, 
we got into talk. Among other things he told me that he had not 
always served in Petersburg; that he had been guilty of some misde­
meanour there and had been transferred to R. , though as a sergeant 
in a garrison regiment. 
"It was from there I was sent here," observed Baklushin. 
"But what for?" I asked. 
"What for? What do you think it was for, Alexandr Petrovitch? Be­
cause I fell in love." 
"Oh, well, they don't send people here for that yet," I retorted 
laughing. 
"It is true," Baklushin added, "it's true that through that I shot a 
German there with my pistol. But was the German worth sending me 
here for, tell me that! " 
"But how was it? Tell me, it's interesting." 
"It's a very funny story, Alexandr Petrovitch." 
"So much the better. Tell me." 
"Shall I? Well, listen, then." 
I heard a strange, though not altogether amusing, story of a murder. 
"This is how it was," Baklushin began. "When I was sent to R. I saw 
it was a fine big town, only there were a lot of Germans in it. Well, of 
course, I was a young man then; I stood well with the officers; I used to 
pass the time walking about with my cap on one side, winking at the 
German girls. And one little German girl, Luise, took my fancy. They 
were both laundresses, only doing the finest work, she and her aunt. 

1 28 
The House of the Dead 
Her aunt was a stuck-up old thing and they were well of[ I used to 
walk up and down outside their windows at first, and then I got to be 
real friends with her. Luise spoke Russian well, too, she only lisped a 
little, as it were--she was such a darling, I never met one like her . . .  I 
was for being too free at first, but she said to me, 'No, you mustn't, 
Sasha, for I want to keep all my innocence to make you a good wife,' 
and she'd only caress me and laugh like a bell . . .  and she was such a 
clean little thing, I never saw anyone like her. She suggested our getting 
married herself Now, could I help marrying her, tell me that? So I 
made up my mind to go to the lieutenant -colonel for permission. . . .  
One day I noticed Luise did not turn up at our meeting-place, and 
again a second time she didn't come, and again a third. I sent a letter; 
no answer. What is it? I wondered. If she had been deceiving me she 
would have contrived somehow, have answered the letter, and have 
come to meet me. But she did not know how to tell a lie, so she simply 
cut it of[ It's her aunt, I thought. I didn't dare go to the aunt's; though 
she knew it, we always met on the quiet. I went about as though I were 
crazy; I wrote her a last letter and said, 'If you don't come I shall come 
to your aunt's myself She was frightened and came. She cried; she told 
me that a German called Schultz, a distant relation, a watch-maker, 
well-off and elderly, had expressed a desire to marry her-'to make me 
happy,' he says, and not to be left without a wife in his old age; and he 
loves me, he says, and he's had the idea in his mind for a long time, but 
he kept putting it off and saying nothing. 'You see, Sasha,' she said, 'he's 
rich and it's a fortunate thing for me; surely you don't want to deprive 
me of my good fortune?' I looked at her-she was crying and hugging 
me . . . .  'Ech,' I thought, 'she is talking sense! What's the use of marry­
ing a soldier, even though I am a sergeant?' 'Well, Luise,' said I, 'good­
bye, God be with you. I've no business to hinder your happiness. Tell 
me, is he good-looking?' 'No,' she said, 'he is an old man, with a long 
nose,' and she laughed herself I left her. 'Well,' I thought, 'it was not 
fated to be! '  The next morning I walked by his shop; she had told me 
the street. I looked in at the window: there was a German sitting 
there mending a watch, a man of forty-five with a hooked nose and 
goggle eyes, wearing a tail-coat and a high stand-up collar, such a 
solemn-looking fellow. I fairly cursed; I should like to have broken his 
window on the spot . . .  but there, I thought, it's no good touching 
him, it's no good crying over spilt milk! I went home to the barracks at 

Isay Fomitch-The Bath-House-Baklushin's Story 
1 29 
dusk, lay down on my bed and would you believe it, Alexandr Petro­
vitch, I burst out crying . . . .  
"Well, that day passed, and another and a third. I did not see Luise. 
And meantime I heard from a friend (she was an old lady, another 
laundress whom Luise sometimes went to see) that the German knew 
of our love, and that was why he made up his mind to propose at 
once, or else he would have waited another two or three years. He 
had made Luise promise, it seemed, that she would not see me again; 
and that so far he was, it seems, rather churlish with both of them, 
Luise and her aunt; as though he might change his mind and had not 
quite decided even now. She told me, too, that the day after tomor­
row, Sunday, he had invited them both to have coffee with him in the 
morning and that there would be another relation there, an old man 
who had been a merchant but was very poor now and served as 
a caretaker in a basement. When I knew that maybe on Sunday every­
thing would be settled, I was seized with such fury that I did not 
know what I was doing. And all that day and all the next I could do 
nothing but think of it. I felt I could eat that German. 
"On Sunday morning I did not know what I would do, but when 
the mass was over I jumped up, put on my overcoat and set off to the 
German's. I thought I would find them all there. And why I went to the 
German's, and what I meant to say. I did not know myself But I put a 
pistol in my pocket to be ready for anything. I had a wretched little pis­
tol with an old-fashioned trigger; I used to fire it as a boy. It wasn't fit 
to be used. But I put a bullet in it: I thought 'if they try turning me out 
and being rude I'll pull out the pistol and frighten them all.' I got there, 
there was no one in the shop, they were all sitting in the backroom. 
And not a soul but themselves, no servant. He had only one, a German 
cook. I walked through the shop and saw the door was shut, but it was 
an old door, fastening with a hook. My heart beat; I stood still and lis­
tened: they were talking German. I kicked the door with all my might 
and it opened. I saw the table was laid. On the table there was a big 
coffee-pot and the coffee was boiling on a spirit lamp. There were bis­
cuits; on another tray a decanter of vodka, herring and sausage, and an­
other bottle with wine of some sort. Luise and her aunt were sitting on 
the sofa dressed in their best; on a chair opposite them the German, her 
suitor, with his hair combed, in a tail-Coat and a stand-up collar stick­
ing out in front. And in another chair at the side sat another German, 

1 30 
The House of the Dead 
a fat grey-headed old man who did not say a word. When I went in 
Luise turned white. The aunt started up but sat down again, and the 
German frowned, looking so cross, and got up to meet me. 
" 'What do you want?' said he. I was a bit abashed, but I was in 
such a rage. 
" 'What do I want! Why, you might welcome a visitor and give 
him a drink. I've come to see you.' 
"The German thought a minute and said, 'Sit you.' 
"I sat down. 'Well, give me some vodka,' I said. 
" 'Here's some vodka,' he said, 'drink it, pray.' 
" 'Give me some good vodka,' said 1. I was in an awful rage, you 
know. 
" 'It is good vodka.' 
"I felt insulted that he treated me as though I were of no account, 
and above all with Luise looking on. I drank it off and said: 
" 'What do you want to be rude for, German? You must make 
friends with me. I've come to you as a friend.' 
" 'I cannot with you be friend,' said he, 'you are a simple soldier.' 
"Then I flew into a fury. 
" 'Ah, you scarecrow,' I said, 'you sausage-eater! But you know that 
from this moment I can do anything I like with you? Would you like 
me to shoot you with my pistol?' 
"I pulled out my pistol, stood before him and put the muzzle 
straight at his head. The women sat more dead than alive, afraid to stir; 
the old man was trembling like a leaf, he turned pale and didn't say a 
word. 
"The German was surprised, but he pulled himself together. 
" 'I do not fear you,' said he, 'and I beg you as an honourable man 
to drop your joke at once and I do not fear you.' 
" 'That's a lie,' said I, 'you do! '  
"Why, he did not dare to move his head away, he just sat there. 
" 'No,' said he, 'you that will never dare.' 
" 'Why don't I dare?' said 1. 
" 'Because,' said he, 'that is you strictly forbidden and for that they 
will you strictly punish.' 
"The devil only knows what that fool of a German was after. If he 
hadn't egged me on he'd have been living to this day. It all came from 
our disputing. 

Isay Fomitch-The Bath-House-Baklushin's Story 
1 3 1  
" 'So I daren't, you think?' 
" 'No.' 
" 'I daren't?' 
" 'To treat me so you will never dare.' 
" 'Well, there then, sausage! '  I went bang and he rolled off his 
chair. The women screamed. 
"I put the pistol in my pocket and made off, and as I was going 
into the fortress I threw the pistol into the nettles at the gate. 
"I went home, lay down on my bed and thought: 'They'll come and 
take me directly.' One hour passed and then another-they did not 
take me. And when it got dark, such misery came over me; I went out; 
I wanted to see Luise, whatever happened. I went by the watchmaker's 
shop. There was a crowd there and police. I went to my oId friend: 
'Fetch Luise! '  said I. I waited a little, and then I saw Luise running up. 
She threw herself on my neck and cried. 'It's all my fault: said she, 'for 
listening to my aunt.' She told me that her aunt had gone straight 
home after what happened that morning and was so frightened that 
she was taken ill, and said nothing. 'She's told no one herself and she's 
forbidden me to: says she. 'She is afraid and feels "let them do what 
they like." No one saw us this morning: said Luise. He had sent his 
servant away too, for he was afraid of her. She would have scratched 
his eyes out if she had known that he meant to get married. There 
were none of the workmen in the house either, he had sent them all 
out. He prepared the coffee himself and got lunch ready. And the rela­
tion had been silent all his life, he never used to say anything, and 
when it had all happened that morning he picked up his hat and was 
the first to go. 'And no doubt he will go on being silent: said Luise. So 
it was. For a fortnight no one came to take me and no one had any sus­
picion of me. That fortnight, though you mayn't believe it, Alexandr 
Petrovitch, was the happiest time in my life. Every day I met Luise. And 
how tender, how tender she grew to me! She would cry and say, 'I'll 
follow you wherever they send you, I'll leave everything for you! ' It 
was almost more than I could bear, she wrung my heart so. Well, and 
in a fortnight they took me. The old man and the aunt came to an un­
derstanding and gave information against me . . . .  " 
"But excuse me," I interrupted, "for that they could not have given 
you more than ten or twelve years at the utmost in the civil division, 
but you are in the special division. How can that be?" 

1 3 2 
The House of the Dead 
"Oh, that is a different matter," said Baklushin. "When I was 
brought to the court the captain swore at me with nasty words be­
fore the court. I couldn't control myself and said to him, 'What are 
you swearing for? Don't you see you are in a court of justice, you 
scoundrel! '  Well, that gave a new turn to things; they tried me again 
and for everything together they condemned me to four thousand 
blows and sent me here in the special division. And when they 
brought me out for punishment, they brought out the captain too: me 
to walk down the 'green street,' and him to be deprived of his rank 
and sent to serve as a soldier in the Caucasus. Good-bye, Alexandr 
Petrovitch. Come and see our performance." 

C H A P T E R  X 
C H R I S T MAS 
AT LAST THE HOLIDAYS came. The convicts did hardly any work on Christ­
mas Eve. Some went to the sewing-rooms and workshops; the others 
were sent to their different tasks, but for the most part, Singly or in 
groups, came back to prison immediately afterwards and they all re­
mained indoors after dinner. Indeed the majority had left the prison 
in the morning more on their own business than for the regulation 
work: some to arrange about bringing in and ordering vodka; others 
to see friends, male and female, or to collect any little sums owing to 
them for work done in the past. Baklushin and others who were tak­
ing part in the theatricals went to see certain acquaintances, princi­
pally among the officers' servants, and to obtain necessary costumes. 
Some went about with an anxious and responsible air, simply because 
others looked responsible, and though many of them had no grounds 
for expecting money, they, too, looked as though they were reckoning 
on getting it. In short everyone was looking forward to the next day 
in expectation of a change, of something unusual. In the evening the 
veterans in charge who had been marketing for the convicts brought 
in eatables of all sorts: beef, sucking-pigs, even geese. Many of the 
convicts, even the humblest and most careful who used to save up 
their farthings from one year's end to another, felt obliged to be lav­
ish for such an occasion and to celebrate befittingly the end of the 
fast. The next day was a real holiday, guaranteed to them by law and 
not to be taken from them. On that day the convict could not be set 
to work and there were only three such days in the year. 
And who knows what memories must have been stirred in the 
hearts of these outcasts at the coming of such a day! The great festivals 
of the Church make a vivid impression on the minds of peasants 
from childhood upwards. They are the days of rest from their hard 
toil, the days of family gatherings. In prison they must have been re­
membered with grief and heartache. Respect for the solemn day had 
1 3 3 

1 34 
The House of the Dead 
passed indeed into a custom strictly observed among the convicts; 
very few caroused, all were serious and seemed preoccupied, though 
many of them had really nothing to do. But whether they drank or 
did nothing, they tried to keep up a certain dignity . . . .  It seemed as 
though laughter were prohibited. In fact they showed a tendency to 
be over-particular and irritably intolerant, and if anyone jarred on the 
prevailing mood, even by accident, the convicts set on him with out­
cries and abuse and were angry with him, as though he had shown 
disrespect to the holiday itself. This state of mind in the convicts was 
remarkable and positively touching. Apart from their innate reverence 
for the great day, the convicts felt unconsciously that by the obser­
vance of Christmas they were, as it were, in touch with the whole of 
the world, that they were not altogether outcasts and lost men, not al­
together cut off; that it was the same in prison as amongst other peo­
ple. They felt that; it was evident and easy to understand. 
Akim Akimitch too made great preparations for the holiday. He 
had no home memories, for he had grown up an orphan among 
strangers, and had faced the hardships of military service before he 
was sixteen; he had nothing very joyful to remember in his life, for 
he had always lived regularly and monotonously, afraid of stepping 
one hair's-breadth out of the prescribed path; he was not particularly 
religious either, for propriety seemed to have swallowed up in him all 
other human qualities and attributes, all passions and desires, bad and 
good alike. And so he was preparing for the festival without anxiety or 
excitement, untroubled by painful and quite useless reminiscences, 
but with a quiet, methodical propriety which was just sufficient for 
the fulfilment of his duties and of the ritual that has been prescribed 
once and for alL As a rule he did not care for much reflection. The in­
ner meaning of things never troubled his mind, but rules that had 
once been laid down for him he followed with religious exactitude. 
If it had been made the rule to do exactly the opposite, he would 
have done that to-morrow with the same docility and scrupulous­
ness. Once only in his life he had tried to act on his own judgment, 
and that had brought him to prison. The lesson had not been thrown 
away on him. And though destiny withheld from him for ever all un­
derstanding of how he had been to blame, he had deduced a solitary 
principle from his misadventure-never to use his own judgment 
again under any circumstances, for sense "was not his strong-point," 

Christmas 
1 3 5 
as the convicts used to say. In his blind devotion to established ritual, 
he looked with a sort of anticipatory reverence even upon the festal 
sucking-pig, which he himself stuffed with kasha and roasted (for 
he knew how to cook) , as though regarding it not as an ordinary pig 
which could be bought and roasted any day, but as a special, holiday 
pig. Perhaps he had been used from childhood to see a sucking-pig 
on the table at Christmas, and had deduced from it that a sucking­
pig was indispensable on the occasion; and I am sure that if he had 
once missed tasting sucking-pig on Christmas Day he would for the 
rest of his life have felt a conscience-prick at having neglected his 
duty. 
Until Christmas Day he remained in his old jacket and trousers, 
which were quite threadbare though neatly darned. It appeared now 
that he had been carefully keeping away in his box the new suit given 
to him four months ago and had refrained from touching it, with the 
delectable idea of putting it on for the first time on Christmas Day. 
And so he did. On Christmas Eve he got out his new suit, unfolded it, 
examined it, brushed it, blew on it and tried it on. The suit seemed a 
good fit; everything was as it should be, buttoning tightly to the col­
lar; the high collar stood up as stiff as cardboard under his chin; at the 
waist it fitted closely, almost like a uniform. Akim Akimitch positively 
grinned with delight, and not without a certain swagger he turned 
before the tiny looking-glass, round which at some leisure moment 
he had pasted a border of gold paper. Only one hook on the collar 
seemed not quite in the right place. Noticing it Akim Akimitch made 
up his mind to alter it; he moved it, tried the coat on again and then 
it was perfectly right; then he folded it up as before and put it away 
in his box again, with his mind at rest. His head was satisfactorily 
shaven; but examining himself carefully in the looking-glass he no­
ticed that his head did not seem perfectly smooth-there was a 
scarcely visible growth of hair and he went at once to "the major" 
to be properly shaven according to regulation. And although Akim 
Akimitch was not to be inspected next day, he was shaven simply for 
conscience' sake, that he might leave no duty unperformed before 
Christmas. A reverence for epaulettes, buttons and details of uniform 
had from childhood been indelibly impressed upon his mind and 
upon his heart, as a duty that could not be questioned and as the 
highest form of the beautiful that could be attained by a decent man. 

1 3 6  
The House of the Dead 
After this, as the senior convict in the ward, he gave orders for hay to 
be brought in, and carefully superintended the laying of it on the 
floor. The same thing was done in the other wards. I don't know why, 
but hay was always laid on the floor at Christmas time. Then having 
finished his labours Akim Akimitch said his prayers, lay down on his 
bed and at once fell into a sweet sleep like a baby's, to wake up as 
early as possible next morning. All the convicts did the same, how­
ever. In all the wards they went to bed much earlier than usual. Their 
usual evening pursuits were laid aside, there was no thought of cards. 
All was expectation of the coming day. 
At last it came. Quite early, before daybreak, as soon as the morn­
ing drum had sounded, the wards were unlocked and the sergeant on 
duty who came in to count over the prisoners gave them Christmas 
greetings, and was greeted by them in the same way, with warmth 
and cordiality. After hastily saying their prayers Akim Akimitch and 
many of the others who had geese or sucking-pigs in the kitchen 
hurried off to see what was being done with them, how the roasting 
was getting on, where they had been put and so on. From the little 
prison windows blocked up with snow and ice, we could see through 
the darkness in both kitchens bright fires that had been kindled be­
fore daybreak, glowing in all the six ovens. Convicts were already flit­
ting across the courtyard with their sheepskins properly put on or 
flung across their shoulders, all rushing to the kitchen. Some, though 
very few, had already been to the "publicans." They were the most 
impatient. On the whole, all behaved decorously, peaceably, and with 
an exceptional seemliness. One heard nothing of the usual swearing 
and quarrelling. Everyone realized that it was a great day and a holy 
festival. Some went into other wards to greet special friends. One saw 
signs of something like friendship. I may mention in parenthesis that 
there was scarcely a trace of friendly feeling among the convicts-I 
don't mean general friendliness, that was quite out of the question, 
I mean the personal affection of one convict for another. There was 
scarcely a trace of such a feeling among us, and it is a remarkable 
fact: it is so different in the world at large. All of us, as a rule, with 
very rare exceptions, were rough and cold in our behaviour to one 
another, and this was, as it were, the accepted attitude adopted once 
for all. 
I, too, went out of the ward. It was just beginning to get light. The 

Christmas 
1 3 7  
stars were growing dim and a faint frosty haze was rising. The smoke 
was puffing in clouds from the kitchen chimneys. Some of the con­
victs I came upon in the yard met me with ready and friendly Christ­
mas greetings. I thanked them, and greeted them in the same way. 
Some of them had never said a word to me till that day. 
At the kitchen door I was overtaken by a convict from the military 
division with his sheepskin thrown over his shoulders. He had caught 
sight of me in the middle of the yard and shouted after me, "Alexandr 
Petrovitch, Alexandr Petrovitch! "  He was running towards the kitchen 
in a hurry. I stopped and waited for him. He was a young lad with a 
round face and a gentle expression; very taciturn with everyone; he 
had not spoken a word to me or taken any notice of me since I entered 
the prison; I did not even know his name. He ran up to me out of 
breath and stood faCing me, gazing at me with a blank but at the same 
time blissful smile. 
"What is it?" I asked wondering, seeing that he was standing and 
gazing at me with open eyes, was smiling but not saying a word. 
"Why, it's Christmas," he muttered, and realizing that he could say 
nothing more, he left me and rushed into the kitchen. 
I may mention here that we had never had anything to do with 
one another and scarcely spoke from that time till 1 left the prison. 
In the kitchen round the glowing ovens there was great crowding 
and bustling, quite a crush. Everyone was looking after his property; 
the cooks were beginning to prepare the prison dinner, which was 
earlier that day. No one had yet begun eating, though some of them 
wanted to; but they had a regard for decorum in the presence of the 
others. They were waiting for the priest, and the fast was only to be 
broken after his visit. Meanwhile, before it was fully daylight, we heard 
the corporal at the prison gate calling the cooks. He shouted almost 
every minute and went on for nearly two hours. The cooks were 
wanted to receive the offerings, which were brought into the prison 
from all parts of the town. An immense quantity of provisions was 
brought, such as rolls, cheesecakes, pastries, scones, pancakes and sim­
ilar good things. I believe there was not a housewife of the middle or 
lower class in the town who did not send something of her baking by 
way of Christmas greeting to the "unfortunate" and captives. There 
were rich offerings-large quantities of fancy bread made of the 
finest flour. There were very humble offerings too-such as a farthing 

1 3 8  
The House of the Dead 
roll and a couple of rye cakes with a smear of sour cream on them: 
these were the gifts of the poor to the poor, and all they had to give. 
All were accepted with equal gratitude without distinction of gifts 
and givers. The convicts took off their caps as they received them, 
bowed, gave their Christmas greetings and took the offerings into the 
kitchen. When the offerings were piled up in heaps, the senior con­
victs were sent for, and they divided all equally among the wards. 
There was no scolding or quarrelling; it was honestly and equitably 
done. The share that was brought to our ward was divided among us 
by Akim Akimitch with the help of another convict. They divided it 
with their own hands, and with their own hands gave each convict 
his share. There was not the slightest protest, not the slightest jeal­
ousy; all were satisfied; there could be no suspicion of an offering be­
ing concealed or unfairly divided. 
Having seen to his cooking, Akim Akimitch proceeded to array 
himself. He dressed himself with all due decorum and solemnity, not 
leaving one hook unfastened, and as soon as he was dressed he began 
saying his real prayers. He spent a good time over them. A good many 
of the convicts, chiefly the elder ones, were already standing saying 
their prayers. The younger ones did not pray much: the most they did 
even on a holiday was to cross themselves when they got up. When 
his prayers were over, Akim Akimitch came up to me and with a cer­
tain solemnity offered me his Christmas greeting. I at once invited 
him to join me at tea and he invited me to share his sucking-pig. 
Soon after, Petrov, too, ran up to greet me. He seemed to have been 
drinking already and, though he ran up out of breath, he did not say 
much; he only stood a little while before me as though expecting 
something, and soon went off into the kitchen again. Meanwhile in 
the military ward they were preparing for the priest. That ward was 
arranged differently from the others; the plank bed ran along the 
walls instead of being in the middle of the room as in all the other 
wards, so that it was the only room in the prison which had a clear 
space in the middle. It probably was so arranged in order that when 
necessary the convicts could be all gathered together there. In the 
middle of the room they put a table, covered it with a clean towel, 
and on it set the ikon and lighted the lamp before us. At last the priest 
came with the cross and the holy water. After repeating prayers and 
singing before the ikon, he stood facing the convicts and all of them 

Christmas 
1 39 
with genuine reverence came forward to kiss the cross. Then the 
priest walked through all the wards and sprinkled them with holy 
water. In the kitchen he praised our prison bread, which was famous 
throughout the town, and the convicts at once wanted to send him two 
new freshly baked loaves; a veteran was at once dispatched to take 
them. They followed the cross out with the same reverence with 
which they had welcomed it and then almost immediately the gover­
nor and the major arrived. The governor was liked and even respected 
among us. He walked through all the wards, escorted by the major; 
he gave them all Christmas greetings, went into the kitchen and tried 
the prison soup. The soup was excellent: nearly a pound of beef for 
each prisoner had been put into it in honour of the occasion. There 
was boiled millet, too, and butter was liberally allowed. When he had 
seen the governor off, the major gave orders that they should begin 
dinner. The convicts tried to avoid his eye. We did not like the spiteful 
way in which he glanced to right and to left from behind his specta­
cles, trying even to-day to find something amiss, someone to blame. 
We began dinner. Akim Akimitch's sucking-pig was superbly 
cooked. I don't know how to explain it, but immediately after the 
major had gone, within five minutes of his departure, an extraordi­
nary number of people were drunk, and yet only five minutes before 
they had all been almost sober. One suddenly saw flushed and beam­
ing faces and balalaikas were brought out. The little Pole with a fiddle 
was already at the heels of a reveller who had engaged him for the 
whole day; he was scraping away merry jig tunes. The talk began to 
grow louder and more drunken. But they got through dinner with­
out much disturbance. Everyone had had enough. Many of the older 
and more sedate at once lay down to sleep. Akim Akimitch did the 
same, apparently feeling that on a great holiday one must sleep after 
dinner. The old dissenter from Starodubov had a brief nap and then 
clambered on the stove, opened his book and prayed almost uninter­
ruptedly till the dead of night. It was painful to him to see the "shame­
fulness," as he said, of the convicts' carousing. All the Circassians settled 
themselves on the steps and gazed at the drunken crowd with curios­
ity and a certain disgust. I came across Nurra: "Bad, bad! " he said, 
shaking his head with pious indignation, "Ough, it's bad! Allah will 
be angry! "  Isay Fomitch lighted his candle with an obstinate and su­
percilious air and set to work, evidently wanting to show that the 

1 40 
The House of the Dead 
holiday meant nothing to him. Here and there, card parties were 
made up. The players were not afraid of the veterans, though they put 
men on the look-out for the sergeant, who for his part was anxious 
not to see anything. The officer on duty peeped into the prison three 
times during the day: But the drunken men were hidden and the 
cards were slipped away when he appeared, and he, too, seemed to 
have made up his mind not to notice minor offences. Drunkenness 
was looked on as a minor offence that day. Little by little, the convicts 
grew noisier. Quarrels began. Yet the majority were still sober and 
there were plenty to look after those who were not. But those who 
were drinking drank a vast amount. Gazin was triumphant. He swag­
gered up and down near his place on the bed, under which he had 
boldly stored away the vodka, hidden till that day under the snow be­
hind the barracks, and he chuckled slyly as he looked at the cus­
tomers coming to him. He was sober himself; he had not drunk a 
drop. He meant to carouse when the holidays were over, when he 
would have emptied the convicts' pockets. There was singing in all 
the wards. But drunkenness was passing into stupefaction and the 
singing was on the verge of tears. Many of the prisoners walked to 
and fro with their balalaikas, their sheepskins over their shoulders, 
twanging the strings with a jaunty air. In the special division they 
even got up a chorus of eight voices. They sang capitally to the ac­
companiment of balalaikas and guitars. Few of the songs were gen­
uine peasant songs. I only remember one and it was sung with 
spirit: 
T, the young woman, 
Went at eve to the feast. 
And I heard a variation of that song which I had never heard before. 
Several verses were added at the end: 
T, the young woman, 
Have tidied my house; 
The spoons are rubbed, 
The boards are scrubbed, 
The soup's in the pot, 
The peas are hot. 

Christmas 
1 4 1  
For the most part they sang what are called in Russia "prison" songs, 
all well-known ones. One of them, "In times gone by," was a comic 
song, describing how a man had enjoyed himself in the past and 
lived like a gentleman at large, but now was shut up in prison. It de­
scribed how he had "flavoured blancmange with champagne" in old 
days and now: 
Cabbage and water they give me to eat, 
And I gobble it up as though it were sweet. 
A popular favourite was the hackneyed song: 
As a boy I lived in freedom, 
Had my capital as well. 
But the boy soon lost his money, 
Straightway into bondage fell. 
and so on. There were mournful songs too. One was a purely convict 
song, a familiar one too, I believe: 
Now the dawn in heaven is gleaming, 
Heard is the awakening drum. 
Doors will open to the jailer, 
The recording clerk will come. 
We behind these walls are hidden, 
None can see us, none can hear. 
But the Lord of Heaven is with us, 
Even here we need not fear . . . .  
Another was even more depressing but sung to a fine tune and prob­
ably composed by a convict. The words were mawkish and somewhat 
illiterate. I remember a few lines of it: 
Never more shall I behold 
The country of my birth. 
In suffering, guiltless, I'm condemned 
To pass my life on earth. 
The owl upon the roof will call 

1 42 
And grief my heart will tear, 
His voice will echo in the woods, 
And I shall not be there, 
The House of the Dead 
This song was often sung amongst us, not in chorus, but as a solo. 
Someone would go out on to the steps, sit down, ponder a little with 
his cheek on his hand and begin singing it in a high falsetto. It made 
one's heart ache to hear it. There were some good voices among us. 
Meanwhile it was beginning to get dark. Sadness, despondency 
and stupefaction were painfully evident through the drunkenness and 
merry-making. The man who had been laughing an hour before was 
sobbing, hopelessly drunk. Others had had a couple of fights by now. 
Others, pale and hardly able to stand, lounged about the wards pick­
ing quarrels with everyone. Men whose liquor never made them 
quarrelsome were vainly looking for friends to whom they could 
open their hearts and pour out their drunken sorrows. All these poor 
people wanted to enjoy themselves, wanted to spend the great holi­
day merrily, and, good God! how dreary, how miserable the day was 
for almost all of us. Everyone seemed disappointed. Petrov came to see 
me twice again. He had drunk very little all day and was almost sober. 
But up to the last hour he seemed to be still expecting that something 
must be going to happen, something extraordinary, festive and amus­
ing. Though he said nothing about it, one could see this in his eyes. 
He kept flitting from ward to ward without wearying. But nothing spe­
cial happened or was to be met with, except drunkenness, drunken, 
senseless oaths and men stupefied with drink. Sirotkin, too, wandered 
through the wards, well washed and looking pretty in a new red shirt; 
he, too, seemed quietly and naively expectant of something. By degrees 
it became unbearable and disgusting in the wards. No doubt there was 
a great deal that was laughable, but I felt sad and sorry for them all, I 
felt dreary and stifled among them. 
Here were two convicts disputing which should treat the other. Ev­
idently they had been wrangling for a long time and this was not their 
first quarrel. One in particular seemed to have an old grudge against 
the other. He was complaining and speaking thickly, was struggling 
to prove that the other had been unfair to him: some sheepskin coat 
had been sold, a sum of money had been made away with somehow, 
a year before at carnival. There was something else besides . . . .  He was 

Christmas 
1 43 
a tall muscular fellow of peaceable disposition and by no means a 
fool. When he was drunk he was disposed to make friends with 
anyone and to open his heart to him. He even swore at his oppo­
nent and got up a grievance against him in order to be reconciled 
and more friendly afterwards. The other, a short, thick-set, stubby 
man, with a round face, was a sharp and wily fellow. He had drunk 
more than his companion, perhaps, but was only slightly drunk. He 
was a man of character and was reputed to be well off but it was 
for some reason to his interest just now not to irritate his expansive 
friend, and he led him up to the vodka dealer; while the friend kept 
repeating that he should and must treat him "if only you are an 
honest man." 
The "publican," with a shade of respect for the short man and a 
shade of contempt for his expansive companion, because the latter 
was being treated and not drinking at his own expense, brought out 
some vodka and poured out a cupful. 
"No, Styopka, you owe it me," said the expansive friend, seeing he 
had gained his point, "for it's what you owe me." 
"I am not going to waste my breath on you! " answered Styopka. 
"No, Styopka, that's a lie," protested the other, taking the cup from 
the "publican," "for you owe me money, you've no conscience! Why, 
your very eyes are not your own but borrowed. You are a scoundrel, 
Styopka, that's what you are; that's the only word for you!" 
"What are you whining about?-you've spilt your vodka. One 
stands you treat, so you might as well drink," cried the publican to the 
expansive friend, "You can't keep us standing here till to-morrow! " 
"But I am going to drink it-what are you shouting about! A 
merry Christmas to you, Stepan Dorofeitch! "  cup in hand he turned 
politely, and made a slight bow to Styopka whom half a minute be­
fore he had called a scoundrel. "Good health to you for a hundred 
years, not reckoning what you've lived already! " He emptied his cup, 
cleared his throat and wiped his mouth. "I could carry a lot of vodka 
in my day, lads," he observed with grave dignity. addressing the world 
in general and no one in particular, "but now it seems age is coming 
upon me. Thank you, Stepan Dorofeitch." 
"Not at all." 
"But I shall always tell you of it, Styopka, and besides your behav­
ing like a regular scoundrel to me, I tell you . . .  " 

1 44 
The House of the Dead 
"And I've something to tell you, you drunken lout," Styopka broke 
in, losing all patience. "Listen and mark my words. Look here: we'll 
halve the world between us-you take one half, and I'll take the 
other. You go your way and don't let me meet you again. I am sick of 
you." 
"Then you won't pay me the money?" 
"What money, you drunken fool?" 
"Ah, in the next world you'll be wanting to pay it, but I won't take 
it. We work hard for our money, with sweat on our brows and blisters 
on our hands. You'll suffer for my five kopecks in the other world." 
"Oh, go to the devil! "  
"Don't drive me, I am not in harness yet." 
"Go on, go on! "  
"Scoundrel! "  
"You jail-bird! "  
And abuse followed again, more violent than before. 
Here two friends were sitting apart on the bed. One of them, a tall, 
thick-set, fleshy fellow with a red face, who looked like a regular 
butcher, was almost crying, for he was very much touched. The other 
was a frail-looking, thin, skinny little man, with a long nose which 
always looked moist and little piggy eyes which were fixed on the 
ground. He was a polished and cultivated individual; he had been a 
clerk and treated his friend a little superciliously, which the other se­
cretly resented. They had been drinking together all day. 
"He's taken a liberty! " cried the fleshy friend, shaking the clerk's 
head Violently with his left arm, which he had round him. By "taking 
a liberty" he meant that he had hit him. The stout one, who had been 
a sergeant, was secretly envious of his emaciated friend and so they 
were trying to outdo one another in the choiceness of their language. 
"And I tell you that you are wrong too . . .  " the clerk began dog­
matically, resolutely refusing to look at his opponent and staring at 
the floor with a dignified air. 
"He's taken a liberty, do you hear!" the first man broke in, shaking 
his friend more violently than ever. "you are the only friend I have in 
the world, do you hear? And that's why I tell you and no one else, he's 
taken a liberty! "  
"And I tell you again, such a feeble justification, my friend, is only 
a discredit to you," said the clerk in a high-pitched, bland voice. 

Christmas 
1 45 
"You'd better admit, my friend, that all this drunken business is due 
to your own incontinence." 
The stout convict staggered back a little, looked blankly with his 
drunken eyes at the self-satisfied clerk and suddenly and quite unex­
pectedly drove his huge fist with all his might into his friend's little 
face. That was the end of a whole day's friendship. His dear friend was 
sent flying senseless under the bed . . . .  
A friend of mine from the special division, a clever good­
humoured fellow of boundless good-nature and extraordinarily sim­
ple appearance, who was fond of a joke but quite without malice, 
came into our ward. This was the man who on my first day in prison 
had been at dinner in the kitchen, asking where the rich peasant lived 
and declaring that he had pride, and who had drunk tea with me. He 
was a man of forty, with an extraordinarily thick lower lip and a large 
fleshy nose covered with pimples. He was holding a balalaika and 
carelessly twanging the strings. A diminutive convict with a very large 
head was folloWing him about as though he were on a string. I had 
scarcely seen him before, and indeed no one ever noticed him. He 
was a queer fellow, mistrustful, always silent and serious; he used to 
work in the sewing-room, and eVidently tried to live a life apart and 
to avoid having anything to do with the rest. Now, being drunk, he 
followed Varlamov about like a shadow. He followed him about in 
great excitement, waving his arms in the air, bringing his fist down 
on the wall and on the bed, and almost shedding tears. Varlamov 
seemed to be paying no attention to him, as though he were not be­
side him. It is worth remarking that these men had had scarcely any­
thing to do with one another before; they had nothing in common in 
their pursuits or their characters. They belonged to different divisions 
and lived in different wards. The little convict's name was Bulkin. 
Varlamov grinned on seeing me. I was sitting on my bed by the 
stove. He stood at a little distance faCing me, pondered a moment, 
gave a lurch, and coming up to me with unsteady steps, he flung 
himself into a swaggering attitude and lightly touching the strings, 
chanted in measured tones with a faint tap of his boot: 
Round face! fair face! 
Like a tomtit in the meadow 
Hear my darling's voice! 

1 46 
When she wears a dress of satin 
With some most becoming trimming, 
ah, she does look nice! 
The House of the Dead 
This song seemed the last straw for Bulkin; he gesticulated, and ad­
dressing the company in general he shouted: 
"He keeps telling lies, lads, he keeps telling lies! Not a word of 
truth in it, it is all a lie!" 
"Respects to old Alexandr Petrovitch! " said Varlamov. He peeped 
into my face with a sly laugh, and was on the point of kissing me. He 
was very drunk. The expression "old" So-and-so is used among the 
people all over Siberia even in addressing a lad of twenty. The word 
"old" suggests respect, veneration, something flattering, in fact. 
"Well, Varlamov, how are you getting on?" 
"Oh, I am jogging along. If one's glad it's Christmas, one gets 
drunk early; you must excuse me! " Varlamov talked in rather a drawl. 
"That's all lying, all lying again! "  shouted Bulkin, thumping on the 
bed in a sort of despair. But Varlamov seemed determined to take no 
notice of him, and there was something very comic about it, because 
Bulkin had attached himself to Varlamov from early morning for no 
reason whatever, simply because Varlamov kept "lying," as he some­
how imagined. He followed him about like a shadow, found fault 
with every word he said, wrung his hands, banged them against the 
walls and the bed till they almost bled, and was distressed, evidently 
distressed, by the conviction that Varlamov "was lying." If he had had 
any hair on his head, I believe he would have pulled it out in his mor­
tification. It was as though he felt responsible for Varlamov's conduct, 
as though all Varlamov's failings were on his conscience. But what 
made it comic was that Varlamov never even looked at him. 
"He keeps lying, nothing but lying and lying! There's not a word 
of sense in all he says! "  shouted Bulkin. 
"But what's that to you?" responded the convicts laughing. 
"I beg to inform you, Alexandr Petrovitch, that I was very hand­
some and that the wenches were awfully fond of me . . .  " Varlamov 
began suddenly, apropos of nothing. 
"He's lying! He's lying again! "  Bulkin broke in with a squeal. The 
convicts laughed. 
"And didn't I swell it among them! I'd a red shirt and velveteen 

Christmas 
1 4 7  
breeches; I lay at my ease like that Count Bottle, that is, as drunk as a 
Swede; anything I liked in fact! "  
"That's a lie!" Bulkin protested stoutly. 
"And in those days I had a stone house of two storeys that had 
been my father's. In two years I got through the two storeys, I'd noth­
ing but the gate left and no gate posts. Well, money is like pigeons 
that come and go." 
"That's a lie," Bulkin repeated more stoutly than ever. 
"So the other day I sent my parents a tearful letter; I thought maybe 
they'd send me something. For I've been told I went against my parents. 
I was disrespectful to them! It's seven years since I sent it to them." 
"And haven't you had an answer?" I asked laughing. 
"No, I haven't," he answered, suddenly laughing too, bringing his 
nose nearer and nearer to my face. "And I've a sweetheart here, 
Alexandr Petrovitch . . .  " 
"Have you? A sweetheart?" 
"Onufriev said the other day: 'My girl may be pock-marked and 
plain, but look what a lot of clothes she's got; and yours may be 
pretty, but she is a beggar and goes about with a sack on her back.' " 
"And is it true?" 
"It's true she is a beggar!" he answered, and he went off into a 
noiseless laugh; there was laughter among the other convicts too. 
Everyone knew indeed that he had picked up with a beggar girl and 
had only given her ten kopecks in the course of six months. 
"Well, what of it?" I asked, wanting to get rid of him at last. 
He paused, looked at me feelingly and pronounced tenderly: 
"Why, things being so, won't you be kind enough to stand me a 
glass? I've been drinking tea all day, Alexandr Petrovitch," he added 
with feeling, accepting the money I gave him, "I've been swilling tea 
till I am short of breath, and it's gurgling in my belly like water in a ' 
bottle." 
When he was taking the money Bulkin's mental agitation reached 
its utmost limits. He gesticulated like a man in despair, almost crying. 
"Good people! "  he shouted, addressing the whole ward in his 
frenzy. "Look at him! He keeps lying! Whatever he says, it's nothing 
but lies, lies and lies! "  
"But what is it to you," cried the convicts, wondering at his fury, 
"you ridiculous fellow?" 

1 48 
The House of the Dead 
"1 won't let him tell lies! " cried Bulkin with flashing eyes, bring­
ing his fist down on the bed with all his might. "1 don't want him to 
tell lies! " 
Everyone laughed. Varlamov took the money, bowed to me and, 
grimacing, hurried out of the ward, to the publican, of course. And 
then he seemed for the first time to become aware of Bulkin. 
"Well, come along! "  he said to him, stopping in the doorway, as 
though he were of some use to him. "You walking-stick! " he added 
as he contemptuously made way for the mortified Bulkin to pass out 
before him, and began twanging the balalaika again. 
But why describe this Bedlam! The oppressive day came to an 
end at last. The cOllvicts fell heavily asleep on the plank bed. They 
talked and muttered in their sleep that night even more than usual. 
Here and there they were still sitting over cards. The holiday, so long 
looked forward to, was over. Tomorrow the daily round, to-morrow 
work again. 

C H A P T E R  X I  
T H E  T H E A T R I C A L S 
ON THE THIRD DAY in Christmas week we had the first performance of 
our theatricals. A great deal of trouble had no doubt been spent on 
getting them up, but the actors had undertaken it all so that the rest 
of us had no idea how things were going, what was being done. We 
did not even know for certain what was to be performed. The actors 
had done their best during those three days to get hold of costumes 
when they went out to work. When Baklushin met me he did nothing 
but snap his fingers with glee. Even the major seemed to be in a de­
cent mood, though we really were not sure whether he knew of the 
theatricals. If he did know, would he give his formal sanction or only 
make up his mind to say nothing, winking at the convicts' project, in­
sisting of course that everything should be as orderly as possible? I 
imagine he knew about the theatricals and could not but have known 
of them, but did not want to interfere, realizing that he might make 
things worse by prohibiting them: the convicts would begin to be 
disorderly and drunken, so that it would really be much better for 
them to have something to occupy them. I assume that this was the 
major's line of argument, simply because it is most natural, sensible 
and correct. It may even be said if the convicts had not got up theatri­
cals or some such entertainment for the holidays, the authorities 
ought to have thought of it themselves. But as our major's mind did 
not work like the minds of the rest of mankind but in quite the op­
posite way, it may very well be that I am quite in error in supposing 
that he knew of the theatricals and allowed them. A man like the ma­
jor must always be oppressing someone, taking something away, de­
priving men of some right-making trouble somewhere, in fact. He 
was known all over the town for it. What did it matter to him if re­
strictions might lead to disturbances in prison? There were penalties 
for such disturbances (such is the reasoning of men like our major) 
and severity and strict adherence to the letter of the law is all that the 
1 49 

1 50 
The House of the Dead 
scoundrelly convicts need. These obtuse ministers of the law absolutely 
fail to understand and are incapable of understanding that the strict 
adherence to the letter of it, without using their reason, without un­
derstanding the spirit of it, leads straight to disturbance, and has 
never led to anything else. "It is the law, there's nothing more to be 
said," they say, and they are genuinely astonished that they should be 
expected to show common sense and a clear head as well. This seems 
particularly unnecessary to many of them, a revolting superfluity, a 
restriction and a piece of intolerance. 
But however that may have been, the senior sergeant did not op­
pose the convicts, and that was all they cared about. I can say with 
certainty that the theatricals and the gratitude felt for their being per­
mitted were the reason why there was not one serious disturbance in 
the prison during the holidays: not one violent quarrel, not one case 
of theft. I myself witnessed the convicts themselves trying to repress 
the riotous or quarrelsome, simply on the ground that the theatricals 
might be prohibited. The sergeant exacted a promise from the con­
victs that everything should be orderly and that they would behave 
themselves. They agreed joyfully, and kept their promise faithfully; 
they were much flattered at their words being trusted. It must be 
added, however, that it cost the authorities nothing to allow the the­
atricals, they had not to contribute. No space had to be set apart for 
the theatre-the stage could be rigged up and taken to pieces again in 
a quarter of an hour. The performance lasted for an hour and a half, 
and if the order had suddenly come from headquarters to stop the 
performance, it could all have been put away in a trice. The costumes 
were hidden in the convicts' boxes. But before I describe how the 
theatricals were arranged and what the costumes were like, I must de­
scribe the programme, that is, what it was proposed to perform. 
There was no written programme. But on the second and third 
performances a programme in the handwriting of Baklushin made its 
appearance for the benefit of the officers and of distinguished visitors 
generally who had honoured our theatricals by being present at the 
first performance. The officer of the guard usually came, and on one 
occasion the commanding officer of the guards came himself. The of­
ficer of the engineers came, too, on one evening, and it was for visi­
tors like these the programme was prepared. It was assumed that the 
fame of the prison theatricals would spread far and wide in the 

The Theatricals 
1 5 1  
fortress and would even reach the town, especially as there was no 
theatre in the town. There was a rumour that one performance had 
been got up by a society of amateurs, but that was all. The convicts 
were like children, delighted at the smallest success, vain over it in­
deed. "Who knows," they thought and said among themselves, "per­
haps even the highest authorities will hear about it, they'll come and 
have a look; then they'll see what the convicts are made of It's not a 
simple soldiers' performance with dummy figures, floating boats, 
and dancing bears and goats. We have actors, real actors, they act 
high-class comedies, there's no theatre like it even in the town. 
General Abrosimov had a performance, they say, and is going to 
have another, but I dare say he'll only beat us in the dresses. As for 
the conversations, who knows whether they'll be as good! It will reach 
the governor's ears, maybe, and-you never can tell!-he may take 
it into his head to have a look at it himself There's no theatre in the 
town . . . .  " In fact the prisoners' imagination was so worked up 
during the holidays, espeCially after the first success, that they were 
ready to fancy they might receive rewards or have their term of im­
prisonment shortened, though at the same time they were almost at 
once ready to laugh very good-naturedly at their own expense. They 
were children, in fact, perfect children, though some of these chil­
dren were over forty. 
But though there was no regular programme I already knew in 
outline what the performance would consist of The first piece was 
called "Filatka and Miroshka, orThe Rivals." Baklushin had boasted to 
me a week beforehand that the part of Filatka which he was under­
taking would be acted in a style such as had never been seen even in 
the Petersburg theatres. He strolled about the wards bragging without 
shame or scruple, though with perfect good-nature; and now and 
then he would suddenly go through a bit of "theatrical business," a 
bit of his part, that is, and they all would laugh, regardless of whether 
the performance was amusing; though even then, it must be admit­
ted, the convicts knew how to restrain themselves and keep up their 
dignity. The only convicts who were enraptured by Baklushin's pranks 
and his stories of what was coming were either quite young people, 
greenhorns, deficient in reserve, or else the more important among 
the convicts whose prestige was firmly established, so that they had 
no reason to be afraid of giving vent to their feelings of any sort, 

1 5 2  
The House of the Dead 
however simple (that is, however unseemly, according to prison no­
tions) they might be. The others listened to the gossip and rumours 
in silence; they did not, it is true, contradict or disapprove, but they 
did their utmost to take up an indifferent and even to some extent su­
percilious attitude to the theatricals. Only during the last days just 
before the performance everyone began to feel inquisitive. What was 
coming? How would our men do? What was the major saying? Would 
it be as successful as it was last year? and so on. 
Baklushin assured me that the actors had been splendidly chosen, 
every one "to fit his part"; that there would even be a curtain, that 
Filatka's betrothed was to be acted by Sirotkin "and you will see 
what he is like in woman's dress," he added, screwing up his eyes 
and clicking with his tongue. The benevolent lady was to wear a 
mantle and a dress with a flounce, and to carry a parasol in her hand. 
The benevolent gentleman was to come on in an officer's coat with 
epaulettes, and was to carry a cane in his hand. There was to be a 
second piece with a highly dramatic ending called "Kedril the Glut­
ton." The title aroused my curiosity, but in spite of all my inquiries I 
could learn nothing about this piece beforehand. I only learnt that 
they had not taken the play out of a book, but from a "written 
copy"; that they got the play from a retired sergeant living in the 
town who had probably once taken part in a performance of it 
himself in some soldiers' entertainment. In our remote towns and 
provinces there are such plays which no one seems to know any­
thing about, and which have perhaps never been printed, but seem 
to have appeared of themselves, and so have become an indispensa­
ble part of every "people's theatre." It would be a very, very good 
thing if some investigator would make a fresh and more careful 
study of the people's drama, which really does exist, and is perhaps 
by no means valueless. I refuse to believe that all I saw on our prison 
stage was invented by the convicts themselves. There must be a con­
tinuous tradition, established customs and conceptions handed down 
from generation to generation and consecrated by time. They must 
be looked for among soldiers, among factory hands, in factory 
towns, and even among the working classes in some poor obscure 
little towns. They are preserved, too, in villages and provincial towns 
among the servants of the richer country gentry. I imagine indeed 
that many old-fashioned plays have been circulated in written copies 

The Theatricals 
1 5 3  
all over Russia by house-serfs. Many of the old-fashioned landown­
ers and Moscow gentlemen had their own dramatic companies, 
made up of serf actors. And these theatres laid the foundations of the 
national dramatic art of which there are unmistakable signs. As for 
"Kedril the Glutton," I was able to learn nothing about it before­
hand, except that evil spirits appear on the stage and carry Kedril off 
to hell. But what does the name Kedril mean, why is it Kedril and 
not Kiril? Whether it is a Russian story or of foreign origin I could 
not find out. It was announced that finally there would be a "pan­
tomime to the accompaniment of music." All this of course was very 
interesting. The actors were fifteen in number-all smart, spirited 
fellows. They bestirred themselves, rehearsed-sometimes behind 
the prison-held their tongues and kept things secret. In fact they 
meant to surprise us with something extraordinary and unexpected. 
On working days the prison was locked up early, as soon as night 
came on. Christmas week was an exception: they did not lock up till 
the evening tattoo. This concession was made expressly for the sake of 
the theatre. Almost every afternoon during Christmas week they sent 
a messenger from the prison to the officer of the watch with a hum­
ble request "to allow the theatricals and leave the wards unlocked a 
little longer," adding that this had been allowed the day before and 
there had been no disorder. The officer of the watch reasoned that 
"there really had been no disorder the day before, and if they gave 
their word that there would be none to-day, it meant that they would 
see to that themselves and that made things safer than anything. Be­
sides, if the theatricals were not allowed, maybe (there's no knowing 
with a lot of criminals!) they might get up some mischief through 
spite and get the watch into trouble." Another point was that it was 
tedious to serve on the watch, and here was a play, not simply got up 
by the soldiers, but by the convicts, and convicts are an interesting 
lot; it would be amusing to see it. The officers of the watch always 
had the privilege of looking on. 
If his superior officer came along he would ask, "Where is the of­
ficer of the watch?" "He is in the prison counting over the convicts 
and locking the wards"-a straightforward answer and a sufficient 
explanation. And so every evening through the Christmas holidays 
the officers of the watch allowed the performance, and did not lock 
the wards till the evening tattoo. The convicts knew beforehand that 

1 54 
The House of the Dead 
there would be no hindrance from the officers of the watch, and they 
had no anxiety on that ground. 
About seven 0' clock Petrov came to fetch me and we went to the 
performance together. Almost all the inmates of our ward went to 
the performance except the Old Believer and the Poles. It was only on 
the very last performance, on the fourth of January, that the Poles 
made up their minds to be present, and only then after many assur­
ances that it was nice and amusing, and that there was no risk about 
it. The disdain of the Poles did not irritate the convicts in the very 
least, and they were welcomed on the fourth of;anuary quite politely. 
They were even shown into the best places. As for the Circassians and 
still more Isay Fomitch, the performance was to them a real enjoy­
ment. Isay Fomitch paid three kopecks every time, and on the last 
performance put ten kopecks in the plate and there was a look of bliss 
on his face. The actors decided to collect from the audience what they 
were willing to give for the expenses of the theatre and for their own 
"fortifying." Petrov assured me that I should be put into one of the 
best seats, however crowded the theatre might be, on the ground that 
being richer than most of them I should probably subscribe more 
liberally and also that I knew more about acting. And so it was. But I 
will first describe the room and the arrangement of the theatre. 
The military ward in which our stage was arranged was fifteen 
paces long. From the yard one mounted some steps into the passage 
leading to the ward. This long ward, as I have mentioned already, was 
different from the others: the bed platform ran round the walls so 
that the middle of the room was free. The half of the room nearest to 
the steps was given up to the spectators and the other half which 
communicated with another ward was marked off for the stage. What 
struck me first of all was the curtain. It stretched for ten feet across 
the room. To have a curtain was such a luxury that it was certainly 
something to marvel at. What is more, it was painted in oil colours 
with a design of trees, arbours, lakes and stars. It was made of pieces 
of linen, old and new, such as they were able to collect among the 
convicts, old leg wrappers and shirts sewn together after a fashion 
into one large strip, and where the linen fell short the gap was filled 
simply with paper which had been begged, sheet by sheet, from 
various offices and departments. Our painters, amongst whom the 
"Briillov" of the prison, A., was conspicuous, had made it their work 

The Theatricals 
1 5 5  
to decorate and paint it. The effect was surprising. Such a refinement 
delighted even the most morose and fastidious of the convicts, who, 
when it came to the performance, were without exception as childish 
in their admiration as the most enthusiastic and impatient. All were 
very much pleased and even boastful in their pleasure. 
The stage was lighted by means of a few tallow candles which 
were cut into pieces. In front of the curtain stood two benches 
brought from the kitchen, and in front of the benches were three or 
four chairs from the sergeant's room. The chairs were intended for 
any officers that might come in, the benches for the sergeants and the 
engineering clerks, foremen and other persons in official positions, 
though not officers, in case any such looked in on the performance. 
And as a fact, spectators from outside were present at every perfor­
mance; there were more on some evenings than on others, but at the 
last performance there was not a vacant seat on the benches. In the back 
of the room were the convicts themselves, standing, and in spite 
of the suffocating, steamy heat of the room wearing their coats or 
sheepskins and carrying their caps in their hands, out of respect for 
their visitors. Of course the space allotted to the convicts was too 
small. And not only were people literally sitting on others, especially 
in the back rows, but the beds too were filled up, as well as the spaces 
to right and left of the curtain, and there were even some ardent 
spectators who always went round behind the scenes, and looked at 
the performance from the other ward at the back. The crush in the 
first part of the ward was incredible, and might even be compared to 
the crush and crowding I had lately seen at the bath-house. The door 
into the passage was open and the passage, where the temperature was 
20° below zero, was also thronged with people. Petrov and I were at 
once allowed to go to the front, almost up to the benches, where we 
could see much better than from the back. They looked upon me as to 
some extent a theatre-goer, a connoisseur, who had frequented per­
formances very different from this; they had seen Baklushin consult­
ing me all this time and treating me with respect; so on this occasion 
I had the honour of a front place. The convicts were no doubt ex­
tremely vain and frivolous, but it was all on the surface. The convicts 
could laugh at me, seeing that I was a poor hand at their work. Almazov 
could look with contempt upon us "gentlemen" and pride himself on 
knOWing how to burn alabaster. But, mixed with their persecution and 

1 5 6 
The House of the Dead 
ridicule, there was another element: we had once been gentlemen; 
we belonged to the same class as their former masters, of whom they 
could have no pleasant memories. But now at the theatricals they 
made way for me. They recognized that in this I was a better critic, 
that I had seen and knew more than they. Even those who liked me 
least were (I know for a fact) anxious now for my approval of their 
theatricals, and without the slightest servility they let me have the 
best place. I see that now, recalling my impressions at the time. It 
seemed to me at the time-I remember-that in their correct esti­
mate of themselves there was no servility, but a sense of their own 
dignity. The highest and most striking characteristic of our people is 
just their sense of justice and their eagerness for it. There is no trace 
in the common people of the desire to be cock of the walk on all oc­
casions and at all costs, whether they deserve to be or not. One has 
but to take off the outer superimposed husk and to look at the kernel 
more closely, more attentively and without prejudice, and some of us 
will see things in the people that we should never have expected. 
There is not much our wise men could teach them. On the contrary, 
I think it is the wise men who ought to learn from the people. 
Before we started, Petrov told me naively that I should have a front 
place partly because I should subscribe more. There was no fixed price 
of admission: everyone gave what he could or what he wished. When 
the plate was taken round almost everyone put something in it, even if 
it were only a halfpenny. But if I were given a front place partly on ac­
count of money, on the supposition that I should give more than oth­
ers, what a sense of their own dignity there was in that again! "You are 
richer than I am, so you can stand in front, and though we are all 
equal, you'll give more; and so a spectator like you is more pleasing to 
the actors. You must have the first place, for we are all here not think­
ing of the money, but showing our respect, so we ought to sort our­
selves of our own accord." How much fine and genuine pride there is 
in this! It is a respect not for money, but respect for oneself. As a rule 
there was not much respect for money, for wealth, in the prison, espe­
cially if one looks at convicts without distinction, as a gang, in the 
mass. I can't remember one of them seriously demeaning himself for 
the sake of money. There were men who were always begging, who 
begged even of me. But this was rather mischief, roguery, than the real 
thing; there was too much humour and naivete in it. I don't know 

The Theatricals 
1 5 7  
whether I express myself so as to be understood. But I am forgetting 
the theatricals. To return. 
Till the curtain was raised, the whole room was a strange and ani­
mated picture. To begin with, masses of spectators crowded, squeezed 
tightly, packed on all sides, waiting with patient and blissful faces for 
the performance to begin. In the back rows men were clambering on 
one another. Many of them had brought blocks of wood from the 
kitchen; fixing the thick block of wood against the wall, a man would 
climb on to it, leaning with both hands on the shoulders of someone 
in front of him, and would stand like that without changing his atti­
tude for the whole two hours, perfectly satisfied with himself and his 
position. Others got their feet on the lower step of the stove and 
stayed so all the time, leaning on men in front of them. This was quite 
in the hindmost rows, next to the wall. At the sides, too, men were 
standing on the bed in dense masses above the musicians. This was a 
good place. Five people had clambered on to the stove itself and, ly­
ing on it, looked down from it. They must have been blissful. The 
window-sills on the opposite wall were also crowded with people 
who had come in late or failed to get a good place. Everyone behaved 
quietly and decorously. Everyone wished to show himself in the best 
light before the gentry and the officers. All faces expressed a simple­
hearted expectation. Every face was red and bathed in sweat from the 
closeness and heat. A strange light of childlike joy, of pure, sweet 
pleasure, was shining on these lined and branded brows and cheeks, 
on those faces usually so morose and gloomy, in those eyes which 
sometimes gleamed with such terrible fire. They were all bare-headed, 
and all the heads were shaven on the right side. 
Suddenly sounds of bustle and hurrying were heard on the stage. In 
a minute the curtain would rise. Then the band struck up. This band de­
serves special mention. Eight musicians were installed on the bed on 
one side; two violins (one from the prison and one borrowed from 
someone in the fortress, but both the fiddlers were convicts) , three bal­
alaikas, all home-made, two guitars and a tambourine instead of a 
double-bass. The violins simply scraped and squealed, the guitars were 
wretched, but the balalaikas were wonderful. The speed with which 
they twanged the strings with their fingers was a positive feat of agility. 
They played dance tunes. At the liveliest part of the tunes, the balalaika­
players would tap the case of the instruments with their knuckles; the 

1 5 8  
The House of the Dead 
tone, the taste, the execution, the handling of the instrument and the 
characteristic rendering of the tune, all was individual, original and 
typical of the convicts. One of the guitarists, too, played his instrument 
splendidly. This was the gentleman who had murdered his father. As for 
the tambourine, it was simply marvellous. The player whirled it round 
on his finger and drew his thumb across the surface; now we heard 
rapid, resonant, monotonous taps; then suddenly this loud distinct 
sound seemed to be broken into a shower of innumerable jangling and 
whispering notes. Two accordions also appeared on the scene. Upon 
my word I had had no idea till then what could be done with simple 
peasant instruments: the blending and harmony of sounds, above all, 
the spirit, the character of the conception and rendering of the tune in 
its very essence were simply amazing. For the first time I realized fully 
all the reckless dash and gaiety of the gay dashing Russian dance songs. 
At last the curtain rose. There was a general stir, everyone shifted 
from one leg to the other, those at the back stood on tiptoe, someone 
fell off his block of wood, everyone without exception opened his 
mouth and stared, and absolute silence reigned . . . .  The performance 
began. 
Near me was standing Aley in a group consisting of his brothers and 
all the other Circassians. They were all intensely delighted with the per­
formance, and came every evening afterwards. All Mohammedans, 
Tatars and others, as I have noticed more than once, are passionately 
fond of spectacles of all sorts. Next to them Isay Fomitch had tucked 
himself in. From the moment the curtain rose, he seemed to be all ears 
and eyes, and Simple-hearted, greedy expectations of delights and mar­
vels. It would have been pitiful indeed if he had been disappointed. 
Aley's charming face beamed with such pure childlike joy that I must 
confess I felt very happy in looking at him, and I remember that at 
every amusing and clever sally on the part of the actors, when there 
was a general burst of laughter, I could not help turning to Aley and 
glancing at his face. He did not see me--he had no attention to spare 
for me! On the left side quite near me stood an old convict who was al­
ways scowling, discontented and grumbling. He, too, notiCed Aley, and 
I saw him more than once turn with a half-smile towards him: he was 
so charming! "Aley Semyonitch" he called him, I don't know why. 
They began with "Filatka and Miroshka." Filatka acted by Baklushin 
was really splendid. He played his part with amazing precision. One 

The Theatricals 
1 59 
could see that he had thought out every phrase, every movement. 
Into the slightest word or gesture he knew how to put value and sig­
nificance in perfect harmony with the character he was acting. And to 
this conscientious effort and study must be added an inimitable gai­
ety, Simplicity and naturalness. If you had seen Baklushin, you would 
certainly have agreed that he was a born actor of real talent. I had seen 
Filatka more than once at theatres in Moscow and Petersburg, and I 
can say pOSitively that the city actors were inferior to Baklushin in the 
part of Filatka. By comparison with him they were too much of 
paysans, and not real Russian peasants. They were too anxious to mimic 
the Russian peasant. Baklushin was stirred, too, by emulation. Every­
one knew that in the second play the part of Kedril would be taken by 
the convict Potseykin, who was for some reason considered by all a 
more talented actor than Baklushin, and at this Baklushin was as cha­
grined as a child. How often he had come to me during those last few 
days to give vent to his feelings! Two hours before the performance he 
was in a perfect fever. When they laughed and shouted to him from 
the crowd: "Bravo, Baklushin! First-rate! " ,  his whole face beamed 
with pleasure, there was a light of real inspiration in his eyes. The 
scene of his kissing Miroshka, when Filatka shouts to him beforehand 
"Wipe your nose! "  and wipes his own, was killingly funny. Everyone 
was rocking with laughter. But what interested me more than all was 
the audience; they were all completely carried away. They gave them­
selves up to their pleasure without reserve. Shouts of approbation 
sounded more and more frequently. One would nudge his neighbour 
and hurriedly whisper his impressions, without caring or even notic­
ing who was beside him. Another would turn ecstatically to the audi­
ence at an amusing passage, hurriedly look at everyone, wave his 
hand as though calling on everyone to laugh and immediately turn 
greedily round to the stage again. Another one simply clicked with 
his fingers and his tongue, and could not stand still, but being unable 
to move from his place, kept shifting from one leg to the other. By the 
end of the performance the general gaiety had reached its height. I 
am not exaggerating anything. Imagine prison, fetters, bondage, the 
vista of melancholy years ahead, the life of days as monotonous as the 
drip of water on a dull autumn day, and suddenly all these oppressed 
and outcast are allowed for one short hour to relax, to rejoice, to for­
get the weary dream, to create a complete theatre, and to create it to 

1 60 
The House of the Dead 
the pride and astonishment of the whole town-to show "what fel­
lows we convicts are!" Of course everything interested them, the 
dresses, for example; they were awfully curious for instance to see a 
fellow like Vanka Otpety or Netsvetaev or Baklushin in a different 
dress from that in which they had seen them every day for so many 
years. "Why, he is a convict, a convict the same as ever, with the fet­
ters jingling on him, and there he is in a frock-coat, with a round hat 
on, in a cloak-like an ordinary person' He's got on moustaches and 
a wig. ! Here he's brought a red handkerchief out of his pocket, he is 
fanning himself with it, he is acting a gentleman-for all the world as 
though he were a gentleman! "  And all were in raptures. "The benev­
olent country gentleman" came on in an adjutant's uniform, a very old 
one, it's true, in epaulettes and a cap with a cockade, and made an ex­
traordinary sensation. There were two competitors for the part, and, 
would you believe it, they quarrelled like little children as to which 
should play it: both were eager to appear in an adjutant's uniform 
with shoulder knots. The other actors parted them, and by a majority 
of votes gave the part to Netsvetaev, not because he was better-looking 
and more presentable than the other and so looked more like a gen­
tleman, but because Netsvetaev assured them that he would come 
on with a cane and would wave it about and draw patterns on the 
ground with it like a real gentleman and tiptop swell, which Vanka 
Otpety could not do, for he had never seen any real gentlemen. And, 
indeed, when Netsvetaev came on the stage with his lady, he kept on 
rapidly drawing patterns on the floor with a thin reedy cane which 
he had picked up somewhere, no doubt conSidering this a sign of the 
highest breeding, foppishness and fashion. Probably at some time 
in his childhood, as a barefoot servant boy, he had happened to see a 
finely-dressed gentleman with a cane and been fascinated by his dex­
terity with it, and the impression had remained printed indelibly on 
his memory, so that now at thirty he remembered it exactly as it was, 
for the enchantment and delectation of the whole prison. Netsvetaev 
was so absorbed in his occupation that he looked at no one; he even 
spoke without raising his eyes, he simply watched the tip of his cane. 
"The benevolent country lady," too, was a remarkable conception in 
its way: she came on in a shabby old muslin dress which looked no 
better than a rag, with her neck and arms bare, and her face horribly 
rouged and powdered, with a cotton nightcap tied under her chin, 

The Theatricals 
1 6 1  
carrying a parasol in one hand and in the other a painted paper fan 
with which she continually fanned herself. A roar of laughter greeted 
this lady's appearance; the lady herself could not refrain from laugh­
ing several times. A convict called Ivanov took the part. Sirotkin 
dressed up as a girl looked very charming. The verses, too, went off 
very well. In fact, the play gave complete satisfaction to all. There was 
no criticism, and indeed there could not be. 
The orchestra played the song, "My porch, my new porch," by way 
of overture, and the curtain rose again. The second piece was "Kedril," 
a play somewhat in the style of Don Juan; at least the master and ser­
vant are both carried off to hell by devils at the end. They acted all they 
had, but it was obviously a fragment, of which the beginning and the 
end were lost. There was no meaning or consistency in it. The action 
takes place in Russia, at an inn. The innkeeper brings a gentleman in 
an overcoat and a battered round hat into the room. He is followed by 
his servant Kedril carrying a trunk and a fowl wrapped up in a piece 
of blue paper. Kedril wears a sheepskin and a footman's cap. It is he 
who is the glutton. He was acted by Baklushin's rival, Potseykin. His 
master was acted by Ivanov, who had been the benevolent lady in the 
first piece. The innkeeper, Netsvetaev, warns them that the room is 
haunted by devils and then goes away. The gentleman, gloomy and 
preoccupied, mutters that he knew that long ago and tells Kedril to 
unpack his things and prepare the supper. Kedril is a coward and 
a glutton. Hearing about the devils, he turns pale and trembles like 
a leaf. He would run away, but is afraid of his master. And, what's 
more, he is hungry. He is greedy, stupid, cunning in his own way, and 
cowardly; he deceives his master at every step and at the same time is 
afraid of him. He is a striking type, which obscurely and remotely 
suggests the character of Leporello. It was really remarkably rendered. 
Potseykin had unmistakable talent, and in my opinion was even a bet­
ter actor than Baklushin. Of course, when I met Baklushin next day, I 
did not express my opinion quite frankly; I should have wounded 
him too much. The convict who acted the master acted pretty well, 
too. He talked the most fearful nonsense; but his delivery was good 
and spirited, and his gestures were appropriate. While Kedril was 
busy with the trunk, the master paced up and down the stage lost in 
thought, and announced aloud that that evening he had reached the 
end of his travels. Kedril listened inquisitively, made grimaces, spoke 

1 62 
The House of the Dead 
aside, and made the audience laugh at every word. He had no pity for 
his master, but he had heard of the devils; he wants to know what 
that meant and so he begins to talk and ask questions. His master at 
last informs him that in some difficulty in the past he had invoked the 
aid of hell; the devils had helped him and had extricated him; but that 
to-day the hour had come, and that perhaps that evening the devils 
would arrive according to their compact to carry off his soul. Kedril 
begins to be panic-stricken. But the gentleman keeps up his spirits 
and tells him to prepare the supper. Kedril brightens up, brings out 
the fowl, brings out some wine and now and then pulls a bit off the 
fowl and tastes it. The audience laughs. Then the door creaks, the 
wind rattles the shutters; Kedril shudders and hastily, almost uncon­
Sciously, stuffs into his mouth a piece of chicken too huge for him to 
swallow. Laughter again. "Is it ready?" asks the gentleman striding 
about the room. "Directly, sir . . .  I am getting it ready," says Kedril. 
He seats himself at the table and calmly proceeds to make away with 
his master's supper. The audience is evidently delighted at the smart­
ness and cunning of the servant and at the master's being made a fool 
of It must be admitted that Potseykin really deserved the applause he 
got. The words "Directly, sir, I am getting it ready," he pronounced 
superbly. Sitting at the table, he began eating greedily, starting at every 
step his master took, for fear the latter should notice what he was 
about; as soon as the master turned round he hid under the table, 
pulling the chicken after him. At last he had taken off the edge of his 
appetite; the time came to think of his master. "Kedril, how long will 
you be?" cries the master. "Ready," Kedril replies briskly, suddenly re­
alizing that there is hardly anything left for his master. There is noth­
ing but one drumstick left on the plate. The gentleman, gloomy and 
preoccupied, sits down to the table noticing nothing, and Kedril 
stands behind his chair holding a napkin. Every word, every gesture, 
every grimace of Kedril's, when, turning to the audience, he winked 
at his simpleton of a master, was greeted by the spectators with irre­
sistible peals oflaughter. But as the master begins to eat, the devils ap­
pear. At this point the play became quite incomprehensible, and the 
devils' entrance was really too grotesque; a door opened in the wing 
and something in white appeared having a lantern with a candle in it 
instead of a head; another phantom, also with a lantern on his head, 
held a scythe. Why the lanterns, why the scythe, why the devils in 

The Theatricals 
1 63 
white? No one could make out. Though, indeed, no one thought of 
it. It was evidently as it should be. The gentleman turns pretty pluck­
ily to the devils and shouts to them that he is ready for them to take 
him. But Kedril is as frightened as a hare; he creeps under the table, 
but for all his fright does not forget to take the bottle with him. The 
devils vanish for a minute; Kedril creeps out from under the table. But 
as soon as the master attacks the chicken once more, three devils burst 
into the room again, seize the master from behind, and carry him off 
to the lower regions. "Kedril, save me! "  shouts his master, but Kedril 
has no attention to spare. This time he has carried off the bottle, a 
plate, and even the loaf under the table. Here he is now, alone; there 
are no devils, no master either. Kedril creeps out, looks about him and 
his face lights up with a smile. He winks slyly, sits down in his master's 
place, and nodding to the audience says in a half-whisper, "Well, now 
I am alone . . .  without a master! "  Everyone roars at his being without 
a master, and then he adds in a half-whisper, turning confidentially to 
the audience and winking more and more merrily, "The devils have 
got my master! "  
The rapture of the audience was beyond all bounds! Apart from 
the master's being taken by the devils, this was said in such a way, 
with such slyness, such an ironically triumphant grimace, that it was 
impossible not to applaud. But Kedril's luck did not last long. He had 
hardly taken the bottle, filled his glass and raised it to his lips when 
the devils suddenly come back, steal up on tiptoe behind him, and 
seize him under the arms. Kedril screams at the top of his voice; he is 
so frightened he dare not look round. He cannot defend himself ei­
ther; he has the bottle in one hand and the glass in the other, and can­
not bring himself to part with either. For half a minute he sits, his 
mouth wide open with fright, staring at the audience with such a 
killing expression of cowardly terror that he might have sat for a pic­
ture. At last he is lifted up and carried away; still holding the bottle, 
he kicks and screams and screams. His screams are still heard from 
behind the scenes. But the curtain drops and everyone laughs, every­
one is delighted . . .  the orchestra strikes up the Kamarinsky. 
They begin quietly, hardly audibly, but the melody grows stronger 
and stronger, the time more rapid; now and then comes the jaunty 
note of a flip on the case of the instrument. It is the Kamarinsky in all 
its glory, and indeed it would have been nice if Glinka could by 

1 64 
The House of the Dead 
chance have heard it in the prison. The pantomime begins to the mu­
sic, which is kept up all through. The scene is the interior of a cottage. 
On the stage are a miller and his wife. The miller in one corner is 
mending some harness; in the other corner his wife is spinning flax. 
The wife was played by Sirotkin, the miller by Netsvetaev. 
I may observe that our scenery was very poor. Both in this play and 
in the others we rather supplied the scene from our imagination than 
saw it in reality. By way of a background there was a rug or a horse­
cloth of some sort; on one side a wretched sort of screen. On the left 
side there was nothing at all, so that we could see the bed, but the au­
dience was not critical and was ready to supply all deficiences by 
their imagination, and indeed, convicts are very good at doing so. "If 
you are told it's a garden, you've got to look on it as a garden, if it's a 
room it's a room, if it's a cottage it's a cottage-it doesn't matter, and 
there is no need to make a fuss about it." 
Sirotkin was very charming in the dress of a young woman. Sev­
eral compliments were paid him in undertones among the audience. 
The miller finishes his work, takes up his hat, takes up his whip, goes 
up to his wife and explains to her by signs that he must go out, but 
that if his wife admits anyone in his absence then . . .  and he indi­
cates the whip. The wife listens and nods. Probably she is well ac­
quainted with that whip: the hussy amuses herself when her husband 
is away. The husband goes off. As soon as he has gone, the wife shakes 
her fist after him. Then there is a knock: the door opens and another 
miller appears, a neighbour, a peasant with a beard, wearing a full 
coat. He has a present for her, a red kerchief. The woman laughs, but 
as soon as the neighbour tries to embrace her, there is another knock. 
Where can he hide? She hurriedly hides him under the table and sits 
down to her distaff again. Another admirer makes his appearance: 
an army clerk, in military dress. So far the pantomime had gone ad­
mirably, the gestures were perfectly appropriate. One could not help 
wondering as one looked at these impromptu actors; one could not 
help thinking how much power and talent in Russia are sometimes 
wasted in servitude and poverty. But the convict who acted the clerk 
had probably at some time been on some private or provincial stage, 
and he imagined that our performers, one and all, had no notion of 
acting and did not move on the stage as they ought to. And he paced 
the stage as we are told the classic heroes used to in the past: he 

The Theatricals 
1 65 
would take one long stride, and before moving the other leg, stop 
short, throw his head and his whole body back, look haughtily around 
him and take another stride. If such deportment is absurd in the clas­
sical drama, in an army clerk in a comic scene it is even more ridicu­
lous. But our audience thought that probably it was as it ought to be 
and took for granted the long strides of the lanky clerk without criti­
cising them. The clerk had hardly reached the middle of the stage be­
fore another knock was heard: the woman was in a flutter again. 
Where was she to put the clerk? Into a chest which stood conveniently 
open. The clerk creeps into the chest and she shuts the lid on him. 
This time it is a different sort of visitor, a lover, too, but of a special 
kind. It is a Brahmin, and even dressed as one. There is an overwhelm­
ing burst oflaughter from the audience. The Brahmin was acted by the 
convict Koshkin, and acted beautifully. He looked like a Brahmin. In 
pantomime he suggests the intensity of his feelings. He raises his 
hands to heaven, then lays them on his heart; but he has hardly begun 
to be sentimental when there is a loud knock at the door. From the 
sound one can tell it is the master of the house. The frightened wife is 
beside herself, the Brahmin rushes about like one possessed and im­
plores her to conceal him. She hurriedly puts him behind the cup­
board and, forgetting to open the door, rushes back to her work and 
goes on spinning, heedless of her husband's knocking. In her alarm 
she twiddles in her fingers an imaginary thread and turns an imagi­
nary distaff, while the real one lies on the floor. Sirotkin acted her ter­
ror very cleverly and successfully. But the husband breaks open the 
door with his foot, and whip in hand approaches his wife. He has 
been on the watch and has seen it all, and he plainly shows her on his 
fingers that she has three men hidden and then he looks for the stow­
aways. The one he finds first is the neighbour, and cuffing him he 
leads him out of the room. The terrified clerk wanting to escape puts 
his head out from under the lid and so betrays himself The husband 
thrashes him with the whip, and this time the amorous clerk skips 
about in anything but a classic style. The Brahmin is left; the husband 
is a long while looking for him. He finds him in the corner behind the 
cupboard, bows to him politely and drags him by the beard into the 
middle of the stage. The Brahmin tries to defend himself, shouts "Ac­
cursed man, accursed man!" (the only words uttered in the pan­
tomime) , but the husband takes no notice and deals with him after 

1 66 
The House of the Dead 
his own fashion. The wife, seeing that her turn is coming next, flings 
down the flax and the distaff and runs out of the room; the spinning­
bench tips over on the floor, the convicts laugh. Aley tugs at my arm 
without looking at me, and shouts to me, "Look! The Brahmin, the 
Brahmin! "  laughing so that he can hardly stand. The curtain falls. A 
second scene follows. 
But there is no need to describe them all. There were two or three 
more. They were all amusing and inimitably comic. If the convicts did 
not positively invent them, each of them put something of his own 
into them. Almost every one of the actors improvised something, so 
that the follOwing evenings the same parts acted by the same actors 
were somewhat different. The last pantomime of a fantastic character 
concluded with a ballet. It was a funeral. The Brahmin with numerous 
attendants repeated various spells over the coffin, but nothing was of 
use. At last the strains of the "Setting Sun" are heard, the corpse comes 
to life and all begin to dance with joy. The Brahmin dances with the re­
suscitated corpse and dances in a peculiar Brahminical fashion. And so 
the theatricals were over till the next evening. The convicts dispersed 
merry and satisfied; they praised the actors, they thanked the sergeant. 
There were no sounds of quarrelling. Everyone was unusually con­
tented, even as it were happy, and fell asleep not as on other nights, 
but almost with a tranquil spirit-and why, one wonders? And yet it is 
not a fancy of my imagination. It's the truth, the reality. These poor 
people were only allowed to do as they liked, ever so little, to be merry 
like human beings, to spend one short hour not as though in prison­
and they were morally transformed, if only for a few minutes . . . .  
Now it is the middle of the night. I start and wake up. The old man 
is still praying on the stove, and will pray there till dawn. Aley is 
sleeping quietly beside me. I remember that he was still laughing and 
talking to his brothers about the theatricals as he fell asleep, and un­
conSCiously I look closer into his peaceful childlike face. Little by lit­
tle, I recall everything: the previous day, the holidays, the whole of 
that month . . .  I lift up my head in terror and look round at my 
sleeping companions by the dim flickering light of the prison candle. 
I look at their poor faces, at their poor beds, at the hopeless poverty 
and destitution-I gaze at it-as though I wanted to convince myself 
that it is really true, and not the continuation of a hideous dream. 
But it is true: I hear a moan, someone drops his arm heavily and 

The Theatricals 
1 67 
there is the clank of chains. Another starts in his sleep and begins to 
speak, while the old man on the stove prays for all "good Christians," 
and I hear the even cadence of his soft prolonged, "Lord Jesus Christ, 
have mercy upon us." 
"After all, I am not here for ever, only for a few years," I think, and 
I lay my head on the pillow again. 


PART I I 


C H A P T E R I 
T H E  H O S P I TA L  ( 1 )  
SOON AFTER THE HOLIDAYS I was taken ill and went into our military hos­
pital. It stood apart, half a mile from the fortress. It was a long one­
storey building painted yellow. In the summer when the buildings 
were done up, an immense quantity of yellow ochre was spent on it. 
Round the huge courtyard of the hospital were grouped the offices, the 
doctors' houses and other buildings. The principal building consisted 
only of wards for the patients. There were a number of wards, but only 
two for the convicts, and these were always very crowded, especially 
in the summer, so that the beds had often to be moved close together. 
Our wards were full of all sorts of "unfortunate people." Our convicts, 
soldiers of all sorts awaiting trial, men who had been sentenced and 
men who were awaiting sentence, and men who were on their way to 
other prisons, all came here. There were some, too, from the diScipli­
nary battalion-a strange institution to which soldiers who had been 
guilty of some offence or were not trustworthy were sent for reforma­
tion, and from which two or more years later they usually came out 
scoundrels such as are rarely to be met with. Convicts who were taken 
ill in our prison usually informed the sergeant of their condition in the 
morning. Their names were at once entered in the book, and with this 
book the invalid was sent to the battalion infirmary under escort. There 
the doctor made a preliminary examination of all the invalids from the 
various military divisions in the fortress, and any who were found to 
be really ill were admitted to the hospital. My name was entered in the 
book, and between one and two, when all the prisoners had gone out 
to work after dinner, I went to the hospital. The sick convict usually 
took with him all the money he could collect, some bread-for he 
could not expect to get rations at the hospital that day-a tiny pipe and 
a pouch of tobacco with a flint for lighting it. The latter articles he kept 
carefully hidden in his boots. I entered the precincts of the hospital, 
feeling some curiosity about this novel aspect of our prison life. 
1 7 1  

1 7 2 
The House of the Dead 
It was a warm, dull, depressing day, one of those days when an in­
stitution such as a hospital assumes a peculiarly callous, dejected and 
sour appearance. I went with the escort into the waiting-room, where 
there were two copper baths. There were two patients with their escort 
in the room already, not convicts, but men awaiting their trial. A hos­
pital assistant came in, scanned us indolently with an air of authority, 
and still more indolently went to inform the doctor on duty. The latter 
soon made his appearance. He examined us, treated us very kindly, 
and gave each of us a medical chart with our name on it. The further 
description of the illness, the medicines and diet prescribed, were left 
for the doctor who was in charge of the convict wards. I had heard be­
fore that the convicts were never tired of praising the doctors. "They 
are like fathers to us," they said in answer to my inquiries when I was 
going to the hospital. Meanwhile, we had changed our clothes. The 
clothes we had come in were taken from us and we were dressed up in 
hospital underlinen and provided with long stockings, slippers, night­
caps and thick cloth dressing-gowns of dark brown colour, lined with 
something that might have been coarse linen or might have been 
sticking-plaster. In fact, the dressing-gown was filthy to the last de­
gree, but I only fully realized this later. Then they took us to the con­
vict wards, which were at the end of a very long, clean and lofty 
corridor. The appearance of cleanliness everywhere was very satisfac­
tory; everything that caught the eye was shining-though perhaps this 
may have seemed so to me by contrast with the prison. The two pris­
oners awaiting trial went into the ward on the left, while I went to the 
right. At the door, which fastened with an iron bolt, stood a sentry 
with a gun; beside him stood a sub-sentry to relieve him. The junior 
sergeant (of the hospital guard) gave orders I should be admitted, and 
I found myself in a long, narrow room, along two walls of which 
were rows of beds, about twenty-two altogether, of which three or 
four were unoccupied. The bedsteads were wooden and painted 
green, of the kind only too familiar to all of us in Russia, the sort of 
bedstead which by some fatality is never free from bugs. I was put in 
the corner on the side where there were windows. 
As I have said before, there were some convicts from our prison 
here. Some of these knew me already, or at least had seen me. But the 
majority were prisoners awaiting trial or from the diSCiplinary bat­
talions. There were only a few who were too ill to get up. The others 

The Hospital (1) 
1 73 
suffering from slight ailments, or convalescent, were either sitting 
on their beds or walking up and down the ward, where there was 
space enough for exercise between the two rows of beds. There was 
a suffocating hospital smell in the ward. The air was tainted with un­
pleasant effluvia of different sorts, as well as with the smell of drugs, 
although the fire was kept almost all day long in the stove in the cor­
ner. My bed had a striped quilt over it. I took it off. Under it was a 
cloth blanket lined with linen, and coarse sheets and pillow-cases of 
very doubtful cleanliness. Beside the bed stood a small table with a 
jug and a tin cup. All this was tidily covered with a little towel put 
ready for me. Underneath the table was a shelf on which patients 
kept a jug of kvas, or any such thing, and those who drank tea, a 
teapot; but very few of them did drink tea. The pipes and tobacco 
pouches which almost all the patients, even the consumptive ones, 
possessed were hidden under the mattresses. The doctor and the 
other attendants scarcely ever examined the beds, and even if they 
did find a man smoking, they pretended not to notice it. But the 
convicts were almost always on their guard, and went to the stove to 
smoke. It was only at night that they sometimes smoked in bed; but 
no one ever went through the wards at night, except perhaps the of­
ficer of the hospital guard. 
I had never been a patient in a hospital till then, so everything sur­
rounding me was perfectly new to me. I noticed that I excited some 
curiosity. They had already heard about me, and stared at me without 
ceremony, and even with a shade of superciliousness, as a new boy is 
looked at at school, or a petitioner is looked at in a government of­
fice. On the right of me lay a clerk awaiting his punishment, the ille­
gitimate son of a captain. He was being tried for making counterfeit 
coin, and he had been for a year in the hospital apparently not ill in 
any way, though he assured the doctors that he had aneurism of the 
heart. He had attained his object and escaped penal servitude and cor­
poral punishment. A year later he was sent to T -k to be kept at a hos­
pital. He was a broad, sturdily built fellow of eight-and-twenty, a 
great rogue with a good knowledge of the law, very sharp, extremely 
self-confident, and free and easy in his behaviour. He was morbidly 
vain, had persuaded himself in earnest that he was the most truthful 
and honourable of men and, what is more, had done nothing wrong, 
and he clung to this conviction to the end. He spoke to me first; he 

1 74 
The House of the Dead 
began questioning me with curiosity, and described to me in some 
detail the external routine of the hospital. First of all, of course, he told 
me that he was the son of a captain. He was very anxious to make 
himself out a nobleman, or at least "of good family." 
The next one who approached me was a patient from the diScipli­
nary battalion, and he began to assure me that he knew many of the 
"gentleman" exiles, mentioning them by their names. He was a grey­
headed soldier; one could see from his face that he was romancing. 
His name was Tchekunov. He was evidently trying to make up to me, 
probably suspecting I had money. Noticing that I had a parcel con­
taining tea and sugar, he at once proffered his services in getting a 
teapot and making tea. M. had promised to send me a teapot next day 
from prison by one of the convicts who came to the hospital to work. 
But Tchekunov managed all right. He got hold of an iron pot and 
even a cup, boiled the water, made the tea, in fact waited on me with 
extraordinary zeal, which at once called forth some malignant jeers at 
his expense from a patient lying opposite me. This was a man called 
Ustyantsev, a soldier under sentence, who from fear of corporal pun­
ishment had drunk a jug of vodka after steeping snuff in it, and had 
brought on consumption by so doing; I have mentioned him already. 
Till that moment he had been lying silent, breathing painfully, look­
ing at me intently and earnestly and watching Tchekunov with indig­
nation. His extraordinarily bitter intensity gave a comic flavour to his 
indignation. At last he could stand it no longer: 
"Ugh, the flunky! He's found a master! "  he said gasping, his voice 
broken with emotion. He was within a few days of his death. 
Tchekunov turned to him indignantly. 
"Who's the flunkey?" he brought out, looking contemptuously at 
Ustyantsev. 
"You are a flunkey! "  the other replied in a self-confident tone, as 
though he had a full right to call Tchekunov over the coals, and in fact 
had been appointed to that duty. 
"Me a flunkey?" 
"That's what you are. Do you hear, good people, he doesn't believe 
it! He is surprised! "  
"What is it to you? You see the gentleman is helpless. He is not 
used to being without a servant! Why shouldn't I wait on him, you 
shaggy-faced fool?" 

The Hospital (1) 
"Who's shaggy-faced?" 
"You are shaggy-faced." 
"Me shaggy-faced?" 
"Yes, you are!" 
1 75 
"And are you a beauty? You've a face like a crow's egg . . .  if I am 
shaggy-faced." 
"Shaggy-faced is what you are! Here God has stricken him, he 
might lie still and die quietly. No, he must poke his nose in! Why, 
what are you meddling for?" 
"Why! Well, I'd rather bow down to a boot than to a dog. My fa­
ther didn't knuckle under to anybody and he told me not to. I . . .  
I . . .  " 
He would have gone on but he had a terrible fit of coughing that 
lasted for some minutes, spitting blood. Soon the cold sweat of exhaus­
tion came out on his narrow forehead. His cough interrupted him, or 
he would have gone on talking; one could see from his eyes how he 
was longing to go on scolding; but he simply waved his hand help­
lessly, so that in the end Tchekunov forgot about him. 
I felt that the consumptive's indignation was directed rather at me 
than at Tchekunov. No one would have been angry with the latter, or 
have looked on him with particular contempt, for his eagerness to 
wait upon me and so earn a few pence. Everyone realized that he did 
this simply for gain. Peasants are by no means fastidious on that 
score, and very well understand the distinction. What Ustyantsev dis­
liked was myself, he disliked my tea, and that even in fetters I was like 
"a master," and seemed as though I could not get on without a ser­
vant, though I had not asked for a servant and did not desire one. I 
did, as a fact, always prefer to do everything for myself, and indeed I 
particularly wanted not even to look like a spoiled idle person, or to 
give myself the airs of a gentleman. I must admit while we are on the 
subject that my vanity was to some extent concerned in the matter. 
But-I really don't know how it always came to pass-I never could 
get away from all sorts of helpers and servants who fastened them­
selves upon me, and in the end took complete possession of me, so 
that it was really they who were my masters and I who was their ser­
vant, though it certainly did appear as though I were a regular "gen­
tleman," as though I gave myself airs, and could not get on without 
servants. This annoyed me very much, of course. But Ustyantsev was 

1 76 
The House of the Dead 
a consumptive and an irritable man. The other patients preserved an 
air of indifference, in which there was a shade of disdain. I remember 
they were all absorbed in something particular: from their conversa­
tion I learnt that a convict who was then being punished with the 
sticks was to be brought to us in the evening. The patients were ex­
pecting him with some interest. They said, however, that his punish­
ment was a light one-only five hundred blows. 
By degrees I took in my surroundings. As far as I could see, those 
who were really ill were suffering from scurvy and affections of 
the eye-diseases frequent in that region. There were several such in 
the ward. of the others who were really ill, some had fever, skin dis­
eases or consumption. This was not like other wards-here patients 
of all kinds were collected together, even those suffering from vene­
real diseases. I speak of "those who were really ill," because there were 
some here who had come without any disease, "to have a rest." The 
doctors readily admitted such sham invalids from sympathy, especially 
when there were many beds empty. Detention in the guard-houses 
and prisons seemed so disagreeable, compared with the hospital, that 
many convicts were glad to come to the hospital in spite of the bad 
air and the locked ward. There were indeed some people, especially 
from the disciplinary battalion, who were fond of lying in bed and of 
hospital life in general. I looked at my new companions with interest, 
but I remember my curiosity was espeCially aroused by one from our 
prison, a man who was dying, also consumptive, and also at the last 
gasp. He was in the bed next but one beyond Ustyantsev, and so al­
most opposite me. His name was Mihailov; a fortnight before I had 
seen him in the prison. He had been ill a long while and ought to 
have been in the doctor's hands long before; but with obstinate and 
quite unnecessary patience he had controlled himself, and gone on, 
and only at Christmas he had come into the hospital to die three 
weeks later of galloping consumption; it was like a fire consuming 
him. I was struck this time by the awful change in his face, which was 
one of the first I noticed when I entered the prison; it somehow 
caught my eye then. Near him was a soldier of the disciplinary battal­
ion, an old man of filthy and revolting habits . . . .  However, I cannot 
go over all the patients. I have mentioned this old man now simply be­
cause he made some impression on me at the time, and in the course 
of one minute gave me a full idea of some peculiarities of the convict 

The Hospital (1) 
1 7 7 
ward. This old fellow, I remember, had a very heavy cold at the time. 
He was constantly sneezing, and went on sneezing for the whole of 
the following week, even in his sleep, in fits of five or six sneezes at a 
time, regularly repeating each time, "Oh Lord, what an affliction." At 
that minute he was sitting on the bed greedily stuffing his nose with 
snuff from a paper parcel, so that his sneezes might be more violent 
and complete. He sneezed into a checked cotton handkerchief of his 
own, that had been washed a hundred times and was faded to the last 
extreme; and as he sneezed he wrinkled up his nose in a peculiar way 
into tiny innumerable creases, and showed the relics of ancient black­
ened teeth between his red dribbling jaws. Then at once he opened 
his handkerchief, scrutinized the phlegm in it, and immediately 
smeared it on his brown hospital dressing-gown, so that the handker­
chief remained comparatively clean. He did this the whole week. This 
persistent miserly care of his own handkerchief at the sacrifice of the 
hospital dressing-gown aroused no sort of protest from the other pa­
tients, though one of them would have to wear that dressing-gown 
after him. But our peasants are not squeamish and are strangely lack­
ing in fastidiousness. I winced at that moment and I could not help at 
once beginning to examine with disgust and curiosity the dressing­
gown I had just put on. Then I realized that it had been attracting my 
attention for a long time by its strong smell; by now it had become 
warm on me and smelt more and more strongly of medicines, plas­
ters, and, as I thought, of something decomposing, which was not to 
be wondered at, since it had been for immemorial years on the 
backs of patients. Possibly the linen lining may have been washed 
sometimes; but I am not sure of that. At the present, anyway, it was 
saturated with all sorts of unpleasant discharges, lotions, matter 
from broken blisters, and so on. Moreover, convicts who had just re­
ceived corporal punishment were constantly coming into the con­
vict wards with wounded backs. Compresses were applied and then 
the dressing-gown being put on straight over the wet shirt could not 
possibly escape getting messed, and everything that dropped on it 
remained. 
And the whole time I was in prison, that is, several years, I used to 
put on the dressing-gown with fear and mistrust whenever I had to 
be in hospital (and I was there pretty often) . I particularly disliked 
the huge and remarkably fat lice I sometimes came across in those 

1 78 
The House of the Dead 
dressing-gowns. The convicts enjoyed killing them, so that when one 
was squashed under the convict's thick, clumsy nail, one could see 
from the hunter's face the satisfaction it gave him. We particularly dis­
liked bugs, too, and sometimes the whole ward joined in their de­
struction on a long dreary winter evening. And though, apart from 
the bad smell, everything on the surface was as clean as possible in the 
ward, they were far from being fastidious over the cleanliness of the in­
side, so to speak. The patients were accustomed to it and even accepted 
it as natural. And indeed the very arrangements of the hospital were not 
conducive to cleanliness. But I will talk of these arrangements later. 
As soon as Tchekunov had made my tea (made, I may mention in 
parenthesis, with the water in the ward which was brought up only 
once in the twenty-four hours, and was quickly tainted in the foul at­
mosphere), the door was opened with some noise and the soldier 
who had just been punished was led in under a double escort. This 
was the first time I saw a man after corporal punishment. Afterwards 
they came in often, some so seriously injured that they had to be car­
ried in, and this was always a source of great interest to the patients, 
who usually received them with an exaggeratedly severe expression 
and a sort of almost affected seriousness. However, their reception 
depended to some extent on the gravity of their crime, and conse­
quently on the number of strokes they had received. Those who had 
been very badly beaten and were reputed to be great criminals en­
joyed greater respect and greater consideration than a runaway 
recruit, like the one who was brought in now, for instance. But in 
neither case were there any remarks expressive of speCial compassion 
or irritation. In silence they helped the victim and waited upon him, 
especially if he could not do without assistance. The hospital atten­
dants knew that they were leaving the patient in skilful and experienced 
hands. The necessary nursing usually took the form of constantly 
changing the sheet or shirt, which was soaked in cold water and ap­
plied to the torn flesh of the back, especially if the patient were too 
weak to look after himself. Another necessary operation was the skil­
ful extraction of splinters, which were often left in the wounds from 
broken sticks, and this was usually very painful to the patient. But I 
was always struck by the extraordinary stoicism with which the vic­
tims bore their sufferings. I have seen many of them, sometimes ter­
ribly beaten, and hardly one of them uttered a groan! Only their faces 

The Hospital (1) 
1 79 
changed and turned white, their eyes glowed, they looked preoccu­
pied and uneasy, their lips quivered, so that the poor fellows often bit 
them till they almost bled. 
The soldier who had come in was a strongly built, muscular lad of 
twenty-three, with a handsome face, tall, well-made and dark-skinned. 
His back had been rather badly beaten. The upper part of his body 
was stripped to below the waist; on his shoulders was laid a wet 
sheet, which made him shiver all over, as though he were in a fever, 
and for an hour and a half he walked up and down the ward. I looked 
into his face: it seemed to me he was thinking of nothing at that mo­
ment; he looked strangely and wildly around with wandering eyes, 
which it was evidently an effort for him to fix on anything. It seemed 
to me that he looked intently at my tea. The tea was hot and steaming; 
the poor fellow was chilled and his teeth were chattering. I offered 
him a drink. He turned to me mutely and abruptly, took the cup, 
drank it off standing and without putting in sugar, in great haste, 
seemingly purposely to avoid looking at me. When he had emptied 
it, he put back the cup without a word, and without even a nod to me 
began pacing up and down the ward again. He was beyond words or 
nodsl As for the convicts, they all for some reason avoided speaking to 
him; on the contrary, though they helped him at first, they seemed to 
try expressly to take no further notice of him afterwards, perhaps 
feeling it best to leave him alone as much as possible, and not to 
bother him with questions or "sympathy," and he seemed perfectly 
satisfied to be left alone. 
Meanwhile it got dark and the night-lamp was lighted. Some, 
though very few, of the convicts had, it appeared, candlesticks of their 
own. At last, after the doctor's evening visit, the sergeant of the guard 
came in, counted over the patients and the ward was locked. A tub 
was first brought in, and I learnt with surprise that it was kept in the 
ward all night, for though there was accommodation only two steps 
away in the corridor, it was against the rules for the convicts to leave 
the ward on any pretext at night, and even during the day they were 
only allowed to be absent for a moment. The convict wards were not 
like the ordinary ones, and the convict had to bear his punishment 
even in illness. Who had first made this rule I do not know; I only 
know that there was no reason for it, and the utter uselessness of such 
formalism was nowhere more apparent than in this case. The doctors 

1 80 
The House of the Dead 
were certainly not responsible for the rule. I repeat, the convicts 
could not say enough in praise of their doctors, they looked on them 
as fathers and respected them. Everyone was treated with kindness 
and heard a friendly word from the doctor, and the convicts, cast off by 
all men, appreciated it, for they saw the genuineness and sincerity of 
these friendly words and this kindness. It might have been different: no 
one would have called the doctors to account if they had behaved dif­
ferently. that is, more roughly and inhumanely; so they were kind 
from real humanity. And of course they knew that a sick man, even 
though he were a convict, needed fresh air as much as any other pa­
tient, even of the highest rank. Patients in the other wards, those who 
were convalescent, I mean, could walk freely about the corridors, 
take plenty of exercise, and breathe fresher air than that of the ward, 
which was always tainted and inevitably charged with stifling fumes. 
It is both terrible and disgusting to me now to realize how foul the 
tainted atmosphere of our ward must have been at night after the tub 
had been brought into the heated room, where there were patients 
suffering from dysentery and such complaints. When I said just 
now that the convict had to bear his punishment even though he 
were sick, I did not and I do not, of course, suppose that such a rule 
was made simply as a form of punishment. Of course, that would 
be senseless calumny on my part. It is useless to punish a sick man. 
And, since that is so, it follows that probably some stern, inevitable 
necessity had forced the authorities to a measure so pernicious in its 
effects. What necessity? But what is so vexatious is that it is impossi­
ble to find any explanation of this measure, and many others so in­
comprehensible that one cannot even conjecture an explanation of 
them. How explain such useless cruelty? On the theory that the con­
vict will purposely sham illness to get into the hospital, will deceive 
the doctors, and if allowed to leave the ward at night will escape un­
der cover of darkness? It is impossible to treat such a notion seriously. 
Where could he escape? How could he escape? In what clothes could 
he escape? By day they are allowed to leave the room one at a time, 
and it might be the same at night. At the door stands a sentinel with a 
loaded gun, and although the lavatory is only two steps from the 
door, the convict is always accompanied by a guard, and the one dou­
ble window in it is covered by a grating. To get out of the window it 
would be necessary to break the grating and the double frame. Who 

The Hospital (1) 
1 8 1  
would allow this? Even supposing anything so absurd as that he could 
first kill the guard without making a noise or letting him cry out, he 
would still have to break the window frame and the grating. Note that 
close beside the sentry sleep the ward attendants, and that ten paces 
away stands another armed sentinel at the door of another convict 
ward with another guard and other attendants beside him. And 
where can a man run in the winter in stockings and slippers, in a 
hospital dressing-gown and a nightcap? And since this is so, since 
there is so little danger (that is, really, none at all) why a rule so bur­
densome to the patients, perhaps in the last days of their lives, sick 
men who need fresh air even more than the healthy? What is it for? I 
could never understand it. 
But since we have once begun asking why, I cannot pass over an­
other point which for many years stood out as the most perplexing 
fact, for which I could never find a solution. I must say a few words 
about this before I go on with my description. I am thinking of the 
fetters, which are never removed from a convict, whatever illness he 
may be suffering from. Even consumptives have died before my eyes 
with their fetters on. Yet everyone was accustomed to it, everyone re­
garded it as an established fact that could not be altered. I doubt 
whether anybody even thought about it, since during the years I was 
there it never struck one of the doctors even to petition the authori­
ties that a patient seriously ill, especially in consumption, might have 
his fetters removed. The fetters were in themselves not a very great 
weight. They weighed from eight to twelve pounds. It is not too great 
a burden for a healthy man to carry ten pounds. I was told, however, 
that after several years the convict's legs begin to waste from wearing 
fetters. I do not know whether it is true, though there is some proba­
bility of it. Even a small weight, a weight of no more than ten 
pounds, makes the limb abnormally heavy, and may have some inju­
rious action after a length of time. But admitting that it is not too 
much for a healthy man, is it the same for a sick man? And even sup­
posing it is not too much for an ordinary patient, is it not very differ­
ent for the dangerously ill, for consumptives whose arms and legs 
waste away in any case, so that a straw's weight is too heavy for them? 
And, indeed, if the doctors succeeded in freeing only the consump­
tives, that would be in itself a really great and good action. Someone 
will say perhaps that the convict is a wicked man and does not deserve 

1 82 
The House of the Dead 
kindness; but surely there is no need to double the sufferings of one 
who is already stricken by the hand of God! And one cannot believe 
that this is done simply for the sake of punishment. Even by law 
the consumptive is exempt from corporal punishment. Consequently 
we must look upon the retention of fetters as a mysterious and im­
portant measure of precaution. But what the reason for it is I cannot 
imagine. There can really be no fear that the consumptive will escape. 
Who would dream of such a thing, especially in the advanced stages 
of the disease? To sham consumption and to deceive the doctors in 
order to escape is impossible. It is not a disease that can be simulated; 
it is unmistakable. And by the way, are convicts put into fetters merely 
to prevent them escaping, or to make it more difficult for them to do 
so? Certainly not. Fetters are simply a form of degradation, a disgrace, 
and a physical and moral burden. That at least is what they are meant 
to be. They could never hinder anyone from running away. The least 
skilful, the least expert convict can qUickly and easily file them off or 
can smash the rivet with a stone. The fetters are no obstacle at all; and 
if that is so, if they are put on the condemned convict simply as a 
punishment, I ask again: is it right to punish a dying man in this way? 
And now as I write this, I vividly recall the death of the consump­
tive patient, Mihailov, whose bed was nearly opposite mine, not far 
from Ustyantsev's. He died, I remember, four days after I came in. 
Possibly I have mentioned the case of the consumptives through un­
consciously recalling the impressions and ideas which came into my 
mind at the Sight of that death. I knew little of Mihailov himself, 
however. He was quite young, not more than five-and-twenty, tall, 
thin, and of extremely attractive appearance. He was in the "special 
division," and was strangely silent, always gently and quietly melan­
choly, as though he were "drying up" in prison, as the convicts said 
of him. He left a pleasant memory among them. I only remember 
that he had fine eyes, and I really do not know why he comes back to 
my mind so distinctly. He died at three 0' clock in the afternoon on a 
bright frosty day. I remember the glowing slanting rays of the sun 
pierced through the green frozen panes of our windows. The sunshine 
was streaming full on the dying man. He was unconscious, and lay 
for several hours in the death agony. From early morning he had 
scarcely recognized those who went up to him. The patients would 
have liked to do something for him, seeing his distress; his breathing 

The Hospital (1) 
1 83 
was deep, painful and raucous; his chest heaved as though he could 
not get air. He flung off his quilt and his clothes, and began at last to 
tear off his shirt; even that seemed a weight to him. The other patients 
went to his help and took off his shirt. It was terrible to see that long, 
long body, the arms and legs wasted to the bone, the sunken belly, the 
strained chest, the ribs standing out like a skeleton's. Nothing re­
mained on his body but a wooden cross and a little bag with a relic in 
it, and his fetters which might, it seemed, have slipped off his wasted 
legs. Half an hour before his death the whole ward was hushed, we 
began to talk almost in whispers. Everyone moved about nOiselessly. 
The patients did not talk much, and then of other things; they only 
looked now and then at the dying man, who was gasping more and 
more terribly. At last, with a straying and uncertain hand, he fumbled 
at the cross on his chest and began pulling it off, as though even that 
. were a weight that worried and oppressed him. The patients removed 
the cross, too. Ten minutes later he died. They knocked at the door for 
the sentry and told him. An attendant came in, looked blankly at the 
dead man, and went to fetch a medical assistant. The medical assis­
tant, a good-natured young fellow somewhat excessively occupied 
with his personal appearance, which was prepossessing however, 
soon came in, went up to the dead man with rapid steps that sounded 
noisy in the silent ward, and with a particularly unconcerned air, 
which he seemed to have assumed for the occasion, took his wrist, 
felt his pulse and went away with a wave of his hand. Word was sent 
to the sergeant in charge: the criminal was an important one and 
could not be certified as dead without special ceremony. While we 
were waiting for the sergeant, one of the convicts suggested in a low 
voice that it might be as well to close the dead man's eyes. Another 
man listened attentively, without a word went up to the dead man 
and closed his eyes. Seeing the cross lying on the pillow, he picked it 
up, looked at it, and put it round Mihailov's neck again; then he 
crossed himself Meanwhile the dead face was growing rigid; the 
sunlight was flickering on it; the mouth was half open; two rows of 
white young teeth glistened between the thin parched lips. 
At last the sergeant on duty came in, in a helmet and with a sabre, 
followed by two guards. He went up, moving more slowly as he got 
nearer, looking in perplexity at the hushed convicts who were gazing 
grimly at him from all sides. When he was a little way off, he stood 

1 84 
The House of the Dead 
stock-still, as though he were scared. The sight of the naked and 
wasted body with nothing on but the fetters impressed him, and he 
suddenly unbuckled his sword-belt, took off his helmet, which he was 
not required to do, and solemnly crossed himself. He was a grim­
looking, grey-headed man who had seen many years of service. I re­
member that at that momentTchekunov, also a grey-headed man, was 
standing near. He stared the whole time mutely and intently into the 
sergeant's face, and with strange attention watched every movement 
he made. But their eyes met and something made Tchekunov's lower 
lip quiver; he twisted it into a grin and, nodding rapidly. as it were in­
voluntarily, towards the dead man, he said to the sergeant: 
"He too had a mother! "  and he walked away. I remember those 
words stabbed me to the heart. What made him say them, what made 
him think of them? They began lifting the dead body: they lifted 
the bed as well; the straw rustled, the chains clanked loudly on the 
floor in the silent ward . . .  they were picked up. The body was car­
ried out. Suddenly everyone began talking aloud. We could hear the 
sergeant in the corridor sending someone for the smith. The fetters 
were to be removed from the dead man . . . .  
But I am digressing. 

C H A P T E R  I I  
T H E  H O S P  I TA L  ( 2 )  
THE DOCTORS WENT THEIR rounds in the morning; between ten and 
eleven they made their appearance in our ward all together, with the 
chief doctor at their head, and an hour and a half before that our spe­
cial ward doctor used to visit the ward. At that time our ward doctor 
was a friendly young man and a thoroughly good doctor. The con­
victs were very fond of him and only found one fault in him: that he 
was "too soft." He was in fact not very ready of speech and seemed ill 
at ease with us, he would almost blush and change the diet at the first 
request of the patient, and I believe he would even have pre್cribed 
the medicines to suit their fancy if they had asked him. But he was a 
splendid young man. 
It may be said that many doctors in Russia enjoy the love and re­
spect of the peasants, and, as far as I have observed, that is perfectly 
true. I know that my words will seem paradoxical when one consid­
ers the distrust of medicine and of foreign drugs universally felt by 
the common people in Russia. A peasant will, in fact, even in severe 
illness, go on for years consulting a wise woman, or taking his home­
made remedies (which are by no means to be despised) , rather than 
go to a doctor, or into a hospital. There is one important element in 
this feeling which has nothing to do with medicine, that is, the gen­
eral distrust felt by the peasants for everything which is stamped with 
the hall-mark of government; moreover, the people are frightened 
and prejudiced against hospitals by all sorts of horrible tales and gos­
sip, often absurd but sometimes not without a foundation of fact. But 
what they fear most is the German routine of the hospital, the pres­
ence of strangers about them all the time they are ill, the strict rules 
in regard to diet, the tales of the rigorous severity of the attendants 
and doctors and of the cutting open and dissection of the dead and so 
on. Besides, the people argue that they will be treated by "the gentry," 
for doctors are after all "gentlemen." But all these terrors disappear 
l 85 

1 86 
The House of the Dead 
very quickly when they come into closer contact with the doctors 
(generally speaking, not without exceptions, of course) which I think 
is greatly to the credit of our doctors, who are for the most part 
young men. The majority of them know how to gain the respect and 
even the love of the people. Anyway, I am writing of what I have my­
self seen and experienced many times and in many places, and I have 
no reason to think that things are different in other places. Here and 
there, of course, there are doctors who take bribes, make a great 
profit out of their hospitals and neglect their patients almost com­
pletely, till they forget all they have learnt. Such men are still to be 
found, but I am speaking of the majority or rather of the tendency, 
the spirit which animates the medical profession in our day. Whatever 
one may say in defence of these renegades, these wolves in the fold, 
however one may ascribe their shortcomings, for instance, to the 
"environment" of which they too are the victims, they will always be 
greatly to blame, especially if they also show a lack of humanity. Hu­
manity, kindness, brotherly sympathy are sometimes of more use to 
the patients than any medicines. It is high time we gave up apathetic 
complaints of being corrupted by our environment. It is true no 
doubt that it does destroy a great deal in us, but not everything, and 
often a crafty and knOWing rogue, especially if he is an eloquent 
speaker or writer, will cover up not simply weakness but often real 
baseness, justifying it by the influence of his " environment." 
But again I have wandered from my subject; I merely meant to say 
that the mistrust and hostility of the peasants are directed rather 
against medical administration than against the doctors themselves. 
When the peasant finds out what they are really like, he quickly loses 
many of his prejudices. The general arrangements of our hospitals are 
still in many respects out of harmony with the national spirit, their 
routine is still antagonistic to the people's habits, and not calculated 
to win their full confidence and respect. So at least it seems to me 
from some of my personal experiences. 
Our ward doctor usually stopped before every patient, examined 
and questioned him gravely and with the greatest attention, and pre­
scribed his medicine and his diet. Sometimes he noticed that there 
was nothing the matter with the patient, but as the convict had come 
for a rest from work, or to lie on a mattress instead of bare boards, 
and in a warm room instead of in the damp lock-up, where huge 

The Hospital (2) 
1 8 7  
masses of pale and wasted prisoners were kept awaiting their trial 
(prisoners awaiting trial are almost always, all over Russia, pale and 
wasted-a sure sign that they are generally physically and spiritually 
worse off than convicted prisoners) , our ward doctor calmly entered 
them as suffering from "febris catarrhalis"* and sometimes let them 
stay even for a week. We all used to laugh over this "febris ca­
tarrhalis." We knew very well that this was, by a tacit understanding 
between the doctor and the patient, accepted as the formula for ma­
lingering or "handy shooting pains," which was the convicts' transla­
tion of "febris catarrhalis." Sometimes a patient abused the doctor's 
soft-heartedness and stayed on till he was forcibly turned out. Then 
you should have seen our ward doctor: he seemed shy, he seemed 
ashamed to say straight out to the patient that he must get well and 
make haste to ask for his discharge, though he had full right to dis­
charge him by writing on his chart "sanat est"t without any talk or 
cajoling. At first he gave him a hint, afterwards he tried as it were to 
persuade him: "Isn't your time up? You are almost well, you know; 
the ward is crowded," and so on and so on, till the patient himself 
began to feel ashamed, and at last asked for his discharge of his own 
accord. The chief doctor, though he was a humane and honest man 
(the convicts were very fond of him, too) , was far sterner and more 
determined than the ward doctor; he could even show a grim sever­
ity on occasion, and he was particularly respected among us for it. He 
made his appearance followed by the whole staff, and also examined 
each patient separately, staying longer with those who were seriously 
ill, and he always managed to say a kind, encouraging word to them, 
often full of true feeling. Altogether he made a very good impression. 
Convicts who came in with a "handy shooting pain" he never re­
jected nor turned out, but if the patient were too persistent, he sim­
ply discharged him: "Well, brother, you've been here long enough, 
you've had a rest, you can go, you mustn't outstay your welcome." 
Those who persisted in remaining were either lazy convicts who 
shirked work, especially in the summer when the hours were long, or 
prisoners who were awaiting corporal punishment. I remember special 
*Infiuenl.a, flll (Latin) . 
tHealthy (Latin) . 

1 88 
The House of the Dead 
severity, even cruelty, being used in one such case to induce the con­
vict to take his discharge. He came with an eye affection; his eyes 
were red and he complained of an acute shooting pain in them. He 
was treated with blisters, leeches, drops of some corrosive fluid, but 
the malady remained, the eyes were no better. Little by little, the doc­
tors guessed that it was a sham: there was a continual slight inflam­
mation which grew neither worse nor better, it was always in 
the same condition. The case was suspicious. The convicts had long 
known that he was shamming and deceiving people, though he did 
not confess it himself He was a young fellow, rather good-looking, 
indeed, though he made an unpleasant impression on all of them: re­
served, suspicious, frowning, he talked to no one, had a menacing 
look, held aloof from everyone as though he were suspicious. I re­
member it even occurred to some people that he might do some­
thing violent. He had been a soldier, had been found out in thieving 
on a large scale, and was sentenced to a thousand strokes and a con­
vict battalion. To defer the moment of punishment, as I have men­
tioned before, convicts sometimes resorted to terrible expedients: by 
stabbing one of the officials or a fellow convict they would get a new 
trial, and their punishment would be deferred for some two months 
and their aim would be attained. It was nothing to them that the pun­
ishment when it did come, two months later, would be twice or three 
times as severe; all they cared about was deferring the awful moment 
if only for a few days at any cost-so extreme is sometimes the pros­
tration of spirit of these poor creatures. 
Some of the convicts whispered among themselves that we ought to 
be on our guard against this man-he might murder someone in the 
night. However, it was only talk, no special precautions were taken, 
even by those who slept next to him. It was seen, however, that he 
rubbed his eyes at night with plaster taken from the wall as well as 
with something else, that they might be red in the morning. At last 
the head doctor threatened him with a seton. In obstinate eye affections 
of long duration when every medical expedient has been tried, to 
preserve the Sight, the doctors have recourse to a violent and painful 
remedy; they apply a seton to the patient as they would to a horse. 
But even then the poor fellow would not consent to recover. He 
was too obstinate or perhaps too cowardly. A seton perhaps was not 
so bad as the punishment with sticks, but it was very painful too. The 

The Hospital (2) 
1 89 
patient's skin, as much as one can grip in the hand, is pinched up be­
hind the neck and all of it stabbed through with a knife which pro­
duces a long and wide wound all over the back of the neck. Through 
this wound they thrust a linen tape, rather wide-a finger's breadth. 
Then every day at a fixed hour they pull this tape in the wound so that 
it is opened again, that it may be continually separating and not heal­
ing. Yet for several days the poor fellow obstinately endured this tor­
ture, which was accompanied with horrible suffering, and only at 
last consented to take his discharge. His eyes became perfectly well in 
a Single day, and as soon as his neck was healed he went to the lock­
up to receive next day the punishment of a thousand strokes with 
sticks. 
Of course the minute before punishment is awful; so awful that I 
am wrong in calling the terror of it cowardice and weakness of spirit. 
It must be awful when men are ready to endure twice or thrice the 
punishment, if only they can avoid faCing it at once. I have men­
tioned, however, that there were some who asked for their discharge 
before their backs were quite healed after the first beating, in order to 
endure the remainder of their punishment and have their sentence 
over; and detention in the lock-up awaiting punishment was without 
doubt incomparably worse for all than life in prison. But apart from 
the difference in temperaments, years of being accustomed to blows 
and punishments play a great part in the fortitude and fearlessness of 
some. Men who have been frequently flogged seem to harden their 
hearts and their backs; at last they look upon the punishment scepti­
cally, almost as a trifling inconvenience and lose all fear of it. Speak­
ing generally, this is true. One of our convicts in the special divisions, 
a Kalmuck, who had been christened Alexandr or "Alexandra" as they 
used to call him in the prison, a queer fellow, sly, fearless and at the 
same time very good-natured, told me how he got through his four 
thousand "sticks." He told me about it, laughing and joking, but 
swore in earnest that if he had not from childhood-his earliest, ten­
derest childhood-always been under the lash, so that his back had 
literally never been free from scars all the while he lived with his 
horde, he never could have endured the punishment. He seemed to 
bless his education under the lash. 
"I was beaten for everything, Alexandr Petrovitch! " he told me 
one evening, sitting on my bed, before the candles were lighted, 

1 90 
The House of the Dead 
"for everything and nothing, whatever happened, I was beaten for 
fifteen years on end, as far back as I can remember, several times 
every day; anyone beat me who liked, so that in the end I got quite 
used to it." 
How he came to be a soldier I don't know; I don't remember, 
though perhaps he told me; he was an inveterate runaway and tramp. 
I only remember his account of how horribly frightened he was 
when he was condemned to four thousand "sticks" for killing his su­
perior officer. 
"I knew I should be severely punished and that perhaps I shouldn't 
come out alive, and though I was used to the lash, four thousand 
strokes is no joke; besides, all the officers were furious with me! 
I knew, I knew for certain that I shouldn't get through it, that I couldn't 
stand it; I shouldn't come out alive. First I tried getting christened; I 
thought maybe they'd forgive me, and though the fellows told me it 
would be no use, I shouldn't be pardoned, I thought I'd try it. Any­
way, they'd have more feeling for a Christian after all. Well, they chris­
tened me and at the holy christening called me Alexandr; but the 
sticks remained, they did not take one off; I thought it was too bad. I 
said to myself: 'Wait a bit, I'll be a match for you all.' And would you 
believe it, Alexandr Petrovitch, I was a match for them! I was awfully 
good at pretending to be dead, that is, not being quite dead, but just 
on the point of expiring. I was brought out for punishment; I was led 
through the ranks for the first thousand; it burnt me; I shouted. I was 
led back for the second thousand; well, thought I, my end is come, 
they've beaten all sense out of me; my legs were giving way, I fell on 
the ground; my eyes looked lifeless, my face was blue, I stopped 
breathing and there was foam on my mouth. The doctor came up. 
'He'll die directly,' said he. They carried me to the hospital and I re­
vived at once. Then they led me out twice again and they were angry 
with me too, awfully angry, and I cheated them twice again; the sec­
ond time I looked like dead after one thousand; and when it came to 
the fourth thousand every blow was like a knife in my heart, every 
blow was as good as three, it hurt so! They were savage with me. That 
niggardly last thousand-damn it-was as bad as all the three thou­
sand together and had I not died before the very end (there were 
only two hundred left) they would have beaten me to death. But I 
took my own part; I deceived them again and shammed death. Again 

The Hospital (2) 
1 9 1  
they were taken in and how could they help being? The doctor be­
lieved I was dead. So they beat me for the last two hundred with all 
the fury they could, they beat me so that it was worse than two thou­
sand, but yet they didn't kill me, no fear! And why didn't they kill me? 
Why, just because I've grown up from childhood under the lash. That's 
why I am alive to this day. Ach, I have been beaten in my day! " he 
added at the end of the story in a sort of mournful reverie, as though 
trying to recall and reckon hoyv many times he had been beaten. "But 
no," he added, after a minute's silence. "There's no counting the beat­
ings I've had! How could 17 They're beyond reckoning." He glanced at 
me and laughed, but so good-naturedly that I could not help smiling 
in response. "Do you know, Alexandr Petrovitch, that whenever I 
dream at night now, I always dream that I am being beaten? I never 
have any other dreams." He certainly often cried out at night and so 
loudly that the other convicts waked him up at once by prodding him, 
and saying, "What are you shouting for, you devil! "  He was a short 
sturdy fellow of forty-five, good-humoured and restless; he got on 
well with everyone and though he was very fond of stealing, and of­
ten got a beating among us for that, after all everyone stole and every­
one was beaten for it. 
I will add one other point. I was always amazed at the extraordi­
nary good-nature, the absence of vindictiveness, with which all these 
victims talked of how they had been beaten, and of the men who had 
beaten them. Often there was not the slightest trace of spite or hatred 
in their story, which gripped my heart at once, and made it throb vi­
olently. Yet they would tell the story and laugh like children. 
M., for instance, described his punishment to me. He was not of 
the privileged class and received five hundred strokes. I heard of this 
from the others and asked him myself whether it were true, and how 
it happened. He answered with a certain breVity, as though with an 
inward pang; he seemed to avoid looking at me and his face flushed; 
half a minute later he did look at me; there was a gleam of hatred in 
his eyes, and his lips were quivering with indignation. I felt that he 
could never forget that page in his past. 
But almost all our convicts (I will not guarantee that there were no 
exceptions) took quite a different view of it. It cannot be, I some­
times thought, that they consider themselves guilty and deserving of 
punishment, especially when they have committed an offence, not 

1 92 
The House of the Dead 
against one of their own class, but against someone in authority. The 
majority of them did not blame themselves at all. I have said already 
that I saw no signs of remorse even when the crime was against one 
of their class; as for crimes against officers in control of them, they 
did not count them at all. It sometimes seemed to me that for the lat­
ter class of crimes they had a peculiar, so to speak, practical, or rather 
matter-of-fact, point of view. They put it down to fate, to the in­
evitability of the act, and this was not done deliberately but was an 
unconscious attitude, a kind of creed. Though the convict is almost 
always disposed to consider himself justified in any crime against of­
ficers, so much so that there is no question about it in his mind, yet 
in practice he recognizes that the authorities take a very different 
view of his crime, and that therefore he must be punished, and then 
they are quits. It is a mutual struggle. The criminal knows and never 
doubts that he will be acquitted by the verdict of his own class, who 
will never, he knows, entirely condemn him (and for the most part 
will fully acquit him) , so long as his offence has not been against his 
equals, his brothers, his fellow peasants. His conscience is clear, and 
with that he is strong and not morally disturbed, and that is the chief 
thing. He feels, as it were, that he has something to rest upon, and so 
he feels no hatred, but takes what has happened to him as something 
inevitable which has not begun with him and will not end with him, 
but will go on for long ages as part of a passive but stubborn and old­
established feud. No soldier hates the individual Turk he is fighting 
with; yet the Turk stabs him, hacks at him, shoots him. 
Yet not all the stories I heard, however, showed the same coolness 
and indifference. They talked of Lieutenant Zherebyatnikov, for in­
stance, with a certain shade of indignation, though even in this case 
the feeling was not very strong. I made the acquaintance of this Lieu­
tenant Zherebyatnikov when I was first in hospital-from the con­
victs' stories about him, I mean. Afterwards I met him in the flesh 
when he was on duty at the prison. He was a tall man about thirty, 
big and fat, with red puffy cheeks, white teeth and with a loud laugh 
like Nozdryov's.9 One could see from his face that he was a man who 
never thought about anything. He was particularly fond of flogging 
and punishing with "sticks" when it was his duty to superintend. I 
hasten to add that I looked upon Lieutenant Zherebyatnikov at the 
time as a monster, and that was how he was regarded by the convicts 

The Hospital (2) 
1 93 
themselves. There were, in the past, in that recent past, of course, of 
which "the tradition is still fresh though it is hard to believe in it," ID 
other officers who were eager to do their duty conscientiously and 
zealously. But as a rule they did their work in all Simplicity of heart 
without relishing it. Zherebyatnikov had something of the pleasure of 
an epicure in administering punishment. He was passionately fond of 
the art of punishing, and he loved it as an art. He enjoyed it and like 
the worn-out aristocratic debauchees of the Roman Empire, he in­
vented all sorts of subtleties, all sorts of unnatural tricks to excite and 
agreeably thrill his crass soul. 
The convict is led out for punishment; Zherebyatnikov is the offi­
cer in command; the mere sight of the long ranks of men drawn up 
with thick sticks in their hands inspires him. He walks round the 
ranks complacently, and repeats emphatically that every man is to do 
his duty thoroughly, conscientiously, or else . . . .  But the soldiers don't 
need to be told what that or else means. Then the criminal is brought 
out, and if he knows nothing of Zherebyatnikov, if he has not heard 
all about him, this would be the sort of trick the lieutenant would 
play on him-one of hundreds, of course; the lieutenant was inex­
haustible in inventing them. At the moment when the convict is 
stripped and his hands are tied to the butt-ends of guns by which the 
sergeants afterwards drag him down the "Green Street," it is the reg­
ular thing for him to beg in a plaintive, tearful voice, entreating the 
commanding officer to make his punishment easier and not to in­
crease it by unnecessary severity. "Your honour," cries the poor 
wretch, "have mercy on me, be a father to me; I'll pray for your hon­
our all my life; don't destroy me, have pity on me! "  
That was just what Zherebyatnikov wanted; he would pause, and 
would begin talking to the victim with a sentimental air. 
"But what am I to do, my friend?" he would begin. "It's not I am 
punishing you, it's the law! " 
"Your honour, it's all in your hands, have pity on me! "  
"Do you suppose I don't feel for you? Do you suppose it's a plea­
sure to me to see you beaten? I am a man too. Am I a man or not, do 
you suppose?" 
"For sure, your honour, we all know you are our father, we are your 
children. Be a father to me! "  cries the convict, beginning to hope. 
"But judge for yourself. my friend-you've got sense; I know that 

1 94 
The House of the Dead 
as a fellow creature I ought to be merciful and indulgent even to a 
sinner like you." 
"It's the holy truth you are speaking, your honour." 
"Yes, to be merciful however sinful you may be. But it's not my 
doing, it's the law! Think of that! I have my duty to God and to my 
country; I shall be taking a great sin upon myself if I soften the law, 
think of that! " 
"Your honour! "  
"But there! So be it, for your sake! I know I am doing wrong, but so 
be it . . . .  I will have mercy on you this time. I'U let you off easy. But 
what if I am doing you harm? If I have mercy on you this once and let 
you off easily, and you'll reckon on it being the same next time and 
commit a crime again, what then? It will be on my conscience." 
"Your honour! I'd not let friend or foe! As before the throne of the 
Heavenly Father . . ." 
"All right, all right! But do you swear to behave yourself for the 
future?" 
"Strike me dead, may I never in the world to come . . .  " 
"Don't swear, it's a sin. I'll believe your word. Do you give me 
your ... word?" 
"Your honour! ! ! "  
"Well, I tell you, I'll spare you simply for your orphan's tears. You 
are an orphan, aren't you?" 
"Yes, your honour, alone in the world, neither father nor 
mother . . .  " 
"Well, for the sake of your orphan's tears; but mind you, it's the last 
time . . . .  Take him," he adds in such a soft-hearted way that the convict 
does not know how to pray devoutly enough for such a benefactor. 
But the fearful procession begins; he is led along; the drum begins 
to boom; the sticks begin flying. 
"Give it him! " Zherebyatnikov bawls at the top of his voice. 
"Whack him! Flay him, flay him! Scorch him! Lay it on, lay it on! Hit 
him harder, the orphan, harder, the rascal! Touch him up, touch him 
up! "  
And the soldiers hit as hard as they can, the poor wretch begins to 
scream and there are flashes before his eyes, while Zherebyatnikov 
runs after him along the line in peals of laughter, holding his sides, 
and hardly able to stand, so that one felt sorry for the dear man at last. 

The Hospital (2) 
1 95 
He is delighted and amused and only from time to time there is a 
pause in his loud hearty roars of laughter, and one hears again: 
"Flay him, flay him! Scorch him, the rascal, scorch him, the 
orphan! . . .  " 
Or he would invent another variation. The convict brought out to 
punishment begins to entreat him again. This time Zherebyatnikov 
does not grimace or play a part with him, but goes in for frankness: 
"I tell you what, my good fellow," he says, "I shall punish you 
properly, for you deserve it. But I tell you what I'll do for you: I won't 
tie you to the guns. You shall go alone, but in a new way. Run as fast as 
you can along the line! Every stick will hit you just the same, but it 
will sooner be over; what do you think? Would you like to try?" 
The convict listens with perplexity and mistrust and hesitates. 
"Who knows," he thinks to himself, "maybe it will be easier. I'll run 
as hard as I can and the pain will not last a quarter so long and per­
haps not all the sticks will hit me." 
"Very well, your honour, I agree." 
"Well, I agree too, then. Cut along! Mind now, look sharp! "  he 
shouts to the soldiers, though he knows beforehand that not one 
stick will miss the guilty back; the soldier knows very well what 
would be in store for him if he missed. 
The convict runs with all his might along the "Green Street," but 
of course he doesn't get beyond the fifteenth soldier: the sticks fall 
upon his back like lightning, like the tattoo on a drum, and the poor 
wretch drops with a scream, as though he had been cut down or 
struck by a bullet. 
"No, your honour, better the regular way," he says, getting up 
slowly from the ground, pale and frightened. 
And Zherebyatnikov, who knows the trick beforehand and how it 
ends, roars with laughter. But there is no describing all his diversions 
or all that was said about him: 
Stories of somewhat different tone and spirit were told of Lieu­
tenant Smekalov, who was commanding officer of our prison before 
our major was appointed. Though the convicts talked somewhat un­
concernedly and without special anger of Zherebyatnikov, yet they 
did not admire his exploits, they did not speak well of him and were 
eVidently disgusted by him. Indeed, they seemed to look down upon 
him with contempt. But Lieutenant Smekalov was remembered among 

1 96 
The House of the Dead 
us with enjoyment and delight. He had no particular liking for pun­
ishment. There was nothing of the Zherebyatnikov element in him. 
But he was by no means opposed to the lash; yet the fact is that even 
his floggings were remembered among the convicts with love and 
satisfaction-so successful was the man in pleasing them! And how? 
How did he gain such popularity? It is true that the convicts, like all 
the Russian people, perhaps, are ready to forget any tortures for the 
sake of a kind word; I mention it as a fact without qualifying it in one 
way or another. It was not difficult to please these people and to be 
popular among them. But Lieutenant Smekalov had won a peculiar 
popularity, so that even the way he used to administer punishment 
was remembered almost with tenderness. "We had no need of a fa­
ther," the convicts would say, and they would sigh, comparing their 
recollections of their old commanding officer, Smekalov, with the 
present major. "He was a jolly good fellow! "  
He was a simple-hearted man, good-natured, perhaps, in his own 
way. But sometimes it happens that there is a man in authority who 
has not only good-nature but a generous spirit, and yet everyone dis­
likes him and sometimes they simply laugh at him. Smekalov knew 
how to behave so that they looked upon him as one of themselves, 
and this is a great art, or more accurately an innate faculty, which 
even those who possess it never think about. Strange to say, some 
men of this sort are not good-natured at all, yet they sometimes gain 
great popularity. They don't despise, they don't scorn the people un­
der their control-in that, I think, lies the explanation. There is no 
sign of the fine gentleman, no trace of class superiority about them, 
there is a peculiar whiff of the peasant inborn in them; and, my 
word! what a keen scent the people have for it! What will they not 
give for it? They are ready to prefer the sternest man to the most mer­
ciful, if the former has a smack of their own homespun flavour. And 
what if the same man is really good-natured, too, even though in a 
peculiar way of his own? Then he is beyond all price. 
Lieutenant Smekalov, as I have said already, sometimes punished 
severely, but he knew how to do it so that, far from being resented, 
his jokes on the occasion were, even in my day when it was all long 
past, remembered with enjoyment and laughter. He had not many such 
jokes, however: he was lacking in artistic fancy. In fact, he really had 
one solitary joke which was his mainstay for nearly a year; perhaps its 

The Hospital (2) 
1 9 7  
charm lay in its uniqueness. There was much simplicity in it. The 
guilty convict would be brought in to be flogged. Smekalov comes in 
with a laugh and a joke, he asks the culprit some irrelevant questions 
about his personal life in the prison not with any sort of object, not 
to make up to him, but simply because he really wants to know. The birch­
rods are brought and a chair for Smekalov. He sits down and even 
lights his pipe; he had a very long pipe. The convict begins to entreat 
him . . . .  "No, brother, lie down . . .  it's no use," says Smekalov. The 
convict sighs and lies down. "Come, my dear fellow, do you know 
this prayer by heart?" 
"To be sure, your honour, we are Christians, we learnt it from child­
hood." 
"Well then, repeat it." 
And the convict knows what to say and knows beforehand what 
will happen when he says it, because this trick has been repeated 
thirty times already with others. And Smekalov himself knows that 
the convict knows it, knows that even the soldiers who stand with 
lifted rods over the prostrate victim have heard of this joke long ago 
and yet he repeats it again-it has taken such a hold on him once for 
all, perhaps from the vanity of an author, just because it is his own 
composition. The convict begins to repeat the prayer, the soldiers wait 
with their rods while Smekalov bends forward, raises his hand, leaves 
off smoking, and waits for the familiar word. After the first lines of 
the well-known prayer, the convict at last comes to the words, "Thy 
Kingdom come." That's all he is waiting for. "Stay," cries the inspired 
lieutenant and instantly turning with an ecstatic gesture to a soldier 
he cries, "Now give him some." 
And he explodes with laughter. The soldiers standing round grin 
too, the man who thrashes grins, even the man who is being 
thrashed almost grins, although at the word of command, "Now give 
him some," the rod whistles in the air to cut a minute later like a ra­
zor through his guilty flesh. And Smekalov is delighted, delighted just 
because he has had such a happy thought, and has himself found the 
word to rhyme with "come." 
And Smekalov goes away perfectly satisfied with himself and, in­
deed, the man who has been flogged goes away almost satisfied with 
himself and with Smekalov, and half an hour later he will be telling the 
story in the prison of how the joke that had been repeated thirty times 

1 98 
The House of the Dead 
before had now been repeated for the thirty-first time. "He is a jolly 
good fellow! He loves a joke!" 
There was even a flavour of maudlin sentimentality about some 
reminiscences of the good-natured lieutenant. 
"Sometimes one would go by, brothers," a convict would tell us, 
his face all smiles at the recollection, "and he'd be sitting in the win­
dow in his dressing-gown, drinking his tea and smoking his pipe. I'd 
take off my cap. 'Where are you off to, Aksyonov?' he'd say. 'Why, to 
work, Mihail Vassilitch. first thing I must go to the work-room.' He'd 
laugh to himself. He was a jolly good fellow! Jolly is the only word! "  
"We shall never see his like again," one of his listeners would add. 

C H A P T E R  I I I  
T H E  H O S P I TA L  * (3) 
I HAVE SPOKEN ABOUT corporal punishment and the various officers 
who had to perform this interesting duty, because it was only when I 
went into the hospital that I formed an idea from actual acquaintance 
of these matters, of which, till then, I had only known by hearsay. 
From all the battalions, disciplinary and otherwise, stationed in our 
town and in the whole surrounding district, all who had received the 
punishment of the "sticks" were brought into our two wards. In 
those early days when I still looked so eagerly at everything about me, 
all these strange proceedings, all these victims who had been pun­
ished or were preparing for punishment, naturally made a very strong 
impression on me. I was excited, overwhelmed and terrified. I re­
member that at the same time I began suddenly and impatiently go­
ing into all the details of these new facts, listening to the talk and tales 
of the other convicts on this subject. I asked them questions, tried to 
arrive at conclusions. I had a great desire to know among other things 
all about the various grades of sentences and punishments, the vary­
ing severity of the different forms of punishments, the attitude of the 
convicts themselves. I tried to picture to myself the psychological 
condition of men going to punishment. I have mentioned already 
that it is unusual for anyone to be unconcerned before punishment, 
even those who have been severely punished and on more than one 
occasion. The condemned are overcome by an acute purely physical 
terror, involuntary and irresistible, which masters the man's whole 
moral being. Even during my later years in prison, I could not help 
watching with interest the prisoners who, after being in hospital till 
the wounds left by the first half of their punishment were healed, 
were leaving to endure next day the second half of their sentence. 
*All that I am writing here about corporal punishment was true in my time. Now 
I am told that all this is changed and still changing (Dostoevsky's note) . 
1 99 

200 
The House of the Dead 
This division of the punishment into two parts is always done by the 
decision of the doctor who is present at the punishment. If the num­
ber of strokes to be inflicted is too great for the prisoner to endure all 
at once, the sentence is inflicted in two or even three parts, according 
to the decision of the doctor at the actual time, as to whether the 
prisoner can safely go on walking through the ranks or whether do­
ing so will endanger his life. As a rule five hundred, a thousand, or 
even fifteen hundred blows are endured at one time; but if the sen­
tence is one of two or three thousand blows, the punishment has to 
be divided into two or even into three parts. Men leaving hospital for 
the second half of their punishment, after their wounded backs were 
healed, were usually gloomy, sullen and disinclined to talk on the day 
of their discharge and the day before. There was noticeable in them a 
certain dullness of intelligence, a sort of unnatural preoccupation. A 
man in this position does not readily enter into conversation, and is for 
the most part silent; what is interesting is that the convicts themselves 
never talk to him, and do not attempt to speak of what is in store for 
him. There is no unnecessary talk, nor attempt at consolation; they even 
try to pay no attention to him. Of course this is better for the victim. 
There are exceptions: Orlov, for instance, whose story I have told al­
ready: After the first half of his punishment was over, the only thing that 
vexed him was that his back was so long healing, that he could not take 
his discharge sooner. He wanted to get the second half of his punish­
ment over as soon as possible and to be sent off to his place of exile, 
hoping to escape on the road. But this man was kept up by the object 
he had in view, and God knows what was in his mind. His was a vital 
and passionate nature. He was much pleased and in a state of great ex­
citement, though he controlled his feelings: for, before receiving the 
first part of his punishment, he had thought that they would not let 
him off alive, and that he would die under the sticks. Even while he was 
on his trial various rumours had reached him of what the authorities 
meant to do, and he prepared himself then to die. But, having got 
through the first half of the sentence, his spirits revived. He was 
brought into the hospital half dead: I had never seen such wounds; 
but he came in with joy in his heart, with the hope that he would 
outlive it, that the rumours were false. Having once come out alive 
from the sticks, he began now, after his long imprisonment, to dream 
of the open road, of escape, freedom, the plain and the forest. Two 

The Hospital (3) 
20 1 
days after his discharge he died in the same hospital and in the same 
bed, after the second half of his punishment. But I have spoken of this 
already. 
Yet the very prisoners whose days and nights were so gloomy be­
forehand endured the punishment itself with manly fortitude, even 
the most faint-hearted of them. I rarely heard a groan even on the first 
night of their arrival, and even from the most cruelly punished; the 
people as a rule know how to bear pain. I asked many questions about 
the pain. I wanted to find out definitely how bad the pain was, with 
what it might be compared. I really do not know what induced me to 
do this. I only remember one thing, that it was not from idle curiosity. 
I repeat that I was shaken and distressed. But I could not get a satisfac­
tory answer from anyone I asked. It burns, scorches like fire--was all I 
could find out, and that was the one answer given by all. During those 
early days, as I got to know M. better, I asked him. "It hurts dread­
fully," he said, "and the sensation is burning like fire; as though your 
back were being roasted before the hottest fire." In fact everyone said 
the same thing. But I remember that I made at the time one strange 
observation, for the accuracy of which I do not vouch, though the 
unanimous verdict of the prisoners on the subject strongly confirms 
it: that is that the birch, if many strokes are inflicted, is the worst of all 
punishments in use in Russia. At first Sight it might seem that this was 
absurd and impossible. Yet five hundred, even four hundred, strokes 
may kill a man, and more than five hundred strokes are almost certain 
to. Even the man of the strongest endurance cannot survive a thou­
sand.Yet five hundred blows with "sticks" can be endured without the 
slightest danger to life. Even men of not very strong constitution can 
endure the punishment of a thousand "sticks" without danger. Even 
two thousand will hardly kill a man of medium strength and healthy 
constitution. The convicts all said that the birch was worse than the 
"sticks." "The birch smarts more," they told me, "it's more agony." 
There is no doubt the birch is more agonizing than the sticks. It is 
more irritating, it acts more acutely on the nerves, excites them vio­
lently, and strains them beyond endurance. I do not know how it is 
now, but in the recent past there were gentlemen who derived from 
the power of flogging their victims something that suggests the Mar­
quis de Sade and the Marquise de Brinvilliers. l l  I imagine there is 
something in this sensation which sends a thrill at once sweet and 

202 
The House of the Dead 
painful to the hearts of these gentlemen. There are people who are like 
tigers thirsting for blood. Anyone who has once experienced this 
power, this unlimited mastery of the body, blood and soul of a fellow 
man made of the same clay as himself, a brother in the law of Christ­
anyone who has experienced the power and full licence to inflict the 
greatest humiliation upon another creature made in the image of God 
will unconsciously lose the mastery of his own sensations. Tyranny is 
a habit; it may develop, and it does develop at last, into a disease. I 
maintain that the very best of men may be coarsened and hardened 
into a brute by habit. Blood and power intoxicate; coarseness and de­
pravity are developed; the mind and the heart are tolerant of the most 
abnormal things, till at last they come to relish them. The man and the 
citizen is lost for ever in the tyrant, and the return to human dignity, 
to repentance and regeneration becomes almost impossible. More­
over, the example, the possibility of such despotism, has a perverting 
influence on the whole of society: such power is a temptation. Society, 
which looks indifferently on such a phenomenon, is already contami­
nated to its very foundations. In short, the right of corporal punish­
ment given to one man over another is one of the sores of social life, 
one of the strongest forces destructive of every germ, every effort in 
society towards civic feeling, and a sufficient cause for its inevitable 
dissolution. 
The professional torturer is an object of disgust to SOCiety, but a 
gentleman torturer is far from being so. It is only lately that an oppo­
site idea has been expressed, and that only in books and abstractly. 
Even those who express it have not all been able to extinguish 
in themselves the lust of power. Every manufacturer, every capitalist, 
must feel an agreeable thrill in the thought that his workman, with all 
his family, is sometimes entirely dependent on him. This is undoubt­
edly true: a generation does not so quickly get over what has come to 
it as a legacy from the past; a man does not so easily renounce what 
is in his blood, what he has, so to speak, sucked in with his mother's 
milk. Such rapid transformations do not occur. To acknowledge one's 
fault and the sins of one's fathers is little, very little; one must uproot 
the habit of them completely, and that is not so qUickly done. 
I have spoken of the torturer. The characteristics of the torturer ex­
ist in embryo in almost every man of to-day But the brutal qualities do 
not develop equally. If they develop so as to overpower all the man's 

The Hospital (3) 
203 
other qualities, he becomes, of course, a hideous and terrible figure. 
Torturers are of two kinds: some act of their own free will, others in­
voluntarily, of necessity. The voluntary torturer is, of course, more de­
graded in every respect than the other, though the latter is so despised 
by the people, inspiring horror, loathing, an unaccountable, even mys­
terious, terror. Why this almost superstitious horror for one torturer 
and such an indifferent, almost approving, attitude to the other? 
There are instances that are strange in the extreme. I have known 
people good-natured, even honest, and even respected by society who 
yet could not with equanimity let a man go until he screamed out un­
der the lash, till he prayed and implored for mercy. It was the duty of 
men under punishment to cry out and pray for mercy. That was the ac­
cepted thing: it was looked upon as necessary and proper, and when, 
on one occasion, the victim would not scream, the officer, whom I 
knew personally and who might perhaps have been regarded in other 
relations as a good-natured man, took it as a personal insult. He had 
meant at first to let him off easily, but not hearing the usual "your 
honour, father, have mercy, I'll pray to God for you all my life" and the 
rest of it, he was furious, and gave the man fifty lashes extra, trying to 
wring cries and supplications out of him-and he attained his end. "It 
couldn't be helped, the man was rude," he said to me quite seriously. 
As for the actual executioner who is not a free agent but acts under 
compulsion, he is as everyone knows a condemned convict who es­
capes his sentence by turning executioner. At first he learns his calling 
from another executioner, and when he is expert, he is attached per­
manently to the prison, where he lives apart in a speCial room, keep­
ing house for himself, though he is almost always guarded. Of 
course, a live man is not a machine; although the executioner beats as 
a duty, he sometimes grows keen on his work, but, though the beat­
ing may be some satisfaction to himself, he scarcely ever feels per­
sonal hatred for his victim. His dexterity, his knowledge of his art and 
his desire to show off before his fellow convicts and the public stim­
ulate his vanity. He exerts himself for art's sake. Besides, he knows 
very well that he is an outcast, that he is met and followed every­
where by superstitious terror, and there is no saying that this may not 
have an influence on him, may not accentuate ferocity and brutal ten­
dencies in him. Even children know that he "has disowned father and 
mother." Strange to say, though, of the executioners I have seen, all 

204 
The House of the Dead 
have been men of some education, men of sense and intelligence 
who had an extraordinary vanity, even pride. Whether this pride has 
been developed in them in reaction against the general contempt felt 
for them, or whether it has been increased by the consciousness of 
the terror they inspire in their victim and the feeling of mastery over 
him, I do not know. Possibly the very ceremony and theatrical sur­
roundings with which they make their appearance on the scaffold 
before the public help to develop a certain haughtiness in them. I 
remember that I had once for some time opportunities of frequently 
meeting an executioner and closely observing him. He was a thin, 
muscular man of forty, of medium stature with a rather pleasant, in­
telligent face and a curly head. He was always extraordinarily calm 
and dignified, behaved like a gentleman, always answered briefly, 
sensibly and even affably; but there was a haughtiness in his affability, 
as though he felt superior to me. The officers on duty often addressed 
him before me, and they positively showed him a sort of respect. He 
was conscious of this and before the officers he redoubled his polite­
ness, frigidity and sense of personal dignity. The more friendly the of­
ficer was to him, the more unbending he became, and though he 
never departed from his refined courtesy, I am sure that he felt him­
self at the moment infinitely superior to the officer who was address­
ing him. One could see this from his face. Sometimes on hot summer 
days he would be sent under guard with a long thin pole to kill dogs 
in the town. There were an immense number of these dogs, who be­
longed to no one and multiplied with extraordinary rapidity. In hot 
weather they became dangerous, and by order of the authorities the 
executioner was sent to destroy them. But even this degrading duty 
evidently did not in the least detract from his dignity. It was worth 
seeing the majesty with which he paced up and down the town, ac­
companied by the weary guard, scaring the women and children 
by his very appearance, and how calmly and even superciliously he 
looked at all who met him. 
The executioners have a very good time of it, though. They have 
plenty of money, they are very well fed, and have vodka to drink. They 
get money from bribes. The civilian prisoner who is condemned to 
corporal punishment always makes the executioner a preliminary pres­
ent of something, even if it is his last penny. But from some rich pris­
oners the executioner demands a sum suitable to the victim's supposed 

The Hospital (3) 
205 
means; they will exact as much as thirty roubles, sometimes even 
more. They bargain dreadfully with very rich prisoners. But the exe­
cutioner cannot punish a man very lightly; he would answer for it 
with his own back. For a certain sum, however, he will promise the 
victim not to chastise him very severely. The condemned men almost 
always agree to his terms, for if they don't he really will punish them 
savagely, and it lies almost entirely in his hands. It sometimes happens 
that he demands a considerable ransom from a very poor prisoner; the 
relations come, bargain and bow down to him, and woe betide them 
if they do not satisfy him. In such cases the superstitious terror he in­
spires is a great help to him. What wild stories are told of execution­
ers! The convicts themselves assured me that an executioner can kill a 
man at one blow. But when has there been an instance of this? How­
ever, it may be so. Of this they spoke with absolute confidence. The 
executioner assured me himself that he could do so. They told me, 
too, that he could aim a swinging blow at the convict's back, yet so 
that not the slightest bruise would follow and the convict would feel 
no pain. But of all these tricks and subtleties too many stories have 
been told already. 
But even if the executioner is bribed to let the victim off easily, he 
gives the first blow with all his might. That is the invariable habit. He 
softens the later blows, especially if he has received his payment. But 
whether he has been bought off or not, the first blow is his own af­
fair. I really do not know why this is their custom-whether to pre­
pare the victim for the later blows, on the theory that after a very bad 
one the slighter ones will seem less painful, or whether simply to 
show off his power to the victim, to strike terror into him, to crush 
him at once, that he may realize the sort of man he has to deal with, 
to display himself, in fact. In any case, the executioner is in a state of 
excitement before he begins his work; he feels his power, he is con­
scious of mastery; at that moment he is an actor; the public gazes 
at him with wonder and alarm, and there is no doubt that he enjoys 
shouting to his victim at the first stroke, "Ready now, I'll scorch 
you" -the fatal and habitual phrase on these occasions. It is hard to 
imagine how far a man's nature may be distorted! 
During those early days in the hospital, I listened with interest to 
all these convict stories. It was very dull for us all, lying in bed. One 
day was so much like another! In the morning we were entertained 

206 
The House of the Dead 
by the visit of the doctors, and soon after that, dinner. Eating, of 
course, was a great recreation in the monotony of our existence. The 
rations were various, as prescribed for the different patients. Some of 
them only had soup with some cereal in it, others only had porridge, 
others were restricted to semolina pudding, for which there were al­
ways many candidates. The convicts had grown nice from lying in 
bed so long and were fond of dainties. The convalescent received 
a slice of boiled beef, "bull" as they called it. Those who had scurvy 
were the best fed of all-they got beef with onion, horseradish and 
such things, and sometimes a glass of vodka. The bread, too, differed 
according to the patient's complaint; some was black, while some 
was nearly white and was well baked. This formality and exactitude in 
prescribing their diet only served to amuse the patients. Of course 
some patients did not care to eat at all. But those who had an appetite 
ate whatever they liked. Some exchanged their rations, so that the diet 
appropriate for one complaint was eaten by a patient suffering from 
something quite different. Others who were prescribed a lowering 
diet bought the beef or the diet prescribed for the scurvy, drank kvas 
or the hospital beer, buying it from those to whom it was prescribed. 
Some individuals even consumed the rations of two. The plates of 
food were sold and resold for money. A helping of beef was priced 
rather high; it cost five farthings. If there was none to sell in our ward, 
we used to send the attendant to the other convict ward, and if we 
could not get it there, we would send to the soldiers' or "free" ward, 
as it was called. Patients who wanted to sell it could always be found. 
They were left with nothing but bread, but they made money. 
Poverty, of course, was universal. but those who had money sent to 
market for rolls and even sweet things. Our attendants carried out all 
these commissions quite disinterestedly. 
After dinner was the dreariest time; some of us, bored with noth­
ing to do, fell asleep, while some were gossiping, others were quar­
relling, others were telling stories. If no fresh patients were brought 
in, it was even duller. A new arrival almost always made some sensa­
tion, especially if no one knew him. The patients scrutinized him, 
tried to find out who and what he was, where he came from and 
what brought him there. They were particularly interested in those 
who were being forwarded to other prisons. These always had some­
thing to tell, though not as a rule about their personal life; if they did 

The Hospital (3) 
207 
not speak of that of their own accord, they were never questioned 
about it, but were only asked where had they come from? With 
whom? What sort of a journey they had? Where they were going? and 
so on. Some were at once reminded by their account of something in 
their own past, and told of different journeys, parties and the officers 
in charge of them. 
Prisoners who had suffered the punishment of the "sticks" were 
brought in about that time also, towards evening, that is. Their arrival 
always made rather a sensation as I have mentioned already, but they 
did not come every day, and on the days when there were none of 
them we felt dreary; all the patients seemed fearfully bored with one 
another and they even began to quarrel. We were glad to see even the 
lunatics, who were brought in to be kept under observation. The trick 
of pretending to be mad to escape corporal punishment was fre­
quently adopted by convicts. Some were quickly detected, or rather 
they changed their tactics, and the convict who had been playing an­
tics for two or three days would suddenly, apropos of nothing, behave 
sensibly, calm down and begin gloomily asking to be discharged. 
Neither the convicts nor the doctors reproached such a man, or tried 
to put him to shame by reminding him of the farce he had been play­
ing. They discharged him without a word and let him go. Two or 
three days' later he was brought back after punishment. Such cases 
were, however, rare on the whole. 
But the real madmen who were brought for observation were a 
perfect curse for the whole ward. Some of the lunatics who were 
lively, in high spirits, who shouted, danced and sang were at first wel­
comed by the convicts almost with enthusiasm. "Here's fun! "  they 
would say, watching the antics of some new arrival. But I found it 
horribly painful and depressing to see these luckless creatures. I could 
never look at madmen without feeling troubled. 
But the continual capers and uneasy antics of the madman who 
was welcomed with laughter on his arrival soon sickened us all, and 
in a day or two exhausted our patience. One of them was kept in our 
ward for three weeks, till we all felt like running away. To make mat­
ters worse, another lunatic was brought in at that very time, who 
made a great impression upon me. This happened during my third 
year in the prison. During my first year, or rather my first months, in 
prison, in the spring I went to a brickyard a mile and a half away to 

208 
The House of the Dead 
carry bricks for a gang of convicts who worked as stove builders. They 
had to mend the kilns in readiness for making bricks in the summer. 
That morning M. and B. introduced me to the overseer of the brick­
yard, a sergeant called Ostrozhsky. He was a Pole, a tall thin old man of 
sixty, of extremely dignified and even stately appearance. He had been 
in the army for many years, and though he was a peasant by birth and 
had come to Siberia as a simple soldier after 1 830, yet M. and B. loved 
and respected him. He was always reading the Catholic Bible. I con­
versed with him and he talked with much friendliness and sense, de­
scribed things interestingly, and looked good-natured and honest. I 
did not see him again for two years; I only heard that he had got into 
trouble about something; and suddenly he was brought into our ward 
as a lunatic. He came in shrieking and laughing, and began dancing 
about the ward with most unseemly and indecent actions. The con­
victs were in ecstacies, but I felt very sad. Three days later we did not 
know what to do with him; he quarrelled, fought, squealed, sang 
songs even at night, and was continually doing such disgusting things 
that all began to feel quite sick. He was afraid of no one. They put him 
in a strait waistcoat, but that only made things worse for us, though 
without it he had been picking quarrels and fighting with almost 
everyone. Sometimes during those three weeks the whole ward rose as 
one man and begged the senior doctor to transfer our precious visitor 
to the other convict ward. There a day or two later they begged that he 
should be transferred back. And, as there were two restless and quar­
relsome lunatics in the hospital at once, the two convict wards had 
them turn and turn about and they were one as bad as the other. We all 
breathed more freely when at last they were taken away. 
I remember another strange madman. There was brought in one 
summer day a healthy and very clumsy-looking man of forty-five, with 
a face horridly disfigured by smallpox, with little red eyes buried in fat, 
and a very gloomy and sullen expression. They put him next to me. He 
turned out to be a very quiet fellow, he spoke to no one, but sat as 
though he were thinking about something. It began to get dark and 
suddenly he turned to me. He began telling me without the slightest 
preface, but as though he were telling me a great secret, that he was in 
a few days to have received two thousand "sticks," but that now it 
would not come off because the daughter of Colonel G. had taken up 
his case. I looked at him in perplexity and answered that I should not 

The Hospital (3) 
209 
have thought that the colonel's daughter could have done anything in 
such a case. I had no suspicions at the time; he had been brought in 
not as a lunatic but as an ordinary patient. I asked him what was the 
matter with him. He answered that he did not know, that he had been 
brought here for some reason, that he was quite well, but that the 
colonel's daughter was in love with him; that a fortnight ago she had 
happened to drive past the lock-up at the moment when he was 
looking out of the grated window. She had fallen in love with him as 
soon as she saw him. Since then, on various pretexts she had been 
three times in the lock-up; the first time she came with her father 
to see her brother, who was then an officer on duty there; another 
time she came with her mother to give them alms, and as she passed 
him she whispered that she loved him and would save him. It was 
amazing with what exact details he told me all this nonsense, which, 
of course, was all the creation of his poor sick brain. He believed de­
voutly that he would escape corporal punishment. He spoke calmly 
and confidently of this young lady's passionate love for him, and al­
though the whole story was so absurd, it was uncanny to hear such a 
romantic tale of a love-sick maiden from a man nearly fifty of such a 
dejected, woebegone and hideous appearance. It is strange what the 
fear of punishment had done to that timid soul. Perhaps he had really 
seen someone from the window, and the insanity, begotten of terror 
and growing upon him every hour, had at once found its outlet and 
taken shape. This luckless soldier, who had very likely never given a 
thought to young ladies in his life before, suddenly imagined a whole 
romance, instinctively catching at this straw. I listened without an­
swering and told the other convicts about it. But when the others 
showed their curiosity he preserved a chaste silence. 
Next day the doctor questioned him at length, and as he said that 
he was not ill in any way, and as on examination this seemed to be 
true, he was discharged. But we only learnt that they had put sanat on 
his case-sheet after the doctors had left the ward, so that it was im­
possible to tell them what was the matter with him. And indeed we 
hardly realized ourselves at the time what was really the matter. It was 
all the fault of the officers who had sent him to the hospital without 
explaining why they had sent him. There must have been some over­
Sight. And perhaps those responsible may not have been at all sure 
that he was mad, and had acted on vague rumours in sending him to 

2 1 0  
The House of the Dead 
the hospital to be watched. However that may have been, the poor 
fellow was taken out two days later to be punished. The unexpected­
ness of his fate seems to have been a great shock to him; he did not 
believe in it till the last minute, and when he was led between the 
ranks he screamed for help. When he was brought back to the hospi­
tal afterwards, he was taken to the other convict ward, as there was 
no bed empty in ours. But I inquired about him and learnt that for 
eight days he did not say a word to anyone, that he was crushed and 
terribly depressed. He was transferred elsewhere, I believe, when his 
back was healed. I never heard anything more of him, anyway. 
As for the general treatment and the drugs, so far as I could see, 
the patients who were only slightly ill scarcely followed the prescrip­
tions or took their medicines at all. But all who were seriously ill, all 
who were really ill, in fact, were very fond of being doctored, and 
took their mixtures and powders punctually, but what they liked best 
of all were external remedies. Cuppings, leeches, poultices and 
blood-Ietting-the remedies which our peasants are so fond of and 
put such faith in-were accepted by the patients readily, even with 
relish. I was interested by one strange circumstance. The very men 
who were so patient in enduring agonizing pain from the sticks and 
the birch often complained, writhed and even groaned when they 
were cupped. Whether they had grown soft through illness or were 
simply showing off, I really do not know. It is true our cuppings were 
of a peculiar sort. The assistant had at some remote period lost, or 
spoilt, the instrument with which the skin was pierced, or perhaps it 
was worn out, so that he was obliged to make the necessary incisions 
with a lancet. About twelve such incisions are made for every cup­
ping; with the proper instrument it does not hurt. Twelve little pricks 
are made instantaneously and the pain is scarcely felt. But when the 
incisions are made by the lancet it is a very different matter: the 
lancet cuts comparatively slowly, the pain is felt, and as for ten cup­
pings, for example, a hundred and twenty of such cuts had to be 
made, the whole operation was rather unpleasant. I have tried it; but 
though it was painful and annoying, still it was not so bad that one 
couldn't help moaning over it. It was positively absurd sometimes to 
see a tall sturdy fellow wriggling and beginning to whine. Perhaps 
one may compare it with the way a man, who is firm and even self­
possessed in a matter of importance, will sometimes be moody and 

The Hospital (3) 
2 1 1 
fanciful at home when he has nothing to do, will refuse to eat what is 
given to him, scold and find fault, so that nothing is to his taste, 
everyone annoys him, everyone is rude to him, everyone worries 
him-will, in short, "wax fat and wanton," as is sometimes said of 
such gentlemen, though they are met even among the peasantry, and, 
living altogether as we did, we saw too many of them in our prison. 
Such a weakling would often be chaffed by the other convicts in the 
ward, and sometimes even abused by them. Then he would subside, 
as though he had only been waiting for a scolding to be quiet. 
Ustyamsev particularly disliked this complaining and never lost an 
opportunity for abUSing the grumbler. He seized every chance of 
finding fault with anyone, indeed. It was an enjoyment, a necessity 
for him, due partly to his illness no doubt, but partly also to the dull­
ness of his mind. He would first stare at the offender intently and 
earnestly and then begin to lecture him in a voice of calm conviction. 
He meddled in everything, as though he had been appOinted to 
watch over the discipline and the general morality of the ward. 
"He has a finger in every pie," the convicts would say, laughing. 
But they were not hard on him and avoided quarrelling with him; 
they only laughed at him sometimes. 
"What a lot of talk!" they would say. "More than three wagon 
loads." 
"A lot of talk? We don't take off our caps to a fool, we all know. 
Why does he cry out over a lancet prick? You must take the crust with 
the crumb, put up with it." 
"But what business is it of yours?" 
"No, lads," interrupted one of our convicts, "the cupping is noth­
ing, I've tried it; but there's no pain worse than having your ear 
pulled for too long." 
Everyone laughed. 
"Why, have you had yours pulled?" 
"Don't you believe it, then? Of course I have." 
"That's why your ears stick out so." 
The convict in question, whose name was Shapkin, actually had 
very long prominent ears. He had been a tramp, was still young, and 
was a quiet and sensible fellow who always spoke with a sort of seri­
ous concealed humour, which gave a very comical effect to some of 
his stories. 

2 1 2  
The House of the Dead 
"But why should I suppose you'd had your ears pulled? And how 
was I to imagine it, you thickhead?" Ustyantsev put in his spoke 
again, addressing Shapkin with indignation, though the latter had not 
spoken to him but to the company in general. Shapkin did not even 
look at him. 
"And who was it pulled your ear?" asked someone. 
"Who? Why, the police captain, to be sure. That was in my tramp­
ing days, mates. We reached K. and there were two of us, me and an­
other tramp, Efim, who had no surname. On the way we had picked 
up a little something at a peasant's at Tolmina. That's a village. Well, we 
got to the town and looked about to see if we could pick up some­
thing here and make off In the country you are free to go north and 
south and west and east, but in the town you are never at ease, we 
know. Well, first of all we went to a tavern. We looked about us. A fel­
low came up to us, a regular beggar, with holes in his elbows, but not 
dressed like a peasant. We talked of one thing and another. 
" 'And allow me to ask, have you got papers* with you or not?' 
" 'No,' we said, 'we haven't.' 
" 'Oh! ' says he, 'I haven't either. I have two other good friends 
here,' says he, 'who are in General Cuckoo's service too.t Here we've 
been going it a little and meanwhile we've not earned a penny. So I 
make bold to ask you to stand us a pint.' 
" 'With the greatest of pleasure,' say we. So we drank. And they put 
us up to a job that is in our own line, housebreaking. There was a 
house at the end of the town and a rich man lived there, with lots of 
property; so we decided to call on him at night. But we were caught, 
all the five of us, that night in his house. We were taken to the police 
station and then straight to the police captain's. 'I'll question them 
myself,' says he. He came in with a pipe, a cup of tea was brought 
in after him. He was a hearty-looking fellow, with whiskers. He sat 
down. Three others were brought in besides ourselves, tramps too. A 
tramp's a funny chap, you know, brothers: he never remembers any­
thing; you might break a post on his head, you won't make him re­
member; he knows nothing. The police captain turned straight to me. 
*Passports are meant (Dostoevsky's note) . 
tThat is, living in the woods. He means that they too were tramps (Dostoevsky's 
note) . 

The Hospital (3) 
2 1 3  
'Who are you?' he growled out at me with a voice that came out of 
his boots. Well, of course, I said what we all do: 'I don't remember 
anything, your honour, I've forgotten.' 
" 'Wait a bit, I shall have something more to say to you, I know 
your face,' says he, staring, all eyes, at me. But I had never seen him 
before. Then to the next: 'Who are you?' 
" 'Cut-and-run, your honour.' 
" 'Is that your name?' 
" 'Yes, your honour.' 
" 'All right, you're Cut-and-run; and you?' he turns to the third. 
" 'And I follow him, your honour.' 
" 'But what's your name?' 
" 'That's my name, your honour: I follow him.' 
" 'But who has given you that name, you rascal?' 
" 'Good people, your honour. There are good people in the world, 
your honour, we all know.' 
" 'And who are these good people?' 
" 'I've rather forgotten, your honour, you must graCiously forgive 
me.' 
" 'You've forgotten them all?' 
" 'Yes, all, your honour.' 
" 'But you must have had a father and mother? You must remem­
ber them, anyway?' 
" 'It must be supposed I had them, your honour, but I've rather 
forgotten them too; perhaps I did have them, your honour.' 
" 'But where have you lived till now?' 
" 'In the woods, your honour.' 
" 'Always in the woods?' 
" 'Always.' 
" 'And what about the winter?' 
" 'I haven't seen the winter, your honour.' 
" 'And you, what's your name?' 
" 'Hatchet, your honour.' 
" 'And you?' 
" 'Quick-sharpener, your honour.' 
" 'And you?' 
" 'Sharpener-for sure, your honour.' 
" 'You none of you remember anything?' 

2 1 4 
The House of the Dead 
" 'None of us, your honour.' 
"He stands and laughs and they look at him and laugh. But another 
time he might give you one in the jaw, it's all luck. And they were such 
a fat sturdy lot. 'Take them to prison,' says he, 'I'll talk to them later, but 
you stay here,' says he to me. 'Come this way. sit down.' 1 look-there's 
a table, paper and pen. What is he up to now? thinks I. 'Sit down on the 
chair,' says he, 'take the pen, write,' and he took hold of my ear and 
pulled it. 1 looked at him as the devil looked at the priest: '1 can't, your 
honour,' says 1. 'Write! '  says he. 'Have mercy, your honour! '  'Write,' 
says he. 'write as best you can.' And he kept pulling and pulling my ear 
and suddenly gave it a twist. Well, I tell you. lads. I'd rather have had 
three hundred lashes. There were stars before my eyes! 'You write. and 
that's all about it.' " 
"Why. was he crazy or what?" 
"No, he wasn't crazy. But not long before a clerk at. T. had played a 
fine prank: he nabbed the government money and made off with it, 
and he had ears that stuck out too. Well, they sent word of it in all di­
rections and I seemed like the description. So he was trying whether 
I knew how to write and how I wrote." 
"What a position. lad! And did it hurt?" 
"I tell you it did." 
There was a general burst of laughter. 
"Well, and did you write?" 
"Why. how could 1 write? 1 began moving the pen and I moved it 
about over the paper; he gave it up. He gave me a dozen swipes in the 
face and then let me go, to prison too, of course." 
"And do you know how to write?" 
"I did once, but since folks began writing with pens I lost the art." 
Well, it was in tales like these or rather in chatter like this that our 
weary hours were spent. Good God, how wearisome it was! The days 
were long. stifling, exactly like one another. If one had only a book! 
And yet I was constantly going to the hospital. espeCially at first, 
sometimes because I was ill and sometimes simply for a rest, to get 
away from the prison. It was unbearable there, more unbearable than 
here, morally more unbearable. The hatred, enmity, quarrelling, envy, 
the continual attacks on us "the gentlemen," the spiteful, menacing 
faces! Here in the hospital all were more on an equal footing and lived 
more amicably. The saddest time of the whole day was the beginning 

The Hospital (3) 
2 1 5  
of the evening when the candles were lit and night was coming on. 
They settled down to sleep early. The dim night-lamp gleamed, a spot 
of brightness in the distance near the door, while at our end it was 
half dark. The air grew close and fetid. Some patient unable to sleep 
would get up and sit for a couple of hours on his bed, his head bent 
forward in his nightcap, as though pondering something. One looks at 
him for an hour to pass the time and wonders what he is thinking 
about, or one begins to dream and think of the past, while fancy 
draws pictures in vivid colours with wide horizons. One recalls details 
which one would not remember at another time, and which one 
would not feel as one does then. And one speculates on the future, 
how one will get out of prison. Where will one go? When will that be? 
Whether one will return to one's native place? One muses and muses, 
and hope begins to stir in one's heart. . . .  At other times one simply 
begins counting one, two, three, and so on, to put oneself to sleep. I 
have sometimes counted to three thousand and not slept. Someone 
would stir. Ustyantsev would cough his sickly consumptive cough and 
then groan feebly. and every time would add, "Lord, I have sinned! "  
And it is strange to hear this sick, broken, moaning voice in the com­
plete stillness. In another corner there are others awake, talking to­
gether from their beds. One begins to tell something of his past, some 
event long gone by, of his tramping, of his children, of his wife, of the 
old days. You feel from the very sound of the far-away whisper that all 
he is telling is long over and can never return, and that he, the speaker, 
has cut off all connexion with it. The other listens. One can hear noth­
ing but a soft measured whisper, like water trickling far away. I re­
member one long winter night I heard a story. It seemed to me at first 
like a nightmare, as though I had been lying in fever and had dreamed 
it all in delirium. 

C H A P T E R I V  
AK U L KA ' S  H U S B A N D  
(A STORY) 
IT WAS RATHER LATE at night, about twelve 0 '  clock. I had fallen asleep 
but soon woke up. The tiny dim light of the night-lamp glimmered 
faintly in the ward . . . .  Almost all were asleep. Even Ustyantsev was 
asleep, and in the stillness one could hear how painfully he breathed 
and the husky wheezing in his throat at every gasp. Far away in the 
passage there suddenly sounded the heavy footsteps of the sentry 
coming to relieve the watch. There was a clang of a gun against 
the floor. The ward door was opened: the corporal, stepping in cau­
tiously, counted over the patients. A minute later the ward was shut 
up, a new sentry was put on duty, the watchman moved away, and 
again the same stillness. Only then I noticed that on the left at a little 
distance from me there were two patients awake, who seemed to be 
whispering together. It used to happen in the ward sometimes that 
two men would lie side by side for days and months without speak­
ing, and suddenly would begin talking, excited by the stillness of the 
night, and one would reveal his whole past to the other. 
They had evidently been talking for a long time already. I missed 
the beginning and even now I could not make it all out; but by de­
grees I grew used to it and began to understand it all. I could not get 
to sleep; what could I do but listen? One was speaking with heat, half 
reclining on the bed, with his head raised, and craning his neck 
towards his companion. He was obviously roused and excited; he 
wanted to tell his story. His listener was sitting sullen and quite un­
concerned in his bed, occasionally growling in answer or in token of 
sympathy with the speaker, more as it seemed out of politeness than 
from real feeling, and at every moment stuffing his nose with snuff. 
He was a soldier called Tcherevin from the diSciplinary battalion, a 
man of fifty, a sullen pedant, a cold formalist and a conceited fool. 
The speaker, whose name was Shishkov, was a young fellow under 
thirty, a convict in the civil division in our prison, who worked in the 
2 1 6  

Akulka's Husband 
2 1 7  
tailor's workshop. So far, I had taken very little notice of him, and I 
was not drawn to see more of him during the remainder of my time 
in prison. He was a shallow, whimsical fellow; sometimes he would 
be silent, sullen and rude and not say a word for weeks together. 
Sometimes he would suddenly get mixed up in some affair, would 
begin talking scandal, would get excited over trifles and flit from one 
ward to another repeating gossip, talking endlessly, frantic with ex­
citement. He would be beaten and relapse into silence again. He was 
a cowardly, mawkish youth. Everyone seemed to treat him with con­
tempt. He was short and thin, his eyes were restless and sometirnes 
had a blank dreamy look. At times he would tell a stor>'; he would 
begin hotly, with excitement, gesticulating with his hands, and sud­
denly he would break off or pass to another subject, carried away by 
fresh ideas and forgetting what he had begun about. He ,vas often 
quarrelling, and whenever he quarrelled would reproach his oppo­
nent for some wrong he had done him, would speak with feeling and 
almost with tears . . . .  He played fairly well on the balalaika and was 
fond of playing it. On holidays he even danced, and danced well 
when they made him. He could very easily be made to do anything. 
It was not that he was specially docile but he was fond of making 
friends and was ready to do anything to please. 
For a long time I could not grasp what he was talking about. I 
fancy, too, that at first he was constantly straying away from his sub­
ject into other things. He noticed perhaps thatTcherevin took scarcely 
any interest in his story, but he seemed anxious to convince himself 
that his listener was all attention, and perhaps it would have hurt him 
very much if he had been convinced of the contrary. 
" . . .  He would go out into the market," he went on. "Everyone 
would bow to him. They felt he was a rich man; that's the only word 
for it." 
"He had some trade, you say?" 
"Yes, he had. They were poor folks there, regular beggars. The 
women used to carry water from the river ever so far up the steep 
bank 10 water their vegetables; they wore themselves out and did not 
get cabbage enough f(x soup in the autumn. It was poverty. Well, he 
rented a big piece of land, kept three labourers to work it; besides he 
had his own beehives and sold honey, and cattle too in our parts, you 
know; he was highly respected. He was pretty old, seventy if he was 

2 1 8  
The House of the Dead 
a day, his old bones were heavy, his hair was grey, he was a great big 
fellow. He would go into the market-place in a fox-skin coat and all 
did him honour. They felt what he was, you see! 'Good morning, 
Ankudim Trofimitch, sir.' 'Good day to you,' he'd say. He wasn't too 
proud to speak to anyone, you know. 'Long life to you, Ankudim 
Trofimitch! ' 'And how's your luck?' he'd ask. 'Our luck's as right 
as soot is white; how are you dOing, sir?' 'I am doing as well as my 
sins will let me, I am jogging along.' 'Good health to you, Ankudim 
Trofimitch! ' He wasn't too proud for anyone, but if he spoke, every 
word he said was worth a rouble. He was a Bible reader, an educated 
man, always reading something religiOUS. He'd set his old woman be­
fore him: 'Now wife, listen and mark! ' and he'd begin expounding to 
her. And the old woman was not so very old, she was his second wife, 
he married her for the sake of children, you know, he had none from 
the first. But by the second, Marya Stepanovna, he had two sons not 
grown up. He was sixty when the youngest, Vasya, was born, and his 
daughter, Akulka, the eldest of the lot, was eighteen." 
"Was that your wife?" 
"Wait a bit. First there was the upset with Filka Morozov. 'you 
give me my share,' says Filka to Ankudim, 'give me my four hundred 
roubles-am I your servant? I won't be in business with you and I 
don't want your Akulka. I am going to have my fling. Now my father 
and mother are dead, so I shall drink up my money and then hire 
myself out, that is, go for a soldier, and in ten years I'll come back 
here as a field-marshal.' Ankudim gave him the money and settled up 
with him for good-for his father and the old man had set up busi­
ness together. 'You are a lost man,' says he, 'Whether I am a lost man 
or not, you, grey-beard, you'd teach one to sup milk with an awl. 
You'd save off every penny, you'd rake over rubbish to make por­
ridge. I'd like to spit on it all. Save every pin and the devil you win. 
I've a will of my own,' says he. 'And I am not taking your Akulka, 
anyway. I've slept with her as it is,' says he. 'What ! '  says Ankudim, 'do 
you dare shame the honest daughter of an honest father? When have 
you slept with her, you adder's fat? You pike's blood! ' And he was all 
of a tremble, so Filka told me. 
" 'I'll take good care,' says he, 'that your Akulka won't get any hus­
band now, let alone me; no one will have her, even Mikita Grigoritch 
won't take her, for now she is disgraced. I've been carrying on with 

Akulka's Husband 
2 1 9  
her ever since autumn. I wouldn't consent for a hundred crabs now. 
You can try giving me a hundred crabs, I won't consent . . .  .' 
"And didn't he run a fine rig among us, the lad! He kept the coun­
try in an uproar and the town was ringing with his noise. He got to­
gether a crew of companions, heaps of money; he was carousing for 
three months, he spent everything. 'When I've got through all the 
money: he used to say, 'I'll sell the house, sell everything, and then I'll 
either sell myself for a soldier or go on the tramp.' He'd be drunk 
from morning till night, he drove about with bells and a pair of 
horses. And the way the wenches ran after him was tremendous. He 
used to play the tarba finely." 
"Then he'd been carrying on with Akulka before?" 
"Stop, wait a bit. I'd buried my father just then too, and my 
mother used to make cakes, she worked for Ankudim, and that was 
how we lived. We had a hard time of it. We used to rent a bit of 
ground beyond the wood and we sowed it with corn, but we lost 
everything after father died, for I went on the spree too, my lad. I 
used to get money out of my mother by beating her." 
"That's not the right thing, to beat your mother. It's a great sin." 
"I used to be drunk from morning till night, my lad. Our house 
was all right, though it was tumbledown, it was our own, but it was 
empty as a drum. We used to sit hungry, we had hardly a morsel from 
one week's end to another. My mother used to keep on nagging at 
me; but what did I care? I was always with Filka Morozov in those 
days. I never left him from morning till night. 'Play on the guitar and 
dance: he'd say to me, 'and I'll lie down and fling money at you, for 
I'm an extremely wealthy man!' And what wouldn't he do! But he 
wouldn't take stolen goods. 'I'm not a thief,' he says, 'I'm an honest 
man. But let's go and smear Akulka's gate with pitch, for I don't want 
Akulka to marry Mikita Grigoritch. I care more for that than for jelly.' 
The old man had been meaning to marry Akulka to Mikita Grigoritch 
for some time past. Mikita, too, was an old fellow in spectacles and a 
widower with a business. When he heard the stories about Akulka he 
drew back: 'That would be a great disgrace to me, Ankudim Trofim­
itch: says he, 'and I don't want to get married in my oId age.' So we 
smeared Akulka's gate. And they thrashed her, thrashed her for it at 
home . . . .  Marya Stepanovna cried, 'I'll wipe her off the face of the 
earth!' 'In ancient years: says the old man, 'in the time of the worthy 

220 
The House of the Dead 
patriarchs, I should have chopped her to pieces at the stake, but 
nowadays it's all darkness and rottenness.' Sometimes the neighbours 
all along the street would hear Akulka howling-they beat her from 
morning till night. Filka would shout for the whole market-place to 
hear: 'Akulka's a fine wench to drink with,' says he, 'You walk in fine 
array, who's your lover, pray! I've made them feel it,' says he, 'they 
won 't forget it.' 
. About that time I met Akulka one day carrying the pails and I 
shouted at her, 'Good morning, Akulina Kudimovna. Greetings to your 
grace! You walk in the fine array. Where do you get it, pray? Come, 
who's your lover, say!' That was all I said. But how she did look at me. 
She had such big eyes and she had grown as thin as a stick. And as she 
looked at me her mother thought she was laughing with me and 
shouted from the gateway, 'What are you gaping at, shameless hussy?' 
and she gave her another beating that day. Sometimes she'd beat her 
for an hour together. 'I'll do for her,' says she, 'for she is no daughter of 
mine now.' " 
"Then she was a loose wench?" 
"You listen, old man. While I was always drinking with Filka, my 
mother comes up to me one day-I was lying down. 'Why are you 
lying there, you rascal?' says she. 'You are a blackguard: says she. She 
swore at me in fact. 'You get married,' says she. 'You marry Akulka. 
They'll be glad to marry her now even to you, they'd give you three 
hundred roubles in money alone.' 'But she is disgraced in the eyes of 
all the world,' says 1. "You are a fool,' says she, 'the wedding ring cov­
ers all, it will be all the better for you if she feels her guilt all her life. 
And their money will set us on our feet again. I've talked it over with 
Marya Stepanovna already. She is very ready to listen.' 'Twenty roubles 
down on the table and I'll marry her,' says 1. And would you believe 
• 
it, right up to the day of the wedding I was drunk. And Filka Morozov 
was threatening me, too: 'I'll break all your ribs, Akulka's husband,' 
says he, 'and I'll sleep with your wife every night if I please.' 'You lie, 
you dog's flesh: says 1. And then he put me to shame before all the 
street. I ran home: 'I won't be married: says I, 'if they don't lay down 
another fifty roubles on the spot.' " 
"But did they agree to her marrying you?" 
"Me? Why not? We were respectable people. My father was only 
ruined at the end by a fire; till then we'd been better off than they. 

Akulka's Husband 
22 1 
Ankudim says, 'You are as poor as a rat,' says he. 'There's been a lot 
of pitch smeared on your gate,' I answered. 'There's no need for you 
to cry us down,' says he. 'You don't know that she has disgraced her­
self, but there's no stopping people's mouths. Here's the ikon and 
here's the door,' says he. 'You needn't take her. Only pay back the 
money you've had.' Then I talked it over with Filka and I sent Mitri 
Bikov to tell him I'd dishonour him now over all the world; and right 
up to the wedding, lad, I was dead drunk. I was only just sober for 
the wedding. When we were driven home from the wedding and sat 
down, Mitrofan Stepanovitch, my uncle, said, 'Though it's done in 
dishonour, it's just as binding,' says he, 'the thing's done and finished.' 
Old Ankudim was drunk too and he cried, he sat there and the tears 
ran down his beard. And I tell you what I did, my lad: I'd put a whip 
in my pocket, I got it ready before the wedding. I'd made up my mind 
to have a bit of fun with Akulka, to teach her what it meant to get 
married by a dirty trick and that folks might know I wasn't being 
fooled over the marriage. 
"QUite right too! To make her feel it for the future . . .  " 
"No, old chap, you hold your tongue. In our part of the country 
they take us straight after the wedding to a room apart while the oth­
ers drink outside. So they left Akulka and me inside. She sits there so 
white, not a drop of blood in her face. She was scared, to be sure. Her 
hair, too, was as white as flax, her eyes were large and she was always 
quiet, you heard nothing of her, she was like a dumb thing in the 
house. A strange girl altogether. And can you believe it, brother, I got 
that whip ready and laid it beside me by the bed, but it turned out 
she had not wronged me at all, my lad!" 
"You don't say so! "  
"Not at all. She was quite innocent. And what had she had to go 
through all that torment" for? Why had Filka Morozov put her to 
shame before all the world?" 
"Yes . .  
, "  
"I knelt down before her then, on the spot, and clasped my hands. 
'Akulina Kudimovna,' says I, 'forgive me, fool as I am, for thinking ill 
of you too. Forgive a scoundrel like me,' says 1. She sat before me 
on the bed looking at me, put both hands on my shoulders while her 
tears were flOWing. She was crying and laughing . . . .  Then I went out 
to all of them. 'Well,' says I, 'if I meet Filka Morozov now he is a dead 

222 
The House of the Dead 
man! ' As for the old people, they did not know which saint to pray to. 
The mother almost fell at her feet, howling. And the old fellow said, 
'Had we known this, we wouldn't have found a husband like this fc)r 
you, our beloved daughter.' 
"When we went to church the first Sunday, I in my astrakhan cap, 
coat af fine cloth and velveteen breeches, and she in her new hareskin 
coat with a silk kerchief on her head, we looked a well-matched pair: 
didn't we walk along! People were admiring us. I needn't speak for 
myself, and though I can't praise Akulina up above the rest, I can't say 
she was worse: and she'd have held her O\i\'n with any dozen." 
"That's all right, then." 
"Come, listen. The day after the wedding, though I was drunk, I got 
away from my visitors and I escaped and ran away. 'Bring me that 
wretch Filka Morozov,' says I, 'bring him here, the scoundrel! '  I shouted 
all over the market. Well, I was drunk too: I was beyond the Vlasovs' 
when they caught me, and three men brought me home by force. And 
the talk was all over the town. The wenches in the market-place were 
talking to each other: 'Gi.rls, darlings, have you heard7 Akulka is proved 
innocent.' 
"Not long after, Filka says to me before folks, 'Sell your wife and 
you can drink. Yashka the soldier got married just for that,' says he. 
'He didn't sleep with his wife, but he was drunk for three years.' I 
said to him, 'You are a scoundrel.' 'And you: says he, 'a fool. Why, you 
weren't sober when you were married,' says he, 'how could you tell 
about it when you were drunk7' I came home and shouted, 'You mar­
ried me when I was drunk,' said 1. My mother began scolding me. 
'Your ears are stopped with gold, mother. Give me Akulka.' Well, I be­
gan beating her. I beat her, my lad, beat her for two hours, till I 
couldn't stand up. She didn't get up from her bed for three weeks." 
"To be sure," observed Tcherevin phlegmatically, "if you don't beat 
them, they'll . . .  But did you catch her with a lover?" 
"Catch her? No, I didn't," Shishkov observed, after a pause, and, as 
it were, with an effort. "But I felt awfully insulted. People teased me 
so and Filka led the way. 'You've a wife for show,' says he, 'for folks to 
look at.' Filka invited us with others, and this was the greeting he gave 
me: 'His wife is a tender-hearted soul,' says he, 'honourable and po­
lite, who knows how to behave, nice in every way-that's what he 
thinks now. But you've forgotten, lad, how you smeared her gate with 

Akulka's Husband 
223 
pitch yourself! ' I sat drunk and then he seized me by the hair sud­
denly and holding me by the hair he shoved me down. 'Dance: says 
he, 'Akulka's husband! I'll hold you by your hair and you dance to 
amuse me! '  'You are a scoundrel: I shouted. And he says to me, 'I shall 
corne to you with companions and thrash Akulka, your wife, before 
you, as much as I like.' Then I, would you believe it, was afraid to go 
out of the house for a whole month. I was afraid he'd corne and dis­
grace me. And just for that I began beating her . . . .  
" 
"But what did you beat her for? You can tie a man's hands but you 
can't stop his tongue. You shouldn't beat your wife too much. Show 
her, give her a lesson, and then be kind to her. That's what she is for." 
Shishkov was silent for some time. 
"It was insulting," he began again. "Besides, I got into the habit of 
it: some days I'd beat her from morning till night; everything she did 
was wrong. If I didn't beat her, I felt bored. She would sit without say­
ing a word, looking out of the window and crying . . . .  She was always 
crying, I'd feel sorry for her, but I'd beat her. My mother was always 
swearing at me about her: 'You are a scoundrel: she'd· say, 'you're a jail­
bird! ' 'I'll kill her,' I cried, 'and don't let anyone dare to speak to me; 
for they married me by a trick.' At first old Ankudim stood up for her; 
he'd come himself: 'You are no one of much account: says he, 'I'll find 
a law for you.' But he gave it up. Marya Stepanovna humbled herself 
completely. One day she came and prayed me tearfully, 'I've come to 
entreat you, Ivan Semyonovitch, it's a small matter, but a great favour. 
Bid me hope again: she bowed down, 'soften your heart, forgive her. 
Evil folk slandered our daughter. You know yourself she was innocent 
when you married her.' And she bowed down to my feet and cried. 
But I lorded it over her. 'I won't hear you now! I shall do just what I 
like to you all now, for I am no longer master of myself. Filka Morozov 
is my mate and my best friend . . . .  " 
"So you were drinking together again then?" 
"Nothing like it! There was no approaching him. He was quite mad 
with drink. He'd spent all he had and hired himself out to a store­
keeper to replace his eldest son, and in our part of the country when a 
man sells himself for a soldier, up to the very day he is taken away 
everything in the house has to give way to him, and he is master over 
all. He gets the sum in full when he goes and till that time he lives in 
the house; he sometimes stays there for six months and the way he'll 

224 
The House of the Dead 
go on, it's a disgrace to a decent house. '1 am going for a soldier in 
place of your son,' the fellow would say, 'so 1 am your benefactor, so 
you must all respect me, or I'll refuse.' So Filka was having a rare time 
at the shopkeeper's, sleeping with the daughter, pulling the father's 
beard every day after dinner, and doing just as he liked. He had a bath 
every day and insisted on using vodka for water, and the women 
carrying him to the bath-house in their arms. When he came back 
from a walk he would stand in the middle of the street and say, '1 
won't go in at the gate, pull down the fence,' so they had to pull down 
the fence in another place beside the gate for him to go through. At 
last his time was up, they got him sober and took him off The people 
came out in crowds into the street saying, 'Filka Morozov's being taken 
for a soldier! '  He bowed in all directions. Just then Akulka came out 
of the kitchen garden. When Filka saw her just at our gate, 'Stop,' he 
cried, and leapt out of the cart and bowed down before her. 'You are 
my soul: he said, 'my darling, I've loved you for two years, and now 
they are taking me for a soldier with music. Forgive me,' said he, 'hon­
est daughter of an honest father, for I've been a scoundrel to you and 
it's all been my fault! '  And he bowed down to the ground again. 
Akulka stood, seeming scared at first, then she made him a low bow 
and said, 'You forgive me too, good youth, 1 have no thought of any 
evil you have done.' 1 followed her into the hut. 'What did you say to 
him, dog's flesh)' And you may not believe me but she looked at me: 
'Why, 1 love him now more than all the world,' said she." 
"You don't say so! "  
" 1  did not say one word to her all that day . . .  only in the evening. 
'Akulka, 1 shall kill you now,' says 1. All night 1 could not sleep; 1 went 
into the passage to get some kvas to drink, and the sun was beginning 
to rise. 1 went back into the room. 'Akulka: said 1, 'get ready to go out 
to the field.' 1 had been meaning to go before and mother knew we 
were going. 'That's right,' said she. 'It's harvest-time now and 1 hear 
the labourer's been laid up with his stomach for the last three days.' 1 
got the cart out without saying a word. As you go out of our town 
there's a pine forest that stretches for ten miles, and beyond the forest 
was the land we rented. When we had gone two miles 1 stopped the 
horse. 'Get out, Akulina,' said 1, 'your end has come.' She looked at 
me, she was scared; she stood up before me, she did not speak. '1 am 
sick of you,' says 1, 'say your prayers! '  And then 1 snatched her by the 

Akulka's Husband 
225 
hair; she had two thick long plaits. I twisted them round my hand 
and held her tight from behind between my knees. I drew out my 
knife, I pulled her head back and I slid the knife along her throat. She 
screamed, the blood spurted out, I threw down the knife, flung my 
arms round her, lay down on the ground, embraced her and screamed 
over her, yelling; she screamed and I screamed; she was fluttering all 
over, struggling to get out of my arms, and the blood was simply 
streaming, simply streaming on to my face and on to my hands. I left 
her, a panic came over me, and I left the horse and set off running, and 
ran home along the backs of the houses and straight to the bath­
house. We had an old bath-house we didn't use: I squeezed myself into 
a corner under the steps and there I sat. And there I sat till nightfall." 
"And Akulka?" 
"She must have got up, too, after I had gone and walked home-
wards too. They found her a hundred paces from the place." 
"Then you hadn't killed her?" 
"Yes . . . .  " Shishkov paused for a moment. 
"There's a vein, you know," observed Tcherevin, "if you don't cut 
through that vein straightaway a man will go on struggling and won't 
die, however much blood is lost." 
"But she did die. They found her dead in the evening. They in­
formed the police, began searching for me, and found me at nightfall 
in the bath-house! . . .  And here I've been close upon four years," he 
added, after a pause. 
"H'm . . .  to be sure, if you don't beat them there will be trouble," 
Tcherevin observed coolly and methodically, pulling out his tobacco­
pouch again. He began taking long snifTs at intervals. "Then again 
you seem to have been a regular fool, young fellow, too. I caught my 
wife with a lover once. So I called her into the barn; I folded the bri­
dle in two. 'To whom do you swear to be true? To whom do you 
swear to be true?' says 1. And I did give her a beating with that bridle, 
I beat her for an hour and a half. 'I'll wash your feet and drink the wa­
ter: she cried at last. Ovdotya was her name." 

C H A P T E R  V 
S U M M E R  T I M E  
BUT NOW IT IS the beginning of April, and Easter is drawing near. Little 
by little the summer work begins. Every day the sun is warmer and 
more brilliant; the air is fragrant with spring and has a disquieting in­
fluence on the nerves. The coming of spring agitates even the man in 
fetters, arouses even in him vague desires, cravings and a yearning 
melancholy. I think one pines for liberty more in the bright sunshine 
than in dull winter or autumn days, and that may be noticed in all 
prisoners. Although they seem glad of the fine days, yet at the same 
time their impatience and restlessness is intensified. In fact I have no­
ticed that quarrels in prison become more frequent in the spring. 
Noise, shouting and uproar are heard more often, rows are more com­
mon; yet sometimes at work one suddenly notices dreamy eyes fixed 
on the blue distance, where far away beyond the Irtish stretch the free 
Kirghiz steppes, a boundless plain for a thousand miles. One hears 
a man heave a deep sigh from a full heart, as though he yearned to 
breathe that far-away free air and to ease with it his stifled and fettered 
soul. "Ech-ma! " the convict exclaims at last, and suddenly, as though 
shaking off dreams and brooding, he sullenly and impatiently snatches 
up the spade or the bricks he has to move from place to place. A 
minute later he has forgotten his sudden feeling and begun laughing 
or swearing according to his disposition. Or he suddenly sets to his 
task, ifhe has one, with extraordinary and quite superfluous zeal, and 
begins working with all his might, as though trying to stifle in him­
self something which is cramping and oppressing him within. They 
are all vigorous, men for the most part in the flower of their age and 
their strength . . . .  Fetters are hard to bear at this season! I am not po­
etizing and am convinced of the truth of what I say. Apart from the 
fact that in the warmth, in the brilliant sunshine, when, in all your 
soul, in all your being, you feel nature with infinite force springing 
into life again around you, prison doors, guards and bondage are 
226 

SummerTime 
2 2 7  
harder to bear than ever-apart from that, with the coming of spring 
and the return of the lark, tramping begins all over Siberia and Rus­
sia; God's people escape from prison and take refuge in the forests. 
After stifling dungeons, law courts, fetters and beatings, they wander 
at their own free will wherever they please, wherever it seems fair 
and free to them; they eat and drink what they find, what God sends 
them, and at night they fall asleep peacefully under God's eye in the 
forest, or the fields, troubling little for the future, and free from the 
sadness of prison, like the birds of the forest, with none to say good­
night to but the stars. There is no denying that one may have to face 
hardship, hunger and exhaustion "in the service of General Cuckoo." 
One may have to go for days together without bread; one must keep 
in hiding, out of Sight of everyone; one may be driven to steal, to rob 
and sometimes even to murder. "A convict free is like a baby, what he 
wants he takes," is what they say in Siberia of the convict settlers. This 
saying applies in full force and even with some additions to the 
tramp. It is rare for a tramp not to be a robber and he is always a thief, 
more from necessity than from vocation, of course. 
There are inveterate tramps. Some, after their imprisonment is over, 
run away from settlements. One would have thought that a man would 
be satisfied in the settlement and free from anxiety, but no, something 
lures him, beckons him away. life in the forest, a life poor and terrible, 
but free and adventurous, has a fascination, a mysterious charm for 
those who have once known it, and one may sometimes see a sedate 
precise man, who was promising to become a capable farmer and a 
good settled inhabitant, run away to the forest. Sometimes a man will 
marry and have children, live for five years in one place, and suddenly 
one fine day disappear somewhere, leaving his wife, his children and 
the whole parish in amazement. A wanderer of this kind was pointed 
out to me in prison. He had never committed any special crime, at least 
I never heard anything of the kind spoken of, but he was always run­
ning away, he had been running away all his life. He had been on the 
southern frontier of Russia beyond the Danube, and in the Kirghiz 
steppes, and in Eastern Siberia and in the Caucasus-he had been 
everywhere. Who knows, perhaps in other circumstances, with his pas­
sion for travelling he might have been another Robinson Crusoe. 12 But 
I was told all this about him by other people; he spoke very little in 
prison himself and then only of necessity. He was a little peasant of 

228 
The House of the Dead 
fifty, extremely meek, with an extremely calm and even va.cant face, 
calm to the point of idiocy. In the summer he was fond of sitting in 
the sun, always humming some song to himself; but so quietly that five 
steps away he was inaudible. His features were somehow wooden; 
he ate little and chiefly bread; he never bought a roll or a glass of vodka 
and I doubt whether he ever had any money or knew how to count. He 
was perfectly unconcerned about everything. He sometimes fed the 
prison dogs with his own hands and no one else ever did. Indeed, Rus­
sians in general are not given to feeding dogs. They said he had been 
married, twice indeed; it was said that he had children somewhere . . . .  
How he got into prison I have no idea. The convicts all expected him to 
give us the slip too, but either the time had not come or he was too 
old for it, for he went on living amongst us, calmly contemplating the 
strange environment in which he found himself However, there was 
no reckoning on him, though one would have thought that he had 
nothing to run away for, that he would gain nothing by it. 
Yet, on the whole, the life of a tramp in the forest is paradise com­
pared with prison. That is easy to understand and indeed there can be 
no comparison. Though it's a hard life, it is freedom. That is why every 
convict in Russia, whatever prison he may be in, grows restless in the 
spring with the first kindly rays of sunshine. Though by no means 
everyone intends to run away; one may say with certainty, indeed, that 
owing to the difficulty of escape and the penalties attaching to it, not 
more than one in a hundred ventures upon it; yet the other ninety­
nine dream at least of how they might escape and where they would 
escape to and comfort their hearts with the very desire, with the very 
imagination of its being possible Some recall how they have run away 
in the past . . . .  I am speaking now only of those who are serving their 
sentence. But of course those who are awaiting sentence take the risks 
of flight far more frequently than other prisoners. Convicts con­
demned for a term run away only at the beginning of their imprison­
ment, if at all. When a convict has been two or three years in prison, 
those years begin to have a value in his mind and by degrees he makes 
up his mind that he would rather finish his term in the legal way and 
become a settler than run such risks, and take the chances of ruin ifhe 
fails. And failure is so pOSSible. Scarcely one in ten succeeds in changing 
his luck. Another class of convicts, who more frequently take the haz­
ards of flight, consists of those who are condemned to very long 

SummerTime 
229 
terms. Fifteen or twenty years seem an eternity, and a man condemned 
for such lengthy periods is always ready to dream of changing his 
luck, even if he has passed ten years in prison. 
The branding does something to prevent prisoners attempting 
flight. 
To change one's luck is a technical expression, so much so that even in 
cross-examination a prisoner caught trying to escape will answer that 
he wanted to change his luck. This rather bookish expression is exactly 
what is meant. Every fugitive looks forward, not exactly to complete 
freedom-he knows that is almost impossible-but either to getting 
into another institution or being sent as a settler, or being tried again 
for a fresh offence committed when he was tramping; in fact he does 
not care what becomes of him, so long as he is not sent back to the old 
place he is sick of, his former prison. If these fugitives do not, in the 
course of the summer, succeed in finding some exceptional place in 
which to spend the winter, if for instance they do not chance upon 
someone willing for interested motives to shelter a fugitive, if they do 
not, sometimes by means of murder, obtain a passport of some sort 
with which they can live anywhere they like, they are all either caught 
by the police or go in autumn of their own accord in crowds into the 
towns and the prisons and remain there for the winter, not, of course 
without hopes of escaping again in the summer. 
Spring had an influence on me too. I remember how eagerly I 
sometimes peeped through the chinks in the fence and how long I 
used to stand with my head against the fence looking obstinately 
and insatiably at the greenness of the grass on our prison rampart 
and the deeper and deeper blue of the sky in the distance. My rest­
lessness and depression grew stronger every day, and the prison be­
came more and more hateful to me. The dislike with which as a 
"gentleman" I was continually regarded by the convicts during my 
first few years became intolerable, poisoning my whole life. During 
those first few years I often used to go into the hospital, though I 
had no illness, simply to avoid being in prison, simply to escape 
from this obstinate, irreconcilable hatred. "You have beaks of iron, 
you've pecked us to death," the convicts used to say to us, and how I 
used to envy the peasants who were brought to the prison! They were 
looked upon as comrades by everyone at once. And so the spring, 
the phantom of freedom, the general rejoicing of nature affected me 

2 3 0  
The House of the Dead 
with melancholy and nervous restlessness. At the end of Lent, I 
think in the sixth week, I took the sacrament. All the prisoners had 
been at the beginning of Lent divided by the senior sergeant into 
seven relays, one to take the sacrament during each week of the fast. 
Each of the relays consisted of about thirty men. I very much liked 
the week of the preparation for the sacrament. We were relieved of 
work. We went to the church, which was not far from the prison, 
twice or three times a day. It was long since I had been to church. 
The Lenten service so familiar to me from far-away days of child­
hood in my father's house, the solemn prayers, the prostrations-all 
this stirred in my heart the far, far-away past, bringing back the days 
of my childhood, and I remember how pleasant it was walking over 
the frozen ground in the early morning to the house of God, es­
corted by guards with loaded guns. The guards did not, however, go 
into the church. We stood all together in a group close to the 
church door, so far back that we could only hear the loud-voiced 
deacon and from time to time catch a glimpse of the black cope and 
the bald head of the priest through the crowd. I remembered how 
sometimes standing in church as a child I looked at the peasants 
crowding near the entrance and slavishly parting to make way for a 
thickly epauletted officer, a stout gentleman, or an over-dressed but 
pious lady, who invariably made for the best places and were ready 
to quarrel over them. I used to fancy then that at the church door 
they did not pray as we did, that they prayed humbly, zealously, 
abasing themselves and fully conscious of their humble state. 
Now I, too, had to stand in the background, and not only in the 
background; we were fettered and branded as felons; everyone avoided 
us, everyone seemed to be even afraid of us, alms were always given 
to us, and I remember that this was positively pleasing to me in a 
way; there was a special subtlety in this strange pleasure. "So be it," I 
thought. The convicts prayed very earnestly and every one of them 
brought his poor farthing to the church every time to buy a candle, 
or to put in the collection. "I, too, am a man," he thought, and felt 
perhaps as he gave it, "in God's eyes we are all equal. . . .  " We took the 
sacrament at the early mass. When with the chali<;:e in his hands the 
priest read the words, " . . .  accept me, 0 Lord, even as the thief," al­
most all of them bowed down to the ground with a clanking of 
chains, apparently applying the words literally to themselves. 

SummerTime 
23 1 
And now Easter had come. We received from the authorities an 
egg each and a piece of white bread made with milk and eggs. Loads 
of offerings for the prisoners were brought from the town again. 
Again there was a visit from the priest with a cross, again a visit of the 
authorities, again a cabbage soup with plenty of meat in it, again 
drinking and desultory idleness-exactly as at Christmas, except that 
now one could walk about the prison yard and warm oneself in the 
sun. There was more light, more space than in the winter, but yet it 
was more melancholy The long endless summer day seemed particu­
larly unbearable in the holidays. On ordinary days, at least, it was 
shortened by work. 
The summer tasks turned out to be far harder than our work in 
winter. All were chiefly employed upon building. The convicts dug out 
the earth, laid the bricks; some were employed as carpenters, lock­
smiths or painters in doing up the government buildings. Others went 
to the brickyard to make bricks. This was considered the hardest work 
of all. The brickyard was two or three miles from the fortress. At six 
0' clock, every summer morning, a whole party of convicts, some fifty 
in number, set off for the brickyard. For this work they chose unskilled 
labourers, that is, men who had no special craft or trade. They took 
bread with them, for, as the place was so far off, it was waste of time 
going six miles home to dinner and back, so they had dinner on their 
return in the evening. The tasks were set for the whole day and we 
could only just get through them by working all day long. To begin 
with, one had to dig and carry the clay, to fetch water, to pound the 
clay in a pit, and finally to make a great number of bricks out of it­
I believe it was two hundred, or perhaps even two hundred and fifty, a 
day. I only went twice to the brickyard. The brickyard men returned in 
the evening, worn out and exhausted, and all the summer they were 
continually throwing it up against the others, declaring that they 
were doing the hardest work. That seemed to be their consolation. Yet 
some of them were very ready to go to the brickyard: in the first 
place, it was outside the town, it was a free open space on the banks 
of the lrtish. It was a relief to look about one, anyway-to see some­
thing not the regulation prison surroundings I One could smoke 
freely and even lie down for half an hour with great satisfaction. 
I used to go as before to pound alabaster, or to the workshop, or I 
was employed to carry bricks on the building. I once had to carry 

2 3 2  
The House of the Dead 
bricks a distance of about a hundred and sixty yards, from the bank 
of the Irtish to the barracks that were being built on the other side of 
the fortress rampart, and I had to go on doing this every day for two 
months. I positively liked the work, though the cord in which I had 
to carry the bricks always cut my shoulder. But I liked to feel that I 
was obviously gaining muscular strength through the work. At first I 
could only carry eight bricks and each brick weighed nearly eleven 
pounds. But I got up to twelve and even fifteen bricks later on, and 
that was a great joy to me. In prison physical strength is no less nec­
essary than moral strength to enable one to endure the hardships of 
that accursed manner of life. 
And I wanted to go on living when I got out of prison. 
I liked carrying bricks not only because it strengthened my muscles 
but also because the work took me to the bank of the Irtish. I speak of 
the river-bank so often because it was only from there one had a view 
of God's world, of the pure clear distance, of the free solitary steppes, 
the emptiness of which made a strange impression on me. It was only 
on the bank of the Irtish that one could stand with one's back to the 
fortress and not see it. All our other tasks were done either in the 
fortress or close by it. From the very first days I hated that fortress, 
some of the buildings particularly. The major's house seemed to me a 
damnable, loathsome place, and I always looked at it with hatred every 
time I passed by. On the river-bank one might forget oneself: one 
would look at that boundless solitary vista as a prisoner looks out to 
freedom from his window. Everything there was sweet and precious 
in my eyes, the hot brilliant sun in the fathomless blue sky and the far­
away song of the Kirghiz floating from the further bank. One gazes 
into the distance and makes out at last the poor smoke-blackened tent 
of some Kirghiz. One discerns the smoke rising from the tent, the 
Kirghiz woman busy with her two sheep. It is all poor and barbarous, 
but it is free. One descries a bird in the limpid blue air and for a long 
time one watches its flight: now it darts over the water, now it van­
ishes in the blue depths, now it reappears again, a speck flitting in the 
distance . . . .  Even the poor sickly flower which I found early in spring 
in a crevice of the rocky bank drew my attention almost painfully. 
The misery of all that first year in prison was intolerable, and it 
had an irritating, bitter effect on me. During that first year I failed to 
notice many things in my misery. I shut my eyes and did not want to 

SummerTime 
2 3 3  
look. Among my spiteful and hostile companions in prison, I did not 
observe the good ones-the men who were capable of thought and 
feeling in spite of their repellent outer husk. In the midst of ill­
natured sayings, I sometimes failed to notice kind and friendly words, 
which were the more precious because they were uttered with no 
interested motives, and often came straight from a heart which had 
suffered and endured more than mine. But why enlarge on this? I 
was very glad to get thoroughly tired: I might go to sleep when I got 
home. For the nights were an agony in the summer, almost worse 
than in the winter. The evenings, it is true, were sometimes very 
nice. The sun, which had been on the prison yard all day, set at last. 
Then followed the cool freshness of evening and then the compara­
tively cold night of the steppes. The convicts wandered in groups 
about the yard, waiting to be locked in. The chief mass, it is true, 
were crowding into the kitchen. There some burning question of the 
hour was always being agitated; they argued about this and that, 
sometimes discussed some rumour, often absurd, though it aroused 
extraordinary interest in these men cut off from the outer world; a 
report came for instance that our major was being turned out. Con­
victs are as credulous as children; they know themselves that the 
story is ridiculous, that it has been brought by a notorious gossip, an 
"absurd person"-the convict Kvasov whom it had long been an 
accepted rule not to believe, and who could never open his mouth 
without telling a lie; yet everyone pounced on his story, talked it 
over and discussed it, amusing themselves and ending by being an­
gry with themselves and ashamed of themselves for having believed 
Kvasov. 
"Why, who's going to send him away?" shouted one. "No fear, his 
neck is thick, he can hold his own." 
"But there are others over him, surely! "  protested another, an ea­
ger and intelligent fellow who had seen something of life, but was 
the most argumentative man in the world. 
"One raven won't pick out another's eyes! "  a third, a grey-headed 
old man who was finishing his soup in the corner in solitude, mut­
tered sullenly as though to himself. 
"I suppose his superior officers will come to ask you whether 
they're to sack him?" a fourth added casually, strumming lightly on 
the balalaika. 

234 
The House of the Dead 
"And why not?" answered the second furiously. "All the poor peo­
ple could petition for it, you must all come forward if they begin 
questioning. To be sure, with us it's all outcry, but when it comes to 
deeds we back out." 
"What would you have?" said the balalaika player. "That's what 
prison's for! "  
"The other day," the excited speaker went on, not heeding him, 
"there was some flour left. We scraped together what little there was 
and were sending it to be sold. But no, he heard of it; our foreman let 
him know; it was taken away; he wanted to make something out of it, 
to be sure. Was that fair now?" 
"But who is it you want to complain to?" 
"Who? Why, the inspector that's coming." 
"What inspector?" 
"That's true, lads, that an inspector's coming," said a lively young 
fellow of some education who had been a clerk and was reading 
"The Duchess la Valliere," or something of the kind. He was always 
merry and amusing, but he was was respected for having a certain 
knowledge of life and of the world. Taking no notice of the general 
interest aroused by the news that an inspector was coming, he went 
straight up to one of the cooks and asked for some liver. Our cooks 
often used to sell such things. They would, for instance, buy a large 
piece of liver at their own expense, cook it, and sell it in small pieces 
to the convicts. 
"One ha'p'orth or two ha'p'orths?" asked the cook. 
"Cut me two ha'p'orths; let folks envy me," answered the convict. 
"There's a general, lads-a general coming from Petersburg; he'll in­
spect all Siberia. That's true. They said so at the commander's." 
This news produced an extraordinary sensation. For a quarter of 
an hour there was a stream of questions: who was it, what general, 
what was his rank, was he superior to the generals here? Convicts 
are awfully fond of discussing rank, officials, which of them takes 
precedence, which can lord it over the other, and which has to give 
way; they even quarrel and dispute and almost fight over the gener­
als. One wonders what difference it can make to them. But a minute 
knowledge of generals and the authorities altogether is the criterion 
of a man's knowledge, discrimination and previous importance in 

SummerTime 
235 
the world. Talk about the higher authorities is generally considered 
the most refined and important conversation in prison. 
"Then it turns out to be true, lads, that they are coming to sack the 
major," observes Kvasov, a little red-faced man, excitable and remark­
ably muddle-headed. He had been the first to bring the news about 
the major. 
"He'll bribe them," the grim, grey-headed convict, who had by 
now finished his soup, brought out jerkily. 
"To be sure he will," said another. "He's grabbed money enough! 
He had a battalion before he came to us. The other day he was want­
ing to marry the head priest's daughter." 
"But he didn't-they showed him the door, he was too poor. He's 
not much of a match! When he gets up from a chair he takes all he's 
got with him. He lost all his money gambling at Easter. Fedka said 
so." 
"Yes; the lad's not one to spend, but he gets through cash no end." 
"Ah, brother, I was married, too. It's no use for a man to be mar­
ried; when you are married the night's too short," remarked Skura­
tov, putting his word in. 
"Oh, indeed! It was you we were talking about, of course," ob­
served the free-and-easy youth who had been a clerk. "But you are a 
silly fool, Kvasov, let me tell you. Do you suppose the major could 
bribe a general like that, and that such a general would come all the 
way from Petersburg to inspect the major? You are a fool, my lad, let 
me tell you." 
"Why, because he's a general won't he take it?" someone in the 
crowd observed sceptically. 
"Of course he won't; if he does, he'll take a jolly big one." 
"To be sure, he will; to match his rank." 
"A general will always take bribes," Kvasov observed with deci­
sion. 
"You've tried it on, I suppose?" said Baklushin, suddenly coming 
in and speaking contemptuously. "I don't believe you've ever seen a 
general." 
"I have, though! "  
"You are lying! "  
"Liar yourself! " 

2 3 6  
The House of the Dead 
"Lads, if he has seen one, let him tell us all direcdy what general 
he knows. Come, speak away-for I know all the generals." 
''I've seen General Ziebert," Kvasov answered with strange hesita­
tion. 
"Ziebert? There isn't such a general. He looked at your back, I sup­
pose, your Ziebert, when he was a lieutenant-colonel maybe, and you 
fancied in your fright he was a general! "  
"No, listen to me! "  cried Skuratov, "for I am a married man. There 
really was such a general at Moscow, Ziebert, of German family, 
though he was a Russian. He used to confess to a Russian priest every 
year, at the fast of the Assumption, and he was always drinking water, 
lads, like a duck. Every day he'd drink forty glasses of Moscow river 
water. They said that he took it for some disease, his valet told me so 
himself." 
"He bred carp in his belly, I bet, with all that water," observed the 
convict with the balalaika. 
"Come, do shut up! We are talking business and they . . .  What is 
this inspector, brothers?" a fussy old convict called Martinov, who 
had been a hussar, anxiously inquired. 
"What nonsense people talk! " observed a sceptic. "Where do they 
get it from and how do they fit it in? And it's all nonsense! "  
"No, it's not nonsense," Kulikov, who had hitherto been majesti­
cally silent, observed dogmatically. He was a man of some conse­
quence, about fifty, with an exceptionally prepossessing countenance 
and disdainfully dignified manners. He was aware of the fact, and was 
proud of it. He was a veterinary surgeon, pardy of gipsy descent, 
who used to earn money by doctoring horses in the town, and sold 
vodka in prison. He was a clever fellow and had seen a good deal. He 
dropped his words as though he were bestowing roubles. 
"That's the truth, lads," he went on calmly. "I heard it last week. 
There's a general coming, a very important one; he'll inspect the 
whole of Siberia. We all know he will be bribed, too, but not by our 
old Eight-eyes; he wouldn't dare to come near him. There are gener­
als and generals, brothers. There are some of all sorts. Only I tell you, 
our major will stay where he is, anyway. That's a sure thing. We can't 
speak, and none of the officers will speak against one of their own 
lot. The inspector will look into the prison and then he'll go away and 
report that he found everything all right . . . .  " 

SummerTime 
2 3 7  
"That's right, lads, but the major's in a funk: he's drunk from 
morning till night." 
"But in the evening he drives a different sort of cart. Fedka was 
saying so." 
"You'll never wash a black dog white. It's not the first time he's 
been drunk, is i.t?" 
"I say, what if the general really does nothing? It is high time they 
took notice of their goings on! " the convicts said to each other in ex­
citement. 
The news about the inspector was all over the prison in a mo­
ment; men wandered about the yard impatiently, repeating the news 
to one another, though some were purposely silent and maintained 
an indifferent air, eVidently trying to increase their importance by so 
doing. Others remained genuinely unconcerned. Convicts with bal­
alaikas were sitting on the barrack steps. Some went on gOSSiping. 
Others struck up songs, but all were in a state of great excitement 
that evening. 
Between nine and ten we were all counted over, driven into the bar­
racks and locked up for the night. The nights were short, we were 
waked between four and five, and we were never all asleep before 
eleven. There was always noise and talking till that hour and some­
times, as in winter, there were card parties. It became insufferably hot 
and stifling in the night. Though there were wafts of the cool night air 
from the open window, the convicts tossed about on their beds all 
night as though in delirium. The fleas swarmed in myriads. There were 
fleas in the winter, too, and in considerable numbers, but from the 
beginning of spring they swarmed in multitudes. Though I had been 
told of it before, I could not believe in the reality till I experienced it. 
And as the summer advanced, they grew more and more ferocious. It 
is true that one can get used to fleas-I have learnt this by experi­
ence; but still one has a bad time of it. They torment one so much that 
one lies at last as though in a fever, feeling that one is not asleep but 
in delirium. When at last, towards morning, the fleas desist, and as 
it were subside, and when one really drops into a sweet sleep in the 
cool of dawn, the pitiless tattoo of the drum booms out at the prison 
gate and the morning watch begins. Rolled up in your sheepskin you 
hear with a curse the loud, distinct sounds, as it were counting them, 
while through your sleep there creeps into your mind the insufferable 

2 3 8  
The House of the Dead 
thought that it will be the same tomorrow and the day after tomor­
row, and for years together, right on to the day of freedom. But 
when, one wonders, will that freedom be, and where is it? Mean­
while, one must wake up; the daily movement and bustle begins . . .  
men dress and hurry out to work. It is true one can sleep for an hour 
at midday. 
The story of the inspector was true. The rumour received more 
and more confirmation each day, and at last we all knew for a fact that 
an important general was coming from Petersburg to inspect the 
whole of Siberia, that he had already arrived, that he was by now at 
Tobolsk. Every day fresh reports reached the prison. News came, too, 
from the town. We heard that everyone was frightened and fluttered, 
and trying to show things the best side up. It was said that the higher 
officers were preparing receptions, balls, festivities. The convicts were 
sent out in parties to level the road to the fortress, to remove hillocks, 
to paint the fences and posts, to repair the stucco, to whitewash; in 
fact, they tried all in a minute to set right everything that had to be 
shown. 
The convicts understood all this very well, and talked with more 
and more heat and defiance among themselves. Their fancy took im­
mense flights. They even prepared to make a complaint when the gen­
eral should inquire whether they were satisfied. Meanwhile they 
quarrelled and abused each other. 
The major was in great excitement. He used to visit the prison 
more frequently, he shouted at people, and fell upon them, sent pris­
oners to the guard-house more frequently and was more zealous 
about cleanliness and decency. It was just at that time, as luck would 
have it, that a little incident took place which did not, however, as 
might have been expected, disturb the major at all, but on the con­
trary gave him positive satisfaction. A convict stuck an awl into an­
other's chest, just over the heart. 
The convict who committed this crime was called Lomov; the man 
who was wounded was called Gavrilka among us; he was an inveter­
ate tramp. I don't know if he had any other name; among us he was 
called Gavrilka. 
Lomov had been a prosperous peasant from the K. district of 
T. province. All the Lomovs lived together in one family, the old father 

SummerTime 
2 3 9  
with his brother and three sons. They were well-to-do peasants. It was 
rumoured all over the province that they were worth as much as a 
hundred thousand roubles. They tilled the land, tanned skins, traded, 
but did more in the way of moneylending, sheltering tramps, receiv­
ing stolen goods, and such pursuits. Half the peasants in the district 
were in their debt and in bondage to them. They were reputed to be 
shrewd and crafty peasants, but at last they became puffed up with 
pride, especially when one important person in the district took to 
putting up at their house when he travelled, saw the old father and 
took to him for his quick-wittedness and practical ability. They began 
to think they could do what they liked, and ran greater and greater 
risks in illegal undertakings of all sorts. Everyone was complaining of 
them, everyone was wishing the earth would swallow them up; but 
they held their heads higher and higher. They cared nothing for po­
lice captains and excise officials. At last they came to grief and were 
ruined, but not for any wrongdoing, not for their secret crimes, but 
for something of which they were not guilty. They had a big outlying 
farm some seven miles from the village. Once they had living there in 
the autumn six Kirghiz, who had worked for them as bondsmen un­
der a contract for many years. One night all these Kirghiz labourers 
were murdered. An inquiry was made. It lasted a long while. Many 
other misdeeds were discovered in the course of the inquiry. The 
Lomovs were accused of murdeting their labourers. They told the tale 
themselves, and everyone in the prison knew about it; it was sus­
pected that they owed a great deal to their labourers, and as they were 
greedy and miserly in spite of their wealth, they had murdered 
the Kirghiz to escape paying them the arrears of their wages. During 
the trial and legal proceedings they lost all their property. The old 
father died. The sons were scattered. One of the sons and his uncle were 
sent to our prison for twelve years. And after all they were completely 
innocent as far as the death of the Kirghiz was concerned. There after­
wards turned up in our prison a notorious rogue and tramp called 
Gavrilka, a brisk and lively fellow, who was responsible for the crime. 
I did not hear, however, whether he admitted it himself, but the 
whole prison was convinced that he had a share in the murder. 
Gavrilka had had dealings with the Lomovs when he had been a 
tramp. He had come to the prison for a short term as a deserter from 

240 
The House of the Dead 
the army and a tramp. He had murdered the Kirghiz with the help of 
three other tramps; they had hoped to plunder the farm and carry off 
a lot of booty. 
The Lomovs were not liked among us; why, I don't knOw. One of 
them, the nephew, was a fine fellow, clever and easy to get on with; 
but his uncle, who stuck the awl into Gavrilka, was a stupid and quar­
relsome man. He had quarrelled with many of the prisoners before 
and had been often soundly beaten. Gavrilka everyone liked for his 
cheerful and easy temper. Though the Lomovs knew that he was the 
criminal and that they were suffering for his crime, they did not 
quarrel with him, although they were never friendly with him; and 
he took no notice of them either. And suddenly a quarrel broke out 
between Gavrilka and the uncle Lomov over a most disgusting girl. 
Gavrilka began boasting of her favours; Lomov was jealous, and one 
fine day he stabbed him with the awl. 
Though the Lomovs had been ruined by their trial, yet they lived 
in comfort in prison. They evidently had money. They had a samovar, 
drank tea. Our major knew of it and hated the two Lomovs intensely. 
Everyone could see that he was always finding fault with them and 
trying to get them into trouble. The Lomovs put this down to the ma­
jor's desire to get a bribe out of them. But they never offered him a 
bribe. 
of course, if Lomov had driven the awl a very little further in, 
he would have killed Gavrilka. But the assault ended in nothing worse 
than a scratch. It was reported to the major. I remember how he 
pranced in, out of breath, and obviously delighted. He treated Gavrilka 
with wonderful gentleness, quite as if he had been his own son. 
"Well, my boy, can you walk to the hospital or not? No, you'd bet­
ter drive. Get the horse out at once! "  he shouted in excited haste to 
the sergeant. 
"But I don't feel anything, your honour. He only gave me a little 
prick, your honour." 
"You don't know, you don't know, my dear boy; we shall see . . .  It's 
a dangerous place; it all depends on the place; he struck you just over 
the heart, the ruffian! And you, you," he roared, addreSSing Lomov, 
"now I'll make you smart! . . .  To the guard-house! "  
And he certainly did make him smart. Lomov was tried and, though 
the wound turned out to be the slightest of pricks, the intent was 

SummerTime 
241 
unmistakable. The criminal's term of imprisonment was increased and 
he was given a thousand strokes. The major was thoroughly satisfied. 
At last the inspector arrived. The day after he arrived in the town 
he visited our prison. It was on a holiday. For some days before 
everything in the prison had been scrubbed, polished, cleaned. The 
prisoners were freshly shaven. Their clothes were white and clean. 
In the summer the regulation dress for the prisoners was white 
linen jacket and trousers. Every one of them had a black circle about 
four inches in diameter sown on the back of his jacket. A whole 
hour was spent in drilling the convicts to answer properly if the 
great man should greet them. There were rehearsals. The major bus­
tled about like one possessed. An hour before the general's appear­
ance the convicts were all standing in their places like posts with 
their arms held stiffly to their sides. At last, at one o'clock, the gen­
eral arrived. He was a general of great consequence, of such conse­
quence that I believe all official hearts must have throbbed all over 
Western Siberia at his arrival. He walked in sternly and majestically, 
followed by a great suite of the local authorities in attendance 
on him, several generals and colonels among them. There was one 
civilian, a tall and handsome gentleman in a swallow-tail coat and 
low shoes, who had come from Petersburg, too, and who behaved 
with extreme freedom and independence. The general frequently 
turned to him and with marked courtesy. This interested the con­
victs immensely-a civilian and treated with such esteem and by 
such a general, too! Later on they found out his surname and who 
he was, but there were numbers of theories. Our major, wearing a 
tight uniform with an orange-coloured collar, with his bloodshot 
eyes and crimson pimply face, did not, I fancy, make a particularly 
agreeable impression on the general. As a sign of special respect to 
the distinguished visitor, he had taken off his spectacles. He stood at 
a little distance, stiffly erect, and his whole figure seemed feverishly 
anticipating the moment when he might be wanted to fly to carry 
out his excellency's wishes. But he was not wanted. The general 
walked through the prison-ward in silence, he glanced into the 
kitchen; I believe he tried the soup. I was pointed out to him, they 
told him my story, and that I was of the ೎ducated class. 
"Ah!" answered the general. "And how is he behaving himself 
now?" 

242 
The House of the Dead 
"So far, satisfactorily, your excellency," they answered him. 
The general nodded, and two minutes later he went out of the 
prison. The convicts were, of course, dazzled and bewildered, but yet 
they remained in some perplexity. Complaints against the major 
were, of course, out of the question. And the major was perfectly cer­
tain of that beforehand. 

C H A P T E R  V I  
P R I S O N  A N I MA L S  
THE PURCHASE OF SORREL, an event which took place shortly afterwards 
in the prison, occupied and entertained the prisoners far more agree­
ably than the grand visit. We kept a horse in the prison for bringing 
water, carrying away refuse and such things. A convict was told off to 
look after it. He used to drive it, too, accompanied, of course, by a 
guard. There was a great deal of work for our horse, both in the 
morning and in the evening. The former Sorrel had been in our ser­
vice for a long time. It was a good horse, but worn out. One fine 
morning, just before St. Peter's Day, this old Sorrel fell down after 
bringing in the barrel of water for the evening, and died within a few 
minutes. They were sorry for him; they all collected around him, dis­
cussing and disputing. The old cavalrymen, the gipsies, and the vet­
erinary surgeons among us showered great erudition as regards 
horses on the occasion and even came to abusing one another, 
but they did not get old Sorrel on to his legs again. He lay dead with 
distended belly, which they all seemed to feel bound to poke at with 
their fingers. The major was informed of this act of God, and he at 
once decided that a new horse should be bought. On the morning 
of St. Peter's Day after mass, when we were all assembled together, 
horses for sale were led in. It was a matter of course that the convicts 
themselves should make the selection. There were some genuine con­
noisseurs in horse-flesh amongst us, and to deceive two hundred and 
fifty men who were specialists on the subject would be difficult. 
Kirghiz nomads, horse-dealers, gipsies, and townspeople turned up 
with horses. The convicts awaited with impatience the arrival of each 
fresh horse. They were as happy as children. What flattered them most 
of all was that they were buying a horse as though for themselves, as 
though they were really paying for it out of their own money, and 
had a full right to buy it like free men. Three horses were led in and 
taken away before they settled upon the fourth. The dealers who came 
243 

244 
The House of the Dead 
in looked about them with some astonishment and even timidity and 
glanced round from time to time at the guards who led them in. A 
rabble of two hundred of these fellows, shaven, branded and fettered, 
at home in their own prison nest, the threshold of which no one ever 
crosses, inspired a certain sort of respect. Our fellows invented all 
sorts of subtleties by way of testing each horse that was brought; they 
looked it over and felt it in every part, and what is more, with an air 
as businesslike, as serious and important as though the welfare of the 
prison depended upon it. The Circassians even took a gallop on 
the horse. Their eyes glowed and they gabbled in their incomprehen­
sible dialect, showing their white teeth and nodding with their 
swarthy, hook-nosed faces. Some of the Russians kept their whole at­
tention riveted upon the Circassians' discussion, gazing into their 
eyes as though they would jump into them. Not understanding their 
language, they tried to guess from the expression of their eyes 
whether they had decided that the horse would do or not, and such 
strained attention might well seem strange to a spectator. One won­
ders why a convict should be so deeply concerned in the matter­
and a convict so insignificant, humble and down-trodden that he 
would not have dared to lift up his voice before some of his own 
comrades-as though he had been buying a horse for himself, as 
though it made any difference to him what sort of horse were 
bought. Besides the Circassians, the former horse-dealers and gipsies 
were the most conspicuous; they were allowed the first word, there 
was even something like a chivalrous duel between two convicts in 
particular-Kulikov, who had been a gipsy horse-stealer and horse­
dealer, and a self-taught vet, a shrewd Siberian peasant who had lately 
come to the prison and had already succeeded in carrying off all Ku­
likov's practice in the town. Our prison vets were greatly esteemed 
in the town, and not only the shopkeepers and merchants, but even the 
higher gentry applied to the prison when their horses fell ill, in spite of 
the fact that there were several regular veterinary surgeons in the town. 
Kulikov had had no rival until Yolkin, the Siberian peasant, had ap­
peared upon the scene; he had a large practice and was, of course, paid 
for his services. He was a terrible gipsy and charlatan, and knew 
much less than he pretended. As far as money went he was an aris­
tocrat among us and by his experience, intelligence, audacity and 
determination he had long won the involuntary respect of all the 

Prison Animals 
245 
convicts in the prison. He was listened to and obeyed among us. But he 
talked little; he spoke as though he were making one a present of his 
words, and only opened his lips on the most important occasions. He 
was a regular fop, but he had a great deal of genuine energy. He was 
no longer young, but very handsome and very clever. He behaved to 
us convicts of the upper class with a sort of refined courtesy, and at 
the same time with extraordinary dignity. I believe that ifhe had been 
dressed-up and introduced into some club in Moscow or Petersburg 
as a count he would have been quite at home even there, would have 
played whist, would have talked well, speaking little but with weight, 
and that perhaps it would not have been detected all the evening that 
he was not a count but a tramp. I am speaking seriously; he was so 
clever, resourceful and quick-witted, moreover he had excellent man­
ners and a good deal of style. He must have had many experiences 
of different kinds in his life. But his past was wrapped in the mists 
of obscurity. He was in the speCial division. But after the arrival of 
Yolkin, who, though he was a peasant, was a very crafty man of fifty. a 
dissenter, Kulikov's fame as a vet began to decline. In two months' 
time Yolkin had carried off almost the whole of his practice in the 
town; he cured, and it seemed quite easily, horses that Kulikov had 
given up as hopeless. Yolkin even cured some that the town veterinary 
surgeons had looked upon as incurable. 
This peasant had been brought to prison with some others for 
false coining. What had induced him at his age to mix himself up in 
such doings! He used to tell us, laughing at himself, that by melting 
down three real gold coins they could only turn out one counterfeit 
one. Kulikov was rather mortified at Yolkin's veterinary successes and 
indeed his glory began to wane among the convicts. He kept a mis­
tress in the town, wore a velveteen coat, had a silver ring on his fin­
ger, wore an earring, and boots of his own with decorated tops. Now, 
from want of money, he was forced to begin trading in vodka. There­
fore everyone expected that the enemies would be sure to have a fight 
over the purchase of the new Sorrel; the convicts awaited it with cu­
riosity. Each of them had his followers; the leading spirits on both 
sides were already getting excited and were gradually beginning to 
fall foul of one another. Yolkin had already pursed up his crafty face 
in a most sarcastic smile. But it turned out that they were mistaken. 
Kulikov did not attempt to be abusive, but he behaved in a masterly 

246 
The House of the Dead 
way. He began by giving way and even listening with attention to his 
rival's criticism, but, catching up one of his sayings, he observed 
modestly and emphatically that he was mistaken, and before Yolkin 
could recover and correct himself, he proved to him that he was in 
error on this point and on that. In factYolkin was routed quite unex­
pectedly and skilfully, and though he still carried the day, Kulikov's 
followers were satisfied. 
"No, lads, you don't beat him easily; he can take his own part, 
rather! "  said some. 
"Yolkin knows more!" observed others, but they observed it rather 
deprecatingly. Both parties spoke suddenly in very conciliatory tones. 
"It's not that he knows more, simply he has a lighter hand. And as 
for treating cattle, Kulikov is equal to anything there! "  
"That he is, lad! " 
"That he is." 
Our new Sorrel was at last chosen and bought. It was a capital 
horse, young, strong and good-looking, with an extremely pleasant, 
good-humoured expression. It was, of course, irreproachable in all 
other respects. The convicts began haggling. The dealers asked thirty 
roubles, our fellows offered twenty-five. The bargaining was hot and 
lengthy. They kept adding and subtracting. At last they were amused at 
it themselves. 
"Are you going to take the money out of your own purse? What 
are you bargaining about?" said some. 
"Do you want to spare the government?" cried others. 
"But, after all, lads, after all, it's sort of common money." 
"Common money! Well, to be sure, there's no need to sow fools 
like us, we spring up of ourselves." 
At last the bargain was clinched for twenty-eight roubles. The ma­
jor was informed and the purchase was completed. Of course they 
brought out bread and salt and led the new Sorrel into the prison 
with all due ceremony. I don't think there was a convict who did not, 
on this occasion, pat the horse on the neck or stroke its nose. On the 
same day Sorrel was harnessed to bring in the water, and everyone 
looked with curiosity to see the new Sorrel drawing his barrel. Our 
water-carrier, Roman, looked at the new horse with extraordinary 
self-satisfaction. He was a peasant of fifty, of a silent and stolid char­
acter. And all Russian coachmen are of a very sedate and even taciturn 

Prison Animals 
247 
character, as though it were really the case that constant association 
with horses gave a man a special sedateness and even dignity. Roman 
was quiet, friendly to everyone, not talkative; he used to take pinches 
from a horn of tobacco and had always from time immemorial 
looked after the prison Sorrels. The one that had just been bought was 
the third of that name. The convicts were all convinced that a horse of 
sorrel colour was suited to the prison, that it would be, so to speak, 
better for the house. Roman, too, maintained this idea. Nothing would 
have induced them to buy a piebald horse, for instance. The task of 
water-carrier was, by some special privilege, always reserved for Ro­
man, and none of us would ever have dreamt of disputing his right. 
When the last Sorrel died, it never occurred to anyone, even the major, 
to blame Roman; it was God's will, that was all about it, and Roman 
was a good driver. 
Soon the new Sorrel became the favourite of the prison. Though 
the convicts are a rough set of men, they often went up to stroke him. 
It sometimes happened that Roman, returning from the river with 
the water, got down to close the gate which the sergeant had opened 
for him, and Sorrel would stand still in the yard with the barrel, wait­
ing for him, and looking towards him out of the corner of his eyes. 
"Go on alone," Roman would shout to him, and Sorrel would imme­
diately go on alone, right up to the kitchen door, where he would 
stop, waiting for the cooks and the slop-pail men to come with their 
buckets for the water. "Clever Sorrel," the prisoners shouted to him; 
"he's brought the water alone I He does as he is told! " 
"There, upon my word! Only a beast, but he understandsl "  "He is 
a capital fellow, Sorrel! "  
Sorrel snorts and shakes his head as though he really did under­
stand and is pleased at the praise. And someone is sure to bring him 
bread and salt at this point. Sorrel eats it and nods his head again as 
though to say: "I know you, I know you! I am a nice horse and you 
are a good man." 
I used to like taking bread to Sorrel. It was pleasant to look into his 
handsome face and to feel on the palm of one's hand his soft warm 
lips quickly picking up the offering. 
Our prisoners in general would readily have been fond of animals, 
and if they had been allowed, they would gladly have reared all sorts 
of domestic birds and animals in prison. And could anything be more 

248 
The House of the Dead 
calculated to soften and elevate the harsh and savage character of the 
convicts than such occupation? But this was not allowed. It was for­
bidden by the regulations, and there was no place suitable for it. 
Yet it happened that there were several animals in prison during 
my time there. Besides Sorrel, we had dogs, geese, the goat Vaska and, 
for some time, there was an eagle. 
We had as a permanent prison dog, as I mentioned already, Sharik, 
a clever, good-natured animal with whom I was always on friendly 
terms. But as among the peasants everywhere the dog is always 
looked upon as an unclean animal whom one should scarcely notice, 
hardly anyone paid any attention to Sharik. The dog was simply there, 
slept in the yard, lived on the scraps from the kitchen, and no one 
took any particular interest in him; it knew everyone, however, and 
looked upon everyone in prison as its master. When the prisoners 
came in from work, as soon as the shout "Corporals! "  was heard at 
the guard-house, the dog ran to the gates with a friendly greeting for 
every group, wagging his tail and looking affectionately in the face of 
every convict as he came in, hoping for some sort of caress. But for 
many years he did not succeed in winning a caress from anyone ex­
cept me, and so he loved me more than all. 
I don't remember how it was that another dog, Byelka, came 
among us. The third, Kultyapka, I introduced myself, bringing him in 
as a puppy from where we were working. Byelka was a strange crea­
ture. He had once been run over by a cart and his spine was curved 
inwards, so that when he ran it looked like two white animals run­
ning, grown together. He was mangy too, and had discharging eyes; 
his tail, which was always between his legs, was mangy and patchy, 
almost without hair. A victim of destiny, he had eVidently made up his 
mind to accept his lot without repining. He never barked or growled 
at anyone, as though he had not courage to. He lived for the most part 
behind the prison barracks in the hope of picking up food; if he saw 
any of us he would immediately, while we were some paces away, 
turn over on his back as a sign of humility, as much as to say, "Do 
with me what you will, you see I have no thought of resistance." And 
every convict before whom he rolled over would give him a kick 
with his boot, as though he felt it incumbent on him to do so. "Ah, 
the nasty brute," the convicts would say. But Byelka did not even dare 
to squeal, and if the pain was too much for him would give a muffled 

Prison Animals 
249 
plaintive whine. He would roll over in the same way before Sharik or 
any other dog when anything called him outside the prison walls. He 
used to turn over and lie humbly on his back when some big long­
eared dog rushed at him growling and barking. But dogs like humil­
ity and submissiveness in their fellows. The savage dog was at once 
softened and stood with some hesitation over the submissive creature 
lying before him with his legs in the air, and slowly, with great cu­
riosity, he would begin sniffmg him all over. What could the trem 
bling Byelka have been thinking all this time ) What if he bites me, the 
ruffian? was pro bably what was in his mind. But after sniffing him 
over attentively, the dog would leave him at last, finding I10lhing 
particularly interesting abo ut him. Byelka would at once leap up and 
again hobble after the long string of dogs who were following some 
charming bitch, and though he knew fClr a certai.nty that he would 
n ever be on speaking terms with the charmer, still he hobbled after in 
the distance and it was a comfCJft to him in his trouble. He had ap­
parently ceased to consider the point of honour; haVing lost all hope 
of a career in the future, he lived only for daily bread, and was fully 
aware of the fact. I once tried to caress him; it was something so new 
and unexpected for him that he suddenly collapsed on all fours on 
the ground trembling al over and beginning to whine aloud with 
emotion. I often patted him from compassion. After that he could not 
meet me without whining. As soon as he saw me in the distance, he 
would begin whining tearfully and hysterically. He ended by being 
killed by dogs on the rampart outside the prison. 
Kultyapka was a dog of quite a different character. Why I brought 
him from the workshop into the prison when he was still a blind 
pnppy, I don 't know. I liked feeding him and bringing him up. Sharik 
at once took Kultyapka under his wing and used to sleep vvith him . 
When Kultyapka began to grow up, Sharik would let him bite h i s  
ears, pull his coat and play with him, a s  grown-up dogs usually play 
with puppies. Strange to say, Kultyapka hardly grew at all in height, 
but only in length and breadth. His coat vvas shaggy and of a light 
mouse colour; one ear hung down and on e stood up. He was of a fer­
vent and enthusiastic disposition like every puppy, who wil as a rule 
squeal and bark with delight at seeing his master, dart up to lick 
his face and be ready to give the rein to all his other emotions, feel­
ing that the proprieties are not to be considered and that all that 

2 5 0  
The House of the Dead 
matters is to show his enthusiasm. Wherever I might be, if I called 
"Kultyapka! "  he would appear at once round some corner as though 
he had sprung out of the earth, and would fly to me with squealing 
rapture, turning somersaults and rolling over like a ball as he came. I 
was awfully fond of this little monster. It seemed as though fate had 
nothing in store for him but joy and prosperity. But one fine day 
a convict called Neustroev, who made women's shoes and tanned 
skins, happened to take special notice of him. An idea seemed to 
strike him. He called Kultyapka to him, felt his coat and rolled him on 
his back in a friendly way. Kultyapka, suspecting nothing, squealed 
with delight. But next morning he disappeared. I looked for him for 
a long time; he had utterly vanished. And only a fortnight later all was 
explained. Neustroev had taken a particular fancy to Kultyapka's coat. 
He skinned him, tanned the skin and lined with it the warm velvet 
boots which had been bespoken by the auditor's wife. He showed me 
the boots when they were finished. The dog-skin lining looked won­
derfully well. Poor Kultyapka! 
Many prisoners tanned skins, and they often brought into the 
prison dogs with good coats, who instantly disappeared. Some of 
these dogs were stolen, some even bought. I remember once seeing 
two convicts behind the kitchen consulting together and very busy 
about something. One of them held by a string a magnificent big black 
dog evidently of an expensive breed. Some rascal of a servant had 
brought it from his master's and sold it for about sixpence to our 
shoemakers. The convicts were just going to hang it. This was a thing 
very easily done; they would strip off the skin and flung the dead 
body into the big deep cesspool in the furthest corner of the prison 
yard, which stank horribly in the hottest days of summer. It was 
rarely cleaned out. The poor dog seemed to understand the fate in 
store for it. It glanced at each of the three of us in turn with search­
ing and uneasy eyes and from time to time ventured to wag its 
drooping bushy tail, as though trying to soften us by this sign of its 
trust. I made haste to move away, and they no doubt finished the job 
to their satisfaction. 
It was by chance that we came to keep geese. Who first introduced 
them and to whom they really belonged I don't know, but for some 
time they were a source of great diversion to the convicts and even 
became familiar objects in the town. They were hatched in the prison 

Prison Animals 
25 1 
and were kept in the kitchen. When all the goslings were full grown, 
they all used to follow the convicts to work in a flock. As soon as the 
drum sounded and the prisoners began to move towards the gates, 
our geese would run after us, cackling, fluttering their wings one af­
ter another leaping over the high sill of the gate, and would unhesi­
tatingly turn towards the right wing and there draw up and wait till 
the convicts were ready to start. They always attached themselves to 
the largest party, and while the convicts were at work they would 
graze close by. As soon as the party began to move off again towards 
the prison, the geese started too. It was reported in the fortress how 
the geese followed the convicts to work. "Hullo, here are the convicts 
with their geese," people would say when they met them. "How did 
you train them?" "Here's something for the geese," another would 
add and give us alms. But in spite of their devotion they were all 
killed for some feast day. 
On the other hand nothing would have induced the convicts to kill 
our goat, Vaska, if it had not been for a special circumstance. I don't 
know where he came from either, or who brought him into the 
prison, but one day a very charming little white kid made his appear­
ance. In a few days we all grew fond of him and began to find enter­
tainment and even consolation in him. They even found an excuse for 
keeping him by saying, "If we have a stable in the prison, we must 
have a goat." He did not, however, live in the stable, but at first in the 
kitchen and afterwards all over the prison. He was a very graceful, 
very mischievous creature. He ran up when he was called, jumped 
on benches and tables, butted at the convicts, and was always merry 
and amusing. One evening when his horns had grown fairly big, a 
Lezghian called Babay, who was sitting on the steps with a group of 
other convicts, took it into his head to butt at the goat; they were 
knocking their foreheads together for a long time-to play like this 
with the goat was a favourite pastime of the convicts-when sud­
denly Vaska skipped on to the topmost step, and as soon as Babay 
turned aside, the goat instantly reared on its hind legs and, bending 
his fore-legs inward, he butted with all his might at the back of 
Babay's head so that the man flew head over heels off the steps to the 
intense glee of all present, especially Babay himself. Everyone was aw­
fully fond ofVaska, in fact. 
When he began to be full grown it was decided after a long and 

2 5 2  
The House of the Dead 
earnest deliberation to perform a certain operation on him which 
our veterinary specialists were very skilful in, "or he will smell so 
goaty," said the convicts. After that Vaska grew fearfully fat. The con­
victs used to feed him, too, as though they were fattening him up. He 
grew at last into a fine and handsome goat of extraordinary size with 
very long horns. He waddled as he walked. He, too, used to follow us 
to work, to the diversion of the convicts and of everyone we met. 
Everyone knew the prison goat, Vaska. Sometimes if they were work­
ing on the bank of the river, for instance, the convicts would gather 
tender willow shoots and other leaves and pick flowers on the ram­
part to decorate Vaska with them; they would wreathe flowers and 
green shoots round his horns and hang garlands all over his body. 
Vaska would return to the prison always in front of the convicts, 
decked out, and they would follow him, and seem proud of him 
when they met anyone. This admiration for the goat reached such a 
pitch that some of our men, like children, suggested that they might 
gild Vaska's horns. But they only talked of doing this, it was never ac­
tually done. I remember, however, asking Akim Akimitch, who, after 
Isay Fomitch, was our best gilder, whether one could really gild goats' 
horns. At first he looked attentively at the goat and after serious con­
sideration he replied that it was perhaps possible, but that it would 
not be lasting and would besides be utterly useless. With that the mat­
ter dropped. And Vaska might have lived for years in the prison and 
would perhaps have died of shortness of breath. But one day as he 
was returning home decked out with flowers at the head of the con­
victs, he was met by the major in his droshki. "Stop! " he roared; 
"whose goat is it?" It was explained to him. "What! a goat in the 
prison and without my permission! Sergeant! "  The sergeant came for­
ward and the order was promptly given that the goat should be im­
mediately killed, that the skin should be sold in the market, and the 
money for it be put into the prison purse, and that the meat should be 
served out to the convicts in the soup. There was a great deal of talk 
and lamentation in the prison, but they did not dare to disobey. Vaska 
was slaughtered over the cesspool in the yard. One of the convicts 
bought the whole of the meat, paying a rouble and a half for it into 
the prison purse. With this money they bought rolls and the convict 
sold the meat in portions to the prisoners to be roasted. The meat 
turned out really to be exceptionally good. 

Prison Animals 
2 5 3  
We had for some time in the prison an eagle, one of the small ea­
gles of the steppes. Someone brought him into the prison wounded 
and exhausted. All the prisoners crowded round him; he could not 
fly; his right wing hung down on the ground, one leg was dislocated. 
I remember how fiercely he glared at us, looking about him at the in­
quisitive crowd, and opened his crooked beak, prepared to sell his 
life dearly When they had looked at him long enough and were be­
ginning to disperse, he hopped limping on one leg and fluttering his 
uninjured wing to the furthest end of the prison yard, where he took 
refuge in a corner right under the fence. He remained with us for three 
months, and all that time would not come out of his corner. At first the 
convicts often went to look at him and used to set the dog at him. 
Sharik would fly at him furiously, but was evidently afraid to get too 
near. This greatly diverted the convicts. "Savage creature! He'll never 
give in! " they used to say Later Sharik began cruelly ill-treating him. 
He got over his fear, and when they set him on the eagle he learnt to 
catch him by his injured wing. The eagle vigorously defended himself 
with his beak and, huddled in his corner, he looked fiercely and 
proudly like a wounded king at the inquisitive crowd who came to 
stare at him. 
At last everyone was tired of him; everyone forgot him, aban­
doned him, yet every day there were pieces of fresh meat and a bro­
ken pot of water near him. So someone was looking after him. At first 
he would not eat, and ate nothing for several days; at last he began 
taking food, but he would never take it from anyone's hand or in the 
presence of people. It happened that I watched him more than once. 
Seeing no one and thinking that he was alone, he sometimes ven­
tured to come a little way out of his corner and limped a distance of 
twelve paces along the fence, then he went back and then went out 
again, as though he were taking exercise. Seeing me he hastened back 
to his corner, limping and hopping, and throwing back his head, 
opening his beak, with his feathers ruffled, at once prepared for battle. 
None of my caresses could soften him; he pecked and struggled, would 
not take meat from me, and all the time I was near him he used to stare 
intently in my face with his savage, piercing eyes. Fierce and solitary he 
awaited death, mistrustful and hostile to all. At last the convicts seemed 
to remember him, and though no one had mentioned him, or done 
anything for him for two months, everyone seemed suddenly to feel 

254 
The House of the Dead 
sympathy for him. They said that they must take the eagle out. "Let 
him die if he must, but not in prison," they said. 
"To be sure, he is a free, fierce bird; you can't get him used to 
prison," others agreed. 
"It's not like us, it seems," added someone. 
"That's a silly thing to say. He's a bird and we are men, aren't we?" 
"The eagle is the king of the forests, brothers," began Skuratov, but 
this time they did not listen to him. 
One day, after dinner, when the drum had just sounded for us to 
go to work, they took the eagle, holding his beak, for he began fight­
ing savagely, and carried him out of the prison. We got to the ram­
part. The twelve men of the party were eagerly curious to see where 
the eagle would go. Strange to say, they all seemed pleased, as though 
they too had won a share of freedom. 
"See, the cur, one does something for his good, and he keeps bit­
ing one," said the convict who was carrying him, looking at the fierce 
bird almost with affection. 
"Let him go, Mikitka! "  
"It's no use rigging up a jack-in-the-box for him, it seems. Give 
him freedom, freedom full and free! "  
He threw the eagle from the rampart into the plain. It was a cold, 
gloomy day in late autumn, the wind was whistling over the bare 
plain and rustling in the yellow, withered, tussocky grass of the 
steppes. The eagle went off in a straight line, fluttering his injured 
wing, as though in haste to get away from us anywhere. With curios­
ity the convicts watched his head flitting through the grass. 
"Look at him!" said one dreamily. "He doesn't look round! "  added 
another. "He hasn't looked round once, lads, he just runs off! " 
"Did you expect him to come back to say thank you?" observed a 
third. 
"Ah, to be sure it's freedom. It's freedom he sniffs." 
"You can't see him now, mates . . . .  " 
"What are you standing for? March! "  shouted the guards, and we 
all trudged on to work in silence. 

C H A P T E R  V I I  
T H E  C O M P L A I N T  
IN BEGINNING THIS CHAPTER the editor of the late Alexandr Petrovitch 
Goryanchikov's notes feels it his duty to make the following state­
ment to the reader: --
In the first chapter of "The House of the Dead" some words were 
said about a parricide belonging to the upper class. Among other 
things he was quoted as an instance of the callousness with which the 
convicts will sometimes speak of their crimes. It was stated, too, that 
the murderer did not admit his gUilt at his trial. but that judging by 
accounts given by people who knew all the details of his story, the 
facts were so clear that it was impossible to have any doubt of his 
guilt. These people told the author of the notes that the criminal was 
a man of reckless behaviour, that he had got into debt, and had killed 
his father because he coveted the fortune he would inherit from him. 
But all the people in the town where this parricide had lived told the 
story in the same way. of this last fact the editor of these notes has 
fairly trustworthy information. Finally, it was stated in these notes 
that the criminal was always in the best of spirits in prison; that he 
was a whimsical, frivolous fellow, extremely lacking in common 
sense, though by no means a fool, that the author had never noticed 
in him any sign of cruelty. And the words are added: "Of course I did 
not believe in that crime." 
The other day the editor of the notes from "The House of the 
Dead" received information from Siberia that the criminal really was 
innocent and had suffered ten years in penal servitude for nothing; 
that his innocence had been established before a court, officially, that 
the real criminals had been found and had confessed, and that the 
luckless fellow had been already released from prison. The editor can 
feel no doubt of the truth of this news. There is nothing more to 
add. There is no need to enlarge on all the tragic significance of this 
255 

2 5 6  
The House of the Dead 
fact, and to speak of the young life crushed under this terrible 
charge. The fact is too impressive, it speaks for itself. 
We believe, too, that if such a fact can be possible, this possibility 
adds a fresh and striking feature to the description of "The House of 
the Dead," and puts a finishing touch to the picture. 
Now we will continue. 
I have already said that I did at last become accustomed to my po­
sition in prison. But this came to pass painfully and with difficulty 
and far too gradually. It took me almost a year, in fact, to reach this 
stage, and that was the hardest year of my life. And that is why the 
whole of it is imprinted on my memory for ever. I believe I remem­
ber every successive hour of that year. I said, also, that other convicts, 
too, could not get used to that life. I remember how in that first year 
I often wondered to myself what they were feeling, could they be 
contented? And I was much occupied with these questions. I have 
mentioned already that all the convicts lived in prison not as though 
they were at home there, but as though they were at a hotel, on a 
journey, at some temporary halt. Even men sentenced for their whole 
life were restless or miserable, and no doubt every one of them was 
dreaming of something almost impossible. This everlasting uneasi­
ness, which showed itself unmistakably, though not in words, this 
strange impatient and intense hope, which sometimes found invol­
untary utterance, at times so wild as to be almost like delirium, and 
what was most striking of all, often persisted in men of apparently 
the greatest common sense-gave a special aspect and character to 
the place, so much so that it constituted perhaps its most typical char­
acteristic. It made one feel, almost from the first moment, that there 
was nothing like this outside the prison walls. Here all were dream­
ers, and this was apparent at once. What gave poignancy to this feel­
ing was the fact that this dreaminess gave the greater number of the 
prisoners a gloomy and sullen, almost abnormal, expression. The 
vast majority were taciturn and morose to the point of vindictiveness; 
they did not like displaying their hopes. Candour, Simplicity were 
looked on with contempt. The more fantastical his hopes, and the 
more conscious the dreamer himself was of their fantastical charac­
ter, the more obstinately and shyly he concealed them in his heart, 
but he could not renounce them. Who knows, some perhaps were 

The Complaint 
2 5 7  
inwardly ashamed of them. There i s  s o  much sober-mindedness and 
grasp of reality in the Russian character, and with it such inner mock­
ery of self Perhaps it was this continual hidden self-dissatisfaction 
which made these men so impatient with one another in the daily af­
fairs of life, so irritable and sneering with one another, and if, for in­
stance, some one of them rather simpler and more impatient than the 
rest were to make himself conspicuous by uttering aloud what was 
in the secret mind of all, and were to launch out into dreams and 
hopes, the others roughly put him down at once, suppressed him and 
ridiculed him; but I fancy that the harshest of his assailants were just 
those who perhaps outstripped him in their own hopes and dreams. 
Candid and simple people were, as I have said already, looked upon 
generally as the vulgarest fools, and they were treated with contempt. 
Every man was so ill-humoured and vain that he despised anyone 
good-natured and free from vanity: All but these naIve and simple 
chatterers, all the taciturn, that is, may be sharply divided into the ill­
natured and the good-natured, the sullen and the serene. There were 
far more of the ill-natured and the sullen, and those of them who 
were naturally talkative were infallibly uneasy backbiters and slander­
ers. They meddled in everyone's affairs, though of their own hearts, 
their own private affairs, they showed no one a glimpse. That was not 
the thing, not correct. The good-natured-a very small group-were 
quiet, hid their imaginings in their hearts, and were of course more 
prone than the ill-natured to put faith and hope in them. Yet I fancy 
that there was another group of prisoners who had lost all hope. Such 
was the old dissenter from the Starodubovsky settlements; there were 
very few of these. The old man was externally calm (I have described 
him already) , but from certain symptoms I judge that his inner mis­
ery was terrible. But he had his means of escape, his salvation­
prayer, and the idea of martyrdom. The convict whom I have described 
already, who used to read the Bible, and who went out of his mind 
and threw a brick at the major, was probably one of the desperate 
class too, one of those who have lost their last hope, and as life is im­
possible without hope he found a means of escape in a voluntary and 
almost artificial martyrdom. He declared that he attacked the major 
without malice, simply to "accept suffering." And who knows what 
psychological process was taking place in his heart then! Without 
some goal and some effort to reach it no man can live. When he has 

2 5 8  
The House of the Dead 
lost all hope, all object in life, man often becomes a monster in his 
misery. The one object of the prisoners was freedom and to get out of 
prison. 
But here I have been trying to classify all the prisoners, and that is 
hardly possible. Real life is infinite in its variety in comparison with 
even the cleverest abstract generalization, and it does not admit of 
sharp and sweeping distinctions. The tendency of real life is always 
towards greater and greater differentiation. We, too, had a life of our 
own of a sort, and it was not a mere official existence but a real inner 
life of our own. 
But, as I have mentioned already, I did not, and indeed could not, 
penetrate to the inner depths of this life at the beginning of my time 
in prison, and so all its external incidents were a source of unutter­
able misery to me then. I sometimes was simply beginning to hate 
those men who were sufferers like myself. I even envied them for be­
ing, anyway, among their equals, their comrades, understanding one 
another; though in reality they were all as sick and weary as I was of 
this companionship enforced by stick and lash, of this compulsory 
association, and everyone was secretly looking towards something far 
away from all the rest. I repeat again, there were legitimate grounds 
for the envy which came upon me in moments of ill-humour. Those 
who declare that it is no harder for a gentleman, an educated man 
and all the rest of it, in our prisons and in Siberia than it is for any 
peasant are really quite wrong. I know I have heard of theories on the 
subject of late, I have read of them. There is something true and hu­
mane at the back of this idea-all are men, all are human beings. But 
the idea is too abstract. It overlooks too many practical aspects of the 
question, which cannot be grasped except by experience. I don't say 
this on the grounds that the gentleman, the man of education, may 
be supposed to be more refined and delicate in his feelings, that he is 
more developed. There is no standard by which to measure the soul 
and its development. Even education itself is no test. I am ready to be 
the first to testify that, in the midst of these utterly uneducated and 
down-trodden sufferers, I came across instances of the greatest spiri­
tual refinement. Sometimes one would know a man for years in 
prison and despise him and think that he was not a human being but 
a brute. And suddenly a moment will come by chance when his soul 
will suddenly reveal itself in an involuntary outburst, and you see in 

The Complaint 
259 
it such wealth, such feeling, such heart, such a vivid understanding 
of its own suffering, and of the suffering of others, that your eyes are 
open and for the first moment you can't believe what you have seen 
and heard yourself The contrary happens too; education is some­
times found side by side with such barbarity, such cynicism, that it 
revolts you, and in spite of the utmost good-nature and all previous 
theories on the subject, you can find no justification or apology. 
I am not speaking of the change of habits, of manner of life, of 
diet, etc., though that is harder of course for a man of the wealthier 
class than for a peasant, who has often been hungry when free, and 
in prison at least has enough to eat. I am not going to argue about 
that. Let us assume that for a man of any strength of will all this is of 
little consequence compared with other discomforts, though in real­
ity a change of habits is not a trifling matter nor oflittle consequence. 
But there are discomforts beside which all this is so trivial that one 
ceases to notice the filth of one's surroundings, the fetters, the close 
confinement, the insufficient and unclean food. The sleekest fine gen­
tleman, the softest weakling will be able to eat black bread and soup 
with beetles in it, after working in the sweat of his brow, as he has 
never worked in freedom. To this one can get accustomed, as de­
scribed in the humorous prison song which tells of a fine gentleman 
in prison: 
Cabbage and water they give me to eat, 
And I gobble it up as though it were sweet. 
No; what is much more important than all this is that while two 
hours after his arrival an ordinary prisoner is on the same footing 
as all the rest, is at home, has the same rights in the community as 
the rest, is understood by everyone, understands everyone, knows 
everyone, and is looked on by everyone as a comrade, it is very differ­
ent with the gentleman, the man of a different class. However straight­
forward, good-natured and clever he is, he will for years be hated 
and despised by all; he will not be understood, and what is more he 
will not be trusted. He is not a friend, and not a comrade, and 
though he may at last in the course of years attain such a position 
among them that they will no longer insult him, yet he will never 
be one of them, and will for ever be painfully conscious that he is 

260 
The House of the Dead 
solitary and remote from all. This remoteness sometimes comes to 
pass of itself unconsciously through no ill-natured feeling on the 
part of the convicts. He is not one of themselves, and that's all. Noth­
ing is more terrible than living out of one's natural surroundings. A 
peasant transported from Taganrog to the port of Petropavlovsk at 
once finds the Russian peasants there exactly like himself, at once 
understands them, and gets on with them, and in a couple of hours 
they may settle down peaceably to live in the same hut or shanty. It 
is very different with gentlemen. They are divided from the peas­
ants by an impassable gulf, and this only becomes fully apparent 
when the gentleman is by force of external circumstances completely 
deprived of his former privileges, and is transformed into a peas­
ant. You may have to do with the peasants all your life, you may as­
sociate with them every day for forty years, offiCially for instance, in 
the regulation administrative forms, or even simply in a friendly 
way, as a benefactor or, in a certain sense, a father-you will never 
know them really. It will all be an optical illusion and nothing 
more. I know that all who read what I say will think that I am exag­
gerating. But I am convinced of its truth. I have reached the convic­
tion, not from books, not from abstract theory, but from experience, 
and I have had plenty of time to verify it. Perhaps in time everyone 
will realize the truth of this. 
Events, as ill-luck would have it, confirmed my observations from 
the first and had a morbid and unhinging influence on me. That first 
summer I wandered about the prison in almost complete loneliness, 
without a friend. As I have mentioned already, I was in such a state 
of mind that I could not even distinguish and appreciate those of the 
prisoners who were later on able to grow fond of me, though they 
never treated me as an equal. I had comrades too of my own class, but 
their comradeship did not ease my heart of its oppression. I hated the 
sight of everything and I had no means of escape from it. And here, 
for instance, is one of the incidents which from the beginning made 
me understand how completely I was an outsider, and how peculiar 
my position was in the prison. 
One day that summer, early in July, on a bright hot working day at 
one o'clock, when usually we rested before our afternoon work, the 
prisoners all got up like one man and began forming in the yard. I had 

The Complaint 
2 6 1  
heard nothing about it till that minute. At that time I used to be so ab­
sorbed in myself that I scarcely noticed what was going on about me. 
Yet the prisoners had for the last three days been in a state of sup­
pressed excitement. Perhaps this excitement had begun much earlier, as 
I reflected afterwards when I recalled snatches of talk, and at the same 
time the increased quarrelsomeness of the convicts and the moroseness 
and peculiar irritability that had been conspicuous in them of late. I 
had put it down to the hard work, the long wearisome summer days, 
the unconscious dreams of the forest and of freedom, and the brief 
nights, in which it was difficult to get enough sleep. Perhaps all this 
was working together now into one outbreak, but the pretext for this 
outbreak was the prison food. For some days past there had been loud 
complaints and indignation in the prison, and especially when we 
were gathered together in the kitchen at dinner or supper; they were 
discontented with the cooks and even tried to get a new one, but 
quickly dismissed him and went back to the old. In fact all were in an 
unsettled state of mind. 
"They work us hard and they feed us on tripe," someone would 
growl in the kitchen. 
"If you don't like it, order a blancmange," another would reply. 
"I like soup made of tripe, lads," a third would put in, "it's nice." 
"But if you never get anything else but tripe, is it nice?" 
"Now, to be sure, it's time for meat," said a fourth; "we toil and 
toil at the brickyard; when one's work's done, one wants something 
to eat. And what is tripe?" 
"And if it is not tripe, it's heart." 
"Yes, there's that heart too. Tripe and heart, that's all they give us. 
Fine fare that is! Is that justice or is it not?" 
"Yes, the food's bad." 
"He's filling his pockets, I warrant." 
"It's not your business." 
"Whose then? It's my belly. If everybody would make a complaint 
we should get something done." 
"A complaint?" 
"Yes," 
"It seems you didn't get flogged enough for that complaint. You 
image! "  

262 
The House of the Dead 
"That's tme," another who had hitherto been silent said grumpily. 
"It's easy talking. \Vhat are you going to say in your complaint7You'd 
better tell us that first, you blockhead! "  
"All right, I'll tell you. If all would come, I'd speak with all. It's be­
ing poor, it is! Sc)me of us eat their own food, and some never sit down 
but to prison fare." 
"Ah, the sharp-eyed, envious fellow! His eyes smart to see others 
well off." 
"Don't covet another man's pelf, but up and earn it for yourselfl " 
''I'll dispute that with you till my hair is grey. So you are a rich 
man, since you want to sit with your arms folded?" 
"Eroshka is fat with a dog and a catl " 
"But truly, lads, why sit still? We've had enough of putting up with 
their fooling. They are skinning us. Why not go to them?" 
"Why not?You want your food chewed, and put into your mouth, 
that's what you are used to. Because it's prison, that's why!" 
"When simple folk fall out, the governor grows fat." 
"Just so. Eight-eyes has grown fat. He's bought a pair of greys." 
"Yes, and he is not fond of drinking, eh?" 
"He was fighting the other day with the veterinary over cards. 
They were at it all night. Our friend was two hours at fisticuffs with 
him. Fedka said so." 
"That's why we have stewed heart." 
"Ah, you fools! It's not for us to put ourselves forward." 
"But if we all go, then we shall see what defence he will make. We 
must insist on that." 
"Defence! He'll give you a punch in the face and that will be all." 
"And then court-martial us afterwards." 
In short everyone was excited. At that time our food really was poor. 
And besides, all sorts of things came Simultaneously-above all, the 
general mood of depression, the continual hidden misery. The convict 
is from his very nature fault-finding, mutinous; but the mutiny of all or 
even of a large number is rare, owing to the continual dissensions 
among them. Every one of them is aware of it; that's why they are 
much more given to violent language than to deeds. But this time the 
excitement did not pass off without action. They began collecting in 
groups about the prison wards, arguing; they recalled with oaths the 
whole of the major's term of office, ferreted out every detail. Some 

The Complaint 
263 
were particularly excited. Agitators and ringleaders always turn up at 
such times. The ringleaders on these occasions-that is, on the occa­
sion of a complaint being made-are always remarkable men, and not 
only in prison, but in gangs of workmen, companies of soldiers and 
so on. They are of a special type and everywhere have something in 
common. They are spirited men, eager for justice, and in perfect sim­
pliCity and honesty persuaded of its inevitable, direct and, above all, 
immediate possibility. These men are no stupider than their fellows, in 
fact there are some very clever ones among them, but they are too ar­
dent to be shrewd and calculating. If there are men who are capable of 
skilfully leading the masses and winning their cause, they belong to a 
different class of popular heroes and natural leaders of the people, a 
type extremely rare among us. But those agitators and ringleaders of 
whom I am speaking now almost always fail, and are sent to prison 
and penal servitude in consequence. Through their zeal they fail, but it 
is their zeal that gives them their influence over the masses. Men fol­
low them readily. Their warmth and honest indignation have an effect 
on everyone and in the end the most hesitating give their adherence to 
them. Their blind confidence in success seduces even the most inveter­
ate sceptics, although sometimes this confidence has such feeble, such 
childish foundations that one wonders, looking on, how they can have 
gained a following. The great thing is that they march in the front and 
go forward fearing nothing. They rush straight before them like bulls, 
with their heads down, often with no knowledge of the affair, no cau­
tion, none of that practical casuistry by means of which the most vul­
gar and degraded man will sometimes succeed, attain his object and 
save his skin. They ineVitably come to grief themselves. In ordinary 
life these people are choleric, contemptuous, irritable and intolerant. 
Most often they are of very limited intelligence and that, indeed, 
partly makes their strength. What is most annoying in them is that, 
instead of going straight for their object, they often go off on a side­
issue into trifles, and it is this that is their ruin. But the people can 
understand them and therein lies their strength. I must, however, say 
a few words to explain what is meant by a complaint. 
There were some men in our prison who had been sent there for 
making a complaint. They were the men who were most excited now. 
EspeCially one called Martinov, who had been in the hussars, a hot­
headed, restless and suspicious man, but honest and truthful. Another 

264 
The House of the Dead 
was Vassily Antonov, a man as it were coldly irritated, with an insolent 
expression and a haughty, sarcastic smile, extremely intelligent, how­
ever. He too was honest and truthful. But I cannot describe all of 
them, there were a great many. Petrov among others was continually 
flitting backwards and forwards listening to all the groups, saying lit­
tle, but evidently excited, and he was the first to run out when they 
began to assemble in the yard. 
The sergeant whose duty it was to keep order among us at once 
came out in a panic. The convicts, drawn up in the yard, asked him 
politely to tell the major that the prisoners wanted to speak to him in 
person and to ask him about one or two points. All the veterans fol­
lowed the sergeant and drew themselves up on the other side facing 
the prisoners. The message given to the sergeant was an extraordinary 
one and filled him with horror. But he dared not refuse to take it at 
once to the major. To begin with, since the prisoners had already 
come to this, something worse might happen-all the prison officials 
were extraordinarily cowardly with regard to the convicts. In the sec­
ond place, even if there were nothing wrong and they should all 
think better of it and disperse at once, even then it was the duty of the 
sergeant to report everything that happened to the major at once. Pale 
and trembling with fear, he hastily went without attempting to ques­
tion the convicts or reason with them himself. He saw that they would 
not even talk to him now. 
Knowing nothing about it, I, too, went out to stand with the oth­
ers. I only learnt the details of the affair later. I thought that some in­
spection was going on, but not seeing the soldiers whose duty it was 
to carry out the inspection, I wondered and began looking about me. 
The men's faces were excited and irritated. Some were even pale. All 
looked anxious and silent, in anticipation of speaking to the major. I 
noticed that several looked at me with extraordinary amazement, but 
turned away in silence. It obviously seemed strange to them that I 
should have joined them. They evidently did not believe that I had 
come out to take part in the complaint, but soon afterwards all who 
were around me turned to me again. All looked at me inquiringly. 
"What are you here for?" Vassily Antonov, who stood further off 
than the rest, asked me in a loud, rude voice. Till then he had always 
addressed me formally and treated me with politeness. 
I looked at him in perplexity, still trying to understand what it all 

The Complaint 
265 
meant, and beginning to guess that something extraordinary was 
happening. 
"Yes, what need have you to stand here? Go indoors," said a young 
convict of the military division, a quiet, good-natured fellow whom I 
knew nothing of. "It's nothing to do with you." 
"But they are all forming up, I thought there was an inspection," I 
said. 
"I say, so he has crawled out, too!" shouted another. 
"Iron beak! " said another. "Fly-crushers! "  said a third with ineffa­
ble contempt. This new nickname evoked general laughter. 
"He sits with us in the kitchen as a favour," answered someone. 
"They're in clover everywhere. This is prison, but they have rolls to 
eat and buy sucking-pig. You eat your own provisions, why are you 
poking in here?" 
"This is not the place for you, Alexandr Petrovitch," said Kulikov, 
approaching me in a nonchalant way; he took me by the arm and led 
me out of the ranks. 
He was pale, his black eyes were gleaming, and he was biting his 
lower lip. He was not awaiting the major with indifference. I particu­
larly liked looking at Kulikov, by the way, on all such occasions, that is, 
on all occasions when he had to show what he was. He posed fearfully, 
but he did what had to be done. I believe he would have gone to the 
scaffold with a certain style and gallantry. At this moment, when every­
one was being rude and familiar to me, he with evident intention 
redoubled his courtesy to me, and at the same time his words were pe­
culiarly, as it were disdainfully, emphatic and admitted of no protest. 
"This is our affair, Alexandr Petrovitch, and you've nothing to do 
with it. You go away and wait. All your friends are in the kitchen; you 
go there." 
"Under the ninth beam, where Antipka nimble-heels lives! "  some­
one put in. 
Through the open window of the kitchen I did, in fact, see our 
Poles. I fancied, however, that there were a good many people there 
besides. Disconcerted, I went into the kitchen. I was pursued by 
laughter, oaths and cries of tyu-tyu-tyu (the sound which took the 
place of whistling in prison) . 
"He didn't like it! Tyu-tyu-tyu! At him!" I had never before been so 
insulted in the prison, and this time I felt it very bitterly But I had 

266 
The House of the Dead 
turned up at the wrong moment. In the entry to the kitchen I met T. ,  
a young man of strong will and generous heart, of no great education, 
though he was a man of good birth. He was a great friend of B's. The 
other convicts marked him out from the rest of us "gentlemen" and 
had some affection for him. He was brave, manly and strong, and this 
was somehow apparent in every gesture. 
"What are you doing, Goryanchikov?" he shouted to me; "come 
here! "  
"But what's the matter?" 
"They are presenting a complaint, don't you know? It won't do 
them any good; who'll believe convicts? They'll try to find out the in­
stigators, and if we are there they'll be sure to pitch on us first as re­
sponsible for the mutiny. Remember what we came here for. They 
will simply be flogged and we shall be tried. The major hates us all, 
and will be glad to ruin us. And by means of us he'll save himself" 
"And the convicts would be glad to betray us," added M., as we 
went into the kitchen. 
"You may be sure they wouldn't spare us," T. assented. 
There were a great many other people, some thirty, besides us 
"gentlemen" in the kitchen. They had all remained behind, not wish­
ing to take part in the complaint-some from cowardice, others from 
a full conviction of the uselessness of any sort of complaint. Among 
them was Akim Akimitch, who had a natural and inveterate hostility to 
all such complaints, as destructive of morality and official routine. He 
said nothing, but waited in perfect tranquillity for the end of the affair, 
not troubling himself as to its result, and thoroughly convinced of the 
inevitable triumph of discipline and the will of the authorities. Isay 
Fomitch was there, too, looking much perplexed, and with drooping 
nose listening greedily and apprehensively to our conversation. He 
was in great anxiety. All the Poles of the peasant class were here, too, 
with their compatriots of the privileged class. There were some other 
timid souls, people who were always silent and dejected. They had not 
dared to join the others, and were mournfully waiting to see how it 
would end. There were also some morose and always sullen convicts 
who were not of a timid character. They stayed behind from obstinacy 
and a contemptuous conviction that it was all foolishness, and that 
nothing but harm would come of it. But yet I fancy they felt some­
what awkward now; they did not look perfectly at their ease. Though 

The Complaint 
267 
they knew they were perfectly right about the complaint, as they were 
proved to be in the sequel, yet they felt rather as though they had cut 
themselves off from their mates, as though they had betrayed their 
comrades to the major. Another man who was in the kitchen was 
Yolkin, the Siberian peasant condemned for false coinage who had 
carried off Kulikov's practice as a vet in the town. The Starodubovsky 
Old Believer was there, too. The cooks to a man had remained in the 
kitchen, probably convinced that they constituted part of the prison 
management, and consequently that it was not seemly for them to act 
in opposition to it. 
"Almost all have gone out except these, though," I observed hesi­
tatingly to M. 
"What, is it true?" muttered B. 
"We should have run a hundred times more risk than they do if 
we went out, and why should we? ]e hai"s ces brigands.* And can you 
imagine for a moment that their complaint will have any effect? Why 
should we meddle in this foolishness?" 
"Nothing will come of it," put in another convict, a stubborn and 
exasperated old man. Almazov, who was present, made haste to agree 
with him, saying: 
"Except that fifty of them will get a flogging, nothing will come 
of it." 
"The major has come! "  shouted someone, and all rushed eagerly 
to the windows. 
The major flew up, spiteful and infuriated, flushed and wearing 
spectacles. Mutely but resolutely he went up to the front row. On 
such occasions he was really bold and never lost his presence of 
mind. Besides, he was almost always half drunk. Even his greasy for­
age cap with the orange band on it and his dirty silver epaulettes had 
a sinister aspect at this moment. He was followed by Dyatlov, the 
clerk, a very important person, who in reality governed everyone in 
the prison, and even had an influence over the major; he was a sly 
man, very cunning, but not a bad fellow. The convicts liked him. He 
was followed by our sergeant, who had evidently just come in for a 
fearful wigging, and was expecting something ten times worse later 
*1 hate these bandits (French) . 

268 
The House of the Dead 
on. Behind him were three or four guards, not more. The convicts, 
who had been standing with their caps off ever since they had sent 
the sergeant to fetch the major, now all drew themselves up and 
pulled themselves together; every man of them shifted from one leg 
to the other, and then they all stood mute and rigid, waiting for the 
first word or rather for the first shout of the major. 
It followed promptly; at his second word the major bawled at the 
top of his voice, almost squealed, in fact; he was in a violent fury. 
From the windows we could see him running along the front rank, 
rushing up to the men, questioning them. But it was too far off for us 
to hear his questions or the convicts' replies. We could only hear him 
shouting shrilly: 
"Mutineers! . . .  Beating! . . .  Ringleaders! You are a ringleader? 
You are a ringleader?" he shouted, pouncing on somebody. 
No answer was audible. But a minute later we saw a convict leave 
the general body and walk towards the guard-house. A minute later 
another followed him in the same direction, then a third. 
"All under arrest! I'll teach you! Whom have you got there in the 
kitchen?" he squealed, seeing us at the open windows. "All come 
here! Drive them here at once!" 
The clerk Dyatlov came to us in the kitchen. In the kitchen he was 
told that we had no complaint to make. He returned at once and re­
ported to the major. 
"Ah, they haven't! " he repeated two notes lower, obViously re­
lieved. "No matter, send them all here ! "  
We went out. I felt rather ashamed of coming out. And indeed, we 
all walked with hanging heads. 
"Ah, Prokofyev! Yolkin too. Is that you, Almazov? Stand here-stand 
here all together," the major said to us in a soft but hurried voice, 
looking at us amicably. "M., you are here, too . . .  Make a list of them, 
Dyatlov! Dyatlov, make a list at once of those who are satisfied and 
those who are dissatisfied; every one of them, and bring the list to me. 
I'll put you all . . .  under arrest. I'll teach you, you rascals! "  
The list had an effect. 
"We are satisfied! "  a grating voice said suddenly from the crowd 
of the dissatisfied, but he spoke rather hesitatingly. 
"Ah, you are satisfied! Who's satisfied? Those who are satisfied come 
forward." 

The Complaint 
269 
"We are satisfied, we are satisfied," several voices chimed in. 
"Satisfied? Men, you've been led astray. So there have been agita­
tors working upon you. So much the worse for them! " 
"Good God, what's happening! "  said a voice in the crowd. 
"Who's that who shouted?" roared the major, rushing in the di­
rection from which the voice came. "Is that you, Rastorguyev? You 
shouted? To the guard-house! "  
Rastorguyev, a tall, puffy-faced young fellow, stepped out and 
walked at once towards the guard-house. It was not he who had spo­
ken, but as he had been pitched upon he went. 
"You don't know when you are well off! " the major howled after 
him. "Ah, you fat-face! I'll find you all out! Those who are satisfied, 
step forward! "  
"We are satisfied, your honour! "  murmured some dozens of 
gloomy voices; the rest remained stubbornly silent. But that was 
enough for the major. It was evidently to his advantage to end the 
scene as quickly as possible, and to end it somehow pacifically. 
"Ah, now all are satisfied! "  he said hurriedly. "I saw that . . .  I knew 
it. It's the work of agitators! There must be agitators among them! " he 
went on, addressing Dyatlov. "We must go into that more carefully. 
But now . . .  now it's time for work. Beat the drum! " 
He was present himself at the telling off of convicts to their differ­
ent tasks. The convicts dispersed in mournful silence to their work, 
glad at any rate to be out of his sight as soon as possible. But after they 
had gone, the major at once went to the guard-house and punished 
the "ringleaders," not very cruelly, however. He hurried over it, in fact. 
One of them, we were told afterwards, begged his pardon, and was at 
once let off. It was evident that the major was not perfectly at his ease, 
and was perhaps even a little scared. A complaint is always a ticklish 
matter, and though the convicts' protest could hardly be called a com­
plaint, because it was presented not to a higher authority, but to the 
major himself, yet it was awkward, it was not the right thing. What 
disconcerted him most was that almost all the prisoners had taken part 
in the protest. He must suppress it at all costs. They soon released the 
ringleaders. Next day the food was better, but the improvement did 
not last long. For some days afterwards the major visited the prison 
more frequently and found fault more frequently. Our sergeant went 
about looking anxious and perplexed, as though he could not get over 

2 7 0  
The House of the Dead 
his amazement. As for the convicts, they could not settle down for a 
long time afterwards, but they were not so much excited as before, 
they were in a state of dumb perplexity and bewilderment. Some of 
them were deeply despondent. Others expressed their discontent, but 
sparingly. Many in their exasperation jeered at themselves aloud, as 
though to punish themselves for having got up the protest. 
"Put it in your pipe and smoke it," someone would say. 
"We had our joke and now we must pay for it! "  another would 
add. 
"What mouse can bell the cat?" observed a third. 
"There's no teaching us without the stick, we all know. It's a good 
thing he didn't flog us all." 
"For the future think more and talk less and you'll do better! " 
someone would observe malignantly. 
"Why, are you setting up to teach?" 
"To be sure I am." 
"And who are you to put yourself forward?" 
"Why, I am a man so far, and who are you?" 
"you are a dog's bone, that's what you are." 
"That's what you are." 
"There, there, shut up! What's the shindy about! " the others 
shouted at the disputants from all sides. 
The same evening, that is, on the day of the complaint, on my re­
turn from work, I met Petrov behind the barracks. He was looking for 
me. Coming up to me he muttered something, two or three vague ex­
clamations, but soon relapsed into absent-minded silence and walked 
mechanically beside me. All this affair was still painfully weighing on 
my heart, and I fancied that Petrov could explain something to me. 
"Tell me, Petrov," said I, "are they angry with us?" 
"Who angry?" he asked, as though waking up. 
"The convicts angry with us-the gentlemen." 
"Why should they be angry with you?" 
"Because we did not take part in the complaint." 
"But why should you make a complaint?" he asked, as though try­
ing to understand me. "you buy your own food." 
"Good heavens! But some of you who joined in it buy your own 
food, too. We ought to have done the same-as comrades." 
"But . . .  but how can you be our comrades?" he asked in perplexity. 

The Complaint 
2 7 1 
I looked at him qUickly; he did not understand me in the least, he 
did not know what I was driving at. But I understood him thoroughly 
at that instant. A thought that had been stirring vaguely within me and 
haunting me for a long time had at last become clear to me, and I sud­
denly understood what I had only imperfectly realised. I understood 
that they would never accept me as a comrade, however much I might 
be a convict, not if I were in for life, not if I were in the special divi­
sion. But I remember most clearly Petrov's face at that minute. His 
question, "how can you be our comrade?" was full of such genuine 
simplicity, such Simple-hearted perplexity. I wondered if there were 
any irony, any malicious mockery in the question. There was nothing 
of the sort: simply we were not their comrades and that was all. You go 
your way, and we go ours; you have your affairs, and we have ours. 
And, indeed, I had expected that after the complaint they would 
simply torment us to death without mercy, and that life would be im­
possible for us. Nothing of the sort, we did not hear one word of re­
proach, not a hint of reproach; there was no increase of ill-feeling 
against us. They simply gibed at us a little on occasions, as they had 
done before-nothing else. They were not in the least angry either 
with the other convicts who had remained in the kitchen and not 
jOined in the complaint; nor with those who had first shouted that 
they were satisfied. No one even referred to it. This last fact puzzled 
me especially. 

C H A P T E R  V I I I  
C O M RA D E S  
I WAS, OF COURSE, most attracted to the men of my own sort, the " gen­
tlemen" that is, especially at first. But of the three Russian convicts of 
that class who were in our prison (Akim Akimitch, the spy A., and the 
man who was believed to have killed his father) the only one I knew 
and talked to was Akim Akimitch. I must confess that I resorted to 
Akim Akimitch only, so to say, in despair, at moments of the most in­
tense boredom and when there was no prospect of speaking to anyone 
else. In the last chapter I have tried to arrange all the convicts in 
classes, but now I recall Akim Akimitch, I think that one might add an­
other class. It is true that he would be the only representative of it­
that is, the class of the absolutely indifferent convicts. Absolutely 
indifferent convicts, those, that is, to whom it was a matter of indif­
ference whether they lived in prison or in freedom, one would have 
supposed did not and could not exist, but I think Akim Akimitch was 
an example of one. He had established himself in prison, indeed, 
as though he meant to spend his life there; everything about him, his 
mattress, his pillows, his pots and pans, all were on a solid and perma­
nent footing. There was nothing of a temporary, bivouacking character 
about him. He had many years still to be in prison, but I doubt 
whether he ever thought of leaving it. But if he were reconciled to his 
position, it was not from inclination, but from subordination, though, 
indeed, in his case it amounted to the same thing. He was a good­
natured man, and he helped me, indeed, at first with advice and kind 
offices; but I confess, sometimes, especially at first, he produced in me 
an intense depression which still further increased my misery. Yet it 
was my misery drove me to talk to him. I longed sometimes for a liv­
ing word, however bitter or impatient or spiteful; we might at least 
have railed at our destiny together. But he was silent, gumming his 
paper lamps, or he would tell me of the review in which he had 
taken part in such a year, and who was the commanding officer of 
2 7 2  

Comrades 
2 7 3  
the division and what his Christian name was, and whether he had 
been satisfied with the review, and how the signals for the gunners 
had been changed, and all in the same even, decorous voice like the 
dripping of water. He scarcely showed the slightest animation when 
he told me that he had been deemed worthy to receive the ribbon of 
St. Anne on his sword for the part he had taken in some action in the 
Caucasus. Only at that moment his voice became extraordinarily dig­
nified and solemn; it dropped to a mysterious undertone when he 
pronounced the words "St. Anne," and for three minutes afterwards he 
became particularly silent and sedate . . . .  During that first year I had 
stupid moments when I (and always quite suddenly) began, I don't 
know why, almost to hate Akim Akimitch, and I cursed the fate which 
had put me with my head next his on the common bed. Usually an 
hour later I reproached myself for the feeling. But this was only during 
my first year; later on I became quite reconciled to Akim Akimitch in 
my heart, and was ashamed of my foolishness. Outwardly, as far as I 
remember, we were always on good terms. 
Besides these three Russians there were eight others, Polish pris­
oners, of the upper class in the prison while I was there. Some of 
them I got to know pretty well, and was glad of their friendship, but 
not all. The best of them were morbid, exceptional and intolerant to 
the last degree. With two of them I gave up talking altogether in the 
end. Only three of them were well educated: B., M. , and Z., who had 
been a professor of mathematics, a nice, good-natured old man, very 
eccentric and not at all clever, I think, in spite of his education. M. and 
B. were men of a quite different type. I got on well with M. from the 
first; I respected him and never quarrelled with him, but I never 
could get fond of him or feel any affection for him. He was a pro­
foundly mistrustful and embittered man with a wonderful power of 
self-control. But this very excess of self-control was what I did not 
like; one somehow felt that he would never open his heart to anyone. 
But perhaps I am mistaken. He was a man of strong and very noble 
character. His extreme and almost Jesuitical skill and circumspection in 
dealing with people betrayed his profound inner scepticism. Yet his was 
a soul tormented just by this duality-scepticism and a deep steadfast 
faith in some of his own hopes and convictions. But for all his skill in 
getting on with people, he was an irreconcilable enemy of B. and of 
the latter's friend T. B. was a man in ill-health, of consumptive 

2 74 
The House of the Dead 
tendency, nervous and irritable, but at bottom a very kind-hearted 
and even great-hearted man. His irritability sometimes reached the 
pitch of extreme intolerance and caprice. I could not put up with his 
temper, and in the end I gave up having anything to do with B., but I 
never ceased to love him; with M. I never quarrelled, but I never was 
fond of him. It happened that, through cutting off my relations with 
B. , I had also to give up T. ,  the young man of whom I have spoken in 
the last chapter when I described our "complaint." I was very sorry 
for that. Though T. was not an educated man, he was kind-hearted 
and manly, a splendid young fellow, in fact. He was so fond of B. , had 
such a respect and reverence for him that if anyone were ever so litde 
at variance with B. he at once looked upon him almost as an enemy. I 
believe in the end he was estranged even from M. on B.'s account, 
though he held out for a long time. But they were all morally sick, 
embittered, irritable and mistrustful. It was easy to understand; it was 
very hard for them, much worse than for us. They were far from their 
own country. Some of them were exiled for long periods, ten or 
twelve years, and what was worse they regarded everyone around 
them with intense prejudice, saw in the convicts nothing but their 
brutality, could not discern any good quality, anything human in 
them, and had indeed no wish to do so. And, as was very easy to un­
derstand also, they were led to this unfortunate point of view by the 
force of circumstance, by fate. There is no doubt that they were very 
miserable in prison. To the Circassians, to the Tatars and to Isay Fomitch 
they were cordial and friendly, but shunned the other convicts with 
abhorrence. Only the Starodubovsky Old Believer won their entire re­
spect. It is remarkable, however, that all the while I was in prison 
none of the convicts ever taunted them with their nationality and 
their religion, or their ideas, as Russian peasants sometimes, though 
very rarely, do with foreigners, especially Germans. Though perhaps 
they do no more than laugh at the Germans; a German is always an 
extremely comic figure in the eyes of the Russian peasant. The con­
victs treated our foreign prisoners respectfully in prison, far more so 
than the Russian "gendemen" prisoners indeed, and they never touched 
them. But the latter seemed unwilling to notice and consider this fact. 
I have spoken of T. It was he who, when they were walking from their 
first place of exile to our prison, carried B. in his arms almost the 
whole journey, when the latter, weak in health and constitution, broke 

Comrades 
2 7 5  
down before half the day's march was over. They had at first been ex­
iled to U. There, so they said, they were well off, that is, much better 
off than in our prison. But they got up a correspondence, of a per­
fectly harmless character however, with some other exiles in another 
town, and for this reason it was considered necessary to exile these 
three to our fortress, where they would be under the eye of a higher 
official. Their third comrade was Z. Till they came, M. was the only 
Pole in the prison. How miserable he must have been in his first year 
there! 
This Z. was the old man who was always saying his prayers, as I 
have mentioned before. All our political prisoners were young, some 
mere boys; only Z. was a man of over fifty. He was a man of unques­
tionable honesty, but rather strange. His comrades B. and T. disliked 
him very much; they did not even speak to him; they used to say of 
him that he was quarrelsome, obstinate and fussy. I don't know how 
far they were right. In prison, as in all places where people are kept 
together in a crowd against their will, I think people quarrel and even 
hate one another more easily than in freedom. Many circumstances 
combine to bring this about. But Z. certainly was a rather stupid and 
perhaps disagreeable man. None of his other comrades were on good 
terms with him. Though I never quarrelled with him, I did not get on 
with him particularly well. I believe he knew his own subject, math­
ematics. I remember that he was always trying to explain to me in his 
broken Russian some special astronomical system he had invented. 
I was told that he had once published an account of it, but the learned 
world had only laughed at him. I think he was a little cracked. For 
whole days together he was on his knees saying his prayers, for which 
all the convicts respected him to the day of his death. He died before 
my eyes in our hospital after a severe illness. He won the convicts' re­
spect, however, from the first moment in prison after the incident 
with our major. On the journey from U. to our prison they had not 
been shaved and they had grown beards, so when they were led 
straight to the major he was furiously indignant at such a breach of 
discipline, though they were in no way to blame for it. 
"What do they look like!" he roared; "they are tramps, brigands! "  
Z. , who at that time knew very little Russian and thought they 
were being asked who they were-tramps or brigands?-answered: 
"We are not tramps, we are political prisoners." 

2 7 6  
The House of the Dead 
"Wha-aat? You are insolent! Insolent! "  roared the major. "To the 
guard-house! A hundred lashes, at once, this instant! "  
The old man was flogged. He lay down under the lashes without a 
protest, bit his hand and endured the punishment without a cry, a 
moan, or a movement. Meanwhile B. and T. went into the prison, 
where M. , already waiting for them at the gate, fell on their necks, 
though he had never seen them before. Agitated by the way the major 
had received them, they told M. all about Z. I remember how M. told 
me about it. 
"I was beside myself," he said. "I did not know what was happen­
ing to me and shivered as though I were in a fever. I waited for Z. at 
the gate. He would have to come straight from the guard-house 
where the flogging took place." Suddenly the gate opened: Z. came 
out with a pale face and trembling white lips, and without looking at 
anyone passed through the convicts who were assembled in the yard 
and already knew that a . gentleman' was being flogged; he went into 
the prison ward, straight to his place, and without saying a word knelt 
down and began to pray. The convicts were impressed and even 
touched. "When I saw that old grey-headed man," said M., "who had 
left a wife and children in his own country-when I saw him on his 
knees praying, after a shameful punishment, I rushed behind the 
prison, and for two hours I did not know what I was dOing; I was 
frantic . . . .  " 
The convicts had a great respect for Z. from that time forward and 
they always treated him respectfully. What they particularly liked was 
that he had not cried out under punishment. 
One must be fair, however: one cannot judge of the behaviour of 
the authorities in Siberia to prisoners of the educated class, whoever 
they may be, Poles or Russians, from this instance. This instance only 
shows that one may come across a bad man, and, of course, if that bad 
man is an independent senior officer somewhere, the fate of an exile 
whom that bad man particularly disliked would be very insecure. But 
one must admit that the highest authorities in Siberia, upon whom 
the tone and disposition of all the other commanding officers depend, 
are very scrupulous in regard to exiles of the upper class, and are even 
in some cases disposed to favour them in comparison with the other 
convicts of the peasant class. The reasons for this are clear: these higher 
authorities, to begin with, belong to the priVileged class themselves; 

Comrades 
2 7 7  
secondly, it has happened in the past that some of the exiles of this 
class have refused to lie down to be flogged and have attacked the of­
ficers, which has led to terrible consequences; and, thirdly, I believe 
the chief explanation is that thirty-five years ago a great mass of exiles 
of the upper class were sent to Siberia all at once, 13 and these exiles 
had succeeded in the course of thirty years in establishing their char­
acter throughout Siberia, so that from an old traditional habit the gov­
ernment in my day could not help looking upon political prisoners as 
very different from ordinary convicts. The subordinate officers were 
accustomed to look upon them in the same way, taking their tone and 
attitude from the higher authorities, of course, and following their 
lead. But many of these commanding officers of inferior rank were 
stupid and secretly critical of the instructions given them, and they 
would have been very glad if they could have made their own arrange­
ments without being checked. But this was not altogether permitted. I 
have good reason for this belief and I will give it. The second class of 
penal servitude in which I was serving-imprisonment in the fortress 
under military command-was incomparably more severe than the 
other two divisions, that is, servitude in the mines and in government 
works. It was not only harder for prisoners of the privileged class but 
for all the convicts, simply because the government and organization 
of this division was all military and not unlike that of the diSciplinary 
battalions in Russia. Military government is harsher, the regulations 
are stricter, one is always in chains, always under guard, always behind 
bars and bolts; and this is not so much the case in the other two divi­
sions. So at least all our convicts said, and there were some amongst 
them who knew what they were talking about. They would all gladly 
have passed into the first division, which is reckoned by the law to be 
the hardest, and often dreamed of the change. Of the diSCiplinary 
battalions in Russia, all who had been in them spoke with horror, 
declaring that in all Russia nothing was harder than the diSciplinary 
battalions in the fortresses, and that Siberia was paradise compared 
with the life in them. So if, in such harsh conditions as in our prison 
under military rule, before the eyes of the Governor-General himself, 
and in spite of the possibility (such things sometimes occurred) of 
officious outsiders through spite or jealousy secretly reporting that cer­
tain political prisoners were favoured by officers of doubtful loyalty­
if in such circumstances, I repeat, the political prisoners were looked 

2 7 8  
The House of the Dead 
upon somewhat differently from the other convicts, they must have 
been treated even more leniently in the first and third divisions. So I be­
lieve I can judge in this respect of all Siberia by the place where I was. 
All the tales and rumours that reached me on this subject from exiles of 
the first and third divisions confirmed my conclusion. In reality all of 
us, prisoners of the upper class, were treated by the authorities with 
more attention and circumspection in our prison. We certainly had no 
favour shown us in regard to work or other external conditions: we 
had the same work, the same fetters, the same bolts and bars-in fact, 
we had everything exactly like the other convicts. And indeed it was 
impossible to mitigate our lot. I know that in that town in the recent but so 
remote past14 there were so many spies, so many intrigues, so many peo­
ple laying traps for one another, that it was natural that the governing 
authorities should be afraid of being denounced. And what could be 
more terrible at that period than to be accused of showing favour to 
political prisoners? And so all were afraid, and we lived on an equal 
footing with all the convicts; but as regards corporal punishment there 
was a certain difference. It is true they would readily have flogged us if 
we had deserved it, that is, had committed a misdemeanour. That much 
was dictated by official duty and equality as regards corporal punish­
ment. But they would not have flogged us at random on the impulse of 
the moment; and, of course, cases of such wanton treatment of the 
common convicts did occur, especially with some commanding offi­
cers of lower rank, who enjoyed domineering and intimidation. We 
knew that the governor of the prison was very indignant with the ma­
jor when he knew the story of old Z., and impressed upon him the ne­
cessity of restraining himself in the future. So I was told by everyone. It 
was known also in prison that the Governor-General, too, though he 
trusted and to some extent liked our major as a man of some ability 
who did his duty, reprimanded him about that affair. And the major 
had made a note of it. He would dearly have liked, for example, to lay 
hands upon M., whom he hated from the tales A. told him, but he was 
never able to flog him, though he persecuted him and was on the look­
out for a pretext and ready to pounce upon him. The whole town soon 
heard of the Z. affair, and public opinion condemned the major; many 
people reproved him, and some made themselves very unpleasant. 
I remember at this moment my first encounter with the major. 
When we were at Tobolsk, the other political prisoner with whom 

Comrades 
2 7 9  
I entered the prison and myself, they frightened us by telling us of 
this man's ferocious character. Some old political exiles, who had 
been in Siberia for twenty-five years and who met us at Tobolsk with 
great sympathy and kept up relations with us all the time we were in 
the forwarding prison, warned us against our future commanding 
officer and promised to do what they could, through certain promi­
nent persons, to protect us from his persecution. Three daughters of 
the Governor-General, who had come from Russia and were staying 
with their father, did, in fact, receive letters from them and spoke 
about us to their father. But what could he do? He merely told the 
major to be more careful. About three o'clock in the afternoon my 
comrade and I arrived in the tOWIl, and the guards took us at once to 
the major. We stood in the entry waiting for him. Meanwhile they 
sent for the prison sergeant. As soon as he appeared, the major, too, 
came out. His spiteful, purple, pimply face made a very depressing 
impression: it was as though a malicious spider had run out to 
pounce on some poor fly that had fallen into its web. 
"What's your name?" he asked my comrade. He spoke rapidly, 
sharply, abruptly; he evidently wished to make an impression on us. 
"So-and-so." 
"You?" he went on, addressing me and glaring at me through his 
spectacles. 
"So-and-so." 
"Sergeant! To prison with them at once, shave them in the 
guard-house-half the head, as civilian prisoners; change their fet­
ters tomorrow. What coats are those? Where did you get them?" he 
answered suddenly, his attention being caught by the grey overcoats 
with yellow circles on the back which had been given us at Tobolsk 
and which we were wearing in his illustrious presence. "That's a 
new uniform! It must be a new uniform . . . .  A new pattern . . .  from 
Petersburg," he added, making us turn round one after the other. 
"They've nothing with them?" he asked the escort. 
"They've got their own clothes, your honour," said the gendarme, 
draWing himself up suddenly with a positive start. Everyone knew of 
the major, everyone had heard of him, everyone was frightened of 
him. 
"Take away everything! Only give them back their underlinen, the 
white things; if there are any coloured things take them away; and 

280 
The House of the Dead 
sell all the rest by auction. The money for the prison funds. The con­
vict has no property," he added, looking at us sternly. "Mind you 
behave yourselves! Don't let me hear of you! Or . . .  cor-po-ral 
pu-nishment. For the least misdemeanour-the lash!" 
This reception, which was unlike anything I was used to, made me 
almost ill the whole evening. And the impression was increased by 
what I saw in the prison; but I have already described my first hours 
in prison. 
I have mentioned already that the authorities did not, and dared 
not, show us any favour or make our tasks lighter than those of the 
other convicts. But on one occasion they did try to do so: for three 
whole months B. and T. used to go to the engineer's office to do cleri­
cal work there. But this was done in strict secrecy, and was the engi­
neering officer's dOing. That is to say, all the other officials concerned 
knew of it, but they pretended not to. That happened when G. was 
commanding officer. Lieutenant-Colonel G. was a perfect godsend for 
the short time he was with us-not more than six months, ifI mistake 
not, rather less perhaps. He made an extraordinary impression on the 
convicts before he left them to return to Russia. It was not simply that 
the convicts loved him; they adored him, if such a word may be used 
in this connexion. How he did it I don't know, but he gained their 
hearts from the first moment. "He is a father to us, a father! We've no 
need of a father! " the convicts were continually saying all the time he 
was at the head of the engineering department. I believe he was a 
terribly dissipated character. He was a little man with a bold, self­
confident expression. But at the same time he was kind, almost tender, 
with the convicts, and he really did love them like a father. Why he was 
so fond of the convicts I can't say, but he could not see a convict with­
out saying something kindly and good-humoured to him, without 
making a joke or laughing with him, and the best of it was there was 
no trace of the authoritative manner in it, nothing suggestive of conde­
scending or purely official kindness. He was their comrade and com­
pletely one of themselves. But although he was instinctively democratic 
in manner and feeling, the convicts were never once gUilty of disre­
spect or familiarity with him. On the contrary: But the convict's whole 
face lighted up when he met the lieutenant-colonel and, taking off his 
cap, he was all smiles when the latter came up to him. And if the offi­
cer spoke the convict felt as though he had received a present. There 

Comrades 
2 8 1  
are popular people like this. He looked a manly fellow, he walked with 
an erect and gallant carriage. "He is an eagle," the convicts used to say 
of him. He could, of course, do nothing to mitigate their lot; he was 
only at the head of the engineering work, which, having been settled 
and laid down by law once for all, went on unchanged, whoever was 
in command. At most, if he chanced to come across a gang of convicts 
whose work was finished, he would let them go home before the 
drum sounded, instead of keeping them hanging about for nothing. 
But the convicts liked his confidence in them, the absence of petty 
fault-finding and irritability, the utter lack of anything insulting in 
speech or manner in his official relations with them. If he had lost a 
thousand roubles, and a convict had picked the money up, I do be­
lieve, if it were the worst thief in prison, he would have restored it.Yes , 
I am sure of that. With intense sympathy the convicts learnt that their 
" eagle" had a deadly quarrel with our hated major. It happened during 
the first month G. was there. Our maj or had at some time served with 
him in the past. After years of separation they met as friends and used 
to drink together. But their relations were suddenly cut short. They 
quarrelled and G. became his mortal enemy. There was a rumour that 
they had even fought on the occasion, which was by no means out of 
the question with our major: he often did fight. When the convicts 
heard of this their delight knew no bounds. "As though old Eight-eyes 
could get on with a man like him ! He is an eagle, but the maj or a . . .  " 
and here usually followed a word quite unfit for print. The prisoners 
were fearfully interested to know which had given the other a beating. 
If the rumours of the fight had turned out to be false (which was per­
haps the case) I believe our convicts would have been very much an­
noyed. "You may be sure the colonel got the best of it," they used to 
say; " he's a plucky one, though he is small, and the maj or crawled un­
der the bed to get away from him, they say." 
But G. soon left us and the convicts sank into despondency again. 
Our engineering comman ders were all good, however; three or four 
succeeded one another in my time. "But we shall never have another 
like him," the convicts used to say; "he was an eagle, an eagle and our 
champion." This G. was very fond of us political prisoners , and to­
wards the end he used to make B. and me come to work in his office 
sometim es. After he went away this was put on a more regular foot­
in g. Some in the engineering department (especially one of them) 

282 
The House of the Dead 
were very sympathetic with us. We used to go there and copy papers, 
our handwriting began to improve even, when suddenly there came 
a peremptory order from the higher authorities that we were to be 
sent back to our former tasks: someone had already played the spy. It 
was a good thing, however; we had both begun to be fearfully sick 
of the office! Afterwards for two years B. and I went almost insepara­
bly to the same tasks, most frequently to the workshops. We used to 
chat together, talk of our hopes and convictions. He was a splendid 
fellow; but his ideas were sometimes very strange and exceptional. 
There is a certain class of people, very intelligent indeed, who some­
times have utterly paradoxical ideas. But they have suffered so much 
for them in their lives, they have paid such a heavy price for them, 
that it would be too painful, almost impossible, to give them up. B. 
listened to every criticism with pain and answered with bitterness. I 
daresay he was more right than I was in many things-I don't know; 
but at last we parted, and I was very sad about it: we had shared so 
many things together. 
Meanwhile M. seemed to become more melancholy and gloomy 
every year. He was overwhelmed by depression. During my early days 
in prison he used to be more communicative, his feelings found a 
fuller and more frequent utterance. He had been two years in prison 
when I first came. At first he took interest in a great deal of what had 
happened in the world during those two years, of which he had no 
idea in prison; he questioned me, listened, was excited. But towards 
the end, as the years went on, he seemed to be more concentrated 
within and shut up in his own mind. The glowing embers were being 
covered up by ash. His exasperation grew more and more marked. 
"Je hai's ces brigands, " he often repeated to me, looking with hatred at the 
convicts, whom I had by then come to know better, and nothing I 
could say in their favour had any influence. He did not understand 
what I said, though he sometimes gave an absent-minded assent; but 
next day he would say again: "Je hals ces brigands. " We used often to talk 
in French, by the way; and on this account a soldier in the engineers, 
called Dranishnikov, nicknamed us the "medicals"-I don't know 
from what connexion of ideas. M. only showed warmth when he 
spoke of his mother. "She is old, she is ill," he said to me; "she loves 
me more than anything in the world, and here I don't know whether 
she is alive or dead. To know that I had to run the gauntlet was 

Comrades 
283 
enough for her . . . .  " M. did not come of the privileged class, and be­
fore being sent to exile had received corporal punishment. He used 
to clench his teeth and look away when he recalled it. Towards the 
end he used more and more frequently to walk alone. 
One morning, about midday, he was summoned by the governor. 
Our governor came out to him with a good-humoured smile. 
"Well, M. , what did you dream about last night?" he asked. 
"I trembled," M. told us afterwards, "I felt as though I had been 
stabbed to the heart." 
"I dreamt I had a letter from my mother," he answered. 
"Better than that, better than that! " replied the governor. "You are 
free! Your mother has petitioned in your favour, and her petition has 
been granted. Here is her letter and here is the order relating to you. 
You will leave the prison at once." 
He came back to us pale, unable to recover from the shock. We 
congratulated him. He pressed our hands with his cold and trembling 
hands. Many of the common convicts, too, congratulated him and 
were delighted at his good luck. 
He was released and remained in our town as a "settler." Soon he 
was given a post. At first he often came to our prison, and when he 
could, told us all sorts of news. Politics was what interested him 
most. 
Besides M., T. ,  B. and Z., there were two quite young men who had 
been sent for brief terms, boys of little education, but honest, simple, 
and straightforward. A third, A-tchukovsky, was quite a simpleton, and 
there was nothing special about him. But a fourth, B-m, a middle-aged 
man, made a very disagreeable impression upon all of us. I don't 
know how he came to be one of the political prisoners, and, indeed, 
he denied all connexion with them himself He had the coarse soul of 
a petty huckster, and the habits and principles of a shopkeeper who 
had grown rich by cheating over halfpence. He was entirely without 
education, and took no interest in anything but his trade. He was a 
painter, and a first-rate one-magnificent. Soon the authorities heard 
of his talent, and all the town began wanting B-m to paint their walls 
and ceilings. Within two years he had painted almost all the officials' 
houses. Their owners paid him out of their own pockets, and so he 
was not at all badly off But the best of it was that his comrades, too, 
began to be sent to work with him. Two who went out with him 

284 
The House of the Dead 
continually learnt the trade, too, and one of them, T-zhevsky, became 
as good a painter as he was himself Our major, who lived in a gov­
ernment house himself, sent for B-m in his turn, and told him to 
paint all the walls and ceilings. Then B-m did his utmost: even the 
Governor-General's house was not so well painted. It was a tumble­
down, very mangy-looking, one-storey wooden house; but the inte­
rior was painted as though it were a palace, and the major was highly 
delighted . . .  He rubbed his hands, and declared that now he really 
must get married: "with such a house one must have a wife," he added 
quite seriously. He was more and more pleased with B-m, and through 
him with the others who worked with him. The work lasted a whole 
month. In the course of that month the major quite altered his views of 
the political prisoners, and began to patronise them. It ended by his 
summoning Z. one day from the prison. 
"z. , "  said he, "I wronged you. I gave you a flogging for nothing. I 
know it. I regret it. Do you understand that? I, I, I-regret it! " 
Z. replied that he did understand it. 
"Do you understand that I, I, your commanding officer, have sent 
for you, to ask you your forgiveness; Do you feel that? What are you 
beside me? A worm! Less than a worm: you are a convict. And I, by 
the grace of God, * am a major. A major! Do you understand that?" 
Z. answered that he understood that, too. 
"Well, now I am making peace with you. But do you feel it, do 
you feel it fully, in all its fullness? Are you capable of understanding 
it? Only think: I, I, the major . . .  " and so on. 
Z. told me of the whole scene himself. So even this drunken, quar­
relsome, and vicious man had some humane feeling. When one takes 
into consideration his ideas and lack of culture, such an action may 
almost be called magnanimous. But probably his drunken condition 
had a good deal to do with it. 
His dreams were not realised; he did not get married, though he 
had fully made up his mind to do so by the time the decoration of 
his house was finished. Instead of being married he was arrested, 
and he was ordered to send in his resignation. At the trial all his old 
*This expression was literally used in my time, not only by the major, but by many 
petty officers, especially those who had risen from the lower ranks (Dostoevsky's 
note) . 

Comrades 
285 
sins were brought up against him. He had previously been a provost 
of the town . . .  The blow fell on him unexpectedly. There was im­
mense rejoicing in the prison at the news. It was a festive day, a day 
of triumph! They said that the major howled like an old woman and 
was dissolved in tears. But there was nothing to be done. He retired, 
sold his pair of greys, and then his whole property, and even sank 
into poverty. We carne across him afterwards, a civilian wearing a 
shabby coat and a cap with a cockade in it. He looked viciously at the 
convicts. But all his prestige went with his uniform. In a uniform he 
was terrible, a deity. In civil dress he became absolutely a nonentity, 
and looked like a lackey. It's wonderful what the uniform does for 
men like that. 

C H A P T E R I X  
AN E S C A P E  
SOON AFTER OUR MAJOR was removed, there were fundamental changes 
in our prison. They gave up using the place as a prison for penal 
servitude convicts and founded instead a convict battalion, on the 
pattern of the Russian diSciplinary battalions. This meant that no 
more convicts of the second class were brought to our prison. It be­
gan to be filled at this time only with convicts of the military divi­
sion, men therefore not deprived of civil rights, soldiers like all other 
soldiers except that they were undergoing punishment in the prison 
for brief terms, six years at the utmost. At the expiration of their sen­
tence they would go back to their battalions as privates, just as before. 
Those, however, who came back to the prison after a second offence 
were punished as before by a sentence of twenty years. There had 
been, indeed, even before this change a division of convicts of the 
military class, but they lived with us because there was no other place 
for them. Now the whole prison became a prison for this military 
section. The old convicts, genuine civil convicts, who had been de­
prived of all rights, had been branded, and shaved on one side of the 
head, remained, of course, in the prison till their full terms were 
completed. No new ones came, and those who remained gradually 
worked out their terms of servitude and went away, so that ten years 
later there could not have been a convict left in our prison. The spe­
cial division was left, however, and to it from time to time were sent 
convicts of the military class who had committed serious crimes, 
and they were kept there till certain penal works were established in 
Siberia. So in reality life went on for us as before, the same condi­
tions, the same food, and almost the same regulations; but the offi­
cers in command were different and more numerous. A staff officer 
was appOinted, a commander of the battalion and four superior offi­
cers who were on duty in the prison in turns. The veterans, too, were 
abolished and twelve sergeants and a quartermaster were appOinted. 
2 8 6  

An Escape 
2 8 7  
The prisoners were divided into tens and corporals were appointed 
from the convicts themselves, nominally, of course, and Akim Akim­
itch at once became a corporal. All these new institutions and the 
whole prison, with its officials and convicts, were as before left under 
the control of the governor of the prison as the highest authority. That 
was all that happened. 
The convicts were, of course, very much excited at first; they talked, 
guessed and tried to read the characters of their commanders, but 
when they saw that in reality everything went on as before, they 
calmed down and our life went on in its old way. But the great thing 
was that we were all saved from the old major; everyone seemed 
to breathe freely and to be more confident. They lost their panic­
stricken air; all knew now that in case of need one could have things 
out with the authorities and that the innocent would not be punished 
for the guilty except by mistake. Vodka was sold just as before and on 
the same system, although instead of the veterans we had sergeants. 
These sergeants turned out to be for the most part a good sort of sen­
sible men who understood their position. Some of them, however, at 
first showed an inclination to domineer, and, of course, in their inex­
perience thought they could treat the convicts like soldiers, but soon 
even these realised the position. Those who were too slow in under­
standing had it pointed out to them by the convicts. There were some 
sharp encounters; for instance, they would tempt a sergeant and 
make him drunk, and afterwards point out to him, in their own fash­
ion, of course, that he had drunk with them, and consequently . . .  It 
ended in the sergeants looking on unconcerned, or rather trying not 
to see, when vodka was brought in in bladders and sold. What is 
more, they went to the market as the veterans had done before and 
brought the convicts rolls, beef, and all the rest of it; that is, anything 
that was not too outrageous. Why all these changes were made, why 
convict battalions were formed, I don't know. It happened during my 
last years in prison. But I had two years to spend under these new 
regulations. 
Shall I describe all that life, all my years in prison? I don't think so. 
If I were to describe in order, in succession, all that happened and all 
that I saw and experienced in those years, I might have written three 
times, four times as many chapters as I have. But such a description 
would necessarily become too monotonous. All the incidents would 

2 8 8  
The House of the Dead 
be too much in the same key, especially if, from the chapters already 
written, the reader has succeeded in forming a fairly satisfactory con­
ception of prison life in the second division. I wanted to give a vivid 
and concrete picture of our prison and of all that I lived through in 
those years. Whether I have attained my object I don't know. And, in­
deed, it is not quite for me to judge of it. But I am convinced that I can 
end my story here. Besides, I am sometimes depressed by these mem­
ories myself. And I can hardly recollect everything. The later years have 
somehow been effaced from my memory. Many circumstances, I am 
quite sure, I have entirely forgotten. I remember that all those years, 
which were so much alike, passed drearily, miserably. I remember that 
those long wearisome days were monotonous, as drops of water trick­
ling from the roof after rain. I remember that nothing but the pas­
sionate desire to rise up again, to be renewed, to begin a new life, gave 
me the strength to wait and to hope. And at last I mastered myself; I 
looked forward, and I reckoned off every day, and although a thou­
sand remained, I took pleasure in ticking them off one by one. I saw 
the day off; I buried it, and I rejOiced at the coming of another day, be­
cause there were not a thousand left but nine hundred and ninety­
nine days. I remember that all that time, though I had hundreds of 
companions, I was fearfully lonely, and at last I grew fond of that lone­
liness. In my spiritual solitude I reviewed all my past life, went over it 
all to the smallest detail, brooded over my past, judged myself sternly 
and relentlessly, and even sometimes blessed fate for sending me this 
solitude, without which I could not have judged myself like this, nor 
have reviewed my past life so sternly. And what hopes set my heart 
throbbing in those days! I believed, I resolved, I swore to myself that in 
my future life there should be none of the mistakes and lapses there 
had been in the past. I sketched out a programme for myself for the 
whole future, and I firmly resolved to keep to it. The blind faith that 
I should and could keep these resolutions rose up in my heart again. I 
looked forward eagerly to freedom, I prayed for it to come quickly; I 
longed to test myself again in fresh strife. At times I was overcome by 
nervous impatience. But it hurts me to recall now my spiritual condi­
tion at that time. Of course, all that concerns no one but me. But I have 
written all this because I think everyone will understand it, for the 
same thing must happen to everyone if he is sent to prison for a term 
of years in the flower of his youth and strength. 

An Escape 
289 
But why talk of it? I had better describe something else, that I may 
not end too abruptly. 
It occurs to me that someone may ask, was it really impossible for 
anyone to escape from prison, and did no one escape in all those years? 
As I have said already, a prisoner who has spent two or three years in 
prison begins to attach a value to those years and cannot help corning 
to the conclusion that it is better to serve the rest of his time without 
trouble and risk and leave the prison finally in the legal way as a "set­
tler." But this conclusion can only occur to a convict who has been sen­
tenced to a brief term. The man with many years before him might 
well be ready to risk anything. But somehow this did not often happen 
in our prison. I don't know whether it was that they were very cow­
ardly, whether the supervision was particularly strict and military, 
whether the situation of our town in the open steppes was in many 
ways unfavourable; it is hard to say. I imagine all these considerations 
had their influence. Certainly it was rather difficult to escape from 
us. And yet one such case did happen in my time; two convicts ven­
tured on the attempt and those two were among the most important 
criminals. 
After the major had gone, A. (the convict who had played the spy 
for him in the prison) was left quite friendless and unprotected. He 
was still young, but his character had grown stronger and steadier as 
he grew older. He was altogether a bold, resolute and even very intel­
ligent man. Though he would have gone on spying and making his 
living in all sorts of underhand ways if he had been given his free­
dom, he would not have been caught so stupidly and imprudently as 
before and have paid so dearly for his folly. While he was in prison, 
he practised making false passports a little. I cannot speak with cer­
tainty about this. however. But I was told so by the convicts. It was 
said that he used to work in that line at the time when he frequented 
the major's kitchen and of course he picked up all he could there. In 
short he was capable of anything "to change his luck." I had an op­
portunity of reading his character and seeing to some extent into his 
mind; cynicism in him reached a pitch of revolting impudence and 
cold mockery, and it excited an invincible repugnance. I believe that, 
if he had had a great desire for a glass of vodka and if he could not 
have got it except by murdering someone, he would certainly have 
committed the murder, if he could only have done it in secret so that 

290 
The House of the Dead 
no one could discover it. In prison he learnt prudence. And this man 
caught the attention of Kulikov, a convict in the special division. 
I have already spoken of Kulikov. He was a man no longer young, 
but passionate, vital, vigorous, with great and varied abilities. There 
was strength in him and he still had a longing for life. Such men feel 
the same thirst for life up to extreme old age. And if I had wondered 
why none of the convicts escaped from the prison, the first I should 
have thought of would have been Kulikov. But Kulikov made up his 
mind at last. Which of them had the most influence on the other­
A. on Kulikov or Kulikov on A.-I do not know, but they were a match 
for one another and well suited for such an enterprise. They became 
friends. I fancy Kulikov reckoned on A.'s preparing the passports. A. 
was a .. gentleman," had belonged to good society; that promised 
something different from the usual adventures, if only they could get 
to Russia. Who can tell how they came to an agreement and what 
hopes they had? But it is certain that they were hoping for something 
very different from the usual routine of tramping in Siberia. Kulikov 
was an actor by nature; he could play many and varied parts in life; he 
might hope for many things, at least for a great variety of things. 
Prison must weigh heavily on such men. They agreed to escape. 
But it was impossible to escape without the help of a guard. They 
had to persuade a guard to join them. In one of the battalions sta­
tioned in the fortress there was a Pole, a man of energy, deserving 
perhaps of a better fate; he was middle-aged and serious, but he was 
a fine, spirited fellow. In his youth, soon after he had come as a sol­
dier to Siberia, he had deserted from intense home-sickness. He was 
caught, punished and kept for two years in a diSCiplinary battalion. 
When he was sent back to serve as an ordinary soldier again, he 
thought better of it and began to be zealous and to do his best in his 
work. For distinguished service he was made a corporal. He was an 
ambitious, self-reliant man who knew his own value. He spoke and 
looked like a man who knows his own value. I met him several times 
during those years among our guards. The Poles too, had spoken of 
him to me. It seemed to me that his home-sickness had turned to a 
hidden, dumb, unchanging hatred. This man was capable of doing 
anything and Kulikov was right in choosing him as a comrade. His 
name was Koller. 
They agreed and fixed on a day. It was in the hot days of June. The 

An Escape 
29 1 
climate was fairly equable in our town; in the summer there was hot 
settled weather, and that just suited tramps. of course they could not 
set off straight from the fortress; the whole town stands on rising 
ground open on all sides. There was no forest for a long distance 
round. They had to change into ordinary dress, and to do this they 
had first to get to the edge of the town, where there was a house that 
Kulikov had long frequented. I do not know whether his friends 
there were fully in the secret. One must suppose that they were, 
though the point was not fully established when the case was tried 
afterwards. That year in a secluded nook at the edge of the town a 
very prepossessing young woman, nicknamed Vanka-Tanka, who 
showed great promise and to some extent fulfilled it later on, was just 
beginning her career. Another nickname for her was Fire. I believe 
she, too, had some share in the escape. Kulikov had been spending 
lavishly upon her for a whole year. 
Our heroes went out as usual into the prison yard in the morning 
and cleverly succeeded in being sent with Shilkin, a convict who 
made stoves and did plastering, to plaster the empty barracks, which 
the soldiers had left some time before to go into camp. A. and Kulikov 
went with Shilkin to act as porters. Koller turned up as one of the 
guards, and as two guards were required for three convicts, Koller, as 
an old soldier and a corporal, was readily entrusted with a young re­
cruit that he might train him and teach him his duties. Our fugitives 
must have had great influence on Koller and he must have had great 
confidence in them, since after his lengthy and in latter years success­
ful service, clever, prudent, sensible man as he was, he made up his 
mind to follow them. 
They came to the barracks. It was six 0' clock in the morning. There 
was no one there except them. After working for an hour, Kulikov 
and A. said to Shilkin that they were going to the workshop to see 
someone and to get some tool, which it seemed they had come with­
out. They had to manage cleverly, that is, as naturally as pOSSible, with 
Shilkin. He was a Moscow stove-maker, shrewd, clever, full of dodges, 
and sparing of his words. He was frail and wasted-looking. He ought 
to have been always wearing a waistcoat and a dreSSing-gown in the 
Moscow fashion, but fate had decreed otherwise, and after long wan­
derings he was settled for good in our prison in the speCial division, 
that is, in the class of the most dangerous military criminals. How he 

292 
The House of the Dead 
had deserved such a fate I don't know, but I never noticed any sign of 
special dissatisfaction in him; he behaved peaceably and equably, only 
sometimes got as drunk as a cobbler, but even then he behaved de­
cently. He was certainly not in the secret and his eyes were sharp. Ku­
likov, of course, winked to him signifying that they were going to get 
vodka, of which a store had been got ready in the workshop the day 
before. That touched Shilkin; he parted from them without any suspi­
cion and remained alone with the recruit, while A., Kulikov and 
Koller set off for the edge of the town. 
Half an hour passed; the absent men did not return and at last, on 
reflection, Shilkin began to have his doubts. He had seen a good deal in 
his day. He began to remember things. Kulikov had been in a peculiar 
humour, A. had seemed to whisper to him twice, anyway Kulikov had 
twice winked to him, he had seen that; now he remembered it all. 
There was something odd about Koller, too, as he went away with 
them; he had begun lecturing the recruit as to how he was to behave 
in his absence, and that was somehow not quite natural, in Koller, at 
least. In fact the more Shilkin thought about it, the more suspicious 
he became. Meanwhile time was getting on, they did not corne back, 
and his uneasiness became extreme. He realized thoroughly his posi­
tion and his own danger; the authorities might turn their suspicions 
upon him. They might think that he let his comrades go knowingly 
and had an understanding with them, and ifhe delayed to give notice 
of the disappearance of A. and Kulikov, there would seem to be more 
grounds for suspicion. There was no time to lose. At that point he rec­
ollected that Kulikov and A. had been particularly thick of late, had 
often been whispering, and had often been walking together behind 
the prison out of sight of everyone. He remembered that even at the 
time he had thought something about them. He looked searchingly 
at his guard; the latter was leaning on his gun. yawning and very in­
nocently picking his nose. So Shilkin did not deign to communicate 
his suspicions to him, but simply told him that he must follow him 
to the engineer's workshop. He had to ask whether they had been 
there. But it appeared that no one had seen them there. Shilkin's last 
doubts were dissipated. "They might have simply gone to drink and 
have a spree at the edge of the town, as Kulikov sometimes did," 
thought Shilkin, "but no, that could hardly be it. They would have 
told him, they would not have thought it worth while to conceal that 

An Escape 
293 
from him." Shilkin left his work and, without returning to the bar­
racks, he went straight off to the prison. 
It was almost nine o'clock when he presented himself before the 
chief sergeant and informed him of what had happened. The sergeant 
was aghast and at first was unwilling to believe it. Shilkin, of course, 
told him all this simply as a guess, a suspicion. The sergeant rushed 
off to the commanding officer, and the latter at once informed the 
governor of the prison. Within a quarter of an hour all the necessary 
steps had been taken. The Governor-General was informed. The crim­
inals were important ones, and there might be serious trouble from 
Petersburg on their account. Correctly or not, A. was reckoned a po­
litical prisoner; Kulikov was in the special division, that is, a criminal 
of the first magnitude and a military one, too. There had never been 
an instance of a prisoner's escaping from the special division before. 
It was inCidentally recalled that every convict of the special division 
should be escorted to work by two guards, or, at the least, have one 
each. This rule had not been observed. So it looked an unpleasant busi­
ness. Messengers were sent to all the villages through all the surround­
ing country to announce the escape of the fugitives and to leave their 
description everywhere. Cossacks were sent out to overtake and catch 
them; neighbouring districts and provinces were written to. The au­
thorities were in a great panic, in fact. 
Meanwhile there was excitement of a different sort in prison. As 
the convicts came in from work, they learnt at once what had hap­
pened. The news flew round to all. Everyone received it with extraor­
dinary secret joy. It set every heart throbbing. Besides breaking the 
monotony of prison life and upsetting the ant-hill, an escape, and such 
an escape, appealed to something akin in every heart and touched on 
long-forgotten chords; something like hope, daring, the possibility 
of "changing their luck" stirred in every soul. "Men have escaped, 
it seems, why then . . .  ?" And at this thought everyone plucked up his 
spirit and looked defiantly at his mates. At any rate, they all seemed 
suddenly proud and began looking condescendingly at the sergeants. 
of course the authorities swooped down on the prison at once. The 
governor of the prison came himself. Our convicts were in high spir­
its, and they looked bold, even rather contemptuous, and had a sort 
of silent stern dignity, as though to say, "We know how to manage 
things." Of course they had foreseen at once that all the authorities 

294 
The House of the Dead 
would visit the prison. They foresaw, too, that there would be a search 
and got everything hidden in readiness for it. They knew that the au­
thorities on such occasions are always wise after the event. And so it 
turned out; there was a great fuss, everything was turned upside down, 
everything was searched and nothing was found, of course. The con­
victs were sent out to their afternoon work and escorted by a larger 
number of guards. Towards evening the sentries looked into the prison 
every minute; the men were called over an extra time and mistakes in 
the counting were made twice as often as usual. This led to further con­
fusion; all the men were sent out into the yard and counted over again. 
Then there was another counting over in the prison wards. There was a 
great deal of fuss. 
But the convicts were not in the least disturbed. They all looked ex­
tremely independent and, as is always the case on such occasions, be­
haved with extraordinary decorum all that evening, as though to say, 
"There's nothing you can find fault with." The authorities, of course, 
wondered whether the fugitives had not left accomplices in prison 
and gave orders that the convicts should be watched and spied upon. 
But the convicts only laughed. "As though one would leave accom­
plices behind one in a job of that sort! " "A thing of that sort is done 
on the quiet and nohow else! "  "And as though a man like Kulikov, a 
man like A., would leave traces in an affair like that! They've managed 
in a masterly way, every sign hidden; they're men who've seen a thing 
or two; they'd get through locked doors! "  
In fact the glory of Kulikov and A. was vastly increased; everyone 
was proud of them. The convicts felt that their exploit would be handed 
down to the remotest generation of convicts, would outlive the prison. 
"They're master-hands! "  some would say. 
"You see, it was thought there was no escaping from here. They've 
escaped, though," others added. 
"Escaped! "  a third would pronounce, looking round with an air of 
some authority. "But who is it has escaped? The likes of you, do you 
suppose?" 
Another time the convict to whom this question referred would 
certainly have taken up the challenge and defended his honour, but 
now he was modestly silent, reflecting: "Yes, really, we are not all like 
Kulikov and A.; we must show what we can do before we talk." 

An Escape 
295 
"And why do we go on living here, after all, brother?" said a fourth, 
breaking the silence. He was sitting modestly at the kitchen window 
with his cheek propped on his hand. He spoke in a rather sing-song 
voice, full of sentimental but secretly complacent feeling. "What are we 
here for? We are not alive though we are living and we are not in our 
graves though we are dead. E-e-ch!" 
"It's not a shoe, you can't cast it off. What's the use of saying 
'e-e-ch' ?" 
"But you see, Kulikov . . .  " a green youth, one of the impulsive 
sort, tried to interpose. 
"Kulikov! " Another cut him short at once, cocking his eye con-
temptuously at the green youth. "Kulikov! "  
This was as much as to say, "Are there many Kulikovs here?" 
"And A. too, lads, he is a cute one, oh, he is a cute one!" 
"Rather! He could turn even Kulikov round his finger! You won't 
catch him!" 
"I wonder whether they've got far by now, lads? I should like to 
know." 
At once there followed a discussion of whether they had gone far, 
and in what direction they had gone, and where it would have been 
best for them to go, and which district was nearer. There were people 
who knew the surrounding country; they were listened to with inter­
est. They talked of the inhabitants of the neighbouring villages and 
decided that they were not people to reply upon. They were too near 
a town to be simple. They wouldn't help a convict, they'd catch him 
and hand him over. 
"The peasants hereabouts are a spiteful set, mates, that they are!" 
"There's no depending on them!" 
"They're Siberians, the beggars. If they come across you, they'll 
kill you." 
"Well, but our fellows . . .  " 
"To be sure, there's no saying which will get the best of it. Our 
men are not easy customers either." 
"Well, we shall hear, if we live long enough." 
"Why, do you think they'll catch them?" 
"I don't believe they'll ever catch them!" another of the enthusi­
asts pronounces, banging the table with his fist. 

296 
The House of the Dead 
"H'm! That's all a matter of luck." 
"And I tell you what I think, lads," Skuratov breaks in: "if I were a 
tramp, they'd never catch me." 
"You! "  
There is laughter, though some pretend not to want to listen. But 
there is no stopping Skuratov. 
"Not if I know it! " he goes on vigorously. "I often think about it 
and wonder at myself, lads. I believe I'd creep through any chink be­
fore they catch me." 
"No fear! You'd get hungry and go to a peasant for bread." 
General laughter. 
"For bread? Nonsense! "  
"But why are you wagging your tongue? Uncle Vasya and you 
killed the cow plague. * That's why you came here." 
The laughter was louder than ever. The serious ones looked on 
with even greater indignation. 
"That's nonsense! "  shouted Skuratov. "That's a fib of Mikita's, and 
it's not about me, but Vaska, and they've mixed me up in it. I'm a 
Moscow man and I was brought up to tramping from a child. When 
the deacon was teaching me to read, he used to pull me by the ear 
and make me repeat, 'Lead me not into temptation in Thy infinite 
mercy,' and soon I used to repeat, 'lead me to the police-station in Thy 
infinite mercy,' and so on. So that's how I used to go on from my 
childhood up." 
Everyone burst out laughing again. But that was all Skuratov 
wanted. He could not resist playing the fool. Soon the convicts left 
him and fell to serious conversation again. It was mainly the old men, 
authorities on such affairs, who gave their opinions. The younger and 
humbler prisoners looked on in silent enjoyment and craned their 
heads forward to listen. A great crowd gathered in the kitchen; there 
were, of course, no sergeants present. They would not have spoken 
freely before them. 
Among those who were particularly delighted, I noticed a Tatar, 
called Mametka, a short man with high cheek-bones, an extremely 
comic figure. He could hardly speak Russian at all and could hardly 
*That is, killed a man or woman, suspecting that he or she had put a spell on the cat­
tle, causing their death. We had one such murderer amongst us (Dostoevsky's note) . 

An Escape 
297 
understand anything of what was said, but he, too, was craning his 
head forward out of the crowd and listening, listening with relish. 
"Well, Mametka, yakshee?"* Skuratov, abandoned by all and not 
knowing what to do with himself, fastened upon him. 
"Yakshee, oh, yakshee! " Mametka muttered in great animation, nod-
ding his ridiculous head to Skuratov. "Yakshee!" 
"They won't catch them, yak?" 
"Yak, yak!" and Mametka began babbling, gesticulating as well. 
"So you lie, me not understand, eh?" 
"Yes, yes, yakshee, " Mametka assented, nodding. 
"Yakshee to be sure!" and Skuratov, giving the Tatar's cap a tweak 
that sent it over his eyes, went out of the kitchen in the best of spir­
its, leaving Mametka somewhat perplexed. 
For a whole week there was strict discipline in the prison, and 
search and pursuit were kept up vigorously in the neighbourhood. I 
don't know how, but the convicts got immediate and accurate informa­
tion of the manceuvres of the police outside the prison. The first few 
days the news was all favourable to the fugitives; there was no Sight or 
sound of them, every trace was lost. The convicts only laughed. Al anx­
iety as to the fate of the runaways was over. "They won't find anything, 
they won't catch anyone," was repeated in prison with complacency. 
"Nothing. They've gone like a shot." 
"Good-bye, don't cry, back by-and-by." It was known in prison 
that all the peasants in the neighbourhood had been roused. All sus­
picious places, all the woods and ravines were being watched. 
"Foolishness!" said the convicts, laughing. "They must have some 
friend they are staying with now." 
"No doubt they have," said the others. "They are not fools; they 
would have got everything ready beforehand." 
They went further than this in their suppositions; they began to say 
that the runaways were still perhaps in the outskirts of the town, living 
somewhere in a cellar till the excitement was over and their hair had 
grown, that they would stay there six months or a year and then go on. 
Everyone, in fact, was inclined to romance. But, suddenly, eight 
days after the escape there was a rumour that a clue had been found. 
*Tatar word. 

298 
The House of the Dead 
This absurd rumour was, of course, rejected at once with contempt. 
But the same evening the rumour was confirmed. The convicts began 
to be uneasy. The next morning it was said in the town that they had 
been caught and were being brought back. In the afternoon further 
details were learnt; they had been caught about fifty miles away, at a 
certain village. At last a definite piece of news was received. A corpo­
ral, returning from the major, stated positively that they would be 
brought that evening straight to the guard-house. There was no pos­
sibility of doubt. It is hard to describe the effect this news had on the 
convicts. At first they all seemed angry, then they were depressed. 
Then attempts at irony were apparent. There were jeers, not now at 
the pursuers, but at the captives, at first from a few, then from almost 
all, except some earnest and resolute men who thought for them­
selves and who could not be turned by taunts. They looked with con­
tempt at the shallowness of the majority and said nothing. 
In fact, they now ran Kulikov and A. down, enjoyed running them 
down as much as they had crying them up before. It was as though 
the runaways had done them all some injury. The convicts, with a 
contemptuous air, repeated that the fugitives had been very hungry, 
that they had not been able to stand, and had gone to a village to ask 
for bread from the peasants. This is the lowest depth of ignominy for 
a tramp. These stories were not true, however. The fugitives had been 
tracked; they had hidden in the forest; the forest had been sur­
rounded by a cordon. Seeing that they had no hope of escape, they 
had surrendered. There was nothing else left for them to do. 
But when in the evening they really were brought back by the 
gendarmes, their arms and legs tied, all the convicts trooped out to 
the fence to see what would be done with them. They saw nothing, of 
course, except the carriages of the major and the governor outside 
the guard-house. The runaways were put in a cell apart, fettered, and 
next day brought up for trial. The contempt and the jeers of the con­
victs soon passed off. They learnt more fully the circumstances, they 
found out that there was nothing for them to do but surrender, and 
all began following the course of the proceedings sympathetically. 
"They'll give them a thousand," said some of them. 
"A thousand, indeed! "  said the others. "They'll do for them. A. 
a thousand, perhaps, but Kulikov will be beaten to death, because he 
is in the special division." 

An Escape 
299 
They were mistaken, however. A. got off with five hundred blows; 
his previous good behaviour and the fact that it was his first offence 
were taken into account. Kulikov, I believe, received fifteen hundred, 
but the punishment was administered rather mercifully. Like sensible 
men, the fugitives implicated no one else at the trial, gave clear and 
exact answers; they said they had run straight away from the fortress 
without staying anywhere in the town. I felt sorriest of all for Koller; 
he had lost everything, his last hopes; his sentence was the worst of 
all, I believe two thousand "sticks," and he was sent away to another 
prison as a convict. Thanks to the doctors, A.'s punishment was light 
and humane, but he gave himself airs and talked loudly in the hospi­
tal of his being ready for anything, of his sticking at nothing now, and 
of doing something much more striking. Kulikov behaved as usual, 
that is, with dignity and decorum, and when he returned to prison 
after the punishment, he looked as though he had never left it. But 
the convicts looked at him differently; though Kulikov always and 
everywhere knew how to stand up for himself, the convicts had 
somehow inwardly ceased to respect him and began to treat him 
with more familiarity. In fact, from this time Kulikov's glory greatly 
declined. Success means so much to men. 

C H A P T E R X 
H O W  I L E F T  P R I S O N  
ALL THIS HAPPENED DURING my last year in prison. The last year was al­
most as memorable as the first one, especially the last days in prison. 
But why go into detail! I only remember that that year, in spite of my 
impatience for the end of my time, I found life easier than during all 
my previous years in prison. In the first place I had by then in the 
prison a number of friends and well-wishers, who had quite made 
up their minds that I was a good man. Many of them were devoted to 
me and loved me Sincerely. The "pioneer" almost shed tears when he 
saw me and my comrade off on the day we left the prison, and when, 
after leaving, we spent a month in the town, he came almost every 
day to see us, with no object except to have a look at us. There were 
some of the convicts, however, who remained morose and churlish to 
the end and seemed, God knows why, to grudge having to speak to 
me. It seemed as though there existed a kind of barrier between us. 
I enjoyed more privileges towards the last than in the early years 
of my life in prison. I discovered among the officers serving in the 
town some acquaintances and even old schoolfellows of mine. I re­
newed my acquaintance with them. Through their good offices I was 
able to obtain larger supplies of money, was able to write home and 
even to have books. It was some years since I had read a book, and it 
is difficult to describe the strange and agitating impression of the first 
book I read in the prison. I remember I began reading in the evening 
when the ward was locked up and I read all night long, till daybreak. 
It was a magazine. It was as though news had come to me from 
another world; my former life rose up before me full of light and 
colour, and I tried from what I read to conjecture how far I had 
dropped behind. Had a great deal happened while I had been away, 
what emotions were agitating people now, what questions were oc­
cupying their minds? I pored over every word, tried to read between 
the lines and to find secret meanings and allusions to the past; 
300 

How I Left Prison 
3 0 1  
I looked for traces of what had agitated us in my time. And how sad it 
was for me to realize how remote I was from this new life, how cut 
off I was from it all. I should have to get used to everything afresh, to 
make acquaintance with the new generation again. I pounced with 
special eagerness on articles signed by men I had known and been in­
timate with. But there were new names too; there were new leaders, 
and I was in eager haste to make their acquaintance, and I was vexed 
that I had the prospect of so few books to read, and that it was so dif­
ficult to get hold of them. In old days, under our old major, it was 
positively dangerous to smuggle a book into prison. If there had been 
a search, there would immediately have been questions where the 
book had come from, where one had got it from. It would be sur­
mised that one had acquaintances in the town. And what could I have 
answered to such inquiries? And therefore, living without books I 
had unconsciously become absorbed in myself, set myself problems, 
tried to solve them, worried over them sometimes. But there's no de­
scribing all that! 
I had entered the prison in the winter and therefore I was to leave 
it and be free in the winter too, on the anniversary of my arrival. 
With what impatience I looked forward to the winter, with what en­
joyment at the end of the summer I watched the leaves withering and 
the grass fading in the steppes. And now the summer had passed, the 
autumn wind was howling; at last the first flakes of snow fluttered 
down. At last the winter I had so long looked forward to had come! 
At times my heart began throbbing dumbly at the great thought 
of freedom. But, strange to say, as time went on and the end came 
nearer, the more and more patient I became. In the last few days I was 
really surprised and reproached myself. It seemed to me that I had 
become quite unconcerned and indifferent. Many of the convicts 
who met me in the yard in our leisure time would speak to me and 
congratulate me. 
"You'll soon be going out to freedom, Alexandr Petrovitch, soon, 
soon. You'll leave us all alone, poor devils." 
"And you, Martynov, will your time soon be up?" I would re­
spond. 
"Me! Oh, well, I have another seven years to pine away." 
And he would sigh to himself, stand still and look lost in thought, 
as though staring into the future . . . .  Yes, many joyfully and sincerely 

302 
The House of the Dead 
congratulated me. It seemed to me as though all of them began to be 
more cordial to me. They had evidently begun to think of me as 
no longer one of themselves; they were already taking leave of me. 
K-tchinksky, one of the educated Poles, a quiet and gentle young 
man, was, like me, fond of walking about the yard in his leisure time. 
He hoped by exercise and fresh air to preserve his health and to 
counteract the evil effect of the stifling nights in the prison ward. 
"I am impatiently looking forward to your release," he said with 
a smile, meeting me one day as we walked. "When you leave the 
prison, I shall know that I have exactly a year before I leave." 
I may mention here parenthetically that our dreams and our long 
divorce from the reality made us think of freedom as somehow freer 
than real freedom, that is, than it actually is. The convicts had an ex­
aggerated idea of real freedom, and that is so natural, so characteris­
tic of every convict. Any officer's servant was looked on by us almost 
as in his way a king, almost as the ideal of a free man compared with 
the convicts, simply because he was not shaven and went about un­
fettered and unguarded. 
On the evening before the last day I walked in the dusk for the last 
time all round our prison by the fence. How many thousands of times 
I had walked along that fence during those years! Here behind the 
barracks during my first year in prison I used to pace up and down, 
alone, forlorn and dejected. I remember how I used to reckon then 
how many thousand days were before me. Good God, how long 
ago it was! Here in this corner our eagle had lived in captivity; here 
Petrov often used to meet me. Even now he was constantly at my side. 
He would run up and, as though guessing my thoughts, would walk 
in silence beside me, seeming as though he were secretly wondering. 
Mentally, I took leave of the blackened rough timbered walls of our 
prison. How unfriendly they had seemed to me then, in those first 
days! They, too, must have grown older by now, but I saw no differ­
ence in them. And how much youth lay uselessly buried within those 
walls, what mighty powers were wasted here in vain! After all, one 
must tell the whole truth; those men were exceptional men. Perhaps 
they were the most gifted, the strongest of our people. But their 
mighty energies were vainly wasted, wasted abnormally, unjustly, 
hopelessly. And who was to blame, whose fault was it? 
That's just it, who was to blame? 

How I Left Prison 
303 
Early next morning as soon as it began to get light, before the con­
victs went out to work, I walked through the prison wards to say 
good-bye to all the convicts. Many strong, horny hands were held out 
to me cordially. Some, but they were not many, shook hands quite like 
comrades. Others realized thoroughly that I should at once become 
quite a different sort of man from them. They knew that I had friends 
in the town, that I was going straight from the prison to "the gentry," 
and that I should sit down with them as their equal. They understood 
that and, although they said good-bye to me in a friendly and cordial 
way, they did not speak to me as to a comrade, but as to a gentleman. 
Some turned away from me and sullenly refused to respond to my 
greeting. Some even looked at me with a sort of hatred. 
The drum beat and all went out to work, and I remained at home. 
Sushilov had got up almost before anyone that morning and was do­
ing his utmost to get tea ready for me before he went. Poor Sushilov! 
He cried when I gave him my convict clothes, my shirts, my fetter­
wrappers and some money. "It's not that that I want, not that," he 
said, with difficulty controlling his trembling lips. "It's dreadful los­
ing you, Alexandr Petrovitch! What shall I do here without you!" 
I said good-bye for the last time to Akim Akimitch, too. 
"You'll be going soon, too," I said to him. 
"I've long, very long to be here still," he muttered as he pressed 
my hand. I threw myself on his neck and we kissed. 
Ten minutes after the convicts had gone out, we, too, left the 
prison, never to return. My comrade had entered prison with me and 
we left together. We had to go straight to the blacksmith's to have our 
fetters knocked off. But no guard followed us with a gun; we went 
accompanied only by a sergeant. Our fetters were removed by our 
convicts in the engineer's workshop. While they were doing my com­
rade, I waited and then I, too, went up to the anvil. The blacksmiths 
turned me round so that my back was towards them, lifted my leg up 
and laid it on the anvil. They bestirred themselves, tried to do their 
best, their most skilful. 
"The rivet, the rivet, turn that first of all ! "  the senior commanded, 
"hold it, that's it, that's right. Hit it with the hammer now." 
The fetters fell off. I picked them up. I wanted to hold them in my 
hand, to look at them for the last time. I seemed already to be won­
dering that they could have been on my legs a minute before. 

3 04 
The House of the Dead 
"Well, with God's blessing, with God's blessing! "  said the convicts 
in coarse, abrupt voices, in which, however, there was a note of plea­
sure. 
Yes, with God's blessing! Freedom, new life, resurrection from the 
dead . . . .  What a glorious moment! 

P O O R  F O L K  
A NOVEL 
Ah, these story tellers! If only they would write anything useful, pleas­
ant, soothing, but they will unearth all sorts of hidden things! . . .  I 
would prohibit their writing! Why, it is beyond everything; you 
read . . .  and you can't help thinking-and then all sorts of foolishness 
comes into your head; I would really prohibit their writing; I would 
simply prohibit it altogether. 
PRINCE V. F. ODOEVSKY. 1 


April 8 .  
My PRECIOUS VARVAAA ALEXYEVNA, 
I was happy yesterday. immensely happy. impossibly happy, impos­
sibly happy! For once in your life, you obstinate person, you obeyed me. 
At eight 0' clock in the evening I woke up (you know, little mother, that 
I love a little nap of an hour or two when my work is over) . I got out a 
candle, I got paper ready, was mending a pen when suddenly I chanced 
to raise my eyes-upon my word it set my heart dancing! So you un­
derstood what I wanted, what was my heart's desire! I saw a tiny corner 
of your window-curtain twitched back and caught against the pot of 
balsams, just exactly as I hinted that day. Then I fancied I caught a 
glimpse of your little face at the window, that you were looking at me 
from your little room, that you were thinking of me. And how vexed I 
was, my darling, that I could not make out your charming little face dis­
tinctly! There was a time when we, too, could see clearly. dearie. It is 
poor fun being old, my own! Nowadays everything seems sort of spotty 
before my eyes; if one works a little in the evening, writes something, 
one's eyes are so red and tearful in the morning that one is really 
ashamed before strangers. In my imagination, though, your smile was 
beaming, my little angel, your kind friendly little smile; and I had just 
the same sensation in my heart as when I kissed you, Varinka, do you re­
member, little angel? Do you know, my darling, I even fancied that you 
shook your little finger at me? Did you, you naughty girl? You must be 
sure to describe all that fully in your letter. 
Come, what do you think of our little plan about your curtain, 
Varinka? It is delightful, isn't it? Whether I am Sitting at work, or lying 
down for a nap, or waking up, I know that you are thinking about me 
over there, you are remembering me and that you are well and cheer­
ful. You drop the curtain-it means "Good-bye, Makar Alexyevitch, 
it's bedtime! "  You draw it up-"Good morning, Makar Alexyevitch, 
3 0 7  

308 
Poor Folk 
how have you slept or are you quite well, Makar Alexyevitch? As for 
me, thank God, I am well and all right! " You see, my darling, what a 
clever idea; there is no need of letters! It's cunning, isn't it? And you 
know it was my idea. What do you say to me now, Varvara Alexyevna? 
I beg to inform you, Varvara Alexyevna, my dear, that I slept last 
night excellently, contrary to my expectations, at which I am very 
much pleased; though in new lodgings, after moving, it is always dif­
ficult to sleep; there is always some little thing amiss. 
I got up this morning as gay as a lark! What a fine morning it was, 
my darling! Our window was opened; the sun shone so brightly; the 
birds were chirping; the air was full of the scents of spring and all na­
ture seemed coming back to life-and everything else was to corre­
spond; everything was right, to fit the spring. I even had rather pleasant 
dreams to-day, and my dreams were all of you, Varinka. I compared you 
with a bird of the air created for the delight of men and the adornment 
of nature. Then I thought, Varinka, that we men, living in care and anx­
iety, must envy the careless and innocent happiness of the birds of the 
air-and more of the same sort, like that; that is, I went on making 
such far-fetched comparisons. I have a book, Varinka, and there is the 
same thought in it, all very exactly described. I write this, my darling, 
because one has all sorts of dreams, you know. And now it's spring­
time, so one's thoughts are always so pleasant; witty, amusing, and ten­
der dreams visit one; everything is in a rosy light. That is why I have 
written all this; though, indeed, I took it all out of the book. The author 
there expresses the same desire in verse and writes: 
"Why am I not a bird, a bird of prey! " 
And so on, and so on. There are all sorts of thoughts in it, but never 
mind them now! 
Oh, where were you going this morning, Varvara Alexyevna? Be­
fore I had begun to get ready for the office, you flew out of your room 
exactly like a bird of the air and crossed the yard, looking so gay. How 
glad it made me to look at you! Ah, Varinka, Varinka!-You must not 
be sad; tears are no help to sorrow; I know that, my dear, I know it 
from experience. Now you are so comfortable and you are getting a 
little stronger, too. 
Well, how is your Fedora? Ah, what a good-natured woman she 

Poor Folk 
3 0 9  
is! You must write and tell me, Varinka, how you get on with her now 
and whether you are satisfied with everything. Fedora is rather a 
grumbler; but you must not mind that, Varinka. God bless her! She has 
such a good heart. I have written to you already about Teresa here­
she, too, is a good-natured and trustworthy woman. And how uneasy 
I was about our letters! How were they to be delivered? And behold 
the Lord sent us Teresa to make us happy. She is a good-natured 
woman, mild and long-suffering. But our landlady is simply merciless. 
She squeezes her at work like a rag. 
Well, what a hole I have got into, Varvara Alexyevna! It is a lodg­
ing! I used to live like a bird in the woods, as you know yourself-it 
was so quiet and still that if a fly flew across the room you could hear 
it. Here it is all noise, shouting, uproar! But of course you don't know 
how it is all arranged here. Imagine a long passage, absolutely dark 
and very dirty. On the right hand there is a blank wall, and on the left, 
doors and doors, like the rooms in a hotel, in a long row. Well, these 
are lodgings and there is one room in each; there are people living by 
twos and by threes in one room. It is no use expecting order-it is a 
regular Noah's ark! They seem good sort of people, though, all so well 
educated and learned. One is in the service, a well-read man (he is 
somewhere in the literary department) : he talks about Homer and 
Brambeus2 and authors of all sorts: he talks about everything; a very 
intelligent man! There are two officers who do nothing but play cards. 
There is a naval man; and an English teacher. 
Wait a bit, I will divert you, my darling; I will describe them satiri­
cally in my next letter; that is, I will tell you what they are like in full de­
tail. Our landlady is a very untidy little old woman, she goes about all 
day long in slippers and a dressing-gown, and all day long she is scold­
ing at Teresa. I live in the kitchen, or rather, to be more accurate, there is 
a room near the kitchen (and our kitchen, I ought to tell you, is clean, 
light and very nice) , a little room, a modest corner . . .  or rather the 
kitchen is a big room of three windows so I have a partition running 
along the inside wall, so that it makes as it were another room, an extra 
lodging; it is roomy and comfortable, and there is a window and all-in 
fact, every convenience. Well, so that is my little corner. So don't you 
imagine, my darling, there is anything else about it, any mysterious sig­
nificance in it; "here he is living in the kitchen! "  you'll say. Well, if you 
like, I really am living in the kitchen, behind the partition, but that is 

3 1 0  
Poor Folk 
nothing; I am quite private, apart from everyone, quiet and snug. I have 
put in a bed, a table, a chest of drawers and a couple of chairs, and I have 
hung up the ikon. It is true there are better lodgings-perhaps there may 
be much better, but convenience is the great thing; I have arranged it all 
for my own convenience, you know, and you must not imagine it is for 
anything else. Your little window is opposite, across the yard; and the 
yard is narrow, one catches glimpses of you passing-it is more cheerful 
for a poor, lonely fellow like me, and cheaper, too. The very cheapest 
room here with board costs thirty-five roubles in paper: beyond my 
means; but my lodging costs me seven roubles in paper and my board 
five in silver-that is, twenty-four and a half, and before I used to pay 
thirty and make it up by going without a great many things. I did not al­
ways have tea, but now I can spare enough for tea and sugar, too. And 
you know, my dear, one is ashamed as it were not to drink tea; here they 
are all well-to-do people so one feels ashamed. One drinks it, Varinka, 
for the sake of the other people, for the look of the thing; for myself I 
don't care, I am not particular. Think, too, of pocket-money --one must 
have a certain amount-then some sort of boots and clothes-is there 
much left? My salary is all I have. I am content and don't repine. It is suf­
ficient. It has been sufficient for several years; there are extras, too. 
Well, good-bye, my angel. I have bought a couple of pots of bal­
sam and geranium--quite cheap-but perhaps you love mignonette? 
Well, there is mignonette, too, you write and tell me; be sure to write 
me everything as fully as possible, you know. Don't you imagine any­
thing, though, or have any doubts about my having taken such a 
room, Varinka dear; no, it is my own convenience made me take it, 
and only the convenience of it tempted me. I am putting by money, 
you know, my darling, I am saving up: I have quite a lot of money. You 
must not think I am such a softy that a fly might knock me down with 
his wing. No, indeed, my own, I am not a fool, and I have as strong a 
will as a man of resolute and tranquil soul ought to have. Good-bye, 
my angel! I have scribbled you almost two sheets and I ought to have 
been at the office long ago. I kiss your fingers, my own, and remain 
Your humble and faithful friend, 
MAKAR DYEvUSHKIN. 
P.S.-One thing I beg you: answer me as fully as possible, my an­
gel. I am sending you a pound of sweets with this, Varinka. You eat 

Poor Folk 
3 1 1  
them up and may they do you good, and for God's sake do not worry 
about me and make a fuss. Well, good-bye then, my precious. 
April 8 .  
DEAR SIR, MAKAR ALEXYEVITCH, 
Do you know I shall have to quarrel with you outright at last. I 
swear to you, dear Makar Alexyevitch, that it really hurts me to take 
your presents. I know what they cost you, how you deny yourself, 
and deprive yourself of what is necessary. How many times have I 
told you that I need nothing, absolutely nothing ; that I shall never be 
able to repay you for the kindnesses you have showered upon me? 
And why have you sent me these flowers? Well, the balsams I don't 
mind, but why the geranium? I have only to drop an incautious 
word, for instance, about that geranium, and you rush off and buy 
it. I am sure it must have been expensive? How charming the flow­
ers are! Crimson, in little crosses. Where did you get such a pretty 
geranium? I have put it in the middle of the window in the most 
conspicuous place; I am putting a bench on the floor and arranging 
the rest of the flowers on the bench; you just wait until I get rich 
myself! Fedora is overjoyed; it's like paradise now, in our room-so 
clean, so bright! 
Now, why those sweets? Upon my word, I guessed at once from 
your letter that there was something amiss with you-nature and 
spring and the sweet scents and the birds chirping. "What's this," I 
thought, "isn't it poetry?" Yes, indeed, your letter ought to have been 
in verse, that was all that was wanting, Makar Alexyevitch! There are 
the tender sentiments and dreams in roseate hues-everything in it! 
As for the curtain, I never thought of it; I suppose it got hitched up of 
itself when I moved the flower-pots, so there! 
Ah, Makar Alexyevitch! Whatever you may say, however you 
may reckon over your income to deceive me, to prove that your 
money is all spent on yourself, you won't take me in and you won't 
hide anything from me. It is clear that you are depriving yourself of 
necessities for my sake. What possessed you, for instance, to take 
such a lodging? Why, you will be disturbed and worried; you are 
cramped for room, uncomfortable. You love solitude, and here, 
goodness knows what you have all about you! You might live a great 

3 1 2  
Poor Folk 
deal better, judging from your salary. Fedora says you used to live 
ever so much better than you do now. Can you have spent all your 
life like this in solitude, in privation, without pleasure, without a 
friendly affectionate word, a lodger among strangers? Ah, dear 
friend, how sorry I am for you! Take care of your health, anyway, 
Makar Alexyevitch! You say your eyes are weak; so you must not 
write by candlelight; why write? Your devotion to your work must 
be known to your superiors without that. 
Once more I entreat you not to spend so much money on me. I 
know that you love me, but you are not well off yourself . . .  I got up 
this morning feeling gay, too. I was so happy; Fedora had been at work 
a long time and had got work for me, too. I was so delighted; I only 
went out to buy silk and then I set to work. The whole morning I felt 
so lighthearted, I was so gay! But now it is all black thoughts and sad­
ness again; my heart keeps aching. 
Ah, what will become of me, what will be my fate! What is 
painful is that I am in such uncertainty, that I have no future to look 
forward to, that I cannot even guess what will become of me. It is 
dreadful to look back, too. There is such sorrow in the past, and my 
heart is torn in two at the very memory of it. All my life I shall be in 
suffering, thanks to the wicked people who have ruined me. 
It is getting dark. Time for work. I should have liked to have writ­
ten to you of lots of things but I have not the time, I must get to work. 
I must make haste. Of course letters are a good thing; they make it 
more cheerful, anyway. But why do you never come to see us your­
self? Why is that, Makar Alexyevitch? Now we are so near, you know, 
and sometimes you surely can make time. Please do come! I have seen 
your Teresa. She looks such a Sickly creature; I felt sorry for her and 
gave her twenty kopecks. Yes! I was almost forgetting : you must write 
to me all about your life and your surroundings as fully as possible. 
What sort of people are they about you and do you get on with them? 
I am longing to know all that. Mind you write to me! To-day I will 
hitch up the curtain on purpose. You should go to bed earlier; last 
night I saw your light till midnight. Well, good-bye. To-day I am mis­
erable and bored and sad! It seems it is an unlucky day! Good-bye. 
Yours, 
VARVARA DOBROSELOV. 

Poor Folk 
3 1 3  
April 8. 
DEAR MADAM, VARVARA ALEXYEVNA, 
Yes, dear friend, yes, my own, it seems it was a bad day for poor 
luckless me! Yes; you mocked at an old man like me, Varvara 
Alexyevna! It was my fault, though, entirely my fault! I ought not in 
my oid age, with scarcely any hair on my head, to have launched out 
into lyrical nonsense and fine phrases . . . .  And I will say more, my 
dear: man is sometimes a strange creature, very strange. My goodness! 
he begins talking of something and is carried away directly! And what 
comes of it, what does it lead to? Why, absolutely nothing comes ofit, 
and it leads to such nonsense that-Lord preserve me! I am not angry, 
Varinka dear, only I am very much vexed to remember it all, vexed 
that I wrote to you in such a foolish, high-flown way. And I went to 
the office to-day so cock-a-hoop; there was such radiance in my heart. 
For no rhyme or reason there was a regular holiday in my soul; I felt 
so gay. I took up my papers eagerly-but what did it all amount to! As 
soon as I looked about me, everything was as before, grey and dingy. 
Still the same ink-spots, the same tables and papers, and I, too, was 
just the same; as I always have been, so I was still-so what reason was 
there to mount upon Pegasus? And what was it all due to? The sun 
peeping out and the sky growing blue! Was that it? And how could I 
talk of the scents of spring? when you never know what there may be 
in our yard under the windows! I suppose I fancied all that in my fool­
ishness. You know a man does sometimes make such mistakes in his 
own feelings and writes nonsense. That is due to nothing but foolish, 
excessive warmth of heart. 
I did not walk but crawled home. For no particular reason my 
head had begun to ache; well that, to be sure, was one thing on the 
top of another. (I suppose I got a chill to my spine.) I was so delighted 
with the spring, like a fool, that I went out in a thin greatcoat. And you 
were mistaken in my feelings, my dear! 
You took my outpouring of them qUite in the wrong way. I was 
inspired by fatherly affection-nothing but a pure fatherly affection, 
Varvara Alexyevna. For I take the place of a father to you, in your sad 
fatherless .and motherless state; I say this from my soul, from a pure 
heart, as a relation. After all, though, I am but a distant relation, as the 

3 1 4 
Poor Folk 
proverb says "only the seventh water on the jelly," still I am a relation 
and now your nearest relation and protector; seeing that where you 
had most right to look for protection and support you have met with 
insult and treachery. As for verses, let me tell you, my love, it would 
not be seemly for me in my oId age to be making verses. Poetry 
is nonsense! Why, boys are thrashed at school nowadays for making 
poetry . . .  so that is how it is, my dear . . . .  
What are you writing to me, Varvara Alexyevna, about comfort, 
about quiet and all sorts of things? I am not particular, my dear soul, I 
am not exacting. I have never lived better than I am doing now; so why 
should I be hard to please in my oid age? I am well fed and clothed and 
shod; and it is not for us to indulge our whims! We are not royalties! 
My father was not of noble rank and his income was less than mine for 
his whole family. I have not lived in the lap of luxury! However, if I 
must tell the truth, everything was a good deal better in my oId lodg­
ing; it was more roomy and convenient, dear friend. Of course my 
present lodging is nice, even in some respects more cheerful, and more 
varied if you like; I have nothing to say against that but yet I regret the 
old one. We old, that is elderly people, get used to old things as though 
to something akin to use. The room was a little one, you know; the 
walls were . . .  there, what is the use of talking! . . .  the walls were like 
all other walls, they don't matter, and yet remembering all my past 
makes me depressed . . .  it's a strange thing: it's painful, yet the memo­
ries are, as it were, pleasant. Even what was nasty, what I was vexed 
with at the time, is, as it were, purified from nastiness in my memory 
and presents itself in an attractive shape to my imagination. We lived 
peacefully, Varinka, I and my oId landlady who is dead. I remember my 
old landlady with a sad feeling now. She was a good woman and did 
not charge me much for my lodging. She used to knit all sorts of rugs 
out of rags on needles a yard long. She used to do nothing else. We used 
to share light and fuel, so we worked at one table. She had a grand­
daughter, Masha-I remember her quite a little thing. Now she must 
be a girl of thirteen. She was such a mischievous little thing-very 
merry. always kept us amused, and we lived together, the three of us. 
Sometimes in the long winter evenings we would sit down to the 
round table, drink a cup of tea and then set to work. And to keep Masha 
amused and out of mischief the old lady used to begin to tell tales. And 

Poor Folk 
3 1 5  
what tales they were! A sensible intelligent man would listen to them 
with pleasure, let alone a child. Why, I used to light my pipe and be so 
interested that I forgot my work. And the child, our little mischief. 
would be so grave, she would lean her rosy cheek on her little hand, 
open her pretty little mouth and, if the story were the least bit terrible, 
she would huddle up to the old woman. And we liked to look at her; 
and did not notice how the candle wanted snuffing nor hear the wind 
roaring and the storm raging outside. 
We had a happy life, Varinka, and we lived together for almost 
twenty years. 
But how I have been prattling on! Perhaps you don't care for such 
a subject, and it is not very cheering for me to remember it, especially 
just now in the twilight. Teresa's busy about something, my head 
aches and my back aches a little, too. And my thoughts are so queer, 
they seem to be aching as well. I am sad to-day, Varinka! 
What's this you write, my dear? How can I come and see you? My 
darling, what would people say? Why, I should have to cross the yard, 
our folks would notice it, would begin asking questions-there would 
be gossip, there would be scandal, they would put a wrong construction 
on it. No, my angel, I had better see you to-morrow at the evening ser­
vice, that will be more sensible and more prudent for both of us. And 
don't be vexed with me, my precious, for writing you such a letter; 
reading it over I see it is al so incoherent. I am an old man, Varinka, and 
not well-educated; I had no education in my youth and now I could get 
nothing into my head if I began studying over again. I am aware, 
Varinka, that I am no hand at writing, and I know without anyone else 
pointing it out and laughing at me that if I were to try to write some­
thing more amusing I should only write nonsense. 
I saw you at your window to-day, I saw you let down your blind. 
Good-bye, good-bye, God keep you! Good-bye, Varvara Alexyevna. 
Your disinterested friend, 
MAKAR DYEVUSHKIN. 
P.S.-I can't write satirical accounts of anyone now, my dear. I am 
too old, Varvara Alexyevna, to be facetiOUS, and I should make myself a 
laughing-stock; as the proverb has it: "those who live in glass houses 
should not throw stones." 

3 1 6  
Poor Folk 
April 9. 
DEAR SIR, MAKAR ALEXYEVITCH, 
Come, are not you ashamed, Makar Alexyevitch, my friend 
and benefactor, to be so depressed and naughty? Surely you are not 
offended! Oh, I am often too hasty, but I never thought that you 
would take my words for a biting jest. Believe me, I could never dare to 
jest at your age and your character. It has all happened through my 
thoughtlessness, or rather from my being horribly dull, and dullness 
may drive one to anything! I thought that you meant to make fun 
yourself in your letter. I felt dreadfully sad when I saw that you were 
displeased with me. No, my dear friend and benefactor, you are wrong 
if you ever suspect me of being unfriendly and ungrateful. In my heart 
I know how to appreciate all you have done for me, defending me 
from wicked people, from their persecution and hatred. I shall pray for 
you always, and if my prayer rises to God and heaven accepts it you will 
be happy. 
I feel very unwell to-day. I am feverish and shivering by turns. Fe­
dora is very anxious about me. There is no need for you to be ashamed 
to come and see us, Makar Alexyevitch; what business is it of other 
people's! We are acquaintances, and that is all about it . . . .  
Good-bye, Makar Alexyevitch. I have nothing more to write now, 
and indeed I can't write; I am horribly unwell. I beg you once more 
not to be angry with me and to rest assured of the invariable respect 
and devotion, 
With which I have the honour to remain, 
Your most devoted and obedient servant, 
VARVARA DOBROSELOV: 
April 1 2 .  
DEAR MADAM, VARVARA ALEXYEVNA, 
Oh, my honey, what is the matter with you! This is how you 
frighten me every time. I write to you in every letter to take care of 
yourself, to wrap yourself up, not to go out in bad weather, to be cau­
tious in every way-and, my angel, you don't heed me. Ah, my dar­
ling, you are just like some child! Why, you are frail, frail as a little 
straw, I know that. If there is the least little wind, you fall il. So you 

Poor Folk 
3 1 7  
must be careful, look after yourself, avoid risks and not reduce your 
friends to grief and distress. 
You express the desire, dear Varinka, to have a full account of my 
daily life and all my surroundings. r gladly hasten to carry out your 
wish, my dear. r will begin from the beginning, my love: it will be 
more orderly. 
To begin with, the staircases to the front entrance are very passable 
in our house; especially the main staircase-it is clean, light, wide, all 
cast-iron and mahogany, but don't ask about the backstairs: winding 
like a screw, damp, dirty, with steps broken and the walls so greasy that 
your hand sticks when you lean against them. On every landing there 
are boxes, broken chairs and cupboards, rags hung out, windows bro­
ken, tubs stand about full of all sorts of dirt and litter, eggshells and the 
refuse of fish; there is a horrid smell . . .  in fact it is not nice. 
r have already described the arrangement of the rooms; it is con­
venient, there is no denying; that is true, but it is rather stuffy in 
them. r don't mean that there is a bad smell, but, if r may so express 
it, a rather decaying, acrid, sweetish smell. At first it makes an un­
favourable impression, but that is of no consequence; one has only to 
be a couple of minutes among us and it passes off and you don't 
notice how it passes off for you begin to smell bad yourself, your 
clothes smell, your hands smell and everything smells--well, you get 
used to it. Siskins simply die with us. The naval man is just buying the 
fifth-they can't live in our air and that is the long and short of it. 
Our kitchen is big, roomy and light. In the mornings, it is true, it is 
rather stifling when they are cooking fish or meat and splashing and 
slopping water everywhere, but in the evening it is paradise. In our 
kitchen there is always old linen hanging on a line; and as my room 
is not far off, that is, is almost part of the kitchen, the smell of it does 
worry me a little; but no matter, in time one gets used to anything. 
Very early in the morning the hubbub begins, people moving 
about, walking, knocking-everyone who has to is getting up, some 
to go to the office, others about their own business; they all begin 
drinking tea. The samovars for the most part belong to the landlady; 
there are few of them, so we all use them in turn, and if anyone goes 
with his teapot out of his turn, he catches it. 
I, for instance, the first time made that mistake, and . . .  but 
why describe it? I made the acquaintance of everyone at once. The 

3 1 8  
Poor Folk 
naval man was the first I got to know; he is such an open fellow, told 
me everything : about his father and mother, about his sister married 
to an assessor in Tula, and about the town of Kronstadt. He promised to 
protect me and at once invited me to tea with him. I found him in 
the room where they usually play cards. There they gave me tea and 
were very insistent that I should play a game of chance with them. 
Whether they were laughing at me or not I don't know, but they were 
losing the whole night and they were still playing when I went away. 
Chalk, cards-and the room so full of smoke that it made my eyes 
smart. I did not play and they at once observed that I was talking of 
philosophy. After that no one said another word to me the whole time; 
but to tell the truth I was glad of it. I am not going to see them now; 
it's gambling with them, pure gambling. The clerk in the literary de­
partment has little gatherings in the evening, too. Well, there it is nice, 
quiet, harmless and delicate; everything is on a refined footing. 
Well, Varinka, I will remark in passing that our landlady is a very 
horrid woman and a regular old hag. You've seen Teresa. You know 
what she is like, as thin as a plucked, dried-up chicken. There are two 
of them in the house, Teresa and Faldoni.3 I don't know whether he 
has any other name, he always answers to that one and everyone calls 
him that. He is a red-haired, foul-tongued Finn, with only one eye 
and a snub nose: he is always swearing at Teresa, they almost fight. 
On the whole life here is not exactly perfect at all times . . . .  
If only all would go to sleep at once at night and be quiet-that 
never happens. They are for ever sitting somewhere playing, and 
sometimes things go on that one would be ashamed to describe. By 
now I have grown accustomed to it; but I wonder how people with 
families get along in such a Bedlam. There is a whole family of poor 
creatures living in one of our landlady's rooms, not in the same row 
with the other lodgings but on the other side, in a corner apart. They 
are quiet people! No one hears anything of them. They live in one 
little room dividing it with a screen. He is a clerk out of work, dis­
charged from the service seven years ago for something. His name is 
Gorshkov-such a grey little man; he goes about in such greasy, 
such threadbare clothes that it is sad to see him; ever so much worse 
than mine. He is a pitiful, decrepit figure (we sometimes meet in the 
passage) ; his knees shake, his hands shake, his head shakes, from 
some illness I suppose, poor fellow. He is timid, afraid of everyone 

Poor Folk 
3 1 9  
and sidles along edgeways; I am shy at times, but he is a great deal 
worse. His family consists of a wife and three children. The eldest, a 
boy, is just like his father, just as frail. The wife was once very good­
looking, even now one can see it; she, poor thing, goes about in pitiful 
tatters. They are in debt to the landlady, I have heard, she is none too 
gracious to them. I have heard, too, that there is some unpleasant 
business hanging over Gorshkov in connection with which he lost 
his place . . . .  Whether it is a lawsuit-whether he is to be tried, or 
prosecuted , or what, I can't tell you for certain. Poor they are, mercy 
on us! It is always still and quiet in their room as if no one were liv­
ing there. There is no sound even of the children. And it never hap­
pens that the children frolic about and play, and that is a bad sign. 
One evening I happened to pass their door; it was unusually quiet 
in the house at the time; I heard a sobbing, then a whisper, then 
sobbing again as though they were crying but so quietly, so pitifully 
that it was heart-rending, and the thought of those poor creatures 
haunted me all night so that I could not get to sleep properly. 
Well, good-bye, my precious little friend, Varinka. I have de­
scribed everything to the best of my abilities. I have been thinking of 
nothing but you all day. My heart aches over you, my dear. I know, my 
love, you have no warm cloak. Ah! these Petersburg springs, these 
winds and rain mixed with snow-they'll be the death of me, Varinka! 
Such salubrious airs, Lord preserve us! 
Don't scorn my description, my love. I have no style, Varinka, no 
style whatever. I only wish I had. I write just what comes into my head 
only to cheer you up with something. If only I had had some educa­
tion it would have been a different matter, but how much education 
have I had? Not a ha'porth. 
HONOURED SIR, MAKER ALEXYEVITCH, 
Always your faithful friend, 
MAKAR DYEVUSHKIN. 
April 2 5 .  
I met my cousin Sasha to-day! It is horrible! She will be ruined 
too, poor thing! I heard, too, from other sources that Anna Fyodorovna 
is still making inquiries about me. It seems as though she will never 
leave off persecuting me. She says that she wants to forgive me, to forget all 

3 2 0  
Poor Folk 
the past and that she must come and see me. She says that you are no re­
lation to me at all, that she is a nearer relation, that you have no right to 
meddle in our family affairs and that it is shameful and shocking to live 
on your charity and at your expense . . . .  She says that I have forgotten 
her hospitality, that she saved mother and me from starving to death, 
perhaps, that she gave us food and drink, and for more than a year and 
a half was put to expense on our account, and that besides all that she 
forgave us a debt. Even mother she will not spare! and if only poor 
mother knew how they have treated me! God sees it! . . .  Anna Fyodor­
ovna says that I was so silly that I did not know how to take advantage 
of my luck, that she put me in the way of good luck, that she is not to 
blame for anything else, and that I myself was not able or perhaps was 
not anxious to defend my own honour. Who was to blame in that, 
great God! She says that Mr. Bykov was perfectly right and that he 
would not marry just anybody who . . .  but why write it! 
It is cruel to hear such falsehoods, Makar Alexyevitch! I can't tell 
you what a state I am in now. I am trembling, crying, sobbing. I have 
been two hours over writing this letter to you. I thought that at least 
she recognised how wrongly she had treated me; and you see what 
she is now! 
For God's sake don't be alarmed, my friend, the one friend who 
wishes me well! Fedora exaggerates everything, I am not ill. I only 
caught cold a little yesterday when I went to the requiem service for 
mother at Volkovo. Why did you not come with me? I begged you so 
much to do so. Ah, my poor, poor mother, if she could rise from the 
grave, if she could see how they have treated me! 
V. D. 
May 2 0 .  
M y  DARLING VARINKA, 
I send you a few grapes, my love; I am told they are good for a 
convalescent and the doctor recommends them for quenching the 
thirst-simply for thirst. You were longing the other day for a few 
roses, my darling, so I am sending you some now. Have you any ap­
petite, my love?-that is the most important thing. 
Thank God, though, that it is all over and done with, and that our 
troubles, too, will be soon at an end. We must give thanks to heaven! 

Poor Folk 
3 2 1  
As for books, I cannot get hold of them anywhere for the mo­
ment. I am told there is a good book here written in very fine lan­
guage; they say it is good, I have not read it myself, but it is very much 
praised here. I have asked for it and they have promised to lend it me, 
only will you read it? You are so hard to please in that line; it is difficult 
to satisfy your taste, I know that already, my darling. No doubt you 
want poetry, inspiration, lyrics-well, I will get poems too, I will get 
anything; there is a manuscript book full of extracts here. 
I am getting on very well. Please don't be uneasy about me, my 
dearie. What Fedora told you about me is all nonsense; you tell her that 
she told a lie, be sure to tell her so, the wicked gossip! . . .  I have not sold 
my new uniform. And why should I . . .  judge for yourself, why should 
I sell it? Here, I am told, I have forty roubles bonus coming to me, so 
why should I sell it? Don't you worry, my precious; she's suspicious, 
your Fedora, she's suspicious. We shall get on splendidly, my darling! 
Only you get well, my angel, for God's sake, get well. Don't grieve your 
old friend. Who told you I had grown thin? It is slander, slander again! 
I am well and hearty and getting so fat that I am quite ashamed. I am 
well fed and well content: the only thing is for you to get strong again! 
Come, good-bye, my angel; I kiss your little fingers, 
And remain, always, 
Your faithful friend, 
MAKAR DYEVUSHKIN. 
P'S.-Ah, my love, what do you mean by writing like that 
again? . . .  What nonsense you talk! Why, how can I come and see you 
so often, my precious? I ask you how can I? Perhaps snatching a 
chance after dark; but there, there's scarcely any night at all now,4 at 
this season. As it was, my angel, I scarcely left you at all while you 
were ill, while you were unconscious; but really I don't know how I 
managed it all; and afterwards I gave up going to you for people had 
begun to be inquisitive and to ask questions. There had been gossip 
going about here, even apart from that. I rely upon Teresa; she is not 
one to talk; but think for yourself, my darling, what a to-do there will 
be when they find out everything about us. They will imagine some­
thing and what will they say then? So you must keep a brave heart, my 
darling, and wait until you are qUite strong again; and then we will 
arrange a rendezvous somewhere out of doors. 

3 2 2  
Poor Folk 
June 1 .  
My DEAR MAKAR ALEXYEVITCH, 
I so long to do something nice that will please you in return for 
all the care and trouble you have taken about me, and all your love for 
me, that at last I have overcome my disinclination to rummage in my 
chest and find my diary. which I am sending to you now. I began it in 
the happy time of my life. You used often to question me with curios­
ity about my manner of life in the past, my mother, Pokrovskoe, my 
time with Anna Fyodorovna and my troubles in the recent past, and 
you were so impatiently anxious to read the manuscript in which I 
took the fancy, God knows why, to record some moments of my life 
that I have no doubt the parcel I am sending will be a pleasure to you. 
It made me sad to read it over. I feel that I am twice as old as when I 
wrote the last line in that diary. It was all written at different dates. 
Good-bye, Makar Alexyevitch! I feel horribly depressed now and of­
ten I am troubled with sleeplessness. Convalescence is a very dreary 
business !  
v. n. 

I 
I WAS ONLY FOURTEEN when my father died. My childhood was the hap­
piest time of my life. It began not here but far away in a province in 
the wilds. My father was the steward of Prince p" s  huge estate in the 
province ofT--. We lived in one of the Prince's villages and led a 
quiet, obscure, happy life . . . .  I was a playful little thing; I used to do 
nothing but run about the fields, the copses and the gardens, and no 
one troubled about me. My father was constantly busy about his 
work, my mother looked after the house; no one taught me anything, 
for which I was very glad. Sometimes at daybreak I would run away 
either to the pond or to the copse or to the hayfield or to the 
reapers-and it did not matter that the sUIl was baking, that I was 
running, I did not know where, away froIll the village, that I was 
scratched by the bushes, that I tore my dress . . . .  I should be scolded 
afterwards at home, but I did not care for that. 
And it seems to me that I should have been so happy if it had been 
my lot to have spent all my life in one place and never to have left the 
country. But I had to leave my native place while I was still a child. I 
was only twelve when we moved to Petersburg. Ah, how well I re­
member our sorrowful preparations! How I cried when I said good­
bye to everything that was so dear to me. r remember that I threw 
myself on father's neck and besought him with tears to remain a little 
longer in the country. Father scolded me, mother wept; she said that 
we had to go, that we could not help it. Old Prince P-- was dead. 
His heirs had discharged father from his post. Father had some 
money in the hands of private persons in Petersburg. Hoping to im­
prove his position he thought his presence here in person essential. 
All this I learnt from mother. We settled here on the Petersburg Side 
and lived in the same spot up to the time of father's death. 
How hard it was for me to get used to our new life! We moved to 
Petersburg in the autumn. When we left the country it was a clear, 
warm, brilliant day; the work of the fields was over; huge stacks of 
wheat were piled up on the threshing-floors and flocks of birds were 
3 2 3  

324 
Poor Folk 
calling about the fields; everything was so bright and gay: here as we 
came into the town we found rain, damp autumn chilliness, muggy 
greyness, sleet and a crowd of new, unknown faces, unwelcoming, 
ill-humoured, angry! We settled in somehow. I remember we were all 
in such a fuss, so troubled and busy in arranging our new life. Father 
was never at home, mother had not a quiet minute-I was forgotten 
altogether. I felt sad getting up in the morning after the first night in 
our new abode-our windows looked out on a yellow fence. The 
street was always covered with mud. The passers-by were few and they 
were all muffled up, they were all so cold. And for whole days together 
it was terribly miserable and dreary at home. We had scarcely a rela­
tion or intimate acquaintance. Father was not on friendly terms with 
Anna Fyodorovna. (He was in her debt.) People came on business to 
us pretty often. Usually they quarrelled, shouted and made an uproar. 
After every visit father was ill-humoured and cross; he would walk up 
and down the room by the hour together, frowning and not saying a 
word to anyone. Mother was silent then and did not dare to speak to 
him. I used to sit in a corner over a book, still and quiet, not daring 
to stir. 
Three months after we came to Petersburg I was sent to boarding­
school. How sad I was at first with strangers! Everything was so cold, 
so unfriendly' The teachers had such loud voices, the girls laughed 
at me so and I was such a wild creature. It was so stern and exacting! 
The fixed hours for everything, the meals in common, the tedious 
teachers-all that at first fretted and harassed me. I could not even 
sleep there. I used to cry the whole night, the long, dreary, cold night. 
Sometimes when they were all repeating or learning their lessons in 
the evening I would sit over my French translation or vocabularies, 
not daring to move and dreaming all the while of our little home, of 
father, of mother, of our old nurse, of nurse's stories . . . .  Oh, how I 
used to grieve! The most trifting thing in the house I would recall 
with pleasure. I would keep dreaming how nice it would be now at 
home! I should be sitting in our little room by the samovar with my 
own people; it would be so warm, so nice, so familiar. How, I used to 
think, I would hug mother now, how tightly, how warmly! One 
would think and think and begin crying softly from misery, choking 
back one's tears, and the vocabularies would never get into one's 
head. I could not learn my lessons for next day; all night I would 

Poor Folk 
3 2 5  
dream of the teacher, the mistress, the girls; all night I would be re­
peating my lessons in my sleep and would not know them next day. 
They would make me kneel down and give me only one dish for din­
ner. I was so depressed and dejected. At first all the girls laughed at me 
and teased me and tried to confuse me when I was saying my lessons, 
pinched me when in rows we walked into dinner or tea, made com­
plaints against me to the teacher for next to nothing. But how heav­
enly it was when nurse used to come for me on Saturday evening. I 
used to hug the old darling in a frenzy of joy. She would put on my 
things, and wrap me up, and could not keep pace with me, while 
I would chatter and chatter and tell her everything. I would arrive 
home gay and happy, would hug everyone as though I had been away 
for ten years. There would be explanations, talks; descriptions would 
begin. I would greet everyone, laugh, giggle, skip and run about. 
Then there would be serious conversations with father about our stud­
ies, our teachers, French, Lomond's grammar,s and we were all so 
pleased and happy. It makes me happy even now to remember those 
minutes. I tried my very utmost to learn and please father. I saw he was 
spending his last farthing on me and God knows what straits he was 
in. Every day he grew more gloomy, more ill-humoured, more angry. 
His character was quite changed, his business was unsuccessful, he 
had a mass of debts. Mother was sometimes afraid to cry, afraid to say 
a word for fear of making father angry. She was getting quite ill, was 
getting thinner and thinner and had begun to have a bad cough. 
When I came back from school I used to find such sad faces, 
mother weeping stealthily, father angry. Then there would be scolding 
and upbraiding. Father would begin saying that I was no joy, no com­
fort to them; that they were depriving themselves of everything for 
my sake and I could not speak French yet; in fact all his failures, all his 
misfortunes were vented on me and mother. And how could he worry 
poor mother! It was heartrending to look at her; her cheeks were hol­
low, her eyes were sunken, there was a hectic flush in her face. 
I used to come in for more scolding than anyone. It always began 
with trifles, and goodness knows what it went on to. Often I did 
not understand what it was about. Everything was a subject of 
complaint! . . .  French and my being a great dunce and that the mis­
tress of our school was a careless, stupid woman; that she paid no at­
tention to our morals, that father was still unable to find a job, that 

3 2 6  
Poor Folk 
Lomond's was a very poor grammar and that Zapolsky's was very 
much better,6 that a lot of money had been thrown away on me, that 
I was an unfeeling, stony-hearted girl-in fact, though I, poor thing, 
was striving my utmost, repeating conversations and vocabularies, I 
was to blame for everything, I was responsible for everything! And 
this was not because father did not love me; he was devoted to 
mother and me, but it was just his character. 
Anxieties, disappointments, failures worried my poor father to 
distraction; he became suspicious, bitter; often he was close upon de­
spair, he began to neglect his health, caught cold and all at once fell 
ill. He did not suffer long, but died so suddenly, so unexpectedly that 
we were all beside ourselves with the shock for some days. Mother 
seemed stunned; I actually feared for her reason. 
As soon as father was dead creditors seemed to spring up from 
everywhere and rushed upon us like a torrent. Everything we had we 
gave them. Our little house on Petersburg Side, which father had 
bought six months after moving to Petersburg, was sold too. I don't 
know how they settled the rest, but we were left without refuge, 
without sustenance. Mother was suffering from a wasting disease, we 
could not earn our bread, we had nothing to live on, ruin stared us in 
the face. I was then only just fourteen. It was at this point that Anna 
Fyodorovna visited us. She always said that she owned landed estates 
and that she was some sort of relation of ours. Mother said, too, that 
she was a relation, only a very distant one. While father was alive she 
never came to see us. She made her appearance now with tears in her 
eyes and said she felt great sympathy for us; she condoled with us on 
our loss and our poverty-stricken condition; added that it was father's 
own fault; that he had lived beyond his means, had borrowed right 
and left and that he had been too self-confident. She expressed a de­
sire to be on more friendly terms with us, said we must let by-gones 
be by-gones; when mother declared she had never felt any hostility 
towards her, she shed tears, took mother to church and ordered a re­
quiem service for the "dear man". (That was how she referred to fa­
ther.) After that she was solemnly reconciled to mother. 
After leading up to the subject in many lengthy preambles, Anna 
Fyodorovna first depicted in glaring colours our poverty-stricken and 
forlorn position, our helplessness and hopelessness, and then invited 
us, as she expressed it, to take refuge with her. Mother thanked her, 

Poor Folk 
3 2 7  
but for a long time could not make up her mind to accept; but see­
ing that there was nothing else she could do and no help for it, she 
told Anna Fyodorovna at last that we would accept her offer with 
gratitude. 
I remember as though it were to-day the morning on which we 
moved from the Petersburg Side to Vassilyevsky Ostrov. It was a clear, 
dry, frosty autumn morning. Mother was crying. I felt horribly sad; 
my heart was torn and ached with a terrible inexplicable misery . . .  
it was a terrible time . . . .  

I I  
AT FIRST TILL wE-that is mother and I-had grown used to our new 
home we both felt strange and miserable at Anna Fyodorovna's. Anna 
Fyodorovna lived in a house of her own in Sixth Row. There were 
only five living-rooms in the house. In three of them lived Anna Fyo­
dorovna and my cousin Sasha, a child who was being brought up by 
her, an orphan, fatherless and motherless. Then we lived in one room, 
and in the last room, next to ours, there was a poor student called 
Pokrovsky who was lodging in the house. 
Anna Fyodorovna lived very well, in a more wealthy style than one 
could have expected; but her fortune was mysterious and so were her 
pursuits. She was always in a bustle, was always full of business, she 
drove out and came back several times a day; but what she was doing, 
what she was in a fuss about and with what object she was busy I 
could never make out. She had a large and varied circle of acquain­
tances. Visitors were always calling upon her, and the queerest people, 
always on business of some sort and to see her for a minute. Mother 
always carried me off to my room as soon as the bell rang. Anna Fyo­
dorovna was horribly vexed with mother for this and was continually 
repeating that we were too proud, that we were proud beyond our 
means, that we had nothing to be proud about, and she would go on 
like that for hours together. I did not understand these reproaches at 
the time and, in fact, it is only now that I have found out, or rather that 
I guess why mother could not make up her mind to live with Anna 
Fyodorovna. Anna Fyodorovna was a spiteful woman, she was contin­
ually tormenting us. To this day it is a mystery to me why it was she 
invited us to live with her. At first she was fairly nice to us, but after­
wards she began to show her real character as soon as she saw we 
were utterly helpless and had nowhere else to go. Later on she became 
very affectionate to me, even rather coarsely affectionate and flatter­
ing, but at first I suffered in the same way as mother. Every minute she 
was upbraiding us, she did nothing but talk of her charitable deeds. 
She introduced us to outsiders as her poor relations-a helpless 
3 2 8  

Poor Folk 
3 2 9  
widow and orphan to whom in the kindness of her heart, out of 
Christian charity, she had given a home. At meals she watched every 
morsel we took, while if we did not eat, there would be a fuss again; 
she would say we were fastidious, that we should not be over-nice, 
that we should be thankful for what we had; that she doubted if we 
had had anything better in our own home. She was continually abus­
ing father, saying that he wanted to be better than other people and 
much good that had done him; that he had left his wife and daughter 
penniless and that if they had not had a benevolent relation, a Chris­
tian soul with a feeling heart, then, God knows, they might have been 
rotting in the street and dying of hunger. What did she not say! It was 
not so much painful as disgusting to hear her. 
Mother was continually crying; her health grew worse from day to 
day. She was visibly wasting, yet she and I worked from morning till 
night, taking in sewing, which Anna Fyodorovna very much disliked, 
she was continually saying that she was not going to have her house 
turned into a dressmaker's shop. But we had to have clothes; we had 
to lay by for unforeseen expenses; it was absolutely necessary to have 
money of our own. We saved on the off-chance, hoping we might be 
able in time to move elsewhere. But mother lost what little health was 
left her over work; she grew weaker every day. The disease sucked the 
life out of her like a worm and hurried her to the grave. I saw it all, I 
felt it all, I realised it all and suffered; it all went on before my eyes. 
The days passed and each day was like the one before. We lived as 
qUietly as if we were not in a town. Anna Fyodorovna calmed down 
by degrees as she began fully to recognise her power. Though, in­
deed, no one ever thought of contradicting her. We were separated 
from her rooms by the corridor, and Pokrovsky's room was, as I have 
mentioned before, next to ours. He used to teach Sasha French and 
German, history, geography-all the sciences, as Anna Fyodorovna 
said, and for this he had his board and lodging from her. Sasha was a 
very intelligent child, though playful and mischievous; she was thir­
teen. Anna Fyodorovna observed to mother that it would not be 
amiss if I were to have lessons, since my education had not been fin­
ished at the boarding-school. and for a whole year I shared Sasha's 
lessons with Pokrovsky. Pokrovsky was poor, very poor. His health 
had prevented him from continuing his studies and it was only from 
habit that he was called a student. He was so retiring, so quiet and so 

3 3 0  
Poor Folk 
still that we heard no sound of him from our room. He was very 
queer-looking; he walked so awkwardly, bowed so awkwardly and 
spoke so queerly that at first I could not look at him without laugh­
ing. Sasha was continually mocking at him, especially when he was 
giving us our lessons. He was of an irritable temper, too, was con­
stantly getting cross, was beside himself about every trifle, scolded 
us, complained of us, and often went off into his own room in anger 
without finishing the lesson. He used to sit for days together over his 
books. He had a great many books, and such rare and expensive 
books. He gave other lessons, too, for which he was paid, and as soon 
as ever he had money he would go and buy books. 
In time I got to know him better and more intimately. He was a 
very kind and good young man, the best person it has been my lot to 
meet. Mother had a great respect for him. Afterwards he became the 
best of my friends-next to mother, of course. 
At first, though I was such a big girl, I was as mischievous as Sasha. 
We used to rack our brains for hours together to find ways to tease 
him and exhaust his patience. His anger was extremely funny, and we 
used to find it awfully amusing. (I am ashamed even to think of it 
now.) Once we teased him almost to the point of tears and I distinctly 
heard him whisper, "Spiteful children." I was suddenly overcome 
with confusion; I felt ashamed and miserable and sorry for him. I re­
member that I blushed up to my ears and almost with tears in my 
eyes began begging him not to mind and not to be offended at our 
stupid mischief. But he closed the book and without finishing the les­
son went off to his own room. I was torn with penitence all day long. 
The thought that we children had reduced him to tears by our cruelty 
was insufferable. So we had waited for his tears. So we had wanted 
them; so we had succeeded in driving him out of all patience; so we 
had forced him, a poor unfortunate man, to realise his hard lot. 
I could not sleep all night for vexation, sorrow, repentance. They 
say repentance relieves the soul-on the contrary. There was an ele­
ment of vanity mixed, I don't know how, with my sadness. I did not 
want him to look upon me as a child, I was fifteen then. 
From that day I began worrying my imagination, creating thou­
sands of plans to make Pokrovsky change his opinion about me. But I 
had become all of a sudden timid and shy; in my real position I could 
venture upon nothing and confined myself to dreams (and God 

Poor Folk 
3 3 1 
knows what dreams! ) .  I left off joining in Sasha's pranks; he left off 
being angry with us; but for my vanity that was little comfort. 
Now I will say a few words about the strangest, most curious and 
most pathetic figure I have ever chanced to meet. I speak of him now, 
at this passage in my diary, because until that period I had hardly paid 
any attention to him. But now everything that concerned Pokrovsky 
had suddenly become interesting to me. 
There used sometimes to come to the house a little old man, grey­
headed, grubby, badly-dressed, clumsy, awkward, incredibly queer in 
fact. At the first glance at him one might imagine that he was, as it 
were, abashed by something-as it were, ashamed of himself. That is 
why he always seemed to be shrinking into himself, to be, as it were, 
cowering; he had such queer tricks and ways that one might almost 
have concluded he was not in his right mind. He would come to the 
house and stand at the glass door in the entry without daring to 
come in. If one of us passed by-Sasha or I or any one of the servants 
he knew to be rather kind to him-he would begin waving at once, 
beckoning, making gesticulations, and only when one nodded and 
called to him-a sign agreed upon that there was no outsider in the 
house and that he might come in when he liked-only then the old 
man stealthily opened the door with a smile of glee, and rubbing his 
hands with satisfaction, walked on tiptoe straight to Pokrovsky's 
room. This was Pokrovsky's father. 
Later on, I learnt the whole story of this poor old man. He had once 
been in the service, was entirely without ability. and filled the very low­
est and most insignificant post. When his first wife (our Pokrovsky's 
mother) died he took it into his head to marry a second time and mar­
ried a girl of the working-class. Everything was turned topsy-turvy 
under the rule of his new wife. She let no one live in peace, she dom­
ineered over everyone. Our Pokrovsky was still a child, ten years old. 
His stepmother hated him, but fate was kind to the boy. A country gen­
tleman called Bykov, who had known the elder Pokrovsky and at one 
time been his patron, took the child under his protection and sent him 
to school. He was interested in him because he had known his mother, 
who had been a protegee of Anna Fyodorovna's and had by her been 
married to Pokrovsky. Mr. Bykov, a very intimate friend of Anna Fyo­
dorovna's, had generously given the girl a dowry of five thousand rou­
bles on her marriage. Where that money went to I don't knOw. 

3 3 2  
Poor Folk 
That was the story Anna Fyodorovna told me; young Pokrovsky 
never liked speaking of his family circumstances. They say his mother 
was very pretty, and it seems strange to me that she should have been 
so unfortunately married to such an insignificant man. He was quite 
young when she died four years after their marriage. 
From boarding-school young Pokrovsky went on to a high school 
and then to the university. Mr. Bykov, who very often came to Peters­
burg, did not confine his protection to that. Owing to the breakdown 
of his health Pokrovsky could not continue his studies at the university. 
Mr. Bykov introduced him to Anna Fyodorovna, commended him to 
her good offices and so young Pokrovsky was taken into the house and 
was given his board on condition of teaching Sasha everything that was 
necessary. Old Pokrovsky was driven by grief at his wife's cruelty to the 
worst of vices and was scarcely ever sober. His wife used to beat him, 
make him live in the kitchen, and brought things at last to such a pass 
that he was quite accustomed to being beaten and ill-treated and did 
not complain of it. He was not a very old man, but his mind had almost 
given way owing to his bad habits. The one sign he showed of gener­
ous and humane feeling was his boundless love for his son. It was said 
that young Pokrovsky was as like his dead mother as one drop of water 
is like another. Maybe it was the memory of his first good wife that 
stirred in the ruined old man's heart this infinite love for his son. The 
old man could speak of nothing but his son and always visited him 
twice a week. He did not dare to come oftener, for young Pokrovsky 
could not endure his father's visits. Of all his failings, undoubtedly the 
greatest and foremost was his disrespect to his father. The old man cer­
tainly was at times the most insufferable creature in the world. In the 
first place he was horribly inquisitive, secondly, by remarks and ques­
tions of the most trivial and senseless kind he interrupted his son's 
work every minute, and, lastly, he would sometimes come under the 
influence of drink. The son gradually trained the old man to overcome 
his vices, his curiosity and incessant chatter, and at last had brought 
things to such a point that the old man obeyed him in everything like 
an oracle and did not dare open his mouth without permission. 
The poor old man could not sufficiently admire and marvel at his 
Petinka (as he called his son) . When he came to see him he almost al­
ways had a timid, careworn air, most likely from uncertainty as to the 
reception his son would give him. He was usually a long time making 

Poor Folk 
3 3 3  
up his mind to come in, and if I happened to b e  there he would spend 
twenty minutes questioning me: "How was Petinka? Was he quite 
well? What sort of mood was he in, and was he busy over anything 
important? What was he doing? Was he writing, or absorbed in reflec­
tion?" When I had sufficiently cheered and reassured him, the old 
man at last ventured to come in, and very, very quietly, very, very cau­
tiously opened the door, first poked in his head, and if his son nodded 
to him and the old man saw he was not angry, he moved stealthily 
into the room, took off his overcoat and his hat, which was always 
crushed, full of holes and with a broken brim, hung them on a hook, 
did everything quietly, nOiselessly; then cautiously sat down on a 
chair, never taking his eyes off his son, watching every movement and 
trying to guess what mood his "Petinka" was in. If his son seemed 
ever so little out of humour and the old man noticed it, he got up 
from his seat at once and explained, "I just looked in, Petinka, only 
for a minute. I have been on a long walk, I was passing and came in for 
a rest." And then, dumbly. submissively he would take his coat, his 
wretched hat, again he would stealthily open the door and go away, 
keeping a forced smile on his face to check the rush of disappoint­
ment in his heart and to hide it from his son. 
But when the son made the father welcome, the old man was be­
side himself with joy. His face, his gestures, his movements all be­
trayed his pleasure. If his son began talking to him, the old man 
always rose a little from the chair and answered softly, deferentially, 
almost with reverence, always trying to use the choicest, that is, the 
most absurd expressions. But he was not blessed with the gift of 
words; he was always nervous and confused, so that he did not know 
what to do with his hands, what to do with himself, and kept whis­
pering the answer to himself long afterwards as though trying to cor­
rect himself. If he did succeed in giving a good answer, the old man 
smoothed himself down, straightened his waistcoat, his tie, his coat 
and assumed an air of dignity. Sometimes he plucked up so much 
courage and grew so bold that he stealthily got up from his chair, 
went up to the bookshelf, took down some book and even began 
reading something on the spot, whatever the book might be. All this 
he did with an air of assumed unconcern and coolness, as though he 
could always do what he liked with his son's books, as though his 
son's graciousness was nothing out of the way. 

3 3 4  
Poor Folk 
But I once happened to see how frightened the poor fellow was 
when Pokrovsky asked him not to touch the books. He grew nervous 
and confused, put the book back upside down, then tried to right it, 
turned it round and put it in with the edges outside; smiled, flushed 
and did not know how to efface his crime. Pokrovsky by his persua­
sions did succeed in turning the old man a little from his evil propen­
sities, and whenever the son saw his father sober three times running 
he would give him twenty-five kopecks, fifty kopecks, or more at 
parting. Sometimes he would buy his father a pair of boots, a tie or 
a waistcoat; then the old man was as proud as a cock in his new 
clothes. 
Sometimes he used to come to us. He used to bring Sasha and me 
gingerbread cocks and apples and always talked to us of Petinka. He 
used to beg us to be attentive and obedient at lessons, used to tell us 
that Petinka was a good son, an exemplary son and, what was more, 
a learned son. Meanwhile he would wink at us so funnily with his left 
eye and make such amusing grimaces that we could not help smiling, 
and went into peals of laughter at him. Mother was very fond of him. 
But the old man hated Anna Fyodorovna, though he was stiller than 
water, humbler than grass in her presence. 
Soon I left off having lessons with Pokrovsky. As before, he looked 
upon me as a child, a mischievous little girl on a level with Sasha. This 
hurt me very much, for I was trying my utmost to efface the impres­
sion of my behaviour in the past, but I was not noticed. That irritated 
me more and more. I scarcely ever spoke to Pokrovsky except at our 
lessons, and indeed I could not speak. I blushed and was confused, 
and afterwards shed tears of vexation in some corner. 
I do not know how all this would have ended if a strange circum­
stance had not helped to bring us together. One evening when mother 
was sitting with Anna Fyodorovna I went stealthily into Pokrovsky's 
room. I knew he was not at home, and I really don't know what put it 
into my head to go into his room. Until that moment I had never 
peeped into it, though we had lived next door for over a year. This 
time my heart throbbed violently, so violently that it seemed it would 
leap out of my bosom. I looked around with peculiar curiosity. 
Pokrovsky's room was very poorly furnished: it was untidy. Papers 
were lying on the table and the chairs. Books and papers! A strange 
thought came to me, and at the same time an unpleasant feeling of 

Poor Folk 
3 3 5  
vexation took possession o f  me. I t  seemed t o  me that my affection, 
my loving heart were little to him. He was learned while I was stu­
pid, and knew nothing, had read nothing, not a single book . . .  at 
that point I looked enviously at the long shelves which were almost 
breaking down under the weight of the books. I was overcome by 
anger, misery, a sort of fury. I longed and at once determined to read 
his books, every one of them, and as qUickly as possible. I don't 
know, perhaps I thought that when I learned all he knew I should be 
more worthy of his friendship. I rushed to the first shelf; without 
stopping to think I seized the first dusty old volume; flushing and 
turning pale by turns, trembling with excitement and dread, I carried 
off the stolen book, resolved to read it at night-by the night-light 
while mother was asleep. 
But what was my vexation when, returning to our room, I hurriedly 
opened the book and saw it was some old work in Latin. It was half de­
cayed and worm-eaten. I went back without loss of time. Just as I was 
trying to put the book back in the shelf I heard a noise in the passage 
and approaching footsteps. I tried with nervous haste to be quick, but 
the insufferable book had been so tightly wedged in the shelf that 
when I took it out all the others had shifted and packed closer of them­
selves, so now there was no room for their former companion. I had 
not the strength to force the book in. I pushed the books with all my 
might, however. The rusty nail which supported the shelf, and which 
seemed to be waiting for that moment to break, broke. One end of the 
shelf fell down. The books dropped noisily on the floor in all direc­
tions. The door opened and Pokrovsky walked into the room. 
I must observe that he could not bear anyone to meddle in his do­
main. Woe to anyone who touched his books! Imagine my horror 
when the books, little and big, of all sizes and shapes dashed off the 
shelf, flew dancing under the table, under the chairs, all over the 
room! I would have run, but it was too late. It is all over, I thought. it 
is all over. I am lost, I am done for! I am naughty and mischievous 
like a child of ten, I am a silly chit of a girl! I am a great fool! 
Pokrovsky was dreadfully angry. 
"Well, this is the last straw! " he shouted. "Are not you ashamed to 
be so mischievous? . . .  Will you ever learn sense?" and he rushed to 
collect the books. "Don't, don't! "  he shouted. "you would do better 
not to come where you are not invited." 

3 3 6  
Poor Folk 
A little softened, however, by my humble movement, he went on 
more quietly, in his usual lecturing tone, speaking as though he were 
still my teacher: 
"Why, when will you learn to behave properly and begin to be 
sensible?You should look at yourself.You are not a little child. You are 
not a little girl. Why, you are fifteen! "  
And at that point, probably to satisfy himself that I was not a little 
girl, he glanced at me and blushed up to his ears. I did not under­
stand. I stood before him staring in amazement. He got up, came 
towards me with an embarrassed air, was horribly confused, said 
something, seemed to be apologising for something, perhaps for hav­
ing only just noticed that I was such a big girl. At last I understood. 
I don't remember what happened to me then; I was overcome with 
confusion, lost my head, blushed even more crimson than Pokrovsky, 
hid my face in my hands and ran out of the room. 
I did not know what to do, where to hide myself for shame. The 
mere fact that he had found me in his room was enough! For three 
whole days I could not look at him: I blushed until the tears came into 
my eyes. The most absurd ideas whirled through my brain. One of 
them-the maddest-was a plan to go to him, explain myself to him, 
confess everything to him, tell him all openly and assure him I had not 
behaved like a silly little girl but had acted with good intentions. I 
quite resolved to go but, thank God, my courage failed me. I can imag­
ine what a mess I should have made of it! Even now I am ashamed to 
remember it all. 
A few days later mother suddenly became dangerously ill. After 
two days in bed, on the third night, she was feverish and delirious. I 
did not sleep all one night, looking after mother, sitting by her bed­
side, bringing her drink and giving her medicine at certain hours. 
The second night I was utterly exhausted. At times I was overcome 
with sleep, my head went round and everything was green before my 
eyes. I was ready any minute to drop with fatigue, but mother's weak 
moans roused me, I started up, waked for an instant and then was 
overwhelmed with drowsiness again. I was in torment. I don't know, 
I cannot remember, but some horrible dream, some awful apparition 
haunted my over-wrought brain at the agonising moment of strug­
gling between sleeping and waking. I woke up in terror. The room 
was dark; the night-light had burned out. Streaks of light suddenly 

Poor Folk 
3 3 7  
filled the whole room, gleamed over the wall and disappeared. I was 
frightened, a sort of panic came over me. My imagination had been 
upset by a horrible dream, my heart was oppressed with misery . . . .  
I leapt up from my chair and unconsciously shrieked from an agonis­
ing, horribly oppressive feeling. At that moment the door opened and 
Pokrovsky walked into our room. 
All I remember is that I came to myself in his arms. He carefully 
put me in a low chair, gave me a glass of water and showered ques­
tions on me. I don't remember what I answered. 
"You are ill, you are very ill yourself," he said, taking my hand. 
"You are feverish, you will kill yourself. You do not think of your 
health; calm yourself, lie down, go to sleep. I will wake you in two 
hours time. Rest a little . . .  lie down, lie down! " not letting me utter 
a word in objection. I was too tired to object; my eyes were closing 
with weakness. I lay down in a low chair, resolved to sleep only half 
an hour, and slept till morning. Pokrovsky only waked me when the 
time came to give mother her medicine. 
The next evening when, after a brief rest in the daytime, I made 
ready to sit up by mother's bedside again, firmly resolved not to fall 
asleep this time, Pokrovsky at eleven o'clock knocked at our door. I 
opened it. 
"It is dull for you, sitting alone," he said to me. "Here is a book; 
take it, it won't be so dull, anyway." 
I took it; I don't remember what the book was like; I hardly 
glanced into it, though I did not sleep all night. A strange inward ex­
citement would not let me sleep; I could not remain sitting still; sev­
eral times I got up from the chair and walked about the room. A sort 
of inward content was suffused through my whole being. I was so 
glad of Pokrovsky's attention. I was proud of his anxiety and uneasi­
ness about me. I spent the whole night, musing and dreaming. 
Pokrovsky did not come in again, and I knew he would not come, 
and I wondered about the following evening. 
The next evening, when everyone in the house had gone to bed, 
Pokrovsky opened his door and began talking to me, standing in the 
doorway of his room. I do not remember now a Single word of what 
we said to one another; I only remember that I was shy, confused, 
vexed with myself and looked forward impatiently to the end of the 
conversation, though I had been desiring it intensely, dreaming of it 

3 3 8  
Poor Folk 
all day, and making up my questions and answers . . . .  The first stage of 
our friendship began from that evening. All through mother's illness 
we spent several hours together every night. I got over my shyness by 
degrees, though after every conversation I found something in it to be 
vexed with myself about. Yet with secret joy and proud satisfaction I 
saw that for my sake he was beginning to forget his insufferable books. 
By chance the conversation once turned in jest on his books having 
fallen off the shelf It was a strange moment. I was, as it were, too open 
and candid. I was carried away by excitement and a strange enthusi­
asm, and I confessed everything to him . . . .  Confessed that I longed to 
study, to know something, that it vexed me to be considered a little 
girl. . . .  I repeat that I was in a very strange mood; my heart was soft, 
there were tears in my eyes-I concealed nothing and told him 
everything-everything-my affection for him, my desire to love him, 
to live with him, to comfort him, to console him. He looked at me 
somewhat strangely, with hesitation and perplexity. and did not say 
one word. I felt all at once horribly sore and miserable. It seemed to 
me that he did not understand me, that perhaps he was laughing at 
me. I suddenly burst out crying like a child, I could not restrain my­
self, and sobbed as though I were in a sort of fit. He took my hands, 
kissed them and pressed them to his heart; talked to me, comforted 
me; he was much touched. I do not remember what he said to me, 
only I kept on crying and laughing and crying again, blushing, and so 
joyful that I could not utter a word. In spite of my emotion, I noticed, 
however, that Pokrovsky still showed traces of embarrassment and 
constraint. It seemed as though he were overwhelmed with wonder at 
my enthusiasm, my delight, my sudden warm, ardent affection. Per­
haps it only seemed strange to him at first; later on his hesitation van­
ished and he accepted my devotion to him, my friendly words, my 
attentions, with the same simple, direct feeling that I showed, and re­
sponded to it all with the same attentiveness, as affectionately and 
warmly as a sincere friend, a true brother. My heart felt so warm, so 
happy. . . .  I was not reserved, I concealed nothing from him, he saw it 
all and grew every day more and more attached to me. 
And really I do not remember what we used to talk about in those 
tormenting, and at the same time happy, hours when we met at night 
by the flickering light of a little lamp, and almost by my poor 
mother's beside . . . .  We talked of everything that came into our 

Poor Folk 
3 3 9  
minds, that broke from our hearts, that craved expression, and we 
were almost happy . . . .  Oh, it was a sad and joyful time, both at 
once . . . .  And it makes me both sad and joyful now to think of him. 
Memories are always tormenting, whether they are glad or bitter; it is 
so with me, anyway; but even the torment is sweet. And when the 
heart grows heavy, sick, weary and sad, then memories refresh and 
revive it, as the drops of dew on a moist evening after a hot day re­
fresh and revive a poor sickly flower, parched by the midday heat. 
Mother began to get better, but I still sat up by her bedside at 
night. Pokrovsky used to give me books; at first I read them to keep 
myself awake; then more attentively, and afterwards with eagerness. 
They opened all at once before me much that was new, unknown and 
unfamiliar. New thoughts, new impressions rushed in a perfect flood 
into my heart. And the more emotion, the more perplexity and effort 
it cost me to assimilate those new impressions, the dearer they were 
to me and the more sweetly they thrilled my soul. They crowded 
upon my heart all at once, giving it no rest. A strange chaos began to 
trouble my whole being. But that spiritual commotion could not up­
set my balance altogether. I was too dreamy and that saved me. 
When mother's illness was over, our long talks and evening inter­
views were at an end; we succeeded sometimes in exchanging words, 
often trivial and oflittle consequence, but I was fond of giving every­
thing its significance, its peculiar underlying value. My life was full, I 
was happy, calmly, quietly happy. So passed several weeks . . . .  
One day old Pokrovsky came to see us. He talked to us for a 
long time, was exceptionally gay, cheerful and communicative, he 
laughed, made jokes after his fashion, and at last explained the mystery 
of his ecstatic condition, and told us that that day week would be 
Petinka's birthday and that for the occasion he should come and see his 
son; that he should put on a new waistcoat and that his wife had prom­
ised to buy him new boots. In fact, the old man was completely happy 
and chatted away of everything in his mind. His birthday! That birth­
day gave me no rest day or night. I made up my mind to give Pokrovsky 
something as a sign of my affection. But what? At last I thought of giv­
ing him books. I knew he wanted to have Pushkin's works in the latest, 
complete edition,7 and I decided to buy Pushkin. I had thirty roubles of 
my own money earned by needlework. The money had been saved up 
to buy me a dress. I promptly sent old Matrona, our cook, to find out 

340 
Poor Folk 
what the whole of Pushkin cost. Alas! The price of the eleven volumes, 
including the cost of binding, was at least sixty roubles. Where could I 
get the money? I thought and thought and did not know what to de­
cide upon. I did not want to ask mother. Of course mother would have 
certainly helped me; but then everyone in the house would have 
known of our present; besides, the present would have become a token 
of gratitude in repayment for all that Pokrovsky had done for us during 
the past year. I wanted to give it alone and no one else to know of it. 
And for what he had done for me I wanted to be indebted to him for 
ever without any sort of repayment except my affection. 
At last I found a way out of my difficulty. 
I knew at the second-hand shops in the Gostiny Dvor one could 
sometimes, with a little bargaining, buy at half-price a book hardly 
the worse for wear and almost completely new. I resolved to visit the 
Gostiny Dvor. As it happened, next day some things had to be bought 
for us and also for Anna Fyodorovna. Mother was not very well, and 
Anna Fyodorovna, very luckily, was lazy, so that it fell to me to make 
these purchases and I set off with Matrona. 
I was so fortunate as to find a Pushkin very quickly and one in a 
very fine binding. I began bargaining. At first they demanded a price 
higher than that in the bookseller's shops; but in the end, though not 
without trouble, and walking away several times, I brought the shop­
man to knocking down the price and asking no more than ten rou­
bles in silver. How I enjoyed bargaining! . . .  Poor Matrona could not 
make out what was the matter with me and what possessed me to 
buy so many books. But, oh, horror! My whole capital consisted of 
thirty roubles in paper, and the shopman would not consent to let the 
books go cheaper. At last I began beseeching him, begged and begged 
him and at last persuaded him. He gave way but only took off two 
and a half roubles and swore he only made that concession for my 
sake because I was such a nice young lady and he would not have 
done it for anyone else. I still had not enough by two and a half rou­
bles. I was ready to cry with vexation. But the most unexpected cir­
cumstance came to my assistance in my distress. 
Not far off at another bookstall I saw old Pokrovsky. Four or five 
second-hand dealers were clustering about him; they were bewilder­
ing him completely and he was at his wits' end. Each of them was 
proffering his wares and there was no end to the books they offered 

Poor Folk 
341 
and he longed to buy. The poor old man stood in the midst of them, 
looking a disconsolate figure and did not know what to choose from 
what was offered him. I went up and asked him what he was doing 
here. The old man was delighted to see me; he was extremely fond of 
me, hardly less than of his Petinka, perhaps. 
"Why, I'm buying books, Varvara Alexyevna," he answered. "I am 
buying books for Petinka. Here it will soon be his birthday and he is 
fond of books, so, you see, I am going to buy them for him . . . .  " 
The old man always expressed himself in a very funny way and 
now he was in the utmost confusion besides. Whatever he asked the 
price of, it was always a silver rouble, or two or three silver roubles; 
he had by now given up inquiring about the bigger books and only 
looked covetously at them, turning over the leaves, weighing them in 
his hands and putting them back again in their places. 
"No, no, that's dear," he would say in an undertone, "but maybe 
there'll be something here." 
And then he would begin turning over thin pamphlets, song­
books, almanacs; these were all very cheap. 
"But why do you want to buy those?" I asked him. "They are all 
awful rubbish." 
"Oh, no," he answered. "No, you only look what good little books 
there are here. They are very, very good little books! "  
And the last words he brought out in such a plaintive singsong 
that I fancied he was ready to cry with vexation at the good books be­
ing so dear, and in another moment a tear would drop from his pale 
cheeks on his red nose. I asked him whether he had plenty of money. 
"Why, here," the poor fellow pulled out at once all his money 
wrapped up in a piece of greasy newspaper. "Here there's half a rou­
ble, a twenty-kopeck piece and twenty kopecks in copper." 
I carried him off at once to my second-hand bookseller. 
"Here, these eleven volumes cost only thirty-two roubles and a 
half; I have thirty; put your two and a half to it and we will buy all 
these books and give them to him together." 
The old man was beside himself with delight, he shook out all his 
money, and the bookseller piled all our purchased volumes upon 
him. The old man stuffed volumes in all his pockets, carried them in 
both hands and under his arms and bore them all off to his home, 
giving me his word to bring them all to me in secret next day. 

342 
Poor Folk 
Next day the old man came to see his son, spent about an hour 
with him as usual, then came in to us and sat down beside me with 
a very comical mysterious air. Rubbing his hands in proud delight at 
being in possession of a secret, he began with a smile by telling me 
that all the books had been conveyed here unnoticed and were 
standing in a corner in the kitchen under Matrona's protection. Then 
the conversation naturally passed to the day we were looking for­
ward to; the old man talked at length of how we would give our 
present, and the more absorbed he became in the subject the more 
apparent it was to me that he had something in his heart of which 
he could not, dared not, speak, which, in fact, he was afraid to put 
into words. I waited and said nothing. The secret joy, the secret satis­
faction which I had readily discerned at first in his strange gestures 
and grimaces and the winking of his left eye, disappeared. Every 
moment he grew more uneasy and disconsolate; at last he could not 
contain himself. 
"Listen," he began timidly in an undertone. 
"Listen, Varvara Alexyevna . . .  do you know what, Varvara 
Alexyevna . . .  ?"The old man was in terrible confusion. "When the day 
of his birthday comes, you know, you take ten books and give them 
yourself, that is from yourself, on your own account; I'll take only the 
eleventh, and I, too, will give it from myself. that is, apart, on my own 
account. So then, do you see-you will have something to give, and I 
shall have something to give; we shall both have something to give." 
At this point the old man was overcome with confusion and re­
lapsed into silence. I glanced at him; he was waiting for my verdict 
with timid expectation. 
"But why do you want us not to give them together, Zahar Petro­
vitch?" 
"Why, you see, Varvara Alexyevna, it's just . . .  it's only, you 
know . . .  " 
In short, the old man faltered, flushed, got stuck in his sentence 
and could not proceed. 
"You see," he explained at last, "Varvara Alexyevna, I indulge at 
times . . .  that is, I want to tell you that I am almost always indulging, 
constantly indulging . . .  I have a habit which is very bad . . .  that is, 
you know, it's apt to be so cold outdoors and at times there are un­
pleasantnesses of all sorts, or something makes one sad, or something 

Poor Folk 
343 
happens amiss and then I give way at once and begin to indulge and 
sometimes drink too much. Petrusha dislikes that very much. He gets 
angry with me, do you see, Varvara Alexyevna, scolds me and gives 
me lectures, so that I should have liked now to show him by my pres­
ent that I am reforming and beginning to behave properly, that here 
I've saved up to buy the book;saved up for ever so long, for I scarcely 
ever have any money except it may happen Petrusha gives me some­
thing. He knows that. So here he will see how I have used my money 
and will know that I have done all that only for him." 
I felt dreadfully sorry for the old man. I thought for a moment. The 
old man looked at me uneasily. 
"Listen, Zahar Petrovitch," I said; "you give him them all." 
"How all? Do you mean all the books?" 
"Why, yes, all the books." 
"And from myself?" 
"Yes, from yourself" 
"From myself alone? Do you mean on my own account?" 
"Why yes, on your own account." 
I believe I made my meaning very clear, but it was a long time be­
fore the old man could understand me. 
"Why yes," he said, after pondering. "Yes! That would be very 
nice, but how about you, Varvara Alexyevna?" 
"Oh, well, I shall give nothing." 
"What! " cried the old man, almost alarmed. "So you don't want to 
give Petinka anything?" 
The old man was dismayed; at that moment he was ready, I be­
lieve, to give up his project in order that I might be able to give his 
son something. He was a kind-hearted old fellow! I assured him that 
I should have been glad to give something, but did not want to de­
prive him of the pleasure. 
"If your son is satisfied and you are glad," I added, "then I shall be 
glad, for I shall feel secretly in my heart as though I were really giving 
it myself" 
With that the old man was completely satisfied. He spent another 
two hours with us, but could not sit still in his place and was contin­
ually getting up, fussing nOisily about, playing with Sasha, stealthily 
kissing me, pinching my hand and making faces at Anna Fyodorovna 
on the sly. Anna Fyodorovna turned him out of the house at last. The 

344 
Poor Folk 
old man was, in fact, in his delight, more excited than he had perhaps 
ever been before. 
On the festive day he appeared exactly at eleven o'clock, coming 
straight from mass in a decently mended swallow-tail coat and actu­
ally wearing a new waistcoat and new boots. He had a bundle of 
books in each hand. We were all sitting drinking coffee in Anna Fyo­
dorovna's drawing-room at the time (it was Sunday) . The old man 
began by saying, I believe, that Pushkin was a very fine poet; then, 
with much hesitation and confusion, he passed suddenly to the ne­
cessity of one's behaving oneself properly, and that if a man does not 
behave properly then he will indulge; that bad habits are the ruin and 
destruction of a man; he even enumerated several fatal instances of 
intemperance, and wound up by saying that for some time past he 
had been completely reformed and his behaviour now was excellent 
and exemplary; that he had even, in the past, felt the justice of his 
son's exhortations, that he felt it all long ago and laid it to heart, but 
now he had begun to control himself in practice, too. In proof of 
which he presented him with the books bought with money which 
he had saved up during a long period of time. 
I could not help laughing and crying as I listened to the poor old 
man; so he knew how to lie on occasion! The books were carried into 
Pokrovsky's room and arranged on the shelves. Pokrovsky at once 
guessed the truth. The old man was invited to dinner. We were all so 
merry that day; after dinner we played forfeits and cards; Sasha was in 
wild spirits and I was hardly less so. Pokrovsky was attentive to me 
and kept seeking an opportunity to speak to me alone, but I would 
not let him. It was the happiest day of all those four years of my life. 
And now come sad, bitter memories, and I begin the story of my 
gloomy days. That is why, perhaps, my pen moves more slowly and 
seems to refuse to write more. That is why, perhaps, I have dwelt in 
memory with such eagerness and such love on the smallest details of 
my trivial existence in my happy days. Those days were so brief; they 
were followed by grief, black grief, and God only knows when it will 
end. 
My troubles began with the illness and death of Pokrovsky. 
He fell ill about two months after the last incidents I have described 
here. He spent those two months in unceasing efforts to secure some 
means of subsistence, for he still had no settled position. Like all 

Poor Folk 
345 
consumptives he clung up to the very last moment to the hope of a 
very long life. A post as a teacher turned up for him, but he had a great 
distaste for that calling. He could not take a place in a government of­
fice on account of his health. Besides, he would have had to wait a 
long time for the first instalment of his salary. In short, Pokrovsky met 
with nothing but disappointment on all sides and this tried his tem­
per. His health was suffering, but he paid no attention to it. Autumn 
was coming on, every day he went out in his thin little overcoat to try 
and get work, to beg and implore for a place, which was inwardly an 
agony to him; he used to get his teet wet and to be soaked through 
with the rain, and at last he took to his bed and never got up from it 
again . . . .  He died in the middle of autumn at the end of October. 
I scarcely left his room during the whole time of his illness, I nursed 
him and looked after him. Often I did not sleep for nights together. He 
was frequently delirious and rarely quite himself; he talked of good­
ness knows what, of his post, of his books, of me, of his father . . .  and 
it was then I heard a great deal about his circumstances of which I had 
not known or even guessed before. When first he was ill, all of them 
looked at me somehow strangely; Anna Fyodorovna shook her head. 
But I looked them all straight in the tace and they did not blame me any 
more for my sympathy for Pokrovsky-at least my mother did not. 
Sometimes Pokrovsky knew me, but this was seldom. He was al­
most all the time uIlconscious. Sometimes for whole nights together 
he would carry on long, long conversations with someone in ob­
scure, indistinct words and his hoarse voice resounded with a hol­
low echo in his narrow room as in a coffin; I used to feel terrified 
then. Especially on the last night he seemed in a frenzy; he suffered 
terribly, was in anguish; his moans wrung my heart. Everyone in the 
house was in alarm. Anna Fyodorovna kept praying that God would 
take him more qUickly. They sent for the doctor. The doctor said that 
the patient would certainly die by the morning. 
Old Pokrovsky spent the whole night in the passage at the door of 
his son's room; a rug of some sort was put down there for him. He 
kept coming into the room, it was dreadful to look at him. He was so 
crushed by sorrow that he seemed utterly senseless and without feel­
ing. His head was shaking with terror. He was trembling all over and 
kept whispering something, talking about something to himself. It 
seemed to me he was going out of his mind. 

346 
Poor Folk 
Just before dawn the old man, worn out with mental suffering, fell 
asleep on his mat and slept like the dead. Between seven and eight his 
son began to die. I waked the father. Pokrovsky was fully conscious and 
said good-bye to us all. Strange! I could not cry, but my heart was torn 
to pieces. 
But his last moments distressed and tortured me more than all. He 
kept asking for something at great length with his halting tongue and 
I could make out nothing from his words. My heart was lacerated! 
For a whole hour he was uneasy, kept grieving over something, try­
ing to make some sign with his chill hands and then beginning piti­
fully to entreat me in his hoarse hollow voice; but his words were 
disconnected sounds and again I could make nothing of them. I 
brought everyone of the household to him, I gave him drink, but still 
he shook his head mournfully. At last! I guessed what he wanted. He 
was begging me to draw up the window curtain and open the shut­
ters. No doubt he wanted to look for the last time at the day, at God's 
light, at the sunshine. I drew back the curtain, but the dawning day 
was sad and melancholy as the poor failing life of the dying man. 
There was no sun. The clouds covered the sky with a shroud of mist; 
it was rainy, overcast, mournful. A fine rain was pattering on the 
Window-panes and washing them with little rivulets of cold dirty 
water; it was dark and dingy. The pale daylight scarcely penetrated 
into the room and hardly rivalled the flickering flame of the little 
lamp lighted before the ikon. The dying man glanced at me mourn­
fully, mournfully and shook his head; a minute later he died. 
Anna Fyodorovna herself made the arrangements for the funeral. A 
coffin of the cheapest kind was bought and a carter was hired. To de­
fray these expenses Anna Fyodorovna seized all Pokrovsky's books and 
other belongings. The old man argued with her, made a noise, took 
away all the books he could from her, stuffed his pockets full of them, 
put them in his hat, wherever he could, went about with them all 
those three days, and did not part with them even when he had to 
go to church. During those three days he seemed as it were, stupefied, 
as though he did not know what he was doing, and he kept fussing 
about the coffin with a strange solicitude; at one moment he set 
straight the wreath on his dead son and at the next he lighted and took 
away candles. It was evident that his thoughts could not rest on any­
thing. Neither mother nor Anna Fyodorovna was at the funeral service 

Poor Folk 
3 4 7  
at the church. Mother was ill; Anna Fyodorovna had got ready to go, 
but she quarrelled with old Pokrovsky and stayed behind. I went alone 
with the old man. During the service a terror came upon me-as 
though a foreboding of the future. I could scarcely stand up in church. 
At last the coffin was closed, nailed up, put in the cart and taken 
away. I followed it only to the end of the street. The man drove at a 
trot. The old man ran after him, weeping loudly, his lamentations 
quivering and broken by his haste. The poor old man lost his hat and 
did not stop to pick it up. His head was drenched by the rain and the 
wind was rising; the sleet lashed and stung his face. The old man 
seemed not to feel the cold and wet and ran wailing from one side of 
the cart to the other, the skirts of his old coat fluttering in the wind 
like wings. Books were sticking out from all his pockets; in his hands 
was a huge volume which he held tightly. The passers-by took off 
their caps and crossed themselves. Some stopped and stood gazing in 
wonder at the poor old man. The books kept falling out of his pock­
ets into the mud. People stopped him and pointed to what he had 
lost, he picked them up and fell to racing after the coffin again. At the 
corner of the street an old beggar woman joined him to follow the 
coffin with him. The cart turned the corner at last and disappeared 
from my sight. I went home. I threw myself on mother's bosom in 
terrible distress. I pressed her tightly in my arms, I kissed her and 
burst into floods of tears, huddling up to her fearfully as though try­
ing to keep in my arms my last friend and not to give her up to 
death . . .  but death was already hovering over poor mother . . . .  
June I I .  
How grateful I am to you for our walk yesterday to the Island, Makar 
Alexyevitch! How fresh and lovely it is there, how leafy and green I It's 
so long since I saw green leaves-when I was ill I kept fancying that I 
had to die and that I certainly should die--judge what must have been 
my sensations yesterday, how I must have felt . . .  
You must not be angry with me for having been so sad yesterday; 
I was very happy, very content, but in my very best moments I am al­
ways for some reason sad. As for my crying, that means nothing. I don't 
know myself why I am always crying. I feel ill and irritable; my sensa­
tions are due to illness. The pale cloudless sky, the sunset, the evening 

348 
Poor Folk 
stillness-all that-I don't know-but I was somehow in the mood 
yesterday to take a dreary and miserable view of everything, so that my 
heart was too full and needed the relief of tears. But why am I writing 
all this to you? It is hard to make all that clear to one's own heart and 
still harder to convey it to another. But you, perhaps, will understand 
me. Sadness and laughter both at once! How kind you are really, Makar 
Alexyevitch! You looked into my eyes yesterday as though to read in 
them what I was feeling and were delighted with my rapture. Whether 
it was a bush, an avenue, a piece of water-you were there standing 
before me showing its beauties and peeping into my eyes as though 
you were displaying your possessions to me. That proves that you have 
a kind heart, Makar Alexyevitch. It's for that that I love you. Well, good­
bye. I'm ill again to-day; I got my feet wet yesterday and have caught 
cold. Fedora is ailing, too, so now we are both on the sick list. Don't 
forget me. Come as often as you can. 
Your V D. 
June 1 2 . 
My DARLING VARVARA ALEXYEVNA, 
Well, I had expected, my dear soul, that you would write me a 
description of our yesterday's expedition in a regular poem, and you 
have turned out nothing but one simple sheet. I say this because, 
though you wrote me so little in your sheet, yet you did describe it 
extraordinarily well and sweetly. The charms of nature, and the various 
rural scenes and all the rest about your feeling-in short, you de­
scribed it all very well. Now I have no talent for it. If ! smudge a dozen 
papers there's nothing to show for it; I can't describe anything. I have 
tried. 
You write to me, my own, that I am a kind-hearted, good­
natured man, incapable of injuring my neighbour, and able to under­
stand the blessings of the Lord made manifest in nature, and you 
bestow various praises on me, in fact. All that is true, my darling, all 
that is perfectly true; I really am all that you say and I know it myself; 
but when one reads what you write one's heart is touched in spite of 
oneself and then all sorts of painful reflections come to one. Well, lis­
ten to me, Varinka dear, I will tell you something, my own. 
I will begin with when I was only seventeen and went into the 

Poor Folk 
349 
service, and soon the thirtieth year of my career there will be here. 
Well, I needn't say I have worn out many a uniform; I grew to man­
hood and to good sense and saw something of the world; I have lived, 
I may say, I have lived in the world so that on one occasion they even 
wanted to send up my name to receive a cross. Maybe you will not be­
lieve me, but I am really not lying. But there, my darling, in spite of 
everything, I have been badly treated by malicious people I I tell you, 
my own, that though I am an obscure person, a stupid person, per­
haps, yet I have my feelings like anyone else. Do you know, Varinka, 
what a spiteful man did to me? I am ashamed to say what he has done 
to me; you will ask why did he do it? Why, because I am meek, be­
cause I am quiet, because I am good-natured! I did not suit their taste, 
so that's what brought it upon me. At first it began with, "You are this 
and that, Makar Alexyevitch," and then it came to saying, "It's no good 
asking Makar Alexyevitch! "  And then it ended by, "Of course, that is 
Makar Alexyevitch! "  You see, my precious, what a pass it came to; al­
ways Makar Alexyevitch to blame for everything; they managed to 
make Makar Alexyevitch a by-word all over the department, and it was 
not enough that they made me a by-word and almost a term of abuse, 
they attacked my boots, my uniform, my hair, my figure; nothing was 
to their taste, everything ought to be different! And all this has been 
repeated every blessed day from time immemoriaL I am used to it, for 
I grow used to anything, because I am a meek man; but what is it all 
for? What harm do I do to anyone? Have I stolen promotion from any­
one, or what? Have I blackened anyone's reputation with his superi­
ors? Have I asked for anything extra out of turn? Have I got up some 
intrigue? Why, it's a sin for you to imagine such a thing, my dear soul! 
As though I could do anything of that sort! You've only to look at me, 
my own. Have I sufficient ability for intrigue and ambition? Then why 
have such misfortunes come upon me? God forgive me. Here you 
consider me a decent man, and you are ever so much better than any 
of them, my darling. Why, what is the greatest virtue in a citizen? A day 
or two ago, in private conversation, Yevstafy Ivanovitch said that the 
most important virtue in a citizen was to earn money. He said in jest (I 
know it was in jest) that morality consists in not being a burden to 
anyone. Well, I'm not a burden to anyone. My crust of bread is my 
own; it is true it is a plain crust of bread, at times a dry one; but there 
it is, earned by my toil and put to lawful and irreproachable use. Why, 

3 5 0  
Poor Folk 
what can one do? I know very well, of course, that I don't do much by 
copying; but all the same I am proud of working and earning my 
bread in the sweat of my brow. Why, what if I am a copying clerk, af­
ter all? What harm is there in copying, after all? "He's a copying 
clerk," they say, but what is there discreditable in that? My handwrit­
ing is good, distinct and pleasant to the eye, and his Excellency is sat­
isfied with it. I have no gift of language, of course, I know myself that 
I haven't the confounded thing; that's why I have not got on in the ser­
vice, and why even now, my own, I am writing to you simply, art­
lessly. just as the thought comes into my heart . . . .  I know all that; but 
there, if everyone became an author, who would do the copying? I ask 
you that question and I beg you to answer it, Varinka dear. So I see 
now that I am necessary, that I am indispensable, and that it's no use to 
worry a man with nonsense. Well, let me be a rat if you like, since they 
see a resemblance! But the rat is necessary, but the rat is of service, but 
the rat is depended upon, but the rat is given a reward, so that's the 
sort of rat he is! 
Enough about that subject though, my own! I did not intend to 
talk about that at all, but I got a little heated. Besides, it's pleasant from 
time to time to do oneself justice. Good-bye, my own, my darling, my 
kind comforter! I will come, I will certainly come to see you, my 
dearie, and meanwhile, don't be dull, I will bring you a book. Well, 
good-bye, then, Varinka. 
DEAR SIR, MAKAR ALEXYEVITCH, 
Your devoted well-wisher, 
MAKAR DYEVUSHKlN. 
June 2 0 .  
I write a hurried line, I am in haste, I have to finish my work up 
to time. You see, this is how it is: you can make a good bargain. Fedora 
says that a friend of hers has a uniform, quite new, underclothes, a 
waistcoat and cap, and all very cheap, they say; so you ought to buy 
them. You see, you are not badly off now, you say you have money; 
you say so yourself Give over being so stingy, please. You know all 
those things are necessary. Just look at yourself, what old clothes you 
go about in. It's a disgrace! You're all in patches. You have no new 
clothes; I know that, though you declare that you have. God knows 

Poor Folk 
3 5 1  
how you have managed to dispose of them. So do as I tell you, please 
buy these things. Do it for my sake; if you love me, do it. 
You sent me some linen as a present; but upon my word, Makar 
Alexyevitch, you are ruining yourself. It's no joke what you've spent 
on me, it's awful to think how much money! How fond you are of 
throwing away your money! I don't want it; it's all absolutely unnec­
essary. I know--I am convinced-that you love me. It is really unnec­
essary to remind me of it with presents; and it worries me taking 
them from you ; I know what they cost you. Once for all, leave off, do 
you hear? I beg you, I beseech you. You ask me, Makar Alexyevitch, to 
send you the continuation of my diary, you want me to finish it. I 
don't know how what I have written came to be written! But I haven't 
the strength now to talk of my past; I don't even want to think of it; I 
feel frightened of those memories. To talk of my poor mother leaving 
her poor child to those monsters, too, is more painful than anything. 
My heart throbs at the very thought of it: it is all still so fresh: I have 
not had time to think things over, still less to regain my calm, though 
it is all more than a year ago, now. But you know all that. 
I've told you what Anna Fyodorovna thinks now; she blames me 
for ingratitude and repudiates all blame for her association with 
Mr. Bykov! She invites me to stay with her; she says that I am living on 
charity, that I am going to the bad. She says that if I go back to her she 
will undertake to set right everything with Mr. Bykov and compel him 
to make up for his behaviour to me. She says Mr. Bykov wants to give 
me a dowry. Bother them! I am happy here with you close by, with my 
kind Fedora whose devotion reminds me of my oid nurse. Though 
you are only a distant relation you will protect me with your name. I 
don't know them. I shall forget them if I can. What more do they want 
of me? Fedora says that it is all talk, that they will leave me alone at 
last. God grant they may! 
V D. 
June 2 l .  
My DARLING VARINKA, 
I want to write, but I don't know how to begin. How strange it is, 
my precious, how we are living now. I say this because I have never 
spent my days in such joyfulness. Why, it is as though God had blessed 

3 5 2  
Poor Folk 
me with a home and family of my own, my child, my pretty! But why 
are you making such a fuss about the four chemises I sent you? You 
needed them, you know-I found that out from Fedora. And it's a spe­
cial happiness for me to satisfy your needs, Varinka, dear; it's my plea­
sure. You let me alone, my dear soul. Don't interfere with me and 
don't contradict me. I've never known anything like it, my darling. I've 
taken to going into SOciety now. In the first place my life is twice as 
full; because you are living very near me and are a great comfort to 
me; and secondly, I have been invited to tea to-day by a lodger, 
a neighbour of mine, that clerk, Ratazyaev, who has the literary eve­
nings. We meet this evening, we are going to read literature. So you 
see how we are getting on now, Varinka-you see! Well, good-bye. I've 
written all this for no apparent reason, simply to let you know of the 
affection I feel for you. You told Teresa to tell me, my love, that you 
want some silk for coloured embroidery. I will get you it, my darling, 
I will get the silk, I will get it. To-morrow I shall have the pleasure of 
satisfying you. I know where to buy it, too. And now I remain, 
DEAR MADAM, VARVARA ALEXYEVNA, 
Your sincere friend, 
MAKAR DYEvUSHKIN. 
June 2 2 .  
I must tell you, my own, that a very pitiful thing has happened 
in our flat, truly, truly, deserving of pity! Between four and five this 
morning Gorshkov's little boy died. I don't know what he died of. It 
seemed to be a sort of scarlatina, God only knows! I went to see these 
Gorshkovs. Oh, my dear soul, how poor they are! And what disorder! 
And no wonder; the whole family lives in one room, only divided by 
a screen for decency. There was a little coffin standing in the room 
already-a simple little coffin, but rather pretty; they bought it ready­
made; the boy was nine years old, he was a promising boy, they say. 
But it was pitiful to look at them, Varinka! The mother did not cry, but 
she was so sad, so poor. And perhaps it will make it easier for them to 
have got one off their shoulders; but there are still two left, a baby, 
and a little girl, not much more than six. There's not much comfort 
really in seeing a child suffer, especially one's own little child, and 
having no means of helping him! The father was Sitting in a greasy 

Poor Folk 
3 5 3  
old dress suit on a broken chair. The tears were flowing from his eyes, 
but perhaps not from grief, but just the usual thing-his eyes are in­
flamed. He's such a strange fellow! He always turns red when you 
speak to him, gets confused and does not know what to answer. The 
little girl, their daughter, stood leaning against the coffin, such a poor 
little, sad, brooding child! And Varinka, my darling, I don't like it 
when children brood; it's painful to see! A doll made of rags was ly­
ing on the floor beside her; she did not play with it, she held her fin­
ger on her lips; she stood, without stirring. The landlady gave her a 
sweetmeat; she took it but did not eat it. 
It was sad, Varinka, wasn't it? 
MAKAR DYEVUSHKIN. 
June 2 5 .  
DEAR MAKAR ALEXYEVITCH, 
I am sending you back your book. A wretched, worthless little 
book not fit to touch! Where did you ferret out such a treasure? Joking 
apart, can you really like such a book, Makar Alexyevitch? I was prom­
ised the other day something to read. I will share it with you, if you 
like. And now good-bye. I really have not time to write more. 
y. D. 
June 26. 
DEAR VARINKA, 
The fact is that I really had not read that horrid book, my dear 
girl. It is true, I looked through it and saw it was nonsense, just writ­
ten to be funny, to make people laugh; well, I thought, it really is 
amusing; maybe Varinka will like it, so I sent it you. 
Now, Ratazyaev has promised to give me some real literature to 
read, so you will have some books, my darling. Ratazyaev knows, he's 
a connoisseur; he writes himself, ough, how he writes! His pen is so 
bold and he has a wonderful style, that is, there is no end to what 
there is in every word-in the most foolish ordinary vulgar word 
such as I might say sometimes to Faldoni orTeresa, even in such he has 
style. I go to his evenings. We smoke and he reads to us, he reads five 
hours at a stretch and we listen all the time. It's a perfect feast. Such 

3 5 4  
Poor Folk 
charm, such flowers, simply flowers, you can gather a bouquet from 
each page! He is so affable, so kindly and friendly. Why, what am I be­
side him? What am I? Nothing. He is a man with a reputation, and 
what am I? I simply don't exist, yet he is cordial even to me. I am 
copying something for him. Only don't you imagine, Varinka, that 
there is something amiss in that, that he is friendly to me just because 
I am copying for him; don't you believe tittle-tattle, my dear girl, 
don't you believe worthless tittle-tattle. No, I am doing it of myself, of 
my own accord for his pleasure. I understand refinement of manners, 
my love; he is a kind, very kind man, and an incomparable writer. 
Literature is a fine thing, Varinka, a very fine thing. I learnt that 
from them the day before yesterday. A profound thing, strengthening 
men's hearts, instructing them; there are all sorts of things written 
about that in their book. Very well written! Literature is a picture, that 
is, in a certain sense, a picture and a mirror: it's the passions, the ex­
pression, the subtlest criticism, edifying instruction and a document. 
I gathered all that from them. I tell you frankly, my darling, that one 
sits with them, one listens (one smokes a pipe like them, too, if you 
please) , and when they begin to discuss and dispute about all sorts of 
matters, then I simply sit dumb; then, my dear soul, you and I can do 
nothing else but sit dumb. I am simply a blockhead, it seems. I am 
ashamed of myself, so that I try all the evening how to put in half a 
word in the general conversation, but there, as ill-luck would have it, I 
can't find that half word! And one is sorry for oneself, Varinka, that one 
is not this thing, nor that thing, that, as the saying is, "A man one is 
grown, but no mind of one's own." Why. what do I do in my free time 
now? I sleep like a fool! While instead of useless sleep I might have 
been busy in useful occupation; I might have sat down and written 
something that would have been of use to oneself and pleasant to oth­
ers. Why, my dearie, you should only see what they get for it, God for­
give them! Take Ratazyaev, for instance, what he gets. What is it for him 
to write a chapter? Why, sometimes he writes five in a day and he gets 
three hundred roubles a chapter. Some little anecdote, something 
curious-five hundred! take it or leave it, give it or be damned! Or 
another time, we'll put a thousand in our pocket! What do you say to 
that, Varvara Alexyevna? Why, he's got a little book of poems-such 
short poems-he's asking seven thousand, my dear girl, he's asking 
seven thousand; think of it! Why. it's real estate, it's house property! He 

Poor Folk 
3 5 5  
says that they will give him five thousand, but he won't take it. I rea­
soned with him. I said, "Take five thousand for them, sir, and don't 
mind them. Why, five thousand's money ! "  "No," said he, "they'll give 
me seven, the swindlers! "  He's a cunning fellow, really. 
Well, my love, since we are talking of it I will copy a passage from 
the Italian Passions for you. That's the name of his book. Here, read it, 
Varinka, and judge for yourself. . . .  
"Vladimir shuddered and his passion gurgled up furiously 
within him and his blood boiled . . . .  
" 'Countess: he cried. 'Countess! Do you know how awful is this 
passion, how boundless this madness? No, my dreams did not deceive 
me! I love, I love ecstatically, furiously, madly! All your husband's 
blood would not quench the frantic surging ecstasy of my soul! A triv­
ial obstacle cannot check the all-destroying, hellish fire that harrows 
my exhausted breast. Dh, Zinaida, Zinaida! '  . . .  
" 'Vladimir: whispered the countess, beside herself, leaning on 
his shoulder. . . . 
" 'Zinaida! '  cried the enraptured Smyelsky. 
"His bosom exhaled a sigh. The fire flamed brightly on the altar 
of love and consumed the heart of the unhappy victims. 
" 'Vladimir: the countess whispered, intoxicated. Her bosom 
heaved, her cheeks glowed crimson, her eyes glowed . . . .  
"A new, terrible union was accomplished! 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
"Half an hour later the old count went into his wife's boudoir. 
" 'Well, my love, should we not order the samovar for our wel­
come guest?' he said, patting his wife on the cheek." 
Well, I ask you, my dear soul, what do you think of it after that? 
It's true, it's a little free, there's no disputing that, but still it is fine. 
What is fine is fine! And now, if you will allow me, I will copy you an­
other little bit from the novel Yermak and Zuleika. 
You must imagine, my precious, that the Cossack, Yermak, the 
fierce and savage conqueror of Siberia, is in love with the daughter of 
Kutchum, the Tsar of Siberia, the Princess Zuleika, who has been taken 
captive by him. An episode straight from the times of Ivan the Terrible, 
as you see. Here is the conversation of Yermak and Zuleika. 
" 'You love me, Zuleika! Dh, repeat it, repeat it! ' . . .  
" 'I love you, Yermak: whispered Zuleika. 

3 5 6  
Poor Folk 
" 'Heaven and earth, I thank you! I am happy! . . .  You have given 
me everything, everything, for which my turbulent soul has striven 
from my boyhood's years. So it was to this thou hast led me, my guid­
ing star, so it was for this thou hast led me here, beyond the Belt of 
Stone! I will show to all the world my Zuleika, and men, the frantic 
monsters, will not dare to blame me! Ah, if they could understand the 
secret sufferings of her tender soul, if they could see a whole poem in 
a tear of my Zuleika! Oh, let me dry that tear with kisses, let me drink 
it up, that heavenly tear . . .  unearthly one ! '  
" 'Yermak: said Zuleika, 'the world i s  wicked, men are unjust! 
They will persecute us, they will condemn us, my sweetYermak! What 
is the poor maiden, nurtured amid the snows of Siberia in her father's 
yurta to do in your cold, icy, soulless, selfish world? People will not un­
derstand me, my desired one, my beloved one.' 
" 'Then will the Cossack's sabre rise up hissing about them.' " 
And now, what do you say to Yermak, Varinka, when he finds out 
that his Zuleika has been murdered? . . .  The blind old man, Kutchum, 
under cover of night steals into Yermak's tent in his absence and slays 
Zuleika, intending to deal a mortal blow at Yermak, who has robbed 
him of his sceptre and his crown. 
" 'Sweet is it to me to rasp the iron against the stone: shoutedYer­
mak in wild frenzy, whetting his knife of Damascus steel upon the 
magic stone; 'I'll have their blood, their blood! I will hack them! hack 
them! hack them to pieces ! ! ! '  .. 
And, after all that, Yermak, unable to survive his Zuleika, throws 
himself into the Irtish, and so it all ends. 
And this, for instance, a tiny fragment written in a jocose style, 
simply to make one laugh. 
"Do you know Ivan Prokofyevitch Yellow-paunch? Why, the 
man who bit Prokofy Ivanovitch's leg. Ivan Prokofyevitch is a man 
of hasty temper, but, on the other hand, of rare virtues; Prokofy 
Ivanovitch, on the other hand, is extremely fond of a rarebit on 
toast. Why, when Pelagea Antonovna used to know him . . .  Do you 
know Pelagea Antonovna? the woman who always wears her petti­
coat inside out." 
That's humour, you know, Varinka, simply humour. He rocked 
with laughter when he read us that. He is a fellow, God forgive him! 
But though it's rather jocose and very playful, Varinka dear, it is quite 

Poor Folk 
3 5 7  
innocent, without the slightest trace of free-thinking or liberal ideas. 
I must observe, my love, that Ratazyaev is a very well-behaved man 
and so an excellent author, not like other authors. 
And, after all, an idea sometimes comes into one's head, you 
know . . . .  What if I were to write something, what would happen 
then? Suppose that, for instance, apropos of nothing, there came into 
the world a book with the title-Poems by Makar Dyevushkin? What would 
my little angel say then? How does that strike you? What do you think 
of it? And I can tell you, my darling, that as soon as my book came 
out, I certainly should not dare to show myself in the Nevsky Prospect. 
Why, how should I feel when everyone would be saying, Here comes 
the author and poet, Dyevushkin? There's Dyevushkin himself, they 
would say! What should I do with my boots then? They are, I may 
mention in passing, my dear girl, almost always covered with patches, 
and the soles too, to tell the truth, sometimes break away in a very un­
seemly fashion. What should we do when everyone knew that the au­
thor Dyevushkin had patches on his boots! Some countess or duchess 
would hear of it, and what would she say, the darling? Perhaps she 
would not notice it; for I imagine countesses don't trouble themselves 
about boots, especially clerks' boots (for you know there are boots 
and boots) , but they would tell her all about it, her friends would give 
me away. Ratazyaev, for instance, would be the first to give me away; 
he visits the Countess V. ;  he says that he goes to all her receptions, and 
he's quite at home there. He says she is such a darling, such a literary 
lady, he says. He's a rogue, that Ratazyaev! 
But enough of that subject; I write all this for fun, my little angel, 
to amuse you. Good-bye, my darling, I have scribbled you a lot of 
nonsense, but that is just because I am in a very good humour to-day. 
We all dined together to-day at Ratazyaev's (they are rogues, Varinka 
dear) , and brought out such a cordial . . . .  
But there, why write to you about that! Only mind you don't imag­
ine anything about me, Varinka. I don't mean anything by it. I will send 
you the books, I will certainly send them . . . .  One of Paul de Kock's 
novels8 is being passed round from one to another, but Paul de Kock 
will not do for you, my precious . . . .  No, no! Paul de Kock won't do for 
you. They say of him, Varinka dear, that he rouses all the Petersburg crit­
ics to righteous indignation. I send you a pound of sweetmeats-I 
bought them on purpose for you. Do you hear, darling? think of me at 

3 5 8  
Poor Folk 
every sweetmeat. Only don't nibble up the sugar-candy but only suck it, 
or you will get toothache. And perhaps you like candied peel?-write 
and tell me. Well, good-bye, good-bye. Christ be with you, my darling! 
DEAR SIR, MAKAR ALEXYEVITCH, 
I remain ever, 
Your most faithful friend, 
MAKAR DYEVUSHKIN. 
June 2 7 .  
Fedora tells me that, if I like, certain people will be pleased to in­
terest themselves in my position, and will get me a very good position 
as a governess in a family. What do you think about it, my friend­
shall I go, or shall I not? Of course I should not then be a burden upon 
you, and the situation seems a good one; but, on the other hand, I feel 
somehow frightened at going into a strange house. They are people 
with an estate in the country. When they want to know all about me, 
when they begin asking questions, making inquiries-why, what 
should I say then?-besides, 1 am so shy and unsociable, I like to go 
on living in the corner 1 am used to. It's better somehow where one is 
used to being; even though one spends half one's time grieving, still it 
is better. Besides, it means leaving Petersburg; and God knows what 
my duties will be, either; perhaps they will simply make me look after 
the children, like a nurse. And they are such queer people, too; they've 
had three governesses already in two years. Do advise me, Makar 
Alexyevitch, whether to go or not. And why do you never come and 
see me? You hardly ever show your face, we scarcely ever meet except 
on Sundays at mass. What an unsociable person you are! You are as bad 
as I am! And you know 1 am almost a relation. You don't love me, 
Makar Alexyevitch, and I am sometimes very sad all alone. Sometimes, 
especially when it is getting dark, one sits all alone. Fedora goes off 
somewhere, one sits and sits and thinks-one remembers all the past, 
joyful and sad alike-it all passes before one's eyes, it all rises up as 
though out of a mist. Familiar faces appear (I am almost beginning to 
see them in reality)-I see mother most often of all . . .  And what 
dreams 1 have! 1 feel that I am not at all well, I am so weak; to-day, for 
instance, when 1 got out of bed this morning, I turned giddy; and I 
have such a horrid cough, too! 1 feel, I know, that I shall soon die. Who 

Poor Folk 
3 5 9  
will bury me? Who will follow my coffin! Who will grieve for me! . . .  
And perhaps I may have to die in a strange place, in a strange 
house! . . .  My goodness! how sad life is, Makar Alexyevitch. Why do 
you keep feeding me on sweetmeats? I really don't know where you 
get so much money from? Ah, my friend, take care of your money, for 
God's sake, take care of it. Fedora is selling the cloth rug I have embroi­
dered; she is getting fifty paper roubles for it. That's very good, I 
thought it would be less. I shall give Fedora three silver roubles, and 
shall get a new dress for myself, a plain one but warm. I shall make you 
a waistcoat, I shall make it myself, and I shall choose a good material. 
Fedora got me a book, Byelkin's Stories,9 which I will send you, if 
you care to read it. Only don't please keep it, or make it dirty, it be­
longs to someone else-it's one of Pushkin's works. Two years ago I 
read these stories with my mother. And it was so sad for me now to 
read them over again. If you have any books send them to me-only 
not if you get them from Ratazyaev. He will certainly lend you his books 
if he has ever published anything. How do you like his works, Makar 
Alexyevitch? Such nonsense . . .  Well, good-bye! How I have been 
chattering! When I am sad I am glad to chatter about anything. It does 
me good; at once one feels better, espeCially if one expresses all that 
lies in one's heart. Good-bye. Good-bye, my friend! 
Your 
V D. 
June 2 8 .  
My PRECIOUS VARVARA ALEXYEVNA, 
leave off worrying yourself, I wonder you are not ashamed. 
Come, give over, my angell How is it such thoughts come into your 
mind?You are not ill, my love, you are not ill at all; you are blooming, 
you are really blooming; a little pale, but still blooming. And what do 
you mean by these dreams, these visions? For shame, my darling, give 
over; you must simply laugh at them. Why do I sleep well' Why is 
nothing wrong with me? You should look at me, my dear soul. I get 
along all right, I sleep quietly, I am as healthy and hearty as can be, a 
treat to look at. Give over, give over, darling, for shame. You must 
reform. I know your little ways, my dearie; as soon as any . trouble 
comes, you begin fancying things and worrying about something. For 

3 6 0  
Poor Folk 
my sake give over, my darling. Go into a family?-Never! No, no, no, 
and what notion is this of yours? What is this idea that has come over 
you? And to leave Petersburg too. No, my darling, I won't allow it. I 
will use every means in my power to oppose such a plan. I'll sell my 
old coat and walk about the street in my shirt before you shall want 
for anything. No, Varinka, no, I know you! It's folly, pure folly. And 
there is no doubt that it is all Fedora's fault: she's evidently a stupid 
woman, she puts all these ideas into your head. Don't you trust her, 
my dear girl. You probably don't know everything yet, my love . . . .  
She's a silly woman, discontented and nonsensical; she worried her 
husband out of his life. Or perhaps she has vexed you in some way? 
No, no, my precious, not for anything! And what would become of 
me then, what would there be left for me to do? No, Varinka darling, 
you put that out of your little head. What is there wanting in your life 
with us? We can never rejoice enough over you, you love us, so do go 
on living here quietly. Sew or read, or don't sew if you like-it does 
not matter-only go on living with us or, only think yourself, why, 
what would it be like without you? . . .  
Here, I will get you some books and then maybe we'll go for a 
walk somewhere again. Only you must give over, my dearie, you must 
give over. Pull yourself together and don't be foolish over trifles! I'll 
come and see you and very soon too. Only accept what I tell you 
plainly and candidly about it; you are wrong, my darling, very wrong. 
Of course, I am an ignorant man and I know myself that I am ignorant, 
that I have hardly a ha'porth of education. But that's not what I am talk­
ing about, and I'm not what matters, but I will stand up for Ratazyaev, 
say what you like. He writes well, very, very well, and I say it again, he 
writes very well. I don't agree with you and I never can agree with you. 
It's written in a flowery abrupt style, with figures of speech. There are 
ideas of all sorts in it, it is very good! Perhaps you read it without feel­
ing, Varinka; you were out of humour when you read it, vexed with Fe­
dora, or something had gone wrong. No, you read it with feeling; best 
when you are pleased and happy and in a pleasant humour, when, for 
instance, you have got a sweetmeat in your mouth, that's when you 
must read it. I don't dispute (who denies it?) that there are better writ­
ers than Ratazyaev, and very much better in fact, but they are good and 
Ratazyaev is good too. He writes in his own special way, and does very 
well to write. Well, good-bye, my precious, I can't write more; I must 

Poor Folk 
3 6 1  
make haste, I have work to do. Mind now, my love, my precious little 
dearie; calm yourself, and God will be with you, and I remain your 
faithful friend, 
MAKER DYEVUSHKIN. 
P.S.-Thanks for the book, my own; we will read Pushkin too, 
and this evening I shall be sure to come and see you. 
My DEAR MAKAR ALEXYEVITCH, 
No, my friend, no, I ought not to go on living among you. On 
second thoughts I consider that I am doing very wrong to refuse such 
a good situation. I shall have at least my daily bread secure; I will do 
my best, I will win the affection of the strangers, I will even try to 
overcome my defects, if necessary. of course it is painful and irksome 
to live with strangers, to try and win their good-will, to hide one's 
feelings, and suppress oneself, but Good will help me. I mustn't be a 
recluse all my life. I have had experiences like it before. I remember 
when I was a little thing and used to go to school. I used to be frolick­
ing and skipping about all Sundays at home; sometimes mother would 
scold me-but nothing mattered, my heart was light and my soul was 
full of joy all the while. As evening approached an immense sadness 
would come over me-at nine 0 ' clock I had to go back to school, and 
there it was all cold, strange, severe, the teachers were so cross on 
Mondays, one had such a pain at one's heart, one wanted to cry; one 
would go into a corner and cry all alone, hiding one's tears-they 
would say one was lazy; and I wasn't crying in the least because I had 
to do my lessons. 
But, after all, I got used to it, and when I had to leave school I 
cried also when I said good-bye to my schoolfellows. And I am not 
doing right to go on being a burden to both of you. That thought is a 
torment to me. I tell you all this openly because I am accustomed to 
be open with you. Do you suppose I don't see how early Fedora gets 
up in the morning, and sets to work at her washing and works till late 
at night?-and old bones want rest. Do you suppose I don't see how 
you are ruining yourself over me, and spending every halfpenny? You 
are not a man of property, my friend! You tell me that you will sell 
your last rag before I shall want for anything. I believe you, my friend, 
I trust your kind heart, but you say that now. Now you have money 

3 6 2  
Poor Folk 
you did not expect, you've received something extra, but later on?You 
know yourself, I am always ill; and I can't work like you, though I 
should be heartily glad to, and one does not always get work. What is 
left for me? To break my heart with grief looking at you two dear ones. 
In what way can I be of the slightest use to you? And why am I so nec­
essary to you, my friend? What good have I done you? I am only de­
voted to you with my whole soul, I love you warmly, intensely, with 
my whole heart, but-my fate is a bitter one! I know how to love and 
I can love, but I can do nothing to repay you for your kindness. Don't 
dissuade me any more, think it over and tell me your final opinion. 
Meanwhile I remain your loving, 
v. n 
July 1 .  
Nonsense, nonsense, Varinka, simply nonsense! Let you alone and 
there's no knowing what notion you will take into your little head. 
One thing's not right and another thing's not right. And I see now that 
it is all nonsense. And what more do you want, my dear girl? just tell 
me that! We love you, you love us, we're all contented and happy­
what more do you want? And what will you do among strangers? I ex­
pect you don't know yet what strangers are like . . .  You had better ask 
me and I will tell you what strangers are like. I know them, my dar­
ling, I know them very well, I've had to eat their bread. They are spite­
ful, Varinka, spiteful; so spiteful that you would have no heart left, they 
would torment it so with reproach, upbraiding and ill looks. You are 
snug and happy among us as though you were in a little nest; besides, 
we shall feel as though we had lost our head when you are gone; why, 
what can we do without you; what is an old man like me to do then? 
You are no use to us? No good to us? How no good? Come, my love, 
think yourself how much good you are! You are a great deal of good to 
me, Varinka. You have such a good influence . . .  Here I am thinking 
about you now and I am happy . . .  Sometimes I write you a letter and 
put all my feelings into it and get a full answer to everything back 
from you. I bought you a little wardrobe, got you a hat; some com­
mission comes from you; I carry out the commission . . .  How can 
you say, you are no use to me? And what should I be good for in my 
old age? Perhaps you have not thought of that, Varinka; that's just what 

Poor Folk 
3 6 3  
you had better think about, 'what will h e  b e  good for without me?' I 
am used to you, my darling. Or else what will come of it? I shall go 
straight to the Neva, and that will be the end of it. Yes, really, Varinka, 
that will be the only thing left for me to do when you are gone. Ah, 
Varinka, my darling. It seems you want me to be taken to Volkovo 
Cemetery in a common cart; with only an old draggletail beggar­
woman to follow me to the grave; you want them to throw the earth 
upon me and go away and leave me alone. It's too bad, too bad, my 
dear! It's sinful really, upon my word it's a sin! I send you back your 
book, Varinka, my darling, and if you ask my opinion about your book, 
dear, I must say that never in my life have I read such a splendid book. 
I wonder now, my darling, how I can have lived till now such an ig­
noramus, God forgive me! What have I been doing? What backwoods 
have I been brought up in? Why, I know nothing, my dear girl; why, I 
know absolutely nothing. I know nothing at all. I tell you, Varinka, 
plainly-I'm a man of no education: I have read little hitherto-very 
little, scarcely anything :  I have read The Picture of Man, a clever work; I 
have read The boy who played funny tunes on the bells and The Cranes of Ibicus; 
that's all, and I never read anything else. ! O  Now I have read The Station­
master! ! in your book; let me tell you, my darling, it happens that one 
goes on living, and one does not know that there is a book there at 
one's side where one's whole life is set forth, as though it were reck­
oned upon one's fingers. And what one never so much as guessed be­
fore, when one begins reading such a book one remembers little by 
little and guesses and discovers. And this is another reason why I like 
your book: one sometimes reads a book, whatever it may be, and you 
can't for the life of you understand it, it's so deep. I, for instance, am 
stupid, I'm stupid by nature, so I can't read very serious books; but I 
read this as though I had written it myself, as though I had taken my 
own heart, just as it is, and turned it inside out before people and de­
scribed it in detail, that's what it is like. And it's a simple subject, my 
goodness, yet what a thing it is! Really it is just as I should have de­
scribed it; why not describe it? You know I feel exactly the same as in 
the book, and I have been at times in exactly the same positions as, for 
instance, that Samson Vyrin, poor fellow. And how many Samson 
Vyrins are going about amongst us, poor dears' And how clearly it is 
all described! Tears almost started into my eyes when I read that the 
poor sinner took to drink, became such a drunkard that he lost his 

3 64 
Poor Folk 
senses and slept the whole day under a sheepskin coat and drowned 
his grief in punch, and wept piteously, wiping his eyes with the dirty 
skirt of his coat when he thought of his lost lamb, his daughter Dun­
yasha. Yes, it's natural. You should read it, it's natural. It's living! I've seen 
it myself; it's all about me; take Teresa, for instance-but why go so far? 
Take our poor clerk, for instance-Why, he is perhaps just a Samson 
Vyrin, only he has another surname, Gorshkov. It's the general lot, 
Varinka dear, it might happen to you or to me. And the count who lives 
on the Nevsky on the riverside, he would be just the same, it would 
only seem different because everything there is done in their own way, 
in style, yet he would be just the same, anything may happen, and the 
same thing may happen to me. That's the truth of the matter, my dar­
ling, and yet you want to go away from us; it's a sin, Varinka, it may be 
the end of me. You may be the ruin of yourself and me too, my own. 
Oh, my little dearie, for God's sake put out of your little head all these 
wilful ideas and don't torment me for nothing. How can you keep 
yourself, my weak little unfledged bird? How can you save yourself 
from ruin, protect yourself from villains? Give over, Varinka, think bet­
ter of it; don't listen to nonsensical advice and persuasion, and read 
your book again, read it with attention; that will do you good. 
I talked of The Stationmaster to Ratazyaev. He told me that that was 
all old-fashioned and that now books with pictures and descriptions 
have all come in; I really did not quite understand what he said about 
it. He ended by saying that Pushkin is fine and that he is a glory to 
holy Russia, and he said a great deal more to me about him. Yes, it's 
good, Varinka, very good; read it again with attention; follow my ad­
vice, and make an old man happy by your obedience. Then God Him­
self will reward you, my own, He will certainly reward you. 
DEAR SIR, MAKAR DYEVUSHKIN, 
Your sincere friend, 
MAKAR DYEVUSHKIN. 
Fedora brought me fifteen silver roubles to-day. How pleased she 
was, poor thing, when I gave her three! I write to you in haste. I am 
now cutting you out a waistcoat-it's charming material-yellow 
with flowers on it. I send you a book: there are all sorts of stories in it; 
I have read some of them, read the one called The Cloak! 12 You persuade 
me to go to the theatre with you; wouldn't it be expensive? Perhaps 
we could go to the gallery somewhere. It's a long while since I've been 

Poor Folk 
3 6 5  
to the theatre, in fact I can't remember when I went. Only I ' m  afraid 
whether such a treat would not cost too much? Fedora simply shakes 
her head. She says that you have begun to live beyond your means and 
I see how much you spend, on me alone! Mind, my friend, that you 
don't get into difficulties. Fedora tells me of rumours-that you have 
had a quarrel with your landlady for not paying your rent; I am very 
anxious about you. Well, good-bye, I'm in a hurry. It's a trifling matter, 
I'm altering a ribbon on a hat. 
P.S.-You know, if we go to the theatre, I shall wear my new hat 
and my black mantle. Will that be all right? 
July 7 .  
DEAR MADAM, VARVARA ALEXYEVNA, 
. . .  So I keep thinking about yesterday. Yes, my dear girl, even 
we have had our follies in the past. I fell in love with that actress, I 
fell head over ears in love with her, but that was nothing. The 
strangest thing was that I had scarcely seen her at all, and had only 
been at the theatre once, and yet for all that I fell in love. There lived 
next door to me five noisy young fellows. I got to know them, I 
could not help getting to know them, though I always kept at a re­
spectable distance from them. But not to be behind them I agreed 
with them in everything. They talked to me about this actress. Every 
evening as soon as the theatre was opened, the whole company­
they never had a halfpenny for necessities-the whole party set off 
to the theatre to the gallery and kept clapping and clapping, and call­
ing, calling for that actress-they were simply frantic! And after that 
they would not let one sleep; they would talk about her all night 
without ceasing, everyone called her his Glasha, everyone of them 
was in love with her, they all had the same canary in their hearts. 
They worked me up : I was a helpless youngster then. I don't know 
how I came to go, but one evening I found myself in the fourth 
gallery with them. As for seeing, I could see nothing more than the 
corner of the curtain, but I heard everything. The actress certainly 
had a pretty voice-a musical voice like a nightingale, as sweet as 
honey; we all clapped our hands and shouted and shouted, we 
almost got into trouble, one was actually turned out. I went home. 

3 6 6  
Poor Folk 
I walked along as though I were drunk! I had nothing left in my 
pocket but one silver rouble, and it was a good ten days before I 
could get my salary. And what do you think, my love? Next day be­
fore going to the office I went to a French perfumer's and spent my 
whole fortune on perfume and scented soap-I really don't know 
why I bought all that. And I did not dine at home but spent the whole 
time walking up and down outside her window. She lived in Nevsky 
Prospect on the fourth storey. I went home for an hour or so, rested, 
and out into the Nevsky again, simply to pass by her windows. For 
six weeks I used to walk to and fro like that and hang about her; I 
was constantly hiring smart sledges and kept driving about so as to 
pass her window: I ruined myself completely, ran into debt, and 
then got over my paSSion, I got tired of it. So you see, my precious, 
what an actress can make of a respectable man! I was a youngster 
though, I was a youngster then! . . .  
M. D. 
July 8 .  
DEAR MADAM, VARVARA ALEXYEVNA, 
I hasten to return you the book you lent me on the sixth of this 
month, and therewith I hasten to discuss the matter with you. It's 
wrong of you, my dear girl, it's wrong of you to put me to the neces­
sity ofit. Allow me to tell you, my good friend, every position in the lot 
of man is ordained by the Almighty. One man is ordained to wear the 
epaulettes of a general, while it is another's lot to serve as a titular 
councillor; it is for one to give commands, for another to obey without 
repining, in fear and humility. It is in accordance with man's capacities; 
one is fit for one thing and one for another, and their capacities are or­
dained by God himself. I have been nearly thirty years in the service; 
my record is irreproachable; I have been sober in my behaviour, and I 
have never had any irregularity put down to me. As a citizen I look 
upon myself in my own mind as haVing my faults, but my virtues, too. 
I am respected by my superiors, and His Excellency himself is satisfied 
with me; and though he has not so far shown me any special marks of 
favour, yet I know that he is satisfied. My handwriting is fairly legible 
and good, not too big and not too small, rather in the style of italics, 
but in any case satisfactory; there is no one among us except, perhaps, 

Poor Folk 
3 6 7  
Ivan Prokofyevitch who writes as well. I am old and my hair is grey; 
that's the only fault I know of in me. Of course, there is no one without 
his little failings. We're all sinners, even you are a sinner, my dear! But 
no serious offence, no impudence has ever been recorded against me, 
such as anything against the regulations, or any disturbance of public 
tranquillity; I have never been noticed for anything like that, such a 
thing has never happened-in fact, I almost got a decoration, but 
what's the use of talking! You ought to have known all that, my dear, 
and he ought to have known; if a man undertakes to write he ought to 
know all about it. No, I did not expect this from you, my dear girl, no, 
Varinka! You are the last person from whom I should have expected it. 
What! So now you can't live quietly in your own little corner­
whatever it may be like-not stirring up any mud, as the saying is, in­
terfering with no one, knowing yourself, and fearing God, without 
people's interfering with you, without their prying into your little den 
and trying to see what sort of life you lead at home, whether for in­
stance you have a good waistcoat, whether you have all you ought to 
have in the way of underclothes, whether you have boots and what 
they are lined with; what you eat, what you drink, what you write? 
And what even if I do sometimes walk on tiptoe to save my boots 
where the pavement's bad? Why write of another man that he some­
times goes short, that he has no tea to drink, as though everyone is al­
ways bound to drink tea-do I look into another man's mouth to see 
how he chews his crust, have I ever insulted anyone in that way? No, 
my dear, why insult people, when they are not interfering with you! 
Look here, Varvara Alexyevna, this is what it comes to: you work, and 
work regularly and devotedly; and your superiors respect you (how­
ever things may be, they do respect you) , and here under your very 
nose, for no apparent reason, neither with your leave nor by your leave, 
somebody makes a caricature of you. Of course one does sometimes 
get something new-and is so pleased that one lies awake thinking 
about it, one is so pleased, one puts on new boots for instance, with 
such enjoyment; that is true: I have felt it because it is pleasant to see 
one's foot in a fine smart boot-that's truly described! But I am really 
surprised that Fyodor Fyodorovitch should have let such a book pass 
without notice and without defending himself It is true that, though 
he is a high official. he is young and likes at times to make his voice 
heard. Why shouldn't he make his voice heard, why not give us 

3 6 8  
Poor Folk 
a scolding if we need it? Scold to keep up the tone of the office, for 
instance-well, he must, to keep up the tone; you must teach men, you 
must give them a good talking to; for, between ourselves, Varinka, we 
clerks do nothing without a good talking to. Everyone is only on the 
look-out to get off somewhere, so as to say, I was sent here or there, 
and to avoid work and edge out of it. And as there are various grades in 
the service and as each grade requires a special sort of reprimand cor­
responding to the grade, it's natural that the tone of the reprimand 
should differ in the various grades-that's in the order of things-why, 
the whole world rests on that, my dear soul, on our all keeping up our 
authority with one another, on each one of us scolding the other. With­
out that precaution, the world could not go on and there would be no 
sort of order. I am really surprised that Fyodor Fyodorovitch let such an 
insult pass without attention. And why write such things? And what's 
the use of it? Why, will someone who reads it order me a cloak because 
of it; will he buy me new boots? No, Varinka, he will read it and ask for 
a contribution. One hides oneself sometimes, one hides oneself, one 
tries to conceal one's weak points, one's afraid to show one's nose at 
times anywhere because one is afraid of titde-tatde, because they can 
work up a tale against you about anything in the world-anything. And 
here now all one's private and public life is being dragged into litera­
ture, it is all printed, read, laughed and gossiped about! Why, it will be 
impossible to show oneself in the street. It's all so plainly told, you 
know, that one might be recognised in one's walk. To be sure, it's as 
well that he does make up for it a litde at the end, that he does soften it 
a bit, that after that passage when they throw the papers at his head, it 
does put in, for instance, that for all that he was a conscientious man, a 
good citizen, that he did not deserve such treatment from his fellow­
clerks, that he respected his elders (his example might be followed, 
perhaps, in that) , had no ill-will against anyone, believed in God and 
died (if he will have it that he died) regretted. But it would have been 
better not to let him die, poor fellow, but to make the coat be found, to 
make Fyodor Fyodorovitch-what am I saying? I mean, make that gen­
eral, finding out his good qualities, question him in his office, promote 
him in his office, and give him a good increase in his salary, for then, 
you see, wickedness would have been punished, and virtue would have 
been triumphant, and his fellow-clerks would have got nothing by it. I 
should have done that, for instance, but as it is, what is there special 

Poor Folk 
3 6 9  
about it, what i s  there good in it? It's just an insignificant example from 
vulgar, everyday life. And what induced you to send me such a book, 
my own 7 Why, it's a book of an evil tendency, Varinka, it's untrue to life, 
for there cannot have been such a clerk. No, I must make a complaint, 
Varinka. I must make a formal complaint. 
DEAR SIR, MAKAR ALEXYEVITCH, 
Your very humble servant, 
MAKAR DYEVUSHKIN. 
July 2 7. 
Your latest doings and letters have frightened, shocked, and 
amazed me, and what Fedora tells me has explained it all. But what 
reason had you to be so desperate and to sink to such a depth as you 
have sunk to, Makar Alexyevitch?Your explanation has not satisfied me 
at all. Isn't it clear that I was right in trying to insist on taking the sit­
uation that was offered me? Besides, my last adventure has thoroughly 
frightened me. You say that it's your love for me that makes you keep 
in hiding from me. I saw that I was deeply indebted to you while you 
persuaded me that you were only spending your savings on me, 
which you said you had lying by in the bank in case of need. Now, 
when I learn that you had no such money at all, but, hearing by 
chance of my straitened position, and touched by it, you actually 
spent your salary, getting it in advance, and even sold your clothes 
when I was ill-now that I have discovered all this I am put in such an 
agonising position that I still don't know how to take it, and what to 
think about it. ah, Makar Alexyevitch! You ought to have confined 
yourself to that first kind help inspired by sympathy and the feeling of 
kinship and not have wasted money afterwards on luxuries. You have 
been false to our friendship, Makar Alexyevitch, for you weren't open 
with me. And now, when I see that you were spending your last penny 
on finery, on sweetmeats, on excursions, on the theatre and on books­
now I am paying dearly for all that in regret for my frivolity (for I took 
it all from you without troubling myself about you) ; and everything 
with which you tried to give me pleasure is now turned to grief for 
me, and has left nothing but useless regret. I have noticed your de­
pression of late, and, although I was nervously apprehensive of some 
trouble, what has happened never entered my head. What! Could you 

3 7 0  
Poor Folk 
lose heart so completely, Makar Alexyevitch! Why, what am I to think 
of you now, what will everyone who knows you say of you now?You, 
whom I always respected for your good heart, your discretion, and 
your good sense. You have suddenly given way to such a revolting 
vice, of which one saw no sign in you before. What were my feelings 
when Fedora told me you were found in the street in a state of inebri­
ety, and were brought home to your lodgings by the police! I was pet­
rified with amazement, though I did expect something extraordinary, 
as there had been no sign of you for four days. Have you thought, 
Makar Alexyevitch, what your chiefs at the office will say when they 
learn the true cause of your absence? You say that everyone laughs at 
you, that they all know of our friendship, and that your neighbours 
speak of me in their jokes, too. Don't pay any attention to that, Makar 
Alexyevitch, and for goodness' sake, calm yourself. I am alarmed 
about your affair with those officers, too; I have heard a vague ac­
count of it. Do explain what it all means. You write that you were 
afraid to tell me, that you were afraid to lose my affection by your 
confession, that you were in despair, not knowing how to help me in 
my illness, that you sold everything to keep me and prevent my go­
ing to hospital, that you got into debt as far as you possibly could, and 
have unpleasant scenes every day with your landlady-but you made a 
mistake in concealing all this from me. Now I know it all, however. 
You were reluctant to make me realise that I was the cause of your un­
happy pOSition, and now you have caused me twice as much grief by 
your behaviour. All this has shocked me, Makar Alexyevitch. Oh, my 
dear friend! misfortune is an infectious disease, the poor and unfor­
tunate ought to avoid one another, for fear of making each other 
worse. I have brought you trouble such as you knew nothing of in 
your old humble and solitary existence. All this is distressing and 
killing me. 
Write me now openly all that happened to you and how you 
came to behave like that. Set my mind at rest if possible. It isn't selfish­
ness makes me write to you about my peace of mind, but my affection 
and love for you, which nothing will ever efface from my heart. 
Good-bye. I await your answer with impatience. You had a very poor 
idea of me, Makar Alexyevitch. 
Your loving 
VARVARA DOBRosELov. 

Poor Folk 
3 7 1  
July 2 8 .  
My PRECIOUS VAAVARA ALEXYEVNA-
Well, as now everything is over and, little by little, things are 
beginning to be as they used to be, again let me tell you one thing, 
my good friend: you are worried by what people will think about 
me, to which I hasten to assure you, Varvara Alexyevna, that my rep­
utation is dearer to me than anything. For which reason and with 
reference to my misfortunes and all those disorderly proceedings I 
beg to inform you that no one of the authorities at the office know 
anything about it or will know anything about it. So that they will all 
feel the same respect for me as before. The one thing I'm afraid of is 
gOSSip. At home our landlady did nothing but shout, and now that 
with the help of your ten roubles I have paid part of what l owe her 
she does nothing more than grumble; as for other people, they don't 
matter, one mustn't borrow money of them, that's all, and to con­
clude my explanations I tell you, Varvara Alexyevna, that your respect 
for me I esteem more highly than anything on earth, and I am com­
forted by it now in my temporary troubles. Thank God that the first 
blow and the first shock are over and that you have taken it as you 
have, and don't look on me as a false friend, or an egoist for keeping 
you here and deceiving you because I love you as my angel and 
could not bring myself to part from you. I've set to work again 
assiduously and have begun performing my duties well. Yevstafy 
Ivanovitch did just say a word when I passed him by yesterday. I will 
not conceal from you, Varinka, that I am overwhelmed by my debts 
and the awful condition of my wardrobe, but that again does not 
matter, and about that too, I entreat you, do not despair, my dear. 
Send me another half rouble. Varinka, that half rouble rends my heart 
too. So that's what it has come to now, that is how it is, old fool that 
I am; it's not I helping you, my angel, but you, my poor little or­
phan, helping me. Fedora did well to get the money. For the time I 
have no hopes of getting any, but if there should be any prospects I 
will write to you fully about it all. But gOSSip, gOSSip is what I am 
most uneasy about. I kiss your little hand and implore you to get 
well. I don't write more fully because I am in haste to get to the of­
fice. For I want by industry and assiduity to atone for all my short­
comings in the way of negligence in the office; a further account of 

3 7 2  
Poor Folk 
all that happened and my adventures with the officers I put off till 
this evening. 
My PRECIOUS VARINKA-
Your respectful and loving 
MAKAR DYEVUSHKIN. 
July 2 8 .  
Ach, Varinka, Varinka! This time the sin is on your side and your 
conscience. You completely upset and perplexed me by your letter, and 
only now, when at my leisure I looked into the inmost recesses of my 
heart, I saw that I was right, perfectly right. I am not talking of my 
drinking (that's enough of it, my dear soul, that's enough) but about 
my loving you and that I was not at all unreasonable in loving you, not 
at all unreasonable. You know nothing about it, my darling; why, 
if only you knew why it all was, why I was bound to love you, you 
wouldn't talk like that. All your reasoning about it is only talk, and I 
am sure that in your heart you feel quite differently. 
My precious, I don't even know myself and don't remember what 
happened between me and the officers. I must tell you, my angel, that 
up to that time I was in the most terrible perturbation. Only imagine! 
for a whole month I had been clinging to one thread, so to say. My po­
sition was most awful. I was concealing it from you, and concealing it at 
home too. But my landlady made a fuss and a clamour. I should not have 
minded that. The wretched woman might have clamoured but, for one 
thing, it was the disgrace and, for another, she had found out about our 
friendship-God knows how-and was making such talk about it all 
over the house that I was numb with horror and put wool in my ears, 
but the worst of it is that other people did not put wool in theirs, but 
pricked them up, on the contrary. Even now I don't know where to hide 
myself . . .  
Well, my angel, all this accumulation of misfortunes of all sorts 
overwhelmed me utterly. Suddenly I heard a strange thing from Fe­
dora: that a worthless profligate had called upon you and had insulted 
you by dishonourable proposals; that he did insult you, insult you 
deeply, I can judge from myself, my darling, for I was deeply insulted 
myself. That crushed me, my angel, that overwhelmed me and made 
me lose my head completely. I ran out, Varinka dear, in unutterable 

Foor Folk 
3 7 3  
fury. I wanted to go straight to him, the reprobate. I did not know 
what I meant to do. I won't have you insulted, my angel' Well, I was 
sad! And at that time it was raining, sleet was falling, it was horribly 
wretched I 
. .
. I meant to turn back . . . .  Then came my downfall. I 
met Emelyan Ilyitch-he is a clerk, that is, was a clerk, but he is not a 
clerk now because he was turned out of our office. I don't know what 
he does now, he just hangs about there. Well, I went with him. Then­
but there, Varinka, will it amuse you to read about your friend's mis­
fortunes, his troubles, and the story of the trials he has endured? Three 
days later that Emelyan egged me on and I went to see him, that offi­
cer. I got his address from our porter. Since we are talking about it, my 
dear, I noticed that young gallant long ago: I kept an eye upon him 
when he lodged in our buildings. I see now that what I did was un­
seemly, because I was not myself when I was shown up to him. Truly, 
Varinka, I don't remember anything about it, all I remember is that 
there were a great many officers with him, else I was seeing double­
goodness knows. I don't remember what I said either, I only know 
that I said a great deal in my honest indignation. But then they turned 
me out, then they threw me downstairs-that is, not really threw me 
downstairs, but turned me out. You know already, Varinka, how I re­
turned: that's the whole story. Of course I lowered myself and my rep­
utation has suffered, but, after all, no one knows of it but you, no 
outsider knows of it, and so it is all as though it had never happened. 
Perhaps that is so, Varinka, what do you think? The only thing is, I 
know for a fact that last year Aksenty Osipovitch in the same way as­
saulted Pyotr Petrovitch but in secret, he did it in secret. He called him 
into the porter's room-I saw it all through the crack in the door-and 
there he settled the matter, as was fitting, but in a gentlemanly way, 
for no one saw it except me, and I did not matter-that is, I did not 
tell anyone. Well, after that Pyotr Petrovitch and Aksenty OSipovitch 
were all right together. Pyotr Petrovitch, you know, is a man with self­
respect, so he told no one, so that now they even bow and shake hands. 
I don't dispute, Varinka, I don't venture to dispute with you that I have 
degraded myself terribly, and, what is worst of all, I have lowered my­
self in my own opinion, but no doubt it was destined from my birth, 
no doubt it was my fate, and there's no escaping one's fate, you know. 
Well, that is an exact account of my troubles and misfortunes, 
Varinka, all of them, things such that reading of them is unprofitable. 

3 74 
Poor Folk 
I am very far from well, Varinka, and have lost all the playfulness of my 
feelings. Herewith I beg to testify to my devotion, love and respect. I 
remain, dear madam, Varvara Alexyevna, 
My DEAR MAKAR ALEXYEVITCH !  
Your humble servant, 
MAKAR DYEvUSHKIN. 
July 2 9 .  
I have read your two letters, and positively groaned I Listen, my 
dear; you are either concealing something from me and have written 
to me only part of all your troubles, or . . .  really, Makar Alexyevitch, 
there is a touch of incoherency about your letters still. . . .  Come and 
see me, for goodness' sake, come to-day; and listen, come straight to 
dinner, you know I don't know how you are living, or how you have 
managed about your landlady. You write nothing about all that, and 
your silence seems intentional. So, good-bye, my friend; be sure and 
come to us to-day; and you would do better to come to us for dinner 
every day. Fedora cooks very nicely. Good-bye. 
My DEAR VARVARA ALEXYEVNA-
Your 
VARVARA DOBROSELOV. 
August 1 .  
You are glad, my dear girl , that God has sent you a chance to do 
one good turn for another and show your gratitude to me. I believe 
that, Varinka, and I believe in the goodness of your angelic heart, and 
I am not saying it to reproach you-only do not upbraid me for being 
a spendthrift i.n my oid age. Well, if I have done wrong, there's no help 
for it; only to hear it from you, my dearie, is very bitter I Don't be an­
gry with me for saying so, my heart's all one ache. Poor people are 
touchy-that's in the nature of things. I felt that even in the past. The 
poor man is exacting; he takes a different view of God's world, and 
looks askance at every passer-by and turns a troubled gaze about him 
and looks to every word, wondering whether people are not talking 
about him, whether they are saying that he is so ugly, speculating about 
what he would feel exactly, what he would be on this side and what 

Poor Folk 
3 7 5  
he would be on that side, and everyone knows, Varinka, that a poor 
man is worse than a rag and can get no respect from anyone; whatever 
they may write, those scribblers, it will always be the same with the 
poor man as it has been. And why will it always be as it has been? Be­
cause to their thinking the poor man must be turned inside out, he 
must have no privacy, no pride whatever' Emelyan told me the other 
day that they got up a subscription for him and made a sort of official 
inspection over every sixpence; they thought that they were giving 
him his sixpences for nothing, but they were not; they were paid for 
them by showing him he was a poor man. Nowadays, my dear soul, 
benevolence is practised in a very queer way . . .  and perhaps it always 
has been so, who knows! Either people don't know how to do it or 
they are first-rate hands at it-one of the two. Perhaps you did not 
know it, so there it is for you. On anything else we can say nothing, 
but on this subject we are authorities' And how is it a poor man 
knows all this and thinks of it all like this? Why?--from experience' 
Because he knows for instance, that there is a gentleman at his side, 
who is going somewhere to a restaurant and saying to himself, "\'Vhat's 
this beggarly clerk going to eat to-day? 1'm going to eat saute papillotte 
while he is going to eat porridge without butter, maybe." And what 
business is it to him that I am going to eat porridge without butter? 
There are men, Varinka, there are men who think of nothing else. And 
they go about, the indecent caricaturists, and look whether one puts 
one's whole foot down on the pavement or walks on tiptoe; they notice 
that such a clerk, of such a department, a titular councillor, has his bare 
toes sticking (Jut of his boot, that he has holes in his elbow-and then 
they sit down at home and describe it all and publish such rubbish . . .  
and what business is it of yours, sir, if my elbows are in holes? Yes, if 
you will excuse me the coarse expression, Varinka, I will tell you that 
the poor man has the same sort of modesty on that score as you, for 
instance, have maidenly modesty. Why, you wouldn't divest yourself of 
your clothing before everyone-forgive my coarse comparison. So, in 
the same way, the poor man does not like people to peep into his poor 
hole and wonder about his domestic arrangements. So what need was 
there to join in insulting me, Varinka, with the enemies who are at­
tacking an honest man's honour and reputation? 
And in the office to-day I sat like a hen, like a plucked sparrow, so 
that I almost turned with shame at myself. I was ashamed, Varinka' 

3 7 6  
Poor Folk 
And one is naturally timid, when one's elbows are seeing daylight 
through one's sleeves, and one's buttons are hanging on threads. And, 
as ill-luck would have it, all my things were in such disorder! You can't 
help losing heart. Why! . . .  Stepan Karlovitch himself began speaking 
to me about my work to-day, he talked and talked away and added, as 
though unawares, "Well, really, Makar Alexyevitch!" and did not say 
what was in his mind, only I understood what it was for myself, and 
blushed so that even the bald patch on my head was crimson. It was 
really only a trifle, but still it made me uneasy, and aroused bitter re-· 
flections. If only they have heard nothing ! Ah, God forbid that they 
should hear about anything! I confess I do suspect one man. I suspect 
him very much. Why, these villains stick at nothing, they will betray 
me, they will give away one's whole private life for a halfpenny­
nothing is sacred to them. 
I know now whose doing it is; it is Ratazyaev's doing. He knows 
someone in our office, and most likely in the course of conversation 
has told them the whole story with additions; or maybe he has told 
the story in his own office, and it has crept out and crept into our of­
fice. In our lodging, they all know it down to the lowest, and point at 
your window; I know that they do pOint. And when I went to dinner 
with you yesterday, they all poked their heads out of window and the 
landlady said: "Look," said she, "the devil has made friends with the 
baby." And then she called you an unseemly name. But all that's noth­
ing beside Ratazyaev's disgusting design to put you and me into his 
writing and to describe us in a cunning satire; he spoke of this him­
self, and friendly fellow-lodgers have repeated it to me. I can think of 
nothing else, my darling, and don't know what to decide to do. There 
is no concealing the fact, we have provoked the wrath of God, little 
angel. You meant to send me a book, my good friend, to relieve my 
dullness; what is the use of a book, my love, what's the good of it? It's 
arrant nonsense! The story is nonsense and it is written as nonsense, 
just for idle people to read; trust me, my dear soul, trust the experi­
ence of my age. And what if they talk to you of some Shakespeare, 
saying, "You see that Shakespeare wrote literature," well, then, Shake­
speare is nonsense; it's all arrant nonsense and only written to jeer at 
folk! 
Yours, 
MAKAR DYEVUSHKIN. 

Poor Folk 
3 7 7  
August 2 .  
DEAR MAKAR ALEXYEVITCH! 
Don't worry about anything ;  please God it will all be set right. 
Fedora has got a lot of work both for herself and for me, and we have 
set to work very happily; perhaps we shall save the situation. She sus·· 
peets that Anna Fyodorovna had some hand in this last unpleasant 
business; but now I don't care. I feel somehow particularly cheerful 
to-day. You want to borrow money-God forbid' You ' ll get into trou­
ble afterwards when you need to pay it back. We had much better live 
more frugally; come to us more often, and don 't take any notice of 
your landlady. As for your other enemies and ill- wishers , I am sure 
you are wor rying yourself with needless suspicions, Makar Alexye­
vitch! Mind, I told you last time that your language was very exagger­
ated. Well, good-bye till we meet. I expect you without fail. 
Your 
V o. 
August 3 .  
My ANGEL, VARVARA ALEXYEVNA, 
I hasten to tell you, my little life, I have fresh hopes of something. 
But excuse me, my little daughter, you write, my angel, that I am not 
to borrow money. My darling, it is impossible to avoid it; here I am in 
a bad way, and what if anything were suddenly amiss with you ! You 
are frail, you know; so that's why I say we must borrow. Well, so I will 
continue. 
r beg to inform yo u, Varvara Alexyevna, that in the office I am sit­
ting next to Emelyan Ivanovitch. That's not the Emelyan Ilyitch whom 
you know. He is, like me, a titular co uncillor, and he and I are almost 
the oldest veterans in the office. He is a good-natured soul . an un­
worldly soul; he's not given to talking and always sits like a regular 
bear. But he is a good clerk and has a good English handwriting and , 
to tell the whole truth , he writes as well as I do-he's a worthy man! 
I never was very intimate with him, but only just say good-morning 
and good-evening; or if I wanted the pen-knife, I would say, " Give me 
the pen-knife, Emelyan Ivanovitch" ; in short, our intercourse was 
confined to our common necessities. Well so, he says to me to-day, 

3 7 8  
Poor Folk 
"Makar Alexyevitch, why are you so thoughtful?" I see the man 
wishes me kindly, so I told him-I said, "This is how it is, Emelyan 
Ivanovitch"-that is, I did not tell him everything, and indeed, God 
forbid! I never will tell the story because I haven't the heart to, but just 
told him something, that I was in straits for money, and so on. "You 
should borrow, my good soul," said Emelyan Ivanovitch: "you should 
borrow; from Pyotr Petrovitch you might borrow, he lends money at 
interest; I have borrowed and he asks a decent rate of interest, not ex­
orbitant." Well, Varinka, my heart gave a leap. I thought and thought 
maybe the Lord will put it into the heart of Pyotr Petrovitch and in his 
benevolence he will lend me the money. Already I was reckoning to 
myself that I could pay the landlady and help you, and clear myself all 
round. Whereas now it is such a disgrace, one is afraid to be in one's 
own place, let alone the jeers of our grinning jackanapes. Bother 
them! And besides, his Excellency sometimes passes by our table: why, 
God forbid! he may cast a glance in my direction and notice I'm not 
decently dressed! And he makes a great point of neatness and tidiness. 
Maybe he would say nothing, but I should die of shame-that's how it 
would be. In consequence I screwed myself up and, putting my pride 
in my ragged pocket, I went up to Pyotr Petrovitch full of hope and at 
the same time more dead than alive with suspense. But, after all, 
Varinka, it all ended in foolishness! He was busy with something, talk­
ing with Fedosey Ivanovitch. I went up to him Sideways and pulled 
him by the sleeve, saying, "Pyotr Petrovitch, I say, Pyotr Petrovitch!" 
He looked round, and I went on: saying, "this is how it is, thirty rou­
bles," and so on. At first he did not understand me, and when I ex­
plained it all to him, he laughed, and said nothing. I said the same 
thing again. And he said to me, "Have you got a pledge?" And he 
buried himself in his writing and did not even glance at me. I was a 
little flustered. "No," I said, "Pyotr Petrovitch, I've no pledge," and I 
explained to him that when I got my salary I would pay him, would 
be sure to pay him, I should consider it my first duty. Then somebody 
called him. I waited for him, he came back and began mending a pen 
and did not seem to notice me, and I kept on with "Pyotr Petrovitch, 
can't you manage it somehow?" He said nothing and seemed not to 
hear me. I kept on standing there. Well, I thought I would try for the 
last time, and pulled him by the sleeve. He just muttered something, 
cleaned his pen, and began writing. I walked away. You see, my dear 

Poor Folk 
3 7 9  
girl, they may be excellent people, but proud, very proud-but I don't 
mind! We are not fit company for them, Varinka! That is why I have 
written all this to you. Emelyan Ivanovitch laughed, too, and shook his 
head, but he cheered me up, the dear fellow-Emelyan Ivanovitch is a 
worthy man. He promised to introduce me to a man who lives in the 
Vybord Side, Varinka, and lends money at interest too; he is some sort 
of clerk of the fourteenth class. Emelyan Ivanovitch says he will be 
sure to lend it. Shall I go to him to-morrow, my angel, eh? What do 
you think? It is awful if I don't. My landlady is almost turning me out 
and won't consent to give me my dinner; besides, my boots are in a 
dreadful state, my dear; I've no buttons either and nothing else be­
sides. And what if anyone in authority at the office notices such un­
seemliness; it will be awful, Varinka, simply awful! 
MAKAR DYEVUSHKIN. 
August 4. 
DEAR MAKAR ALEXYEVITCH, 
For God's sake, Makar Alexyevitch, borrow some money as soon 
as possible! I would not for anything have asked you for help as things 
are at present, but if you only knew what a position I am in. It's utterly 
impossible for us to remain in this lodging. A horribly unpleasant 
thing has happened here, and if only you knew how upset and agi­
tated I am! Only imagine, my friend; this morning a stranger came 
into our lodging, an elderly, almost old man, wearing orders. I was 
amazed, not knowing what he wanted with us. Fedora had gone out 
to a shop at the time. He began asking me how I lived and what I did, 
and without waiting for an answer, told me that he was the uncle of 
that officer; that he was very angry with his nephew for his disgrace­
ful behaviour, and for having given us a bad name all over the build­
ings; said that his nephew was a featherheaded scamp, and that he was 
ready to take me under his protection; advised me not to listen to 
young men, added that he sympathised with me like a father, that he 
felt a father's feeling for me and was ready to help me in any way. I 
blushed all over, not knowing what to think, but was in no haste to 
thank him. He took my hand by force, patted me on the cheek, told 
me I was very pretty and that he was delighted to find I had dimples 
in my cheeks (goodness knows what he said!) and at last tried to kiss 

3 8 0  
Poor Folk 
me, saying that he was an old man (he was so loathsome) . At that 
point Fedora came in. He was a little disconcerted and began saying 
again that he felt respect for me, for my discretion and good princi­
ples, and that he was very anxious that I should not treat him as a 
stranger. Then he drew Fedora aside and on some strange pretext 
wanted to give her a lot of money. Fedora, of course, would not take it. 
At last he got up to go, he repeated once more all his assurances, said 
that he would come and see me again and bring me some ear-rings 
(I believe he, too, was very much embarrassed) ; he advised me to 
change my lodgings and recommended me a very nice lodging which 
he had his eye on, and which would cost me nothing; he said that he 
liked me very much for being an honest and sensible girl, advised me 
to beware of profligate men, and finally told us that he knew Anna Fy­
odorovna and that Anna Fyodorovna had commissioned him to tell 
me that she would come and see me herself. Then I understood it all. 
I don't know what came over me; it was the first time in my life I had 
had such an experience; I flew into a fury, I put him to shame com­
pletely. Fedora helped me, and we almost turned him out of the flat. 
We've come to the conclusion that it is all Anna Fyodorovna's dOing; 
how else could he have heard of us? 
Now I appeal to you, Makar Alexyevitch, and entreat you to help 
us. For God's sake, don't desert me in this awful position. Please bor­
row, get hold of some money anyway; we've no money to move with 
and we mustn't stay here any longer; that's Fedora 's advice. We need at 
least thirty-five roubles; I'll pay you back the money; I'll earn it. Fe­
dora will get me some more work in a day or two, so that if they ask a 
high interest, never mind it, but agree to anything. I'll pay it ali back, 
only for God's sake, don't abandon me. I can't bear worrying you now 
when you are in such circumstances . . .  Good-bye, Makar Alexye­
vitch; think of me, and God grant you are successful. 
My DARLING VARVARA ALEXYEVNA! 
Yours, 
Y D. 
August 4. 
All these unexpected blows positively shatter me! Such terrible 
calamities destroy my spirit! These scoundrelly libertines and rascally 

Poor Folk 
3 8 1  
old men will not only bring you, my angel, to a bed of sickness, they 
mean to be the death of me, too. And they will be, too, I swear they 
will. You know I am ready to die sooner than not help you! If I don't 
help you it will be the death of me, Varinka, the actual literal death of 
me, and in do help you, you'll fly away from me like a bird out of its 
nest, to escape these owls, these birds of prey that were trying to peck 
her. That's what tortures me, my precious. And you too, Varinka, you 
are so cruel! How can you do it7 You are tormented, you are insulted, 
you, my little bird, are in distress, and then you regret that you must 
worry me and promise to repay the debt, which means, to tell the 
truth, that with your delicate health you will kill yourself, in order to 
get the money for me in time. Why, only think, Varinka, what you are 
talking about. Why should you sew? Why should you work, worry 
your poor little head with anxiety, spoil your pretty eyes and destroy 
your health? Ah, Varinka, Varinka! You see, my darling, I am good for 
nothing, I know myself that I am good for nothing, but I'll manage to 
be good for something! I will overcome all obstacles. I will get outside 
work, I will copy all sorts of manuscripts for all sorts of literary men. 
I will go to them, I won't wait to he asked, I'll force them to give me 
work, for you know, my darling, they are on the look-out for good 
copyists, I know they look out for them, but I won't let you wear 
yourself out; I won't let you carry out such a disastrous intentioIl. 
I will certainly borrow it, my angel, I'd sooner die than IlOt borrow it. 
You write, my darling, that I am not to be afraid of a high rate of 
interest-and I won't be afraid of it, my dear soul, I won't be fright­
ened. I won't be frightened of anything now. I will ask for forty rou­
bles in paper, my dear; that's not much, you know, Varinka, what do 
you think? Will they trust me with forty roubles at the first word? That 
is, I mean to say, do you consider me capable of inspiring trust and 
confidence at first sight. Can they form a favourable impression of me 
from my physiognomy at first sight? Recall my appearance, my angel; 
am I capable of inspiring confidence? What do you think yourself? You 
know I feel such terror; it makes me quite ill, to tell the truth, quite ill. 
Of the forty roubles I set aside twenty-five for you, Varinka, two silver 
roubles will be for the landlady, and the rest I design for my own ex­
penses. You see I ought to give the landlady more, I must, in fact; but 
if you think it all over, my dear girl, and reckon out all I need, then 
you'll see that it is impossible to give her more, consequently there's 

3 8 2  
Poor Folk. 
no use talking about it and no need to refer to it. For a silver rouble I 
shall buy a pair of boots-I really don't know whether I shall be able 
to appear at the office in the old ones; a new necktie would have been 
necessary, too, for I have had the old one a year, but since you've 
promised to make me, not only a tie, but a shirtfront cut out of your 
old apron, I shall think no more of a tie. So there we have boots and a 
tie. Now for buttons, my dear. You will agree, my darling, that I can't 
go on without buttons and almost half have dropped off. I tremble 
when I think that his Excellency may notice such untidiness and say 
something, and what he would say! I shouldn't hear what he would 
say, my darling, for I should die, die, die on the spot, simply go and 
die of shame at the very thought!-Ah, Varinka!-Well, after all these 
necessities, there will be three roubles left, so that would do to live on 
and get half a pound of tobacco, for I can't live without tobacco, my 
little angel, and this is the ninth day since I had my pipe in my mouth. 
To tell the truth, I should have bought it and said nothing to you, but 
I was ashamed. You are there in trouble depriving yourself of every­
thing, and here am I enjoying luxuries of all sorts; so that's why I tell 
you about it to escape the stings of conscience. I frankly confess, 
Varinka, I am now in an extremely straitened position, that is, nothing 
like it has ever happened before. My landlady despises me, I get no sort 
of respect from anyone; my terrible lapses, my debts; and at the office, 
where I had anything but a good time, in the old days, at the hands of 
my fellow clerks-now, Varinka, it is beyond words. I hide everything, 
I carefully hide everything from everyone, and I edge into the office 
sideways, I hold aloof from all. It's only to you that I have the heart to 
confess it. . . .  And what if they won't give me the money! No, we had 
better not think about that, Varinka, not depress our spirits beforehand 
with such thoughts. That's why I am writing this, to warn you not to 
think about it, and not to worry yourself with evil imaginations. Ah! 
my God! what will happen to you then! It's true that then you will not 
move from that lodging and I shall be with you then. But, no, I should 
not come back then, I should simply perish somewhere and be lost. 
Here I have been writing away to you and I ought to have been shav­
ing; it makes one more presentable, and to be presentable always 
counts for something. Well, God help us, I will say my prayers, and 
then set off. 
M. DYEvUSHKIN. 

Poor Folk 
3 8 3  
August 5 .  
My DEAR MAKAR ALEXYEVITCH, 
You really mustn 't give way to despair. There's trouble enough 
without that. 
I send you thirty kopecks in silver, I cannot manage more. Buy 
yourself what you need most, so as to get along somehow, until to­
morrow. We have scarcely anything left ourselves, and I don't know 
what will happen to-morrow. It's sad, Makar Alexyevitch! Don't be 
sad, though, if you've not succeeded, there's no help for it. Fedora says 
that there is no harm done so far, that we can stay for the time in this 
lodging, that if we did move we shouldn't gain much by it, and that 
they can find us anywhere if they want to. Though I don't feel com­
fortable at staying here now. If it were not so sad I would have written 
you an account of something. 
What a strange character you have, Makar Alexyevitch; you take 
everything too much to heart and so you will be always a very unhappy 
man. I read all your letters attentively and I see in every letter you are 
anxious and worried about me as you never are about yourself Everyone 
says, of course, that you have a good heart, but I say that it is too good. I 
will give you some friendly advice, Makar Alexyevitch. I am grateful to 
you, very grateful for all that you have done for me, I feel it very much; 
so judge what it must be for me to see that even now, after all your mis­
fortunes of which I have been the unconsci0L1S cause-that even now 
you are only living in my life, my joys, my sorrows, my feelings! If one 
takes all another person's troubles so to heart and sympathises so in­
tensely with everything it is bound to make one very unhappy To-day, 
when you came in to see me from the office I was frightened at the sight 
of you. You were so pale, so despairing, so frightened-looking; you did 
not look like yourself-and all because you were afraid to tell me of 
your failure, afraid of disappointing me, of frightening me, and when 
you saw I nearly laughed your heart was almost at ease. Makar Alexye­
viteh, don't grieve, don't despair, be more sensible, I beg you, I implore 
you. Come, you will see that everything will be all right. Everything will 
take a better turn: why, life will be a misery to you, for ever grieving and 
being miserable over other people's troubles. Good-bye, my dear friend. 
I beseech you not to think too much about it. 
V D. 

3 8 4  
Poor Folk 
August S. 
My DARLING VARINKA, 
Very well, my angel, very well! You have made up your mind that 
it is no harm so far that I have not got the money. Well, very good, I 
feel reassured, I am happy as regards you. I am delighted, in fact, that 
you are not going to leave me in my oId age but are going to stay in 
your lodging. In fact, to tell you everything, my heart was brimming 
over with joy when I saw that you wrote so nicely about me in your 
letter and gave due credit to my feelings. I don't say this from pride, 
but because I see how you love me when you are so anxious about my 
heart. Well, what's the use of talking about my heart! The heart goes its 
own way, but you hint, my precious, that I mustn't be downhearted. 
Yes, my angel, maybe, and I say myself it is of no use being down­
hearted! but for all that, you tell me, my dear girl, what boots I am to 
go to the office in to-morrow! That's the trouble, Varinka; and you 
know such a thought destroys a man, destroys him utterly. And the 
worst of it is, my own, that it is not for myself I am troubled, it is not 
for myself I am distressed; as far as I am concerned I don't mind going 
about without an overcoat and without boots in the hardest frost; I 
don't care: I can stand anything, and put up with anything. I am a 
humble man of no importance,-but what will people say? My ene­
mies with their spiteful tongues, what will they say, when one goes 
about without an overcoat? You know it is for the sake of other people 
one wears an overcoat, yes, and boots, too, you put on, perhaps, on 
their account. Boots, in such cases, Varinka darling, are necessary to 
keep up one's dignity and good name: in boots with holes in them, 
both dignity and good name are lost; trust the experience of my years, 
my dear child, listen to an old man like me who knows the world and 
what people are, and not to any scurrilous scribblers and satirists. 
I have not yet told you in detail, my darling, how it all happened 
to-day. I suffered so much, I endured in one morning more mental an­
guish than many a man endures in a year. This is how it was: first, I set 
off very early in the morning, so as to find him and be in time for the 
office afterwards. There was such a rain, such a sleet falling this morn­
ing! I wrapped myself up in my overcoat, my little dearie. I walked on 
and on and I kept thinking : "Oh, Lord, forgive my transgressions and 
grant the fulfilment of my desires! "  Passing St. X's Church, I crossed 

Poor Folk 
3 8 5  
myself, repented of all my sins, and thought that i t  was wrong of me 
to bargain with the Almighty. I was lost in my thoughts and did not 
feel like looking at anything; so I walked without picking my way. The 
streets were empty, and the few I met all seemed anxious and preoc­
cupied, and no wonder: who would go out at such an early hour and 
in such weather! A gang of workmen, grinning all over, met me, the 
rough fellows shoved against me! A feeling of dread came over me, I 
felt panic-stricken, to tell the truth I didn't like even to think about the 
money-I felt I must just take my chance! Just at Voskressensky Bridge 
the sole came off my boot, so I really don't know what I walked upon. 
And then I met our office attendant, Yermolaev. He drew himself up 
at attention and stood looking after me as though he would ask 
for a drink. "Ech, a drink, brother," I thought; "not much chance of 
a drink! "  I was awfully tired. I stood still, rested a bit and pushed on far­
ther; I looked about on purpose for something to fasten my attention 
on, to distract my mind, to cheer me up, but no, I couldn't fix one 
thought on anything and, besides, I was so muddy that I felt ashamed 
of myself At last I saw in the distance a yellow wooden house with an 
upper storey in the style of a belvedere. "Well," thought I, "so that's it, 
that's how Emelyan Ivanovitch described it--Markov's house." (It is 
this Markov himself, Varinka, who lends money.) I scarcely knew what 
I was doing, and I knew, of course, that it was Markov's house, but I 
asked a policeman. "Whose house is that, brother?" said 1. The police­
man was a surly fellow, seemed loth to speak and cross with someone; 
he filtered his words through his teeth, but he did say it was Markov's 
house. These policemen are always so unfeeling, but what did the po­
liceman matter?-well, it all made a bad and unpleasant impression, in 
short, there was one thing on the top of another; one finds in every­
thing something akin to one's own position, and it is always so. I took 
three turns past the house, along the street, and the further I went, the 
worse I felt. "No," I thought, "he won't give it me, nothing will in­
duce him to give it me. I am a stranger and it's a ticklish business, and 
I am not an attractive figure. Well," I thought, "leave it to Fate, if only 
I do not regret it afterwards; they won't devour me for making the at­
tempt," and I softly opened the gate, and then another misfortune 
happened. A wretched, stupid yard dog fastened upon me. It was be­
side itself and barked its loudest!-and it's just such wretched, trivial 
incidents that always madden a man, Varinka, and make him nervous 

3 8 6  
Poor Folk 
and destroy all the determination he has been fortifying himself with 
beforehand; so that I went into the house more dead than alive and 
walked straight into trouble again. Without seeing what was below me 
straight in the doorway, I went in, stumbled over a woman who was 
busy straining some milk from a pail into a jug, and spilt all the milk. 
The silly woman shrieked and made an outcry. saying, "Where are you 
shoving to, my man?" and made a deuce of a row. I may say. Varinka, it 
is always like this with me in such cases; it seems it is my fate, I always 
get mixed up in something. An old hag, the Finnish landlady, poked 
her head out at the noise. I went straight up to her. "Does Markov live 
here?" said 1. "No," said she. She stood still and took a good look at 
me. "And what do you want with him?" I explained to her that 
Emelyan had told me this and that, and all the rest of it-said it was a 
matter of business. The old woman called her daughter, a barelegged 
girl in her teens. "Call your father; he's upstairs at the lodger's, most 
likely." 
I went in. The room was all right, there were pictures on the 
wall-all portraits of generals, a sofa, round table, mignonette, and 
balsam-I wondered whether I had not better clear out and take my­
self off for good and all. And, oh dear, I did want to run away, Varinka. 
"I had better come to-morrow," I thought, "and the weather will be 
better and I will wait a little-to-day the milk's been spilt and the gen­
erals look so cross . . .  " I was already at the door-but he came in­
a greyheaded man with thievish eyes, in a greasy dressing-gown with 
a cord round his waist. He enquired how and why, and I told him that 
Emelyan Ivanovitch had told me this and that-"Forty roubles," I said, 
"is what I've come about"-and I couldn't finish. I saw from his eyes 
that the game was lost. "No," says he; "the fact is, I've no money; and 
have you brought anything to pledge as security?" 
I began explaining that I had brought nothing to pledge, but that 
Emelyan Ivanovitch-I explained in fact, what was wanted. He heard 
it all. "No," said he; "what is Emelyan Ivanovitch! I've no money." 
Well, I thought, "There it is, I knew-I had a foreboding of it." 
Well, Varinka, it would have been better really if the earth had opened 
under me. I felt chill all over, my feet went numb and a shiver ran 
down my back. I looked at him and he looked at me and almost said, 
Come, run along, brother, it is no use your staying here--so that if 
such a thing had happened in other circumstances, I should have been 

Poor Folk 
3 8 7  
quite ashamed. "And what do you want money for?"-(do you know, 
he asked that, Varinka) . I opened my mouth, if only not to stand there 
doing nothing, but he wouldn't listen. "No," he said, "I have no 
money, I would have lent it with pleasure," said he. Then I pressed 
him, telling him I only wanted a little, saying I would pay him back on 
the day fixed, that I would pay him back before the day fixed, that 
he could ask any interest he liked and that, by God! I would pay him 
back. At that instant, my darling, I thought of you, I thought of all 
your troubles and privations, I thought of your poor little half-rouble. 
"But no," says he, "the interest is no matter; if there had been a pledge 
now! Besides, I have no money. I have none, by God! or I'd oblige you 
with pleasure,"-he took God's name, too, the villian! 
Well, I don't remember, my own, how I went out, how I walked 
along Vyborgsky Street; how I got to Voskressensky Bridge. I was fear­
fully tired, shivering, wet through, and only succeeded in reaching the 
office at ten 0' clock. I wanted to brush the mud off, but Snyegirev, the 
porter, said I mustn't, I should spoil the brush, and "the brush is gov­
ernment property," said he. That's how they all go on now, my dear, 
these gentry treat me no better than a rag to wipe their boots on. Do 
you know what is killing me, Varinka? it's not the money that's killing 
me, but all these little daily cares, these whispers, smiles and jokes. His 
Excellency may by chance have to refer to me. Oh, my darling, my 
golden days are over. I read over all your letters to-day; it's sad, 
Varinka! Good-bye, my own! The Lord keep you. 
M. DYEVUSHKIN. 
P.S.-I meant to describe my troubles half in joke, Varinka, only it 
seems that it does not come off with me, joking. I wanted to satisfy 
you. I am coming to see you, my dear girl, I will be sure to come. 
August 1 1 . 
VARViilA ALEXYEVNA, MY DARLING, 
I am lost, we are both lost, both together irretrievably lost. My 
reputation, my dignity-all is destroyed! I am ruined and you are ru­
ined, my darling. You are hopelessly ruined with me! It's my doing, I 
have brought you to ruin! I am persecuted, Varinka, I am despised, 
turned into a laughing-stock, and the landlady has simply begun to 

3 8 8  
Poor Folk 
abuse me; she shouted and shouted at me, to-day; she rated and rated 
at me and treated me as though I were dirt. And in the evening, at 
Ratazyaev's, one of them began reading aloud the rough copy of a let­
ter to you which I had aCCidentally dropped out of my pocket. My 
precious, what a joke they made of it! They called us all sorts of flat­
tering names and roared with laughter, the traitors! I went to them 
and taxed Ratazyaev with his perfidy, told him he was a traitor! And 
Ratazyaev answered that I was a traitor myself, that I amused myself 
with making conquests among the fair sex. He said, "You take good 
care to keep it from us; you're a Lovelace," ! 3 he said; and now they all 
call me Lovelace and I have no other name! Do you hear, my little an­
gel, do you hear?-they know it all now, they know all about it, and 
they know about you, my own, and whatever you have, they know 
about it all! And that's not all. Even Faldoni is in it, he's following their 
lead; I sent him to-day to the sausage-shop to get me something; he 
wouldn't go. "I am busy," that was all he said! "But you know it's your 
duty," I said. "No, indeed," he said, "it's not my duty. Here, you don't 
pay my mistress her money; so I have no duty to you." I could not 
stand this insult from him, an illiterate peasant, and I said, "You fool," 
and he answered back, "Fool yourself." I thought he must have had a 
drop too much to be so rude, and I said: "You are drunk, you peas­
ant! " and he answered: "Well, not at your expense, anyway, you've 
nothing to get drunk on yourself; you are begging for twenty kopecks 
from somebody yourself," and he even added: "Ugh ! and a gentleman 
too! " There, my dear girl, that's what it has come to! One's ashamed to 
be alive, Varinka! As though one were some sort of outcast, worse than 
a tramp without a passport. An awful calamity! I am ruined, simply 
ruined! I am irretrievably ruined! 
M.D. 
August 1 3 .  
My DEAR MAKAR ALEXYEVITCH, 
It's nothing but one trouble after another upon us. I don't know 
myself what to do! What will happen to you now?-and I have very lit­
tle to hope for either; I burnt my left hand this morning with an iron; 
I dropped it aCcidentally and bruised myself and burnt my hand at the 
same time. I can't work at all, and Fedora has been poorly for the last 

Poor Folk 
3 8 9  
three days. I am in painful anxiety. I send you thirty kopecks in silver; it 
is almost all we have left, and God knows how I should have liked to 
help you in your need. I am so vexed I could cry Good-bye, my friend! 
You would comfort me very much if you would come and see us to­
day. 
y. D. 
August 1 4. 
MAKAR ALEXYEVITCH 
What is the matter with you? It seems you have no fear of God! 
You are simply driving me out of my mind. Aren't you ashamed? You 
will be your own ruin; you should at least think of your good name! 
You're a man of honour, of gentlemanly feelings, of self-respect; well, 
when everyone finds out about you! Why, you will simply die of 
shame! Have you no pity for your grey hairs? Have you no fear of God? 
Fedora says she won't help you again, and I won't give you money ei­
ther. What have you brought me to, Makar Alexyevitch? I suppose you 
think that it is nothing to me, your behaving so badly?You don't know 
what I have to put up with on your account! I can't even go down our 
staircase; everyone looks at me and points at me, and says such awful 
things; they say plainly that I have taken up with a drunkard. Think what it 
is to hear that! When you are brought in all the lodgers point at you 
with contempt: "Look," they say, "they've brought that clerk in." And 
I'm ready to faint with shame over you. I swear I shall move from 
here. I shall go somewhere as a housemaid or a laundrymaid, I shan't 
stay here. I wrote to you to come and see me here but you did not 
come. So are my tears and entreaties nothing to you, Makar Alexye­
vitch? And where do you get the money? For God's sake, do be care­
ful. Why, you are ruining yourself, ruining yourself for nothing' And 
it's a shame and a disgrace! The landlady would not let you in last 
night, you spent the night in the porch. I know all about it. If only you 
knew how miserable I was when I knew all about it. Come to see me; 
you will be happy with us; we will read together; we will recall the 
past. Fedora will tell us about her wanderings as a pilgrim. For my 
sake, don't destroy yourself and me. Why, I only live for you, for your 
sake I am staying with you. And this is how you are behaving now! Be 
a fine man, steadfast in misfortune, remember that poverty is not a 
vice. And why despair? It is all temporary' Please God, it will all be set 

3 9 0  
Poor Folk 
right, only you must restrain yourself now. I send you twenty kopecks. 
Buy yourself tobacco or anything you want, only for God's sake don't 
spend it on what's harmful. Come and see us, be sure to come. Perhaps 
you will be ashamed as you were before, but don't be ashamed; it's 
false shame. If only you would show genuine penitence. Trust in God. 
He will do all things for the best. 
V. D. 
August 1 9. 
VARVARA ALEXYEVNA, DARLING, 
I am ashamed, little dearie, Varvara Alexyevna; I am quite 
ashamed. But, after all, what is there so particular about it, my dear? 
Why not rejoice the heart a little ? Then I don't think about my sole, for 
one's sole is nonsense, and will always remain a simple, nasty, muddy 
sole. Yes, and boots are nonsense, too! The Greek sages used to go 
about without boots, so why should people like us pamper ourselves 
with such unworthy objects? Oh! my dearie, my dearie, you have 
found something to write about! You tell Fedora that she is a nonsen­
sical, fidgety, fussy woman, and, what's more, she's a silly one, too, 
unutterably silly! As for my grey hairs, you are quite mistaken about 
that, my own, for I am by no means so old as you think. Emelyan 
sends you his regards. You write that you have been breaking your 
heart and crying; and I write to you that I am breaking my heart, too, 
and crying. In conclusion I wish you the best of health and prosperity, 
and as for me I am in the best of health and prosperity, too, and I re­
main, my angel, your friend, 
MAKAR DYEVUSHKIN. 
August 2 1 .  
HONOURED MADAM AND DEAR FRIEND, VARVARA ALEXYEVNA, 
I feel that I am to blame, I feel that I have wronged you, and to 
my mind there's no benefit at all, dear friend, in my feeling it, what­
ever you may say. I felt all that even before my misconduct, but I lost 
heart and fell, knowing I was doing wrong. My dear, I am not a bad 
man and not cruel-hearted, and to torture your little heart, my little 
darling, one must be, more or less, like a bloodthirsty tiger. Well, 

Poor Folk 
3 9 1  
I have the heart of a lamb and, as you know, have no inclination to­
wards bloodthirstiness; consequently, my angel, I am not altogether 
to blame in my misconduct, since neither my feelings nor my 
thoughts were to blame; and in fact, I don't know what was to blame; 
it's all so incomprehensible, my darling! you sent me thirty kopecks 
in silver, and then you sent me twenty kopecks. My heart ached look­
ing at your poor little coins. You had burnt your hand, you would 
soon be going hungry yourself, and you write that I am to buy to­
bacco. Well, how could I behave in such a pOSition? Was I without a 
pang of conscience to begin plundering you, poor little orphan, like 
a robber! Then I lost heart altogether, my darling-that is, at first I 
could not help feeling that I was good for nothing and that I was 
hardly better than the sole of my boot. And so I felt it was unseemly 
to consider myself of any consequence, and began to look upon my­
self as something unseemly and somewhat indecent. Well, and when 
I lost my self-respect and denied my good qualities and my dignity, 
then it was all up with me, it meant degradation, inevitable degrada­
tion! That is ordained by destiny and I'm not to blame for it. 
I went out at first to get a little air, then it was one thing after an­
other; nature was so tearful, the weather was cold and it was raining. 
Well, Emelyan turned up. He had pawned everything he had, Varinka, 
everything he had is gone: and when I met him he had not put a drop 
of the rosy to his lips for two whole days and nights, so that he was 
ready to pawn what you can't pawn, because such things are never 
taken in pawn. Well, Varinka, I gave way more from a feeling of llU­
manity than my own inclination, that's how the sin came to pass, 
my dear! How we wept together' We spoke of you. He's very good­
natured, he's a very good-natured fellow and a very feeling man. I feel 
all that myself, my dear girl, that is just why it all happens to me, that 
I feel it all very much. I know how much l owe to you, my darling. 
Getting to know you, I came first to know myself better and to love 
you; and before I knew you, my angel, I was solitary and as it were 
asleep, and scarcely alive. They said, the spiteful creatures, that even 
my appearance was unseemly and they were disgusted with me, and 
so I began to be disgusted with myself; they said I was stupid and I re­
ally thought that I was stupid. When you came to me, you lighted up 
my dark life, so that my heart and my soul were filled with light and I 
gained peace at heart, and knew that I was no worse than others; that 

3 9 2  
Poor Folk 
the only thing is that I am not brilliant in any way, that I have no polish 
or style about me, but I am still a man, in heart and mind a man. Well 
now, feeling that I was persecuted and humiliated by destiny, I lost 
all faith in my own good qualities; and, shattered by calamities, I lost all 
heart. And now since you know all about it, my dear, I beg you with 
tears not to question me further about that matter, for my heart is 
breaking and it is very bitter for me and hard to bear. 
Assuring you of my respect, I remain, your faithful 
MAKAR DYEVUSHKIN. 
September 3 .  
I did not finish my last letter, Maker Alexyevitch, because i t  was difficult 
for me to write. Sometimes I have moments when I am glad to be alone, 
to mourn, with none to share my grief, and such moments are becom­
ing more and more frequent with me. In my recollections there is 
something inexplicable to me, which attacks me unaccountably and so 
intensely that for hours at a stretch I am insensible to all surrounding 
me and I forget everything-all the present. And there is no impression 
of my present life, whether pleasant or painful and sad, which would 
not remind me of something similar in my past, and most often in my 
childhood, my golden childhood! But I always feel oppressed after such 
moments. I am somehow weakened by them; my dreaminess exhausts 
me, and apart from that my health grows worse and worse. But to-day 
the fresh bright sunny morning, such as are rare in autumn here, re­
vived me and I welcomed it joyfully. And so autumn is with us already! 
How I used to love the autumn in the country! I was a child then, but I 
had already felt a great deal. I loved the autumn evening better than the 
morning. I remember that there was a lake at the bottom of the hill 
a few yards from our house. That lake-I feel as though I could see it 
now-that lake was so broad, so smooth, as bright and clear as crystal! 
At times, if it were a still evening, the lake was calm; not a leaf would stir 
on the trees that grew on the bank, and the water would be as motion­
less as a mirror. It was so fresh, so cool! The dew would be falling on the 
grass, the lights begin twinkling in the cottages on the bank, and they 
would be driving the cattle home. Then I could creep out to look at my 
lake, and I would forget everything, looking at it. At the water's edge, the 
fishermen would have a faggot burning and the light would be reflected 

Poor Folk 
3 9 3  
far, far, over the water. The sky was so cold and blue, with streaks o f  fiery 
red along the horizon, and the streaks kept growing paler and paler; the 
moon would rise; the air so resonant that if a frightened bird fluttered, 
or a reed stirred in the faint breeze, or a fish splashed in the water, 
everything could be heard. A white steam, thin and transparent, rises up 
over the blue water: the distance darkens; everything seems drowned in 
the mist, while close by it all stands out so sharply, as though cut by a 
chisel, the boat, the banks, the islands; the tub thrown away and forgot­
ten floats in the water close to the bank, the willow branch hangs with 
its yellow leaves tangled in the reeds, a belated gull flies up, then dives 
into the cold water, flies up again and is lost in the mist-while I gaze 
and listen. How lovely. how marvellous it was to me! and I was a child, 
almost a baby . . . .  
I was so fond of the autumn, the late autumn when they were 
carrying the harvest, finishing all the labours of the year, when the 
peasants began gathering together in their cottages in the evening, 
when they were all expecting winter. Then it kept growing darker. The 
yellow leaves strewed the paths at the edges of the bare forest while 
the forest grew bluer and darker-especially at evening when a damp 
mist fell and the trees glimmered in the mist like giants, like terrible 
misshapen phantoms. If one were late out for a walk, dropped behind 
the others, how one hurried on alone--it was dreadful! One trembled 
like a leaf and kept thinking that in another minute someone terrible 
would peep out from behind that hollow tree; meanwhile the wind 
would rush through the woods, roaring and whistling, howling so 
plaintively, tearing a crowd of leaves from a withered twig, whirling 
them in the air, and with wild, shrill cries the birds would fly after 
them in a great, noisy flock, so that the sky would be all covered and 
darkened with them. One feels frightened, and then, just as though 
one heard someone speaking-some voice--as though someone 
whispered: "Run, run, child, don't be late; it will be dreadful here 
soon; run, child! "-with a thrill of horror at one's heart one would 
run till one was out of breath. One would reach home, breathless; 
there it was all noise and gaiety; all of us children had some work 
given to us to do, shelling peas or shaking out poppy seeds. The damp 
wood crackles in the stove. Cheerfully mother looks after our cheerful 
work; our old nurse, Ulyana, tells us stories about old times or terrible 
tales of wizards and dead bodies. We children squeeze up to one 

3 94 
Poor Folk 
another with smiles on our lips. Then suddenly we are all silent . . .  
Oh! a noise as though someone were knocking-it was nothing; it 
was old Frolovna's spindle; how we laughed! Then at night we would 
lie awake for hours, we had such fearful dreams. One would wake and 
not dare to stir, and lie shivering under the quilt till daybreak. In the 
morning one would get up, fresh as a flower. One would look out of 
the window; all the country would be covered with frost, the thin 
hoarfrost of autumn would be hanging on the bare boughs, the lake 
would be covered with ice, thin as a leaf, a white mist would be rising 
over it, the birds would be calling merrily, the sun would light up 
everything with its brilliant rays and break the thin ice like glass. It 
was so bright, so shining, so gay, the fire would be crackling in the 
stove again, we would sit down round the samovar while our black 
dog, Polkan, numb with cold from the night, would peep in at the 
window with a friendly wag of his tail. A peasant would ride by the 
window on his good horse to fetch wood from the forest. Everyone 
was so gay, so happy! . . .  There were masses and masses of corn 
stored up in the threshing-barns; the huge, huge stacks covered with 
straw shone golden in the sun, a comforting sight! And all are calm 
and joyful. God has blessed us all with the harvest; they all know they 
will have bread for the winter; the peasant knows that his wife and 
children will have food to eat; and so there is no end to the singing of 
the girls and their dances and games in the evening, and on the Saints' 
days! All pray in the house of God with grateful tears! Oh! what a 
golden, golden age was my childhood! . . .  
Here I am crying like a child, carried away by my reminiscences. 
I remembered it all so vividly, so vividly, all the past stood out so 
brightly before me, and the present is so dim, so dark! . . .  How will it 
end, how will it all end? Do you know I have a sort of conviction, a 
feeling of certainty, that I shall die this autumn. I am very, very ill. I of­
ten think about dying, but still I don't want to die like this, to lie in the 
earth here. Perhaps I shall be laid up as I was in the spring; I've not 
fully recovered from that illness yet. I am feeling very dreary just now. 
Fedora has gone off somewhere for the whole day and I am sitting 
alone. And for some time now I've been afraid of being left alone; I 
always feel as though there were someone else in the room, that 
someone is talking to me; especially when I begin dreaming about 
something and suddenly wake up from my brooding, then I feel 

Poor Folk 
3 9 5  
frightened. That i s  why I've written you such a long letter; i t  goes off 
when I write. Good-bye; I finish my letter because I have neither time 
nor paper for more. Of the money from pawning my dress and my hat 
I have only one rouble in silver left. You have given the landlady two 
roubles in silver; that's very good. She will keep quiet now for a time. 
You must improve your clothes somehow. Good-bye, I'm so 
tired; I don't know why I am growing so feeble. The least work ex­
hausts me. If I do get work, how am I to work? It is that thought that's 
killing me. 
y. o. 
September 5 .  
M y  DARLING VARINKA, 
I have received a great number of impressions this morning, my 
angel. To begin with I had a headache all day. To freshen myself up a bit 
I went for a walk along Fontanka. It was such a damp, dark evening. By 
six o'clock it was getting dusk-that is what we are coming to now. It 
was not raining but there was mist equal to a good rain. There were 
broad, long stretches of storm-cloud across the sky. There were masses 
of people walking along the canal bank, and, as ill-luck would have it, 
the people had such horrible depressing faces, drunken peasants, 
snub-nosed Finnish women, in high boots with nothing on their 
heads, workmen, cab-drivers, people like me out on some errand, 
boys, a carpenter's apprentice in a striped dressing-gown, thin and 
wasted-looking, with his face bathed in smutty oil, and a lock in his 
hand; a discharged soldier seven feet high waiting for somebody to 
buy a pen-knife or a bronze ring from him. That was the sort of 
crowd. It seems it was an hour when no other sort of people could 
be about. Fontanka is a canal for traffic! Such a mass of barges that one 
wonders how there can be room for them all! On the bridges there are 
women sitting with wet gingerbread and rotten apples, and they all of 
them looked so muddy, so drenched. It's dreary walking along 
Fontanka! The wet granite under one's feet, with tall, black, sooty 
houses on both sides. Fog underfoot and fog overhead. How dark and 
melancholy it was this evening !  
When I went back t o  Gorohovoy Street i t  was already getting dark 
and they had begun lighting the gas. I have not been in Gorohovoy 

3 9 6  
Poor Folk 
Street for quite a long while, I haven't happened to go there. It's a noisy 
street! What shops, what magnificent establishments; everything is 
simply shining and resplendent; materials, flowers under glass, hats of 
all sorts with ribbons. One would fancy they were all displayed as a 
show-but no: you know there are people who buy all those things 
and present them to their wives. It's a wealthy street! There are a great 
many German bakers in Gorohovoy Street, so they must be a very pros­
perous set of people, too. What numbers of carriages roll by every 
minute; I wonder the paving is not worn out! Such gorgeous equipages, 
windows shining like mirrors, silk and velvet inside, and aristocratic 
footmen wearing epaulettes and carrying a sword; I glanced into all the 
carriages, there were always ladies in them dressed up to the nines, 
perhaps countesses and princesses. No doubt it was the hour when 
they were all hastening to balls and assemblies. It would be interesting 
to get a closer view of princesses and ladies of rank in general; it must 
be very nice; I have never seen them; except just as to-day, a passing 
glance at their carriages. I thought of you then. Ah, my darling, my 
own! When I think of you my heart begins aching! Why are you so un­
lucky, my Varinka? You are every bit as good as any of them. You are 
good, lovely, well-educated-why has such a cruel fortune fallen to 
your lot? Why does it happen that a good man is left forlorn and for­
saken, while happiness seems thrust upon another? I know, I know, my 
dear, that it's wrong to think that, that it is free-thinking; but to speak 
honestly, to speak the whole truth, why is it fate, like a raven, croaks 
good fortune for one still unborn, while another begins life in the or­
phan asylum? And you know it often happens that Ivan the fool is 
favoured by fortune. "You, Ivan the fool, rummage in the family 
money bags, eat, drink and be merry, while you, So-and-so, can lick 
your lips. That's all you are fit for, you, brother So-and-so! "  It's a sin, 
my darling, it's a sin to think like that, but sometimes one cannot help 
sin creeping into one's heart. You ought to be driving in such a car­
riage, my own little dearie. Generals should be craving the favour of a 
glance from you-not the likes of us; you ought to be dressed in silk 
and gold, instead of a little old linen gown. You would not be a thin, 
delicate little thing, as you are now, but like a little sugar figure, fresh, 
plump and rosy. And then, I should be happy simply to look in at you 
from the street through the brightly lighted windows; simply to see 
your shadow. The thought that you were happy and gay, my pretty little 

Poor Folk 
3 9 7  
bird, would be enough to make me gay. too. But as it is, it is not 
enough that spiteful people have ruined you, a worthless profligate 
wretch goes and insults you. Because his coat hangs smartly on him, 
because he stares at you from a golden eyeglass, the shameless fellow, 
he can do what he likes, and one must listen to what he says indul­
gently, however unseemly it is! Wait a bit-is it really so, my pretty 
gentlemen? And why is all this? Because you are an orphan, because 
you are defenceless, because you have no powerful friend to help and 
protect you. And what can one call people who are ready to insult an 
orphan? They are worthless beasts, not men; simply trash. They are 
mere ciphers and have no real existence, of that I am convinced. That's 
what they are like, these people! And to my thinking, my own, the 
hurdy-gurdy man I met to-day in Gorohovoy Street is more worthy of 
respect than they are. He goes about the whole day long, hoping to get 
some wretched spare farthing for food, but he is his own master, he 
does earn his own living. He won't ask for charity; but he works like a 
machine wound up to give pleasure. "Here," he says, "I do what I can 
to give pleasure." He's a beggar, he's a beggar, it is true, he's a beggar all 
the same, but he's an honourable beggar; he is cold and weary, but still 
he works; though it's in his own way. still he works. And there are many 
honest men, my darling, who, though they earn very little in propor­
tion to the amount and usefulness of their work, yet they bow down to 
no one and buy their bread of no one. Here I am just like that hurdy­
gurdy man-that is, not at all like him. But in my own sense, in an 
honourable and aristocratic sense, just as he does, to the best of my 
abilities, I work as I can. That's enough about me, it's neither here nor 
there. 
I speak of that hurdy-gurdy, my darling, because it has happened 
that I have felt my poverty twice as much to-day. I stopped to look at 
the hurdy-gurdy man. I was in such a mood that I stopped to distract 
my thoughts. I was standing there, and also two cab-drivers, a woman 
of some sort, and a little girl, such a grubby little thing. The hurdy­
gurdy man stopped before the windows of a house. I noticed a little 
boy about ten years old; he would have been pretty, but he looked so 
ill, so frail, with hardly anything but his shirt on and almost barefoot, 
with his mouth open; he was listening to the music-like a child! He 
watched the German's dolls dancing, while his own hands and feet were 
numb with cold; he shivered and nibbled the edge of his sleeve. I 

3 9 8  
Poor Folk 
noticed that he had a bit of paper of some sort in his hands. A gentleman 
passed and flung the hurdy-gurdy man some small coin, which fell 
straight into the box in a little garden in which the toy Frenchman 
was dancing with the ladies. At the clink of the coin the boy started, 
looked round and evidently thought that I had given the money. He 
ran up to me, his little hands trembling, his little voice trembling, he 
held the paper out to me and said, "A letter." I opened the letter; well, 
it was the usual thing, saying: "Kind gentleman, a mother's dying with 
three children hungry, so help us now, and as I am dying I will pray 
for you, my benefactor, in the next world for not forgetting my babes 
now." Well, what of it?--one could see what it meant, an everyday 
matter, but what could I give him? Well, I gave him nothing, and how 
sorry I was! The boy was poor, blue with cold, perhaps hungry, too, 
and not lying, surely he was not lying, I know that for certain. But 
what is wrong is that these horrid mothers don't take care of their 
children and send them out half naked in the cold to beg. Maybe she's 
a weak"willed, silly woman; and there's no one, maybe, to do any­
thing for her, so she simply sits with her legs tucked under her, maybe 
she's really ill. Well, anyway, she should apply in the proper quarter. 
Though, maybe, she's a cheat and sends a hungry, delicate child out on 
purpose to deceive people, and makes him ill. And what sort of train­
ing is it for a poor boy? It simply hardens his heart, he runs about 
begging, people pass and have no time for him. Their hearts are stony, 
their words are cruel . "Get away, go along, you are naughty! "  that is 
what he hears from everyone, and the child's heart grows hard, and in 
vain the poor little frightened boy shivers with cold like a fledgling 
fallen out of a broken nest. His hands and feet are frozen, he gasps for 
breath. The next thing he is coughing, before long disease, like an un­
clean reptile, creeps into his bosom and death is standing over him in 
some dark corner, no help, no escape, and that's his life! That is what 
life is like sometimes! Oh, Varinka, it's wretched to hear "for Christ's 
sake," and to pass by and give nothing, telling him "God will pro­
vide." Sometimes "for Christ's sake" is all right (it's not always the 
same, you know, Varinka) , sometimes it's a long, drawling, habitual, 
practised, regular beggar's whine; it's not so painful to refuse one like 
that; he's an old hand, a beggar by profession. He's accustomed to it, 
one thinks; he can cope with it and knows how to cope with it. Some­
times "for Christ's sake" sounds unaccustomed, rude, terrible-as 

Poor Folk 
3 9 9  
to-day, when I was taking the letter from the boy, a man standing close 
to the fence, not begging from everyone, said to me: "Give us a half­
penny, sir, for Christ's sake," and in such a harsh, jerky voice that I 
started with a horrible feeling and did not give him a halfpenny, I 
hadn't one. Rich people don't like the poor to complain aloud of their 
harsh lot, they say they disturb them, they are troublesome! Yes, in­
deed, poverty is always troublesome; maybe their hungry groans hin­
der the rich from sleeping! 
To make a confession, my own, I began to describe all this to you 
partly to relieve my heart but chiefly to give you an example of the 
fine style of my composition, for you have no doubt noticed yourself, 
my dear girl, that of late my style has been forming, but such a de­
pression carne over me that I began to pity my feelings to the depth of 
my soul, and though I know, my dear, that one gets no good by self­
pity, yet one must do oneself justice in some way, and often, my own, 
for no reason whatever, one literally annihilates oneself, makes oneself 
of no account, and not worth a straw. And perhaps that is why it hap­
pens that I am panic-stricken and persecuted like that poor boy who 
asked me for alms. Now I will tell you, by way of instance and illus­
tration, Varinka; listen: hurrying to the office early in the morning, my 
own, I sometimes look at the town, how it wakes, gets up, begins 
smoking, hurrying with life, resounding-sometimes you feel so 
small before such a sight that it is as though someone had given you a 
flip on your intrusive nose and you creep along your way noiseless as 
water, and humble as grass, and hold your peace! Now just look into 
it and see what is going on in those great, black, smutty buildings. Get 
to the bottom of that and then judge whether one was right to abuse 
oneself for no reason and to be reduced to undignified mortification. 
Note, Varinka, that I am speaking figuratively, not in a literal sense. But 
let us look what is going on in those houses. There, in some smoky 
corner, in some damp hole, which, through poverty, passes as a lodg­
ing, some workman wakes up from his sleep; and all night he has 
been dreaming of boots, for instance, which he had accidentally slit 
tlle day before, as though a man ought to dream of such nonsense! But 
he's an artisan, he's a shoemaker; it's excusable for him to think of 
nothing but his own subject. His children are crying and his wife is 
hungry; and it's not only shoemakers who get up in the morning 
like that, my own-that would not matter, and would not be worth 

400 
Poor Folk 
writing about, but this is the point, Varinka: close by in the same 
house, in a storey higher or lower, a wealthy man in his gilded apart­
ments dreams at night, it may be, of those same boots, that is, boots in 
a different manner, in a different sense, but still boots, for in the sense 
I am using the word, Varinka, everyone of us is a bit of a shoemaker, 
my darling; and that would not matter, only it's a pity there is no one 
at that wealthy person's side, no man who could whisper in his ear: 
"Come, give over thinking of such things, thinking of nothing but 
yourself. living for nothing but yourself; your children are healthy, 
your wife is not begging for food. Look about you, can't you see some 
object more noble to worry about than your boots?" That's what I 
wanted to say to you in a figurative way, Varinka. Perhaps it's too free a 
thought, my own, but sometimes one has that thought, sometimes it 
comes to one and one cannot help its bursting out from one's heart in 
warm language. And so it seems there was no reason to make oneself 
so cheap, and to be scared by mere noise and uproar. I will conclude 
by saying, Varinka, that perhaps you think what I am saying is unjust, 
or that I'm suffering from a fit of the spleen, or that I have copied this 
out of some book. No, my dear girl, you must dismiss that idea, it is 
not that; I abominate injustice, I am not suffering from spleen, and 
I've not copied anything out of a book--so there. 
I went home in a melancholy frame of mind; I sat down to the 
table and heated my teapot to have a glass or two of tea. Suddenly I 
saw coming towards me Gorshkov, our poor lodger. I had noticed in 
the morning that he kept hanging about round the other lodgers, and 
trying to approach me. And I may say, in passing, Varinka, that they live 
ever so much worse than I do. Yes, indeed, he has a wife and children! 
So that if I were in his place I don't know what I should do. Well, my 
Gorshkov comes up to me, bows to me, a running tear as always on 
his eyelashes, he scrapes with his foot and can't utter a word. I made 
him sit down on a chair-it was a broken one, it is true, but there was 
no other. I offered him some tea. He refused from politeness, refused 
for a long time, but at last he took a glass. He would have drunk it 
without sugar, began apologising again, when I tried to persuade him 
that he must have sugar; he argued for a long time, kept refusing, but 
at last put the very smallest lump of sugar in his glass, and began de­
claring that his tea was extremely sweet. Oh, to what degradation 
poverty does reduce people! "Well, my good friend, what is it?" I said. 

Poor Folk 
40 1 
"Well, it is like this, Makar Alexyevitch, my benefactor," he said, 
"show the mercy of the Lord, come to the help of my unhappy fam­
ily; my wife and children have nothing to eat; think what it is for me, 
their father," said he. I tried to speak, but he interrupted me. "I am 
afraid of everyone here, Makar Alexyevitch-that is, not exactly afraid 
but as it were ashamed with them; they are all proud and haughty 
people. I would not have troubled you, my benefactor, I know that you 
have been in difficulties yourself, I know you can't give me much, but 
do lend me a trifle, and I make bold to ask you," said he, "because I 
know your kind heart. I know that you are in need yourself, that you 
know what trouble is now, and so your heart feels compassion." He 
ended by saying, "Forgive my boldness and unmannerliness, Makar 
Alexyevitch." I answered him that I should be heartily glad, but that I 
had nothing, absolutely nothing. "Makar Alexyevitch, sir," said he, "I 
am not asking for much, but you see it is like this-(then he flushed 
crimson)-my wife, my children, hungry-if only a ten-kopeck piece." 
Well, it sent a twinge to my heart. Why, I thought, they are worse off 
than I, even. Twenty kopecks was all I had left, and I was reckoning on 
it. I meant to spend it next day on my most pressing needs. 
"No, my dear fellow, I can't, it is like this," I said. 
"Makar Alexyevitch, my dear soul, what you like," he said, "if it is 
only ten kopecks." 
Well, I took my twenty kopecks out of my box, Varinka, and gave 
it him; it's a good deed anyway! Ah! poverty! I had a good talk with 
him: "Why, how is it, my good soul," I said, "that you are in such 
want and yet you rent a room for five silver roubles?" He explained to 
me that he had taken it six months before and paid for it six months in 
advance; and since then circumstances had been such that the poor 
fellow does not know which way to turn. He expected his case would 
be over by this time. It's an unpleasant business. You see, Varinka, he has 
to answer for something before the court, he is mixed up in a case 
with a merchant who swindled the government over a contract; the 
cheat was discovered and the merchant was arrested and he's managed 
to implicate Gorshkov, who had something to do with it, too. But in 
reality Gorshkov was only guilty of negligence, of injudiciousness and 
unpardonable disregard of the interests of government. The case has 
been going on for some years. Gorshkov has had to face all sorts of 
difficulties. 

402 
Poor Folk 
' '1 ' m not guilty, not in the least gUilty of the dishonesty attributed 
to me," said Gorshkov; "I am not guilty of swindling and robbery" 
This case has thrown a slur on his character; he has been turned 
out of the service, and though he has not been found guilty of any le­
gal crime, yet, till he has completely cleared himself he cannot recover 
from the merchant a considerable sum of money due to him which is 
now the subject of dispute before the courts. I believe him, but the 
court won't take his word for it; the case is all in such a coil and a tan­
gle that it would take a hundred years to unravel it. As soon as they un­
tie one knot the merchant brings forward another and then another. I 
feel the deepest sympathy for Gorshkov, my own, I am very sorry for 
him. The man's out of work, he won't be taken anywhere without a 
character; all they had saved has been spent on food, the case is com­
plicated and, meanwhile, they have had to live, and meanwhile, apro­
pos of nothing and most inappropriately, a baby has been born, and 
that is an expense; his son fell ill-expense; died-expense; his wife is 
ill; he's afflicted with some disease of long standing-in fact, he has 
suffered, he has suffered to the utmost; he says, however, that he is ex­
pecting a favourable conclusion to his business in a day or two and 
that there is no doubt of it now. I am sorry for him, I am sorry for 
him; I am very sorry for him, Varinka. I was kind to him, he's a poor 
lost, scared creature; he needs a friend so I was kind to him. Well, 
good-bye, my dear one, Christ be with you, keep well. My darling! 
when I think of you it's like laying a salve on my sore heart. And 
though I suffer for you, yet it eases my heart to suffer for you. 
My DARLING, VARVARA ALEXYEVNA, 
Your true friend, 
MAKAR DYEVUSHKIN. 
September 9. 
I am writing to you almost beside myself I have been thoroughly 
upset by a terrible incident. My head is going round. Ah, my own, 
what a thing I have to tell you now! This we did not foresee. No, I 
don't believe that I did not foresee it; I did foresee it all. I had a pre­
sentiment of it in my heart. I even dreamed of something of the kind 
a day or two ago. 
This is what happened! I will write to you regardless of style, just 

Poor Folk 
403 
as God puts it into my heart. I went to the office to-day. I went in, I sat 
down, I began writing. And you must know, Varinka, that I was writ­
ing yesterday too. Well, this is how it was: Timofey Ivanovitch came up 
to me and was pleased to explain to me in person, "The document is 
wanted in a hurry," said he. "Copy it very clearly as quickly as possible 
and carefully, Makar Alexyevitch," he said; "it goes to be signed to­
day." I must observe, my angel, that I was not myself yesterday, I could 
not bear the sight of anything; such a mood of sadness and depression 
had come over me! It was cold in my heart and dark in my soul, you 
were in my mind all the while, my little dearie. But I set to work to 
copy it; I copied it clearly, legibly, only-I really don't know how to 
explain it-whether the devil himself muddled me, or whether it was 
ordained by some secret decree of destiny, or simply it had to be-but 
I left out a whole line, goodness knows what sense it made, it simply 
made none at all. They were late with the document yesterday and 
only took it to his Excellency to be signed to-day. I turned up this 
morning at the usual hour as though nothing had happened and set­
tled myself beside Emelyan Ivanovitch. I must observe, my own, that 
of late I have been more abashed and ill at ease than ever. Of late I have 
given up looking at anyone. If I hear so much as a chair creak I feel 
more dead than alive. That is just how it was to-day, I sat down like a 
hedgehog crouched up and shrinking into myself, so that Efim Aki­
movitch (there never was such a fellow for teasing) said in the hear­
ing of all: "Why are you sitting like a picture of misery, Makar 
Alexyevitch?" And he made such a grimace that everyone sitting near 
him and me went off into roars of laughter, and at my expense of 
course. And they went on and on. I put my hands over my ears, and 
screwed up my eyes, I sat without stirring. That's what I always do; 
they leave off the sooner. Suddenly I heard a noise, a fuss and a bustle; 
I heard-did not my ears deceive me?-they were mentioning me, 
asking for me, calling Dyevushkin. My heart began shuddering within 
me, and I don't know myself why I was so frightened; I only know I 
was panic-stricken as I had never been before in my life. I sat rooted to 
my chair-as though there were nothing the matter, as though it were 
not I. But they began getting nearer and nearer. And at last, close to 
my ear, they were calling, "Dyevushkin, Dyevushkin! Where is Dye­
vushkin?" I raised my eyes: Yevstafy Ivanovitch stood before me; he 
said: "Makar Alexyevitch, make haste to his Excellency! You've made 

404 
Poor Folk 
a mistake in that document! "  That was all he said, but it was enough; 
enough had been said, hadn't it, Varinka? Half dead, frozen with ter­
ror, not knowing what 1 was doing, 1 went-why, 1 was more dead 
than alive. 1 was led through one room, through a second, through a 
third, to his Excellency's study. 1 was in his presence! 1 can give you no 
exact account of what my thoughts were then. 1 saw his Excellency 
standing up, they were all standing round him. 1 believe 1 did not bow, 
1 forgot. 1 was so flustered that my lips were trembling, my legs were 
trembling. And 1 had reason to be, my dear girl! To begin with, 1 was 
ashamed; 1 glanced into the looking-glass on the right hand and what 
1 saw there was enough to send one out of one's mind. And in the sec­
ond place, 1 had always tried to behave as if there were no such person 
in the world. So that his Excellency could hardly have been aware of 
my existence. Perhaps he may have heard casually that there was a 
clerk called Dyevushkin in the office, but he had never gone into the 
matter more closely. 
He began, angrily: "What were you about, sir? Where were your 
eyes? The copy was wanted; it was wanted in a hurry, and you spoil it." 
At this point, his Excellency turned to Yevstafy Ivanovitch. 1 could 
only catch a word here and there: "Negligence! Carelessness! You will 
get us into difficulties ! "  1 would have opened my mouth to say some­
thing. 1 wanted to beg for forgiveness, but 1 could not; 1 wanted to run 
away, but dared not attempt it, and then . . .  then, Varinka, something 
happened so awful that 1 can hardly hold my pen, for shame, even 
now. A button-the devil take the button-which was hanging by a 
thread on my uniform-suddenly flew off, bounced on the floor 
(1 must have caught hold of it aCcidentally) with a jingle, the damned 
thing, and rolled straight to his Excellency's feet, and that in the midst 
of a profound silence! And that was my only justification, my sole 
apology, my only answer, all that 1 had to say to his Excellency! What 
followed was awful. His Excellency's attention was at once turned to 
my appearance and my attire. 1 remembered what 1 had seen in the 
looking-glass; 1 flew to catch the button! Some idiocy possessed me! 
1 bent down, 1 tried to pick up the button-it twirled and rolled, 1 
couldn't pick it up-in fact, 1 distinguished myself by my agility. Then 
1 felt that my last faculties were deserting me, that everything, every­
thing was lost, my whole reputation was lost, my dignity as a man was 
lost, and then, apropos of nothing, 1 had the voices of Teresa and Faldoni 

Poor Folk 
405 
ringing in my ears. At last I picked up the button, stood up and drew 
myself erect, and if I were a fool I might at least have stood quietly 
with my hands at my sides! But not a bit of it. I began fitting the but­
ton to the torn threads as though it might hang on, and I actually 
smiled, actually smiled. His Excellency turned away at first, then he 
glanced at me again-l heard him say to Yevstafy lvanovitch: "How is 
this? . . .  Look at him! . . .  What is he? . . .  What sort of man? . . .  " Ah, 
my own, think of that! "What is he?" and, "what sort of man?" I had 
distinguished myself! I heardYevstafy lvanovitch say: "No note against 
him, no note against him for anything, behaviour excellent, salary in 
accordance with his grade . . .  " "Well, assist him in some way, let him 
have something in advance," says his Excellency. . . .  "But he has had an 
advance," he said; "he has had his salary in advance for such and such 
a time. He is apparently in difficulties, but his conduct is good, and 
there is no note, there never has been a note against him." 
My angel, I was burning, burning in the fires of hell! I was 
dying . . . .  
"Well," said his Excellency. "make haste and copy it again; 
Dyevushkin, come here, copy it over again without a mistake; and 
listen . . .  " Here his Excellency turned to the others, gave them various 
instructions and they all went away. As soon as they had gone, his Ex­
cellency hurriedly took out his notebook and from it took a hundred­
rouble note. "Here," said he, "take it as you like, so far as I can help 
you, take it . . .  " and he thrust it into my hand. I trembled, my angel, 
my whole soul was quivering; I don't know what happened to me, 
I tried to seize his hand to kiss it, but he flushed crimson, my darling, 
and-here I am not departing one hair's breadth from the truth, my 
own-he took my unworthy hand and shook it, just took it and shook 
it, as though I had been his equal, as though I had been just such 
a General as himself. "You can go," he said; "whatever I can do for 
you . . .  don't make mistakes, but there, no great harm done this time." 
NowVarinka, this is what I have decided. I beg you and Fedora, and 
if I had any children I should bid them, to pray every day and all our 
lives for his Excellency as they would not pray for their own father! 
I will say more, my dear, and I say it solemnly-pay attention, Varinka­
I swear that however cast down I was and afflicted in the bitterest days 
of our misfortunes, looking at you, at your poverty, and at myself, my 
degradation and my uselessness, in spite of all that, I swear that the 

406 
Poor Folk 
hundred roubles is not as much to me as that his Excellency deigned 
to shake hands with me, a straw, a worthless drunkard! By that he 
has restored me to myself, by that action he has lifted up my spirit, 
has made my life sweeter for ever, and I am firmly persuaded that, 
however sinful I may be before the Almighty, yet my prayers 
for the happiness and prosperity of his Excellency will reach His 
Throne! . . .  
My darling! I am dreadfully upset, dreadfully excited now, my 
heart is beating as though it would burst out of my breast, and I feel, 
as it were, weak all over. 
I am sending you forty-five roubles; I am giving the landlady 
twenty and leaving thirty-five for myself. For twenty I can put my 
wardrobe in order, and I shall have fifteen left to go on with. But just 
now all the impressions of the morning have shaken my whole being, 
I am going to lie down. I am at peace, quite at peace, though; only 
there is an ache in my heart and deep down within me I feel my soul 
qUivering, trembling, stirring. 
I am coming to see you: but now I am simply drunk with all 
these sensations . . . .  God sees all, my Varinka, my priceless darling !  
M y  DEAR MAKAR ALEXYEVITCH, 
Your worthy friend, 
MAKAR DYEvUSHKIN. 
September 1 0. 
I am unutterably delighted at your happiness and fully appreciate 
the goodness of your chief, my friend. So now you will have a little 
respite from trouble! But, for God's sake, don't waste your money 
again. Live quietly and as frugally as possible, and from to-day begin 
to put by a little that misfortune may not find you unprepared again. 
For goodness' sake don't worry about us. Fedora and I will get along 
somehow. Why have you sent us so much money. Maker Alexyevitch? 
We don' t need it at all. We are satisfied with what we have. It is true 
we shall soon want money for moving from this lodging, but Fedora 
is hoping to be repaid an old debt that has been owing for years. I will 
keep twenty roubles, however, in case of extreme necessity. The rest I 
send you back. Please take care of your money, Makar Alexyevitch. 
Good-bye. Be at peace now, keep well and happy. I would write more 

Poor Folk 
40 7 
to you, but I feel dreadfully tired; yesterday I did not get up all day. You 
do well to promise to come. Do come and see me, please, Makar 
Alexyevitch. 
v. n. 
September 1 1 . 
My DEAR VARVARA ALEXYEVNA, 
I beseech you, my own, not to part from me now, now when I 
am quite happy and contented with everything. My darling! Don't 
listen to Fedora and I will do anything you like; I shall behave well if 
only from respect to his Excellency. I will behave well and carefully; 
we will write to each other happy ڟetters again, we will confide in 
each other our thoughts, our joys, our cares, if we have any cares; we 
will live together in happiness and concord. We'll study literature . . .  
My angel! My whole fate has changed and everything has changed for 
the better. The landlady has become more amenable. Teresa is more 
sensible, even Faldoni has become prompter. I have made it up with 
Ratazyaev. In my joy I went to him of myself. He's really a good fellow, 
Varinka, and all the harm that was said of him was nonsense. I have 
discovered that it was all an abominable slander. He had no idea what­
ever of describing us. He read me a new work of his. And as for his 
calling me a Lovelace, that was not an insulting or abusive name; he 
explained it to me. The word is taken straight from a foreign source 
and means a clever fellow, and to express it more elegantly, in a literary 
fashion, it means a young man you must be on the lookout with, you 
see, and nothing of that sort. It was an innocent jest, my angel! I'm an 
ignoramus and in my foolishness I was offended. In fact, it is I who 
apologised to him now . . . .  And the weather is so wonderful to-day, 
Varinka, so fine. It is true there was a slight frost this morning, as 
though it had been sifted through a sieve. It was nothing. It only made 
the air a little fresher. I went to buy some boots, and I bought some 
wonderful boots. I walked along the Nevsky. I read the Bee. 1 4  Why! I 
am forgetting to tell you the principal thing. 
It was this, do you see. 
This morning I talked to Emelyan Ivanovitch and to Axentey 
Mihalovitch about his Excellency. Yes, Varinka, I'm not the only one he 
has treated so graciously. I am not the only one he has befriended, and 

408 
Poor Folk 
he is known to all the world for the goodness of his heart. His praises 
are sung in very many quarters, and tears of gratitude are shed. An or­
phan girl was brought up in his house. He gave her a dowry and mar­
ried her to a man in a good position, to a clerk on special commissions, 
who was in attendance on his Excellency. He installed a son of a 
widow in some office, and has done a great many other acts of kind­
ness. I thought it my duty at that point to add my mite and described 
his Excellency's action in the hearing of all; I told them all and con­
cealed nothing. I put my pride in my pocket, as though pride or dig­
nity mattered in a case like that. So I told it aloud-to do glory to the 
good deeds of his Excellency! I spoke enthusiastically, I spoke with 
warmth, I did not blush, on the contrary, I was proud that I had such 
a story to tell. I told them about everything (only I was judiciously 
silent about you, Varinka) ,  about my landlady, about Faldoni, about 
Ratazyaev, about my boots and about Markov-I told them everything. 
Some of them laughed a little, in fact, they all laughed a little. Proba­
bly they found something funny in my appearance, or it may have 
been about my boots-yes, it must have been about my boots. They 
could not have done it with any bad intention. It was nothing, just 
youthfulness, or perhaps because they are well-to-do people, but they 
could not jeer at what I said with any bad, evil intention. That is, what 
I said about his Excellency-that they could not do. Could they, 
Varinka? 
I still can't get over it, my darling. The whole incident has so over­
whelmed me! Have you got any firewood? Don't catch cold, Varinka; 
you can so easily catch cold. Ah, my own precious, you crush me with 
your sad thoughts. I pray to God, how I pray to Him for you, my 
dearie! For instance, have you got woollen stockings, and other warm 
underclothing? Mind, my darling, if you need anything, for God's sake 
don't wound your old friend, come straight to me. Now our bad 
times are over. Don't be anxious about me. Everything is so bright, so 
happy in the future! 
It was a sad time, Varinka! But there, no matter, it's past! Years will 
pass and we shall sigh for that time. I remember my young days. Why, 
I often hadn't a farthing! I was cold and hungry, but light-hearted, that 
was all. In the morning I would walk along the Nevsky, see a pretty lit­
tle face and be happy all day. It was a splendid, splendid time, my dar­
ling! It is nice to be alive, Varinka! Especially in Petersburg. I repented 

Poor Folk 
409 
with tears in my eyes yesterday, and prayed to the Lord God to fc)rgive 
me all my sins in that sad time: my repining, my liberal ideas. my 
drinking and despair. I remembered you with emotion in my prayers. 
You were my only support. Varinka, you were my only comfort, you 
cheered me on my way with counsel and good advice. I can never tc)r­
get that, dear one. I have kissed all your letters to-day, my darling ' 
Wel l .  good-bye. my precious. They say that somewhere near here there 
is a sale of clothing. So I will make inquirie<; a little. Good-bye, my 
angel. Good-bye ' 
DE,\R MAKAH AlEXYEvlTCH . 
Your deeply devoted, 
MAKAR DYEVUSHKIN. 
September I S .  
I feel dreadfully upset. Listen what has happened here. I foresee 
something momentOlIS. Judge yourselfǽ my precious friend; Mr. Bykov 
is in Petersburg , Fedora met bim. He was driving, he ordered the cab 
to stop, went up to Fedora himself and began asking where she was 
living. At first she wOllld not tell him. Then he said. laughing, that he 
knew who was living with her. (Evidently Anna Fyodorovna had told 
him all aho ut i t . )  Then Fedora could not contain herself and began up­
braiding him on tbe spot, i n  the street, reproaching him ,  telling him 
he was an immoral m an and the cause of all my troubles. He an 
swered, that one who has not a halfpenny is hound to have misfor ­
t u nes. Fedora answered that T might have been able to earn my own 
living, that I might have been married or else have had some situatioIl , 
but that now my h appiness was wrecked for ever and that I was il be­
sides . and would !lot live long. To this he answered that I was still 
young, that I had still a lot of nonsense in my head and that my virtues 
were getting a little tarni shed (his words) . Fedora and I thought he 
did not know our lodging when suddenly', yesterday. just after I had 
gone out to buy some things in the Gostiny Dvor he walked into our 
room. I believe be did not want to find me at home. He questioned 
Fedora at length concerning our manner of life, examined everything 
we had; be looked at my work; at last asked, "Who is this clerk you 
have made friends with ) "  At that moment YOll walked across the yard : 
Fedora pointed to you; he glanced and la ughed ; Fedora begged him to 

4 1 0  
Poor Folk 
go away, told him that I was unwell, as it was, from grieving, and that 
to see him in our room would be very distasteful to me. He was silent 
for a while; said that he had just looked in with no object and tried to 
give Fedora twenty-five roubles; she, of course, did not take it. 
What can it mean? What has he come to see us for? I cannot un­
derstand where he has found out all about usl I am lost in conjecture. 
Fedora says that Axinya, her sister-in-law, who comes to see us, is 
friendly with Nastasya the laundress, and Nastasya's cousin is a porter 
in the office in which a friend of Anna Fyodorovna's nephew is serv­
ing. So has not, perhaps, some ill-natured gOSSip crept round? But it is 
very possible that Fedora is mistaken; we don't know what to think. Is 
it possible he will come to us again! The mere thought of it terrifies 
me! When Fedora told me all about it yesterday, I was so frightened 
that I almost fainted with terror! What more does he want? I don't 
want to know him now! What does he want with me, poor me? Oh! I 
am in such terror now, I keep expecting Bykov to walk in every 
minute. What will happen to me, what more has fate in store for me? 
For Christ's sake, come and see me now, Makar Alexyevitch. Do come, 
for God's sake, come. 
September 1 8 . 
My DARLING VARVARA ALEXYEVNA! 
To-day an unutterably sad, quite unaccountable and unexpected 
event has occurred here. Our poor Gorshkov (I must tell you, Varinka) 
has had his character completely cleared. The case was concluded 
some time ago and to-day he went to hear the final judgment. The case 
ended very happily for him. He was fully exonerated of any blame for 
negligence and carelessness. The merchant was condemned to pay 
him a considerable sum of money, so that his financial position was 
vastly improved and no stain left on his honour and things were bet­
ter all round-in fact, he won everything he could have desired. 
He came home at three 0 ' clock this afternoon. He did not look 
like himself, his face was white as a sheet, his lips quivered and he 
kept smiling-he embraced his wife and children. We all flocked to 
congratulate him. He was greatly touched by our action, he bowed 
in all directions, shook hands with all of us several times. It even 
seemed to me as though he were taller and more erect, and no 

Poor Folk 
4 1 1 
longer had that running tear in his eye. He was in such excitement, 
poor fellow. He could not stand still for two minutes :  he picked up 
anything he came across, then dropped it again; and kept continually 
smiling and bowing, sitting down, getting up and sitting down 
again. Goodness knows what he said: "My honour, my honour, 
my good name, my children," and that was how he kept talking! He 
even shed tears. Most of us were moved to tears, too; Ratazyaev 
clearly wanted to cheer him up, and said, "What is honour, old man, 
when one has nothing to eat? The money, the money's the thing, old 
man, thank God for that! "  and thereupon he slapped him on the 
shoulder. It seemed to me that Gorshkov was offended-not that he 
openly showed dissatisfaction, but he looked rather strangely at 
Ratazyaev and took his hand off his shoulder. And that had never 
happened before, Varinka! But characters differ. Now I, for instance, 
should not have stood on my dignity, at a time of such joy; why, my 
own, sometimes one is too liberal w.ith one's bows and almost cring­
ing from nothing but excess of good-nature and soft-heartedness . . . .  
However, no matter about me! 
"Yes," he said, "the money is a good thing too, thank God, thank 
God ! "  And then all the time we were with him he kept repeating, 
"Thank God, thank God." 
His wife ordered a rather nicer and more ample dinner. Our 
landlady cooked for them herself. Our landlady is a good-natured 
woman in a way. And until dinner-time Gorshkov could not sit still in 
his seat. He went into the lodgers' rooms, without waiting to be in­
vited. He just went in, smiled, sat down on the edge of a chair, said a 
word or two, or even said nothing, and went away again. At the naval 
man's he even took a hand at cards; they made up a game with him as 
fourth. He played a little, made a muddle of it, played three or four 
rounds and threw down the cards. "No," he said, "you see, I just 
looked in, I just looked in," and he went away from them. He met me 
in the passage, took both my hands, looked me straight in the face, 
but so strangely; then shook hands with me and walked away, and 
kept smiling, but with a strange, painful smile like a dead man. His 
wife was crying with joy; everything was cheerful as though it were, 
a holiday. They soon had dinner. After dinner he said to his wife :  "I 
tell you what, my love, I'll lie down a little," and he went to his bed. 
He called his little girl, put his hand on her head, and for a long time 

4 1 2  
Poor Folk 
he was stroking the child's head. Then he turned to his wife again, 
"And what of Petinka? our Petya! "  he said. "Petinka?" . . .  His wife 
crossed herself and answered that he was dead. "Yes, yes, I know all 
about it. Petinka is now in the Kingdom of Heaven." His wife saw that 
he was not himself, that what had happened had completely upset 
him, and she said to him, "You ought to have a nap, my love." "Yes, 
very well, I will directly . . .  just a little," then he turned away, lay still 
for a bit, then turned round, tried to say something. His wife could 
not make out what he said, and asked him, "What it is, my dear?" and 
he did not answer. She waited a little, "Well, he's asleep," she thought, 
and went into the landlady's for an hour. An hour later she came 
back, she saw her husband had not woken up and was not stirring. 
She thought he was asleep, and she sat down and began working at 
something. She said that for half an hour she was so lost in musing 
that she did not know what she was thinking about, all she can say is 
that she did not think of her husband. But suddenly she was roused 
by the feeling of uneasiness, and what struck her first of all was the 
death-like silence in the room . . . .  She looked at the bed and saw that 
here husband was lying in the same pOSition. She went up to him, 
pulled down the quilt and looked at him-and he was already cold­
he was dead, my darling. Gorshkov was dead, he had died suddenly, 
as though he had been killed by a thunder-bolt. And why he died , God 
only knows. It was such a shock to me, Varinka, that I can't get over it 
now. One can't believe that a man could die so easily. He was such a 
poor, unlucky fellow, that Gorshkov! And what a fine, what a fate! His 
wife was in tears and panic-stricken. The little girl crept away into a 
corner. There is such a hubbub going on, they will hold a post­
mortem and inquest . . .  I can't tell you just what. But the pity of it, 
oh, the pity of it! It's sad to think that in reality one does not know the 
day or the hour . . .  One dies so easily for no reason . . . .  
DEAR VARVARA ALEXYEVNA, 
Your 
MAKAR DYEVUSHK1N. 
September 1 9. 
I hasten to inform you, my dear, that Ratazyaev has found me 
work with a writer. Someone came to him, and brought him such a fat 

Poor Folk 
4 1 3  
manuscript-thank God, a lot of work. But it's so illegibly written that 
I don't know how to set to work on it: they want it in a hurry. It's all 
written in such a way that one does not understand it. . . .  They have 
agreed to pay forty kopecks the sixteen pages. I write you all this, my 
own, because now I shall have extra money. And now, good-bye, my 
darling, I have come straight from work. 
My DEAR FRIEND, MAKAR ALEXYEVITCH, 
Your faithful friend, 
MAKAR DYEVUSHKIN. 
September 2 3 .  
For three days I have not written you a word, and I have had a 
great many anxieties and worries. 
The day before yesterday Bykov was here. I was alone, Fedora had 
gone off somewhere. I opened the door to him, and was so frightened 
when I saw him that I could not move. I felt that I turned pale. He 
walked in as he always does, with a loud laugh, took a chair and sat 
down. For a long while I could not recover myself At last I sat down in 
the corner to my work. He even left off laughing. I believe my appear­
ance impressed him. I have grown so thin of late, my eyes and my 
cheeks are hollow, I was as white as a sheet . . .  it would really be hard 
for anyone to recognise me who had known me a year ago. He looked 
long and intently at me; then at last he began to be lively again, 
said something or other; I don't know what I answered, and he 
laughed again. He stayed a whole hour with me; talked to me a long 
time; asked me some questions. At last just before leaving, he took me 
by the hand and said (I write you it word for word) : "Varvara Alexye­
vitch, between ourselves, be it said, your relation and my intimate 
friend, Anna Fyodorovna, is a very nasty woman" (then he used an 
unseemly word about her) . "She led your cousin astray, and ruined 
you. I behaved like a rascal in that case, too; but after all, it's a thing 
that happens every day." Then he laughed heartily. Then he observed 
that he was not great at fine speeches, and that most of what he had to 
explain, about which the obligations of gentlemanly feeling forebade 
him to be silent, he had told me already, and that in brief words he 
would come to the rest. Then he told me he was asking my hand in 
marriage, that he thought it his duty to restore my good name, that he 

4 1 4  
Poor Folk 
was rich, that after the wedding he would take me away to his estates 
in the steppes, that he wanted to go coursing hares there; that he 
would never come back to Petersburg again, because it was horrid in 
Petersburg; that he had here in Petersburg-as he expressed it­
a good-far-nothing nephew whom he had sworn to deprive of the 
estate, and it was just for that reason in the hope of having legitimate 
heirs that he sought my hand, that it was the chief cause of his 
courtship. Then he observed that I was living in a very poar way: and 
it was no wonder I was ill living in such a slum; predicted that I 
should certainly die if I stayed there another month; said that lodgings 
in Petersburg were harrid, and finally asked me if I wanted anything. 
I was so overcome at his offer that, I don't know why, I began cry­
ing. He took my tears far gratitude and told me he had always been sure 
I was a good, feeling, and educated girl, but that he had not been able to 
make up his mind to take this step till he had found out about my pres­
ent behaviour in full detail. Then he asked me about you, said that he 
had heard all about it, that you were a man of good principles, that he 
did not want to be indebted to you and asked whether five hundred 
roubles would be enough for all that you had done far me. When I ex­
plained to him that what you had done far me no money could repay, 
he said that it was all nonsense, that that was all romantic stuff out of 
novels, that I was young and read poetry, that novels were the ruin of 
young girls, that books were destructive of morality and that he could 
not bear books of any sort, he advised me to wait till I was his age and 
then talk about people. "Then," he added, "you will know what men are 
like." Then he said I was to think over his offer thoroughly, that he would 
very much dislike it if I were to take such an important step thought­
lessly; he added that thoughtlessness and impulsiveness were the ruin of 
inexperienced youth, but that he quite hoped for a favourable answer 
from me, but that in the opposite event, he should be farced to marry 
some Moscow shopkeeper's daughter, "because," he said, "I have sworn 
that good-far-nothing nephew shall not have the estate." 
He forced five hundred roubles into my hands, as he said, "to buy 
sweetmeats" .  He said that in the country I should grow as round as a 
bun, that with him I should be living on the fat of the land, that he 
had a terrible number of things to see to now, that he was dragging 
about all day on business, and that he had just slipped in to see me be­
tween his engagements. Then he went away. 

Poor Folk 
4 1 5  
I thought for a long time, I pondered many things, I wore myself 
out thinking, my ffiend; at last I made up my mind. My friend, I shall 
marry him. I ought to accept his offer. If anyone can rescue me from my 
shame, restore my good name, and ward off poverty, privation and 
misfortune from me in the future, it is he and no one else. What more 
can one expect from the future, what more can one expect from fate? 
Fedora says I must not throw away my good fortune; she says, if this 
isn't good fortune, what is? Anyway, I can find no other course for me, 
my precious friend. What am I to do? I have ruined my health with 
work as it is; I can't go on working continually. Go into a family? I 
should pine away with depression, besides I should be of no use to 
anyone. I am of a sickly constitution, and so I shall always be a burden 
on other people. Of course I am not going into a paradise, but what 
am I to do, my friend, what am I to do? What choice have I? 
I have not asked your advice. I wanted to think it over alone. The 
decision you have just read is unalterable, and I shall immediately in­
form Bykov of it, he is pressing me to answer qUickly. He said that his 
business would not wait, that he must be off, and that he couldn't put 
it off for nonsense. God knows whether I shall be happy, my fate is in 
His holy, inscrutable power, but I have made up my mind. They say 
Bykov is a kind-hearted man: he will respect me; perhaps I, too, shall 
respect him. What more can one expect from such a marriage? 
I will let you know about everything, Makar Alexyevitch. I am 
sure you will understand all my wretchedness. Do not try to dissuade 
me from my intention. Your efforts will be in vain. Weigh in your own 
mind all that has forced me to this step. I was very much distressed at 
first, but now I am calmer. What is before me, I don't know. What will 
be, will be; as God wills ! . . .  
Bykov has come, I leave this letter unfinished. I wanted to tell you 
a great deal more. Bykov is here already! 
September 2 3 .  
My DARUNG VARVARA ALEXYEVNA, 
I hasten to answer you, my dear; I hasten to tell you, my precious, 
that I am dumbfounded. It all seems so . . .  Yesterday we buried 
Gorshkov. Yes, that is so, Varinka, that is so; Bykov has behaved hon­
ourably; only, you see, my own . . .  so you have consented. Of course, 

4 1 6  
Poor Folk 
everything is according to God's will; that is so, that certainly must be 
so--that is, it certainly must be God's will in this; and the providence 
of the Heavenly Creator is blessed, of course, and inscrutable, and it is 
fate too, and they are the same. Fedora sympathises with you too. Of 
course you will be happy now, my precious, you will live in comfort, 
my darling, my little dearie, little angel and light of my eyes--only 
Varinka, how can it be so soon? . . .  Yes, business . . . .  Mr. Bykov has 
business--of course, everyone has business, and he may have it too . . . .  
I saw him as he came out from you. He's a good-looking man, good­
looking; a very good-looking man, in fact. Only there is something 
queer about it, the point is not whether he is a good-looking man. In­
deed, I am not myself at all. Why, how are we to go on writing to one 
another? I . . .  I shall be left alone. I am weighing everything, my angel, 
I am weighing everything as you write to me, I am weighing it all in 
my heart, the reasons. I had just finished copying the twentieth quire, 
and meanwhile these events have come upon us! Here you are going a 
journey, my darling, you will have to buy all sorts of things, shoes of all 
kinds, a dress, and I know just the shop in Gorohovoy Street; do you re­
member how I described it to you? But no! How can you, Varinka? 
what are you about? You can't go away now, it's quite impossible, ut­
terly impossible. Why, you will have to buy a great many things and get 
a carriage. Besides, the weather is so awful now; look, the rain is com­
ing down in bucketfuls, and such soaking rain, too, and what's 
more . . .  what's more, you will be cold, my angel; your little heart will 
be cold! Why, you are afraid of anyone strange, and yet you go. And to 
whom am I left, all alone here? Yes! Here, Fedora says that there is 
great happiness in store for you . . .  but you know she's a headstrong 
woman, she wants to be the death of me. Are you going to the evening 
service to-night, Varinka? I would go to have a look at you. It's true, 
perfectly true, my darling, that you are a well-educated, virtuous and 
feeling girl, only he had much better marry the shopkeeper's daughter! 
Don't you think so, my precious? He had better marry the shopkeeper's 
daughter! I will come to see you, Varinka, as soon as it gets dark, I shall 
just run in for an hour. It will get dark early to-day. then I shall run in. 
I shall certainly come to you for an hour this evening, my darling. Now 
you are expecting Bykov, but when he goes, then . . .  Wait a bit, 
Varinka, I shall run across . . .  
MAKAR DYEVUSHKIN. 

Poor Folk 
4 1 7  
September 2 7. 
My DEAR FRIEND, MAKAR ALEXYEVITCH, 
Mr. Bykov says I must have three dozen linen chemises. So I must 
make haste and find seamstresses to make two dozen, and we have 
very little time. Mr. Bykov is angry and says there is a great deal of 
bother over these rags. Our wedding is to be in five days, and we are 
to set off the day after the wedding. Mr. Bykov is in a hurry, he says we 
must not waste much time over nonsense. I am worn out with all this 
fuss and can hardly stand on my feet. There is a terrible lot to do, and 
perhaps it would have been better if all this had not happened. An­
other thing: we have not enough net or lace, so we ought to buy some 
more, for Mr. Bykov says he does not want his wife to go about like a 
cook, and that I simply must "wipe all the country ladies' noses for 
them" . That was his own expression. So, Makar Alexyevitch, please ap­
ply to Madame Chiffon in Gorohovoy Street, and ask her first to send 
us some seamstresses, and secondly, to be so good as to come herself. 
I am ill to-day. It's so cold in our new lodging and the disorder is ter­
rible. Mr. Bykov's aunt can scarcely breathe, she is so old. I am afraid 
she may die before we set off, but Mr. Bykov says that it is nothing, 
she'll wake up. Everything in the house is in the most awful confusion. 
Mr. Bykov is not living with us, so the servants are racing about in all 
directions, goodness knows where. Sometimes Fedora is the only one 
to wait on us, and Mr. Bykov's valet, who looks after everything, has 
disappeared no one knows where for the last three days. Mr. Bykov 
comes to see us every morning, and yesterday he beat the superin­
tendent of the house, for which he got into trouble with the police. I 
have not even had anyone to take my letters to you. I am writing by 
post. Yes! I had almost forgotten the most important point. Tell 
Madame Chiffon to be sure and change the net, matching it with the 
pattern she had yesterday, and to come to me herself to show the new, 
and tell her, too, that I have changed my mind about the embroidery, 
that it must be done in crochet; and another thing, that the letters for 
the monogram on the handkerchiefs must be done in tambour stitch, 
do you hear? Tambour stitch and not satin stitch. Mind you don't for­
get that it is to be tambour stitch! Something else I had almost forgot­
ten! For God's sake tell her also that the leaves on the pelerine are to be 
raised and that the tendrils and thorns are to be in applique; and, then, 

4 1 8  
Poor Folk 
the collar is to be edged with lace, or a deep frill. Please tell her, Makar 
Alexvevitch. 
Your 
y. D. 
P.S.-I am so ashamed of worrying you with all my errands. The 
day before yesterday you were running about all the morning. But 
what can I do! There's no sort of order in the house here, and I am not 
well. So don't be vexed with me, Makar Alexyevitch. I'm so miserable. 
Oh, how will it end, my friend, my dear, my kind Makar Alexyevitch? 
I'm afraid to look into my future. I have a presentiment of something 
and am living in a sort of delirium. 
P.P.S.-For God's sake, my friend, don't forget anything of what I 
have told you. I am so afraid you will make a mistake. Remember tam­
bour, not satin stitch. 
Y. D. 
September 2 7 .  
DEAR VARVARA ALEXYEVNA, 
I have carried out all your commissions carefully. Madame Chiffon 
says that she had thought herself of doing them in tambour stitch; that 
it is more correct, or something, I don't know, I didn't take it in prop­
erly. And you wrote about a frill, too, and she talked about the frill. 
Only I have forgotten, my darling, what she told me about the frill. All 
I remember is, that she said a great deal; such a horrid woman! What 
on earth was it? But she will tell you about it herself I have become 
quite dissipated, Varinka, I have not even been to the office to-day. But 
there's no need for you to be in despair about that, my own. I am ready 
to go the round of all the shops for your peace of mind. You say you are 
afraid to look into the future. But at seven o'clock this evening you will 
know all about it. Madame Chiffon is coming to see you herself So 
don't be in despair; you must hope for the best, everything will turn 
out for the best-so there. Well, now, I keep thinking about that cursed 
frill-ugh! bother that frill! I should have run round to you, my angel, 
I should have looked in, I should certainly have looked in; I have been 
to the gates of your house, once or twice. But Bykov-that is, I mean, 
Mr. Bykov-is always so cross, you see it doesn't . . .  Well, what of it! 
MAKAR DYEvUSHKIN. 

Poor Folk 
4 1 9  
September 2 8 .  
My DEAR MAKAR ALEXYEVITCH, 
For God's sake, run at once to the jeweller's: tell him that he 
must not make the pearl and emerald ear-rings. Mr. Bykov says that it 
is too gorgeous, that it's too expensive. He is angry; he says, that as it 
is, it is costing him a pretty penny, and we are robbing him, and yes­
terday he said that if he had known beforehand and had any notion 
of the expense he would not have bound himself. He says that as 
soon as we are married we will set off at once, that we shall have no 
visitors and that I needn't hope for dancing and flirtation, and that 
the holidays are a long way off. That's how he talks. And, God knows, 
I don't want anything of that sort! Mr. Bykov ordered everything 
himself. I don't dare to answer him: he is so hasty. What will become 
of me? 
y. n. 
September 2 8 .  
My DARLING VARVARA ALEXYEVNA, 
I-that is, the jeweller said-very good; and I meant to say at first 
that I have been taken ill and cannot get up. Here now, at such an ur­
gent, busy time I have caught a cold, the devil take it! I must tell you, 
to complete my misfortunes, his Excellency was pleased to be stern 
and was very angry with Emelyan Ivanovitch and scolded him, and he 
was quite worn out at last, poor man. You see, I tell you about every­
thing. I wanted to write to you about something else, but I am afraid 
to trouble you. You see, I am a foolish, simple man, Varinka, I just 
write what comes, so that, maybe, you may-- But there, never 
mind! 
VARVARA ALEXYEVITCH, MY OWN, 
Your 
MAKAR DYEVUSHKIN. 
September 2 9 .  
I saw Fedora to-day, my darling, she says that you are to be married 
to-morrow, and that the day after you are setting off, and that Mr. Bykov 

4 2 0  
Poor Folk 
is engaging horses already: I have told you about his Excellency already, 
my darling. Another thing-I have checked the bills from the shop in 
Gorohovoy; it is all correct, only the things are very dear. But why is 
Mr. Bykov angry with you? Well, may you be happy, Varinka! I am glad, 
yes, I shall be glad if you are happy: I should come to the church, my 
dear, but I've got lumbago. So I keep on about our letters; who will carry 
them for us, my precious) Yes! You have been a good friend to Fedora, 
my own I You have done a good deed, my dear, you have done quite 
right. It's a good deed! And God will bless you for every good deed. 
Good deeds never go unrewarded, and virtue will sooner or later be re­
warded by the eternal justice of God. Varinka! I wanted to write to you 
a great deal; I could go on writing and writing every minute, every 
hour! I have one of your books still, Byelkin's Stories. I tell you what, 
Varinka, don't take it away, make me a present of it, my darling. It is not 
so much that I want to read it. But you know yourself, my darling, win­
ter is coming on: the evenings will be long; it will be sad, and then I 
could read. I shall move from my lodgings, Varinka, into your old room 
and lodge with Fedora. I would not part from that honest woman for 
anything now; besides, she is such a hard-working woman. I looked at 
your empty room carefully yesterday: Your embroidery frame has re­
mained untouched, just as it was with embroidery on it. I examined 
your needlework; there were all sorts of little scraps left there, you had 
begun winding thread on one of my letters. On the little table I found a 
piece of paper with the words "Dear Makar Alexyevitch, I hasten-" and 
that was alL Someone must have interrupted you at the most interesting 
place. In the corner behind the screen stands your little bed . . . .  Oh, my 
darling! ! !  \Vell, good-bye, good-bye, send me some answer to this letter 
quickly. 
MAKAR DYEVUSHKIN. 
September 3 0 .  
M y  PRECIOUS FRIEND, MAKAR AUXYEVITCH, 
Everything is over! My lot is cast; I don't know what it will be, 
but I am resigned to God's wilL To-morrow we set off I say good-bye 
to you for the last time, my precious one, my friend, my benefactor, 
my own ! Don't grieve for me, live happily, think of me, and may Gbd's 
biessing descend on us! I shall often remember you in my thoughts, in 

Poor Folk 
42 1 
my prayers. So this time is over! I bring to my new life little consola­
tion from the memories of the past; the more precious will be my 
memory of you, the more precious will your memory be to my heart. 
You are my one friend; you are the only one there who loved me. You 
know I have seen it all, I know how you love me! You were happy in a 
smile from me and a few words from my pen. Now you will have to 
get used to being without me. How will you do, left alone here? To 
whom am I leaving you my kind, precious, only friend! I leave you the 
book, the embroidery frame, the unfinished letter; when you look at 
those first words, you must read in your thoughts all that you would 
like to hear or read from me, all that I should have written to you; and 
what I could not write now! Think of your poor Varinka who loves 
you so truly. All your letters are at Fedora's in the top drawer of a chest. 
You write that you are ill and Mr. Bykov will not let me go out any­
where to-day. I will write to you, my friend, I promise; but, God alone 
knows what may happen. And so we are saying good-bye now for 
ever, my friend, my darling, my own, for ever . . . .  Oh, if only I could 
embrace you now! Good-bye, my dear; good-bye, good-bye. Live 
happily, keep well. My prayers will be always for you. Oh! how sad I 
am, how weighed down in my heart. Mr. Bykov is calling me. 
Your ever loving 
v. . 
P'S.-My soul is so full, so full of tears now . . .  tears are choking 
me, rending my heart. Good-bye. Oh, God, how sad I am! 
Remember me, remember your poor Varinka. 
VARINKA, MY DARlING, MY PRECIOUS, 
You are being carried off, you are going. They had better have 
torn the heart out of my breast than take you from me! How could 
you do it? Here you are weeping and going away! Here I have just had 
a letter from you, all smudged with tears. So you don't want to go; so 
you are being taken away by force; so you are sorry for me; so you 
love me! And with whom will you be now? Your little heart will be 
sad, sick and cold out there. It will be sapped by misery, torn by grief. 
You will die out there, they will put you in the damp earth; there will 
be no one to weep for you there! Mr. Bykov will be always coursing 
hares. Oh, my darling, my darling! What have you brought yourself 

42 2 
Poor Folk 
to? How could you make up your mind to such a step? What have you 
done, what have you done, what have you done to yourself? They'll 
drive you to your grave out there; they will be the death of you, my 
angel. You know you are as weak as a little feather, my own! And 
where was I, old fool, where were my eyes! I saw the child did not 
know what she was doing, the child was simply in a fever! I ought 
simply-- But no, fool, fool, I thought nothing and saw nothing, as 
though that were the right thing, as though it had nothing to do with 
me; and went running after frills and flounces too . . . .  No, Varinka, I 
shall get up; tomorrow, maybe, I shall be better and then I shall get 
up! . . .  I'll throw myself under the wheels, my precious, I won't let 
you go away! Oh, no, how can it be? By what right is all this done? 
I will go with you; I will run after your carriage if you won't take me, 
and will run my hardest as long as there is a breath left in my body. 
And do you know what it is like where you are gOing, my darling? 
Maybe you don't know-if so, ask me! There it is, the steppe, my own, 
the steppe, the bare steppe; why, it is as bare as my hand; there, there 
are hard-hearted peasant women and uneducated drunken peasants. 
There the leaves are falling off the trees now, there it is cold and 
rainy-and you are going there! Well, Mr. Bykov has something to do 
there: he will be with his hares; but what about you? Do you want to 
be a grand country lady, Varinka? But, my little cherub! you should 
just look at yourself. Do you look like a grand country lady? . . .  Why, 
how can such a thing be, Varinka? To whom am I going to write letters, 
my darling? Yes! You must take that into consideration, my darling­
you must ask yourself, to whom is he going to write letters? Whom 
am I to call my darling; whom am I to call by that loving name, where 
am I to find you afterwards, my angel? I shall die, Varinka, I shall cer­
tainly die; my heart will never survive such a calamity! I loved you like 
God's sunshine, I loved you like my own daughter, I loved everything 
in you, my darling, my own! And I lived only for you! I worked and 
copied papers, and walked and went about and put my thoughts down 
on paper, in friendly letters, all because you, my precious, were living 
here opposite, close by; perhaps you did not know it, but that was 
how it was. Yes, listen, Varinka; you only think, my sweet darling, how 
is it possible that you should go away from us? You can't go away, my 
own, it is impossible; it's simply utterly impossible! Why, it's raining, 
you are delicate, you will catch cold. Your carriage will be wet through; 

Poor Folk 
4 2 3  
it will certainly get wet through. It won't get beyond the city gates be­
fore it will break down; it will break down on purpose. They make these 
carriages in Petersburg'so badly: I know all those carriage makers; they 
are only fit to turn out a little model, a plaything, not anything solid. 
I'll take my oath they won't build it solid. I'll throw myself on my 
knees before Mr. Bykov: I will explain to him, I will explain every­
thing, and you, my precious, explain to him, make him see reason! Tell 
him that you will stay and that you cannot go away! . . .  Ah, why 
didn't he marry a shopkeeper's daughter in Moscow? He might just as 
well have married her! The shopkeeper's daughter would have suited 
him much better, she would have suited him much better. I know 
why! And I should have kept you here. What is he to you, my darling, 
what is Bykov? How has he suddenly become so dear to you? Perhaps 
it's because he is always buying you frills and flounces. But what are 
frills and flounces? What good are frills and flounces? Why, it is non­
sense, Varinka! Here it is a question of a man's life :  and you know a 
frill's a rag; it's a rag, Varinka, a frill is; why, I shall buy you frills my­
self, that's all the reward I get; I shall buy them for you, my darling, 
I know a shop, that's all the reward you let me hope for, my cherub, 
Varinka. Oh Lord! Lord! So, you are really going to the steppes with 
Mr. Bykov, going away never to return! Ah, my darling! . . .  No, you 
must write to me again, you must write another letter about every­
thing, and when you go away you must write to me from there, or 
else, my heavenly angel, this will be the last letter and you know that 
this cannot be, this cannot be the last letter! Why, how can it be, so 
suddenly, actually the last? Oh no, I shall write and you will write. ' , . 
Besides, I am acquiring a literary style . . . .  Oh, my own, what does 
style matter, now? I don't know, now, what I am writing, I don't know 
at all, I don't know and I don't read it over and I don't improve the 
style. I write only to write, only to go on writing to you . . .  my dar­
ling, my own, my Varinka . . . .  


A P P E N D I X  
T H E  P E A S A N T M A R E Y * 
TRANSLATE D  B Y  KENNE TH LANTZ 
BUT READING ALL THESE professions de foi is a bore, I think, and so I'll tell 
you a story; actually, it's not even a story, but only a reminiscence of 
something that happened long ago and that, for some reason, I would 
very much like to recount here and now, as a conclusion to our trea­
tise on the People. At the time I was only nine years old . . . .  But no, 
I'd best begin with the time I was twenty-nine. 
It was the second day of Easter Week. The air was warm, the sky 
was blue, the sun was high, warm, and bright, but there was only 
gloom in my heart. I was wandering behind the prison barracks, ex­
amining and counting off the pales in the sturdy prison stockade, but 
I had lost even the desire to count, although such was my habit. It 
was the second day of "marking the holiday" within the prison com­
pound; the prisoners were not taken out to work; many were drunk; 
there were shouts of abuse, and quarrels were constantly breaking 
out in all corners. Disgraceful, hideous songs; card games in little 
nooks under the bunks; a few convicts, already beaten half to death 
by sentence of their comrades for their particular rowdiness, lay on 
bunks covered with sheepskin coats until such time as they might 
come to their senses; knives had already been drawn a few times-all 
this, in two days of holiday, had worn me out to the point of illness. 
Indeed, I never could endure the drunken carousals of peasants with­
out being disgusted, and here, in this place, particularly. During these 
days even the prison staff did not look in; they made no searches, nor 
did they check for alcohol, for they realized that once a year they had 
to allow even these outcasts to have a spree; otherwise it might be 
even worse. At last, anger welled up in my heart. I ran across the Pole 
*From Fyodor Dostoevsky, A Writer's Diary, Vol. I ,  1 8 73-1 8 7 6 ,  translated by Kenneth 
Lantz (Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press) . Copyright © 
1 994 by 
Northwestern University Press. Reprinted by permission of the publisher. 
425 

42 6 
Appendix 
M-cki, a political prisoner; he gave me a gloomy look, his eyes glit­
tering and his lips trembling: "Je hais ces brigands! "  he muttered, 
gritting his teeth, and passed me by. I returned to the barrack despite 
the fact that a quarter-hour before I had fled it half-demented when 
six healthy peasants had thrown themselves, as one man, on the 
drunken Tatar Gazin and had begun beating him to make him settle 
down; they beat him senselessly with such blows as might have killed 
a camel; but they knew that it was not easy to kill this Hercules and so 
they didn't hold back. And now when I returned to the barracks I no­
ticed Gazin lying senseless on a bunk in the corner showing scarcely 
any signs of life; he was lying under a sheepskin coat, and everyone 
passed him by in silence: although they firmly hoped he would revive 
the next morning, still, "with a beating like that, God forbid, you 
could finish a man off" I made my way to my bunk opposite a win­
dow with an iron grating and lay down on my back, my hands be­
hind my head, and closed my eyes. I liked to lie like that: a sleeping 
man was left alone, while at the same time one could daydream and 
think. But dreams did not corne to me; my heart beat restlessly, and 
M-cki's words kept echOing in my ears: "Je hais ces brigands! "  How­
ever, why describe my feelings? Even now at night I sometimes 
dream of that time, and none of my dreams are more agonizing. Per­
haps you will also notice that until today I have scarcely ever spoken 
in print of my prison life; I wrote Notes from the House of the Dead fifteen 
years ago using an invented narrator, a criminal who supposedly had 
murdered his wife. (I might add, by the way, that many people sup­
posed and are even now quite firmly convinced that I was sent to 
hard labor for the murder of my wife.) 
Little by little I lost myself in reverie and imperceptibly sank into 
memories of the past. All through my four years in prison I continu­
ally thought of all my past days, and I think I relived the whole of my 
former life in my memories. These memories arose in my mind of 
themselves; rarely did I summon them up consciously. They would 
begin from a certain point, some little thing that was often barely 
perceptible, and then bit by bit they would grow into a finished pic­
ture, some strong and complete impression. I would analyze these 
impressions, adding new touches to things experienced long ago; 
and the main thing was that I would refine them, continually refine 
them, and in this consisted my entire entertainment. This time, for 

The Peasant Marey 
42 7 
some reason, I suddenly recalled a moment of no apparent signifi­
cance from my early childhood when I was only nine years old, a 
moment that I thought I had completely forgotten; but at that time I 
was particularly fond of memories of my very early childhood. I re­
called one August at our home in the country: the day was clear and 
dry, but a bit chilly and Windy; summer was on the wane, and soon 
I would have to go back to Moscow to spend the whole winter in 
boredom over my French lessons; and I was so sorry to have to leave 
the country. I passed by the granaries, made my way down into the 
gully, and climbed up into the Dell-that was what we called a thick 
patch of bushes that stretched from the far side of the gully to a 
grove of trees. And so I make my way deeper into the bushes and can 
hear that some thirty paces away a solitary peasant is plOWing in the 
clearing. I know he's plowing up the steep side of a hill and his horse 
finds it heavy going; from time to time I hear his shout, "Gee-up! "  I 
know almost all our peasants, but don't recognize the one who's 
plowing; and what difference does it make, anyway, since I'm quite 
absorbed in my own business. I also have an occupation: I'm break­
ing off a switch of walnut to lash frogs; walnut switches are so lovely 
and quite without flaws, so much better than birch ones. I'm also 
busy with bugs and beetles, collecting them; some are very pretty; I 
love the small, nimble, red-and-yellow lizards with the little black 
spots as well, but I'm afraid of snakes. I come across snakes far less 
often than lizards, however. There aren't many mushrooms here; you 
have to go into the birch wood for mushrooms, and that's what I 
have in mind. I liked nothing better than the forest with its mush­
rooms and wild berries, its insects, and its birds, hedgehogs, and 
squirrels, and with its damp aroma of rotting leaves that I loved so. 
And even now, as I write this, I can catch the fragrance from our 
stand of birches in the country: these impressions stay with you all 
your life. Suddenly, amid the deep silence, I clearly and distinctly 
heard a shout: "There's a wolf! " I screamed, and, beside myself with 
terror, crying at the top of my voice, I ran out into the field, straight 
at the plowing peasant. 
It was our peasant Marey. I don't know if there is such a name, but 
everyone called him Marey. He was a man of about fifty, heavy-set, 
rather tall, with heavy streaks of gray in his bushy, dark-brown beard. 
I knew him but had scarcely ever had occasion to speak to him before. 

42 8 
Appendix 
He even stopped his little filly when he heard my cry, and when I 
rushed up to him and seized his plow with one hand and his sleeve 
with the other, he saw how terrified I was. 
"It's a wolf! " I cried, completely out of breath. 
Instinctively he jerked his head to look around, for an instant al-
most believing me. 
"Where's the wolf?" 
"I heard a shout. . . .  Someone just shouted, 'Wolf' " . . .  I babbled. 
"What do you mean, lad? There's no wolf; you're just hearing 
things. Just take a look. What would a wolf be doing here?" he mur­
mured, reassuring me. But I was all a-tremble and clung to his coat 
even more tightly; I suppose I was very pale as well. He looked at me 
with an uneasy smile, eVidently concerned and alarmed for me. 
"Why you took a real fright, you did! " he said, wagging his head. 
"Never mind, now, my dear. What a fine lad you are!" 
He stretched out his hand and suddenly stroked my cheek. 
"Never mind, now, there's nothing to be afraid of. Christ be with 
you. Cross yourself, lad." But I couldn't cross myself; the corners of 
my mouth were trembling, and I think this particularly struck him. 
He qUietly stretched out a thick, earth-soiled finger with a black nail 
and gently touched it to my trembling lips. 
"Now, now," he smiled at me with a broad, almost maternal smile. 
"Lord, what a dreadful fuss. Dear, dear, dear!" 
At last I realized that there was no wolf and that I must have imag­
ined hearing the cry of "Wolf." Still, it had been such a clear and dis­
tinct shout; two or three times before, however, I had imagined such 
cries (not only about wolves) , and I was aware of that. (Later, when 
childhood passed, these hallucinations did as well.) 
"Well, I'll be off now," I said, making it seem like a question and 
looking at him shyly. 
"off with you, then, and I'll keep an eye on you as you go. Can't let 
the wolf get you! " he added, still giving me a maternal smile. "Well, 
Christ be with you, off you go." He made the sign of the cross over me, 
and crossed himself. I set off, looking over my shoulder almost every 
ten steps. Marey continued to stand with his little filly, looking after me 
and nodding every time I looked around. I confess I felt a little ashamed 
at taking such a fright. But I went on, still with a good deal of fear of 

The Peasant Marey 
429 
the wolf, until I had gone up the slope of the gully to the first threshing 
barn; and here the fear vanished entirely, and suddenly our dog Volchok 
came dashing out to meet me. With Volchok I felt totally reassured, and 
I turned toward Marey for the last time; I could no longer make out his 
face clearly, but I felt that he was still smiling kindly at me and nodding. 
I waved to him, and he returned my wave and urged on his little filly. 
"Gee-up," came his distant shout once more, and his little filly 
once more started draWing the wooden plow. 
This memory came to me all at once-I don't know why-but 
with amazing clarity of detail. Suddenly I roused myself and sat on 
the bunk; I recall that a quiet smile of reminiscence still played on my 
face. I kept on recollecting for yet another minute. 
I remembered that when I had come home from Marey I told no 
one about my "adventure." And what kind of adventure was it any­
way? I forgot about Marey very quickly as well. On the rare occa­
sions when I met him later, I never struck up a conversation with 
him, either about the wolf or anything else, and now, suddenly, 
twenty years later, in Siberia, I remembered that encounter so 
Vividly, right down to the last detail. That means it had settled un­
noticed in my heart, all by itself with no will of mine, and had sud­
denly come back to me at a time when it was needed; I recalled the 
tender, maternal smile of a poor serf, the way he crossed me and 
shook his head: "Well you did take a fright now, didn't you, lad!" 
And I espeCially remember his thick finger, soiled with dirt, that he 
touched qUietly and with shy tenderness to my trembling lips. Of 
course, anyone would try to reassure a child, but here in this soli­
tary encounter something quite different had happened, and had 
I been his very own son he could not have looked at me with a 
glance that radiated more pure love, and who had prompted him to 
do that? He was our own serf, and I was his master's little boy; no 
one would learn of his kindness to me and reward him for it. Was 
he, maybe, especially fond of small children? There are much peo­
ple. Our encounter was solitary, in an open field, and only God, 
perhaps, looking down saw what deep and enlightened human feel­
ing and what delicate, almost feminine tenderness could fill the 
heart of a coarse, bestially ignorant Russian serf who at the time did 

43 0 
Appendix 
not expect or even dream of his freedom. Now tell me, is this not 
what Konstantin Aksakov had in mind when he spoke of the ad­
vanced level of development of our Russian People? 
And so when I climbed down from my bunk and looked around, I 
remember I suddenly felt I could regard these unfortunates in an en­
tirely different way and that suddenly, through some sort of miracle, 
the former hatred and anger in my heart had vanished. I went off, 
peering intently into the faces of those I met. This disgraced peasant, 
with shaven head and brands on his cheek, drunk and roaring out his 
hoarse, drunken song-why he might also be that very same Marey; 
I cannot peer into his heart, after all. That same evening I met M-cki 
once again. The unfortunate man! He had no recollections of any 
Mareys and no other view of these people but "Je hais ces brigands! "  
No, the Poles had to bear more than we did in those days! 

E N D N O T E S  
THE HOUSE OF THE DEAD 
1 .  (p. 24) "There, poor man, take a farthing, for Christ's sake!": According to the let­
ters of Dostoevsky's wife, this is an autobiographical episode; a similar 
scene appears in Crime and Punishment (part 2 ,  chapter 2) . 
2. (p. 3 4) "One will be a Kantonist": Kantonists were soldiers' sons brought up 
in a military settlement and bound to serve in the army (Garnett's note) . 
3. (p. 69) GogoJ's ]ewYankel in "Taras Bulba": "Taras Bulba" ( 1 8 3 5) , by Russian 
writer Nikolay Gogol, is a story about the Cossack revolt against the 
Poles; Yankel, featured in chapters 1 0  and I I , is largely a negative stereo­
type of the Jewish people: He is avaricious, dirty, cowardly, willing to do 
practically anything for money, and so on. 
4. (p. 79) He was a monster; a moral Quasimodo: Quasimodo is the central character 
in French writer Victor Hugo's very popular 1 8 3 1  novel Notre-Dame de Paris 
(The Hunchback of Notre Dame) ; his name became synonymous with phYSical 
ugliness and deformity. Dostoevsky wrote a foreword to and published a 
Russian translation of the novel in the September 1 862 issue of Vremya 
(Time) . 
5. (p. 80) A. was a remarkable artist, almost on a level with Briillov: Karl Brullov 
( 1 7 99-1 8 5 2) was an artist well known in Russia for his portraits; he 
gained an international reputation in 1 8 3 3 ,  when The Last Day of Pompeii 
was exhibited in Italy. 
6. (p. 8 6) Some people maintain . . .  that the purest love for one's neighbour is at the same 
time the greatest egOism: This is a reference to the theory of "rational ego­
ism," developed by Russian radical Nikolay Chernyshevsky; he intro­
duced the theory in "The Anthropological Principle in Philosophy" 
( 1 8 60) and used it in his novel What Is to Be Done? ( 1 8 63) . Cherny­
shevsky was influenced by the work of German philosopher LudWig 
Feuerbach ( 1 804-1 8 7 2) and other radical philosophers. Rational ego­
ism essentially argues that an enlightened, reasonable man is funda­
mentally selfish, never acting against his own best interests, and that he 
wants to live in a beautiful, harmonious environment. To achieve har­
mony, it is in man's best interest to be kind and to take care of other 
people's needs; this way everyone gets what he wants-harmony and a 
utopia on Earth. However, this is possible only if everyone is enlight­
ened as to their own best interests. Dostoevsky strongly disagreed with 
43 1 

43 2 
Endnotes 
this idea; his "Notes from Underground" ( 1 8 64) is an argument 
against rational egoism. 
7. (p. 1 04) "r wanted to ask you about Napoleon. He is a relation of the one who was here 
in 1 8 1 2, isn't he?": Napoleon III (Charles-Louis-Napoleon Bonaparte, 
1 808-1 8 7 3 )  was the nephew of Napoleon I; he was elected president 
of the Second Republic of France in 1 848 and in 1 85 2  proclaimed him­
self emperor of France, a title he retained until the National Assembly 
deposed him in 1 8 70. 
8. (p. 1 05) "Last year I read about the Countess La Valliere . . . .  It's written b y  Dumas": 
Louise de la Valliere ( 1 644- 1 7 1 0) ,  a mistress of King Louis XIV of 
France, has been immortalized in various literary works : Louise de la Valliere 
(volume 2 ,  or sometimes 3 ,  of Alexandre Dumas's TheVicomte de Bragelonne 
[ 1 848-1 8 5 0] ,  a continuation of The Three Musketeers) ; and the very popu­
lar La Duchesse de La Valliere ( 1 804) , by Madame Stephanie-Felicite Genlis, 
published in Russian translation in 1 805 and frequently reprinted. 
9. (p. 1 92) He was a tall man about thirty. big and fat, with red puffy cheeks, white teeth and 
with a loud laugh like Nozdryov's: Nozdryov is a character in Nikolay Gogol's 
novel Dead Souls ( 1 842) . In chapter 4 of that novel Gogol writes: "Instantly 
Nozdryov burst into a laugh compassable only by a healthy man in whose 
head every tooth still remains as white as sugar. By this I mean the laugh 
of quivering cheeks, the laugh which causes a neighbour who is sleeping 
behind double doors three rooms away to leap from his bed." 
1 0. (p. 1 93 )  "the tradition is still fresh though it is hard to believe in it": This is a quote 
from Aleksandr Griboyedov's 1 8 24 satiric play Woe from Wit (act 2, scene 
2) , one of the best -known plays in the Russian language; many of its 
lines have become proverbs. 
1 1 . (p. 20 1 )  there were gentlemen who derived from the power of /logging their victims some­
thing that suggests the Marquis de Sade and the Marquise de Brinvilliers: The MarquiS 
de Sade, or Comte Donatien-Alphonse-Franڠois de Sade ( 1 740-1 8 1 4) ,  
was a French writer who argued that since both sexual perversion and 
criminality exist in nature, they are therefore natural; he was impris­
oned frequently for various sexual offences. Sadism-sexual deviation 
in which cruelty is inflicted in order to attain a sexual release-is 
named after him. Marie-Madeleine-Marguerite d'Aubray Brinvilliers, 
or the Marquise de Brinvilliers (c. 1 63 0- 1 6 7 6) ,  was a French SOciety 
woman who poisoned her family and was suspected of perfecting her 
"potions" on the poor; according to popular accounts she enjoyed 
watching the suffering of her victims. 
1 2. (p. 22 7) with his passion for travelling he might have been another Robinson Crnsoe: 
Daniel Defoe's novel The Life and Strange Surprizing Adventures of Robinson Crusoe 
( 1 7 1 9) ,  is supposedly based on the experiences of Scottish sailor Alexan­
der Selkirk, who in 1 7 04 requested to be put ashore on an uninhabited is­
land and was rescued five years later. 

Endnotes 
43 3 
1 3. (p. 2 7 7) thirty-five years ago a great mass of exiles of the upper class were sent to Siberia 
all at once: In December 1 8 2 5  there was a mass uprising in Russia against 
Czar Nicholas I by army officers, most of them nobility, who had fought 
in the Napoleonic Wars and become influenced by Western democratic 
ideas. Known as Decembrists, these officers wanted to establish a repre­
sentative government in Russia. Nicholas crushed the uprising on the 
first day of his reign, executing five of the leaders, imprisoning twenty­
one, and exiling the remainder of the participants to Siberia. 
1 4. (p. 2 7 8) in the recent but so remote past: Dostoevsky wrote this line for 
the purpose of passing the censorship. If he hadn't asserted that the 
atrocities he describes in his work occurred in the past, thus implying 
that things were now different, the work would have never have been al­
lowed by the censor. 
POOR FOLK 
1 .  (p. 3 0 5 )  PRINCE V. F. ODOEVSKY: The epigraph is from the short story "The 
living Corpse" ( 1 844) , by the Russian writer Vladimir Fiodorovich 
Odoevsky. Odoevsky was cofounder of the Lovers of Wisdom Society, 
and a noted writer. 
2. (p. 3 09) he talks about Homer and Brambeus: The ancient Greek poet Homer is 
the reputed author of the epic poems the Odyssey and the Iliad. Baron 
Brambeus is a pseudonym of Russian writer OSip Ivanovich Senkovsky 
( 1 800- 1 8 5 8) ,  editor of the very popular journal Biblioteka dlia chteniia (li­
brary for Reading) , whose literary reputation was not of the highest. 
3. (p. 3 1 8) There are two of them in the house, Teresa and Faldoni: Teresa and Faldoni 
are lovers in Nicholas Germain Leonard's 1 7 8 3  sentimental novel Lettres 
de deux amans habitans de Lyon (Letters of Two Lovers Living in Lyon) , published in 
Russian in 1 804. By the 1 840s, when Poor Folk was published, they had 
become negative stereotypes of sentimentality. 
4. (p. 3 2 1 )  there's scarcely any night at all now: In St. Petersburg the end of May is 
characterized by "white nights," when there are few hours of darkness. 
5. (p. 3 2 5 )  Lomond's grammar: The reference is to an 1 83 1  Moscow edition of 
"A Complete French Grammar . . .  " by Lomond. 
6. (p. 3 2 6) Zapolsky's was very much better: The reference is to an 1 8 1  7 Moscow 
edition of the New Textbook of the French Language, edited by V. Zapolsky. 
7. (p. 3 3 9) Pushkin's works in the latest, complete edition: Aleksandr Sergeyevich 
Pushkin ( 1 799- 1 8 3 7) was Russia's first great writer; the edition re­
ferred to here is the eleven-volume St. Petersburg edition ( 1 8 3 8-1 84 1 ) ,  
the first posthumously published edition of Pushkin's complete works. 
8. (p. 3 5 7) One of Paul de Kock's novels: Paul de Kock ( 1 7 9 3-1 8 7 1 )  was a 
French novelist whose work was considered frivolous and "naughty" by 
reactionary critics of the 1 840s. 

4 3 4  
Endnotes 
9. (p. 3 5 9) Fedora got me a book, Byelkin's Stories: The reference is to Tales of 
Belkin ( 1 8 3 1 ) ,  by Aleksandr Pushkin; three different editions (in 1 8 3 1 ,  
1 8 34, and 1 83 8) were published prior to the publication of Poor Folk. 
1 0. (p. 3 6 3 )  I have read The Picture of Man, a clever work; I have read The boy who 
played funny tunes on the bells and The Cranes of Ibicus, that's all, and I 
never read anything else: These three works are meant as examples of passe 
literary tastes. The Picture of Man, an Edifying Treatise on Aspects of Self-knowledge for 
All the Educated Classes ( 1 834) ,  by Pushkin's former teacher, the psycholo­
gist and philosopher-idealist Aleksandr Galich, was most likely read 
to Dostoevsky as a child by his father during "family reading." "The 
Boy Who Played Funny Tunes on the Bells" is a reference to Franr;:ois­
Guillaume Ducray-Duminil's 1 8 09 novel Le petit carillonneur (The Little BeIl­
ringer) , translated into Russian in 1 8 1 0 , about a destitute, miserable little 
boy traveling as a musician who finds his relatives and becomes a count. 
The 1 797 poem "The Cranes ofIbicus" (also spelled Ibycus) , by Friedrich 
Schiller, was translated into Russian in 1 8 1 3 . 
1 1 . (p. 3 63) I have read The Stationmaster: "The Stationmaster" is the title of 
one of Push kin's Belkin tales (see note 9) . 
1 2. (p. 3 64) I send you a book: there are all sorts of stories in it; I have read some of them, 
read the one called The Cloak: The reference is to the third volume of Niko­
lay Gogol's Works ( 1 843) , which contains the first edition of his story 
"The Cloak" (better known as "The Overcoat") . The story's main char­
acter, a poor clerk named Akaky Akakievich, is similar to Dyevushkin. He 
scrimps and saves for a new overcoat and feels like a new man when he 
gets it; but the overcoat is soon stolen, and the hero dies. Nineteenth­
century critics often discussed Akaky Akakievich and Makar Dyevushkin 
as the same "type" : a poor man destroyed by society. 
1 3. (p. 3 8 8) "you're a Lovelace": Lovelace is the name of the seducer in English 
novelist Samuel Richardson's sentimental novel Clarissa Harlowe (7 vols. ,  
1 747-1 748) ; the book was extremely popular i n  Russia, where the 
name Lovelace became synonymous with a great seducer of women. 
14. (p. 40 7) I read the Bee: The "reactionary" St. Petersburg newspaper the 
Northern Bee ( 1 825-1 8 64) was described by Gogol as "classic reading" 
for petty clerks in 1 8 3 5  in his story "Notes of a Madman." 

I N S P I R E D  B Y  
T H E  H O U S E  O F  T H E  D E A D  
MUSIC 
Czech composer Leos Janacek began work on an opera based on The 
House of the Dead in 1 92 7 ,  a year before his death. First staged posthu­
mously in 1 93 0 ,  From the House of the Dead consists of vignettes about 
the broken lives of prisoners in Dostoevsky's novel. In the opera, the 
prisoners relate their crimes; Janacek contrasts their tormented sto­
ries with life-affirming metaphors of freedom: a released bird, a 
river, and rebirth at Easter. At the beginning of his score, Janacek 
penned the phrase "In every creature a spark of God," affirming his 
hope and ultimate faith in life. 
Because From the House of the Dead was the composer's final work, and 
because Janacek's material-both textual and musical-seemed thin, 
the idea emerged that the opera was unfinished. The 1 930 premiere of 
the work was therefore given an erroneous "correction" by Ota Zitek 
(the producer, who filled out some of the text and stage directions) , 
along with Osvald Chlubna and Bretislav Bakala (pupils of Janacek, 
who reorchestrated the work) . Together they created a finale that was 
more optimistic than Janacek's original. Not until 1 964 was the origi­
nal ending reinstated as an appendix to the score, and performances 
have employed this ending ever since. Attempts have been made as 
well to reinstate Janacek's original orchestrations-a perennial prob­
lem with performances of all his operas. Though his disciples at­
tempted to finish and polish From the House of the Dead, it is often 
performed today almost exactly the way Janacek left it upon his death. 
VISUAL ARTS 
In October 1 8 8 8 ,  Vincent van Gogh wrote a letter to his sister Wil­
helmina in which he mentions an article about Dostoevsky, whom he 
identifies as the author of The House of the Dead. Van Gogh tells his sister 
that the article has inspired him to complete his large-scale study of 
a fever clinic. Six months later van Gogh completed Ward in the Hospital 
43 5 

4 3 6  
Inspired by The House of the Dead 
in ArIes. In the painting, a long room with bright lilac-green curtains 
and orange floorboards stretches into the distance; in the foreground, 
dark figures sit huddled around a black stove, while faceless nuns 
make the beds. The quiet despair of the patients mirrors the condition 
of the prisoners in Dostoevsky's camp-and reflects the depressed 
mental state of van Gogh himself. 
While serving three years in a labor camp, Russian artist Leonid 
Lamm read Dostoevsky's The House of the Dead and began making 
sketches for a work based on the novel. In 1 9 7 7 ,  upon his release 
from prison, he began a series of lithographs that he titled The House of 
the Dead. Each of the twenty works corresponds to a chapter in Dosto­
evsky's novel. The lithographs are characterized by large black patches 
and unreal, round forms that represent the surreal nature of the 
camp. Bleak yet strangely energetic, the images connect the sufferings 
of two prisoners separated by more than one hundred years. 
ONE DAY IN THE LIFE OF IVAN DENISOVICH 
One of Russia's most gifted writers, Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, followed 
in the spirit of Dostoevsky's The House of the Dead with the publication in 
1 962 of One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich, a fictionalized account of the 
Stalinist labor camps. Like Dostoevsky, Solzhenitsyn wrote from per­
sonal experience. In 1 945 , while serving as an artillery captain in the 
Red Army, he was arrested for criticizing Stalin, sentenced to eight 
years in a labor camp, and then sent into administrative exile. His cit­
izenship was restored in 1 95 6 ,  three years after Stalin's death. One Day 
in the Life of Ivan Denisovich is a brutally honest depiction of camp life, in 
which men living in extreme conditions are faced with devastating 
moral dilemmas on an almost daily basis. The work, uncensored by 
Khrushchev's anti-Stalinist government, catapulted Solzhenitsyn into 
worldwide celebrity and paved the way for his masterpiece The Gulag 
Archipelago ( 1 9 7 3-1 9 7 5 ) ,  an epic "history and geography" of the So­
viet labor camps. 
Solzhenitsyn's popularity at home waned quickly as he proved to 
be as critical of Khrushchev and the Soviets as he had been of Stalin. 
His popularity abroad remained strong, however, and he was awarded 
a Nobel Prize for Literature in 1 9 70 (an honor he refused in order to 
be allowed to live in Russia) . He was expelled from the Soviet Union 

Inspired by The House of the Dead 
43 7 
in 1 9 74-, but in 1 990 his Soviet citizenship was restored, and he 
moved back to his native country in 1 994-. In his Nobel lecture, 
Solzhenitsyn observed, "Literature transmits incontrovertible con­
densed experience . . .  from generation to generation. In this way 
literature becomes the living memory of a nation." 


C O M M E N T S  & Q U E S T I O N S  
Tn this section, we aim to provide the reader with an array of perspectives on the text, as well as 
questions that challenge those perspectives. The commentary has been culled from sources as diverse 
as reviews contemporaneous with the works, letters written by the author, literary criticism of 
later generations, and appreciations written throughout the works' history. Following the commen­
tary, a series of questions seeks to filter Fyodor Dostoevsky's The House of the Dead and 
Poor Folk through a variety of points of view and bring about a richer understanding of these 
enduring works. 
COMMENTS 
THE NATION 
It is interesting, in connection with this translation of Dostoyevsky's 
famous story, 'Poor Folk: to recall briefly the circumstances of its first 
reading. Dostoyevsky, a young man, twenty-three years of age, had 
completed his course in the Engineers' Institute, and had entered the 
Government service, like his fellow graduates. His dislike of this oc­
cupation led him, at the end of a year, to abandon it. He had no defi­
nite reason or plan of life, but was inspired to write 'Poor Folk.' His 
only literary acquaintance was Grigorovitch, who had published but 
one article at that time; and to him he gave his manuscript, that it 
might be shown to the poet Nekrasoff, who was making arrange­
ments to print a periodical. Having given Grigorovitch his story, he 
spent the night with several friends rereading Gogol's 'Dead Souls.' It 
was the custom of the period for students to read and reread Gogol 
for the dozenth time whenever two or three chanced to meet of an 
evening. Returning home at four 0
' clock in the morning, in the bril­
liant daylight of a "white night" in June, Dostoyevsky sat down by his 
window, instead of going to bed, and was speedily summoned to the 
door by the ringing of the bell. Grigorovitch and Nekrasoff, unable to 
restrain their enthusiasm, had come to congratulate him on his work. 
Having begun with the idea that the perusal of ten pages would en­
able them to reach an opinion, they had been led on by interest and 
emotion to read the whole book aloud, and had taken turns as the 
4 3 9  

440 
Comments & Questions 
voices of each failed. Nekrasoff 's voice, they told him, had broken 
twice with uncontrollable feeling, as he read the description of the 
poor student's funeral. The next day Nekrasoff announced to the cel­
ebrated critic Byelinsky that "a new Gogol" had arisen. "Your Gogols 
spring up like mushrooms! "  retorted Byelinsky; but by the evening, 
after reading the story, he was as much excited as Nekrasoff, and de­
manded that the new author be brought to him at once. 'Poor Folk' 
was published the next year, 1 846. 
-September 6, 1 894 
HENRY JAMES 
Tolstoi and D[ ostoieffsky ] are fluid pudding, though not tasteless, be­
cause the amount of their own minds and souls in solution in the 
broth gives it savour and flavour, thanks to the strong, rank quality of 
their genius and their experience. But there are all sorts of things to 
be said of them, and in particular that we see how great a vice is their 
lack of composition, their defiance of economy and architecture, di­
rectly they are emulated and imitated; then, as subjects of emulation, 
models, they quite give themselves away. There is nothing so de­
plorable as a work of art with a leak in its interest; and there is no such 
leak of interest as through commonness of form. 
-from a letter to Hugh Walpole (May 1 9, 1 9  1 2) 
PRINCE PYOTR ALEKSEYEVICH KROPOTKIN 
The Memoirs from a Dead-House is the only production of Dostoyevkiy 
which can be recognized as truly artistic: its leading idea is beautiful, 
and the form is worked out in conformity with the idea; but in his 
later productions the author is so much oppressed by his ideas, all 
very vague, and grows so nervously excited over them that he cannot 
find the proper form. 
-from Ideals and Realities in Russian Literature ( 1 9 1 5) 
NEW YORK TIMES BOOK REVIEW 
In one sense, "The House of the Dead" is a less important work than 
"Crime and Punishment" or "The Brothers Karamazov" ; in another 
sense it is even more important. For, though in itself rather a frag­
ment of autobiography than a novel, relating as it does in terrible 
and dispassionate detail the story of four years' prison service in 

Comments & Questions 
44 1 
Siberia, it does much to explain the obscurities and incongruities of 
the novels. We have most of us wondered at Dostoevsky's tender­
hearted murderers, marveled how such bad people could possibly 
be so good and such good people so extraordinarily bad, and finally 
concluded that the Russian character must be very, very different 
from ours. In "The House of the Dead" we are brought down to bed 
rock, as it were; past the differences in the social strata, past even the 
fissures that divide race from race, down to the common humanity 
which, for some reason, reveals in misery, rather than in prosperity 
and happiness, its basic oneness. And having once realized the Rus­
sian character at its lowest terms as not intrinsically different from 
our own, we are able to build up again, in a way, to the strange, 
emotional, half-devil, half-angel souls that throng the pages of the 
novels, with a better understanding of them and a closer sympathy. 
To any reader who is inclined to make a study of Dostoevsky we 
should recommend a reading of "The House of the Dead" first of all, 
and a frequent reference back to it afterward, for in it is to be found 
the germ of all his later work. 
-May 9, 1 9 1 5  
WILLIAM LYON PHELPS 
To American readers for whom Dostoevski is yet but a name-and 
this would include a majority of American college professors,-I 
would suggest that they begin with "The House of the Dead." This 
is veridical history, in the diaphanous disgUise of fiction; Dosto­
evski, as everyone does not but ought to know, spent nearly four 
years in a Siberian prison, where his daily companions were shame­
less criminals. This is the most normal book he ever wrote, just as 
Andreev's most cheerful novel is "The Seven Who Were Hanged." 
Fortunate indeed it was for us that so delicately minded and sensi­
tively organized a man should have had to live with such folk; for 
his account of the environment has the double value . that comes 
from experience and aloofness. If there were such a place as hell, 
and one could serve a limi ted term there, I had rather have, let us 
say, Nathaniel Hawthorne's account of it than Jack London's; that is, 
I should like to have someone tell me about it who I feel does not 
really belong there. 
-from Yale Review (January 1 9 1 6) 

442 
Comments & Questions 
GEORGE W. THORN 
The first and perhaps the deepest impression made by Dostoevsky's 
works is of the existence of intense and widespread suffering. In this 
respect his first book, Poor Folk, strikes the keynote of all his writing. In 
one of the letters which compose that story the pitiful "hero" tells of 
the poverty and suffering of some people lodging in the same house, 
and in the course of his letter he says: "One evening when I chanced 
to be passing the door of the room and all was quiet in the house, I 
heard through the door a sob, and then a whisper, and then another 
sob, as though somebody within were weeping with such subdued 
bitterness that it tore my heart to hear the sound." It is the sound of 
that sobbing with subdued bitterness behind the door that we always 
hear as we read Dostoevsky Russia seems to be full of it. And yet, for 
the most part, there is no sign of rebellion; all is borne with pathetic 
resignation. Dievushkin, the poor clerk already referred to, believes 
that our lots in life are apportioned by the Almighty according to our 
desserts, and when doubts suggest themselves as to the justice of a 
scheme of things which allows such suffering as his he fears lest he 
should be guilty of "freethought." It is Dostoevsky's own attitude. 
Those who rebel against the suffering are the sceptics and atheists; his 
refuge was in the thought expressed to him by a young soldier when 
he was in prison awaiting trial. "Do you find it very tiring?" whispered 
this man through the peephole of his cell door, "Suffer in patience: 
Christ also suffered." 
-from Contemporary Review (June 1 9 1 8) 
NEW YORK TIMES BOOK REVIEW 
If Chekhov's picture of Russia is a cross-section under the microscope 
of the scientist, that of Dostoevsky is, as it were, a chunk of her bleed­
ing, quivering flesh, torn off nearest the heart. 
-February 1 6, 1 9 1 9  
QUESTIONS 
1 .  People sometimes use the word "Dostoevskian" to describe a cer­
tain situation or senSibility. On the basis of The House of the Dead and Poor 
Folk, can you describe a situation or sensibility that seems particular 
to Dostoevsky? 

Comments &. Questions 
443 
2. Do you find Dostoevsky's Christianity intrusive, an imposed value 
of the author? Or does it seem inherent in the material, somehow 
there in what is depicted? 
3. Do Dostoevsky's prisoners seem to you true to life, or do they 
seem distorted by Dostoevsky in certain directions and exaggerated 
in certain characteristics in order to make a point? 
4. In Dostoevsky's fiction, guilt often drives characters to strange and 
destructive thoughts and actions. Describe the consequences of guilt 
in Poor Folk. Are the consequences credible? Are they just? 
5 .  From what you have observed and read, would Dostoevsky's de­
piction of the poor, of an oppressed underclass, apply here and now? 
If Dostoevsky were writing today, who would his "poor folk" be? 

-

F O R  F U RT H E R  R E A D I N G  
THE HOUSE OF THE DEAD 
Dostoevsky, Fyodor. A Writer's Diary. Vol. 1 , 1 87 3-1 876; vol. 2 ,  
1 87 7-1 88 1 .  Translated by Kenneth Lantz. Evanston, IL: Northwest­
ern University Press, 1 993-1 994. A collection of short works­
autobiography, semifictional sketches, journalism, and a few short 
stories-that appeared under this title, which was first a column 
in a weekly periodical and later a journal written entirely by 
Dostoevsky. 
Frank, Joseph. "Dostoevsky: The House of the Dead." Sewanee Review 74 
( 1 966) , pp. 7 7 9-803. 
Frank, Joseph. Dostoevsky: The Years of Ordeal, 1 850-1 859. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1 98 3 .  Chapters 6-1 1 deal with The 
House of the Dead primarily from a biographical point of view. 
--. Dostoevsky: The Stir of Liberation, 1 860-1 865. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1 986. Chapter 1 5  discusses The House of 
the Dead from a literary point of view. 
Jackson, Robert Louis. The Art of Dostoevsky: Deliriums and Nocturnes. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1 98 1 .  Chapters 1-5 
contain penetrating discussions of various aspects of The House of 
the Dead. 
--. "The Triple Vision: 'The Peasant Marey.' " In Critical Essays on 
Dostoevsky, edited by Robin Feuer Miller. Boston: G. K. Hall, 1 986, 
pp. 1 7 7-1 88. 
Jones, John. Dostoevsky. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1 98 3 .  Chap­
ter 4 deals with The House of the Dead. 
Mochulsky, Konstantin. Dostoevsky: His Life and Work. Translated by 
Michael A. Minihan. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
1 96 7 .  The best one-volume biography of Dostoevsky; chapter 9 is 
an excellent introduction to The House of the Dead. 
Rosenshield, Gary. "Akulka: The Incarnation of the Ideal in Dosto­
evski's Notes from the House of the Dead." Slavic and East European Journal 3 1  
445 

446 
For Further Reading 
( 1 98 7 ) ,  pp. 1 0-1 9 . Views this character as an image of Dosto­
evsky's Christian ideal. 
--. "Isai Fomich Bumshtein: The Representation of the Jew in 
Dostoevsky's Major Fiction." Russian Review 43 ( 1 984) ,  pp. 26 1-2 7 6 .  
A careful analysis of Dostoevsky's handling of Jewish characters in 
The House of the Dead and later works. 
POOR FOLK 
Belknap, Robert 1. "The Didactic Plot: The Lesson about Suffering in 
Poor Folk." In Critical Essays on Dostoevsky, edited by Robin Feuer Miller. 
Boston: G. K. Hall, 1 986, pp. 3 0-3 9.  Stimulating analysis to show 
that Dostoevsky did not always value suffering simply for its own 
sake. 
Fanger, Donald. Dostoevsky and Romantic Realism: A Study of Dostoevsky in Rela­
tion to Balzac, Dickens, and Gogo/. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 1 965 . A  penetrating study of Dostoevsky's links with the Ro­
mantic tradition. 
Frank, Joseph. Dostoevsky: The Seeds of Revolt, 1 82 1-1 849. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1 9 76. Chapter 1 1  contains a lengthier 
discussion of Poor Folk than is given in the introduction to this 
volume. 
Jones, John. Dostoevsky. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1 9 8 3 .  Jones 
stresses the relation of Poor Folk to contemporary writers who dis­
orient the reader and downplays Dostoevsky's historical context. 
Leatherbarrow, W ]. "The Rag with Ambition: The Problem of Self­
Will in Dostoevsky's Bednye Lyudi and Dvoinik." Modern Language Review 
6 8 ( 1  9 7 3 ) ,  pp. 60 7-6 1 8. Discussion of how the inner conflict in 
Poor Folk foreshadows that of later characters. 
Mochulsky, Konstantin. Dostoevsky: His Life and Work. Translated by 
Michael A. Minihan. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
1 96 7 .  Chapter 2 is an informative study of Poor Folk. 
Neuhauser, Rudolf "Re-Reading Poor Folk and The Double." Interna­
tional Dostoevsky Society Bulletin 6 ( 1  9 7 6) ,  pp. 2 9-3 2 .  
Terras, Victor. The Young Dostoevsky (1 846-1 849):A Critical Study. The Hague 
and Paris: Mouton, 1 969. Chapters 1 -3 .  There is no special section 
on Poor Folk, but the author informatively analyzes the work from 
various points of view. 


